Brazil ! ! Sets Up
.
Folklore Institute
BRAZIL is a vast nation rich in folklore traditions, popular legends, folktales, folkpoetry and folk music. In recent generations, much research work has been carried
out on Brazilian folklore by foreign and native specialists. Until now, however, these
studies have remained to a large extent scattered throughout Brazil and different ports of
the world.
With a view to developing further study and research in folklore within, the country
and to strengthen links between Brazilian folklorists and those in other lands, the Brizilian
National Commission for Unesco (IBECC) has recently set up a National Folklore Com-
omission, with headquarters in Rio de Janeiro.
One of the most important aspects in the Commission's programme will toe the
development of a system of exchange of information and works on folklore between the
various parts of Brazil as well as between this South American nation and other countries.
A special committee has been appointed to see to the speedy execution of this scheme.
The Commission will also prepare a Bibliographical Bulletin, and special documents
on Brazilian folklore, draw up a complete list of national folklore experts, encourage the
reprinting of classical worKS III
the subject with added notes and
commentaries, and make efforts
to bring about a standardized
terminology in Brazilian folklore.
By organizing folklore courses,
lectures and festival, the Com-
mission houses to stimulate in-
terest both abroad and in Brazil.
Prominent figures in the fields
of folklore, anthropology and so-
ciology and many Brazilian au-
thorns and artists are members of
the organization. Its members
represent official institutions such
as the University of Brazil, Na-
tional and Historical Museums,
the Conservatoire, the National
Educational Film Bureau, the
Service for the Protection of the
Indians. Many private associa-
tions have also joined the Com-
mission and include the Brazilian
Society of Anthropology and
Ethnography and the Folklore
Research Centre of the National
School of Music.
Dr. Levi Carneiro, President of
IBECC, is head of the Commis-
sion and Renato Almeida, noted
folklorist, is secretary-general.
Correspondents have already
been appointed in Portugal. Great
Britain, Italy, France and Mexico.
The-establishment of the
Brazilian Folklore Commission
marks an important stage in the
carrying out of a vast programme
of international cultural co-
operation which will undoubtedly
increase in importance as its work
develops and becomes more *wide-
ly known throughout the world.
