Experts who attended recent meeting on Art in General Education : From left to right : A. H. Cor-
rea de Azevedo and Dr. Kuo Yu-Shu of Unesco ; M. ZoItan Kodaly (Hungary) ; Herbert Read (UK !,
Chairman ; Dr. Thomas Munro (US) ; M. Georges Fare (France) ; Mr. E. M. Dicky (UK) of th*
Ministry of Education.
SOME BLUNT WORLDS
FROM-CRITIC READ
[The following interview expresses certain opinions with which
the editors of the"Unesco Courier"caIUlot agree. We feel, however,
that Mr Read's observations rpresent an attitude which is fairly
frequent among the world's intellectual, particularly among belte-
lettrists. As such, we present them in the hope that they will stimulate
diseussion. ]
MAR. HERBERT READ, noted British philosopher of art, and authorsof several books on art and aesthetics, granted a special inters ; sew
on May 15 to the"Unesco Courier", during which he criticized Unesco
and its Constitution, though affirming his belief in the importance of
its role in the world today. Dr. Read came to Paris last month to
preside over the meeting of ex-_.,,,...... _...,
perts on Art in General Educa-
tion which met at Unesco House
from May 11 to 15.
"Any criticisms I make of
Unesco", Mr Read began,"are
based own a desire to co-operate.
They are not inspired by any
fundamental animosity 10 the
aims of Unesco."
"At the same time", Mr Read
continued,"I do feel that a cer-
tain presupposition about the
nature of culture and the means
of promoting it have been made
which are fallacious. The false
assumption to which I refer, and
which seems to be present in the
Constitution of Unesco, is that
culture is something ready-made,
already formulated and develop-
ed, and has merely got to be
shared by the largest part of the
people in order to bring about a
peaceful state of the world."
"Root Simulation"
"But culture and civilization
are a growth, a creative process,
an activity. Our aim should be to
stimulate that activity at the
roots. This'root stimulation',
ho. wever, involves an activity not
contelllplated in the Constitution
of Unesco. The energies of
Unesco are being dissipate in
intellectual and organizational
activities which are seldom con-
crete in their results."
"The most effective way of
changing the minds of men IS
through education. Yet educe ; join
must be understood in a sense
not evident in the Constitution
of Unesco since it interprets edu-
cation in a spirit of intellec-
tualism and scientific humanism.
I feel that education, to be ef-
fective, must be much more'ac-
tivist', relying more on practical
and creative activities and ess
on book knowledge and literacy."
Anasthesia
"Unesco ignores this problem",
he went on."But in my opinion,
more serious than illiteracy 15
the problem of anesthesia'-that
is lack of taste ant sensitivity
which affects not 10 to 15% but
90% of the population of the
world."
"Unesco's work", Mr Read con-
tinued,"should be aimed more at I
people than at ideas. It should'
establish practical institutions
rather than communities of good-
will and this should be done on
a I>ig scale."
"I suggest for example", he
said.''the creation of an Institute
of Experimental Education, where
new methods of education would
be demonstrated and where
teachers could come to leam of
progressive methods of educa-
tion."
Criticizing the distinction made
in the title of Unesco between
Education, Science and Culture,
Mr Read cited T. S. Eliot's phrase
'Science and education are in
themselves a part of culture.'
"If you separate science and
education from. culture", Mr
Read declared,"why not dis-
tinguish art and religion ? The
very fact that science and edu-
cation were picked out by Unesco
reveals a bias-perhaps an un-
conscious bias-in the minds of
those who established it. That
science is distinct from culture is
a modern development which to
the Greek philosopher would
have seemed quite monstrous. It
represents a materialistic point of
view of civilization which is sus-
picious of the world culture and
seeks to correct it or counter-
balance it with the term scten-
tific."
Turning to three of the cultural
projects in which is
playing an important rove, Mr
Read cited the International
Theatre Institute, the programme
for the translation of the classics
and copyright.
"I believe", he said,"that the
circulation of theatrical produc-
tions on an international scale
may gradually stimulate The
dramatic activity. But even here.
I think the effective form of
stimulation is due not to the cir-
culation of mastenpieces by them-
selves, but rather to the encou-
ragement of creative effort on
the amateur levels."
In conclusion, Mr Read re-
affirmed his belief in the work of
Unesco.
"I believe an organizat : on on
the lines of Unesco to be es-
sential", he said."If we do not
agree with the Constitution and
Unesco's procedure, we must not
stand aside and merely condemn,
but at any rate make an effort
to transform it. If one has any
belief in peace and the future of
world culture, an organization of
this kind is essential and must
be criticized until it does its job
more and more effectively."
