UNESCO-U. N
EMBRACES F) W
By Walter M 
U nesco DE
DirectorGE
One hears a great deal in UnitedNations circles these days about
the need for co-ordination.
Indeed, it would seem sometimes that
co-ordination is expected to provide the
answer to all our difficult international
problems.
w n. y is tn. ere this preoccupatton wztn. co-ordination ?
The reason is that there are so many separate units in
the structure of international co-operation. First of all,
there are the fifty-eight sovereign member states of the
United Nations. ese are the primary units of co-ope-
ration. Then there are the Assembly 0/the United
Nations, the Economic and Social Council, the Security
Council, the Trusteeship Council, and the United Nations
Secretariat. Finally there are the eleven Specialized
Agencies, each with its different set of ember states,
its supreme legistalive body, and its own secretariat.
The work of all these public institutions requires co-
ordination, to achieve peace and to promote the com-
mon welfare. It is a. pluralistic structure ; there is no
single body with full and final authority.
Since the United Nations Agencies are agents or their
various member states, the first step toward co-ordina-
tion would seem to be the co-"Ordination at a national
level of national policies, vis-a-vis the varous United
Nations Agencies to which each Member State belonu. ..
If this were fully accomplished, even despite the dif-
ferences in national memberships of the Specialized
Agencies, the principal remaining task would be the
resolution of differing national policies in the United
Nations Agencies.
The Charter of the United Nations recognized, 8. 1
course, that complete co-ordination in this way would
be difficult of achievement. In any case, these would
still be required as a means of ensuring a United Nation
approach to the host of international economic ana
social problems.
The Economic and Social Council was created with
special functions in this respect. But in addition, since
it had been decided to set up Specialized Agencies for
operations in the various economic and social fields, the
Economic and Social Council was given also the task
of co-ordinating the work of these Agencies. The pro-
gress of the Council in carrying out these responsibilities
was discussed during its last session at Geneva in July
and August, and will be reported to the current United
Nations Assembly.

I TEAMWORK--
E CONTINENTS
u C LAVES Meanwhile, very substantial progress
It. has been made by the Secretariats to-
ward èo-ordinating the execution of the
programmes adopted by their various
'General Agencies. Some illustrations in fields in
which Unesco is involved are presented
on this page. There are others, such as
the promotion of fundamental education (UN, WHO,
FAO and the rationalisation of scientific abstracting
(WHO) in which Unesco has also worked closely mitt
other United Nations Agencies.
Collaboration among all the Specialized Agencies under
the leadership of the United Nations has resulted in
real progress toward developing a strong and efficient
international civil service in all the Agencies ; in
estab, ishing comparable budgetary and financial prac-
tices ; in co-ordinating publications, information and
statistical programmes ; in planning for regional offièes
and in the co-ordination of conference calendars.
The progress made in thus pulling together for opera-
tional purposes the otherwise essentially independent
units has been due to painstaking and almost daily
consultation among the staffs concerned. Important, of
course, have been the formal agreements negotiated
among the United Nations and Specialized Agencies, the
periodic reviews by the Economic and Social Council
and by the Assembly's Advisory Committee on Adminis-
trative ond Budgetary questions.
But the first requisite of co-ordination has been the
development of work habits in the several secretariats,
to ensure that United Nations problems are, in fact,
approached, with the full resources of all the United
Nations Agencies and not only those of any single one.
The procresx'made to date relates largely to eo-ordf-
nating work plans under programmes and policies
adopted by the separate Agencies. A real gap in the
United Nations process still exists, therefore, in the
absence, so far, of adequately co-ordinated programme
and policy planning before each of the legislative bodies
of the Agencies concerned determine the programme four
their respective secretariats.
Here lies an important field of activity for the Econo-
mic and Social Council, aided by the principal adminis-
trative officers of the Agencies. Not until more substan-
tial progress is made at this points can we hope to
harness the full resources of the Specialized Agencies
and the United Nations for the attainment of the ends
set forth in their various harters.
() all the Specialized Agen-cies of the United Nations,
none is more essentially
concerned than Unesco with the
maintenance and development of
human rights. The very terms of
Unesco's Constitution impose on
the Organizaion the duty or
fighting against the agents of dis-
cord and war through education,
science and culture and modern
means of communication. The
Organization's final aim is to
help maintain peace and human
happiness.
Now what can threaten human
rights more directly than war and
warlike tendencies ? Or, on the
other hand, what can be a
stronger force for peace than the
unhampered development of
every nation a. nd every man ?
The maintenance or peace and
the advancement of human
happiness are therefore two tasks
indissolubly linked, always to be
considered together ; they are in
fact two aspects of the same
ideal-the attainment of human
rights.
Economic and Social
Council Recommendation
It was this idea which, on the
proposal of the Commission on
Human Rights, brought forth the
Economic and Social Council's
recommendation that Unesco
should co-operate in its work for
the promotion of justice and
peace. The chief ways in which
Unesco can further the work of
the Economic and Social Council
are :. the working out by expert
committees of educational pro-
