I. UnescoProgramme
To Stress Exchange
Between Museums'
During 1948 the principal task of
the Museums programme will be to
promote the exchange of informa-
tion on museums, and of museum
personnel throughout the world.
Emphasis is thus laid on exchanges
because it is by that means that
the immense amount of damage
done to museums, everywhere by
the war can most speedily be made
good.
In many war-devastated coun-
tries, museum systems were entire-
ly destroyed, and it is a primary
duty-of Unesco to help in their
reconstruction. To resume the flow
of ideas, inteN-upted in all coun-
tries by the war, is vital if mu-
seums are to play their part in
developping education, science and
cuiture.-I
The possibility of establishing in-
ternational foundations, supported :
by member governments, as a
means of encouraging co-opera-
tion between museums will be
studied by Unesco ; international
conferences, like the one M be held
by the International Council of
Museums next June, will be aided,
and plans for international exhibi-
tions will be stimulated and en-
couraged.
The work of the Museums pro- !
gramme is not limited to periodical'
conference meetings or exhibitions ;
it must, above all, furnish a per-
manent service which will arrange
for persons connected with mu-
seums to visit museums u foreign
countries, and to meet foreign
museum experts so that they may
exchange ideas and experiences.
This permanent service will be able
to supply, on request, guidance and
information based on the most up-
to-date museum practice wherever
it many be found.
In conclusion, it may be raid
that although a great deal has
already been done to develop the
use of museums in the cause of
education, science and culture, yet I
the greater part of the talk is still
before us, involving much new and
exciting experimental work. but al-
so entailing much routine survey-
ing of present conditions through-
out the world.
Thousands of visitors to the General Conference saw the exhibitions at
the Escue ! a formal de Maestros and through them learned hoTV Unesco
assists in the development of Library, Museum and Educational systems.
Two Mexican visitors, pictured here, study one of the panels of the
Museums'exhibit arranged as part of the"'Unesco Month"programme.
