General view of Beirut, site of Third Session of Unesco's General Conference scheduled to open this month.
Dr. HUXLEY'S SUGGESTIONS FOR :
The Advance
Of World Civilization','
Just before this issue of the"Courier"was to go to press, he
editors received an advance copy of the Introduction written by Dr.
Julian Huxley, Director-General, to his annual report on the activities
of the Organization in 1948. This Intcoduction is the personal report
of Dr. Huxley. Below, our readers will find large extracts from this
highly stimulating and provocative statement.
lrHls is my personal report,
which the Executive Board
through its Chairman will
present to the General Con-
ference.
It IS once again my own view
of what Unesco has done-a
gleam row the dark and disturbed
waters of the world today-and
of what, given good leadership
and some luck, it may yet
achieve-a stilling of the waters
to a peace In which they might
ceflect the glory of the mind's
inheritance for generations yet to
come.
I make no apology for writing
freely of my : aith in the im-
mense service which this Organ-
ization might render to human-
ity : otherwise I would not be
here. As I hand over the reins,
I have felt bound to affirm and
set down, for comment and ap-
praisal. what the work has meant
to me.
In writing this report..., I have
wished to present not only a
resume of the events of 1948, but
some general appraaal of the
Organization in the present state
of its existence, together with
some evaluation 0 : its programme.
While such an evaluation must,
of necessity, be a purely personal
oM. in the majority of cases the
views expressed have esther the
explicit backing of the Con-
ference. Or its implicit approvaL
The first fact to be remembered
is the extreme youthfulness of
Unesco. As a definitive Organ-
ization, it is, at the time this
report goes to press, only 21
months old ; and its effective
operation dates back only to a
year and a half, to the time when
the first programme and budget
was agreed upon in April 1947.
While much can be surmounted
by goodwill, time and practice, it
is prohably true that, : n tne
present state of the world, no
international staff can hope to
attain quite the same degree of
efficient co-operation that is pos-
sible to a homogeneous group
(although of course the heterog-
eneity provides the necessary
: oundation for our ultimate
ideal-an international group
welded into a unified team).
I would also remind my readers
that Unesco has so far been
operating in a period of unusual
political tension and financial
stringency.
Any new organization, es-
pecially a large international one
of great complexity and novel
type such as Unesco, will find
itself in its first years much
preoccupied with problems of ad-
ministration and internal organ-
ization. While Unesco still has
many such preoccupations. I
think it fair to say that it has
now passed a critic : ail point in Its
development. While 1947 was
spent largely in trial and error.
experiment and even sometimes
improvisation, 1948 has seen the
emergence of a more dye : incite
structure and assured cont : nuity
of operation.
Work in Germany
An important innovation in
1948 has been the extension of
Unesco's activities to Germany.
and the decision of the Executive
to recommend to the Conference
their further extension to Japan.
There has not u : : matUraJlv been
a good deal of difficulty in agree-
ing on a programme for Germa-
ny. the nationals of some countries
wishing Unesco to go much more
slowly. those of others, much
faster. A certain fact must be
remembered. This is not oar of
our reconstruction campaign : we
are undertaking work in Ger-
many. not for Germany. We are
attempting a reorientation of the
Germaas towards'democracy and
against all forms of aggressive
nationalism and isolationism.
(Continued on Page 6)

Dr. Hux ! ey On"Ih6 Advance of World Civilization"
(Continued from Page 1)
We are not operating in any sense as
agents of the Allied Authorities (though
ølmays with their agreement and. co-opefa-
tions), but as an international nonolitical
organization : and it is clear that such an
organization will have a much greater
possibility 0 : success in any"re-education"
of Germany than could be expected by as
occupuing Power.
"Advance of World Civilization"
Ã year ago I was thinking in term of ageneral Unesco philosophy, and of its
gradual buildmg up over a comparatively
long period. Today, while still believing
that this might and probably should
eventually be undertaken, I now feel that
we should search for a single unifying
idea, and that we should make this an
immediate task.
t would tike to throw out the suggestion
that for the purpose of a unifying and
general appeal, the underlying idea behind
all Unesco's activities can best be ex-
pressed in the five words"The
Advance of Word Civilization",
"Civilization because civilization
implies peace, and is indeed in
essence the technique of peaceful
Ihing ; World civilization because
peace must be global, and because
civilization confined to one section
of humanity is not compatible
with Unesco's constitution, and is
indeed provocative of violence and
war ; advance of world civilization
because world civilization is in its
infancy, and because we need the
jJynami appeal of a distant and
tver-receding goal.
This idea of the promotion of
çivilization on a world basis has in
the first place the advantage of
( : eing practical and concrete
However, vast in scope, however,
vague at the edges, it adds
up to a series of definite and
limited tasks. It introduces no
Jlote of ideological theory.
Furthermore, it commends itself
o the great majority of people,
what !"over their underlying phi-
losophy. It commends itself im-
mediately to the educated portion
of the world's population, and can
be readily made intelligible and
desirable to the rest.
Tre advance of civilization can
readily be fitted into the broader
concept of evolutionary progress,
but is quite indepe : 1dent of it. or. :_-.. 1--... 11--------------.. -,--..----moeea or anv general Ideology
or philosophy except those which would
entirely reject this world for the sake of a
sell-centred and sterile a3ceticism.
As with any other general and com-
prehensive concept, civilization can be
defined in various ways and can mean
rather different things to different people.
There is, however, an area of common
agreement. The advance of civilization
implies better cultivation of the arts of
peace. It implies the advance of knowledge
and the exploration of new and more outlets
for creative activity and expression.
external matters, such as mutual under-
standing with other nations ; and a nation's
population policy (or equally, its lack of
sue', a policy) may readily become one of
the tensions threatening peace.
Unesco is an inter-governmental organ-
ization. Accordingly while its purposes are
either world purposes (implicitly like peace,
or explicitly like promoting the general
wetfare of mankind), its very nature puts
difficulties in the way of their realization,
since the ultimate control of its policy is
in the hands of official delegations repres-
enting the points of view of separate
national governments.
Leaders of Civilization
 my mind, the best method available-" for securing any immediate advance in
this direction, is for Unesco courageously
to delegate an important part of its work
to private individuals, chosen not as official
delegates of governments, but as leaders of
civilizations-outstanding thinkers, artists,
writers, men of science, owning their best
allegiance not to nations, but to humanity-
view of humaa destiny as the crown and
continuation of the cosmic process of
evolution, seems necessary to synthesize
what is of value in the crowd of warring
beliefs and interpretations to be found in
the world today, and to provide the sour to
fruitful action on a world scale.. That
Unesco might make a contribution towards
some such dynamic synthesis is a : l inspiring
thought.
Value of Personal Contact
A considerable part of my time andenergy has been spent in travelling, I
having visited no less than 19 countries
during the spring and summer, some of
them twice. Since I have been with the
Organization, I have visited 32 countries. 23
of them Member States, and two protector-
ates or colonizes of a Member State.
This has been of great value to my work
for Unesco ; indeed I regard travel as an
indispensable part of the duties of the high
officials of the organization.
Such visits are of importance in making
personal contacts with the authorities and
leading personalities in the countries con-
Mind and Spirit
y is not for me here to try to formulatea detailed definition which will fit both
the facts and Unesco's purpose. That is a
matter, it seems to me, for the world's
leading thinkers and creative workers to
hammer out for Unesco over a period of
years.
I would here only throw out the sugges-
tion that the advance of civilization consists
essentially, or at least most importantly, in
the development of those human activities
which can be shared and participated in
wihout being destroyed or quantitatively
divided-namely the higher activities of the
human mind aid spirit. Knowledge is ac-
tually multiplied by being shared : a work
of art can influence and be enjoyed by an
indefinite number of people. For such
development of the higher activities of may,
there is of course needed an elaborate
framework of material things and activities
which cannot be shared in the same way :
but this, though part of civilization, its
machinery rather than its essence, is means
rather than end.
The idea of world civilization has a
further advantage in that it transcends
both nationalism and the limitations of
that hopeful offspring of nationalism,
interaationalism. I use the phrase"inter-
nationalism"in the strict sense of collabora-
tion between separate sovereign nations.
Nations in our worl, : till claim unrestricted
sovereignty, and all existing international
organizations are debarred from interfering
In the matters of internal concern to their
tmember nations.
In practice, however, this line caa rarely
be drawn sharply. To mention two out of
innumerable possible examples, a nation's
educational policy is legal1y a matter of
purely domestic ccern ; but it may affect
representatives not of governments depart-
ments, but of departments of the human
mind
"We Must Run the Risk"
THERE are, however, certain special fieldsin which Unesco must begin by bravely
delegating the discussion of the question
from the official and governmental to the
unofficial and individual level, even if it
runs the risk of finding that some suscep-
tibilities, including those of some of its own
Member Governments, are offended in the
process. For if it does not run this risk, it
incurs the certainty that little or nothing
will be accomplished.
The Economic and Social Council have
worked along these lines in regard to the
UN Scientific Conference to be held is 1949.
on the Conservatio ; ; l and Utilization of the
Resources. The Conference is designed to
bring out the scientific and technical
aspects of the subject, as far as possible
removed from purely national interest, in
the hope that the illumination and the
rational motives thus provided may
influence possible later official action. Such
a method, I suggest, will be even more
necessary if we are to deal with the prob-
lem of world population.
In fact I do not believe that it be brought
on to the international stage at all unless
it were previously made a matter of public
world concern ; and there is no hope of
effecting this except by means of a con-
ference of private individuals, free to say
what they believe on the basis of the full
facts, and to arrive at any conclusions they
liked without being tied by official instruc-
tions or susceptibilities or by purely na-
tio : lal in terests.
A New Interpretation of Life
INDEED, we may go further, and sav thatthe advance of world civilization in the
inur. ediate future depends upon the emer-
gence of a new interpretation of life, which
would provide the basis for the driving force
of belief and for its realization in action.
Such an interpretation would have to be
in one aspect humanistic, based on the
possibilities and the limitations of human
nat"re, including its spiritual and emotional
and intellectual as well as its physiological
aspects ; it would have to be based on
scientific knowledge of the universe ; and
it would have to be dynamic, concentrating
on the possibilities of change, not on the
litatu quo, nor yet on a static ideal.
Soo'ne such dynamic humanism, some such
cerneu, and in bringing home to them that
Unesco is a livinf reality, not merely a
remote and shadowy organization operating
in far away France.
I should add that this applies not only
to visits from highranking officials, but to
all official travel and to the influeace of
representatives in the field, such as the
staff of the Field Science Co-operation
Offices.
For instance, the representatives of the
Reconstruction Department travelling Ia re-
mote parts of the countries of South and
East Asia have noted the deep impression
made by their mere presence. Through it
the UN and its agencies came alive to the
local population, who could feel that they
were participating L, international life,
instead of being distant and neglected
objects in a scheme of things run by'a
mysterious"They"in some far-off and
alien region.
Grave Population Problem
I stress the gravity of the world populatio : J.problem largely, because I have seen the
undernourished children of the Marbial
Valley in Haiti and the erosion of its hill-
sides under the pressure of its already
excessive but still increasing population,
and have realized at first hand the impos-
sÎl : >llity of relieving that pressure by
emigration. It is because I have seen the
general low standard of life in the in-
habitants of countries like Tunisia and of
Egypt, where the population has doubled
in approximately one geaeration.
To see, with one's own eyes erosion, as
in West Africa and the southern U. S. A. and
Haiti ; the effects of deforestation, as 111
Mexico and North Africa and the Middle
East.. the low state of general health in the
poorer people of Latin America and the
Moslem world ;-to see such things : s to
realize forcibly that Fundamental Educa-
tion must always be concerned as much
with teaching people how to raise their
standard of life as with education in the
narrower sense, and that Unesco in all such
ventures cannot hope for success unless it
works in the closest co-operation with its
sister agencies, FAO and WHO.
Discrimination
I have talked personalIy with represent-atives of the hundreds of University
teachers who have been dismissed or driven
to resign in various countries ; I have
heard with my own ears Lysenko lead the
absence of any social colour-bar in a
country like Brazil, and the intelli-
gence and public spirit of many
African chiefs and professional men
in West Africa, and the wealth of
artistic talent, previously unsus-
pected, that has been elicited among
the Haitians by the modest encour-
agement provided by the Art Centre
at Port au Prince, or in Turkey by
the mere removal of the traditional
ban on representational art, is to
be given very real faith in the
results which could accrue from a
genuine application of non-discrimi-
natory principles.
International Publicity
SUCH facts lead on to theencouraging belief that inter-
national publicity is one of the most
fruitful methods open to Unesco.
If Unesco brings to light the
positive successes which have been
achieved. where discrimination has
not been practised, and where the
authorities have genuinely believed
in equality of opportunity, the facts
will confound the forces of reaction.
University Development
IN a more restricted fietd that of- *-University development it is of
great value for someone familiar
onty with European and North.
American practice to see at first
hand university life in other regions._....J. o nave J. ÆLln-AIllencan pro-
fessors tell you of their duties and their
salaries is to realize that the concoct of
university teaching as many educational
systems in the region. To see for oneself
how. in eastern Europe and the USSR, an
increasing amount of research work is
being assigned to the Academies of
Science is to realize that the. western idea
of research being maialy a university
function is not the only one possible.
To talk to the staff of one of the Islamic
institutions of higher learning attached to
the Great Mosques is to realize that in
Islamic countries two entirely different
conceptions of higher education exist side
by side. with little or no correlation.
During my official visit to Yugoslavia,
Hungary. Poland and Czechoslovakia, every-
where I went I saw the immense efforts
being made in the cultural, scientific and
educational fields, as regards not only
reconstruction but also new ventures and.
achievements ; I found no barriers between
me and my academic colleagues, and in
general a great willingaess to exchange
information with other countries and to
co-operate in Unesco projects. Indeed, 50 far
as I could ascertain, barriers to cultural
exchange are at least as great between
these countries and the USSR, as they are
between them and Western Europe.
In the Middle East, I was accompanied
by Dr. Raadi who was acting as Consultant
on the project of establishing an office of
Cultural Co-operation ia the region. He and
I were equally struck by the general
readiness to think in terms of a broad
cultural region, embraclllg Turkey, Iran
and Afghanistan as well as the countries
of the Arab League, as against the cultural
nationalism of single countries or the more
insidious temptation of a narrower region-
ahsm based solely on Arabic culture.
The first two years of Unesco's existence
have proved that the new organization is
viable and healthy, and that a number of
practical projects, which could not be
undertaken by any other body, lie ready to
its hand.
In its second year, Unesco has for one
thin achieved a much more satisfactory
organization. But what in the ion : run
will be more important, it has begun to
glimpse the way towards a central unifying
concept, or, to use Monsieur Maritain's
phrase, a central principle of practical
action, which will serve both to illuminate
its path more clearly, and to : live added
energy to its action.
now resulted in the dismissal of some. of
the leading biologists in the USSR. and the
strait-jacketing and distorting of one of the
most important branches of Science. And
such experiences have brought home to me
how far the world is from those ideals of
freedom of research, thought and expression
which are enshrined in Unesco's Constitu-
tion.
Again, it is one thing to read about
discrimination. It is a much more forcible
experience to see it at work in many parts
of the world, includin, l :", alas, parts of
countries whish are States Members of
Unesco ; or to hear a leading academic
personality in Peru maintain that the
Indians should not be given educationat
opportunities because they were, racially
and inherently, so inferior as to be un-
educable.
On the other hand, I have seen with my
own eyes the evidence that this is not so,
in the remarkable success of Mr. Truman
Bailey in training Peruvian Indians in
skilled craftmanship and habits of regular
work.
To see this, and the almost complete
