(officiai UN Photo. Devt. of Public lnformatíonel
Dr. Julian Huxley, Director-General and Mr. John Grierson.
Head of Mass Communications and Public Information of Unesco
at a session of Geneva Conference on. Freedom of Information.

tS"o.
Huxley Defines Press Freedom-.-.'.",,..""..,--. ',-
At Geneva. Conferencet Ca y/erece
The following is the abridged text of the addr ? ss
delivered in Geneva on March 25 by Dr. Julian
S. Huxley, Director-General of Unesco, before tbe
United Nations Conference on Freedom of Infor-
mation : 
Ida not need ta emphasise Unesco's interest inthis question of freedom of information.
Wherever Unesco urns in its task of deploying
and developing the resources of education, science
and culture in the cause of rmuual understanding,
it deals, of necessity, with the flow of information
across the borders of nations...
Unesco has, on the invitation of the United
Nations, actively participated in the preparation
ai this conference, both in the general work of
the sub-commission and in the work of the Secre-
tariat. Here today, however, we come to the
moment of practical decision.
Unesco cannot be content merel# ta eX'Press its
sympathetic interest in the question before us.
but, by the very nature of the tasks ta which it is
dedicated as a Specialised Agency, it is bound ta
emphasise its des ire and also ils obligation ta help
you bring a living result from the body of this
conference.
This conference has before it the special work
of preparing international agreements on jreedom
of information, as deriving fram and giving reality
M, one of the jundamental rights of man...
Without a doubt we must meet and agree on a
certain number of directive principles... But here
1 might be permitted ta quote 1100 the advice M) catch
M. Jacques Maritain gave ta us in his inaugural
address ta the General Conference ilt Mexico las'
December.
Seeking ta iso/ate and define the spiritual roofs
of international understanding, M. Maritain dis-
tinguished between speculative and explanatory
ideologies, on which agreement is never likelll ta
be found, and principles of human ac/ion on whi. ch
men in general are agreed because the1/do in
fact express their common will as human beings
everywhere...
Taking mylp. ad from the distinguished French
philosopher, 1 say that only a practical and not
a theoretical conception of freedom of information
is capable of overriding the political and cultural
differences of peopl !'Os...
The spirit of liberty is itself hostile ta abstraction :
freedom can onlJl be defined in cancre te terms...
It is an active force or it is nothing... The problem
is, therefore, one of sa organising bath the spiritual
and the materia/forces of the world to-daJl that in
action and by action, the word of freedom is made
flash.
It is, moreover, the view and emphasis of Unesco
that these forces of action :.. on/JI draw their strength
and value from their relationship with the actual
and patent needs of people as they are feint in
cam mon, appreciated in common and realiseà in
common.
(Continued on Page 2)

Huxley Defines Press Freedom
(Continuer from Page 1.)
Unesco believes that this conception 0/needs
and their satisfaction, should be the biLSis of ail
our discussions, :/Me are ta appear as practical
men in the service of mankind. It seems ta us the
onde concept which gives a common and charac-
teristic phyiognomy ta the situation in the woric !tSf : c  : o<yKOM)/ M t7: e s : Ma< : OK tK te M !0) i ( !
today... Freedorn oj information is neiíher a luxury
nor an ideal ; it is a necessity, if the native and
natural frustrations which we see in the world
today are not () blow up in our fasces...
Everyone is agreed ta the lowering of barriers
ta the jree flow of information. However. what 1
have ta stress here is that this aim, and the
methods of achieving it, must be strictlll and prac-
ticallp conditioned.
... One condition, hast we must immediately reCOg-
nise, is that the material mwns of communication7t : se, M'h<t (fhe maferM MeaKs o/co ? K ? tt ! M ! C< ! OM
cannot be al ! O'Wed to be concentrated ! M MO-
nopolies... (which) are incompatible with the real
nguirements of freedom. There must be no
thwarting or free exchange of information where
the patent service of mankind is at issue ; nof p<tte ? t< s rt ! : ec o/m<tMÂ : tK ( ! : s at MSMe ; N0
thwarting of the right of al ! cultUres ta say their
word in the world ; nor thwarting of any service
Mhtch, by developing mutual aid and understanding,
! eMeM$ thé ( ! t<postt : o ? t to tear OK (Z < !ece ! op hel ss ns e disposi ion ta war and develops th
disposition tua peace.
Two further essential conditions of anll effective
realisation of freedom of information are : a iu. t
equalisation of the material and technical means
of communication and of the mu tUai sharing of
the technical skills which attach to the working
of these communication systems. A fourth essenlial
is a sense of responsibilitv on the part of those
who use the media of modern communications, as
freedom of information deve ! ops on the inter-
national plane...
Content of Information
The realisation of freedom of information does
not consist simply in opening up access ta more
and more masses of information of any and every
kind. Nor does it mean merely the absence of let
or hindrence tei information... A laisser-faire anarchy
in the services of informatiOn is incompatible with
the true nature of liberty, and can only derive from
a blindness to the real needs of the world, tO the
real inequalities which exist, to the basic character
of many of the obstacles which have been es-
tobHshed, and ta the true sOurces of the differences
of opinion on the nature of these ob. tac ! es...
We must have it in our considered minds ta
denounce bath the distortion of news and the com-
mon vulgarity of which the purveyor., of news are
sa frequently guilty. Here the professiona ! organi-
sations in the field of information, with their un-
doubted awareness of the problem before us, have
a great social l'ole ta play in applying themselve.
even more intensely to the con, ! ideration of the
se !/-cr : ttC ! SM, se !/-f ! ! Sc : pHKe ttKd se !/-e< ! ! <c<ttt07t Mhtchlf e iticism, self-discipline and self-edlte/Hion which
the occasion requises.
What criteria are we to adopt in the evaluation
of the content of information ? If we atta ( ; h
OMrsehjes, as in the old days ouf artisan press solely
ta the individnal's right ta express himself, the
only criterion we c : an adopt is the criterion of trurh.
From this standpoint, the only constraints you can
' ; Isk for are those rooted in the requiremenls oi
public order. Further, it has become plain ta us
how much too general is this criterion of abstract
truth.., It would be better, 1 suggest, to describe
freedom of information in terms of the functional
lelationship of information ta the needs of the
people, whether il be in recognition of the mass of
the people as the only true fount of right and
law, or whether it be simply in recognition of their
right to the information they need...
It ils. 1 believe, when we look on the problems
of information in this way that we begin ID reatise
their deep relationship with science imd culture.
Erery group, scientific, artistic, professional ar social
which has its reality in performing a service to
mankind should, for this retts<&gt;n, have ils OWIt
argans of information and expression. Tholtgh
from one angle they may represent different and
sometimes conflicling professional interests, theit'
contributions are necessary tO the common welfare
of mankind and ID the international tJ. nderstanding
and unit y we seek.
It is with this in mind that Unesco's programme
tòday is devoted, on the one hand, to meeting (he
technwal needs 1 have mentioned. But it also
launches OUf to, include the interchange of man's
aehievements in science and the arts, philOsophy
and the humanities. ln particular Unesco is
developing today a large programme of article.
broadeasts and films demonstratinq the excellencies
c ? t< ! part ! C « ! < ! r ochtefeMpttts o/< ! t//e<-eKt eOMtttnes.and icular achievem nts of different countries.
which will oe interehanged amongst the nations of
the world.
It is out of these various considerations that 1
have instructed my representatives here in Geneva
tO present to the eonfere1UY1 onlJl proposais which
we consider to be concrete and pract ! ca !.
Unesco is, by its chameter and Charter dedicated
to freedom of information. But because we attach
slæh impartanee 10 il, it is the substance and not
the shadow which we want. We want Ihat substance
to be emphasised in practical measures and asso-
ciated with the living and working groups which
everywhere represent the creative forces in society
to-day...
We cannot af/ ? rd any longer to have liberty
confused, whether in ! he minds of Doliticians, in-
tellectuals or commerc1al opernfors, eith. er with the
fares of privilege or with the fo :. ces of anarchy.
This we say must be done with, for only then can
. man look at the frue face of freedom and know,
once and for oH, that the on and only begelter
of freedom is the spirit of traternitJl itself.
