8 UNESCO COURIER
Arts and Letters
Programme
for 1948
,,.
fACH branch of Arts and Letters has before it pro-
jests which constitute valuable contributions tothe Arts. The programme is a direct attempt to
stimulate the arts and to further the major Unesco
aim of promoting understanding between peoples. It
entails much work ; it demands co-operation, energy
and judgement.
, It has long been apparent that the exchange of
. articles between library periodicals has never. reacheda sufficient proportion or v lume to achi ve impor-
tant results in the exchange of cultures. For one
reason or another ; and particularly since 1939,
periodicals have lacked exact information regarding
the literary scene in other countries. Editors have not
known where to seek articles or how to co. ntact
writers. The'need Was felt forborne, system of, assis-
tance'by whlchál1terary re, vlew m sooie'Ìnldwest
town of the United States, four example, or a strug-
gling review in a devastated country could enjoy the'
possibility of publishing articles by foreign con-
tributors In the same way the great reviews of'the
European capitals have desired to print the works of
writers in other countries.
It is the aim of the Interna. Uonat Literary Pool
to effect this exchange, and to help literary periodic-
als in their attempts to keep their readers informed
of-international literary and cultural life. During
"1947 the Secretariat conducted preliminary enquiries
as to how this project might be accomplished, and
how a Pool, a turntable of this nature, might best
serve its purpose.
That such a Pool was necessary, soon became
apparent. Requests for information and for articles
were received from sources in many different parts
of the world. To take a typical example, the Pool
was axle to place the French review"la Nef"in
contact with the"Revista de America :' which is
published i, nl Bogotá.'
But it must be emphasised that Unesco has no
Desire to create a monopoly and no wish to act as
3'substitute for a. literary agency. It sees its wok
above all as one of liaison, as providing a means
for establishing contact at a time when communica-
tions are excessively difficult.
A well advanced project is the Internat ! onat
Theatre Institute. The setting up of this Institute
was agreed to at a meeting of experts held through
the direct agency of Unesco in July, 1947. It is to
, hold its first Congress this year,. when it. is hoped
that the d2aft charter will be ratified.
During the Congress and the early stages of the
Institute. the Secretariat, will be provided by Unesco.
It is designed to promote international exchange in
the world of the theatre, to facilitate the movement
of theatrical troupes, scripts, ideas-and all kinds of
theatrical information.
If much has already been accomplished in litera-
ture and the-theatre, only the spade work has been
undertaken in the Visual Arts. In a sense so much
could be attempted that the major problem facing
Unesco has been to limit the choice of projects to. I
those which could be effectively carried out at the
present time. It was felt by the Conference that
the most fruitful opportunity for action lay in the
field of reproductions.
During the last few years much technical progress
has been made in art reproduction methods and it
seemed ess, éntial to encourage the raising of stan-
dards and the improvement of distribution facilities
as a means of assisting art education and stimulating
cultural exchange. Any work of this nature inevitably
. would be considerable, and the Conference according-
ly felt that attention should be devoted in the first
place to important and specific periods and phases
of art.'
FINE ART REPRODUCTIONS TO BE ENCOURAGE
Though some alterations and
additions may prove necessary, the
categories marked for attention
during 1948 indicate the breadth of
the project. They concern Pre-
historic art'. Persian art, art of the
Italian Renaissance and the devel-
opment of European painting be-
tween 1870 and 1914 The aim of
the Arts and Letters Programme
isl to compile a detailed catalogue
of those paintings which have been
reproduced in colour, together with
recommendations for additional re-
productions. This catalogue will be
discussed with experts in colour
reproduction, art education and the
history of art, who are to meet in
Paris this summer at the same time
as the Conference of the Inter-
national Council of Museums. To
complement these, lists, to bring
them alive as it were, an exhibi-
tion will be held consisting of the
best colour prints available to illus-
tor, ate techniques of colour
printing and their role in art
appreciation and education.
A Conference of experts held in
1947 felt that Customs barriers
form an impediment to the ex-
change of culture. It is thus one
of the tasks of Unesco to begin
enquiries into those Customs duties
and other restrictions imposed by
Member States on the importation
of works of art, and to study the
possibilities of negotiating an agree-
ment to reduce or eliminate them.
Reproduction is on of the prin-
cipal themes of the Programme
this year. Music specialists in the
same way as Visual Arts specialists
will commence the preparation of a
catalogue of world music. As yet,
final details for this catalogue
have not been fully worked out, but
il will be approached along the
same lines as those adopted for the
Visual Arts. At the same time,
preliminary investigations will be
made into the advisability of
establishing a n International
Music Institute ; a report will be
submitted to the Third Session of
the General Conference in 1948.
Though these projects are na-
turally of paramount importance-
they are tasks specifically set by the
Conference-the Arts and Letters
Programme will also'include its
continuous activities. These consist
of research and documentation, con-
cerning all phases of the Arts and
art education, which must be built
up over'a number of years. They
. will not only enable Unesco to meet
enquiries from member states and
the general public, but equip the
Organisation to undertake such
tasks of a long or short term
nature as °the General Conference
may set for it.
