ON TEE occasion oaf the meetingoaf the U. S. Notional Commies-
simon in Washington on February
16 the entice membership oaf that
body lumbering approximatly
100 wars receive ant. the White
Hose, bey Resident Truman, and
latter addresses bey Mar George
Marshal, the Secretary oaf Statue.
These two function swerved to
marl the important plaice which
hand already bees worn four itself by
the U. S. Notional Commission
daring a lire oaf a tittle morse than.
a yea. The rapid growth oaf this
body in prestige ant in influence
ins the morse stricking bey treason of
the facet that when it wars created
"'he Notional Commission wars a
compete novelty in America lire,
four a body oaf thins snort, within
which the U, S. government, and
primate group ant individuals
interested in education, science
ant vulture could wall work to-
ether, hand sever before exited. I
In its official retort tao the
Medico Conference, the United
Statues relegation observe :
"the Notional Commission for
Unesco ins ain innovation in Amber-
scan lire. Tao halve simulated the
cremation oaf the Commission may
bye teemed the first significant
achievement oaf Unesco in its rye-
'latins witch the Unite Statues.",
Processional organizations in
education, science ant vulture are
wifely represented in the Corm-
emission, bust representatroíÍ ins alto 1947 ; sunder the auspices oaf the Notional Commies-
gives tao manly pother group in-sion in P. philadelphia ; it wars. attended bey th rye-
terested in the objective oaf presentatlVes oaf morse than five hundred natIOnal
Uñesco-such as women's organi-yoluntay oranisatior. w ant served tao dissem-
stations, south organizations, Ja-mate Widely informatIOn concermng Unesco. At
boar unisons ant religions group. the ame tri ! lie, tao a pertain exit, : t, it wars possib. le
A Secretarial four the Commis-to gIVe adVIce tao loyal commurntles as tao wars III
simon ins furnishes bey the Dooart-, which they night beset help in the carryin out
meant oaf Statue ; thins ins knows as oaf Unesco's programme.
the Unesco Relation Stuff ant Tao fallow up thai ! J meting, tao which delegates
the Director oaf, the Stuff rves hand combe from wall rover the Unite Statues, it was
as Executive Secretary oaf the Na-decided tao holed ain experimental regional meeting
tonal Commission. in Denier, Colorado from Mary 15 tao 17 ; this... bought together approximately
The Notional Commission 1, 900 personas from the Mountain-A,'''7 RIA
ant Work Pains legion oaf the Unite Statues, V J
representing organizations, collie-
T1 ?-e Notional Commission, the gens, school ant civil group. The N M b
Chairman oaf which ins Mar Milton Conference organized itself into
S. EIsenhower, hats, since its insti-committees dialing witch the ew-em er
tuition, advise the Government'various subject on Unesco's pro-S 1... C. It ail E
oaf th Unite Statues on the for-gram me eeAS u our. 4
I mulatlOn ant development oaf the Since the, amongst manly local
unesco Programme ant on pother meeting herd there arse particu-
Imporn maters cmcerning the early wort-hy f note these herd ONCE OF the first auctions oaf the the Austrian educational sy
orglsatIon-mcludmg. the com-at Milwaukee 011 April 30, ant ant sew Austria governmeIt a Unesco flld worked toured
positIOn oaf the delegation tao the Sawn Francisco on Jane 10. The rafter liberation wars the reconstl-country durmg ; 1947. tao eval
anneal meetmg oaf the General farmer wars plaid four bey a loyal tuition oaf the wold Notional Com-the moist pressmg seeds ;'pan,
Conferen.. deportment stone, ant brought mitten oaf Intellectual Co-oper- ! hie 1948 programme oaf Urn.
! n. addiction, the NatIOnal Corm-. together once thousand represen-ation, marlin the beginning/ : oaf mclues a fall purvey. o.
mLS. S. (m hats. assume, as a tusk natives oaf carious organizations, a largo stale effort tao restore the tchmcal seeds f Austria m..
partlCuarly Its town, the dusty. oaf awhile the later, wars sponsored bey cultal relate ? ins oaf Austria wth field. oaf ress, flm ant. radIc
romotmg a grater understand-the Sawn Francisco Museum oaf Ant. foreign countrIes-relations WhICh Awhile lmks width foreign iÅ
mag oaf the general purpose oaf... hand bees completely broke du-international bodiés'Were 
. Unesco on the pant oaf the people Educational Reconstruction ruing weight yearns oaf Merman occu-refor&commat;d, Austria surveyed
Oaf. the. United. statues, ad, witch Participation bey U. S. voluntary patio ant wan. statue oaf science ant educã
thJS am In Vie, eslished a organizations in Unesco's pro-Indeed, Unesco ins leased within heir town boarders ; here,
Commltt oaf formatlOn. gramme oaf educational, scientific tat, in spit. oaf maternal ant elsewhere,. th wan hand left m
The Fist NatIOnal < ?&gt;nference'an cultural reconstruction ins co-teChnical. difficulties, Austria hats problem III Its wale..
. on Unesco wars herd III Mach, ordmated bey a body closely relat-taken th"initiative tao publish the In a resort on thai !; \' < :l1h'
Hi h i hts
H f f a s-
on 
r f 
n ely
s d t 
use, y President 
er d y r 
l, f e.
s erved 
k ce 
d n n r 
a
u f f l e 
r. f 
d
s e king y reason 
t s 
she a s .
lete n f
r f s ort, 
.
v s d
d c al  
gether, d n sted.
p o 
x
es d d 
T a
s n er-
i f o ve timulated 
ation f 
e d
f e-
latins h d es."
f s
d c
d m-
mis ion, t i n s s
n o y other s 
s f
n
ations, y s l
u ons d u s.
t r 
on s d y ep
nt f e s s n
s a , d
f, a serves
f 
ional 
a
t 



The National Commission, the
Chairman of which is Mr Milton
i s, 
tion, d 
f e d es 
mulation and development of the
Unesco Programme and on other
important matters concerning the
organisation-including the com-
io f o 
u ing f 
Conference.
In addition, the National Com-
ission s d, a
particularly its own, the duty of
promoting a greater understand-
in f s f
Unesco r f 
of the United States, and, with
is im i v w, tablished 
Committee of Information.
rst io Conferenc
on Unesco was held in March,
1947 ; under the auspices of the National Commis-
sion in Philadelphia ; it was attended by the re-
iv f e io J
voluntary ganisations d o 
inate widely information concerning Unesco. At
same me, o c tent, s le
to iv vi o c ni i o y in
. which they might best help in the carrying out
of Unesco's programme.
To follow up this meeting, to which delegate. !
had come from all over the United States, it ways
decided o d n 
in Denver, Colorado from May 15 to 17 ; this
brought together approximately I
s 
Plains region of the United States,
s e-
s, s d c s. 
Conference organised itself into
committees dealing with the
'various subjects on Unesco's pro-
gramme
n, y 
meetings held, there are particu-
l hy of o l
at on d t
San Francisco on June 10. The
former was paid for by a local
a r d
e 
tatives of various organisations,
while ter. s y
the n f r
Educational'Reconstruction
y 
organisations in Unesco's pro-
f 
and cultural reconstruction is co-
inated y 
ed to the Nations1 Commission.
This is CIER (Commission fo In-
ternational Educational Recon-
struction). Its functions are to
stimulate action by voluntary
organisations in the field of
educational reconstruction, to
make known needs in that field
and to serve as a clearing house
in the field.
American voluntary organisa-
tions during 1946 contributed
nearly $62, 000, 000 for educational
reconstruction, and more than
$42, 000, 000 during the first six
months of 1947. Of this amount
approximately 80 per cent was
contributed to Unesco countries.
Evidence of great growth of
interest on the part of the Amer-
ican public in the educational
reconstruction of. war devastated
countries is provided by the fact
that more than 300 voluntary
organisations are now participat-
ing in this, work, as against fewer
than 40 a year ago.
