I. T. I.--A Liaison Centre
For Theatres the World Over
By
Maurice
K AT
Specialist in Charge of
Unesco Theatre Affair.
Reports of educational progress in each country were presented at
the Unesco-IBE Conference on Popular Education in Geneva.

Maurice Kurtz, author and play-
right, has been closelv associated
with preparations for the Inter-
national Theatre Institute since
the idea took tangible form in
1946. In the following article, he
explains something of the Insti-
tute's. purpose and something of
what it may accomplish.
THE International Theatre Institute is the newest organization onthe scene of international art. With its creation comes to a close
the two-year production-rehearsal period which focussed upon it the
attention of theatre artists, technicians and administrators the world
over.
It is an exciting experience to help transform into a living reality
the inevitably cold, conventional words of a conference resolution :
"It was resolved to call an international meeting of theatre
experts for the purpose of founding an International Theatre
Institute..." (First General Conference of Unesco, Nov. 1946,),
Many months of preliminary investigation and study went into
the early stages of the I. T. I., giving it its raison d'etre and the
concreteness which earned for it the active guidance of J. B. Priest-
ley, the enthusiasm and support of Armand Salacrou. Jean-Louis
Barrault, Clarence Derwent, Tyrone Guthrie and a host of others :
. professionals, amateurs, public.
A first"reading"of the lost. !.
took place last July when Unesco
invited twenty-five theatre experts
from fourteen countries in Eu-
rope, Asia. North and South
America, to decide for or against
"production".Within a few days, these busy,
practical-minded theatre folk put
together a programme aimed at
lowering, if not eliminating, the
obstacles which interfece with the
international movement of new
playscripts, opera and ballet
scores, performing companies. and
of the various types of informa-
tion leading to increased and
better professional relations be-
tween theatre circles of all coun-
tries, and therefore, between the
people of all countries who flock
to their theatres.
In the past year since the July
1947 Conference, I have had occa-
sion to learn with what genuine
eagerness many countries look to
the establishment of the I. T. I. In
fact, twelve of them have given
concrete proof of this by consti-
tuting national centres :
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile,
China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Italy, Netherlands, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, U. S. A.
Other countries, such as. : Argen-
tina, Bolivia, Denmack, Ethiopia,
Greece, Norway, the Netherlands,
Poland, Sweden, Uruguay, New
Zealand and the Philippines are
in various stages of organization
of their national centres.
The importance of these con-
tres, springing up like guideposts I
on all continents, has not yet be·n,
fully appreciated. For it is an
entirely new idea in the arts to
organize a precise, all-year theatre
programme whose object is to
serve the stage and its world
everywhere.
The Central headquarters is a
convenient tunnel, a clearing-
. house, if you prefer, but in any
case, not The Thing itself. Any
other view, I believe, would be
pretentious and unrealistic,
In other words, the I. T. I, s job
is to help each nation make
known, honestly and effectively
and quickly, its best theatrical
products : spoken, musical, ballet.
dance, amateur, puppets, etc...
The former Société Universelle
du Theatre made an admirable
between-the-wars attempt to
achieve a solid footing in inter-
national theatre, but met with
the insurmountable indifference
inherent to its day.
Now that many more nations
are convinced that man's happi-
ness on earth is inseparably
linked to good international con-
duct, this fresh and more mature
understanding of world problems
gives the I. T. I, a. better chance

for development and success
than its pre. wan parent.
With the hoMing of the First
Congress a few days ago, the
programme is now set. The objec-
tives are clear. The work is be-
gun-but much more remains to
be done.
And it will be, so long as each
country has a National Centre
functioning as an active source
of international theatre liaison
between itself and the rest of
the world.
