CUL
CONTINUITY IN CIVILIZED GRLD

Å Lecture Delivered
At tlte Prague Seminar
fRuth Benedict, word-renowned social anthropologist, was one of the participants at the Unesco-
sponsored Seminar en childhood Education, held in Podebrady Czechoslovakia from July' 21 to August 25,
Shortly after her return to the United States. Ruth Benedict suddenly died on September nth. tier
books "Patterns of Culture''and "The Races of Mankind"have been read and discussed in many
countries.
We publish below the partial text of one of the) ast talks by Ruth Benedict, delivered at the
Podebrady Seminar this summer. Readers wishing to receive the full text of this stimulatinr lecture
can do so by writing to the EducatÎen Department of  Unesco for document Sem. III./Lec./10
The late Ruth Benedict
When Unesco drew up its programme of
 work it stressed the need for"an enquIry
into the distinctive character of the various
national cultures and ideals, with the a : m of
stlmulating the sympathy and respect of nations
for each other's ideals and aspiration and the
appreciation of national-problems. One focus of
such an enquiry would be the study 0 : ways
by which the young are trained to become res-
ponsible participants in the national culture".
Unesco has in this statement of policy stated
its belief that recognition of cultural differences
among civilized nations can promote internation-
al co-operation. Usually in most nations, the
attitude has been qllite different. Usually people
who hope for world co-operation art the very
ones who minimize fundamental
differences among the nations ;
they emphasize the similarity
of human virtues and motives.
no matter what the differences
in cultural practice and behav-
iour.
Those who oppose interna-
tional co-operation, on the other
hand, Name the chaos of the
w c world on the presence of
these differences between
one nation and another
They stress that other nations
must accept the virtues and
practices with which they are
familiar in their own culture
before it will be possible to
make a peaceful world. This is
an attitude which is centuries
old. It has not made for world
peace.
Now Unesco proposes that
social scien : ists should take the
lead in promoting a new and
different attitude, studying na-
tional differences even down
into such fundamental things
as the way we bring up our
children.
Unesco is saying, in effect.
that it is part of wisdom to
recognize that human commun-
ities are not all alike, and is------.,
suggesting that we cultivate psycholog ; callv heal-
thy attitudes also among the nations and that by
greater study and understanding of national diff-
erences we could promote a more co-operative
world.
No Nation Can Live To Itself Alone
This programme of Unesco's  is especially neces-
sary in the world today. No nation any longer
lives by itself alone. In the modern world it is
absolutely  necessary that each nation take some
attitude about other modes of life than its own.
Any study of national differences is a study
of comparative cultures. This is the special field
of social anthropology, and it is necessary to
stress a few of the principal conclusions which
have been derived from such study.
The way of life among people, the virtues
they exhibit and the aggressiveness they show is
learned in their experience in that social order ;
it is not racial ; it is not instinctive in the sense
that human beings everywhere are born with a
set of instincts which account for their aggres-
sions and their cruelties.
The cultural patterns which men in all societies
invent for themselves and transmit down the
generations have in eact1 community a consider-
able degree of consistency w : thin them-
selves. These pattern of learned behaviour have
to be taught anew to each generation. No matter
how distinctively French France seems over
several centuries, or how Dutch Holland seems.
with each ne. generation the personnel of
France and Holland changes completely. One
generation dies and another is born. In the way
in which parents handle their babies, in the
way in which older children treat younger
children, in the way in which teachers reward
and punish their pupils, emotions are selected
and cultivated in them whict1 fit them to be
members of their own commuaity and nation.
Cultural study of national differences is just
beginning to be accepted. The members of this
seminar have therefore an opnortunity to con-
tribute to the research which is necessary, and
it is wcll to say a few words about methods of
training for such work.
Comparative study of human culture was not
possible before the development of certain eli-
mates of opinion, and no student of the subject
can do excellent work who finds this climate of
opinion personally distasteful.
Students of comparative cultures have usually
been trained by acquainting them with a wide
range of the diversities of possible social insti-
tutions which are traditional in various parts
of the world and then sending them to faIrly
small simple communities very different from
their own. These are often pre-
literate tribes.
Because the social arrange-
ments and motivations of
these communities are entirely
unfamiliar to the student, he
has to observe and record every
detail of their lives in order
to understand them. The"cult-
ural surprise"he experiences
gives him an education in patt-
erns of culture which it is hard
to give in any other way.
Genetic Study
of National Character
This Unesco seminar is de-
voted to the study of childhood
education, and Dr. Chen's study
group has as its subject"Child-
hood Education in Different
Nations". In line wi : h Unesco's
programme, seminar members
are interpreting their assign-
ment. not merely as the child's
school education, but as his
home and community exper-
iences as well,"the ways in
which the young are trained to
become responsible participants
in their national culture".
It is hoped that some of the
delegates to this seminar will----Çl-------
be stimulated by the discussions here, to go back
to their countries to record observations and in-
terviews, and thus contribute to mutual knowledge
among nations of the world.
Genetic study of different cultures is precisely
the study of how each generation is conditioned
"to become responsible participants", in the way
of life which is traditional in the community
into which it is born. The technical development
of such study is possible today because of
knowledge that has been acquired in several
sister sciences, all of which are mvolved in such
genetic studies : (a) the study of the physical
maturation of the child ; (by medical studies i : 1
the field of psychosomatics ; (c) psychiatry.
Training The Young
As Responsible Participants
In National Cultures
Aided by the development of these related
sciences, the time is ripe for the study of the
"ways in which the young are trained to become
responsible participants in national cultures". It
is only necessary to collect the observations and
record the attitudes upon which understanding
can be based.
Thus. when all European nations have made
systematic records of observations of child life
and have gathered data from pare : its and from
educators can adequate understanding be
obtained of the ways in which children in differ-
ent areas of Europe are fitted"to become res-
ponsible participants"in national life.
If we are to accept the different ideals and
alternative social arrangements of the nations of
the world, those of us who are professionally
concerned with childhood educatioa have a task
which extends far beyond problems of curricu-
lum revision. We need the clear-sightedness and
the tolerance which will help us to appreciate
the different kinds of strengths which different
nations could contribute to the world in which
we desire to live.
