Meeting in the City of Guatemala, for the first Latin American Congress of Universities.representatives of 134 universities and state and denominational institutions have
approved a new Charter, defining the principles which will govern their activities.
The Charter, accepted by the Congress, at a special meeting under the chairmanship of
Dr. José Rolz Bennet, Dean of the Faculty of Philosophy of Guatemala, lays down that the
Universities of Latin America shall :
« Direct education tow. arus the complete
development of the human personality and
towards ensuring respect for human rights
and fundamental liberties ; towards the
promotion of understanding, tolerance and
friendship between all nations, social or
religious groups ; towards furthering the activ-
ities of the United Nations for the maintenance
uf peace, in close co-operation with institutions
devoted to the advancement Of culture, science,
education. and arts
The Charter also enumerates the Principles
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
to the realization and maintenance of which
the Universities must also contribute. In doing
so, it confìrIIlS the words of M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, who in a
message to the Congress said that such a
Declaration :
«... is not the fruit of a moment's legalistic
euphoria on the part of governments. Though
it yet lacks the contractual character which
would make dt a legal weapon in the hands of
men meeting their current trials, it is even
now a spiritual buttress of the future peace.
Its importance springs from the fact that
every stone in this buttress is a contribution
from some different section of the human race.
All history, all races and all languages speak
its precepts. And with them are heard the
voices of all civilizations ; for many of the
rights here stated found their, first refuge In
halls of learning like your own)).
Universities Union
EstahlÏshed
To carry out the directives of the Congress,the Uni n of Latin American Universities
was established, on a proposal from the
University of Havana and the Institute of
University Relations and Research of Santiago.
Chile.
By these means an improvement of the edu-
cational centres will be sought through the
strengthening of their relations with Unesco,
and with the Inter-American Cultural Council :
of the Organization of American States.
Wider co-operation in the academic and
administrative organization of Latin American
Universities is one objective, but without pre-
judice to the distinctive qualities of each.
There will be considerable increase in exchan-
ges of professors, students, research workers
and graduates as well as freer flow of publi-
cat'ons, articles and research and teaching
material.
Thirty-four delegations, under the Press.
dency of Dr. Carlos Martinez Duran, Rector of
the University of San Carlos, approved these
fundamental bases for cO-Qperation between
educational centres.
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, in his message to
the Congress, also stated :
« In this age of transition the fundamental
problem is that of Duty in Freedom. To the
solution of that problem the universities are
committed as irrevocably as Unesco. Were
there no other reason, that joint task would
alone explain my fraternal interest in your
Congress and my eager wishes for your suc-
cess x.
Living Expression
0' community
A number of international observers studiedthe work car ied out by the Congress
commissions, set up for examining the
various programme items : the mission of the
University, organization of studies, University
co-operation and the formation and indepen-
dence of the University patrimony. Among
these visitors were the Rector of Brussels Uni-
versity and representatives from the University
of California, the George Washington Uni-
versity of Seattle, the University of Tulane,
and of the Paris Sorbonne.
The meetings unanimously upheld the prin-
ciples relating to the intellectual freedom of
professors and research workers, and to the
independence of Universities.
Another clause in the new Charter declares
that the University is :
« The living expression of its times and of
the community in which tt operates. It is not
only an entity which accumulates culture and
transmits knowledge, but an active system of
functions benefiting the community in which
it is born x.
The new code also cites the manner in which
a University must contribute to the forming
of a civic outlook, in order to achieve an era
of peace, based on respect for human persona-
lity in accordance with the ideals of democracy
and social justice.
Professor Bosch-Gimpera, Head of Unesco's
Division of Philosophy and Humanistic Stu-
dies, who attended the Congress as personal
representative of M. Torres Bodet, has reported
that the University spirit dominated the work
done in Guatemala.
« The majority of those present were Uni-
versity Rectors x, he said, « convinced of the
extreme importance of the moment, and of
the need four maintaining close contact with
Unesco and with the Interim Committee of
Universities, which is at present functioning
at Unesco House, and which has been instruc-
ted to organize the First World Conference of
Universities >&gt;,
The Congress supported Unesco's drive to
ensure that the great Educational Centres
in the world co-operate more closely.
