-
'SOMEWHE :
,.,
A Photographer Highlights
THROUGH THE EYE
OF THE CAMERA
The guns did not curve around school buildings
to reach enemy targets. Amidst the ruins of
Favoriten, a workers'district in Vienna, shoeless
boys (Right) play on what was once a
battlefield.
* * *
But the schools are coming back. They are the
first new buildings one sees in war-devastated
Europe. Above, construction of a new school in
a Hungarian village. Eagerly young boy and girl
lend helping hand.
* * *
Below, Polish girl in science classroom uses
Bunsen burner, ingeniously made from ink
bottle, to heat chemistry retort built out of old
electric bulb.
Of Post-Wa
IT the summer of 1948 Mr. Davidt Seymour, a distinguished United States
photographer, undertook for Unesco an
extensive photographic documentation of the
needs and problems of Europe's children,
with special reference to the activities of
the various U. N. agencies engaged in helping
to solve these problems.
Mr. Seymour has recently returned to
Paris after completing six months in five of
Europe's war devastated countries.
The result of this mission is an impressive
collection of over 5, 000 pictures, some of
which have already been or are soon to be
published by LIFE, ILLUSTRATED, SIE UND
ER, FRANCE-ILLUSTRATION, and other
leading magazines in various countries.
Asked to give his first-hand impressions
of this trip, Mr. Seymour told the following
story :
.-
Eyes And Camera Open
To The Faces Or Children
. ii  S a photographer, I don't know much
A'-about words. I speak the language of
pictures. I look around and I try to
record what I see. In the last six months I saw
plenty. I went to Poland, Hungary, Greece, Italy
and Austria with my eyes and my camera open
to the faces of children.
"Here is my key picture to the whole series :
A bunch of kids who in the midst of the ruins
of their bombed-out cities are playing with
bricks. They are building a miniature house for
their games : they marked out two doors, and on
the doors they put up two signs : one saYs"Kin-
dergaten, Age 3 to 6'-the other"Doctor's
Office".
"Here is your answer-direct from the chil-
dren themselves. They want a school to replace
the missing warmth of their tost homes-a
place to play as well as a place to learn. They
want a doctor to protect and build up their
frail health. All over the five countries I saw
this one story : the terrible need and the great
challenge. Youngsters sitting on steps of bombed-
out naked stairways of their houses. Through
the smashed staircases you could see the sky-
the sky that is the limit for the help they need.
"I also saw the beginnings, the wonderful
beginnings of this help. In Poland, amidst the
desert of the Warsaw ghetto, I saw the oasis
of the garden school for handicapped and
backward children-orphans, kids born in con-
centration camps, war-scarred victims of all
sorts. Specially trained teachers are returning
these youngsters to normal life by making them
do productive work of the sim ! llest, vet most
convincing kind : by making them experience
that things can live again, by making them
watch their own garden growing and blossoming
and bearing fruits.
The road through the juvenile court into the refor
9-year old Napolitan stands before a tribunal 0
change. Right, a 13-year old Viennese boy gazes tm
his juvenile prison cell.

.
E IN EUROPE'..
,--..- ;--'--0.--",-
'.
The Drama
Youngsters
W W M N the rubble of Monte Cassino, I sawItalian boys playing with empty sheds.
I saw little girls selling black market
cigarettes and soap in the streets of Naples. But
I also saw, and this is the contrast I want to
stress, I saw the Villagio del Fanciullo-a child-
ren's community with adequate medicat, educa-
tional and recreational facilities.
Old Electric Bulbs
And Corned Beef cans
atory. Above, a
a delinquency
igh the bars of
Italian boy (above), blind and armless after a hand grenade explosion in last days of battle for Rome.
reads Braille with his lips
Classroom (below) of this tiny school in village of Dioanata, Greece, is so overcrowded that 3 child.
must share one desk. Because of schoolbook shortage, children must also share textbooks-
efforts or dtffer-.
e n t countries
the world over,
organizing the
interchange of
different expe-
riences, working
out psychologi-
cal treatments
and other ap-
propriate meth-
ods of healing
the wounds of
the abandoned,
delinquent and
backward child-
ren of Europe.
"In Greece, I saw soldiers camping in a forest
amidst scattered benches of an evacuated school.
I also saw, against the backgrou, nd of the Acro-
polis in Athens, Danish nurses and doctors vac-
cinating Greek children against tuberculosis.
This is being carried out as a joint project of
two United Nations Agencies, the Children's
Emergency Fund and the World Health Organ-
ization. Together with the Danish Red Cross
and the local governments, these agencies aim
at treating, in the next five years, fifty million
children the world over. I saw fifty doctor-nurse
teams operating in Poland and Hungary with
a record of close to three million children
already tested and treated in these two countries
alone.
"Wherever I went, in any of the five countries,
the first new buildings I saw, white and cheerful
amidst the desolation of war-blinded cities, were
schools. Everywhere I saw overworked teachers
fighting with enthusiasm and resource against
shortages of school supplies-making old elec-
tric bulbs into chemistry retorts, corned reef,
cans into calorimeters, or building optical instru-
ments with raw macaroni.
"Wherever I went, I saw children playing out
their dreams of a full and peaceful life amidst
the ruins of their parents'world. Wherever
I went, I saw the efforts of UNICEF to give
them milk-so they could sleep better
In fact, the work of the international and
national relief organizations has shown rea. !,
positive results. TodaJAo the most immediate prob-
lems, the physical needs of food and shelter, are
steadily improving became of the rapid strides
being made in Enrope's material reconstruction.
But the other problem-the great problem
educational help, the psychological rehabilitation
and re-education of Europe's children-presents
a greater challenge than ever before.
And here, I think, Unesco has an important
and decisive role to play in co-ordinating the

THE CH ILD is entitled to special, care and assistance
(rt. 25) and has the right to education (Art. 26), to
social security and the full devel-
opment oj its persnalitr through
national effort ad international
cho-operation (Art. 22).
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
Above, a little Polish lad at the vaccination centre near Garwolin cries
as Danish Red Cross vaccinates him against tuberculosis ; the anticipa-
tion, though, is much worse than the ordeal.
The crowded small classroom set up in an apartment house in Warsaw (shown above),
Is typical of thousands of others in war-devastated Europe. Chalked legend on the black-
board reads :"Wednesday, September 29. Schooi work-Tatio writes."
For the task of educating this generation of children, Europe must recruit its teachers
out of the ranks of those who have endured the common experience of war and the fight
for freedom. The task demands of them new horizons of patience and resourcefulness.
The relation of adult and child, of teacher and pupil is difficult everywhere. But in the war devastated countries of
Europe it is more difficult. For the children of Europe have, as it were, hidden themselves behind what they remember...
They must now be coaxed out from behind the façade of agression, of timidity, In the new schools being made over in
Europe (See cut of model kindergarten in Vienna, on right) the old rigidity is being abandoned to guide the child, to
nourish his persona ! pattern of growth.-+.-+.-+
Dressed in her finest Sunday sailor-suit, this little girl, (above, left) Is seriously engaged in picking out an enchanting
ehildren's book in a recently rebuilt and re-stocked Warsaw library. The memory of terror and the fact of ruin must be
altered within the child so that they do not dominate her view of life.
Should not the sad faced young boy shown above, right, also be holding a book in his hands instead of being thrust, we
. uickl into the confusion of s"Modern Times"factorr T
