THE OUTLOOK FOR
SOCIAL SCIENCE
By Dr. Arthur Ramos, Head of the Department
of Social Sciences
IT is perhaps rather early for me to have termed any definite
impressicns about the Department of Social Sciences, for
- *-I took up my post as Head of that Department only
two weeks ago.
I found the Department carrying out plans and programmes
for which a whole team of specialists and other qualified people.
devoting their best energies and ahilities to the work, is required.
My first task will naturally be to help in carrying on'hese
activities.
I have observed that Unesco's Department of Social Sciences
is fostering three of the principal social sciences : Sociology,
Political Science and Social Psychology.
Cultural Anthropology has not yet found its place in the
Department's programme. Admittedly, in the <&lt;Tensions>&gt;
project, a few problems relating to races and minorities are
being tackled, but no regular attention has yet been given to
the special problems of Man himself.
SOCIAL SCIENCE
THE BACKWARD PEOPLES
I N my opinion, the study of this problem should be amongthe most important of the activities of the Department of
Social Sciences. First of at), a general study should be made
cf the living conditions and the indigenous civilization of the
backward peoples in their native places throughout the world ;
it would then be possible to consider them in comparison with
the dominant cultures. In other words : a study of the life and
culture of non-European peoples considered in relation to the
decisive factors of European civilization.
In this connexion, a matter which I think Unesco should
raise in its Department of Social Sciences is the question of the
assimilation of the Indian and Negro peoples of the New
World and of their introduction to our culture.
Unesco's work in this direction should be tied in with the
activities already. being carried on by certain institutions such
as the/nstituto/ndigenista/nteramericano in Mexico, the Afro-
American Institute in Cuba and others.
Many questions involve more than mere listing of the data
of the problems. and I should be glad if we could employ our
hearts as well as our brains to find solutions for the many
difficulties which confront a large part of mankind, principally
the so-called primitive peoples or the backward, oppressed or
<&lt; ma1"ginal) > folk who have not yet received the benefits of
civilization.
