THERE MUST BE NO QUESTION
OF A DEVALUATION OF UNESCO
Dr G. Zook (United States), on left, explains a point to Dr F.
Bender (Netherlands) and Sir Ronald Madam (Great Britain),
seated.
THE General Conference of Unesco is morethan a crowd of people invading the ( train
qmlity.) of Unesco House, and more than
mere academic Or diplomatic discussions. It is
a meeting of men and women who have come
together for a short time to give to the world
living proof of the work of Unesco. With the
presence of delegates from all over the world,
Unesco's different projects, experiments and
investigations take on a greater human interest
and warmth.
An educational mission to the Philippines or
to Afghanistan for example might appear to be
of limited interest. It seems very different,
however, when the Afghan representative tells of
the hopes his country places in the work of the
Unesco mission there, or when the delegate of
the Philippines in her striking butterfly-wing
dress expresses the thanks of her war-devastated
country for the help sent to schools, laboratories
and libraries.
But above all a Unesco general conference is a
sign of hope, perhaps one of the few real hopes
for peace that still remain for mankind. ThIs
very idea was expressed by India's representative
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. when, in mov !', g
words, he said : « Look at the condition of tne
world ten years after the beginning of the last
war. four years after the victory was won. One
after another the illusions which we have
chenshed are disappearing. We thought that the
sense of community would resolve all class dis-
tinctions. as it did during the period of the
war. It has not happened. We thought again that
the United Nations would be the beginning of a
new world. Well. again it has not happened. We
thought that the allies who fought the war and
won the victory would stand united and win the
peace-that has not happened"
Sir Sarvepalli ended with an urgent appeal to
delegates : « these days are big with fate The
issue of war or peace haunts us ; there is an
atmosphere of gloom ; conflict is creeping slowly
and steadily. Is it not possible under such cir-
cumstances for all our leaders, for those who
stand up for the great ideals, to get together ?
For, say half a dozen of them-two from Asia
two from Europe, America and Russia, to get
together, not for achieving any political results,
but for breaking down this blinding mist of
misunderstanding, breaking through this moun-
tain \"31'of prejudice and trying to understand
(C c) N TIN U E DON P AGE 4)

we are real lovers of peace. Is it impos-
sable ? We are meeting in this great
city, a city of artists, scholars, scien-
tists. writers, a city of a gay, copra-
geous and inspired people, a city which
has seen so many revolutions, born of
distress of mind of anxiety itself. Well.
can't we. from this city, in the name of
Unesco. send forth a message, asking
the leaders to listen to the cry of
anguished humanity, asking them to
build peace, not on the bloodshed of
the peoples of the world in the battle-
fields of earth, water and air, but on
truth and justice, built into the minds
and consciences of human poop, e. Can't
we do that ? >&gt;
Building trJth and justice into the
minds and consciences of human peop. e
is what Unesco is seeking to do in its
day to day work. But the work is too
often hampered by all sorts of difficul-
ties. Like all other efforts of man,
Unesco cannot claim perfection.
That is why. for Unesco. the General
Conference serves as a means'of shelf.
examination. It forces Unesco to take
stock of the efforts made as compared
with the results achieved. At the same
time it enables Unesco's friends not
only to support it, but to offer an ever-
watchful and cC'ìstructive criticism.
And, in fact, such suggestions or criti-
cism concerning Unesco's working
methods, were frankly voiced by the
37 speakers who addressed the Assem-
bly during the discussions of the Direc-
tor-Gsnerat's annual report. Space,
however, permits us to quote only a
few of the many important views ex-
pressed during the first four days of
the Conference.
In Our Own Right
M R. George v. Alien, Head of theUnited States delegation, took
the view that Unesco should
work more closely with the United Na-
tions. <&lt;Unesco exists >&gt;, he said « to
strengthen the system of the United
Nations. How can Unesco best serve the
United Nations ? I hope that this
question w, ll be thoughtfully considered
by evety delegate who proposes a pro-
ject to be undertaken by Unesco, or
who votes a budget item during this
conference >&gt;.
M. Georges Bidault, Head of the
French delegation, speaking a few
hours later, took the opposite view and
asked that Unesco should preserve a

degree of independence : ( (... Let us
op2rate)). he said « in our own right,
in accordance with the essential prin-
ciples we share with the United Na-
tions, as one of its Agencies, closely
connected to it, but as an organiza-
tion which nevertheless has its own
life, its own goats, its own intentions
and desires and. be it added, its own
duties').
Nazi speakers stressed the need for
Unesco to « concentrate its pro-
gramme K. Above all, stated M. Paulo
Carneiro. head of the Brazilian de : e-
gation. <&lt; so that the Secretariat can
really give full thought to each pro-
blem H. Other reasons were given by
Mr Hardman, representative of the
United Kingdom : « We here at this
Conference'\ he said, <&lt; who are learn-
ed and intelligent individual men and
women have a special responsibility as
representatives of our Commissions and
governments. The responsibility is, I
think, to see that thinking and public.
city become action. to ally thought
with the doing of things. As it would
be expressed colloquially in parts of my
country. <&lt; Cut the cackle to a mini-
mum and get on with the job". Turn-
ing to certain of Unesco's specific acti-
pities. Mr Hardman went on : « When
one thinks that some forty million pa-
ges of cyclostyled memoranda and doc-
uments in a single year have ema-
nated from the Organization, surely it
is reasonable that we should ask our-
selves. is all this really necessary ?
Pursuing the same-one of thought, he
later said* : «... the kind of questions
this business conference must ask it-
self is this' « How many people have
we taught to :-ead for the first time in
their lives, since the Beirut Confe-
rence ? and not'how many cyclostyl-
ed pages of memoranda and luxury
editions have we published ?.))
mHESE detailed discussions of) Unesco's activities have not meant
that no delegates have tried to
find solutions to the fundamental prob-
lems facing mankinct today. Thus, for
example, Mr Mev Yi Chi. the delegate
of China, conc'uded his speech with
these words : <&lt; For mutual understand-
ing and appreciation between the East
and the West, it seems that much of
the best of the two cultures, in lite-
rature, in art and in philosophy, should
be brosght out as complementing fac-
tors for what we hop2 eventually to ar-
rive at-the birth of a world culture.
The West is making great strides in
the advanc of modern civilization, but
for an ultimate solution of the situa-
tion arising from conflicting ideas and
attitudes as we have to-day, we may
need to search seriously into the phi-
losophies of the East and the West,
perhaps more of the East.
The Polish delegate, M. Putrament,
voiced strong opposition to any Unesco
activities in Germany, thereby differ-
ing completely with M. EI Hashimt,
the de. egate of Iraq, who had com-
p. ained that Unesco was not duing
enough there.
At the close of the discussion, the
Director-General ot Unesco replied to
the various speakers. To those who had
comp. ained that Unesco's programme
was too broad, M. Torres Bodet said :
« Instead of asking for resources ap-
propriate to secure the aims of the pro-
gramme. the programme can be
brought down to the level of the re-
sources. But I wou. d point out that the
programme of which you compiain is
not my programme ; I had it irom you
in Beirut, still warm with the enthu-
siasm of your discussions. It is, there-
fore, you own work that you want to
reduce. You are certain. y entitled to do
,, 0, but, gentlemen, I b2g yoa to think
carefully before you do it, and not to
allow yourselves to be guided sole. y by
financial considerations. Do not let the
currency devaluation which, in certain
countries, has coincided with this Ses-
sion of the Conference, be a sign of
the deva : uation of Unesco ! >&gt;
Holding out Hope
M TORRES BODET then quoted aletter which he had receivedfo. Iowing his opening speech at
the General Conference. The letter
had stated that it was not « boastful
propaganda>&gt; to make Twentieth-Cen-
tury man familiar with Unesco's aims,
but « a way of holding out hopex. « Are
we to be prevented from holding out
hope'). asked M. Torres Bodet. « Do
we wish to hold up Unesco's develop-
ment in its fourth year of existence at
the very moment when it is becoming
firmly established, when it is beginning
to give tangible signs of its resolve and
of successful achievement, by deferring
further progress to a later date ? Or do
Wè wish to push ahead with yet more
energy and larger resources ? I do not
hesitate to state my conviction that if
we defer progress to later, it will be
too late. We shall have foundered in
apathies. Life is a constant effort. He
who does not go forward drops back ;
he who drops back is lost. There can
be no hesitation btween a great and
a little Unesco, between a Unesco which
'tands stil. 1 and a dynamic Unesco, es-
specially at this ear. y stage in its his-
tory, this moment in the world'S his-
Mry. Unesco must be a great force or
nothing. Our Constitution commits us
to greatness. Gentlemen, you no doubt
rea. izethisasc. earlyasldo. andl
hope In all earnestness that your dis-
cussions will make this clear beyond a
doubt".
