Miss Johanna R. Wolff,'. brarian of the Public library at The Hague, talks to children
in the Cleveland Pubi. c L. brary. She recently returned from the United States, where
she studied on"Unesco Fellowship,
EXPERTS TO DISCUS S
EXCHANGES.
Miss Vidorio Abeterdo. of the Philippines, ond Hr. Johonnes Helgheim, of Norway, both
Unesco Fellows. study oudio-visuol equipment et Columbia University.
P R'OBUEMS relating to the inter-
national movement of persons
for educational and cultural pur-
poses and the promotion of such inter-
change will be discussed by a meeting
of experts to be held at Unesco House
on the 9. 10 and t2 September.
Some of those invited to take part
in the discussions come with long ex-
perience in the field of international
cultural relations, They include : M.
Marce) Abraham,. head of the Cultural
Relations department of the French Mi-
nistry of Education ; Dr. Olaf Devik.
of the Scientific and Cultural Depart-
ment of he Norwegian Ministry of
Church and Education. Our. Girous, of
the Ministry of Education of Czechos-
slovakia ; M. R. Ogiati. Director of
Swiss Aid to Europe and formerly Di-
rector of the Swiss Aid to War Vic-
tims ; Miss Nancy Parkinson, Control'
ler of the Home Division of the Bri-
tish Council ; M r. Donald Shank. Vice-
President of the Institute of Interna-
tional Education in New York.
Some of these experts are from coun-
tries or agencies that have embarked
only recently on this type of activity.
< : r whose programmes have been con-
siderably expanded during the post-v. ar
years. Among them are experts from
the United Nations, the I nternationai
Labour Office, the International Chil-
dren's Emergency Fund and the World
Health Organisation. Other agencies to
he represented are : The British Com-
mittee for the Interchange of Teachers
(buy its Chairman and Director, Miss
E. A. Ford) : The 1 international Fede-
ration of Workers'Educational As-
sociations (by its President, Mr. E.
Green) ; and the) nternationa ! Asso-
ciation for the Exchange of Students
for Technical Experience (by its Ge-
nera ! Secretary. Mr. j. Newby).
It was the United Kingdom delega-
tion to the Beirut Conference that
first proposed that administrators of
fellowship. and other international ex-
change programmes in various parts of
the world be given the opportunity
to exchange views and benefit from ex-
periences of others in the planning and
realization of programmes.
International Fellowships
'T I f, E rrovi-ional agenda of the
meeting includes aspects of the ad-
ministration of international fellowships.
such as puhlicity of opportunities. ade-
quacy of stipends to meet reasonable
needs in the recipients'country 01
;, tudy ; ensuring that opportunity is
given for experience to be put to good
use on the recipients'return home ; fi-
nancing travel to and from the coun-
try of study. The experts will study
barriers to the movement of per-
sons, such as shortage of foreign ex-
change, high costs of transportation,
visa and other problems, legislation pre-
venting students from abroad accepting
part-time employment in their country
of study, and they will consider the
co-ordination and promotion of ex-
change opportunities.
A statistical commentary has been
prepared by t'she Secretariat on existing
opportunities for international study as
reported in Volume I of <&lt;Study
A : broaò>&gt;, While this survey makes no
claim to being. complete, nevertheless
the commentary represents an initial at-
tempt to analyze the returns compara-
tively, with a new technique and the
conclusions reached should stimulate
discussion on ways of co-ordinating
existin ; g programmes a nd promoting
further opportunities in areas of espe-
cial need.
ciFellowships in the IUnesco Program-
mer. a document prepared for donors
of international fellowships, suggest,
ways in which study and travel grants
may be used as a means of promoting
priority projects in the Unesco pro-
gramme. Working papers have also
been prepared on the exchange of youth
workers and teachers, fields to which
L'nesco has this year extended its col-
lection of information and promotio-
nal work.
Discussions will cover the role of the
United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies, governments and private agen-
cies and individuals in promoting ex-
change. Finally, a paper prepared by
the Departments of Social Sciences and
Exchange of Persons will be presented
on the development of standards of eva-
luation of exchange of persons pro-
grammes as they contribute to inter-
national understanding.
It is hoped to publish a summary
of the discussions in the supplement to
Volume II of <study Abroad*, early in
19 9, o../
27
