STUDENT GROUP
"BEHIND THE SCENES"
AT UNESCO CONFERENCE
cultural organization of the United
Nations is concerned.
Dr. E Ronald Walker, President of
the General Conference, was able to
present them with a first-hand pre-
view of what the Conference hoped
to do in Paris. M. Maquet, of the
Belgian delegation, gave up som2 of his
By Georges N. SKAFF
PRESIDENT OF THE LEBANESE
STUDENTS UN ASSOCIATION
THIRTY men and women students,t representing nve continents,
gathered round a table in one of
the rooms of Unesco House, d'uring the
progress of the Fourth Session of the
General Conference, to learn about the
"know-how"of Unesco. This study
group, or seminar, had been inspired
by the World Federation of United
Nations Associations (WFUNA), whose
business it is to spread knowledge to
young and old'about the behind-the-
scenes mechanism of Unesco and other
United Nations Specialized Agencies.
An important purpose of WFUNA
in convening this seminar was to give
the young people concerned, who are
preparing for political, economic and
international careers, a chance of be-
coming acquainted with the technique
of a large international conference.
The Federation had made similar
arrangements for doctors to attend
the WHO Assembly in Rome and the
same opportunity will be given at the
Economic Commission for Europe
meeting in Geneva, next May.
Students Came
From Five Continents
GEOGRAPHICAL distribution of
the students was wide. From the.
Argentine came a student of the
Institute of Social Studies, from Bel-
gium a student of journalism, and from
Cambodia and Ceylon, law students.
A Chinese woman student was
preparing a thesis on Unesco, while
several French women students were
studying law and literature. Science
was the chosen study of the Egyptians,
Syrians and Turks while Dominican
students had taken up social science.
Members of the student group, who had an.. inside view Ð of Unesco's General
Conference, with Miss Myrna Loy a member of the United States Delegation,
after she had spoken to them on films and mass communications.
Young Americans were going in for
international studies, and an English-
man was taking modern languages.
All these studies are closely linked
with Unesco's work.
For a fortnight, the students were
part of the conference organization.
They enjoyed the same advantages as
delegates, attended plenary and com-
mission meetings, and were guests at
official receptions. They had the full-
est opportunity to make close contact
with those responsible for shaping
Unesco's future.
Anthropology and
Conference Preview
But the students had not come to
the conference merely as obser-
vers. They had their own special
work in the Unesco House room, where
every day an important spokesman or
spokeswoman from Unesco spoke to
them. often after lunching with them.
on one of the problems with which the
conference work time to address them
on one of Unesco's most serious pro-
blems : fundamental education. His
example was the Belgian Congo. Pro-
fessor Sommerfelt of Norway used the
latest discoveries of anthropology to
demonstrate how out-of-date are racial
and nationalist doctrines..
How Education May Save
Civilization
Do. G. Zook, Chairman of the
United States Council of Educa-
tions, spoke about higher educe :
tion in his country, and described
Unesco's work at the Universities Con-
ference held at Utrecht last year.
Mr. Mei, president of the Chinese
Univesity of Pelping, told about his
country's students and their work.
M. Sarrailh, Rector of the Academy
of Paris, dealt with the mission of the
universities, and detailed his plan to
oring higher learning more into line
with the needs of modern life.
Mr. David Hardman, British Mem-
ber of Parliament, and Parliamentary
Secretary to the Ministry of Educa-
tion, broadened the scope of the se-
minar discussion with a lively, per-
sonal account of how education may
save our civilization.
Count Jacini, head of the Italian
delegation, lectured on Europeans'pro-
blems, and gave his conclusions on the
work of the Council of Europe at
Strasbourg, which he had attended.
Dr. Zeissel, head of the Austrian dele-
gation, had a busy time answering
questions on current happenings in
Austria.
To end this round of prominent
Unesco speakers came U Ba Lwin,
head of the Burma delegation, who
talked about his country, and Miss
Myrna Loy, film star, and member of
the United States National Commission
for Unesco, who spoke on films and
mass communications.
Twelve Voices
Round a Microphone
, EE discussion followed each talk
and this unofficial, frank and
lively exchange of views between
students was steered by Mr John
Ennals, Secretary General of WFUNA,
and_his assistant, M. Dausset.
Outside their work as observers
and debaters, the visiting students
made excursions to centres of cultural
interest in the vicinity of Paris : mu-
seums, historic chateaux and libra-
ries. At the Palais de la Decou-
verte, M. Leveille spoke to them, on
behalf of the International Council of
Museums, about the links between
Unesco and museography. At the Mu-
see GaIIiera, they saw the Unesco Exhi-
bition of Human Rights. At the Salle
Gaveau, they listened to the concert
of works by international composers
to commemorate the centenary of the
death of Chopin.
A dozen students of different na-
tionalities went to the microphone for
a broadcast arranged by the Unesco
radio division, to give impressions of
their visit to Unesco. They welcomed
the invitation of other broadcasting
stations, Paris-Inter and Radio-Luxem-
bourg to relay these impressions to stu-
dents throughout the world.
