T live Paris exhibition on Human Rights, which
on opens at the Musée Galliéra on October 1, is
the most important achievement to date in
H Unesco's plan to publicize the story of
mankind's age-old fight for freedom, so as to
encourage modern man to respect and defend the rights
on which it is founded.
The largest public exhibition which Unesco has yet
organized, it has required months of research and pre-
paration, and, above all, close collaboration between the
Unesco Secretariat in Paris and the Governments and
National Commissions of Unesco's Member States.
Undoubtedly the most striking proof of this success-
ful collaboration is that Unesco has been able to
assemble a remarkable collection of authentic histo-
rical documents upon which are founded the laws and
guarantees now enjoyed by citizens of different
countries.
Loaned by the governments of these countries for
display at the exhibition, these origin : J I documents-
charters, declarations and drafts-not only advanced
the progress of human rights in their countries of
origin, but were a source of inspiration to people in
other land also struggling to achieve freedom.
Documents such as the French Constitution of l7tlf
and Lincoln's early draft of the Emancipation Procla-
mation which freed the slaves in the United States, both
of which are among those on display, illustrate the
fight for human rights throughout the centuries and
their acknowledgement across the world.
BU. T, tllf'. p ; qn p[J['puse of the exhibition is not simplyto two historic documentary evidence on the
progressive recognition of human rights in different
countries. Primarily, it aims to show the debt that
mankind to-day owes to the"fighters for freedom"of
the past and that the task they began will only be
complete when the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has been converted into fact.
Emphasizing the universal nature of the responsibi-
lity for achieving and defending human rights and thus
bringing out a"world task"theme for the exhibition,
the first exhibit at the J\lusée Galliéra is a planetarium.
Through its window, visitors will see the earth turning
in space-an earth whose political divisions have sym-
Man conquering his FreedUm
bolieally lJeen lefl UlHnHr'ked, And ; as they
look into the window, they will heap a
recorded voice repeating the texts of the first
three articles of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
With this spoken prologue in their minds,
they can next take a"pocket tom"of man-
kind's history from prehistoric times down
to the present âay. Illustrated panels and
panoramas show man's slow emancipation
and his gradual mastery of nature and him-
self : the first tools, the first forms of cultiva-
tion, the first affirmations of moral laws and
the later conquest of civic and political rights
illustrate the contributions of all peoples,
nations and civilizations to the sum total of
Human Rights.
nero, having told the story of how manyof the rights. were achieved, the exhibi-
tion shows in a series of illustrations
how these rights were abused and violated hy
totalitarian states, a state of affairs which led
to the Second World War. A fresh series of
photographs shows the struggle of the demo-
cracies to re-assert the rights and, the even-
tual establishment of the United Nations to
found a peace based on the principles laid
down bv President Roosevelt, in his famous
"Four Freedoms"message of January 6,
1941.
This pictorial"history book"of the last
two Jec : ades leads visitors iuto a second ! jail
where 14 pillars illustrate episodes relating
to one or more of the 30 articles of the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Na-
tions on December 10, 1948.
One side of each pillar shows the periods
in history when the rights concerned were
respected and, lower down, when the rights
were violated or ceased to exist. Illustra-
tions on the other side of the pillar show
steps in the fight for human rights and the
results achieved in the struggle.
It is hoped in this way to bring home the
extent of the debt owed by humanity to those
men and women whose efforts and sacrifices
built up the existing heritage while at the
same time making clear the practical impor-
tance of their achievements.
Having told the background story of the
fight for Human Rights, the exhibition then
shows some of the"milestones"on the road
to their universal recognition-origina !
historic documents from France. Belgium
and the United States.
The last part of the exhibition is devoted
to the duties which each person must fulfìl
if Human Rights are to become and remain
a reality for all, special emphasis being
laid on the responsibility for creating a better
world for children.
To show the measure of responsibility for
safeguarding the rights of future genera-
tions, a number of ingenious devices have
been used. One, showing the average number
of children being born in the world during
each minute is set at zero each morning, and,
by the time the exhibition closes in the
evening, something like 20, 000 births will
have been registered.
IT is very fitting that the words of Mahat-ma Gandhi, one of the greatest defenders
of human rights who ever lived, should
have been chosen as an"epilogue"for visi-
tors to read as they leave the exhibition.
In a letter which Gandhi wrote in 1947 to
Dr Julian Huxley, at that time Director-
General of Unesco, he said :"I learnt from
my illiterate but wise mother that all rights
to be deserved and preserved came from
duty well done. Thus, the very right to live
'accrues to us only when we do the duty of
citizenship of the world. From this one fun-
. damental statement, perhaps it is easy
enough to define the duties of Man and
Woman and correlate every right to some
corresponding duty to be first performed.
Every other right can be shown to be an usur
pation hardly worth fighting for".
The Human Rights exhibition will be open
to the general public from October i until
December 31 and arrangements are being
made for thousands of French school chil-
dren to visit it.
Unesco also hopes that it may be possible
to provide Member States with materials for
organizing in European capitals some sim-
plified replica of the Paris Exhibition. It is
also hoped that photographic reproductions
and plans of the exhibition may be sent to
countries far from Paris so thaI they too may
be able to hold exhibition :- ;'lltÌ I'P IheÙ.
people some idea of what has h.... tl i,,'l1ieved.
