T U ; I< : H is a to-ordinating council of interlÌaUonal non-govern-
mental organizations actively contributing to the habilitaUon of
education and euUure in war devastatcd areas.
Its menlbership is limited to those international OI"IJanizations
most actively engaged in this field, but, as each member is actually
a ledcration of national branches, the particil, ants 01 TICEH repres-
ent over 700 national organizations in more than M) countries.
"'hill'presen'ing their lull autonomy and independence, the
members of TICER have formally associated themselves with
Unesco and hold their meetings in Unesco House.
The article below describes how TICER has been working
with Unesco during the past two and a half years and demonstrates
how its radius of action is now being extended to problems other
than those directly connected with war devastation.
THE STORY OF VOLUNTEERS IN THE FRONT
LINE OF EDUCATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION
EARLY thIs year, the General Con-
r1 ference of TICER representatives
appointed a fact-finding committee
to establish whether or not the
Council had fulfilled Its purpose.
This three-member committee met
shortly before the opening of Unesco's
Fourth General Conference, in September,
and with the aid of records, correspon-
dence and other documents, it reviewed
TICER's activities during the last two and
a half years.
At the end of its enquiry, the committee
decided that the Council had fully justified
its exIstenae and its finding was endorsed
by the Unesco General Conference, when
It later approved the Reconstruction
Department's proposal for"collaboration
with non-governmental agencies".
What is the purpose of keeping alive a
temporary council for educational recon-
struction when, as a body, it does not have
the means to reconstruct ? TICER itself
has not even sent a gross of pencils to a
wrecked school-building In a war devas-
tated country, since it was set up.
On the oiher hand, the member orga-
nizations of TICER together spend a
hundred times more on educational
reconstruction than Unesco. To quote
only one example, the World Student
Relief has between October 1947 and
September 1948 spent over $100, 000 on
relief work.
What would happen, if TICER did not
exist ? In the first place, Unesco's Recons-
truction Department Is not a relief
organization. It may receive donations
and has an emergency fund of $175, 000.
but spread over a number of countries
this amounts to token rather than sub-
stantial help.
Thus, to carry out its tasks of stimulat-
ing and co-ordinating relief, Unesco would
in the absence of TICER itself, have to call
on other agencies engaged in educational
reconstruction, supply them with infor-
mation on urgent needs and publicize the
reports on assistance given.
It would not consult each organization
individually, but would call on groups to
discus specific situations or categories of
needs. Some groups would be concerned
with work camps, others with library needs
In war damaged countries, some would
be consulted on the role of young people
In educational reconstruction and so on.
Advantages of contacts
through Ticer
t LL this is exactly what has beenhappening since 1947, thanks to
TICER, with the exception that being
a semi-permanent organization, TICER has
certain advantages over the alternative
system of looser and more occasional
contacts. Its existence has resulted In
the gradual growth of a close relationship
between its members and Unesco, through
the widespread, friendly and permanent
contacts It has maintained.
Unesco's educational relief programme
In the Middle East, for example, would
never have been so quickly Implemented
If some relationship between Unesco and
the agencies In the field had not already
existed.
But, both TICER and Unesco are con-
tinually striving to improve the efficiency
of these contacts and the scope of the
work being carried out.
TICER's standing committee met
recently to discuss the best ways of using
the experience and machinery of non-
governmental organizations in implement-
ing Unesco's programme. One of the
most important points raised at the
meeting was whether Unesco should call
In as many organizations as possible or
limit its consultations to organizations
doing a specific job connected with its
programme.
The Committee finally recommended
that the best results would be achieved
if Unesco continued to convene working
parties of TICER member organizations to
deal with specific reconstruction subjects
such as aid to handicapped children,
exchange programmes and fellowships anQ
international work camps.
The discussions which take place at
these working parties help organizations
to plan more efficient working methods
for a wide range of activities.
Recently, at a working party on exchange
programmes and fellowships, Mr P. Bearton
Akeley, of the Friends World Committee,
raised the question of whether short visits
abroad help in producing better under-
standing between peoples. He cited the
case of a group of German students which
he brought to Paris after the war.
Psychological hazards
of tourists
THESE students had wonderful time.) Most of them saw Paris for the first
time and they expressed great enthu-
siasm for French culture and love for
French life. Once back in Germany, how-
ever, the same students developed and
spread resentment,"W) ly are they (in
France) so much better ofi than we ?",
they asked.
Mr Akeley, therefore, felt that their
visit had been damaging to France and on
neither side was there more understanding.
Typical of the
work done by
TICER'S member
organizations is
that 01 the World
Student Relief
which, during the
twelve months
ending September
1948. spent over
 100. 000 on relief
work. This photo
shows packages
being distributed
by its representa-
tives in Greece to
tubercular students
at Sotiria sanato-
rium, near Athens.
There were three factors, he felt, which
might help to create the kind of contacts
useful for comprehension and international
understanding. Young travellers should
be trained psychologically to look for
comparable rather than Identical apectB
in cultures different from their own.
Arrangements should be made for them
to meet people of more than one national-
ity simultaneously, thus lessening the
chance of prejudice being developed.
Young travellers should also be left
dependent on the courtesy of their hosts,
with : he feeling that they need to be
understood rather than with the notion
that they have come there to judge.
Mr Akeley also suggested the preparation
of a pamphlet on the psychological hazards
of the tourist.
Working together. TICER and Unesco
have directed more than $100. 000, 000 in
money and gifts for the rehabilitation of
cultural life in war devastated countries.
In continuing and expanding this work
for other needs, in particular to those of
under-developed countries, Unesco needs
the energetic co-operation of international
voluntary relief organizations and through
them, of the millions of men and women
of goodwill.
