Now therefore the General Assembly proclaims this Universal Declaration of
Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all
nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this
Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to
promote respect for these rights and freedoms...
ARTICLE I.-Right to equolity.
ARTICLE 2.-Freedom from discrimination.
ARTICLE 3,-Right to life, liberty, personal security.'
ARTICLE 4.-Freedom from slavery.
ARTICLE 5.-Freedom from torture, degrading treatment.
ARTICLE 6.-Right to recognition as a person before the law.
ARTICLE 7.-Right to equality before the law..
ARTICLE 8.-Right to remedy by competent tribuna/.
ARTICLE 9.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest, exule.
ARTICLE 10.-Right to fair public hearing.
ARTICLE «.-Right to be considered innocent until proved guilty.
ARTICLE l2.-Freedom from interference with privacy, ramify, home, correspondence.
"The task is not finished. We should be less generous than prehistoric man it.
in our turn, we did not work to ensure for our children a more secure and
better life than our town."", :
Anatole France.
In. Brief
ARTICLE 13.-Right to free movement in and out of any country.
ARTICLE 14.-Right to asylum in other countries from persecution.
ARTICLE 15.-Right to a nationality and freedom to change ft.
ARTICLE/6.-Right to marriage and family.
ARTtCLE f7.-Right to own properly..
ARTICLE I8.-Freedom of belief and religion.
ARTICLE 19.-Freedom of opinion and information.
ARTICLE 20.-Right to peaceful assembly ond association.
ARTICLE 21.-right to participate in government, and in free
election..
ARTICLE 22.-Right to social security.
ARTICLE 23.-Right to desirable work and to join trade unions.
ARTICLE 24.-Right to rest and leisure.
ARTICLE 25.-right to adequate living standard.
ARTICLE 26.-Right to education.
ARTICLE 27.-Right to participate in the cultural life of community.
ARTICLE 28.-Right to social order assuring human rights.
ARTICLE 29.-Community duties essential.
ARTICLE 30.-Freedom from State or personal interference in the
above rights.
« Everyone has the
right to education."
Yet even to-day,
two-thirds o'the
world's children
still lack the schools
and the teachers to
help them to play
their rightful part
in the community.
