U. S. Conference To Stress Group,
Individual Action For Unesco
ONCRETE ways in which individuals and communities can parti-
f,---, cipate in the work of Unesco will be discussed and demonstrated
by practical examples at the second nation-wide conference of
the U. S. National Commission, meeting ia Cleveland, Ohio, from
March 31 to April 2.
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet will fly to the United States from Paris
to deliver the principal address on"Unesc ()-A Personal Faith", in which-.---.
he will explain Why he has
dedicated himself to serve the
cause of international collabora-
tion in science, education and
culture.
At its Cleveland meetings, the
U. S. National Commission will
develop the theme"Nations will
come together, not to destroy but
construct", inspired by the words
of Louis Pasteur. (1)
"Unesco's programme has come
into sharper focus since members
met in Philadelphia two years
ago", Milton E. Eisenhower,
chairman of the U. S. National
Commission, recently declared.
"Our purpose this time is to keep
abreast of new developments and
to find better ways of getting
the Unesco story to more people."
Community Cooperation
THE conference, which will haveits headquarters at the Clevel-
and Auditorium with a seating
capacity for 10. 000 people, will
discuss six important areas within
which communities can co-operate
on Unesco objectives. Presented
(1)"I hold the unconquerable belief
that science and peace will triumph
over ignorance and war. that nations
will come together, not to destroy but
to construct, and that the future
belongs to those who accomplish most
for humanity."
as"Unesco"s Challenge to the
American People", they will be
devoted to the global implications
of Human Rights, the interchange
of persons, educational reconstruc-
tion through Unesco, the position
of the UN., advancement of world
civilization through arts ails
sciences, and education for the
world community.
Special panels of experts will
explain Unesco's responsibility and
programme as well as the oppor-
tunities for community action
in respect to each of these topics.
Individual Participation
HE best ways in which indi-viduals can constructively
take part in Unesco activities
will also receive % onsiderab) e dis-
cussion by the educators, scientists
and publicists representing differ-
ent U. S. national organizations
who are expected to attend th*
conference in Cleveland.
Fourteen groups, each examin-
ing such different facets of
community life as the press and
radio, schools, civic, labour
and farm organizations, libraries,
churoh organizations, adult edu-
cation services, or the theatre will
show how individuals can help
put community resources to work
on Unesco objectives and how
these efforts may be extended.
Thus, for example, the con-
ference will show how the mass
media are being used to advance
international understanding, how
music and other arts contribute
to the sense of world community,
and how the schools in the United
States are developing citizens
conscious of the world and without
prejudice toward differences
among races and religions.
Delegates will have an oppor-
tunity to see how the Cleveland
community has organized to carry
out Unesco's aims as well as
special exhibitions and fiJrns on
projects carried out in other
communities.
Featured Speakers
IN announcing last Decemberthat Dr. Torres Bodet had
accepted to travel to Cleveland,
Milton Eisenhower told newspa-
permen :"I speak on behalf of the
U. S. National Commission when I
say that Dr. Torres Bodet's visit
to our country will give added
impetus to a programme for inter-
national understanding which has
already stirred the imagination of
millions of Americans."
Among the other featured speak-
ers announced for the Cleveland
Conference are Mrs. Franklin D.
Roosevelt, who will discuss the
Declaration of Human Rights ;
George V. Allen, Assistant Secre-
tary of State ; and Milt9D S. Eisen-
hower.
