17FLORENCE
"HERE THE SPIRIT LIVES"
WILL WELCOME UNESCO IN MAY 1930
F LORE :'\CE-the ven svmbol of
Form which is continuously chan-
ged and renewed in space. A
* continuity exists in the various
forms of art which mark through the
centuries the city's glorious passage in
the history of the world. The fine and
translucent air emphasises the outlines
of its hills, soft yet firm surrounding
the Arno like a protecting arm.
Perhaps this happy conjunction of
natural elements has made Florence a
source of forms in space. Throughout
centuries filled with history, its artists
have created visible equivalents to the
hopes and anxieties of man.
The Etruscans had already brought
into the Valley of the Arno extreme
refinement and the mystery of their
rites. The soft Tuscan hills have wel-
comed austere priests who studied the
divine laws of the lightning or the flight
of birds.
Today, the Archaeological Museum
enables us, in the heart of Florence, to
make a mysterious and fascinating
parallel in history : Cimabue, Giotto,
Orcagna, Donatelio, Masaccio, Fra An-
gelico, Brunelleschi, Michelangelo, Leo-
nardo... The history of forms offers
few examples of such a wealth of
mighty creations in such a compara-
tively short time.
The Uffizi Gallery, the Pitti Palace,
the Bargeilo, the Monastery of St. Mark,
the Gallery of the Academy, the Chur-
ches... everything in Florence bears the
stamp of unique lives and works of art
and their creative power, transcending
Michelangelo's works are well represented among the art
treasures of Florence. This"Madonna and Child"is in the Chapel
of the Medicis.
The celebrated"Piazza della Signoria", in the centre of Florence with, in the blackground, the
"PaIIazo Vecchio".
(]tLORENCE,"City of the Arts", was chosen by
' : I Unesco's Fourth General Conference as the meeting
place for next year's Conference, to be held in May.
In the accompanying article, Ber : o Larder1l, a Floren-
tine sculptor, gives his impressions of what Florence, with
its"visible equivalents of Man's hopes and fears", means
to an artist.
Lardera, who is now a programme specialist in Unesco's
Division of Arts and Letters, served on the commission
appointed to. sØtuly plans for : he rebuilding of Florence.
journey into the life and times of more
than two thousand years ago : arms,
works of art, jewels which were worn
by knights and ladies during their life-
time and then placed in their tombs,
guarding their eternal rest.
It is a glimpse into an extremely
civilized epoch when men tried to find
forms which would express the sense
of their possible relations with the
world. Transcending space and time,
mysterious and subtle bonds link the
sculptures of the Florence of over two
thousand years ago with the sculptured
forms of the East, of India, China...
As a result of the Roman conquest,
the life of the region considerably
changed. Forms became less inventive
and took on a powerfully realistic
aspect which answered the needs of an
organized life, but diminished the poetic
impulse. The architecture is the best
proof of this, the most striking example
being the Roman theatre at Fiesole.
In the Middle Ages Florence again
took up its primarily creative role.
This was a dark and magnificent era
filled with bloody strife. The citizens
gathered round Church and Empire in
two hostile factions and both sides
waged a relentless struggle for power.
The vanquished lost all ; exile was their
last resource. During such an exile
was created that tremendous and divine
work which summarises passions,
poetry and learning of the period : the
Divine Comedy gave birth to the Ita-
lian language.
It may have been during this period
that the walls of Florence acquired
their forbidding aspect, which persisted
even in full Renaissance days. Around
the Ponte Vecchio, the mediaeval part
of the town spread out in straight lines,
their severity making a striking contrast
with the soft curves of the surrounding
hills.
The Renaissance was the splendid
close of a triumphantly successful crea-
tive period, which is almost without
national boundaries, still stirs our emo-
tions with the high poetical value of
their message.
The Medicis, particularly Cosimo the
Elder and Lorenzo, greatly stimulated
the creative urge of the city in a highly
civilized age. Poetry, painting, sculp-
ture, architecture, craftsmanship, every-
thing contributed during this period to
make Florence one of the most vital
centres in the world.
In the following centuries, the ferti-
lity of ideas that began in Florence
developed in the world a certain sense
of balance and harmony which still
represents an ideal of life.
Florence, on which the War left its
cruel marks, must itself be considered
as one great museum.
Florence, was built as a logical whole,
of which all the parts answered to a
precise need and to a creative desire.
The smallest break was bound to deal
a serious blow at this carefully arranged
harmony. Its logical construction has
today perhaps been destroyed forever ;
two pitiless gaps are to be seen in the
two mediaeval quarters around the
Ponte Vecchio.
The compact line of houses along the
banks of the Arno, from the Ponte
Vecchio to the Ponte Trinita, which
made the river almost like a closed-in
basin-shut in still more by the row
of houses on the Ponte Vecchio itself-
has been broken. The Ponte Santa Tri-
nita, which connected the two sides of
the city by its incomparable arches, and
which was one of the purest examples
of Renaissance architecture, has dis-
appealed.
Those who have examined the pro-
blem of restoring the unity of the city
have grasped the full gravity of this
break.
What was slowlv built in the course
of ages by the combined efforts of the
city's artists who gave it a harmony
answering to the political, Economic and
social demands of life, has been des-
troyed by one violent and sudden below.
The Fifth Session of the General Con-
ference of Unesco will be held in a
building which is one of the master-
pieces of Florentine architecture.
The Palace which Luca Pitti asked
Brunelleschi to build as a private resi-
dence, and which was to constitute an
ideal link between town and country,
has become one of the living symbols
of Art. It combines the constructive
harmony of ancient Roman walls with
the hard austerity of the Middle Ages.
The citizens of Florence, who have not
forgotten the ClastIes and explosions
which accompanied the terrible wounds
inflicted on the city one night in July
1944, await the words of peace, encou-
ragement and understanding which are
to come from these same austere walls
BertoLARDERA.
The 15th century Pitti Palace (above) with its world-famous gardens, will be the
scene of Unesco's 1950 General Conference, next May.