The inevitable result of reckless destruction of forests and uncontrolled abuse of the land's resources : good farmland is turned into barren and desolate dust-bowls (above, let..
Scientifie contour fa. rmin in dust-bowl areas, however, gradually brings the land bact to fertility (above right).
But sons experts have warned that there is not enough land on earth to raise the food humans need."In the race between population and food, population is winnin ;-"the fiI'II&
president of F. A. O. has reported. Over half the people in.. the world don't get enough to eat. Over-population, insufficient farm production : these are the problems.
,
FOOD. AND PEOPLE ) BL_ )  JtL  jB-* tt) JtL'Jt)) t- E-t'-<L, j, . L-M
CAN WE FEED THE MILLIONS OF EXTRA MOUTHS THAT ARE BEING ADDED TO THE
WORLD EVERY YEAR ? ARE WE MAKING FULL USE OF ALL THE NEW RESOURCES OF AGRI-
CULTURAL SCIENCE ? UNESCO PAMPHLETS KEYNOTE WORLD DISCUSSIONS.
II N the last one hundred and fifty years, there have
been three major alarms in regard to the wood's
rising population and the inadequacies of food
supplies : one by Thomas R. Malthus in 1798, a second by
Sir William Crookes exactly one century later, and the
third during the last few years. The first two alarms
proved to be false. Will today's also prove to be a false
alarm ?
Some experts say yes-others are less optimistic. Both
groups agree, however, that the world's food resources
are being used very unevenly and very wastefully, and
recognize that the world cannot afford this at a time
when population is growing at a rate which now exceeds
20, 000. 000 persons a year. The growth threatens to
outstrip our food resources unless something is done
soon to re-establish the balance. This is one of the art-
. manding problems Qf our times.
Unesco has selected"Food and People"as a major
discussion topic for this year and has issued a call to
discussions groups throughout the world to Rive attention
to'his challenge.
Fn order to focus public opinion and stimulate discus-
sion in schools, colleges, local clubs, civic organization.)
and adult education groups, Unesco asked experts in'. he
fro. Jt and population field to write a series of papers on
the problems involved.
If HE first of this series-a"master pamphlet"form-) N mgan introduction to all the others to llow.-
has just b ? en published in English, in. British and Amer-
ican editions under Unesco sponsorship.
Aldous Huxley fires the opening shot of the campaign
with what he terms"The Double Crisis"which the wo'ld
is hopelessly facing today ; be stresses the declinil11J
fertility of the soil as opposed to the increasing fertility
of mankind. Sir John Russell fires back, almost in t"1t&i.
disagreement, emphasizing particularly the incalculable
possibilities of scientific advancement.
As in all the forthcoming pamphlets which Unesco
will sponsor throughout the campaign, the views
expressed are the authors'own, whether optimistic or
pessimistic.
The British and American editions of the Huxle7-
Russell pamphlets have been published by the Bureau
of Current Affairs in London (1) and by". Science
Service"in Washington (2),
The Current Affairs booklet, which sells for 9d., con-
tains valuable suggestions and Questions to guide discus-
sion groups for the entire series."Why not turn your'
first session into a formal or informal debate ?", the
Current Affairs pamphlet writes."Either get two mem-
bers of the group to outline briefly the case, first as out
by Huxley and then by Russell, then throw it open to the
group. Or else, having chosen your opening speakers, let
the rest of the group divide off into"optimists"lind
"pessimists" ; and let fly in debate. A good idea would he
to let each side study in advance only the article that
supports their own view-then see how they stand up
to attack."
Spanish and French editions of the entire"Food and
People"pamphlet series, sponsored by Unesco, will be
published in the forthcoming weeks and months by
Editorial Sud-Americana of Buenos-Aires and by a
French publisher in Paris.
LTHOUGH the pamphlet series is admittedly one
A'off the important means being used to stimulate
discussion in all parts of the world, it is not the sole
method. Working in collaboration with the United Na-
tions, FAO and WHO, Unesco is organizing campaigns
for radio discussions, film treatment, exhibitions and
filmstrips for community and national groups in
different countries.
The Unesco World Review weekly radio programme
for example, is denoting one programme a month to an
aspect of'Food and People".
In the Union of South Africa, Belgium and Iran,
World Federation of the United Nations AssociatiJI1S
have already launched detailed discussion on"Food and
People"problems in their own countries. The WFUNA
summer school, which is scheduled to open in Geneva
in August, will devote one entire week to this question
and will offer a training programme for discussion
leaders from over 20 countries. Unesco will provide train-
ing for discussion teachers to map out plans of action.
and is offering 6 bursaries for representatives from need7
countries.
As the American edition of the"Food and People'"
pamphlet published by"Sé : ience Service"in co-operation
with Unesoo, urges readers,"make this the discussion
topic for your fall programme."
On pages 6, 7 and 8, of this issue the Unesco Courier
presents long extracts from the challenging articles by
A ! dous Huxley and Sir John Russell's reply. In addition,
on page 9, Dr. S. Chandrasekhar presents some owt the
complicated population problems of India.
W)"Current Affair.", No 77 of 2nd April, 1941, published bll 1'1&#1
Bureau 01 Current Affair., Carnegie Hou$e. 117, Piccadilly, Londo
Price 9 pence.
(2) nScience Service", 4"fnstitution for M. e popularizatiON of
teietce. 1719, N. Street N. W., Washington 6, D. C. Price II _u.
SEE PAGES 6 TO 9
