vm A/HEN I saw Rabindranath Ta-
gore for th"last time he was
a venerable figure bowed down
with age and honours. He bad
just returned from a tour of Persia.
where he had been a guest of the Em-
peror. That long flight had caused him
some trouble and he found it very dif-/-
ficult to breach in. a crowded atmos-
phere. Yet he had come to pay his res-
pects to another great compatriot of his,
a scientist-the late sir P. C. Row. Tagore
made a short speech which had all the
magic of his personality. One could
"feel"the prsence of greatness. In his
beautifully made robe and with his silken-
white hair he looked as if he had just
stepped out of India's glorious past. He
was at once a hope for the future.
I look back on that day with a sense
of pride because for once in my life I
was not disappointed in the presence of
greatness.
J
"The Failing Light
ABINDRANATH Tagore v : as born.,I-< : on the 6th if. May in 1861-a criti-
,,'tim'in the political and m.""y'.
history of modem India.
"I was born when the modern age in
Bengal had just begun,"he wrote."The
light of the past age was then failing
but had not quite gone out. I was able
to get some idea of it from behind,
partly by suggestion and partly from
personal experience. There were many
things in it which showed signs of senile
decay, the weakness and laxness of which !.
might make O, 1e f ('el ashamed, if judy eyed
by modern standards. Yet certain other
things were discernible in those days,
which like the rays of the setting sun
amidst the shades Of evening cannot be
debited to the sièp of darkness..."**
Tagore's eariy tfe as spent in the
wonderful SpiiH o Upanishadic learni : 1g,
and also in : the hotbee'of the most ad-
vanced radical thought then prevalent
in Bengal. He thus passed early through
the fever of favid nationaEsm at a time
when many educated Indians were pried-1
ing themselves on the exclusive use of
the English language.
While still a young boy, Tagore went.
to Europe to study literature. This was ;
perhaps a turning pcint in hLS develop-t
ment. HencefJrth he began to give ex-.
pression, perhaps unconsciously, to the
masterly a&si'n : ; ation of the two cultures
which his analytical as well as highly
creative brain was capable of doing.

RABINDRANATH TAGORE
Sentinel of the East
NIRMAL CHAUDHUIU
to that heaven ot freedom, not of man
as a citizen of a narrow nationalism but
of man as a mind, as a thinker". where
the mind is without fear... where know-
led is free.. \Vr. er words come out from
the depths of truth..'
Throughout his tong and intensely
active career, Tagore
wrote over three
thousand songs and
poems. His short
stories are gems of
prose composition. In
these he depicted the
lives of common people with sympathetic
insight, revealing their problems and
portraying their courage under suffering.
His plays and novels give a masterly
analysis of the historical and social forces
which gave shape to India's literature.
Dominated Literary Scene
T AGORE'S influence on the writersas well as on the rest
of India, has been overwhelm : ng.
He dominated ice literary scene of his
dative Bengal for such a long time that,
with the notable. exception of the novelist
Sarat Chatterjee, no new school of litera-
ture grew up in Bengal for nearly sixty
years.
A veritable Tagore cult developed in
Bengal where young writers and artists
even copied the port', handwriting and
spoke in the languages of Rabindranath's
poems.
When, at the age of sixty, Tagore took
to painting, it created a sensation not
only in India but in the salons of Paris
where his tableaux were on view. His
manyfold genius is too intricate for
detailed description in this short article.
He absorbed Is'9mic and European cul-
tures and wro : e extensively in English-
a language he enriched by his deep
philosophical essays and translations of
his original-work in Bengali.
Rabindranath is perhaps the only
Asiatic poet wi whose genius was recog-
nized all over : he world during his own
life-time. Honours were heaped on him
by learned societies and humble institu-
tions alike. Mass adulation haunted the
poet everywhere he went. in the cause
of India's literature For his Hibbert Lec-
ture in 1931, he chrose "Religion of Man"
as his subject. Here was a synthesis of
all that was best-in the philosophies of
the East and t.'1e West. Here was a ray
of hope and faith that transcended the
time and space of our civilization.
RabindranaLh Tagore died in 1941 when
the world was again engulfed in a con-
flict against waich he had preached and
practised for so long He lives in the
heart of every man and woman and
child in India because he belived that
his mission as a poet was"to attract the
voice that was 23 yet inaudible in the
air ; to inspire faith in the dream that
is unfulfilled and to bring the earliest
tidings of the unborn flower to a sceptic
world."
Rabindranath Tagore
"Poet Laureate of Asia"

With a deep faith in
the cultural federation
of different races and
peoples of the world,
he devoted himself, in
his writ : ngs and teach-
ings, to the cause of---.....,-,.-----
unity and. friendly co-operation with the
West.
"Humanity is torn by suffering and
suspicion,"he wrote,"by a disharmony
which has wrought havoc in the very
depths of our lif. on earth. It is for us,
of the Brothechood of Letters, to rescue
humanity from this misery of unnatural
relationship... To whatever land we may
belong, this mJSt he our common mission
on this plane of united effort, to achieve
goodwill between man and man, establish
a secure foundation of fellowship which
will save humanay from suicidal war..."
Tagore saw his people ia India and
in Asia achieving this goodwill and
es. tablishing a solid foundation of fellow-
ship not by a'tempting to wi !) e out their
differences-which he believed neither
possible nor desirable-but by accepting
them :"unity not in spite of the dif-
ferences but through them,"he wrote.
"Let all human races retain their own
individual personalities and yet come
together,"Tag) re said elsewhere,"not into
a uniformity tha* is dead, but into a
unity that is living"
Tagore was called the Sentinel of the
East and the Poet Laureate of Asia. His
writings have been translated into almost
all the major languages of the world.
When his book of poems Gitanjali
(Song Offerings) was published in 1913.
Europe aid the rest of the Western world
were enchante. J. W. B. Yeats records how
intensely he was moved by the mystic
qualities of the poems. Recognition came
in the form of the Nobel Prize for
Jiterature-the f'rst time an Asiatic had
thus been honoured.
In one of the poems of Gitanjali, Ta-
aore prayed that his country might awake
Santiniketan-Abode of Peace
IN 1901, Rabindranath established aneducational centre called Santinike-
tan (Abode of peace) at a small
place named Bolepur, some 93 miles from
Calcutta. There he adopted the ancient
ideal of, forest hermitage to modem, con-
ditions. Twen : y years later he converted
it into a world university called Visga
Bharati, 50 taut it became not only a
centre of Indian culture but of world
culture. Tagore's life's work had begun.
