religion, political party, trade union and many more. The sociological
conception which I wish to put before you is this : this sum of inter-
mingled groups, serving both to unite individuals whilst at the sam
time separating them from their fellows I propose to designate by the
term social symbiosis.
The term'symbiosis'is borrowed from natural sciences and it
signifies that social groups of differing and frequently conflicting types
are agreed not only to exist side by side but, normally, also to help
one another.
... Many advocate the formation of a single strong unified group to
which all other groups would be more or less directly subordinate8
Their theory is that humanity must pass from the stage of social
symbiosis to that of a single social group based, if necessary, on force.
What we must realize, however, is that the chief aim of all these
groups is to perpetuate themselves. Any of the desires made manifest
to unite with other groups is inspired, not by the desire to merge, to
lose their identity in the whole ; on the contrary, they desire to
confirm and prolong their existence. It is thus clearly the duty of all
those who understand the need and the desirability of a society
comprising plural groups to work for the organization of social sym-
biosis. The aim is not to eliminate different groups but to make them
more mutually compatible : antagonisms and rivalries cannot be
entirely eradicated but their probability can be lessened, they can be
reduced to tolerable limits, even made to act as a stimulus.
But, ladies and gentlemen, you will doubtless anticipate my words ;
there is an inner logic which moves faster than I can speak :"What
then is Unesco ? Basically surely it is a manifestation of a sym-
biosis, an organ designed to bring about that plurality of group
which constitutes social symbiosis."
WEare faced with the real character of social
reality ; society is composed, neither simply
v V o  the sum of self-sufficient individual  nor
5imply of the sum of nations, or political, territorial
or military states ; the complete human factor
comprises the sum of all the individuals contained
in groups of this kind, each individual belonging
simultaneously to several different groups-family,
