-UNESCO'S GERMANY,
JAPAN PROGRAMMES
NDORSED BY
GENERAL CONFERENCE
-UNESCO'S activities in Germany
became one of the big policy
issues of the Fourth Session
of the General Conference,
following a speech on Sep-
tember 20 by M. Jan Boor, delegate for
Czechoslovakia."Sonner or later Ger-
many will have-to find her place as a
member of the community of the Euro-
pean nations", M. Boor told the Confe-
rence."\Ve do not see any other solu-
tion of this painful problem than an
agreement between the Big Four and
the consequent early signing of a peace
treaty with a unified Germany. Once
this is achieved, the function of Unesco
in Germany becomes quite clear".
From then on the delegations of Po-
land, Czecholovakia and Hungary
made it plain, in words and by vote,
that they desired a postponement of
the organization's activities in Germa-
ny.
The case for this delay was based
on the political considerations M. Boor
had already put to the conference, plus
his contention that there had been a
revival of national movements in Ger-
many, which, it was asserted, rendered
Unesco's current and projected pro-
gramme in Germany valueless.
Against this submission the majority
of member states taking part in the
sometimes lively discussion through
commission and plenary session,
strongly supported Unesco policy for
Germany, which aims at strengthening
democratic elements particularly among
young Germans, so that they might
reject Nazism.
It is with this purpose in view, and
with the important final project of
bringing Germany as a partner into the
community of nations always in mind,
that the Organization, has drawn up its
work-plans for Germany.
These include the revision of text-
books for schools, the spreading of
knowledge about Unesco and its pur-
pose, and a variety of projects, in which
Germans themselves will co-operate,
directed at securing a peaceful and
democratic development of cultural
life in Germany.
Bevivøl of Hitlerism.
THE first important debate on
Unesco policy in Germany took
place at a joint meeting of the
Programme and Budget and Of-
ficial and External Relations Commis-
sions on 24 September. A proposal from
M. Fleischmann (Czechoslovakia) to re-
move Unesco's proposed 1950 Ger-
many programme from the agenda was
rejected by the majority.
Immediately, M. Ogrodzinski, Vice-
president of the Polish delegation,
spoke of evidence of a revival of Na-
zism in Germany, and of monuments
erected to the victims of Hitler having
been besmirched."'Under these condi-
tions", he said,.'the campaign of
Unesco becomes useless".
He stressed that the absence of uni-
Oed control in Germany, the creation
of a"pseudo-state"of Western Ger-
many, far from creating an atmosphere
favourable to the work of Unesco, had
led to exploitation of divergences of
opinion with a view to revenge. His
delegation could not then vote in favour
of the proposed programme.
'"two refuse to collaborate with
Messrs. Heuss and Adenauer, whose
names are associated with the memory
of aggressions against Poland, Czecho-
slovakia and Austria", he said,"'will
indicate to the Germans that only the
way of peace will lead them to become
part of a world community. Unesco
Will not be able to work usefully in
Germany until there is a return to
agreement between the four occupying
powers".
Dr. Kruyt (Netherlands) declared
that, after Poland, no country had
suffered as much at the hands of the
Germans as had Holland. He said :
'"The general opinion in my country is
that it is absolutely necessary to re-
educate the German people and it is
Unesco's task to do this". He added
that the Netherlands delegation was
satisfied with the work done by
Unesco in Germany in 1949, and
wished to approve the Director-Gene-
ral's report.
Italy's viewpoint was expressed by
Count Stefano Jacini, who said he
sympathised with the sentiments of the
Polish and Czechoslovakian delegations,
but considered that the activity of
Unesco in Germany would only have
the consequences implied in its pro-
gramme.
The importance attached by Switzer-
land to the activities of Unesco in
Germany was emphasised by M. Zutter,
who described the educational and
cultural interchange his country was
prepared to make with Germany.
Four Power Support
Requester.
R. NIEBUHR of the United Statesdelegation, answering the Polish
delegation's contention that no
work could be accomplished in
Germany without Four Power Accord,
reminded the meeting that the Director-
General had sought Four Power sup-
port.
Unesco had initiated in 1947 and con-
tinued in 1948."In my opinion", he
said,"the re-education of the German
people depends on the re-education of
the occupying powers. Unesco has
been doing its very best to overcome
existing obstacles, to break down bar-
riers and teach German youth to follow
Goethe and Kant. The good work has
begun and must be continued".
Miss Pedersen, of Denmark, informed
delegates that for two years Danish
women's organizations had been in
close contact with German women's
democratic organizations, who repre-
sented 65 per cent of the electorate.
Everyone would understand the impor-
tance of Unesco's co-operation with
those women, an importance which
transcended the question of who was
President of the new German State.
Dr. Vejarano of Colombia, felt that
Unesco's action in Germany was a
vital matter. He could not believe that
the German people, who had contribu-
ted so much to world culture and
Unesco, and the \\"llUlc World, was
seeking to help a very sick nation and
be advocated the usual therapeutic
method of turning to the residual
health of the patient."It is monstrous
to suggest", continued Dr. Niebuhr,
"that Lnesco's programme could aid
the re-birth of nationalism in Germany ;
none of its activities is in any way
likely to do that". It was obvious that
L'nesco s aim was the democratic edu-
cation of the German people, and, the-
refore, he moved that the programme
be adopted.
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan of In-
dia, seconded Dr. Niebuhr's motion. He
recalled that the proposal before them
was to extend the scope of the work
science, could be impervious to that
action. He emphasised that the demo-
cratic neighbours of Germany favoured
Unesco's programme and approved
the Director-General's report.
Changed German
Situation.
M. FLEISCHMAt'7N of Czechoslo-
vakia then renewed his earlier
demand for the German ques-
tion to be removed from the
agenda. The first results of the Bonn
Constitution had revealed, he said, the
real intellectual state of Germany.
He re-called that the Unesco Com-
mittee of Experts on Germany was in
agreement that the current nature of
the situation in Germany should be
defined, and that it should be recogni-
zed as different from that of the epoch
of the Mexico and Beirut conferences.
They should not precipitate the march
of events, and until new orders had
been made, all decisions concerning
Germany should be made after agree-
ment between the four occupying
powers.
M. Verniers (Belgium) approved the
programme of the Director-General, but
suggested amending the text to throw
into relief the importance of providing
the fullest Unesco documentation for
educators and youth movement leaders
in Germany.
M. Ogrodzinski of Poland, here de-
clared that not a single delegate had
denied the existence in Germany of a
military and nationalist spirit, which
continued to grow. He again under-
lined the necessity for four-power.
accord in Germany before Unesco
could act there.
A compromise was suggested by
M. Perrin of France, in the form of an
amendment calling on German circles,
especially educators : to refrain from
action prejudicial to the principles of
Unesco, and urging them to help
create the atmosphere of international
understanding necessary for develop-
ing the work in Germany of the Organ-
ization.
This brought from M. Gyalmos of
Hungary the comment that progressive
education for democracy was indispen-
sable in Germany, but conditions in that
country, its way of life, the degree of
denaziScation, of minds as well as of
institutions, and its genuine desire for
democracy must be taken into consi-
deration before any action was under-
taken.
Unesco should consider the question
of German unity, the fundamental
condition of peace and human progress.
As German nationalism still existed, he
said, his delegation did not think
Unesco's action opportune and sup-
ported the Polish motion.
The meeting ended on a dramatic
note after the motion for the removal
of the Germany programme from the
agenda, on which the delegations of
Czeclioslovakia, Hungary and Poland
agreed to combine, was put to the vote
and defeated by 25 votes to 3 with
2 abstentions. Shortly afterwards, the
delegations of these three countries rose
and left the meeting.
The United States proposal, made by
Dr. Niebuhr, approving the Director-
General's report on Germany and the
policy to be adopted in 1950 was then
unanimously approved by the remain-
ing delegations with one abstension.
As a result of these decisions new
resolutions were tabled. In the First,
the Czechoslovakian, Polish and Hun-
garian delegations proposed postpone-
ment of the discussion and decision on
Unesco's German Programme until
next year's Conference in Florence.
The second, presented by the Brazi-
lian delegation, proposed the continua-
tion of Unesco's work in Germany,
and called on the Allied Powers to
promote German unity. It also empha-
sised that Unesco could only succeed
in its German activities with German
co-operation, and underlined the impor-
tance of a supervision by Unesco's
Executive Board, of the work under-
taken.
These two resolutions were the focal
points of the debates which took place
at two plenary sessions of the Confe-
rence on October 4. ProfessoI'Vana, of
Czechoslovakia, opened what was to
prove the liveliest discussion of the
conference. Moving the new three-
power resolution, he said the funda-
mental principles on which they could
form their relations with Germany after
the war were expressed clearly and
precisely in the agreements of Yalta
and Potsdam.
"own the proposals now before us",
he continued,"we must ask ourselves
varous questions. Has the moment, of
which we spoke in the Potsdam agree-
ment, come for Germany to participate
in the life of peaceful peoples. Has
FOUR NATIONS
OPPOSE CONTINUED ACTION IN GERMANY

militarism and Nazism in Germany
been extirpated ? Has Germany ceased
to constitute a threat to her neighbours
and to the peace of the world ? Has
the activity developed or proposed by
Unesco in Germany any uniformity
for the German population throughout
Germany !"
"Ger.""""Divided."
PROFESSOR v AKA protested that
the activities of Unesco in Ger-
many touched only the Western
zone... That signified that Unesco
approved the concept of a Germany
divided into two parts which was a
violation of the Yalta and Potsdam
agreements. Unesco should not conti-
nue its activities in Germany if it was
not possible to spread that activity over
the whole of German territory.
Of present conditions in Germany, he
said :"'The situation is changing, but
it is changing only in one direction, ma-
nifest in the fact that the renaissance
of Nazism in Western Germany is
transforming Western Germany, not
into a democratic state, but. into a
centre of Neo-Fascism and militarism.
The so-called Parliament of Bonn is
merely a platform that calls out for
revenge".
1\1. Paulo de Benedo Carneiro, Head
of the Brazilian delegation, put his pro-
posal declaring,"Hitlerism is a conta-
gious epidemic and the countries far-
thest away from Germany have also
gone through its consequences. Unesco
cannot fail to give attention to this
problem, and try to find a solution.
There is in German youth a tendency
to follow again the road of yesterday.
No one ignores this. : \0 one wishes to
ignore it.
"It is because we are faced with
this picture that we have to be assured
L.'ncco is working to fight this atmo-
sphere, which, during the Hitler years,
allowed this situation in Germany to
survive. Give up the task of Unesco
in Germany, because at this moment
Hitlerite manifestations are taking
place ? 2\'0 ! What ever the difficulties
of the task Unesco cannot give up
without betraying her charter".
Professor. \) fSomtnerfeH of Norway,
while understanding Ine anxieties and
scepticism of the Polish, Czech and
Hungarian delegates, said :"woe cannot
abandon this fight. In reality, if we stop
work in Germany, we declare ourselves
beaten in this right. When we cannot
work in the whole of Germany, and we
have never received a reply from the
authorities of Eastern Germany, we have
to work where we can, in Western Ger-
many". He therefore supported the
Brazilian proposal.
Sir John Maud of the United King-
dom, answered the Czech delegate point
hy point, stating :"It is solely because
the Soviet authorities have not felt it
possible, either in quadripartite discus-
sions or in respect of an individual
invitation, to agree that Unesco should
work in the Soviet Zone, that the ans-
wer to the Czechoslovakian delegate's
question is probably, that Unesco's
activity will not, in the coming year,
be in the whole of Germany". But, Sir
John added, the Brazil resolution left
the door open and invited participation
of the Soviet authorities, so that
l'nesco might work in a united and
whole Germany.
To the question :"Is Germany demo-
cratic enough ?" Sir John said :"Which
of us, in all honesty, can say that our
member State is perfectly democratic
to-day ? Most certainly the United King-
dom would not claim to be perfectly
democratic, and it is because we believe
that Unesco can help us to become
more democratic, that community will
become more of a community, because
we believe that men and women can
forgive each other, that they can be
converted, that we remain in Unesco.
It is in that faith that we believe it is
a perfectly clear answer that we can
give to the question of t) ie Czechoslo-
vak delegate. It is because Germany is
not yet democratic enough that
Unesco should work there".
The first speaker at the second ple-
nary session on October 4 at which
Germany was discussed, was Dr. Mau-
rice Fischer, head of the Israel Dele-
gation, who said his delegation would
oppose thf developing of a Unesco
programme in Germany."We are for-
ced to the conclusion", he said,"from
information that comes to us from Ger-
many that the Nazi spirit is very much
alive".
off Ger."a"People are
foolish".
Mar. GEORGE V. ALLEN, UnitedStates chief delegate, who fol-
lowed Dr. Fischer, said :"We
have listened today to implica-
tions that there is evidence that there
continues to exist in Germany a spirit of
nationalism ; that by implication those
that favour Unesco's activities in Ger-.
many favour that revival of Nazism.
That its a most unpleasant reflection for
anyone to discern, particularly anyone
representing a country which has
recently contributed to the defeat of
Nazism.
"The German people have brought
on a world war twice in the last gene-
ration. I am entirely convinced if the
German people are so foolish as to bring
on another, the destruction of Germany
will be greater than it ever has been
before. There is not the slightest doubt
about the fact that as far as my country
is concerned we are as indelibly opposed
to the rise of Nazism in Germany as
we are in any other country in the
world".
"All the action my country has taken
is directed against the wiles of the Fas-
cist type of mentality or an aggressive
nation-it does not matter who it is-
including Germany".
There were those, he added, who
thought the only way to treat this or
that country was by force. The Unesco
approach was directly opposite to that.
"There are those who propose the
alternative that Unesco should have
nothing to do with the German people.
I believe that is dangerously on the road
towards every principle we detest so
strongly in the Nazi regime : that of
condemning an entire race because of
the actions of certain of its people",
he continued.
"I submit to you, that that is dange-
rously close to the theory of genocide,
which we all condemn so bitterly."
For the second time member states
were called upon to declare by vote
their attitude to Unesco plans for
Germany. The first poll rejected the
three-power postponement resolution
by 35 votes to 4, Israel joining with
the minority, and Mexico abstaining.
By the same number of votes the Brazil
amendment was carried, and was embo-
died in the introduction to Unesco's
programme for Germany.
The German debate ended with a
prot. est on behalf of the Czechoslovak,
Polish and Hungarian delegations, made
by M. Ogrodzinsky, Polish delegate,
who said they considered it necessary
to protest energetically against the
resolution wicIl had been adopted"By
this resolution", he declared,"Unesco
recognises and supports the idea of the
partition of Germany which is a Qa-
grant violation of the Yalta and Potsdam
agreements".
Compared with the protracted inter-
changes on Germany, the following
discussion on Unesco plans for Japan
was brief. 11. Proceso E. Seabastian of
the Philippines, reaffirmed his delega-
tion's belief that it was much too early
to admit the Japanese into Unesco's
Seminars and Conferences, before a
peace treaty had been concluded. He
proposed that the section Df the reso-
lution enabling Japanese individuals to
be invited to conferences and seminars,
be suspended until the 5th General Con-
ference. The Philippines, however,
wished Unesco's work to continue in
Japan.
Mr. A. J. A. Nelson, of Australia,
while stressing that their aim in Japan
was not to open wounds but to heal
them, supported the Philippines propo-
sal. Dr. william K. Bunce, representa-
tive of the Supreme Commander for theAllied Powers in Japan here intervened
to state that the Supreme Commander
believed it was desirable to extend to
the Japanese people participation, as
observers and visitors, to international
conventions or meetings of a technical
nature, not involving political conside-
rations. Put to the vote, the Philip-
pines amendment was defeated by 17
votes to 6 with 5 abstentions. Thus,
Unesco plans for Japan were finally
approved.
