WAR BROKE FABRIC BUT NOT
THE SPIRIT OF RENNES UNIVERSITY
SINCE August 1944, when Rennes University
was severely damaged during the liberation
of Britanny, its faculty and students have
been living up to the University's motto
"Heaven Helps Those Who Help Themselves".
The only institution of its kind in the region,
Rennes University serves seven north-west
departments of France, comprising an area as
large as Belgium. It was therefore a severe blow
to French scientific education when the Nazis
blew up a bridge facing its modern science fa-
culty, devastating the physics, chemistry, zoo-
logy and botany sections.
Since then, the students have been working
under almost unbelievable conditions : carrying
out chemistry and physics experiments in cellars
and former air-raid shelters and pursuing medical
studies in the open air, or, when it rained, in the
central heating boiler house for that, at least,
had a roof.
Although reconstruction measures provided the
place for them to work, the students and profes-
sors still needed the means, in the form of
scientific equipment. Now, through a Unesco
grant of $ 7, 000, the Faculty of Science at Rennes
is being equipped to carry on its teaching and
research activities.
Evidence of Mankind's Solidarity
T HIS grant brings tc almost 895. 000 the amountwhich Unesco has spent to help in equipping
scientific laboratories in eleven countries,
since the beginning of 1949.
It was to pay tribute to Rennes and, at the
same time, to all other universities that suffered
during the war, that M. Torres Bodet, Director-
General of Unesco, visited the University, on
November 19th, to attend the formal re-opening
of the academic year.
At the re-opening ceremony, held in the
Rennes City Hall, M. Torres Bodet told the
faculty and students :"The international conflicts
of the 20th century have cruelly affected
the academic world. In many countries intellec-
tual leaders have been persecuted and educational
systems deliberately destroyed. The aggressor
seemed to be trying to enslave the nations by
reducing them to the status of forced labour
camps for illiterates. Knowledge and freedom
go hand in hand and Universities, particularly in
France, proved that afresh by becoming centres
of resistance.
"I am filled with admiration for many countries
which, like your own, have been impoverished by
war and enemy occupation and, set free, have
undertaken courageously and confidently the
rebuilding of their ruins", he added.
Unesco was doing all it could to help in this
By
Gerda FRIEDMANN
(UNESCO NATURAL SCIENCES DEPT.)
reconstruction and had spent 1, 533, 000 dollars an
the work in the three years from 1947 to 1949 ;
that represented 7 % of its total budget.
"What does all this represent ?" asked M. Tor-
res Bodet."These gilts are, in fact more than
material aid and cannot be measured solely in
terms of dollars or of equipment supplied. They
are evidence that the intellectual and moral soli-
darity of mankind has not been finally des-
troyed, and that it is still possible, by restoring
Lt to conscious activity to reassemble the broken
fragments.. Our modest contribution to repairing
war damage is only a single stage in the building
of a new world."
M. Torres Bodet referred to another vital step
in the building of a new world when he
spoke of the United Nations Technical Assistance
Plan"for countries whose progress has been
retarded because of historical or geographical
reasons".
"The unanimous vote on November 16, by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on the
scheme worked out by the Economic and Social
Council, in collaboration with the Specialized
Agencies, is in many respects one of the outstand-
ing events of our century,"he said."It is a long
time since a proposal of such far-reaching impor-
tance has been given the unanimous support of
the United Nations.
"The Plan is based on three essential principles.
Assistance will be granted only at the request of
interested governments, to the extent and under
conditions to be laid down by themselves.
Main Purpose of U. N. Aid Plan
"Its main object will be to help the under-pri-
vileged countries applying for assistance to
'strengthen their national economies through the
development of their industries and agriculture,
with a view to promoting their economic and
political independence in the spirit, of the Char-
ter of the United Nations, and to ensure the
attainment of higher levels of economic and so-'
cial welfare for their entire populations'".
"Unesco,"said M. Torres Bodet,.'is helping to
Fonfirm the unity of reason and the identity of
the laws governing the life of the mind, by taking
part in this scheme of the United Nations, after
preparation, and by the practical implementation
of its own programme".
"It will be realized,", said M. Torres Bodet,
"that reconstruction is not a finite process and that
it naturally makes way for construction, through
which we hope, a better world will emerge bound
together by closer feelings of brotherhood."
"Such is the fabric of intellectual relations and
material services which Unesco is patiently
weaving from country to country... so that every
individual and every community may grasp the
true unity of the world in which they live."
