STUDY ABROAD v...
Covers World Fellowship Field.
Do you want lokn<) wn how you ean
go abroad for study ? Do you want
to know the total number of
fellowship, scholarships and travel grants
that are available in a country for scho-
lars from other countries ? Do you
want to know how the United Nations and
its Specialized Agencies are using inter-
national fellowship and travel study pro-
grammes as an important tool for the
technical, educational and scientific rue-
construction of war-devastated and less-
developed countries ? Do you Want
to know how to plan a fellowship
programme, and to which countries and
in which f ; etds of study to make it
available ?
Consult <&lt;Study Abroad"-the
Unt : sco re. gister published in December
1948 as the first international handbook
providing details of available opportu-
nities for international study and organ-
ized arrangements made in this field.
As a first attempt at a comprehensive
mapping of a large and only partly
charted sea, Volume I, which report !
more than 15. 000 fellowships donated
by 37 countries, met with a striking
reception from the public and owing to
the big demand it was necessary to have
two reprints made.
Coming in November
STUDY ABROAD. Volume. II,is now in preparation and is sched-
uled for publication and distribution in
November) 949. This second volume
is planned with a view to a more com-
plete coverage of the fellowship field and
with a broader scope to include infor-
mation on all types of it. ternational edu-
cational exchange. Running into 360
pages, it reports the movement of more
than 100, 000 persons organized by over
a thousand agencies in many different
kinds of educational travel and exchange.
The Handbook is divided into four ma-
jor sections on fellowships, youth ex-
change, teachers exchange and workers
exchange.
Section I reports on international
fellowships, scholarships and related
opportunities. Reports have been recei-
ved from 42 countries. aU the United
Nations and Specialized Agencies, and
tnternational (private) organizations. The
national programmes, as reported, are
more complete and informative than
those in Volume l. For instance, India
has now reported its large annual go-
vernmentat overseas scholarship pro-
gramme. Latin America will be repre-
send by at least eight countries. Fellow-
ship programmes of Eastern European
countries will, it is hoped, be more fully
teported. and North American univer-
sities have sent data on a great many
more fellowships than previously.
Periodic publication of this informa-
tion makes for an increase in the number
and quality of candidates applying for
these opportunities to go and study
abroad. It suggests to prospective donors
areas in which new programmes might
usefully be developed and brings into
perfective possibte overtappings of em-
phasis, and areas of outstanding need.
In assembling aU this information in one
publication, Unesco is able to make more
widely known the considerable invest-
ment made by less developed countries
in international training facilities for
their nationals and similar facilities made
available to them by them more developed
countries. cStudy Abroad>&gt; will be an
important tool in the planning of the
United Nations technical assistance pro-
gramme for less developed countries, and
in extending Unesco's advisory services
to member states and agencies operating
in this fiend.
Movements
of Young People
SECTION II reports on internal. tional
U educational exchange movements of
young people. Going beyond the purely
<&lt;academic>&gt; field. Unesco organized an
enquiry into programmes of exchanges,
travel and visits of young people-that
is, persons under 25 years of age-be-
ween countries for educational and cul-
tural purposes. As a beginning, the
investigation was conducted through field
visits to nine European countries and by
correspondence with two other countries.
Volume II will include the results of
this first investigation with regard to the
various types of exchanges of young
people, such as school trips, private vt-
sits, organized tours and youth organiza-
tion exchanges ; it will be the first au-
thoritative listing of 50 organizations
with their addresses in the)) countries
surveyed. This section records that in
1948 65, 000 young persons travelled un-
der programmes organized by national
and international agencies in 11 coun-
tries.
Section ILl reports on interchange
schemes of schoolteachers and professors
between countries. Unesco's first enquiry
into programmes of teacher exchange
shows a striking amount of activity in
this field and assembles for the first time
a world picture of this type of inter-
change, including names and addresses
of 50 agencies sponsoring 3. 000 exchan-
ges. Unesco is planning to develop this
enquiry and investigate possibilities of
setting up machinery for the organization
of exchanges on a wider international
scale.
Exchange of Workers
S E. CTION IV reports on workers'I.... international exchange . I  this field
Unesco has maintained close co-opera-
tive relations with the International Labour
Organisation. The I. L. O. has underta-
len an enquiry into the international
movement of trainees and apprentices for
training and praattca) experience, the
results of which are recorded in this
section. Unesco has circulated to its
Member States a questionnaire on sche-
mes for the international movement of
agricultural and industrial workers far
general educational and cultural pur-
poses. Reports on these schemes, where-
by workers in industrial. commercial
or agricultural employment travel to
another country for a certain period
of time to enlarge their general know-
ledge of the culture, history and/or lan-
guage of that country, to study welfare
and trade union organisation or for fra-
ternal trade union or international study
purposes in general, have been received.
Abcut 2COO training and educational
exchange opportunities organised by 100
agencies are recorded. Unesco, in colla-
boration with the I. L. O., is developing
plans to extend the area of international
educational exchange available to wor-
kers.
<&lt;Study Abroad>&gt;. through the compre-
hensive listing of agencies and institu-
tions operating in this field, enables them
to establish contact with one another,
to coordinate and correlate their pro-
grammes and promote the establishment
of new programmes.
