May 1949 UNESCO COURIER s
VER 2, 000 teachers and professorsf from schools and universities in
England and Wales gave a great
welcome to Lf. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Director-General of Unesco, when he
addressed the annual conference of the
National Union of Teachers at Margate
on April 18th.
Delegates from seven other countries,
including the United States, the Soviet
Union and Poland, joined in the applause
when Dr. Torres Bodet was introduced as
"The first world citizer. kom the teacher s
point of view".
Speaking in English, Dr. Torres Bodet
said that his presence at the Conference
represented a unique synthesis of Unesco's
history and its aims ;. its history, because
Unesco was born in Britain, at a Con-
ference in London in the autumn of 1945 ;
its a ; 111S, because thev as teachers held
the key to Unesco's fundamental objective
- that through education the peoples
should come to understand each otheor and
be enabled to build for themselves a
better and a peaceful world.
Our Hope for Future Peace
GGIF there is anv profession which, by itsvery nature, carries an obligation to
implant Unesco's ideals in the minds of
the young, it is the teaching profession",
he stated.
"In education", he continued,"lies our
hope for future peace and progress."This
was recognized by the General Assembly
of the United Nations in Article 26 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
adopted last December. The Art'cle
declares :'Everyone has the right to edu-
cation'-without distinction of any kind.
"In some countries such a statement
appears self evident. But it is a Right
that is far from being realized. In fact,
today, more than half of mankind is
illiterate. There arre many countries where
the proportion of illiterates is over 60 %
and in Africa and Asia the figure is
often as high as 90 %.
"Article 26 continues :'Education shall
be free, at least in so far as elementary
and fundamental education are concerned.
Elementary education shall be compul-
ttory'.
A'Backward'World
"FOR you, in this country, these condi-- *-tions will appear as self-evident as
the Right to Education itself. They have
been achieved in Britain, and achieved
in a large part as a. result of the efforts
of your own profession and of your own
Un. on. You could not admit that the
'Teachers Hold [ (ey To Unesco
Aims' Di, 4ectol.-Gelleral States
benefits of education should not be en-
joyed by all the childrea of Britain.
"As citizens of the world we cannot-
you cannot-admit that half of its child-
ren should cor. : inue to have no books, no
schools, no teachers-no education, be-
cause they happen to have been born in
so-called'backward'countries.
"So long as these conditions exist we
are all citizens of a backwa. : d world.
"But it will not be enough to achieve
elementary education for all, momentous
as that would be. As ycu well know,
society has not discharged its duties
towards the children when it has taught
them reading, writing and arithmetic.
These children who must build the future
- a better and more peaceful world than
our own-can only do, so if they are
enabled to develop their gifts and abilities
to the full.
"The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights puts it this way :'Everyone has
the right freely to participate ; n the cul-
tural life of the community, to enjoy the
arts and to share in scientific advance-
ment and its benefit'..,
-...'-,.,-.
History and Nationalism
"NONE of us dare acquiesce in the.1 injustice-indeed, the danger-of
reserving culture for the few, while dis-
tributing sparingly to the majority the
rudiments of a purely utilitarian training.
"But our objective goes even beyond
that. We must give all children the op-
portunity of becoming truly educated men
and women. We must also help them to
become good citizens, not only of their
own country but of the world. To that
end, it is essential that they should be
taught history in a way that will help
them to guard against prejudice and
narrow conceptions of nationalism. Too
often the schools to-day fail to offer the
child the opportunity to learn the history
of'peoples othoc than their own. Too
many children leave school totally ignor-
ant of the ways in which civilization has
been fashioned, and is still being fashion-
ed, by the achievements of many peoples
and many cultures.
"How can the child who is brought up
British schoo ! chi) dren listen to Mr. George Tomlinson, lupin : steer of Education, explain
a panel on"Human Rights", part of a recent Unesco exhibition in London. Dr. Torres
Bodet is seen at right.
A section of the exibition organized by the United Kingdom Commission for Unesco,
in London, last month-how schools in war devastated countries are helped through
Unesco.
on the stories of his own national heroes
only and their achievement, fail to fail
prey, as an adult, to such mischievous
ideas as the'hereditary foe', the'foreign-
er', the'inferior race' ?
"It is clear that even with the best of
schools and the best of teachers, education
for citizenship must be reinforced by the
example of the family, the city and the
country. Ethics could not be taught by
slogans or aphorisrns : they must be
buttressed by the lessons of life.
'The Future Cannot Be Evaded'
ZIT may be said", he continued,"that- *-we have not chosen the best time for
the tasks we have she, ourselves. We live
in a world of moral and political tensions,
threatened by a dangerous recrudescence
of aggressive or defensive nationalisms.
Yet no man chooses his fate ; as a great
South American educator put it, the fu-
ture cannot be evaded."
Dr. Torres Bodet said that the tensions
of our times aggravated the task and
increased our responsibility. He did not
suggest that teachers alone could carry
on their shoulders the entire moral burden
of the time, although some people would
like them to do so, thinking no doubt that
they would then be relieved of any fur-
ther responsibility themselves.
"Unesco", he added,"is in somewhat the
same position."
While there were those who argued that
the political issues of our times were such
as to render Unesco an amiable but futile
adjunct to the United Nations, there were
also those who felt that in bringing the
Organization into being they discharged
their full responsibility.
Since the Organization was created
three years ago, 46 countries had joined
and had given it for this year a bUdget of
less than two million pounds. These were
the funds of which Unesco itself disposed
in the war against ignorance. If these
were its sole resources, if the staff at
Unesco House, were the only soldiers in
its army, then indeed the battle would be
hopeless."

A Treasure of Richness
DR. TORRES BODET continued :"Butwe are backed by a treasure of m-
comparabl richness-the accumulated,
tested and ever-growing treasury of
knowledge and experience given to us by
the poets and philosophers and sic : dentists
of all the ages.
"We have our arm : es too. There are the
countless heroes of the past-well-known
and nameless-who fought before us to
win the rights and the benefits we now
enjoy. Our soldiers, today, are the men
and women of goodwill everywhere ; and
in the front ranks are the millions of
teachers.
(Continued page 4)


TEACHERS,
HOLD KEY
(Continued from page 3)
"Finally, the advances of science have
presented us with. weapons that are no
less effective for our kind of war than for
the self-destruction of mankind.
"In the accomplishment of that task,
Unesco places great hope in Britain.
which has made such a magnificent con-
tcibution through the centuries to the
culture of the world.
"You teachers of Britain-because of
your cultural heritage-are especially
fitted for the task that faces the world,
and for which Unesco exists.
"We must reveal to all peoples, amidst
the differences of language, customs and
techniques, the solidarity and the unity
of mankind.
"We must so bind the peoples together
that they shall achieve a peaceful, and a
better life for themselves and foe their
children-and for, she children of the
whole world."
4
