Unesco poster describing thepossibili tie  of public libra-
ries as an agency for popular
education will soon be displayed in
25, 000 libraries and other public
huildings in all parts of the world.
The poster is entitled"The Public
LibrarJj, a Living Force for Popular
Education", and its text, in the
form of a leaflet, wilt be made
available to the public through
adult education groups and libra-
ries.
Both leaflet and poster have been
printed in English, French, Spanish,
Italian and Polish. An Arabic edi-
tion is planned for later in the year.
In general, the publication will be
distributed to libraries and educa-
tional organizations in each country
, through Unesco National Commis-
sions with the co-operation of
library associations.
It is true that. some libraries do
extremely effective popular educa-
tion work and are indispensable to
their communities ; they provide an
adequate servJce of information and
book needs for people near them ;
co-operate closely with local adult
education groups, clubs, labour
unions, schools and universities ;
and organize their own discussions,
film shows and other meetings.
But for every town with a good
library service, there are dozens
with no public libraries at all, and
hundreds of other towns, cities and
rural areas have in ! completely
developed libraries. The creation
and expansion of librari. es in these
places depends greatly on public
interest and support, but frequently
the average person has little or no
idea how helpful to him relatively
complete public library services can
be.
The leaflet and poster, by giving
a clear picture of first-rate public
library servite, will be valuable aids
to librarians in their efforts to stim-
ulate demand and get support in
their communities for the standard
of service endorsed by Unesco.
While public interest is essential
for public library development,

effective nctiC$pends to a large
extent on the knowledge and vision
of librarians and1'\ff1e'rs responsible
for the provision of library services.
Unesco is therefore nlî' ; i) publishing
a series of practice) guides for
librarian, educators and govern-
ment officials who need help in
planning for new and expand-
ed public library services. These
Unesco Public Library blanuals in
elude the following titles :
Education for Librarianship
(English, French, Spanish, Polish,
Arabic editions).
Public Library Extension (Eng-
lish, French, Spanish, Italian, Po-
lish, Hungarian, Czech editions).
Adult Education Activities for
Public Libraries (English, French,
Spanish, Italian editions).
The Public Library, a Force for
Popular Education (English,
French, Spanish, German editions).
most of the editions of the ma-
nuals will be ready for distribution
through Unesco Sales Agents this
year ; others will follow early in
1050.
