UNESCO COURIER
CONSIDERING that Children's
Communities represented one
of its most significant and im-
portant new ventures, the Secretariat
of Unesco convened an international
conference at Trogen (Switzerland) in
July of last year. The purpose of
this meeting was to provide an oppor-
tunity for a free discussion and
exchange of views on the problems of
war-handicapped children. Thirty-five
experts and directors of children's
communities from twelve coantries as
well as observers from the Interna-
tional Bureau of Education and the
International Children's Emergency
Fund attended.
One of the greatest difficulties, the
experts found, which children's commu-
nities encounter in carrying out their
work is that of obtaining the necessary
equipment and of securing funds and
practical help in the form of goods or
voluntary services. As their educa-
tional methods are generally very
different from the traditional methods,
they receive little or no help from public
authorities and derive their resources
almost entirely from private gifts.
The provision of the help needed to
restore, maintain and establish commu-
nities appeared, at this Conference, to
be one of the most urgent and useful
tasks.
As a result of the Conference, an
International Federation of Children's
Communities (I. F. C. C.) was esta-
blished with its headquarters at
Trogen. The aim of this organization
is to trace children's communities
throughout the world, to promote the
exchange of children and teachers
between the different communities, to
coordinate research and to disseminate
information. The Secretariat of
Unesco has given the Federation its
support and has financed four meetings
of the Executive Committee.
Either directly or through National
Commissions, Unesco has encouraged
the establishment of national associa-
tions of children's communities, and
the appointment of national correspon-
dents of the I. F. C. C.
Unesoo's surveys
UNESCO is in touch with overone hundred children's commu-
nities in Germany, Belgium
France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the
Netherlands and Switzerland. It has
received full reports on the aims, orga-
nization and educational methods of
each centre, often accompanied by
photographs, drawings, statistics and
other material.
The needs of children's communities
have been systematically studied by
Unesco and are outiined in general
lists of needs common to all children's
communities and lists of needs of each
individual case, having regard to the
location, special nature of the com-
munity and the type of child for which
it is intended (mentally defective, demi-
cate, difficult children, etc.)
These lists have been published in
English, French and Spanish in
Unesco's periodicals ; they have been
distributed among organizations in
donor countries and to all the people
concerned. Unesco has endeavoured
to put each community in touch
with organizations or people who
may be able to help it. It has thus
increased the number of international
bonds which help to establish better
understanding.
Appeals for war-handicapped
children have also been launched suc-
voluntary organizations concerned to
the desirability of their assisting such
an undertaking.
Model Newspaper
S ECONDL Y, an international seminarways organized for men and
women teachers who wished to
improve their professionnal training
and to give their colleagues in other
countries the benefit of their knowledge.
The Seminar, which lasted a fortnight
was held at the lie de France Commu-
nity School last July.
At the last session of the Executive
Committee of the I. F. C. C., held at
Unesco House in June, a dummy
model of an international newspaper,
prepared by a specialist, was submitted
to the members of the Executive
Committee who decided to circulate it
to all the children's communities
concerned with the idea of producing
an international newspaper which they
would all help to edit. This ljnk
between the different communities
should help to bring about improved
international understanding.
At the same session, a member of
the Executive Committee, M. Richard,
was instructed to prepare a scheme for
setting up a"Unesco House"at
Trogen. Such an international centre
would be designed to make it possible
for children from different communities
and teachers serving in those commun-
ities to meet together for a period of
three to six months. Visitors to the
centre would thus have an opportunity
of practical experience of international
understanding. It would also make it
possible to provide a more thorough
vocational guidance service for the
children on an international scale.
cessfully in the press, by radio and by
means of exhibitions. All the necess-
ary steps have been taken to enable
donors to transmit gifts of money in
cooperation with the I. F. C. C., the
French National Associations of Chil-
dren's Communities (F. N. A. C. C.)
and the national correspondents.
Last month, Unesco helped in the
organization of an International Chil-
dren's Camp at the « Children's Re-
public» at Moulin-Vieux near La-
valdens, (Isere), France. The camp
contained about fifty boys and girls
between the ages of 12 and 17,
chosen from among war victims in
children's communities. The camp
programme included periods of physical
culture, a study of the folklore of
various countries, talks on current pro-
blems and excursions into the surround-
ing country. The children took a
share in organizing and running the
camp. They thus had an opportunity
for persona ! experience of internationa)
cooperation and took back the benefits
of it to their own communities.
As the resources of children's
communities are generally scanty, the
cost of the material organization of the
camp, which amounts to about
three million francs (approximately
$ 11. 000) was covered largely by
public subscription. As the result of
the appeal to French educational
authorities in primary, secondary and
technical schools, launched in the first
week of June under the auspices of
the French National Commission for
Unesco, in order to obtain a donation
of one franc from each pupil, over
half the sum had already been handed
to the treasurer of the F. N. A. C. C. by
the end of June. Furthermore.
Unesco drew the attention of the
20
CH ! LDXEN'S COMMUN ! TJES
A les>on in a natural history museum.
