In his first annual Report to
the General Conference of Cones-
eo, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, Di-
rector-General outlines his t1) own
policy and the acts pities of the
Organization since the beginning
of 1949.
* *
THE REPORT
IN the opening words of his Report, the Di-rector-G eral draws attention t  the excep-
tional difficulties encountered during the
period under review.
"By advancing its next Session to the ninth
month of the year", he writes,"the General
Conference imposed on the Secretariat, and
indeed on the whole Organization, a particu-
larly exacting timetable. In order to allow
sufficient time for the documents to be comple-
ted and despatched to Member States, the
Committees of the Executive Board had before
them, in the second half of May, the various
questions to he submitted to the General Confe-
rence, and the draft Budget for 1950.
"This preparation four the following year
absorbed a considerable prop, ortion 01'the time
and energy of the higher ranks of the Secretariat
at a moment when the}) should have lcn devo-
ting themselves wholl}) to the execution of the
Programme. The work was also undertaken
much too early or it to be based on adequate
experience derived from the ca1i. Ying out of the
CiJlrrent programme."
The change in the Director-Generalship, Dr.
Torres Bodet notes, could not fail to affect the
FAITH IN
normal development of the Secretariat's work,
in spite of his efforts to avoid any break in
continuity. It was to avoid excessive distur-
bance of the existing machinery, which would
have had disastrous consquences at a time when
work was so heavy, that he decided not to
embark this year on a radical revision of the
structure of the Secretariat.
Apart from the severe time limit imposed
upon it, the Organization found itself faced
early thins year with an additional task of the
first importance which had not been contempla-
ted by the General Conference at its Third
Session. This was Unesco's participation in
the Plan of Technical Assistance for economi-
cally under-developed countries which resulted
from the Economic and Social Council's Reso-
lution of March 4. The new proposals involved
not only the holding of an extranrdinary session
of the Executive Board (March 24-25) but
also the despatch to Lake Success of two senior
officials-Dr. Beby, Assistant Director-
General in charge of Education, and M. Auger,
Head of the Natural Sciences Department-
who were absent from their normal duties for
six weks. Meanwhile the D'rector-General,
with the help of a group of five members of the
Executive Board, began to lay the foundations
of Unesco's contribution to the Plan.
"This question", writes Dr. Torres Bodet,
"will, in fact, be one of those to which we
have had to pay most attention. It has
also materially altered the nature of the
Fourth Session of the General Conference,
which was to have been a"short business
session". Discussion of the Technical
Assistance Plan has involved an extension
of the Session by three days, and decisions
on the subject will be of greatest impor-
tance in connexion not only with that ques-
tion itself but with the development of our
cooperation with the United Nations and
other Specialized Agencies".
A Two-Year Programme
IT was clear to the Director-General and toi the Executive Board that a"short business
session"of the General Conference could not
undertake any radica ! revision of the programme
adopted at Beirut, and the addition of Tech-
nical Assistance to the agenda of the Confe-
fence did not inva. lidate this conclusion. This
meant that the-scheme adopted at Beirut must
be regarded as a two-year programme-a
circumstance that offered a welcome opportunity
to bring about greater concentration in the work
of Unesco.
Accordingly, the Director-General selected
from the'"very large and widely ranging"two-
years programme a number of permanent activi-
ties or fixed projects which would have a prior
claim this year. It was not intended to reduce
the programm decided on by the General
Conference, but to establish an order of urgency
in the matter of its execution. The various
projects were therefore divided into three
classes :
(1) Projects involving a special effort in
1949 ;
(2) Projects on which normal work shnuld
be carried out in 1949 ;
(3) Projects whose execution could be de-
ferred until 1950.
In adopting'this classification the Director-
General had the following criteria in mind :
(a) Practical value as regards raising the
standard of living of the ordinary people ;
A NOTE 01 cautious confidence reflecting hi,
together with his determination to see it br
ral's Report, which the General (Conlerence
Throughout this survey Dr. Torres Bodet n
on. e during which (Jnesco could not yet be regarlJ
It uas both a period 01 unusual pressure and one fJ
would be able to devote all its energies to the eXf
Yet, even at this stage, Unesco has a solid
results reprodllced on this page will testily. The i
the ailRs and ideals it has in. eommon with the (Jnl
can be lRpasured in deeds as well as words.
and art. The great
make to peace is tl
largest possible me
from those in whose
resources lie, with
humanity's most pres
first place the most
greatest number of
"Unesco must
which th
and the
have pial
THE process of met)Director-General
partance transcen-
dictating it, and the'
perhaps discover, in t
the ; principles of a poli
that shaH take account
world and of our 0'\
must justify the faith 
peoples haÞe placed j
in m)) view, concentr,
tasks that it can campi
its disposal, and the val
is be)) ond all doubt.
"Twenty tasks of t
ried out, are worth
enterprises still in th
True to this princij :
proceeds to give the list
in the last six months
(b) Likelihood of securing the corporation
of leading intellectuals and professional people
in the Secretariat's work ;
(c) Likelihood of achieving tangible results
fairly quickly.
"Surprise may be expressed", he writes,
"that these criteria do not include peace
or international understanding. It goes
without saying, however, that all Unesco'5
activities are directed towards peace and
international understanding. The ques-
tion to decide is what of project contri-
butes most to that end. It seems to me
that the best type is that which does some-
thing for man rather than merely discussing
him...,
"However much they may disagree on
other matters, all men agree that plenty is
preferable to famine, health to disease,
knowledge to ignorance, and communica-
tions and exchanges to isolation. They
all agree that life is enriched by literature

I UNESCO
his awareness of the difficulties of f} nescos mission
; wrought to fruition, runs through the Director-Gene-
mete wi II examine when it meets in Paris on Sept. 19.
f ! t mak es it clear that the period under review lVas
larded as haring reached a state of functional maturity.
woe 0 f transition to the time when a perfected machine
execution of a flexible and concentrated Programme.
lid rec ord of achievement to its credit, as the list of
he time has come when the contribution of Unesco to
United Nations and their other Specialized Agencies
reatest contribution we can
is therefore to enlist the
measure of cooperation
hose hands these powerful
with a view to satisfying
pressing needs, and in the
10st pressin needs of' ;'she
of people.'
Jst justify the Faith
I the leaders
the Peoples
placed in it."
methodical concentration, the
tera ! writes, may have an im-
ns : ending that of the factors
the General Conference wiN
in the above considerations,
l policy for this Organization
: ount both of the needs of the
If own resources... Un : sco
rith which the leaders and the
ced in it. It must therefore,
centrale'on certain practical
: omplete with the resources at
Ie value and meci'l1ing of which
but.
of this sort, carefully car-
) ruth more than a hundred
in the rudimentary stage."
rinciple, the Director-General
e list of actual results obtained
mths which is printed separa-
convinced", he writes,''that this is the absolute
minimum possible, having regard to the consi-
derable organizational, executive and supervisory
work which these services have to perform...
"That is the present distribution of the
Secretariat. While I have not thought it
possible or desirable to alter it radically
this year, this does not mean that I regard
it as final, but mérely that I wish to test the
need and the time for reforms in the light
of experience. I have thought it better
to concentrate this year on improving the
functioning of the machine rather than on
overhauling the whole machine itself."
tely on this page. An outstanding result of
the Secretariat's work. he notes, has been a
considerable increase in the number of Unesco
publications. The number of works and pam-
phlets issued during the first half of 1949 was
47. as compared with 48 for the whole of the
previnus year and 46 for 1947. Some of
them were published in several languages other
than the working languages. As for periodi-
cals, which amounted to seven in 1947 and
nine in 1948. these have now reached the num-
ber of fourteen.
In a section devoted to the distribution of the
Budget and the proportion of administrative to
executive personnel, the Director-General makes
it clear that although the total Budget shows a
smaH increase over that of the previous year,
the purely administrative expenditure proposed
for 1950 represents only 10. 5 per cent of the
whole draft Budget, as compared with 12. 3 per
cent in 1949. At the same time, the propor-
tion of purely administrative staff to total staff,
which was 27. 1 per cent in 1949. is only 25
per cent under his proposals for 950."I am

The World Outside
TURNING from the internal organization ofUnesco t  its relatio s with the world
outside, the Director-General insists on
the importance of close and active cooperation
with the Governments of Member States and
with all the other organizations, both official
and unofficial, which are animated by the same
ideals as Unesco and are striving to. achieve
comparable aims. He writes :
'The n'or/f of the Secretariat represents
only one part of the Organization's activities,
and, moreover, that wode cannot and must not
be conceived as an ind1ependent activit)). The
real influence of the Organization's activities is
in fact attributable less to its oWn resour, ces than
to its abilit)) to coordinate the energies of the
world in carr)) ing out its purposes."
From this point of view, the Director-General
considers that Unesco's overall success depends
on a four-fold system of contacts linking the
Secretariat with the machinery on which its effi-
ciency depends. These are its contacts with :
(1) the Governments of Member States ;
(2) National Commissions :
(3) the United Nations and the Specialized
Age, ncies ;
(4) international non-governmental organiza-
tions.
Part III of the Report (Official and Exter-
nal Relations) gives a detailed account of re-
cent developments on these lines, including
the accession to Unesco membership, since the
last session of the General Conference, of four
new States-Thailand, Switzerland, Burma
and the Principality of Monaco. All of these
States have completed the formalities necessary
for their membership to become effective, and
several others have announced their intention of
becoming members.
National Delegates in Paris
A LIST of the Member States which haveddegations in Paris, tog ther with th
names of their chief delegates and their
deputies, on Juiy),) 949. is given in the Report
(Part III, page 3). The Director-General
expresses his appreciation of the help given by
the national delegates to Unesco in its work, but
in the preamble to his Report he notes that
cooperation between Unesco and the Govern-
ments of Member States needs to be strengthe-
ned :
In the case of the National Commissions,
also, the Director-General has to report that
"there is a time-lag in the development of these
essential bodies in comparison with the Secreta-
riat. This is a situation which I can most
readily understand but, unless it is corrected, it
will endanger the balance of the Organization
and jeopardize both the efficiency and the uni-
versal significance of our work".
The Machine and the Multitude
A CONSTANT preoccupation runs like a Lett-motiv through the Report : the Director-
General's sense of the social and popular
value of Unesco's work. He shows an anxious
desire to avoid building an administrative wall
between the machine and the multitude. Thus,
in the whole Report he announces only three new
appointments by name, and all of them contri-
bute to this end. They are those of Mr. Dou-
glas Schneider (U. S. A.) to be Head of the
Department of Mass Communications, Mr. A.
Ramos (Brazil) to be Head of the Department
of Natural Sciences, and Mr. Carlo a Prato
(Italy) to be Head of the Department of Public
Information.
We may be allowed to conclude with a quo-
tation from the Director-General's report on the
work of this last Department, to which the
Courier belongs :
"The Bureau of Public Formation,
which is responsible for informing the pu-
blic about Unesco's aims and work, has
continued to improve its machinery...
Besides the Press and the tireless, the Bu-
reau has its own special organs. First and
foremost we must mention the Courier,
which aims at giving a full and vivid pic-
ture of our activities every month...
"with the limited means at its disposal,
which if endeavours to utilize more effectively
by improving its contacts and adapting what it
produces to the needs of the p. ublic, the Bureau
of Public Information is helping to introduce
Unesco to pe () ple who have hitherto been in-
adequately ; nformed about it. Until last April
there was no official Head of the Bureau. The
appointment of M. Carlo a Prato should lead
to fresh progress on both the productive and the
publicity side of the wor/e."
17
