EUROPEAN UNITED NATIONS CENTRE AT GENEVA
thods, but would like to indicate
the main lines along which our
activities are developing,
Cooperation
First, co-operation between the
Secretariat and our Member
States. This is twofold : co-opera-
tion with Governments, and with
National Commissions. With. re-
gard to Governments, the action
of the Secretariat has hitherto
Sometimes we aim at the estab-
lishment of contractual rules
consonant with our aims. A first
convention, to facilitate the
international circulation of visual
and auditory material of an edu-
cational, scientific and cultural
character, was adopted at the last
wssion of our General Confer-
ence and is now open to ratifica-
tion.
Others are in preparation. A
draft agreement on the import-
concern Unesco. But they can
also serve as valuable liaison
between the Secretariat and the
intellectual leaders in the dif-
ferent countries whose co-opera-
tion is indispensable to Unesco.
The second direction in which
our efforts are proceeding con-
cerns collaboration with non-
governmental international orga-
nizations. These bodies. offer us
the aid of communities already
established and organized for pur-
tM) NESCO in my view is inthe process of emerging
from its first phase, which
I would describe as exploratory
or experimental. During that
phase the prime objec'ive, as
was natural and indeed neces-
sary, was to survey the field and
try out methods.
As, moreover, Unesco's field of
activity was that of the workings
and fruits of the human mind,
it is understandable that diver-
sity should also have been the
dominating feature of Unesco's
first endeavours. It is only
thanks to the experience gained
in those early explorations that
Unesco has today a clearer view
of its aims and the means to
attain them.
This better understanding of
our ends and means, coupled
with a growing stability in our
internal administrative structure,
appear to me to open the door
to a second phase which shall
be vigorously constructive. If
Unesco is to succeed in the path
of practical achievement it must
now carefully eschew a dispersion
of effort. Our resources in terms
both of money and manpower
are slight, compared with our
responsibilities, and concentration
must bcome our law.
,,-'-
Economic and Social Council
Approves Unesco Report
DR. JAINE TORRES BODET, Director-General of r. rnesco, submitted the Rport to theUnitecl Nations on the work of Unesco during 1948 tc the United Nations Economic
and Social Cuuncil, meeting in the Palais des Nations at Geneva, on July 18.
On this occasion Dr. Torres Bodet made an important statement on the activities of
Unesco of t"hich the main points are given below. He also paid a tribute to his predeces-
sor, Dr. Julian Huxley, whose work as the first Director-General of Unesco laid the
foundation of its success.
After a discussion in the course of which the delegate, expressed their general appre-
ciation of t ! IC work of Unesco during the year under review, a resolution approving the
Report was passed by fourteen votes to none, with jour G. bstentions.
Acllires : : inç the Council at the opening of the day's proceedings Dr. Torres-Bodet said :
Eighteen Directives
In February last our Executive
Board adopted a scale of pr : o-
rities under which the various
projects in our programme have
been assigned budgetary means
corresponding to varying rates of
performance. These steps will
pave the way for a concentration
of our programme whictl will,
I hope. become effective in 1950,
The General Conference at Bei-
rut itself expressed a desire for
some order of precedence In the
programme. tt requested the
Director-General and the Execu-
tive Board to prepare a code of
directives which will later appear
at the head of our list of projects,
and the purpose of which is to
extract the essential purpose of
those projects.
A first set of eighteen directives
has been drawn up. Lying half-
way between the necessarily
broad objectives laid dbwn in our
Constitution and the very precise
purposes of individual projects,
tbese directives lay down a gene-
ral approach which bears witness
to Unesco's desire for greater
cohesion. Parallel progress can be
noted in our methods of work.
I cannot here review those me-
been largely of an informative
character. We have called upon1
Governments to help us gather
the data we needed and to
organize the international ex-
change of information which is
one of our most useful perma-
nent functions. I would refer in
this context to our work in the
field of exchange of persons, and
particularly to the handbook
which lists over 16, 000 fellowships
'and other opportunities for study
abroad, offered in 37 different
countries. Such information is
sometimes collected by means of
enqu : ries, not necessarilv confined
to official sources, such as that
on technical needs of press, radio
and film, covering to date 43
countries.
The Secretariat's activity, how-
ever, is also-and is increasingly
becoming-stimulative and crea-
tive. Sometimes we use a method
which I might describe as per-
suasion by example, such as the
revision of school textbooks, and
our work on teaching for bet-
ter international understanding.
Dr. Torres Bodet and Prof. Laugier, United Nations Secretary-General
of the E. C. O. S. OC.
tion of books, newspapers and
periodicals has been circulated to
Member States for first conside-
ration, and has also been sub-
mitted for comment to the Con-
ference of Contracting Parties
to the General Agreempnt on
Tariffs and Trade. We are activ-
ely engaged in consultations with
a view to drawing up a draft
universal convention on Copy-
right. We have also undertaken
a systematic analysis of all exist-
ing cultural conventions, or
clauses dealing with cultural
matters in other types of inter-
national agreements, with a view
to. the preparation of model
clauses concprning cultural ex-
changes.
Finally, co-operation with gov-
ernments has in some cases taken
the form of co-operative assis-
tance. Such assistance may be of
a material or a technical nature.
It has been material, for exam-
ple, in our programme of re-
construction of war-devastated
countries, whom Unesco has
sought to aid in two ways : first
by direct emergency supplies,
paid for out of the Organiza-
tion's unfortunately modest re-
sources ; secondly, bv stimulating
private gifts. As to technical as-
sistance, we have provided it this
year in the education field in
the form of consultative missions.
sent at the reauest of govern-
ments and paid for in part by
those governments, to studv for
their benefit problems formulated
by themselves. Two such missions
have been at work in recent
months, in the Philippines and
in Thailand ; and one is about
to leave for Afghanistan.
National Commissions
As regards the National Com-
missions, you are aware that the
very idea of them was originated
by our Organization. They are
intended to serve a twofold pur-
pose. Consisting of exceptionally
qualified or representative indivi-
duals, they are designed as con-
sultative bodies for advising the
government on questions which
poses of international co-opera-
tion. In their respective fields
they give practical expression to
that understanding and agree-
ment beyond the closed walls of
political units to which Unesco
is dedicated. Eighty-two of these
organizations have been granted
consultative status and eighteen
further applications are now
being examined. To my mind
this represents a source of great
strength for us, and one on
which we should draw for joint
constructive effort.
That is what we try to do
whenever the need for restoring
international relations between
intellectual and professional cir-
cles has caused Unesco to initiate
action and assume specific res-
ponsibilities. The relations with
the International Council of
Scientific Unions in the domain
of natural science are a typical
instance of this kind of work,
which in the last few months has
extended to fresh fields. In
January the International Coun-
cil of Philosophy and Humanistic
studies was set up, under Unesco'3
auspices. Unesco has joined hand
with the World Health Organiza-
tion to establish a Council for
the Co-ordination of Internatio-
nal Congresses of the Medical
Sciences. Finally, the Internatio-
nal Theatre Institute. created last
year. is growing steadily.
Thus. followin&, the upheavals
of the war, the international
community of research worker.
and creators, who form the van-
guard of progress, is ! n course of
reestablishment. Numerous con-
ferences and other meetings, an
ever closer network of contacts,
by ensuring the exchange uf
knowledge and comparison bet-
ween ideas. maintain and develop
this association of minds.
The third type of collaboration
in which Unesco participates IS
collaboration with the United
Nations and with the other Spec-
ialized Agencies. I need not enu-
merate the almost daily occa-
sions on wh : ch, in 1949 as in 1948,
we have been associated with
their work. I will onlv refer to
the most recent instance, namely,
the plan for technical aid to
under-developed countries.
A Call To Action b.
In order that those unfavoured
by history and geography may
catch up with the more fortunate,
it is not enou to furnish them
with the means of progress. They
must be made capable and desire
ous of using them and, for that
purpose, it must be"their"prog-
ress which is involved, and they
must know it. It is therefore
essential that technical assistance
be closely linked with a cor-
responding effort to guide peoples
towards an active and intelligent
participation in the shaping of
their own destiny as they them-
selves see it.
The work of peace to which
the United Nations as a whole
is dedicated requires that the
synthesis of forces and special
skills, and especially the alliance
between the intellectual and the
technical, the economic and the
social shall be built up again in
the light of real problems viewed
in all their complexity. That
synthesis can only take place and
is even only conceivable in terms
of the concrete. The problem of
co-ordination must be posed and
solved in and through action.
"It would be dangerous to believe that con-
centration of effort necessarily means reduc-
tion of expenditure. Any programme, no
matter how modest, that aims at obtaining
tangible results, is more costly than a policy
that does not succeed in going beyond the
administration stage...
"Jf Unesco were simply to give a list of
promises without possessing the means of
fulfilling them, it would be in danger of
deceiving the people. By its very vocation, the
Organization must serve the truth...
"The tendency to universality should not
prejudice respect for the genius of each na-
tion. The aim in view should be not stand-
ardization but an attempt to'enrich ourselves
by our differences'. All cultures should be of
mutual help without seeking to dominate one
over the other..."
- Dr. TORRES BODET at Geneva, July 18, 1949.
10 UNESCO COURIER August 1949
