THE
SCIENTIST
By
Dr. Arthur COMPTON
Nobel Prize-winner in Physics 1927
II ; o ; ant o say a word about Albertt Einstein as a scientist, for it is as
one who has greatly clarified man's
vim. w of his world that Einstein will always
be remembered.
Einstein's great contributions to science
are his"Principle of Relativity"and his
theory of particles or"quanta"of light.
These are fields of knowledge so special-
ized that most persons consider them too
abstruse to understand and too theoretical
to affect human life. It would be possible
to tell how these theories have indeed
aided the advance of practical physics
and chemistry, and how they affected the
outcome of the recent war. But this wou) d
put the emphasis in the wrong place.
Einstein is great, not because of any
effect he may have had on our habits of
life, but because he has shown us our
world in truer perspective, and has helped
us to understand a little more clearly
how we are related to the universe around
us.
In 1921 the Nobel Physics Prize was
given to Albert Einstein"for his discovery
of the law of the photoelectric effect".
This was selected as an aspect of his
theoretical study that was subject to
precise test and had been thoroughly
verified by experiment. It is. however, his
"Principle of Relativity.'that has properly
brought to Einstein his great fame.
"The Principle of Relativity"
I"OUND about 1900, new properties ofI-<'rapidly moving objects wer  dis-
covered that did not fit with the
long accepted ideas of physics. Typical

of these properties. was that the mass of
an electron was found to increase greatly
if it was set in motion at very high speed.
One special assumption after another had
been introduced to account for such
effects, but these special assumptions
themselves had no justification.
Then, in 1905, E : ru ; tein sugested that
the laws of physics as we observe them
may be in no way dependent upon how
fast we a, rue mov. ng through space. It is
only how fast an object is moving relative
to us that, on his view. can affect the
way things on this object appear to act.
The mathematical consequences of this
simple assumption were found to fit with
the changes is the prOperties of objects
moving at very high speeds. No further
special hypotheses were needed.
Accordingly, since Einstein, science has
given up the idea of any framework of
space, such as a fixed"ether", relative to
which we might think of ourselves as
moving. The only motion that has any
meaning, according to the"Special Theory
of Relativity", is the motion of one object
relative to another.
Among the unexpected consequences of
this theory is that the mass of anything
is proportional to its energy, a result now
well verified by experiment. It was this
principle, which led Lise Meitner to find
the enormous energy associated with
at. omic fission.
A New Concept of Weight
11-1 ARDLY was the scientific worldI btccoming accustomed o think in
terms of this"special"relativity
when, in 1915, Einstein introduced a
"general theory of relativity". This took
into account not only the speeds, but also
the changes in speed, or"accelerations".
of objects relative to each other.
It introduced a
new concept of
weight : according
to Einstein now,
the weight of
anything, that is,
the pull on it by
gravity, was itself
nothing but the
reaction against
an enforced chan-
ge of motion.
This concept
meant that in, the
neighbourhood of
a massive body,
such as the earth,
toward which ob-
jects fan if left to
themselves, there
must be a natural
state of motion
that is different
from that at dis-
tances far away
from such masses.
ThL natural state
of motion near the earth Einstein found
could be described by modifications of
space and time in its neighbourhood,
modifications that correspond roughly to
the curvature of the"parallels"of lon-
gitude on a globe.
The most celebrated consequence of thiS
was that tested by thi* British expedition
to observe the solar eclipse of 1918 :-
namely, the effect of the sun's attraction
on a rav of light passin I ? ; near it. The
delicate astronomical studies made then
and since have confirmed these and other
predictions of Einstein's General Theory.
This General Theory of Relativity also
has its remarkable consequences. One of
these is that there cannot be an'endless
amount of matter in the universe. Not
only is the space near the earth and sun
curved ; the space including the whole
system of stars is also curved, and this
curvature puts a definite limit on how
many stars can be in the universe and
Expanded Horizons
THUS Albert Einae_n has made Kpossible for man to see hi self in
kuer proportions. His concept of
light quanta has helped us understand the
atoms that make up the world of which
owe are a part. In his special theory of
relativity he has taught us that we must
think in terms of objects that we see, not
in terms of some imagined framework of
space.
By his general theory of relativity he
has unif. ed our laws of motion and out
law of gravitation, and has opened the
way for us to see with new clarity out
universe, finite now in extent, but vastel
far than had been dreamed before his
thoughts stimulated the imagination of
the scientific world.
Einstein continues his studies. He stiD
hopes to bring all the forces that physics
knows, gravitational, electrical, and
nuclear, into one unified formula. As yet
that goal is not achieved ; but in his
progress towards the goal he has greaUl
expanded our horizons.
D,'. CúmptGll
-
Prof. Hadamard
