WHAT IS"DEMOCRACY" ?
We publish on this page extracts
from a few of the replies received
by Unesco in response to its en-
quiry into the current ideological
controversies centering around the
key-word"democracy".
These represent only a very small
selection of the 30 questions and
over 80 replies- (many more than
20 pages in length) which philo-
sophers, historians and social scient-
ìsts from all parts of the world sent
to Unesco.
The results of the Unesco enquiry,
along with a selection of the replies
received will probably be published
in book form.
QUESTION :"To what dent will you
agree that the word'democracy is
ambiguous ?"
Answer give by Professor Richara
McKeon, University of Chicago :
The word"democracy"is ambiguous
not in the sense that many different
formulae have been proposed to define
its meaning, but in the sense that many
different interpretations have been
proposed and elaborated for a formula on
which there has been remarkable con-
tinuity of agreement. Very few discussions
of democracy, adverse or favourable,
would be distorted in interpreting"demo-
cracy"as the"rule of the people in their
cwn interest''. The ambiguities in the in-
terpretation of this formula arise from
two interrelated sources : (1) the deter-
mination of the means by which the
people may"rule in their own interest"
and (2), the determination of who the
"people"are. The discussion of the first
source of ambiguity turns on defining
terms like"law","order"."freedom", and
"equality", while the discussion of the
. second source turns on the relations
between pairs of contracy terms such as
"the many and the few"and"the poor
and the rich".
't- : o
QUESTION :"The opinion has become
very widespread that there is no such
thing as'democracy'in general. but
on ! y a long series of'democracies'.
differing with different historical, social
and psychological conditions : there its
Athenian democracy, Mediaeval demo-
cracy, Bourgeois democracy, Proletariandemocracy. Soviet democracy, but no
'general democracy'. To what extent
would you subscribe to this opinion ?".
Answer newer given by Professor Charles
Bettelheim, University of Paris.-
. Bourgeois Democracy is a democracy for
the bourgeoisie and a dictatorship for the
proletariat. When bourgeois democracy
is in its most democratic guise, this
dictatorship takes the fonn, essentiaily,
of an ideological dictatorship ; it imposes
oi) the proletariat (by means of the
school, the church, the press, radio, film,
etc.) views and ideals designed to
maintain the supremacy of the bour-
geoisie. But the weapons of material,
violent dictatorship-the police, army,
law courts and prisons-are always
ready to hand, and are resorted to
whenever the proletariat, as for instance
on the occasion of a strike, strays from
the path which the bourgeoisie wants it
so. follow. They are also resorted to when
the ideological dictatorship is weakening
and the proletariat subscribes to an
ideology other than that of the bour-
geoisie ; the latter then attempts to
substitute open dictatorship for the
former masked dictatorship, and bour-
geois democracy disappears.
Proletarian democracy, in its turn. is
a democracy for the proletariat and a
dictatorship for the bourgeoisie.
QUESTION'"Abraham Lincoln's famous
Gettysburg phrase government of the
people, by the people, for the people,
hat. often been taken as a point of
departure for clarifications of the essen-
. tial criteria of'democracy' ; the preposi-
tion of indicating the obedience of the
people to the government, the preposi-
tion by indicating the active participa-
tion of the people in the formation of
the decisions taken by the government,
and the preposition for indicating the
value of these decisions for the general
:'welfare of the people.
'"How far do these formulations cor-
:'respond to your own interpretation of
the Lincoln formula"
Answer given by Professor Charles
Perelman, Brussels University :
Lincoln's definition of democracy as a.
government of the people, by the people,
for the people, has been very popular
with the practitioners of political philo-
sophy, because, taken out cf its contest,
it can always be interpreted to suit oppos-
ing political ideals. It is enough either tc
Confusion In Use
of Term Studied
T HE ples of the world laymen no less than experts have never been
more conscious of the conflicting and contradictory ideas which
surround them than in r cent y arn. Ideological conflicts are presenl
et'erywhere, between nations, within nations, between minds,
wtihin minds.
Few Irords have. played a greater role in these disagreements than the
wird "democracy". The problem is one of vast implications. It is not just
a question of terminology. It has its background in contrasts of historical
development, of social condition, of political patterns. It is deeply entangled
in the immense cluster of problems raised by the impact of technology and
industrial civilization on Ihe lives of peoples everywhere. Il is not only a
probl"m of phylosophy-it is a problem or war or peace.
Although many have tried to analyze the causes and responsibililies for
disagreements, the problem has not yet been attacked an the internalional
level within the general framework of organized efforts towards international
understanding.
. N order to bring a little more clarity into. present-day discussions. Unescoun rtook a vas enquiry, n on the concept of, d mocracy. A questionnaire
was sent to 500 philosophers, historians, jurists, economists and to all to all
Unesco National Commissions.
Their, armed rith the replies (small parts of which are reproduced on
this page), a committee of experts from six countries meet in Paris ellrly this
month"to consider the causes of ambiguity and confusion in the present
use of the term "democraty" and their role in politicla disputes today."
7n a In a concluding declaration, signed by all six members, the committee
found that there are not fixed and extreme poles of divergence all that
there are abundant indications of undamental agrreements."
Understanding is possible, the statement said, if "alleged facis are
treated as facts and contrasted with facts " and if "ideals and theories are
tHated meated as aspirations and contrasted with other expressions of purpose and
intentions."
The, Ieclaratian admitted that"clarification of the presellt-day ideological
conflict... is not in itself sufficient to insure peace, " adding however, that
it would"serve to separate the real issues from the problems which arise
from confusions of statement."
"CLARITY of statement", therefore, "will make understanding possible"t and by.. alatlllg the problems, it will simplify the towl s, tuatlOn
and permit the concentration of attention on practical issues and possible
auctions.'
The declaration noted that "for the first time in the history of the world
me doctrines are advanced as anti-democratic" and added that "even the most
sharply contrasted forms of dempcracy share a common traditon of
humanism."
The six experts admitted that"these basic agreements in datement are
ourlain with a great complexity of disagreements" but pointed out that
"power rivalries tend to sharpen the ideological conflict into two opposed
positions and to conceal the great variety of theories and parties."
In ad, additio", the declaration continues,"the fact that the ideologicol
cOllflict is not between two fixed alld extreme views... affords grounds for
the expectation that the conflict of idealogies may be clarified... The
clarification of the issues will attenuate the effect on the general public of
propaganda tending to incite to violence."
T lIE statement concludes with the fallowing,., words :"Ultmately theresolution of ideological conflicts depends on free interchange of
information, of cultural materials, and of persons. The peoples of the world
cannot inderstand each other in all the diversities of their cultural, social
and political lives... without freer and fuller contact with each other."
Members of the committee who, drew up the report were Sergio Buarque
de Hollanda (Brazil) ; Edward H. Carr (Great Britain) ; Richard McKeon
(USA) : Charles Perelman (Belgium) ; Pierre Ricoeur (France) and Alf ; and Alf
Roos (Denmark).
give a slightly different interpretation to
each part of the definition or to stress
one particular part. I have myself inter-
preted rhe phrase"gonrnment of *he
people"as prov : ng that the people are
the source of power in. a democracy, for
I do not see in what way the obedience of
the people to the government is peculiar
to democracy any more than to any other
political system. It is difficult to say
whether this defimtion represents three
essen : ial principles of the democratic
system of government, because it is too
vague to be the basis of an exact criterion.
It is : n fact possible to intervre : and
adapt this definition in such a way that
it is applicable to systems whose demo-
cratic nature is open to doubt.
.
QUESTION :"Shoutd'democracy'be
used to cover a narrow concept, a polio-
ical concept designating methods of
decision-making, or should it be used to
cover a broad eoncept, a social-political
concept designating conditions and
methods as well as results of decision-
making"
. Answer given by Professor C. l. Lexis,
Harvard University :
To say that anything should be done
implies some criterion ot correctness. But
the understood meanings of words are
themselves the criteria of their correct
usage. Unless or until there is a clear,
understood, and agreed upon meaning of
"democracy'* the Question whether"demo-
cracy"should be used in one way rather
than another is a question which has no
answer. Any answer offered will merely
exhibit a preference or prejudice of him
who answers.
.--
QUESTION :"Can a'democracy'in the
narrow sense fulfil any of the requite-
ments it involves if nothing is done to
make it democratic'in the broad
sense ?"
Answer given by Dr Max Nomad, of
New York :
It cannot ; for under such a"narrow'
system the enormous majority of the
voters, in view of their unrelieved poverty,
might be tempted to sell their vote to the
highest bidder ; or else that majority
could easily faU for the promises of
various to : alitarian demagogues, thus
enabling them to do away with the exist-
ing system of"forma]"democracy for the
sake of a despotism parading as a
"broad", or"proletarian", or"people's"
democracy.
QUESTION :"Is'political democracy'
the best means to achieve the goal of
'Social democracy' ? Is'social democracy'
the best means to achieve the goal of
'political democracy' ? Is'political
democracy a means to any sincle goal
at all ? Are the two concepts at all
related as means to ends ?"
A Answer given by Professor Quincy
Wright, University of Chicago :
I think nk political democracy and social
democracy are reciprocally related as
means and ends, that is, either may be
treated as means and the other as end
according to the general philosophy of
values an individual may have. As a
practical matter. I think that under most
c : rcumstances, it is more expedient to
begin-with political democracy with the
anticipation that progress in political
democracy will develop social democracy
as has been illustrated in the case of
England. Political democracy, however,
implies reasonable security and literacy,
and perhaps, reasonable prosperity. It is
clear that the geographic position and
resources provided these conditions in
England and the United States more
than in any other-country. It is therefore
not surprising that political democracy
would have developed first in these coun-
tries. The present world situation of closer
international contacts, but a continuance
of power politics, undoubtedly creates con-
ditions unfavourable to political demo-
cracy. conditions which can only be
solved by world organization giving
greater assurances of security to all
states.
X
QUESTION :"To what extent do you
consider the strict distinction between
the concept'method of decision making'
and the concept'contents of decision
made'a justified and fruitful one ?
What arguments would you think val-
id for supporting the tendency to reserve
the word'democracy'for the method of
decision-making, thus rejecting it as a
broader term comprehending the condi-
tions, the methods and the contents of
the decision-making ?
The attacks upon this line of arguing
have not lagged behind in violence.
Answer given by Humayun Kabir, NeW
Delhi :
What is interesting to note in this
connexion is that the protagonists of
"democracy"and"socialism"are, in spite
of their violent disagreement about the
relative values of liberty and equality, at
one in their dissociation of means from
ends. The". democrat" emphasizes liberty,
and insist that whatever be the result,
the method of taking decisions is what
matters. So long as the appearance of a
free political decision is there, it is im-
material to him whether the consequences
bring social justice or not. In other words,
he is concerned only with the means and
not with the end. Equally, the"socialist"
who insists that equality must be establish-
ed in every sphere of life, whatever be
the method adopted for achieving it, is
prepared to flaunt his adherence to the
view that the end justifies the means.
Thus the two agree in the divorce of
means from ends even though to one it is
the means that alone matters, and to the
other, the end.
To sum up. even if ends are not means,
means and ends are so related that each
modifies the character of the other. The
condemnation of an end must, therefore,
necessarily lead to the condemnation of
the means to it. Contrarily, if the mean
are indefensible, this would immediately
rouse doubts about the justification of
the end itself.
X
QUESTION :"Does'democracy'presup-
pose general agreement on fundamental,
indisputable principles within the groups
it is applied in : if so, what are these ?".
Answer by Dr. A. C. Ewing, Cambridge
University :
I. do not think democracy presupposes
general agreement on any fundamental
principles except this one :-that the
differences between the rival parties are
not sufficiently great to warrant their
settlement by force."
X
QUESTION : Is there any incompatibilUy
between the ultimate political aim
described by Lenin and the aims pre-
claimed by other idealists to be of
ultimate or intrinsic value ?".
Answer given bJl Professor Stanislas
Ossowski, Warsaw University :
When we follow the discussion between
the ideological adversaries in the two
camps on questions of principle, we are
struck by the fact that there is no lack
of a common language. The case is
otherwise in their discussions with the
partisans of racialism-with those who
acknowledge the swastika. Both. in stat-
ing the reasons for their programmes,
invoke the same values, though the
emphasis is not placed on them in the
same way. The condmnation of the
western democracies, which is delivered
by the advocate of the socialization of
the means of production, is not a con-
demnation of the cult of freedom. The
battle with economic liberalism, the battle
with bourgeois liberalism, can be engaged
under the banner of a liberalism dif-
ferently conceived. The argument in such
discussions is, in general, designed to
show that the other camp has betrayed
or debased the ideals to which both
adversaries have subscribed. In saying
this I do not mean to under-estimate the
essential differences between the two
camps, the differences between their
scales of values and their ways of react-
ing to various present-day facts in social
and political life. We shall, indeed,
examine how it is possible to arrive at
such sharp ideological contrasts, whe : l
the main postulates in each case have
been the same. In this way we shall also
throw some light on the divergenq of
meaning attached to the word "de-
mocracy*.
