unesco's
.
Fellowship Programme
THERE are thousands of people todayB who would like to study in other
countries and exchange ideas with.
those from whom they have been isolated
for many years. While many governments,
universities, foundations and charitable
institutions are actively promoting inter-
national study, very often information
about such opportunities. is not easily
available to those who could best benefit
from them.
Unesco's programme in 1949 for the
interchange of persons will attempt to
remedy this situation, at least in part, by
expanding the work already v beI1 : un i  past
years. Unesco will carry out its programme
by means of three chief methods.
First by gathering together, analyzing
and making available information on in-
ternational fellowship programmes and
similar opportunities for study abroad.
Second, by planning and encouraging new
fellowship schemes in its Member States,
National Commissions and interested
agencies. Third, by promoting and ad-
ministering both Unesco-sponsored and
Unesco-financed fellowships.
Although Unesco's major job will
continue to be to stress fellowship oppor-
tunities for mature persons such as
scientists, librarians, museum personnel
and radio and film technicians, etc.,
attention will also be given to the prob-
lems of young peoples'exchanges.
Fellowship Handbook
THE most important tool developed byUnesco for the stimulation of study
in other countries is Unesco's"Study
Abroad-International Handbook of
Fellowships, Scholarships and Educational
Exchange", the first volume of which was
published early in January 1949. The
volume, which is the first comprehensive
mapping of an important aspect of inter-
national cultural relations, covers more
than 10, 000 fellowship awards for 1948-49
and includes data from over 20 countries.
The Handbook also contains analyses of
national programmes and other problems
related to the movement of scholars, scien-
tists, technicians and students from coun-
try to country.
Survey Brings Results
.,. JfTUDY ABROAD"is a result of
a detailed enquiry sent to
countries throughout the world
and long months of painstaking inve -
tigation undertaken during 1948. It is a
croncrete example of how the question-
naire-enquiry technique adopted by
Unesco can be made to work. For it has
undoubtedly served as an"eye-opener"for
certain countries, where this type of in-
formation had never before existed in
collected form, by making them aware of
the facilities available in their own coun-
tries..
In April 1949, Unesco hopes to publish
a supplement to Volume I of"Study
Abroad"and later in the year a Second
volume will appear containing materiat
on facilities avaUaMe in 1949L5C.
The participation of the nations of the
world in preparing material for these
periodic reports wiU. Unesco hopes,
stimulate new fellowships and increase
the interest of the various countries in
international study.
New Fellowships
THE information obtained from thesurvey, together with the advice of
other programme Departments of
Unesco, will enable the Organization in
1949 to develop plans for new fellowship
programmes in various Member States.
Special attention will be given to fellow-
ship programmes aimed at developing
trained personnel for press, radio and
film, the social implications of science,
public administration, certain branches
of Education, and certain aspects of the
cultural programme of Unesco.
Scholarships for Young People
- m-HE Beirut Conference urged theextension of Unesco's international
fellowship programme beyond the
more academic area to include all. vies of
artists, technicians, civil servants, indus-
trial and agricultural workers.
In this work, the Exchange of Persons
Department is already working closely
with the Reconstruction Department,
particularly with respect to the work
camps programme (see Chapter on Re-
construction : Human Problems), and
with the Education Department for
the promotion of world understanding
through Seminars and summer courses.
In addit. ion, a consultant has been
engaged to conduct a special investigation
into exchange schemes for young persons.
Unesco will also study ways of extending
the fellowship programme beyond war-
devastated Member States to include the
needs of under-developed areas and trust
territories.
225 Fellowships Administered
AT the present time approximately 225fellowships are being administered by
Unesco. During 1949, Unesco will be res-
ponsibl for about 20 new Unesco fellow-
slúps and for such new opportunities
which the Organization may be called
upon to sponsor ion the course of the
coming year.
