"HALF THE
WORLDS
POPULATION
IS ILLITERATE
A Message from Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Director-General of Unesco, to the Seminar on
Illiteracy in the American Continent, meeting
at Quitandinha, Brazil, from 27 July to 3 Sep-
tember 1949./.. .-
YOU are meeting to consider
one of the most disquieting
problems of our century. I
mean the illiteracy of
millions of beings whom
we call in all seriousness
cur brothers-as indeed
they are by nature and potential
ability-and on whose shoulders we
lay a burden of civic duties nu
different from those that we ourselves
accept. Yet despite the right of all
men to culture, these, our brothers,
remain under the ycke of ignorance.
They are excluded by poverty from
that equality which is theirs by law.
They are victims of a situation which
we have done nothing to bring about,
but fer which, knowing and admitting
it as we do, we must assume the
responsibility if we take no pract : cal
and effective steps first to lessen, then
to remedy, and finally to abolish th's
evil through our combined efforts and
our unanimous will.
On 10 december 1948, at the General
Assembly of the United Nations, the
representatives of all the American
countries a3opted a Declaration, 0 :
which article 26 reads as follows :
<&lt; Everyone has the right to educa-
tion. Education shall be free, at least
in the elementary and fundamental
stages. Elementary education shall be
compulsory, Technical and professional
education shall be made generally
availlable and higher education shall
be equally accessible to all cn the basis
of merit >&gt;,
Brave words. But how much ar are
they worth, if, in the Latin American
community alone, millions cannot read
them ? If the rest of the world is
added, the problem becomes even more
desperate : half the world's population
is illitrate. In this age of aeroplanes,
radio and nuclear physics, half the
human race has still not learnt to
read and write When we speak of
Human Rights, we shall do well to
bear in mind that, as things stand.
cne human being in every two is
unable to claim respect for those
Rights in writing.
Nor is this the whole picture : tha
incidence of illiteracy is far from uni-
form ; in some regions there are no
illiterates but : n ethers only a tiny
minority of the population enjoys the
privilege cf bsing able to read. There
are great areas where men and wo-
m6n men can do no more than scrawl, at
the foot of the orders they receive or or
of the commitments they enter into,
the symbol of a great martyrdom : a
croM.
The Defences of Peace
U NESCO, which was created to
build the defences of peace in
the mind of men, must ponder
the nature of the peace
wich it is ta prepare and stnngthen
Is it the peace of slaves, who know
not but to yield ? Or is it the peace
of men, of men made free by aware-
ness of their destiny, and by intelligent
and active sharing in a common
liberty, to redeem mankind ?
Without universal education the
ideal of freedom is no more than an
unpund debt, a dangled deceit. The
problem oj illiteracy is of course one
oj of education. But it is more than this : :
it is a universal tragedy which affects
us all directly ani which is at once
economic, pclitical and social in
character.
Some may think it of little im-
portance. There is, they may say,
little relation between the cultural
level of a country and the number of
its people able to read and write at
any given moment. There were more
illiterates in the France of Loujs XIV
than in the. France cf NapolEon III,
yet the age of Racine, Pascal and
Moliere was not on that account
inferior to that of Tiers, Renan and
Victor Hugo. There was perhaps more
reading in the Spain of Isabella II
than in 16th century Spain Yet the
latter period cannet boas : a poet such
as Lope dE Vega, a playwright such
as Tirso de Molina, or storyteller such
as Cervantes. There were more illite-
rates in Shakespeare's t h a n in
Dicken's England ; yet neither did
diplomas add lus : re to Pickwick's ad-
ventures, nor did the lack of schools
J I would not warn you against
sophistries so glaring, were it not daily
apparent that minds which seem the
keenest, and hearts which seem the
soundest, are being infected by the
false notion that progress is a material
investment, a kind of merchandise, and
that with a little capital and a had-
ful oj skilled technicians we can save
whole centuries of time in our fight for
civilization. There can be few atti-
tudes mere dangerous than that of
cne whose vanity and superficiality
lEads him to think that the mere pur-
chase of a gramophone and a plenti-
ful collection of records makes him
the equal of a Beethoven or a Bach.
No one, however wealthy, is rich
enough to purchase dther the title
deeds of genuine progress or its
effective enjoyment. Peoples, like
individuals, must choose on of two
courses : either : hey may copy the
blue-print of an artificial type of econo-
mic development, which must prove
transitory and vain ; or they must pro-
gress by their own efforts, tackling
each problem from its banning,
which calls above all ior humility and
deny laurels to the author of The
Tempest.
Such arguments put the question in
a false light, and these who use them
are equivocating. Equally misleading
is the assertion that in some communi-
ties the illiterates are to be preferred
a human beings to those who have
been through the schools ; that the
value of giving an illiterate the power
to read what may not have been worth
writing is dubicus ; or, as stated by a
great South American, that men of
America need the alphabet less than
they need the plough and the hammer.
All these excuses-or, if you will,
these apologies for illiteracy-imply
some criticism of the kind of life that
awaits *he ignorant when, though still
unlettered in the strict sense, they are
no longer illiterate. Such criticisms
may seem plausible. But do they
really detract from the importance and
urgency of the question ? Do they not
denote a paradoxical superficiality ?
Far from facing the problem squarely.
do they not deliberately elude it ?
The mere fac : that illiterates exist,
who are harder-working and pleasan-
ter to deal with than university
graduates, does not mean that
universities are necessarily havens of
laziness or bitterness ; the fact that
xlcughs and hammers are necessary
does net mean that books or news-
papErs are not ; the fact that there
were many illiterates in the years
when gifted writers composed Don
Quixote or the alexandrines of <&lt; Phe-
dre gave no reason, still less
encouragement, to Cervantes to invent
the adventures cf the Knignt. of the
Lions, or to Racine to describe the
fateful loves of the stepmother of
Hippolytus.
perseverance-and, in a word, for
education at all possible levels.
Scheme for Technical
Assistance
Y YOU have probably already
heard some comment en the
Scheme for Technical Assis-
tance evolved jointly by the
United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies. Unesco shared in the pre-
paration of this plan, and its Gene-
ral Conference will next September
decide what programme and budget
should be adopted to afford technical
aid to under-developed countaes from
1950 onward.
We shall bring to this vast under-
taking our keenest enthusiasm and
our best endeavours. If we obtain
the approval of the General Confe-
rence, we shall, in agreement with
the countries concerned, investigate
their most pressing needs with the
cbject of sending them missions, teach-
ears and advisers whose essential task
will be to create, without detriment
to the cultural individuality of the
country, more favourable conditions
for the development of technical edu-
cation and scientific investigation.
I an convinced of the benefits
which this plan offers to many of the
world's peoples ; but it is also my
belief that none of those advantages
will be lasting unless a high priority
is given to education. Hence the vital
importance which I, as Direc : or-
General of Unesco, attach to the work
you are now undertaking.
The teaching of reading and writing
is not an end in itself ; it is, however,
a means to an end and an essential
cart of any well-ccnceived and well-
balanced plan of social advancement.
Any plan for technical assistance
must rest-often directly-upon a
vigorous educational campaign,'and
where illiterates are. numerous, any
educational campaign, must presuppose
an energetic struggle against illitera-
cy.
What Illiteracy Means
SOME years before I entered the
Organization to which I now
belong, I took part, in my own
country, in a national literacy
campaign. During the examination
period, I viited a rural community
which the inspectors had described to
me as one of the keenest and most
determined of the campaign. In a
strawthatched hut, hut, a girl volunteer
was teaching reading and writing to
a group of peasant women. For black-
board she had a yard or two of
shabby dark o'lcloth. After the
learners had read me a few pas-
sages I asked one of them, the
oldest, to write out two or three
sentences which I oicked from the
primer the teacher was using. With-
out hesitation she wrote out the
words I dictated.
But I was disturbed, less by her
spelling mistakes than by a certain
machine-like swiftness which suggest-
ed the motions of an automaton.
I asked her to write her own name,
and aw at once that this was an
untried task : for hand and mind alike.
She took the chalk hesitantly, and
very slowly, letter by letter, began to
trace her name. When she had finish-
ed she read it out several times under
her breath. Then suddenly, to every-
body's surprise, she burst into tears.
There was certainly no bitterness in
that weeping ; its real cause was sure-
ly the surprise of finding her real
self, suddenly, after so many years of
ignorance, during which that, self had
been absent in exile.
In those few shaky, ill-formed
strokes, She saw herself more clearly
than in a mirror-humble and obe-
dient. bowed down by her poor past.
And were not those triumphant tears
a lesson to us all, and an immense
forgiveness ?
Time presses, We cannot leave
millions of men and women injustly
isolated and cut off-from our life be-
cause the soil of their mind is untilled.
In coming to this Seminar, you, the
teachers of America, have undertaken
a responsibility to which I pay tribute
with respect and gratitude,
May your work be crowned with
success. But how can we doubt of
success, when the "ask is so noble and so oble and
you meet in this magnificent land of
of wh : ch Stefan Zweig has
said in a famous passage :
bountifulness of life itself causes free-
dom to flourish ».
29
