-UNESCO'S meeting of experts on
exchange of persons which was
held recently, in Paris, provided
an opportunity for exchanges of views
and news on cultural policies and
marked a stage in the further develop-
ment of international co-ordination of
exchange of persons programmes.
Unesco's annual Handbook on in-
ternational fellowships and related
opportunities was recognized as an im-
portant tool in this field and sug-
gestions for expanding and improving
its publication and distribution were
made.
The experts also recommended that
Unesco assist countries which offer
fellowships and receive foreign students
with technical advice, continue its sta-
tistical information on the international
movement of students and define fields
of study in which fellowships are re-
quired.
Furthermore, countries engaged in
sending large numbers of their natio-
nals for overseas training requested
Unesco's help in developing techni-
ques for analytical study in the country
of its needs for overseas scientific and
educational training and the provision
of periodic information on outstanding
facilities for study of specific subjects
available in various countries. These
suggestions, it was felt, would not only
promote additional fellowship opportu-
nities but would also rationalize and
co-ordinate existing programmes.
Expert discussion also centred
around certain specialized interchange
programmes. I reviewing the
Unesco survey of young people's
exchanges, the group suggested that
national Commissions and sponsoring
organizations should use teachers,
youth leaders and mass media material
in preparing young people for their tra-
vel abroad, that Unesco's efforts to
co-ordinate and publicise information
on exchange programmes should be
widened and an information manual to
facilitate young peoples'exchanges
should be published.
It was also suggested that
Unesco call a meeting of youth
experts in 1951 to carry forward co-
ordination and expansion of efforts.
In discussing worker's educational
and training exchange programmes, it
was felt that the close collaboration
between the International Labour Of-
fice and Unesco in publicising pro-
grammes in the Unesco Handbook
and promoting further exchanges
should be continued. Existing sche-
mes tor the exchange of primary and
secondary school teachers were review-
ed and Unesco's initial efforts in
this field were commended.
BREAKING
THE BARRIERS
:'-n HE experts discussed the deve-
lopment of techniques for deter-
mining the success of program-
mes in promoting international under-
standing. The group was sharply di-
vided between those who felt that over
elaborate investigations would not
achieve desired results and those who
wished to evaluate the results of exist-
ing programmes with a minimum of
technical machinery in order to bettel
the administrative procedures of ex-

change schemes. It was decided that
any study of the effects of exchange
programmes should be limited in scope
and related to the practical needs of
programmes.
One of the major problems facing
all administrators in this field is the
many barriers-legal, economic and
academic-which impede, to a greater
or lesser degree, the movement of per-
sons for educational purposes. In sur-
veying this problem, it was agreed that
it was part of a larger problem of bar-
riers to travel faced by all persons and
currently under study by the United
Nations. It was also felt that as the
problem of barriers arose primarily at
the national level it could best be met
by action within member States.
It was urged that Unesco's role in
this field was to define clearly and
make known the various obstacles
which obstruct the movement of per-
sons and to publicise current proposals
by States and groups of States to re-
duce these barriers.
