A"BIBLE"FOR PUBLISHERS,
WRITERS AND TRANSLATORS
THE International Bibliography of Trans-
lotions, which Unesco has prepared for
early publication, is, in its quiet way, one
of the most curious and interesting
compilations which the Department of Cultuml
Affairs has produced so far. Thirty countries.
covering nearly every part of the globe, are
represented in this report on the status of
translations covertng the year 1948. and among
the 8, 500 single items included can be found
documents translated into at least twenty tong-
ues from more than 55 languages.
What are these documents, exactly ? They
cover writings on the whole range of human
activity from midwifery (a translation into
Swahlli from Luganda) to the Tibetan Book of
the Dead (from Tibetan, via English, into Ger-
man). There are books on children and for
children, the rarest classics from ancient India,
Greece and the Arabic lands, phllosophical and
religious works of all ages, histories and mathe-
matical treatises, biographies and books of
travel, political manifestos-'books from many
lands and from all times up to the best-sellers
of yesterday.
From Arabian Nights
to Dostoievski
IN the compilation of the Index Translationum1 Unesco has had the assistance of librarians,
"publishers, educational institutions and
individuals in many parts of the world. The
result is a cross-section of those books, great
and small, which have been able, through
translation, to retell a tale, or ! reState a
scientific truth or raise points stlll valid
for discussion and argument, beyond the
boundaries of thetr original linguistic area.
The Arabian Nights, the fairy-tales of Hans
Christian Andersen and the Brothers Grimm,
the novels of Dostoïevski and Dickens, the
sonnets of LouIse ! Labe and of Michelangelo
can stir the minds of readers in regions far
removed from those where they first came into
being.
For a number of reasons it is important that
such a report be made regularly and over a
wide area. In the first place, the United Na-
tions, both in its General Assembly and in
its Economic and Social Council, has expressed
its strong belief in translations as a valuable
force for understanding among different per-
pIes ; whether among peoples of different
nationalities, or for those speaking different
languages within one nation's boundaries.
Unesco, which was given responsibility for
encouraging translations, has already taken
steps to increase both the quality and the
quantity of translations, so that it will even-
tually be possible to see where serious gaps
exist and what efforts can be made to fill such
gaps. With the aid Of the Index Translationum,
publishers will be able to gain an insight into
the kinds of books which are being translated
in various parts of the world, translators can
T
gauge the potential field of their endeavours,
and writers will see where their books are
finding readers beyond their own frontiers.
China, India, Soviet Union
still Isslng
HE Idea of an International Bibliographyt of Translations was nrst carried into
effect is the days of the League of Na-
tions'Institute of Intellectual Co-operation.
when, from 1932 to 1940, a quarterly bulletin
at first listed the translations published In
six countries and by the time its last issue
appeared, in fourteen countries. Unesco has
had the advantage of being able to reach a
greater number of countries, through its Mem-
ber-States and their National Commissions.
and has also been able to cover, more or less
completely, the published translations of seve-
ral countries not members of Unesco.
Thirty countries (of which four reported
that no translations had been published in
1948) represent, nevertheless, only a small
proportion of all those which are actively
engaged IU making translations and distributing
them within their boundaries. Three of the
largest countries In the world, with vastly
complicated problems of translation, and to
the best of our knowledge, with highly deve-
loped programmes for solving those problems.
are not yet represented In the Index : these
three are China, India and the Soviet Unlom.
In its form, the Index Translationum com-
prises, In reality, four Indexes : the main body
of the work Is divided first into the national
brbllographies of the different countries repre-
sented. Each country's bibliography Is divided
according to the ten general categories of the
Universal Decimal Classification system, a
useful aid to one who Is searching for works
In a specific field, since the works In each
category are arranged by alphabetical order of
authors. At the end will be found cross-
Indexes of authors, translators and publishers
In alphabetical order.
It is Unesoo's goal to be able to Include for
each work listed, complete information concern-
ing the published translation and In addition,
to give full details of the original edition. In
a few cases, the original edition has been
fully described, but In all too many cases
there has been no mea, ns of supplylltlg all the
desired information.
It Is expected that before the end of 1949
the first volume at the Index Translationum
will have made Its appearance-the first
volume, that is. of the new series-and work
has already begun on the second volume.
which will record the translations published
In 1949. There are already signs that the
second issue will be more comprehensive than
the first, and It cannot but benefit from a
wider geographical coverage and from the
example of the initial volume.
