the high mountains which encompass
Port au Prince one is in a different land.
The language of the country peasants is
Creole.
In Port au Prince there are attractive
houses on the sidle of the hill, fine hotels,
swimming baths, i large Catholic cathe-
dral and a Presidential palace, all looking
out over a brilliant b1ue in1et of the
Caribbean.
Beyond it on all sides are fine ranges
of mountains. After tropical rains they
are brilliant green with new vegetation.
In the dry season, brown is the predomi-
nant colour, reminiscent of the semi-
desert land of North Africa.
When one gets out of Port au Prince
into the mountains one enters a different
Haiti. Here the peasants live scattered
over the steep mountain sides in their
humble little shacks, each (, De on his own
amall patch of cultivation.
THE PROBLEMS OF HAITI
lti ERE too ar the real problems ofHaiti : over-population, tropical
disease, deforestation, acute soil
erosion, and illiteracy.
Haiti is the smallest of the Latin-Ame-
rican Republics, with an area of some
ten-thousand square miles, but it has the
highest density of population, calculated
at more than three hundred and seventy-
six per square mile.
A high proportion of the inhabitants is
afflicted by a variety of tropical diseases.
Malaria, topical ulcers, intestinal worms.
and the contagious skin disease known
as yaws, are common afflictions.
OF THE HAITI"PILOT
Conference, meeting in Mexico ettJi,
approved the"Haitian Pilot Project"bu
voted to seek the co-operation of the Uni.
ted Nations and other Specialized Agen-
cies in sending experts in fields outsidt
Unesco's competence to work in the field
with the director of the project. Une5Ct'
agreed to provide a director and pal
twenty percent of its estimated cost e.
sixty-six thousand dollars for the firs)
year. The Haitian Government promised
another twenty percent and negotiation
were begun to obtain the remainder ot
the necessary funds from other organi,
VOOL"t
THE PROJECT TAKES J. 1
SHAPE D
HE Head of Unesco's Fundamen
lr Education Division had visite.
Haiti to discuss tile project with
The pressure of increasing population
forced the peasant to chop down. the
tropical forest own almost every avaible
patch o. f land in order to grow food. But
even this was no enough to feed his
family. The Haitian farmer courageously
and grimly undertook the cultivation of
slopes so steep that a goat could hardly
climb them. Using the machete and pri-
mitive hoe he scratched the surface of his
fields, often situated on slopes at a sixty
degree angle, where to keep himself from
falling he was forced to attach himself
with a rope ! His efforts, however, were
often condemned to failure. With the first
tropical'rains, th loose top soil was
washed down into the valley and out to
sea.
Haiti, which twas once considered 1ile
richest of the French Colonies, faced
acute and increasing poverty, reflected in
the misery and starvat : on of the peasants.
In addition, over the whole Republic
the rate of illiteracy was over eighty per-
cent. In the present areas it was normally
well over ninety percent. This meant not
only the inability to read and write but
ignorance of basic scientific principles
of agriculture and of the conservation of
resources, and above all, ignorance of ele-
mentacy hygiene.
Columbus dropped anchor off the Island of Haiti, which he called Hispaniola, on
Dec'jmber 6, 1492. Top map shows point where he landed, with southern"tongue"
where Valley of Marbial is iocated. north of tiny Port of Jacmel. Bottom map :
8kvetched on the spot by Haitian technician, shows Marbial Valley and existing ;...
projected water wells. Unesco Centre is located in middle of Valley.
ORIGIN OF THE PILOT
-- PROJECT
lr HEBE were the problems which ledm Dumarsais Estime. Haiti's vigorous
and poplar president, to turn to
Unesco and propose that a"Pilot Pro-
ject"in fundamental education be star-
ted in his country.
The site chosen bv the Haitian Govern-
ment for the new'Pilot Project"was the
rural section of Marbial. in the valley of
the Gosseline River in the south of Haiti.
The Gosseline, which rises in the high
mountains of Grows Morne and flows for
some twenty mi ! fs through the rugged
foothills of Marbial, is a mountain torrent
which shrinks to a chain of muddy pools
during the dry season. The population of
the valley has been estimated at about
thirty thousand peasants. living scattered
over the steep mountain slopes in isolated
shacks. Hovewer, this is only a rough
estimate because no census has ever been
taken and no statistics exist. There are
no villages in the Marbial VaUey and its
only town is the little port of Jacmel),
where the Gosseline runs out into the sea.
FRUSTRATION
AND DESPAiR" :"
IU NESCO accepted the Haitian"Pi-lot Project"with enthusiasm. But
this initial enthusiasm was soon
destined to frustration.
First there was a period of misun-
derstanding, due to long-distance corres-
pondence-some of which never arrived.
Then, inaccurate articles appeared in
American and Haitian newspapers, sta-
ting that Unesco was putting two-hundred
thousand dollars into a project of funda-
mental education for the Marbial Valley.
This was more than the total budget
avaible to Unesco for its fundamental
education programme for all its forty
Member States.
Late in 1947, three members of Unesco's
staff visited Haiti and made a brief sur-
vey of the Marbial Valley. What they
found in the valley shocked them deeply.
Unesco had been prepared for"tough
sledding"in meeting the region's educa-
tional problems, but Macbial was obviously
a"pcoblem area"of the worst kind.
The over-population, the tropical di-
ceases, the deforestation and erosion
were so serious that it was patently evi-
dent that any project to improve condi-
tions in the valley implied something
more than education as such. Fighting
tropical diseases and reinstating a decli-
ning agriculture were problems in which
the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization were
competent rather than Unesco.
In November 1947, Unesco's General
representatives of the government. Bad
at headquarters in Paris, the Secretaria.
set to work drafting a programme 0
act : on for the project, based on these dis
cussions. This included plans for prima.
schooling for children and general adul'
education for men and women to combs
ignorance and illiteracy ; language teaì
ching ; health education and medical
services ; agricultural and veterinar)
education ; community cultural activitie :
based on a rudimentary library, museum11
and arts centre ; and the establishment
of small industr : es and rural crafts at
well as the organization of cho-operatives
This programme would be integrate
into an over-all community education
scheme with Unesco working with the
Haitian Government and education au-
thorities. Unesco saw its task as a double
challenge : raising the social and econo-
mic level of the community through edu-
cation and at the same time the training
of Haitian teachers and workers so that
the project might become self-supporting
as rapidly as possible. It was obvious,
however, that this goal would not
reached in less than five years.
BASIC SURVEY
HE first principle underlined is, Unesco's plan was that any project
for education and material im-
provement must be based on a thorought.
knowledge of the physical environment*
and the people for whom it was destined.
Unesco's initial task. therefore, was to
undertake a"Basic Survey"to provide
data on which the educational programme
could be realistically based, and a measur-
ing line against which progress could beIi
assessed in a few year's time. f
Teaching th  people of Marbia) to be sell- !
sisal and palm fibres for mats. Young man
pnnection with the
\-/HEN you leave the airfield at Port au Prince
V {f" you step into a world that is African. The
open shops in the market place might be any
typical African town.
The peasants driving their donkeys into market
seem to be almost pure African. The Ministers of the
government and the President himself are proud to
be descendants of Africans who were brought to Haiti
as slaves by the Spaniards and who later feU under
French rule, then defied Napoleon and, in JLoU4, proclaimed the tree
Republic of Haiti.
The spirit of freedom is still proudly maintained in Haiti, one of the
three independent countries of the world entirely governed by black
people. The Haitian8 look back with pride at their national heroes, Tous-
eaint FOuverture and Dessaline.
In Port au Prince, one is conscious of a slrongly French culture. French
is the official language of the country and the people speak it with a
THE
STORY

To head the Survey Team in Haiti,
Unesco called on Dr. Alfred Metraux, an
American anthropologist of Swiss origin,
who left the United Nations'Department
of Social Affairs to join Unesco.
In April 1948, Dr. Métcaux arrived in
Port au Prince, formed his team of field
workers and t to work in Marbial
Valley.
Another eminent anthropologist, Dr.
Melville Herskovits had written a well-
known book entitled"Life in a Haitian
Valley."When Dr. Métcaux had been in
the valley a short time he repocted back
to Unesco that his survey might have to
be called"The Death of a Haitian
Valley."
The team was next to despair at the
formidable problems that faced it. Access
jnto the valley was cut off for many days
by tropical storms Only a rough track
ran up the stony bed of the river and it
was often impassible even by jeep. There
PROJECT'
was no drinking water, no houses for the
staff except a few bfoken-down. leaky
peasants shacks, with no sanitation what-
ever. And one by one, the members of the
team, including Dr. Métraux fell victim
two malaria.
It was obvious that these physical
handicaps would have to be overcome
before any programme of education could
be started. It began to look as though
the Pilot Project might die even before
jt could be brought effectively to life.
In July of the same year, Unesco asked
Dr. Frederick Rex, an American funda-
mental education specialist on Unesco's
staff, to go to Haiti. His report confimled
the pessimistic view already expressed by
Dr. Metraux.
Writing to the Unesco Courier, Dr. Rex
sa : d :"What I saw and heard made me
feel that the undertaking was impossible.
The ravages of floods, erosion, imprudent
and excessive cultivation had left but little
earth for the poor peasants of the Mar-
bial Valley to provide their daily bread.
"The rains had failed and some famines
had begun to eat the seed corn that
was all they had to provide the next
year's crops. A few wi ; d mangoes were
often the only food a family could offer
in exchange for a cup of millet or corn.
Seven out of ten people had malaria.
The swolJen stomachs and the spindly
legs of the children spoke of hookworm
and malnutrition. Yaws, with its horrible
disfiguring effects was apparentlv com-
mon".
It looked as though the project in
Marbial Valley might have to be abandon-
ed, or a new site chosen, since it was
no part Ðf Unesco's work to carry out a
major re1ief job.
Learning of this possibility of abandon-
ing the project. Dr. Metraux, who had
doggedly carried on his work in spite
of his iHness. dispatched a letter to
Unesco in which he wrote :"We cannot
pull out from Haiti... we cannot abandon
these people. If we do. we shall break
their spirit completely... Whatever has been
done in the field of education will co) Japse.
This will be a complete disaster... The
Unesco Pilot Project is an experience
which is worth all our energy".
They too heart
the rumours that
U n e s c 0 might
abandon- them.
They called emer-
gency meetings of
their local co-ope-
rativa associations.
These co-operate
ives, known in the
local Creole as
uppertin ?. YpHU ? pirt ('eft) learning to wve
r : ;. hit) is lJ ('ing paid for work he has done ill
Co operathe project.
A FAMOUS SITE
Y the month of October 1948. Dr.I. J Métraux was able to writ  to Unesco :
"Marbial bas become a famous'site.
More and more people come to visit it.
Last month, the director of rural educa-
tion sent to Marbial twenty-die school
teachers to get some elementary training
in anthropology and field methods... Our
modest hut has been transformed into a
fair ! y roomy structure. The clinic has
been more than successful and is already
too small for the hundreds of patients
who f ! ock to it...
however, it is in the schools where
ehanges are the most striking. Not only
Gosseline River and (beyond), terraced htHs'de (4). Work roiDg ahead on the
(jnt-I>co Community Centre ; large concrete circle is for the foundation of the
community hall (5). M. Bonhomm :, Haitian Government representative (seated)
and (011 his left), Mr. Berrouet, an agronomist, discussing agricultural problems
with Marbial peasants (6). Dr. Metraux, American anthropologist, talks to a peasant
woman on her way to market.
has attendance doubled, but the behaviour
of the children is different..."
On October 30. 1948, Dr. Rex wrote to
Unesco :"The tide of fortune of the
Unesco Pilot Project... seems to have turn-
ed for the better. Before the end of the
year, conditions and facilities will be right
for the establishment of specific educa-
tional activities which may be of great
interest to other fundamental education
schemes facing similar adverse conditions
at the outset... cO ! 1fidence has been estab-
lashed among the peasants of the Marbial
Valley that their miserable prospects of
last summer can be changed by joint and
co-operative efforts..."
U. N. MISSION ARRIVES
lrHAT the Haiti Pilot Project mightbecome more than just a Unesco-
Marbial Valley experiment became
evident as early in July of last year
when President Estimé appealed to the
United Nations'Department of Economic
Affairs to carry out a full survey of the
economic, agricultural, health and edu-
cational conditions and needs of the
entire Republic. When the United Nations
accepted this proposal, Unesco appointed
Dr. Rex as its representative on the
Mission.
Last October, under the leadership of
the Swedish sociologist, Dr. Ansgar Ro-
senborn, and assisted by experts from
FAO, WHO and the Monetary Fund, the
United Nations Mission of Technical
Assistance to Haiti, began a full-scale
survey of the island. At the request of
Unesco it undertook a special study of
the Marbial Valley.
In its report, the Mission pointed out
that although the difficulties of the
Marbial Valley had not been under estimat-
ed, the efforts of the local peasants had
been so remarkable that the project
should certainty be carried through. The
Mission even went further and recom-
mended that the Marbial project should
be fitted into a wider health and agri-
cultural improvement scheme for the
whole watershed of the Gosseline River,
(of which the Marbial area represents
only the middle part). They proposed
that the health scheme should be based
on the small local hospital at Jacmel,
with a'rural clinic at the Unesco Centre
in Marbial and that the training of
health and agricultural community
workers should be carried out as part
of the fundamental education programme
in Marbial.
ENTHUSIASM HIGH
TODAY, thrOUghout the Marbial Valleyn extensive fundamental education
programme is under way.
Continued on Paste 8)
Poverty ant disease in the Marbial Va) J ('y. The { ; nesco Proif'ct sgeJls new hope 141
this family which lives close to the l."nesco Cent.
Reading from left to right (11. Creole
peasants post up first"Rout Ounesko-
Marbial"sign on newly made road (2).
A typical peasant home in the Marbial
Valley (3). Peasants on their way to
market with (middle distane*) the
PEASANTS SPRING TO
ACTION"
II T was at this point that peasants ofMarbial sprang into action and
practically changed the face of the
volley.
"Koumbites", serve for mutual help in
tasks beyond the capacity of one man
and his family. Despite the fact that
they were starving, they rallied to Dr.
Metraux and Dr. Rex and went to work.
They built the first all-year road to the
town of Jacmel. They sank a well forty feet
from the river bed to get pure drinking
water. They brought in a well-digger from
Port au Prince to dig more welis. The
Marbial market which had been halfway
in the river bed was recontructed on
higher ground with dry gravelled lanes
and little stalls. The donkeys, horses and
animals for sale or slaughter were confin-
ed in a corral along the river front. A
small open-air slaughter house was
constructed of concrete. The co-operatives
painted a big sign in Creole over the
market gate :"Sanitary Market of Mar-
bial constructed by UNESCO".
The peasants, with the aid of a Health
Service technician, drained the swamps,
tracked down breeding grounds of malarial
mosquitoes and sprayed them with D. D. T. A
small dispensary was opened with a doctor
and a local medical assistant for the
free treatment of disease and the distri-
bution of medicines. The dispensary serv-
ed the peasants and their livestock alike.
Twenty-eight young, women learned to
weave native cotton on a hand. : oom, On
their small hand-made looms they learned
to weave sisal and palm fibers for mats
used for ladies'sandals.
An oven was built for the construction
of cups, saucers, plates and bowls.
For the* school children an emergency
feeding programme was begun which gave
a substantial midday meal to four-hun-
dred children weekly.
A community centre was established. A
small vegetable"nursery"was started to
encourage the production of food stuffs
and the improvement of local varieties
of corn, egg-plant and beans.
In September 1948 ten education centres
were teaching old and young in the
Valley to read and write in Creole. Some
of the newly literate even began to study
French. Soon a local newspaper appeared.
. handwritten and illustrated with simple
crayon drawings, through the mitiative
of a few members of the Co-operatives
and was distributed through the Unesco
office staff. Now, the newspaper is actually
being printed. It carries all the local
news of the Va'ley-births, deaths, mar-
riages, letters of complaint to the editor,
and a section on agriculture and health
week. There are still not enough copies
to go around so the school boys and girls
read it aloud their eager parents.

EDUCATION
For HEALTH
The story
OJ the Haiti
'Pilot Project'
Today, too, the eagerness of the Haitian
peasants to provide their children with
an education is such, that they have
actually had to be restrained ! Only last
month. Dr. Métraux reported that a young
Haitian architect, named Mangones. was
designing a set of new school buildings
in the Haitian tradition. Unesco flew a
number of designs on microfilm to
Mangones, showing tropical schools in
Brazil, Mexico and Africa. But the
enthusiasm to start building immediately
lWas so great among the Marbial people
that it was only with difficulty that the
laying of the foundations could be post-
poned until the final plans had been
accepted !
In addition to this building already
undertaken, plans are being made for
constructing another rural schood and a
training centre for fundamental education
workers. The original school is now
equipped with blackboards, and locally
made benches and tables. Practical cour-
ses are being given in hygiene, agriculture
and stock-raising, basket-making, weaving
and carpentry.
Now that they are getting better food
every day, the change in the children
is striking. The gloom and sadness are
gone and have been replaced by laughter
and eargerness to play. Their games
M a r b ial children
leamin ;, to read.
'OUNESCO'
OR'INESKO' ?
IN its report to President Estimé. theM United Nations Mission had recom-
mended that the Haitian Gov-
ernment launr ; h an all-out literacy
campaign with the teaching of Creole
and French, and prepare a series of
elementary text-books and readers.
But preparing books and readers in
Haitian Creole poses a knotty problem.
The fact is that Creole, which is a
mixtuce of ancient French and West
African tribal languages has been written
in at least four different ways with
different alphabets. The orthography and
grammar have never been satisfactorily
established. Thia explains why one finds
signs and posters, written in Creole,
which spell Unesco in different ways.
"Ounesco"."Unesco", and even"Inesko"
are thus commonly seen.
With the aid of the Rockefeller Foun-
dation, Unesco obtained the services off.
Dr. Robert Hall, Professor 01 Romance
Languages at Cornell University, and a
Creole linguist. Dr. Hall has just comp : et-
ed an intensive study in Haiti of the
Creole grammar and orthography. The
report on his findings reached Unesco
in Paris early in June. He is now at
work on a standard alphabet and
grammatical system which will be used
by a newly-formed team in Haiti to
prepare basic school books, primers and
refusing material in the local Creole.
The typical young Haitian girl (above left) presents a vivid contrast to woman
of l\larbial (above, centre) whose face is disfigured by th affects of yaws, a
disease rampant in the Valley. The parents of the twin babies (above right)
were paying the local witch doctor to save the life of one of the babies thought
to be growing at the expense of the other whe was dying.
WHEN fundamental education firstcame into being as a part of the
programme of Unesco, it was
agreed that provision should be made
in Pilot Projects for library and museum
services. Haiti, with its vivid traditions
of folk art and visual and aural expres-
sion, was particularly well suited to an
experiment of this kind.
Museums and libraries have recently
developed techniques of direct approach
to ear and eye which are entirely suitable
for fundamental education, using models
and charts to. convey essential ideas to
a largely illiterate community. Use can
also be made of films of static film-
strips, of sound recordings, music, story-
telling, drama groups and specially
prepared exhibitions.
This is an educational technique which
has been successfully developed by popular
museums and libraries in more privileged
countries but has seldom been applied
to illiterate peoples Here, the Haiti Pilot
Project has pioneering work to do.
Last year, Unesco approached the
Rockefeller Foundation for a grant-in-aid
o ! seventy-five hundred dollars to enable
Mademoiselle Yvonne Oddon, an anthro-
pologist and librarian of the Musée de
1'Homme in Paris, to study the cultural
missions and popular museums and libra-
ries in Mexico and the United States
where these techniques were being applied.
Miss Oddon collected information and
sample materials which would help the
field : workers in the Haiti Project to apply
these new museum and library techniques.
She studied methods of preparing film-
strips and educational films, educational
posters, mobile exhibits and trail-side
museums and libraries. Mlle Oddon felt
that no material could be'translated or
copied in Haiti without first being
thoroughly adapted to the local Haitian
requirements, tested in Haitian schools
and adult centres, before being adopted
for general use.
Her idea was to equip the Marbial
Marbial, where she will establish a visual
education museum as part of the funda-
mental education activities in the Pilot
Project. Examples of the exhibits will be
sent to Rio de Janeiro for the Latin-
American Seminar on Literacy Teaching
which will be held from July 27 to
September 6, and some may also be
available in Paris for Unesco's General
Conference in September.
Progress
In the
Valley
The desire for
education in the
Marbial Valley is
s u c h that the
peasants have ac-
tually had to be
restrained.
Even the older
eneration is en-
thusiastic for th :
new educational
opportunities offer-
ed.
The children,
formerly apathetic
effort to help the peasants to raise their
own economic lever by their own efforts
and with their own resources.
WHO JOINS IN
m) NESCO'S sister Agency, the WorldHealth Organization, has now
agreed to co-operate with the Haiti
Pilot Project and will send in a doctor
and a public health nurse to run the
public health programme for the Valley.
In a letter to Dr. Torres Bodet, Director-
General of Unesco, dated June 1, the
Director-General of WHO, Dr. Brock Chis-
holm, writes :"... concerning WHO parti-
cipation in this Project, we are now in
process of recruiting the medical officer...
A tropical nurse to help in the training
of Haitian women in domestic and
midwifery practices is also in process of
recruitement... Budget allotments nave
been made for drugs, medical equipment...
"We are glad to have this opportunity
t share in such a valuable joint Project."
WHO will use the Unesco educational
centre for training medical assistants and
for getting the principles of hygiene
across to the inhabitants. The aim is to
turn the entire Gosseline Valley into a.
"demonstration area"in tropical hygiene
and health education and training. The
educational and training aspects are to
be handled by Unesco while preventive
medicine and tropical hygiene will come
under WHO.
An encouraging example of the Haitians'
. faith in a demonstration cause and remedy
was their reaction to a Walt Disney film
on hookworm. After seeing the film and
realizing why they were suffering from.
hookworm they immediately agreed to
suggestions to build latrines. Now fifty
latrine pits have been sunk and are
regularly supervised by the Koumbite Co-
operative.
But the greatest publ : c health problem
of the Valley is yaws. If it could be acrang-
ed to pump one"shot"of penicillin, which
to-day costs twenty-two cents a dose, into
every local inhabitant of Marbial, all
cases of this hideous disease, and of
other afflictions such as tropical ulcers,
could be wiped out practically over night.
because of chronic matnutrition. have shown a striking
change now that the7 are eating wholesome food.
MIle Oddon, the French museum and
library specialist talking with four
workers of the Community Centre.
If Unesco and WHO could train the
Haitians to use hypodermics and get the
local people to take the injections, the
results would be spectacular and might
give health education Quite a boost in
Haiti.
) f\R Alfred Métraux, who has directedthe Haitian Pilot Project up until
last month, is about two return to
Europe. He leaves the Marbial experiment
to a new Director of Fundamental Edu-
cation, M. Albert Fernandez Ballesteros,
who has just arrived in Haiti. Widely
experienced in modern educational me-
thods. an architect, designer and painter,
M. Ballesteros has lived and worked for
many years in Africa, Mexico, Columbia
and Jamaica, where he was able to observe
at first hand the difficult life of the
peasants. L1 his native Spain, he has
known long years of experience in organiz-
ing and running co-operative movements.
In a letter dated May 27, and written
to Mr. John Bowers, who has directed
Unesco's Fundamental Education Division
since its creation, and who steadfastly and
courageously maintained his faith in the
Pilot Project, Dr. Métraux writes :
"... My sojourn in Haiti is coming to an
end. I shall leave Haiti with regret but...
with a good director on the job and
with the support of the Director-General
of Unesco, the Haitian project will not
have to remain the burden and the worry
it has been for more than two years. The
baby will soon walk and will no longer
need a solicitous nursemaid.'
This, then is the story of the re-birth
of a Haitian Valley. Yes, the baby will
soon walk. The Project is scheduled to
last for five years. At the end of the
first, it looked impossible. Now. by the
end of the second year, its achievements
and future possibilities have been drama-
tically recognized. The success is a tribute
to the peasants of the Valley of Marbial.
The project survived because they had
faith in it, because they were not afraid
to prove that faith in their work despite
the scepticism, anguish and set-backs
that might have halted them. A Haitian
Creole proverb says,"Biê sâ sue pa dure"
or"What one gets without pain doesn't
last".
In proving their faith, the people of
the Marbial Valley have proved the basic
principle of fundamental education-that
progress must be made not FOR the
people, but BY the people themselves.
are a mixture of
children's"rondes"
from France and
traditional African
games.
For the parents,
adult education
centres have been
set up in the Valley.
Often these centres
have been tiny huts
made of no more
than banana leaves.
But it was from
these humble buts
that seventy peas-
ants have proudly
emerged to accept
their new literacy
diplomas for their
studies in Haitian
Creole.
Community Centre for
demonstrations and to
have these examined
and criticized by Hai-
tian educators and
artists.
With the help of a
young Haitian named
Ramponneau (who will
later aid in illustrating
Creole text-books she
went to work on the
project following her
arrival in Haiti last
March. Using a work-
shop lent tun Unesco by
the Art Centre at
Port au Prince, she
prepared an exhibit
including an artistic
chart of Creole phone-
tics. hand-made slides
on mosquitoes and
malaria, a three di-
mensional exhibit on
food. and a diorama on
soil protection.
The exhibit was an
immediate success in
Port au Prince where
such panels and light-
ing effects were almost
unknown. MIle Oddon
has now taken the
exhibit to the Unesco
Community Centre in
AGRICULTURAL
DEVELOPMENTS
HERE is a joint American andHaitian Food Production Organiza-
tion in Haiti known as SCIPA
(Service coopér'ltif inter-american de
production agricole) which is assuming
an important role in the agricultural
development of the Republic. This organ-
ization is supported financially by the
Institute of Inter-American Affairs in
Washington and the Haitian Government
in Port au Prince.
Pending a decision on the recommenda-
tion made by the United Nations Techni-
cal Mission for an agricultural development
plan embracing the entire Gosseline
watershed, SCIPA is carrying on agri-
cultural work in the Marbial VoaI : ey.
Their technicians have helped to get this
year's planting under way. Luckily, the
rains began to fall during the middle of
March. and the peasants are confident
of a fine harvest of beans, corn and
egg-plant.
Already, new seeds have been distribut-
ed in the Valley and the farmers were
so over-joyed to receive them that they
agreed to give two days'free work to
Unesco as a sign of their gratitude.
SCIPA has attached a Haitian agri-
cultural expert to the project and a de-
monstration plot and seed nursery have
also been set up in the Valley.
The plan is not to be a large-scale,
agricultural-engineering scheme, but an
