ONE HUNDRED
NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATION
NOW WORKING WITH -UNESCO
by Vladimir Hercik, Head, Non-Governmental Organizations Division
LTHOUGH planned
 as"A short busi-ness session", Unes-
co's Fourth General Con-
ference has surpassed
ll previons Conferences
as regards the numbers
of observers sent by in-
ternational non-govern-
mental organizations.
The fact that head-
quarters of most of
these organizations are
located relatively near
to Paris, and some of
them in Paris Itself, does
not wholly explain this
record attendance of sev-.-
enty-n ! ne obervers from Slxty-tnree organ-
izations.
A more significant fact is that the number
of non-governmental Organizations entitled
to send observers to the General Conference
has more than trebled since the Second
Session in Mexico City, to which only
thirty such organizations were invited.
Participation in the General Conference
with a light to speak is one of the basic
privileges granted to organizations with
which Unesco has concluded"consultative
arrangements". On the eve of the Confe-
rence, the Executive Board had approved
18 additional organizations to be included
in this category, thus bringing the total
number to one hundred.
The organizations represented at the
General Conference reflected in a striking
way an amazing variety of interests pursued
by these groups on an international level. A
large majority of them have been In exis-
tence considerably longer than Unesco and
have consequently accumulated invaluable
experience in most fields of Unesco's pro-
gramme.
Apart from specialized, professional bodies
of educators, scientists, artists, architects.
the groups represented included a number
of women's organizations, others concerned
with religious, humanitarian, relief, and
child welfare work, as well as youth, stu-
dents and trade-union groups.
Something for Everyone
fVERY one of these organizations was*L abl  to find in the progr mme th t
Unesco proposed for 1950 at least one, and
often more than oar, activity of particular
interest to its members. Representatives of
several bodies spoke in the commissions on
matters falling within the competence of
their organizations.
The Commission of Official and External
Relations devoted two full sessions to dis-
cussion of relations between Unesco and
ion-governmental organizations. An annual
review was made of all international non-
governmental organizations with which
Unesco maintains official relationship, either
under consultative arrangements, or formal
agreements.
A report has been submitted on more than
thirty contracts concluded in the course of
1949 for a total amount of nearly $200. 000
between Unesco and competent non-govern-
mental organizations for the execution of
specific tasks listed in Unesco's programme,
such as surveys, investigations, bibliogra-
cc The evidence of good will which we have
already received in abundance from these asso-
ciations is most encouraging. Whether it is a
case of calling on the services of experts or mobi-
lizing public opinion, they are ready to help us,
so that there may be grouped around the work
of the Secretariat great numbers of people united
by a common interest, who, In conjunction with
the work of governments, wilt convert Unesco
into a true popular crusade for peace. 
M. Jaime TORRES BODET, in his
Report to the Fourth General Conference
EV
phies, international meetings and various
studies.
Another report gave an account of
grants-in-aid accorded by Unesco to cer-
tain very representative organizations
which are in daily working relations with
Unesco programme departments and
contribute by their activity to the further-
ance of Unesco's objectives. These grants
amounted in 1949 to $320. 000.
The Commission discussed at great length
the question of how to make the co-ope-
ration with non-governmental bodies more
effective. Ii was felt that the time had
come to make a thorough review of the
directives governing Unesco's relationship
with these bodies and in the light of the
experience acquired during the past two
years, to amend and complete the policy
of Unesco in these matters when necessary.
Two-way Help
IT has therefore been decided to give spe-t ei l attention to this probl m at th  next
session of the General Conference in Flo-
rence. A comprehensive report will have to
be prepared for the Florence Conference on
the contribution to the work of Unesco
made by all international organizations
which have been brought into official rela-
tions with Unesco and have received
assistance in any form from the Organi-
zation.
This decision is in line with the policy of
the Economic and Social Council of the
United Nations which is contemplating, for
its forthcoming Tenth Session, a similar
review of its relations with non-governmen-
tal Organizations.
In view of this special item on the agenda,
the next General Conference is likely to
attract at least as large a number of obser-
vers of non-governmental organizations as
the last one. Moreover, by giving its atten-
tion to this matter, the Florence Conference
will be able to realize what valuable
resources may be made available for Unesco
by these bodies representing all sections of
public opinion and manifold forms of volun-
tary effort throughout the world.
It is safe to predict that In its own in.
rest. Unesco will increase and intensify co-
operation with International non-govern-
mental organizations which are in their
daily work bringing about the underlying
community of organized interests without
which no form of international co-operation
can succeed.
