% UNESCO COURIER Augment 1949
PUBLIC EDUCATION CONFERENCE
The twelfth International Con-
ference on Public Education,
meeting at Genet'a from Jul"4
to July 12, considered reports by
the Ministries of Education on
developments in Public Educe-
tion during the school year 1948
to 1949 and gave special attention
'0 the introduction to lVntural
Science in the Primary School,
, he teaching of rending and the
teaching of geography as a means
of encouraging internatiønal un-
derstanding.
Prof. de BerreJo Carnf. ; rø. per-
manent delegate of Brail'0
Unesco, presided.
In an address 10 he Con-
ference, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Director-Generøl of Unesco, paid
in port :.
lr HE 19th century can boast of havingM abolished slavery by law, and the
20th century should devote its
efforts to the abolition of another form
of slavery-illiteracy. We are all aware of
the need for removing that fundamental
ignorance, but our task is not so much
to formulate our moral duty as to study
the various campaigns which have al-
ready been carried on in various parts
of the world, and so to develop definite,
practical and efficient methods which
will, so to speak, be the tactics to be
adopted in our struggle.
You savant the teaching of geography
- which should demonstrate the unity of
the world in its marvellous diversity-
tn be a more effective means of develop-
ing international understanding. We
have been told of some very interesting
experiments. Hitherto, you had drawn
mainly on history for instances of the
community of interests among men. You
were right. We must still emphasize that
point. We should sadly deceive ourselves
if we thought that present achievements
in this field were enough to Quieten all
anxiety. We shall not cease our efforts
to improve the teaching given and to
secure the revison of history textbooks,
which, for more or less nationalistic
reasons, often endanger, if not truth, at
least the spirit of international co-opera-
tion. While we shall not forget these
still unfinished tasks, we shall, at this
Twelfth Conference, pay special atten-
tion to the teaching of geography. Can : ot
we find in geography lessons, from the
study of climate to the d's ribution of
natural wealth, excellent opportunities
to awaken and develop in pupils an
appreciation of the interdependence of
humanity ?
I am glad to be able to tcll you that
Unesco, well aware of their importance,
is helping to arrange several internatio-
nal seminars. One of these, dealing with
the problem of illiteracy on the continent
of America, has been organized jointly
by the Brazilian Government, the Organ-
ization óf American States and Unesco ;
it will be held at Niteroi (Brazil) from
27 July to 2 September. Another semi-
nar nvill be held this year, with the as-
sistance of the Indian Government, i. far
Mysore, between 2 Novembr and 14 De-
ctmber ; this one will deal with adult
education in rural communities in Asia.
Preparations are already m hand for
two seminars to be held next year : one,
on the improvement of school textbooks
and in particular of history textbooks,
will be a sequel to a series of surveys
and recommendations begun some time
ago ; the other will deal with the teach-
ing of geography as a means of deveiop-
1n international understanding.
Natural Science
Another item on our agenda, the tenth-
ing of natural science in primary schools,
has been included because of the grow-
ing curiosity of teachers and pupils and
the requirements of the modern world.
We have to discover potential scientists,
and the development of teclmical pro-
cesses in both agriculture and industry
makes it necessary for the workers of
the future to be trained to understand
and overcome the difficult :. As of their
trade. We must be sure to instil not
only knowledge but respect for natural
resources, the waste of which paradoxi-
cally makes the very increase of popula-
tion a menace. Such teaching will illus-
trate the old maxim that"we can com-
snand nature only when we obey her".
In the space of less than tilirty years,
the world has been torn by two great
wars which, in the number of deaths
and the precision of the means of des-
truction used, have surpassed all men's
effort 3n past centuries to slay and de-
base one another. Everything which man
had come to took upon as the triumph
of civilization-the it. ost marvellous dis-
MEETS AT GENEVA
eoveries in engineering and chemistry,
'she utmost refinements of dialectic and
eloquence-all these things became sus-
pect to him when they combined to foster
hatred, evil and negation instead of
glorifying life.
We had been taught to revere in-
telligence, and intelligence sometimes
proved a dread enemy. Whe had
learned to respect science, and science
was converted into a weapon of
aggression. What did this tragic spec-
tacle signify ? The failure of spiritual
values, a sharp reversal of all that'pro-
gress had achieved ? No, most certainly
not. Philosophy, Science and art can
none of them be held guilty of the abuses
to which they were put by those respon-
sible for the vast holocaust in which the
whole civilization of our time so nearly
perisher. ;
Liberation not Complete
t) T is not of intelligence that We mustM beware but of its secret adversary,
intelligence without a moral sense. In
1933 a European th : nker, questioned
about the future of civilization, replied'
"The process of liberation (begun in
the 16th century) reached completion
with the French Revolution and the
establishment of the democratic polit. ical
regime. Humanity had for centuries
something to do : to break free from its
mediaeval bonds. We have now reached
the end of this stage of development, and
civilization does not qu : te know what to
do. It needs some great task to carry
out".
We have a supreme duty-to help, as
teachers, to organize a society in which
every man will be able to shake hands,
in brotherly trust and friendship, with
his kinsman from Europe or Asia, with
the b ; ack man from Africa and the red
man from America, All races, all peoples,
all national aspirations must have scope
for expression in th : s post-war world. If
a single voice were to be silent, if a
single right were to be trodden under
foot, humanity would have shed its blood
in vain in those great battles, The pe-
riod of crisis through which we are pass-
ing will never find a solution in an
arbitrary distinction between victors and
vanquished. A peace founded solely upon
an improvised balance of power could be,
at best. only an uncertain truce.
Life is a Problem \.
"vat we need then, in education,
\'Y are teachers who are men first
and foremost, and not mere store-
houses of educational formulae. We be-
Eeve that educating man does not mean
merely imparting the essentials of tra-
dition and culture. It means instiJIing
an effective confidence in his original
and creative power ; it means providing
him, from early childhood, with teaching
"You need the teaching of Geography..."
in which he may recognize life for what
it is : a problem, a constant process of
discovery, a perpetual seeking of private
and communal responsibilities. Then,
overwhelmed as it were, bv the mounting
wealth of knowledge in the world, he
will convert it into a personal capacity
for renewal, which will endure as long
as I : fe itself.
Human personality does not find fulfil-
ment in the triumph of individualism.
Freedom is only an instrument for a
richer development of man, for which
he must be a member of a community ;
and that membership itself is worthy of
man only if it is freely chosen. The se-
cond paragraph of Article 25 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
expresses that synthesis of the individual
and the community which the true right
t't education helps to promote :"Educa-
t'on shall be directed to the full develop--
ment of human personality and to the
strenl/ ; thening of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. It shall pro-
mote understanding, tolerance and friend-
ship among all nations, racial or reli-
gious groups, and sha1l further the activ-
sties of the United Nations for the main-
tenance of peace". This brings to my
mind the noble motto which I once saw
inscribed on the pediment of the Town
Hall of LuEano : libertas in leg : bus,
liberty in law.
The Soul of the People
UCH liberty within a community canonly be fully exercised, as Article 27
goes on to say, by participation in
the Cultural. artistic and scientific life 0f
the group :"Everyone has the right freely
to participate in the cultural life of the
community, to enjoy the arts and to
share in scientific advancement and its
benefit". There must be no esoteric
culture, the monopoly of a favoured few
The strength and the very survival of a
culture depend upon its being rooted in
the soul of the people,
Unesco is so fwe) I aware that freedom
should increase concurrently with the
sense of civic obligations, and that the
simultaneous development of both should
be the aim of education, that the Organ-
ization's Code of Directives, which has
been drawn up to guide the preparation
of its practical programme, and which
was approved last month bv the Execu-
tive Board, stipulates that :"In Education.
Unesco will act as a centre for the ex-
change and dissemination of ideas and
practices, in order to entourage the
growth of effective systems of education,
seeking spec : ally to bring people to un-
derstand one another, to train good
citizens and to give every person, rich
or poor, in town or country, without dis-
tbction of colour, race, sex, or creed,
the opportunity for an education which
best assures him the possibility to develop
his personality and carry out his social
responsibilities".
Without doubt the two most difficult
things for humanity to learn are the
art of ruling men and the art of educat-
instead of feeling himself outstripped,
ing them. For my part, I am inclined
to bet'eve that if we had mastered the
second, the difficulties of the first would
be appreciably reduced. We must not
forget that when we are training men
we are building the city of the future.
We who are educationist, and those we
have to guide, must all be the architect
of that society in which, if we have well
fuJfllled our task, human rights and
human liberties will flourish.
Prof. CARNEIRO
President
of Education Conference
Professor Paulo de Berrdo Carnei-
ro, member of the Unesco Executive
Board and Permanent Delegate of
Brazil to Unesco, was elected President
of the Public Education Conference
for the current year at the opening
of the 12th Annual Session on July 4.
Professor Carneiro has reprsented
the Government of Brazil at many
international conferences, notably
those of the I. L. O., the Institute cil
Intellectual Co-operation and the
United Nations (first part of the
General Assembly in London, 1946). He
was Brazilian Delegate of I. BE.} n
1948 and has been appointed as de-
legate to the 1949 meeting.
Professor Carneiro has) long ben
associated with the work of Unesco.
He was a delegate to the Conference
in London in 1945, where the Constitu-
tion of Unesco was drawn up ; he was
concerned with the work of the Pre-
paratory Commission during 1946, and
was a delegate to the First, Second
and Third Sessions of the Unesco
General Conference in Paris, Mexico
and Beirut. At the Paris Conference
he was elected for a three-year term
to the Executive Board of Unesco.
On Ju) y 23, when visiting Athens,
Prof. Carniro handed to M. Tatsos,
the Greek Minister of Education, a
cheque for 10, 850 dollars sent by
Unesco"as a symbolic gift"to the
Greek schools which had suffered
most damage from the War. The pres-
entation was mad in the conference
hall of the University of Athens in
the presence of the University Senate,
the Ministers of Education and of the
Press, delegates from women's organ-
izations and other official representa-
tives.
