On April 1, on the occasion of tlu
Second National Conference of the
C/ ? : : <e [ ! StatM 7Vo< : 07K ! : Com ?/t ! ss ! o ? tUnited States Nati nal Commission
for Unesco, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet
addressed a public audience of almost
10, 000 persons on"Unesco-A Personal
Faith". This address, which was widely
applauded by delegates and visitors
attending the conference. is reproduced
in full below.
By J. TORRES BODET
Director-General
II am deeply grateful to the United
States National Commission and to
the citizens of Cleveland for his
opportunity to speak to you. This is not
my first visit to your country. It has,
however, a special significance for me,
because it is my first visit as Director-
General of Unesco.
I am happy to be with you and haJpPY'
IiU to greet on this
platform tonight
one of your most
distinguished citi-
zens-Mrs. Eleanor
Roosevelt. Her work
in furthering the
international u n-
d e l's tan d ing to
which you are all
committed has long
been remarkable.
Most recently,
her signal efforts
in helping the com-
pletion of the Uni-
versal Declaration
of Human Rights
in the Assembly of
the United Nations
have renewed the
world's hope that
mankind will use
the victory of the
last war to build a
better world for all
men to live in. This
indeed has been an
objective long asso-
ciated with the il-
lustrious name she
bears. It is also the
objective of Unesco.
Unesco is an or-
ganization, main-
tained by forty-six
governments, i n-
eluding your own,
to administer cer-
tain human in-
te. rests which they
aU have in com-
mon. By your Gov-
ernment's partici-
pation in it, you, as American citizens,
have both rights and obligations with
regard to this Organization.
Through your participation in the work
of Unesco, and in many other ways, you
are making a major contribution to the
cause of human progress. In you I salute
greatness achieved and greatness yet to
come : the strength of a young nation.
But what strikes me most is not the
imme : lse material force of your country.
It i3 the fact that in your universities and
colleges, libraries and many other na-
tional and community voluntary organiza-
tions. men and women like you are
struggling to uphold those spiritual values
that preserve a nation's virtue from cor-
ruction-the fellowship of men, respect
for ma : l as an individual, and respect, for
civilization as an assertion of freedom.
A man possesses nothing, if he doe. 
not use what he has for the well-being of humanity. In a country
like yours, with its huge resources, theN
may indeed be groups of people who are
concerned to use the fruit of their labour
in order to increase their own power and
influence. But you, educators, scientists,
artists and civic leaders, know as well M
I do that the lust for power often deflects
nations from their natural destiny.
Power is built up only to fall, unless it
rests on the one solid basis-the basis of
the spirit. The continual struggle to
preserve the moral basis of a nation's
strength-through the arts. education and
thought-is the strong. east bulwark of
national security.
That is why, in the recent war, below.
your soldiers had come home, you declar-
ed yourselves in favour of a just and
worthy peace. In the Fall of 1945, your
delegates came to London to plead the
cause of international co-operation through
education, science and culture.
As the delegate of my country, I was
able, in the capital of Great Britain, to see
the efforts which your representatives
were making. And may I tell you frankly
that of all your victories the one that
Impressed me most was that supreme vic-
tory over yourselves, ; when you decided, in
the hour of triumph, to erect no walls of
hatred between victors-and vanquished.but to clear the Path to understanding.
'its THE UNESCO
APPROACH WRONG ?'
) m T was thus that Unesco was broughtto birth. What were the arguments
i : 1 favour of its creation ? They are
summed up in the preamble to our Cons-
titut Hon. Let me recall to your minds one
of rhOs document's most striking clauses :
"that a peace based exclusively upon
the po ! tt ! co ! nKft eeo ; t0 ? tt : c ftrroTte-poli ical and econ mic arrange-
ments oaf governments would not be a
peace wh : ch could secure the una-
nimous, lasting and sincere support
or the peoples of the world and that
the peace must therefore be rounded,
if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual
and moral solidarity of mankind".
The words I have just read to you still
throb with the spirit that gave Unesco
life Maybe, our post-war difficulties
he. : e modified a little of that"first fine
ca ;'cless rapture."We are daily faced, and
faced more clearly, with the fact that
while everyone, as an individual, yearns
for peace, the horizon is clouded with the
tragic menace of fresh wars.
Does that mean that the Unesco ap-
proach was wrong? ? I say emphatically-
no. In my opinion what is wrong is that
the Unesco approach has not yet been
seriously tried. Concerned with organizing
their political and economic life, govern-
ments do not always attach the same
importance to the moral condition which
furnish that political and economic life
with its strongest support in the hearts
and minds of men. Thus the concept or
interdependence often takes precedencp
over the concept of solidarity. Unhappily
the interdepe : 1dence o. ! governments,
without the solidarity of nations, is not
enough to avert the dangers of war.
Stunted Minds Breed War
WAR can always be made between
'l {fVl/ ! f the great capitals. Peace has to
be built in the slums and in the
villages. That is where most people live'-
and live under conditions which constitute
a permanent threat to peace. About two-
thirds of the human race are forgotten
men-and the most forgotten thing about
them is their minds.
About half of the human race is totally
illiterate.
A very small percentage of all the adults
in the world have had the equivalent of
a full high-school education. A much
smaller fraction can be considered really
educated men and women. The fact that
this handful of intellectuals has attai : 1ed
a level of education unprecedented in
history does not lessen the gravity. of the
situation. On the contrary, it increase it.
I know that you do not need to be cof-
vinced that the unequal distributiox of
food and material, wealth in the world ill
a menace to peace. But, inequalities in the
access to knowledge and to technical skilla
may be as great a menace to peace as
those inequalities in the access to raw
materials about, which we used to hear so
much. Stunted minds breed war.
II T is for this reason that no pro-gramme for raising standards of
living, for insuring the world with
greater prosperity is possible, or indeed
has any prospect of success unless it K
accompanied by programmes of educate. : Q
for the development of men's minds, theQ
spirit, and their moral strength.
In this connexion I have read with great
iaterest the resolution of the ECOSOC
calling upon the United Nations and
Specialized Agencies to submit propose
for the economic development of under-
developed territories. Unesco is giv : IJ/f
careful study to this question to determine
what its, best contribution may be.
History shows that, wherever the few
are too highly educated, and the many tao
ignorant, there tend to arise energeU8
individuals or groups whose minds are a
terrifying mixture of ignorance and end. 
cation, of intelligence and brutality, of
savagery and progress.
This mixture is the most deadly social
explosive that we know. Therefore I
maintain that the most dangerous divisvon
in the world is the O : 1e between educa-
tion and ignorance, between the CtDo
turally-privileged and the culturally-undee*
privileged, between the intellectual"have""
and the intellectual"have-nots".
'A GRIM REALITY'
IN any country, so long as there are,on the one hand, people who can
command all the benefits of tech-
nical progress in education and science
and, on the other hand, vast numbers
who are illiterate, there can be no real
social peace. And, in the world, so long as
there are two groups of peoples-the O : 1e
privileged, supplied with first-class uni-
versities, laboratories and libraries, the
other backward, for whom even a primary
school is a luxury, there can be no true
mternational peace of a just and lasting.
character.
Too fe. w people admit or understand this
grim reality. Perhaps that is why we
sometimes hear Unesco ridiculed as an
Ol'R3 :,'z : llion of dreamers and idealist*.
For we are aware of the problem and
. we are trying to do something about it.
Our means are feeble. You cannot bring
education, science and culture to all the
forgotten men and forgotten minds of
the world with a budget which is less than
eight million dollars a year. But let me
ask you : Which is more unrealistic-to
work at the foundations of peace with
inadequate tools, or to start putting urn
the house before the foundation has been
laid ?
THE problem of co-ordination ofefforts is more difficult in our case,
perhaps, than in the case of the
other Specialized Agencies of the United
Nations. Unesco's work takes place, so to
speak, at the third remove : questions
submitted to us must previously have been
considered by the National Commissions
a : led by the Governments. If the National
Commissions do not work diligently
enough, or if the governments place
obstacles in the way of the Commission'*
activities, Unesco cannot do its. Jot*.
Fortunately, this does not happen in your
country. I would like to take this occasion
to voice my admiration for the work which
your National Commisison is doinlt for
the execution of the Unesco programme.
Since I cannot, today, express my thanks
to each one of you individually, let me
thank you through the person of'your
Chairman.
Dr. Eisenhower, your own tireless
labours in the cause of Unesco are an
inspiration to all of us. Under your
brilliant leadership, the U. S. National
Commission is an example of free and
well organized ability. As Director-General
of Unesco, I rejoice at that and am happy
to con ! lratulate you most warmly upon it.
As you know,
Unesco was direct-
ed by the General
Conference at
Beirut to give wide
publicity to the
Universal Declara-
tion of Human
Rights, and we
have accordingly
made Hum4"Il
Rights the subject
of one of our main
programme activi.
ties for the year.
As part or this
campaign I wrote
to all the National
Commissions in the
Member States re-
commending that
they take active
steps to publicize
the Declaration.
In his reply on
behalf of your Na-
tional Commission.
Dr. Eisenhower aso
sured me that,
apart from other
action the Commis-
sion is taking, this
meeting in Cleve-
land wou) d empha*
size Human Rights
as one of its major
themes. I am hap.
py to see how ear.
fectively this proat-
ise has been real-
iaed and again I
would like to thank
Mrs. Roosevelt for
the support sre i. t
giving our work by her presence hare.
Surely no one is better fitted in bringing
home to the masses the importance of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
. Unesco Cannot Go A. head
Wit/lOut the Support oj
the Great Masses'
UNESCO cannot go ahe. ad. without thesupport of the great masses whic ! t
make up public opinion. Unesco Watt
. 5P. t up to promote international under-
fitandi : 1g throughout the world ; it must
begin by making itself understood buy
men throughout the world. Hitherto.
despite the efforts of the secretariat and
of my distinguishes predecessor, we have
not made much progress along that road.
(continued on pale,.)
UNESCO COURIER : S
April 1949

The National Commissions of Unesco's
Member States must clearly understand
that one of their main functions is to
briag Unesco into direct contact with the
people. We, in our work, often need spe-
c : aJists. technicians and experts ; but the
greatest fruits of our efforts must be
enjoyed by the greatest number. The man
in the street must not remain unaware
that Unesco exists and is thinking of him.
His distress, he anxieties, and his desires
are the best reasons for our existence.
WE NEED NATIONAL COMMISSIONS suoa
AS YOURS. THESE COMMISSIONS MUST MUL-
TIPLY THEIR RELATIONSHIPS WITH THE
PEOPLES THEY REPRESENT. THERE SHOULD
NOT BE A NEWSPAPER, A UNIVERSITY. A
COLLEGE, A PRIMARY SCHOOL OR AN ADULT
ORGANIZATION THAT DOES NOT KNOW
WHAT UNESCO IS. THERE ARE THOUSANDS
c..  TEACHERS A..'D WRITERS AND MILLIONS
OF MEN AND WOMEN WHO THINK AS YOU
AND I DO. WHY NOT GO OUT TO THEM
THROUGH THE BOOK OR THE SPOKEN
WORD. THE RADIO, OR THE FILM. THE PRVIi
OR TELEVISION ?
A Challenge to File ; ;
Producers
,-"OUT have at your hand the greatest
) T instrument for swaying minds that
man has ever created-your motion
pictures. Why nDt try to persuade your
studios to turn out a series of films, ex-
plaining how ignorance : mprisons man ;
how ignorance of other countries'ways of
life creates political tensions which might
be avoided if all men made an honest
attempt to understand each other ? Films
finally, to show that many peoples, poor
and undernourished though they are,
furnish humanity with treasures of art
and with some of the greatest leaders of
our time ?
During the war, the motion picture did
a wonderful job in showing the moral
reasons which had impelled the demo-
cracies to take up the challenge of the
totalitarian governments. Why sflould not
film producers throw themselves today
with equal fervour into the task of show-
ing the moral reasons why we must not
accept blindly, as an inevitable calamity.
the threat of new wars ?
Could they not, by moving and dramatic
stories-as dramatic and as moving as the
facts themselves-bring home to the. world
the need for educational reconstruction in
war-devastated countries and the need to
help education in economically backward
countries ?
Cornie-Strips As a
Constructive Force
HERE is another great force in yourcountry whic  could be harnessed to
constructive ends. I refer to your
tomic-strips, which are gaining such popu-
Jarity throughout the world-so much,
indeed, that. in certain Gentries, alarm
has been expressed at the influence which
they have upon young minds. I think
myself that this influence is often harm-
furl. But it need not be. It could be a
wholesome influence.
For example, your most talented cosmic-
etrip artists might more frequently weave
into their stories characters portraying
foreigners and members of under-privileg-
ed minority groups within your own coun-
try in a sympathetic light. That would be
a good contribution to the work of Unesco
- and to the social health of your country.
Comics should be used also to tell the
story off, what each nation has contributed
to our civilization-especially what they
have contributed to the development of
human rights. This would be aiding one of
Unesco's main campaigns.
Such th : ngs could not be done to order
or by decree in a country like yours,
which owes its astounding progress to
Initiative, free enterprise and free associa-
tion. But much could be done by a cam-
paign of patient and sustained persuasion.
It is a natural pursuit of children two
form"excursion clubs"and, from their
schools. to exchange letters. messages,
stamps and so forth. Why not take the
opportunity of founding clubs of young
"Friends of Unesco" ? Their members
would practise in their communities and
homes the principles of social life advocat-
ed by Unesco and so, to the experience
i. hey have gained of their own country,
they would add a knowledge of the world,
a united world. Like chanty, Unesce
begins at biome.
One of Humanity's
Cravest Problems
I HERE aje two Unesco campaignswhich I hope you will push forward
even more vigorously than you
have in the past. One is the"Food and
People"drive-the programme of mass
education in which we are co-operating
with the United Nations Food and Agri-
culture Organization to make people
throughout the world aware of one of
humanity's gravest problems.
Surely there are few better ways of
promoting the moral and intellectual
solidarity of mankind than to make the.
world understand that our grandchildren
are going to starve and wars will be
encouraged unless we co-operate in utiJiz-
1n all the possibilities of science to pre-
serve and develop our food resources.
"It is a natural pursuit of children to form'excuson clubs'
and, from their schools, to exchange letters, messages, stamps
and so forth. Why not take the opportunity of founding clubs
of young'Friends of Unesco' ? Their members would practise
in their communities and homes the principles of social life
advocated by Unesco and so, to the experience they have gained
of their own country, they would add a knowledge of the world."
'IT IS THE FOUNDATIONS
OF CIVILIZATION WE HAVE
TO RECONSTRUCT'
THE other campaign which I hopeHj you will intensify is the one on
behalf of educational reconstruction
in. war-devastated countries. Through the
voluntary organizations and the United
States National Commission with which
Unesco is co-operating, the American
people have already contributed gener-
ously to this cause. From the bottom. of
my heart, I thank you. But let me plead
with you not to relax your efforts, or
curb your generosity. The need is as
great as ever, and it is more than a.
humanitarian need.
It is the foundations of civilization
whICh lIVe have to reconstruct-founda-
tions that were already too narrow and
too precarious before war blasted them
away in many lands. Remember that it
was not merely the fruits of yesterday's
civilization which war destroyed, but the
This was recognized in your country
as early as 1914, when a bill was introduc-
ed into your House of Representatives
calling for an international educational
fund-to be administered by an interna-
tional committee of educators-for the
very purpose we have in mint. In one
way we have made progress since then,
for Unesco now exists to do this work.
On the other hand, the bill to which
I refer proposed that all governments
participating in the international educa-
tional fund should contribute to it one
per cent of their annual military budgets.
If this principle were applied to Unesco
our budget would not, at it is, be less than
eight million dollars-it would be many
times that amount. At present, when
Member States apply to us for advice in
developing their educational programmes,
we feel like a doctor prescribing costly
remedies to a patient who has not t. he
money to buy them.
Cultural Uniformity :
Â Spiritual Disaster
'mA/HEN I speak of educational and
WHEN economic a-ssistance in raising
the cultural level of under-privi-
leged countries. I am not thinking of a
specific form of culture, however fine it
might be. In my opinion, uniformity
would be a spiritual disaster, amounting
to the loss of all that is most original
and typical in any nation : its language.
its art, its thought, its view of life and
of beauty-its soul, in fact.
Funds collected for assistance of this
sort could, of course, be administered by
an international body ; but they would
have to be used in accordance with the
laws, and on behalf of the educational
systems, of the countries which accept
the assistar. oe.
Then, again, when
I speak of the need
to combat ignoran-
ce in order to
promote peace, I
place no exaggerat-
ed belief in what
the schools alone
can do for social
reconstruction.
UNESCO hasbeen given the
task of work-
ing through the
scools to promote
the ideals of jus-
tice toward all
countries and res-
pect for the dignity
of every man. But
if, as Director-
General of Unesco,
I said to you :"In
a world wnose
thoughts are fixed
on war, the schools
alone wits be
enough to educate
mankind for peace",
then I should be
wrong. The schools
are not enough ; the
writers, artists and
poets are not enough. Schools worthy
of the life which we desire demand a
life worthy of the schools we seek. The
ruler in his decisions. the statesman In
his speeches ; the scientISt in the appli-
cation of his discoveries ; the journalist
in the drafting of his articles ; the woman
in her daily household tasks, every one
- I say every single one-is a potential
educator for peace.
Teacher and the
BIt/I-Fight
A all of you have heard of bull-fights.
AS I used to go to them occasionally
when I was young. I thought I
liked them until, one day, I found I did
not. And when I realized why, I made a
firm resolve to go no more to entertain-
ments of that kind. What I realized then
was that, at bull-fights, the public feels
brave because it is applauding the pro-
fessional who risks his life against the
bull. It feels brave-but what the speeta"
tors are doing is enjoying the fC1wards
of courage by proxy. They pay for a
professional to be brave on their behalf
for two or three hours, and that gives
them pleasure and makes them feel tough
In quite a number of cases, something
very similar takes place in education.
People cheer on the teacher and delegate
to him the task of being friendly, under-
standing, fair, frank and peaceful. But
nobodycanbekindlyor courageous through
another ; he can be so only through his
own personal effort. No one can live
eur lives for us, save ourselves. In other
wcrds, we must not make of the educator
what Nietzsche would probably have
christened"Virtue's gladiator". Let us not
lounge on the benches above the arena
while, on the sand below, the teacher
bottles against the forces of rancour and
ignorance. Let us accept the responsibil-
ities which the need to save peace imposes
on us. I give you my solemn assurance
that Unesco will not cease to bear its.
part of the burden.
'WHY NOT UNDERTAKE
A GREAT CRUSADE IN PEACE
AS ! N WAR ?'
"For me, Unesco is not merely an insti-
tution. It is a personal faith. If I
believe in Unesco, it is because I
know that peace is worth more than war,
and education more than propaganda,
just as truth is better than a lie, and
light is better than darkness. Men can-
not live without struggling, but if men
are to struggle, it should be against
poverty, ignorance, hatred, fear and
disease ; they should struggle to build up,
and never to destroy."
tools of tomorrow's civilization. And it
is now-today-that the worst cultural
losses of war are occuring-in the minds
of millions of children who are be : ng de-
prived of education because the means for
educating'them have been destroyed.
These are really the irreparable losses. I
know you will not let them go on.
Education for Backward Áreas
suggested earlier to you that there
is urgent need for the governments
of advanced countries to give edu-
cational, as well as economic assistance
to the backward or undeveloped areas
of the world.
There are, however. certain limitations
110 the action of individual governments
in this field. There are certain necessary
tasks which can best performed by an
impartial and non-political international
or wilt ask whether what I am pro-
posing to you is a crusade. Well,
yes, it is just that-a great crusade.
And why should the nations and indivi-
duals not undertake this crusade in peace.
as they did, at the risk of their lives,
in war ?
For me, Unesco is not merely an insti-
tution. It is a personal faith. If I had
not this deep faith in it, I should not
have left my country, that reality which
is my country, to devote myself to an
international fiction. No, if I had not that
faith, I should not be here. I should be
somewhere in my country, either a
Minister, as I was when I accepted to
assume the direction of Unesco, or else
a simple citizen. living, hoping and suffer-
ing with'my cuals ; but I believe in
Unesco, and that is why I am at Unesco.
And if I believe in Unesco, it is because
I know that peace is worth more than
war. and education more than propa-
ganda, just as truth is better than a
lie, and light is better than darkness.
Men cannot live without struggling ; but
if men are to struggle, it should be
against poverty, ignorance, hatred, fear
and disease ; they should struggle to build
up, and never to destroy.
OR centuries, the peoples have livedIn a world of isolated cultures
which they regarded as mutually
incompatible. But we now know that all
cultures can and mut hannonize. witbout
exclude or distorting each other, in
order to contribute to the emergence
of a. wo, ld civilization.
Harmony does not imply uniformity.
Far be it from me to advocate a uniform
world, in which individuals and peoples
would be as interchangeable as the mass-
produced parts of a machine. Life means
diversity, but diversity is not r. necessarily
a source of conflict.
11'. laying the foundation for a world
civilization based upon cultural diversity
without conflict, a special respo : : ! sibility
rests on your shoulders. Your country is
stress and rich. The world is entited
tn expect from you not mere self-restraint
and co-operaticn, but continuing inspira-
tion and initiative.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for
your patience. Before I end, may I express
my earnest conviction that you will not
disappoint the hopes which are placed
in you. I know that you are unshakably
committed to the mission which one of
your greatest Presidents proclaimed in
words that have an immortal echo :
"With malice toward none, with cha-
rity for all, with firmness in the right.-
let us strive on to all which may
achieve and cherish a just and lasting
peace".
Lincoln's words still apply today ; their
grandeur is undiminished by the passage
of time. They define, as well as anything
which has ever been said since, the task
trat hes before you, and the : oal which
Unesco seeks for a. U mankind.
4
