CONCENTRATED PROGRAMME'
For Unesco Urged
by Delegates To 4 the
General Conference
THIS issue of the « Courier >&gt; covers only the openingand first days of the UNESCO General Conference
now meeting in Paris. Our last month's number,
containing 32 pages, gave a comprehensive preview of the
subjects to be discussed. Full details of the results and
conclusions reached at the conference as well as reports
on the 3-day debate scheduled to open at the Maison de la
Chimie in Paris on September 27 will be found in our next
number.
Some of the 250 delegates and ob-
ervers (above) at the General Con-
ference. Right, Mr U Ba Lwin, head
of the Burmese Delegation.
ISRAEL
and PAKISTAN
Join UNESCO
AFTER travelling to Mexico City
win 1947 and to Beirut in 1948,
Unesco's General Conference
"came home"to Paris, this year,
for its Fourth Session which on Septem-
ber 19 opened in Unesco House-only a
few steps away from the historic Arch
of Triumph.
Into the plenary hall, on Monday
morning, filed over 250 delegates and
observers under the'''fire''. of world
press and film photographers who are
reporting the conference.
Sharply at 10. 30 a. m. the noise and
talking in the crowded assembly stopped
as H. E. Ahmed Bey Daouk, head of the
Lebanese Delegation, advanced to the
speakers platform, which had as its
backcloth the flags of Unesco's 50 Mem-
ber States, and declared the Fourth Ses-
sion open.
Following the Unesco tradition, its
General Conference is opened by the
representative of the country which
provided the chairman of the previous
Conference. This tradition, Ahmed Bey
Daouk remarked,'''brings to my mind
the ceremonies of the Olympics of
ancient Greece in which runners, handing
on a flaming torch, carried it finally to
the altar of Prometheus".
Later in the morning, Dr. E. Ronald
Walker, head of the Australian Delega-
tion, was unanimously elected chairman
of Unesco's fourth annual conference.
Previous chairmen have been : M. Leon
Blum in Paris (1946), H. E. Don Manuel
Gual Vidal in Mexico ICity (1947) and
M. Hamid Bey Frangie in Beirut (1948).
M. Georges Bidault, former Prime
Minister and head of the French Dele-
gation, who had been proposed as
chairman of the Paris Conference had
declined, stating that as Unesco would
now meet in Paris every two years, it
could not be expected that a French
delegate be chairman every other year.
THE first days of the conference,which this i sue of the COUR-
RIER is reporting, were taken up
almost entirely with the presentation
and discussion of the annual report of
the Director-General. Presenting this
report, Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
recently appointed Indian Ambassador
to Moscow and Chairman of Unesco's
Executive Board, warned delegates that
Unesco' mission could be fulfilled only
T"WO countries which recentl,'g, lin-ed their independence-Pakis-
tan and Israel-joined UNESCO on
the eve of its Fourth General Confer-
ence and thus brought the total
number of its member countries to so.
Delegations from both these coun-
tries have been present at the Confer-
ence. Israel's being led by the Israeli
Minister in Paris, Mr : \Iaurice Fisher
and Pakistan's by M. S. M. Sharif.
if governments and National Commis-
sions played their full part."Unfortu-
nately", he said."the activity of many
member states does not extend beyond
attendance at sessions of the General
Conference. It is obvious that atthena-
tional level, there is a breakdown in the
means of im1Jlementation of Unesco's
programme."
The second day of the conference was
marked by a British proposal to alter
the agenda so as to a)) ow the conference
immediately to fix a ceiling for Unesco's
1950 budget. This proposal, coming
24 hours after news of important cur-
rency devaluations in Great Britain and
other countries, provoked liyely opposi-
tion from delegates of a dozen nations.
and was fina)) y withdrawn.
In some respects, the Paris conference
differs from previous ones. In principle
it was to have been"a short business
session", but it has come to be definitely
more important than was at first expected
because of vital discussions on Unesco's
participation in the UN plan for techni-
caul assistance to underdeveloped areas
and the interest already aroused in the
''Duties of the State"debate,
Some'of the latest technical facili-ties and equipm nt have been mo-
bilized to bring the conference's
message to the public. Thus, for the
first time in international conference
practice, the speeches of delegates are
not being set down in shorthand but are
being registered on magnetic-wire record-
ing apparatus. Sound recordings of the
Fourth Session are being made at Unesco
House studios for French, Belgian and
other radio networks and are also being
f ! own to Lake Success for broadcast on
special UN radio programmes. Similar
recordings will also be made for the
international debate beginning on Sep-
tember 2ï which will be placed at the
disposal of broadcasting systems through-
out the world.
