RA]KUMARI AMRIT KAUR,
INDIA'S HEALTH
IS S H E R JOB
by Daniel BEHRMAN
FOR fifteen years, an Indian princess
worked side by side with Mahatma
Gandhi in his patient struggle to
create a nation for over 300 million
people. As the secretary to Bapu--which
means Father-Rajkumar ! Amrit Kaur
even went to jail in support of the Ma-
hatma's beliefs. the day after an assays
sin's bullet ended Gandhi's life in Janua, y
1948, she said to a grieving nation :
« (May God have me, cy on us and give
us the strength to be true to Bapu and. thus build up the India of his dreams. >&gt;
It is this faith which she brings to her
present task as India's Minister of Health,
one of the most difficult jobs facing any
woman or man in the world. It was the
some faith which transformed her into one
of Gandhi's hardest-working followers.
For Rajkumari-meaning ( (princess>&gt; in
Hindustani-Amrit Kaur was born into
a princely family, educated in England
and France and brought up as a Chris-
tian.
As Gandhi's secretary, she religiously
followed the simple, ascetic life he laid
down. Even today, the Rajkumari still
wears a robe of khadi, or homespun, and
she is a strict vegetarian in her diet. She
has an excellent radio voice and she com-
bines Gandhi's idealism with a modern
outlook on her work.
This pleasant, sincere woman-who
looks much younger than her 60 years-
became India's minister of health in 1947
at a time when the new country was being
torn by rioting and upset by iarge-scaie re-
fugee migrations.
The difficulties before Rajkumari Amrit
Kaur are quite in keeping with the vast
size and population of India. Smallpox,
for example, is under control in large
parts of the world, but in India. there
is a constant fear that it can become an
epidemic at any time. The average life
expectancy of man in Western nations is
about 60 years ; in India it is only 27.
Much of the population lives in rural vil-
lages and must be educated in the use
of proper sanitary methods before'it can
be told to practise them.
A Million Nurses Needed
RAJKUMARI Amrit Kaur is well awareof the fact that all cannot be reme-
died overnight. The Bhore Committee
report, made several years ago, estimated
that the nation needs a million nurses to
give its population adequate protection.
It is hoped this goal will be reached in
30 years, but today there are less than
15, 000 nurses for India's 300 million, The
Rajkumari is attacking this problem, is
well as others, with patience and a belief
that whatever is done must be done well.
She already has been instrumental in sett-
ing up the first Nursing Council in India
and she has sponsored legislation raising
the pay level of nurses. last year. when
many nation ! contributed gifts ofpeni-
cillin, atabrine and other badiy-needed
drugs to Indian, she personally supervised
their distribution.
Her eventual aim is what she once
called ! ied « an adequate, efficient health ser-
vice for every man, woman and child
whether they can afford to pay for such
a service or not.)) Between the India
of 1949 and this ideal stand tremendous
obstacles such as bad housing, overcrowd-
ing, poor water supply, insufficent food
and not enough trained medical person-
nel. To all of this, the Rajkumari has ans-
wered : « Every little step forward means
a great deal. I believe that if anyone
wants anything badly enough, he gene-
rally works for it and is therefore able
in the end. to get it.))
Besides her duties as health minister,
this frail little woman also takes part in
such activities as the Indian Red Cross
and various delegations to Unesco's ge-
neral conference. It all is part of an
extremely busy rife.
« A cabinet minister's lot is a hard one)),
she said recently. There are endless in-
terviews, some very interesting, some ex-
tremely boring ; endless good deeds to be
done like the distribution of prizes at
functions ; the inauguration of something
or other, the laying of a foundation stone
somewhere or other and so on. When
I look at my programme at the beginning
of each day, I wonder how I am ever
going to get through it. And yet the
days fly by and so much is there to do
and think and discuss and write that one
has not time even to feel tired.))
She believes in direct methods to get
things done rather than the delicate pro-
cesses of protocol and formality. She
feels that a woman is much less patient
with governmental red tape than a man.
Recently, the ever-active Rajkumari attend-
ed the World Health Assembly at Rome
on behalf of her government. She took
with her this same capacity for hard work
and devotion to her job.
Not long ago, she told a radio audience
in India :
« ! t is a tremendous thing to have
attained our political independence. It
is an even bigger thing to be alive and
working one's hardest so that we may
make of India a country which will help
lead this troubled world into the paths of
peace. >&gt;
21
