MASACCIO
Masccio as seen by
another artist.
Head Detail of"Adam and Eve".
a Portfolio of High
Quality Colour Reproductions
Two Carmelite
Adam and Eve drive the Garden
of Eden
E first Unesco-sponsored art portfolio of highM quality colour reproductions, devoted to the
Florentine Master Masaccio, has just been
produced by the Italian publisher Amilcare Pizzi,
of Milan.
This portfolio, which is only the first of a whole
series including various great artists and periods
in the history of world art, will be placed on sale
to the general public within the next few weeks.
Published in three editions with English, French
and Italian texts, the Unesco-sponsored publica-
tion offers 23 reproductions in full colour of
Masaccio's frescos in the Brancacci Chapel of the
Church of Santa Maria del Carmine, located in
Florence. This is the first time that these maser-
pieces of 15th century fresco painting have ever
been rfn>'""eri so completely and so faithfullY.
The Brancacci frescos a. re undoubtedly the most
important achievement of Masaccio, who died br-
fore his 28th birthday. No more than a dozen iso-
lated examples of his work exist outside Italy, so
the Pizzi-Unesco portfolio will undoubtedly take on
unusual significance for students and art lovers in
all countries of the world.
The 28 plates include reproductions from the
frescos"Expulsion from Paradise","The Tribute
NIoney","Peter and John healing the sick","Pc tel'
Bapti, ; ing" and"Raising the King's Son."All the
prints are removeaMe and can easily be framed
or used by groups of students.
Other portfolios dealing with the great Masters
of Italian art are scheduled for publication at
regular intervals. It is planned that all the im-
portant phases of Italian art from the 13th cent :. try
on will be covered in this unique series. To appeal
shortly are portfolios devoted to the Sistine Chapel
and the 15th century frescos in the Vatican.
Working in collaboration with Unesco, other
publishers will produce similar portfo : ios on th"
; h ancient and modern, of other
Another detail of Mnsaccio's
"Tribute Money" : Custom offi-
cial and Apostle. sot. fetter with woman
countries.
Each of the 28 prints in the Masaccio portfolio
is mounted on a solid backing 13j"by In", suital. Jle
for framing in the schoolroom or in the home.
The portfolio is sold at a retail price of 6. 000
Italian lire, or its equivalent.
Wholesale and retail orders can be placed by
writmg direct to Amilcare Pizzi, 14 Viale Piave.
Milan. Further information may be obtained from
the Arts and Letters Division. Unesco.
An apostle. Reproduced from"The Tribute Money", in the Pizzi-
Unesco portfolio.
"Raising the King's Son", a detail reproduced
from a larger plate in the portfolio.
5t-Peter-detail of"The Tribute Money"
reproduced in Masaccio portfolio.