Appeal
THE General Conference of Unescomeeting in plenary session, ur-
gently appeals to the Govern-
ments of Member states, to the
National Commissions and to interna-
tional organizations on behalf of the
340, 000 Greek refugee children froth
the northern provinces at present liv-
ing in makeshift camps or in hastily
requisitioned buildings. They are
without schools, teachers, teaching ma-
terial, clothing, medical attention and
a social and cultural environment cap-
able of meeting their essential needs.
Out of 10, 000 schools, 7, 625 have been
completely destroyed or badly damag-
ed. In the educational field alone
the losses amount to more than 50
million dollars.
Instead of the relief which the end
of the war brought to almost every
country, the situation in Greece today
is worse than during the better years
of 1940-1944. Nine years of incessant
fghting have reduced the children of
this country to an indescribable state
of physical debility and moral dis-
tress. In spite of the ordeals of the
second World War, which have blunt-
ed human sensibilities, we cannot
but be moved at the thought or these
340, 000 children whom it is necessary
to save from ignorance and from re-
volt against an inhuman destiny.
The sense of continuity and of cul-
tural influences needs no rekindling in
regard to Greece, which gave birth to
the art, science and philosophy that
are ours today. All those who share
the advantages of modern civilization
know well what they owe to its Helle-
nic sources.
Resolved to give effective help to the
Greek refugee children. Unesco is-
anxious to find the means necessary
for this work of mercy.
It therefore launches this appeal
with confidence. In the name of civi-
lization as well as of humanity it asks
for a gesture of gratitude and solida-
rity which will help education, science
and culture to flourish once more on
the devastated soil of Greece.
Help for the people of countries devastated by war. One of the most urgent
problems UNESCO is tackling is to help Greek refugee children, like the ones
shown above, driven from their homes by
war.
