AD international conference-the first of its kind since the war-metrecently at Unesco House to resume and expand the work done by the
League of Nations before 1939 for the conservation and restoration of
monuments of art and history. The Conference decided to set up an inter-
national council of 14 experts and approved the creation of an international fund
to help this work.
Experts from 11 countries who were present studied the question which
occupied the Member States at Unesco's General Conferences in Beirut (1948)
and Paris (1949) : WHAT CAN UNESCO DO FOR THE PROTECTION,
CONSERVATION AND RESTORATION OF ANTIQUITIES, MONU-
MENTS AND HISTORIC SITES ? Speaking in this connection, M. Torres
Bodet told the Conference that it was no longer simply a question of safeguarding
culture, but also the feelings of peoples and. their attachment to the glorious relics
of their past". 
In an interview with the Courier>&gt;, which we reproduce here in the form of
'counterpoint"to extracts from recent documents assembled by Unesco on
post-war restoration, Professor Roberto Pane, the Italian expert-consultant
who arranged the recent Conference, stresses the educational aspect of the
international problem of protecting the cultural wealth of mankind.
H The truth is", said Professor Pane,"that the problem is, above all,
one of popular education. There
can be no protection of historic monuments
without the assistance of the people.
"In some areas, especially in the Near
East, the good intentions of governments
meet a general apathy which raises extre-
mely difficult problems.
"If the Conference insisted upon the
Importance of scientific missions, it was
because there is every reason to fear that
within the next ten years many works of
art of immense historic value in the Near
East will have totally disappeared.
"Every cultivated person will under-
stand that this would be not merely a
national and regional disaster, but also an
international one."
bb he conservation of paintings is a most intricate problem". This wasthe comment of a Ne r Ea t specialist in a report submitted to t e Con-
ference. <It is often impossible to conserve frescoes in situ. Through lack of
suitable transport facilities, valuable frescoes, such as those at Arslan-Tash in
the North of Syria, had to be sacrificed, despite the rarity of Assyrian paintings'.
Dr. Julian Huxley, Unesco's first Director-General, in a memorandum ad-
dressed to the Organization's experts, reported that : <'all the antiquities of Trans-
jordan are in packing-cases owing to lack of funds to exhibit them... At Latakia,
I watched the local administrator pulling down various Greco-Roman pillars.
This seemed to me wanton destruction').
The Church of San Lorenzo Fuori Ie Mura is said to be the oldest existing basilica of the
Eternal City, and tradition has it that the Emperor Constantine was responsible for it
construction. 11 was severely damaged by bombing during the war, as is shown by this
photo, but has now been completely restored by the ltalian Goverment.
 l, IR. UISl, IEIE  COUlf\Jl, IR. 111ES M\UISl, SAIFIEGUIAIR. ID
MANK ! NDS AR. T ! ST ! C HEMTAGE
"T h. e urgency of the Near East pro-lems", continued Prof. Pane,
-'-"must not blind us to the fact
that in the West, where conservation is
quite well organized, there are also pro-
blems and not all of these are due to
wartime destruction.
there are"rich"countries which do
not spend enough on the protection of their
monuments.
"In the view of the specialists who met
at the recent Conference, Unesco's work of
education and publicity-the most useful
activity for the Organization to undertake
in the immediate future-should be addres-
sed as much to governments as to the
public.
"In France, one of the countries where
protection is best organized, the budget
allowed for this protection amounts to
barely one-fiftieth of requirements (843
million francs, or 0. 05 per cent of the
total budget).
"The same difficulties exist in several
other countries, aggravated In some cases
by war-time devastation. Very many
countries today find it materially impos-
sible to ensure out of their own resour-
ces, the safeguarding and restoration of
artistic and historical treasures of which
they are the trustees.
"The Conference was particularly struck
by the restoration efforts of Poland,
whose tosses in the last war exceeded the
total damage to its artistic treasures
Inflicted in the course of its 1, 000 years
of existence."
"warsaw, Danzig, Poznan and Wroc1aw>&gt;, said Professor Stanislas Lorentz,Director-General of Museums and Protection of Monuments, <&lt;are h
most striking examples of this unparalleled devastation. At first all our efforts
were spent oñ at least provisionally protecting damaged buildings, which it
was important to prevent falling completely into ruins... In the second stage,
1948-1949, we continued this work of protection, but went on to the recon-
struction proper of the most important monuments. During the third stage
which, will take from 1950 to 1955, it is intended, among other things, to rebuild
the Royal Castle in Warsaw and the old historic parts of Warsaw and Danzig).
"India'"added Professor Pane,"also)) occupied the Conference's atten-
tion, because of the vigour with
which that country has for several years
protected its immense archaeological and
architectural wealth, tndia's monuments
need protection more particularly against
the effects of the climate, the rains and
the spread of rank vegetation. This has
raised special problems of conservation
which were discussed by the Conference."
The Taj Mahal, supreme achievement of Mohammedan art, was built (1629-1650) near Agra,
India, by Shah Jahan, as the burial place for his favourite wide. Mumtaz-i-Mahal. Although
it is considered bv some to be the most beautiful building in the world, it is only twenty
years ago that the Taj Mahal was threatened with destruction. In 1928, a proposal to
demolish it was adopted by the government, but was fortunately not put into execution.
The building, however, suffered through neglect, and in 1942, the Indian Government ordered
large-scale restoration work to be carried out. This photo shows the scaffoldings placed
round the dome 01 the Taj Mahal while restoration work on the masonry was taking place.
Presenting the Conference with the conclusions of his memorandum, MrN. P. Chakravarti, Director-General f Archaeology in India, said : (<Some
of the problems of murals in India are highly complex. For example, at Tanjore
there are two layers of wall paintings superimposed one over the other, and it is
a problem to remove the upper layer intact, and, without damaging it, to expose
for preservation in situ the under layer... Through the good offices of Unesco
my enquiries about similar work in other countries were passed throughout
the scientific world... I would therefore urge the establishment of a properly
equipped research centre, under the auspices of Unesco, from which expert
advice would be available to all the member countries').
To fulfil its role as a centre of"*) information and documentation
in this field, Unesco must above
all co-operate with Institutions concerned,
and especially with tourist services. Its
education of the public will merely become
more thorough and effective.
"The tourist industry is working for us
and we are working for it.
"It is not the climate which takes
traveiierstoRheims, Ghent, Pisa, Salisbury
to the Taj Mahal or the Royal Cometery at
Chang-Ping.
"For many countries, travel Is today
the first and most complex of its export
industries. In 1948 it earned for France
more than 30 milliards of francs In foreign
currency.
"The economic importance of these
resources, combined with the intrinsic
cultural value of historic monuments, has
created in some countries extremely im-
portant popular movements."
"In Sweden, according to a Conference memorandum, awe owe to the popularmovem t Hambygder relsen, mad -up of more than 800 local societies, the
safe-guarding of an impressive number of monuments, documents and works of
art. Building which have been saved by this public zeal now number 2, 6239.
66TTn every field of protection", Pro-fessor Pane conclud d, Unesco
has clearly an immense task before
it, a task out of all proportion to the
means with which it is at present supplied
by its Member States.
"In 1950 the Organisation's budget will
not allow it to send out a single one of
those scientific missions, whose Importance
was stressed by experts at the Conferen-
ce. In 1951 Unesco hopes to be able to
organize one such mission with a budget
of 12, 000 dollars... It will thus perhaps
be possible to save a few of the artistic
treasures.
"But, there must be more of these mis-
sions. The war has brought about their
urgent need, and at the same time made
them too costly for the resources of one
country or one international institution.
"Accordingly, the Conference approved
Unesco's wish to see the establishment of
an international fund, which could be used
at the start for certain particularly im-
portant missions and for the restoration of
monuments having an international cultural
interest.
"The Conference also recommended the
establishment of a Council of 14 Experts,
as a kind of international General Staff to
direct Unesco's campaign for the con-
servation and restoration of historic sites
and monuments.
"It would be the duty of these experts
to consult Unesco upon the choice of
priorities, in such matters as the prepar-
ation of International agreements for pro-
tection against dangers arising from war,
in the organization of international photo-
graphic archives of the world's treasures,
and in the sending out of scientific mis-
stones. They will also have to direct
Unesco's programme of publicity and pop-
ular education.
"In this second post-war period this
Council will take the place of the Inter-
national Committee set up by the League
of Nations. The League Committee had
30 national representatives and was, there-
fore, a far larger and more ofncia) body.
The Council will have a more technicai
aspect, In keeping with the urgency of Its
task."