IS A WORLD
of Philosophy
Really Necessary ?By Robert FAWTIER
Professor at the Sorbonne.
N January 18, an Intemaiona ! Council for Philosophy
it) and Humanistic Studies was founded in Brussels.
Sceptics may smile on hearing of the creation, of
pother organization and of the forming of a new inter-
1.. 1tional council and may ask themselves what good all
zits will do. They may even smile at the mention of
L'lmanistic sciences. For to many of them the human
fences, which study Man, his moral behaviour and the
\ : : pious manifestations of his mind, are not sciences at aiL
And then, too, they may probably say that in our age of
the practical application of science and of the mastery
. oi matter over mind. the human sciences are of no impor-
trance or interest whatever.
It is, of course, true that the natural sciences have for
more than a century made unquestionable advances, and
have pursued their research and practical applications to
ach a-point that we are sometimes tempted to believe
that their potentialities are unlimited and their work in
the world unique. But what is not always realized is that
ti, e results of these sciences, and indeed the sciences
themselves, are in the last resort only manifestations and
products of the human mind.
If we examine the matter, we are forced to admit that
it is man himself, either individually or collectively, who
has the command of these sciences and of their results.
and that upon him, and him alone, depends the use that
is made of them ; that it is through him, and him alone,
that their discoveries will prove a blessing to mankind or,
alternatively, its utter destruction.
We see, therefore, that there is after all a certain value
In knowing about Man, on whom the natural sciences
have conferred powers which primitive times reserved for
the Divmity alone.
Now, it is this Man which the human sciences study.
Little by little, these sciences have revealed to us the secret
springs of human action. It is through them that we can
discover how individuals aid human communities react.
Finally, they are the means by which. we can, if not
establish certainties, at least determine with a fair
measure of preciseness, Man's potentialities of action,
either as an individual or as a member of a community.
The physicist, in spotting the atom, suddenly unleashes
forces the powers of which frighten even those who have
discovered them. However, if we allow ourselves to be
impressed by these immediate practical results, what shall
we say of the thinker or worker in the human sciences
who elaborates a theory the social application of which
is ignored or even despised, but which may one day
transform man ?
The answer will no doubt be that a meeting of phi-
lologists or linguists, of historians or folklorists has only
a very relative immediate interest, and that the results
these research workers obtain will be applied only in a
more or less distant future.
Outmoded View of Life
Such an attitude is simply the survival of a largely
outmoded view of life. The means of spreading knowledge
have become so rapid that we cannot say how IO : 1g it will
be before a particular theory discovered by the study of
human sciences will take effect.
In the past, and not a very remote past, it took weeks
and months to travel a few thousand miles. Now it takes
a single day. Formerly it took months, years, centuries
almost, for an idea conceived and formulated at one end
of the world to reach the other end ; now it takes a second.
That is a point of some importance.
Should we expect the scholars emerging from their
recent meeting in Brussels to solve all the problems of the
human sciences over night ? They would be the first to
laugh at such a suggestion. What they want'to do first
of all is to learn to work together.
The human sciences have as their subject Man, a
ceature of infinite diversity. But they are studied by men
\\ho, perhaps because of the very nature of their studies
[2nd to work in isolation. Teamwork may be perfectly
r. atural to chemists and physicists and to all natural
scientists, but for the human scientist it represents
something against which he has a tendency to revolt.
Thus, too, work in the human sciences is often carried
can, with the idea that it will be linked up only in infinity.
And yet how often, during research in a specific field,
ae we not obliged to cast a glance at what is happening
in parallel disciplines ? The truth is that at the present
time there is no way of knowing what is being done
j'1 related fields of the'social sciences without much waste
cf time and effort.
Each of the humeri sciences has its own separate

COUNCIL
At the Palais des Académies in Brussels, M. Camille Huysmans (standing), Belgian Minister of Public Educa-
tion, is seen addressing an audience attending the inaugural session of the International Council for Philosophy
and Humanistic Studies. At extreme right of table, M. Jean Thomas, Assistant Director-General of Unesco
for Cultur al Affairs..
method and rarely troubles about the methods used in
the other human sciences. Thus one finds that human
scientists very often"re-discover"things which have
already been discovered in neighbouring fields.
The first goal of the newly created Council for Phi-
) osophy. and Huma7istic Studies is therefore to establish
contacts between scientists working in different fields
and to inform them of what is being done in similar or
related fields devoted to the study of Man. If in this way
we could break down the water-tight compartments be-
tween the different disciplines, research. work in the
humanities would be made considerably easier. An
observation made by an anthropologist is often valuable
to a linguist ; a discovery by a linguist may teach the
historian that his enquiries are along the right lines ; a
particular feature in folklore throws light on the literary
heritage of mankind.
In order to make serious progress, the human sciences
need crossfertilization. Up to the present there has been
little or none of it, and for that reason a clearing-house
of information on all that is being done in this enormous
field of world-wide intellectual activity cannot fail to be
of value.
Finally, the human sciences-precisely because of the
difficulty they have in discovering truth-offer another
advantage for the human mind. The materials they use
can7ot be isolated in a test-tube, or be subjected to
chemical analysis, or broken up or bombarded by elec-
trons. Their great merit-we might almost say their
superiority over the natural sciences-is that even if
they arrive at the truth they are never sure of possessing
it. Hence that constant intellectual research, that
ceaseless criticism of work already done, that constant
criticism of the materials to hand.
1 : : 1 those who practise these sciences all this develops
a mentality which is sometimes exasperating, but which
is none the less essential. The critical spirit is a product
of the human sciences, and it is the critical spirit which
makes of man what he must be if he is to be. worthy of
that high title : a being who does not accept all that he
is told, who does not do everything that he is ordered,
and who reflects before he acts-in a word, a being who
is free.
That is why those systems which want to reduce ma : : 1
to the function of a machine or animal do not encourage
the development of the human sciences. What they want
is human material which does not think, because-if it
did-it might come to see that those in command are not
so much to be feared as they imagine. The critical spirit
and liberty are indissolubly bound together. For that
reason it is possible that, by encouraging the establish-
ment of a Council on Humanistic Sciences which hopes to
give these sciences a fresh impulse and unite in common
action all those who make moral man the subject of
their studies, Unesco may have done the best service to
its own cause, namely, to give man his intellectual
freedom, his only true freedom, and the only possible
basis of peace.
