CULTURAL INTERCHANGE
.'-
BETWEEN COUNTRIES t
ARTS AND LETTERS
THOUGH supported financially byUnesco, the International Theatre
Institute, with headquarters at
Paris, is a young independent organiz-
ation working to encourage and facilitate
theatrical exchar. ges of all types.
At present, Unesco is making prepara-
tions for the foundation, on similar auto-
nomous lines, of an International Or-
ganization for Music. The preliminary
investigation has been made and a com-
mittee of experts and of representatives
of specialized international organiza-
tions is to meet at Unesco House to con-
sider the possibility of such an organiza-
tion of its programme and its constitu-
tion.
Unesco has also undertaken the pre-
paration of catalogues of existing re-
corded music, which, it is hoped, will
prove of the utmost value to the general
public, schools and projessionnal musi-
cians of all countries. Three catalogues
are in course of preparation and will
cover Western and Oriental classical
music and folk music..
Reproductions of Paintings
similar effort is being made regard-
® ing art reproductions. Unesco ispreparing lists of the fine repro-
ductions currently available in all coun-
tries. A cataloue of reproductions of
western paintings since 1860 is in course
of preparation and will be followed this
year by a second catalogue covering
paintings prior to that date. Catalogues
on oriental painting will also be com-
pleted.
The finest reproductions, selected with
the assistance of highly qualified experts,
and covering major periods in the history
of art, will be made available to school
and other education groups, so that they
may arrange travelling exhibitions for
the countries most lacking in original
works.
Closely connected with the preceding
projects is Unesco's task of encouraging
Member States to take steps to strengh-
then the role of the arts in teaching and
general culture. Committees are in
course of organization in several coun-
tries, and an international committee
wille be convened at Unesco in 1949 to
report on this subject and publish its
results.
Literary Pool
IN the field of Letters the Interna-tional Pool of'Literature enables
reviews 1M all countries to offer to
their readers articles published in the
reviews of other lands, and sometimes
original works, through a scheme of
translations and exchanges. During 1949
it will devote special attention to forg-
ing closer links between distant cultures.
Unesco is now carrying out a plan
drawn up by the international committee
of experts, which met in Paris in 1948,
to increase the translation of literary,
philosophic and scientific works. Steps
have already been taken for the trans-
lation of world classics into Arabic. and
of Arabic classics into other fanfares.
A similar programme has begun for
Latin America, and will be applied later
to other regions of the world.
Unesco is also to resume the publica-
tion of the Index Translationum fonnely
published by the International Institute
of Intellectual Co-operation.
Freedom of the Artist
II N addition to the programme out-
lined above, the Arts and Letters
Division will this year undertake an
inquiry into the way in which artists
can serve the ends of Unesco and into
the obstacles of all kinds preventing the
free exercice of their art. This inquiry
will enable the Director-General to
submit to the next General Conference
concrete plans designed to improve the
working conditions of artists in the
world.
Unesco will also study the possibility
of creating a series of annual awards
to be made on the recommendation of
recognized international authorities for
the best musical, theatrical, artistic and
literary works produced during the pre-
ceding twelve months.
MUSEUMS AND HISTORIC
MONUMENTS
I () URING the coming months Unescowill devote considerable effort to
the questions of scientific, technic-
al and art museums, work on which in
1948 has already made considerable
progress.
Consideration will also be given to the
problem of the protection and conserva-
tion of ancient monuments of artistic
and cultural significance.
The projects now in hand stress the
international contacts and future ac-
tivities to be effected through museums.The most important of these projects
calls for the co-operation of Member
States of Unesco in a scheme for the
organization of international exchange
of exhibitions. It is based on reports
furnished by the International Council
of Museums and by experts from all parts
of the world. These reports bring out
the present difficulties and make re-
commendations for surmounting them.
The second volume of Museum, the
quaterly review of museographical
technique, will be published during 1949.
It will include issues on the conservation
of works of arts, archeaological sites and
ancient monuments, on the new tech-
niques perfected in Swedish museums ;
on the teaching role of museums and the
technique of its application. Co-opera-
tion with the International Council of
Museums, with its world experience and
world-wide influence will be intensified.
On the basis of the inquiries con-
ducted in 1948 and of the report sub-
mitted by the experts of the Interna-
tional Council of Museums, the Secreta-
riat will prepare draft proposals design-
ed to secure access to archaeological sites,
which will be submitted to Member
States for consideration.
The problem of the protection against
destruction, and, where necessary the
restoration, of ancient monuments and
historic sites is assuming an alarming
degree of acuteness and gravity in many
Member States. The Secretariat has been
instructed by the General Conference to
investigate, in co-operation with the In-
ternational Council of Museums, the
desirability of setting up, under Unesco's
auspices, an international committee of
experts and the possibility of creating
an international fund to subsidize the
work of preservation and restoration.
COPYRIGHT
A FTER overcoming the initial dif-
/L ficulties of a new activity and the
establishment of a truly effective
network of international relations, the
Copyright Division completed in 1948 the
launching of the vast inquiry into com-
parative law.
In 1949, the Copyright Division will
study replies received to its 1948 inquiry
on comparative law. The results will
then be submitted to Unesco's Member
States. Thereafter the result of the in-
quiry and the remarks of Member States
will be submitted for study by an inter-
national copyright committee, which will
decide on the future drafting of a Uni-
versal Copyright Convention.

CULTURAL LIAISON
OFFICE FOR
MIDDLE EAST
() N the basis of the report submittedto It, after the most thorough in-
vestigation by the Director-General.
the General Conference voted to set up
within the Secretariat, a cultural liaison
office with the special task of encourag-
ing the exchange of ideas, documentary
information, material and persons, be-
tween the countries of the Middle East
and between those countries and other
parts of the world.
This unit, though small in number,
will endeavour to draw up, in consult.
tion with the governments and national
Commissions of the countries concerned,
a programme of cultural liaison in the
field of arts, letters, philosophy and
humanistic studies, in which the first
step will be to encourage translations of
world masterpiéces and collaboration
among the libraries of the Middle East.
BOOKS AND LIBRARIES
us an outcome of contacts establish-
end during the Beirut Conference
Unesco will publish a guide to
Middle East libraries as a practical con-
tribution to the work of the Middle East
Cultural Liaison Office and to cultural
contacts between the Middle East and
the rest of the world. Also, as another
publications project the reproduction is
being organized of a number of highly
important out-of-print periodicals.
Unesco will especially undertake the
publication of manuals in promotion of
public library work and assistance to
public libraries. This is largely based
on the valuable discussions held during
the 1948 Unesco Summer School for
Public Librarians.
Libraries Reconstruction
To a large extent Unesco's librariesprogramme is directly concerned
with the establishment of libraries
- particularly public libraries for the
general readers-with the technical ef-
"f ; cienCy of libraries, the education of. orarians and with the background
library services of bibliography and
documentation.
But in the foreground of this coming
year's work, as of previous years, is the
problem of library reconstruction widely
conceived as the problem of international
library communications and the distri-
bution of publications. All libraries
everywhere are inter-dependent and the
problem of reconstruction cannot be
isolated as affecting only libraries in
war-damaged countries.
The largest part of the Division's work
is concerned with the operation of
Unesco's Clearing House for Publication,
as an advice centre in connection with
all book distribution and exchange ac-
tivity and the promotion of national book
exchange centres.
Bulletin for Libraries
THROUGH the Clearing House,donors of books and periodicals can
obtain accurate and up-to-date ad-
vice on library needs of war-damaged
countries ; the libraries in these countries
can be helped to find the books they need
and. to a limited extent, direct purchase
is made of publications and equipment
for reconstruction area libraries.
A main Clearing House activity is the
publication of a monthly Bulletin for
Libraries, in which needs and offers of
donations and proposals for inter-library
exchange are advertised. The Bulletin
goes free to 6, 500 libraries and has prov-
ed its value as a unique and essentially
practical journal of international library
communication.
A fundamental obstruction to all
library development is the lack of in-
formation on what publications exist
and the deficiencies in bibliographical
services. No librarian can build up his
collection and no scholar conduct his
studies unless he has good bibliographies
on which to base his purchases and.
reading.
This complex and vast problem is
being studied cooperatively with the U. S.
Library of Congress and other national
libraries as a Ions term survey project,
leading towards proposals for practical
improvemen* in bibliographical services.
During 1949 an attempt will be made
to prepare guides to the main biblio-
graphical sources in various Unesco
field.