FOUR major facts perhaps can sum
up the history of the past fif-
ty years ; the rise to world in-
fluency of the United States ; the
development of Russian power under
Soviet Communism ; the dye : line of
world influence of the nations-states
of Western Europe ; the movement to-
wards political self-determination and
independence cf peoples in Asia, Afro-
ca. and Latin America, who in the nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries li-
vej under systems of colonial rulre
The purpose of this book. Most cut the
WorM, is to paint a picture ef this last
group of countries, which are assuming
increasing control over their own pat-
terns of power and collaboration after
Wcrld War II.
A group of trained anthrqpologists has
studied the countries of Latin America.
the Far East, and Africa in terms of
population and natural political history.
and has made a detailed sociological
map. What Is refreshing In these experts
presentation is the brcad sweep of
their interest, their concern not'cnly
for the geography and natural resources.
but also for the human and cultural
elements which more than any other
fa : tors will determine the future shape
and history of these areas.
What are some of the broad conclu-
sians drawn frem that detailed and
masterly picture thus presented 0
On the resources side. the picture is
of a combinÜiC'\1. vf great potentialities
and ma, sive underdevelopment. No-
where in the countries described are
there the basic foundations for the in-
tense industrial development wich
would be comparable to that seen in
the Ruhr, the English Midlands, the
Eastern U. S. A.. or the Donetz basin of
the U. S. S. R. But important industrial
growth can be fcreshadowed in N.
Eastern India. Manchuria. Japan, and
possibly Brazil. In all these areas, whe-
ther in industrialization or the mere
exploitation of resources, progress wil ;
depend on new types of organization
and skill, many of which will require
the sial reorganlzaticn of old culture
habits to bring them to full fruition.
Population Pressure
IF national self-determination is theprime political factor and driving
force behind this development, tilt>
prime Ecclal factor is population pres-
sure. Without cffering any pat solution
to the prcblem, one expert writes, ( The
entire set of life conditions which con-
tribute to high mertallty and high fer-
tility must alter... Fcr most of the
world this means that ways must bp
found to increase agricultural produc-
tion. to introduce and develop indus-
tries, te promote trade. to broaden hori-
zons, through wider education and the
promotion of literacy, to improve health
facilities and individuals welfare servi-
ces, to Insure political stability and
leadership. In short, through balanced
modernization of all the world's ba : k-
ward areas a solutlcn to problems of
overpopulation may be preached.))
The term « balanced mo : lernizatlon >&gt;
Is a useful one for those whose thoughts
have been turned of late to the pro-
grammes of Technical Assistance for
the less-developed areas of the world
now under discussicn In the Economic
and Sc_ial Council ef the United Na-
ticns, and in the United States Congress
in implementing Paint Four of Presi-
dent Truman's Inaugural address.
As this book underscores, the task
of modernization of these countries can
no lcnger be conceived in the old pat-
terns of control, and will require new
methcds of collaboration between the
more and less advanced countries of the
world. This is perhaps the challenge
and the premise ef the present Techni-
cal Assistance programme now under
discussion.
William DRAPER CARTER
tal) New York : Columbia Universzty
Press, 1M9. 917 pp. 5, 501011ars,
2
