-,
SA VING
OUR
RESOURCES
by
Eleen
SA1Jl
PEOPLE uften think uf <&lt; prutectiun
of nature>&gt; as cuncerned onlY
with natiunal parks and reserves.
and the preservation of animal
and plant species threatened with extinc-
tion. But this Is only a limited part of
nature protection which Is concerned
with man's entire natural environment,
Including the earth's renewable natu-
ral resources. That these natural re-
sources are not inexllauslible is nu lung-
er in doubt. The problem is how to
utilize nature's resources for man's
henetlt and at the same time maintain a
balance between human demands and
the earth's productivity.
This is the problem which brought
together at Lake Success for three
weeks in August and September more
than six hundred scientists, engineers
and technologists from nearly sixty dif-
ferent countries and a score of interna-
tional organizations. Tile'were attend-
ing the United Nations Scientific Confer-
ence on the Conservation and Utilization
uf Resuurces (UNSCCUR) and the Inter-
national Technical Conference on the
Protection of Nature. The second confer-
ence was convened juintly by UNESCO
and the International Union for the
Protection of Nature. As Mr. Fairfield
Osborn, President of the Conservation
Foundation, said in one of the meet-
ings, the earth's resources are unim-
portant in themselves : man is depen-
dent on them, and it is his business to
see how they are used and how they
are distributed. But utilization in itself
creates other far-reaching problems.
T lIUS, while the economists and tench-nicians of UNSCCUR were ex-
clranging information on new
techniques fur wresting more wealth
from the earth's resources, the biolo-
gists and other scientists attending the
\a ! ure Protection Conference deliho'-
ated. uver the 1>o., siblr cun, equences lu
IIII' ! Jalance of nature, tllat is to suy
nature's natural state, of the e. L'ploil-
aliun of furmerly undat !/o]Jed region".
Tiley daoted three of their elaen spe-
('iali ; ed meetings to discussing the best
lecllltiques to be used in educating child-
ren and adults alike to a greater a]J) J/>e-
/"iation of nature, and to au ; areness o {
Ilteir responsibility to {uture generatio/l,'
for sa {eguarding nature's resources.
To exploit a natural resource in order
to get tile highest economic)"ip1--/with-
out considering the total biological
effect on the regions concerned and
perhaps eventually on the world, is
irresponsible and shortsighted. That is
why questions as to the effects of « pian-
ned enterprises on the balance of
nature, the possible consequences on
natural associations of the generalized
use of anti-parasitic products (DDT
etc.), and of the uncontrolled introduc-
tion of exotic species, were given spe-
cial attention. Several of the Resolutions
which the conference passed dealt with
the basic problem of keeping the ba-
lance of nature where interference by
man has also brought about destruction,
and protecting rare species from be-
coming extinct. This is one reason why
it is essential to maintain as wide a
variety as possible of representative
natural communities and environments.
They are a means of helping us to un-
derstand how to manage animal and
plant life, and how to apply scientific
knowledge in our social economic and
i I) d ustrla I life.
THE different aspects of nature pro-j tectiun are so varied-eduea-
tiunally, seientit1call\", aesthetical-
ly,-that tI ; ey clearly enìer within the
interests of other United nations Specia-
sized. agencies, such as \\"HO anù F, \O.
besides UNESCO. Thus one resolution
of the Conference calls on \VHO, FAO
and UNESCO to investigate the esta-
blishment of a Permanent Joint Com-
mission on Pesticides to deal with the
effective regulation of the use of insect
and other pest killers.
The significance of these two confer-
ences. front)) ie human point of view,
was illustrated by M Antoine Gilding.
LX. Deputy. \,, istJnl-Secretary-Gene-
ral for Economic Affair,, who stressed
their importance for the United Nations
programme of technical assistance.
<&lt; I Jill afraid >&gt;, he said, <&lt; that we shall
come lip against failures and seriousu  i t f il r   ri
difficulties if the human aspect of this
great programme is not examined with
care... I am sure that the results of
your work'sill he of great use to me. >&gt;
