"WHY WE FIGHT."During the War, while the world struggled to
determine it future, the United Nations illustrated their aims in
UM a remarkable film whose titl6 the Courier has taken to express
the peaceful aims of UNESCO, to-day...
The Constitution of UNESCO proclaims the basic aims which deter-
mine its action, and in these pages the Courier is presenting pictorially
the essential themes of this fight for peace in which no cannons speak
- a fight whose outcome is as vital as that of the struggle which ended
in 1945.
The duties incumbent on all men and women in the fight for peace
were recently defined by M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of
Unesco, when he spoke at the United Nations Day ceremony, held at
the Paris City Hall, on October 24.
Below, we publish extracts from this speech.
THE war which has recently wrought such havoc, was a crisis without precedent in
history. Begun in 1914, with an interval more apparent than real of twenty years,
it att ined between 1939 and 1945 such pr portions that we should today feel
no surprise that peace is so difficult to establish, but rather wonder that civilization did
not sink without trace during the storm, and that even before peace has been signed,
the peoples had the wisdom to evolve a law designed to bind them all.
We have barely started to blaze the trail of international co-operation through the
darkness, our hands still stained with blood. We know that the task will be a harsh
one, but we know, too, that there is no work more urgent or worthier of our devotion.
Today all problems are universal ; neither economics, education nor health can any
longer be treated solely on national lines. Mankind has at long last realized this unchal-
lengeable truth : its life is a single whole and its future indivisible. From now on, no
race, no nation, can either owe salvation to, or seek it for, itself alone. For years it was
said that collective security was an impracticable theory. Events have swiftly shown
the fatuity of that assertion. The only security is collective security ; and in our day
collective means world-wide. The temporary check suffered by this principle was due
not to the ideal itself, stated before the war by the League of Nations, but rather to the
dangerous spirit of passivity with which the peoples received it, as though they saw in it
an encouragement to sloth, a pretext for negligence and a premium on irresponsibility.
Peace is only a finer name for work, for daily self-sacrifice. Or if we prefer, it is the
collective name for all occupations and all skills aimed at serving humanity. Peace is
not a rampart, erected once and for all against the forces of evil. Peace is man's dwelling,
which must constantly be rebuilt and strengthened, enlarged, adapted to changing needs,
for as long as man survives and because man survives.
As a result ofthe obstacles against which the United Nations have inevitably stumbled,
the impatient lose hope on finding once again that peace calls for vigilance as stern and
unceasing as in war. In so doing, they discover merely that collective security can never
be a synonym for the collective neglect of duties incumbent on all and on each one.
We must not hesitate to repeat, on every occasion and in whatever words and tones
suit best, that the measure of peace's worth is the degree of freedom and justice which
it secures for the world
We have been shown clearly enough that there is no victory to be won in modern
war ; for the conquered there is suffering and humiliation ; and for the conqueror, suffering
and responsibility.
j
All European wars, said Voltaire, are civil wars. In the twentieth century his formula
applies to the whole earth. In our world, which shrinks progressively as communications
become swifter, all wars are civil wars ; all battles are battles between fellow-citizens,
nay more, between brothers.
... Through the Food and Agriculture Organization they concern themselves with the
needs of a world which must eat to live. Through the International Labour Organization
they co-ordinate endeavours to secure working conditions which are in accord with social
justice. Through the World Health Organization they combat disease and contribute
to bringing health to unhealthy regions. Through UNESCO they endeavour to increase
international understanding by ensuring the spread of education, science and culture.
The work of these Specialized Agencies does not always capture the interest of the
general public as much as it deserves. Usually the newspaper reader does not attach
much importance to an anti-malaria campaign, or to the ratification of a Convention on
Women's Hours of Work, or an agreement on the agricultural resources of Polynesia,
or a pilot project in Fundamental Education in Haiti. He is more concerned with the
political discussions proceeding in the limelight of actuality.
In the final analysis, the most urgent political questions are no more than the conse-
quence of age-long chronic problems, economic and social, ethical and educational, pro-
blems ill-stated and ill-resolved. In every. political issue there lies latent a history, some-
times centuries old, of incalculable and disastrous technical shortcomings.
Undoubtedly, it is of very great importance to decide who is to rule over a particular
area of the earth, for it may happen that such a decision may threaten the peace we need
in order to rebuild a civilization in ruins. But if we take a truly historical view, the most
urgent task is to satisfy the manifold necessities of men, by devoting to that end all the
resources available through international co-operation. Political solutions merely cure
the symptoms ; and they do not always do that much. Economic and social solutions
go to the very roots of the evil.
In the few years of their existence, the several Institutions making up the complex
system of the United Nations have been able to do no more than plot the course they
must follow in the future. let us not grudge them the support they need. let us not
despair of their success, for that would be to despair of humanity itself.
A rule of justice such as the San Francisco Charter offers us, is not born full-fledged
in the moment of its acceptance by the plenipotentiaries of governments, nor even later
when it is ratified by the parliaments of the peoples. Such a rule must be ratified by
every man, at every moment, everywhere and by all his acts.
