Dr. Torres Bodet confers with President Truman at the White House during a visit of the Unesco Director-General to Wash-'ington on Aprit 5. Standing : Asst. Secretary of State George V. Alien.
Unesco Can Aid U. N. Plan
For Under-Devetoped Areas.,
NESCO can make an important
contribuLon to the United Na-
tions plan. to give technical assis-
trance to the under-developed areas of
the world. Or. Jaime Torres Bodet de-
Ü9red in Washington earlv this month.
After calling on President Truman at
the-White House on April 5 to express
appreciation for the"outstanding work"
the United States has done for Unesco,
Torres Bodet told newsmen in Washing-
ton that he"'warmly welcomed"the
'revolution which the Economic and
Social Council of the U. N. had adopted
on March 4.
This resolution requests Trygve Lie,
in consultation with the Specialized
Agencies, to submit a plan to ECOSOC
xefore its meetng m July,. for the tech-
u'c9l and economic development of less
t>dv&néed countries.
"This generous and at the same time
realistic initiative is in full harmony with
the mission of the United Nations and es-
pecially of Unesco. since education is a
necessary corollary to economic develop-
ment,"Torres Bodet declared.
RECALLING that"the impetus for de-veloping this programme came ori-
ginally from President Truman", the
Unesco chief added :"By focusing world
attention on the problem of under-
developed areas, Mr. Truman, in my
opinion, has made a very great contri-
bution to the cause of peace. Giving
assistance to the under-privileged masses
who have been by-passed by progress in
many parts of the world is a constructive
goal for international co-operation."
"The educational and scientific aspects
Tories rodent
y
of the programme", he continued,"are
just as important as technical assistance.
The latter will be largely wasted if the
inhabitants of the regions which are being
assisted are not. educated to make the
best possible use of the economic assis-
tance. Furthermore, any tare-scale
programme of the kind which is con-
templated has important cultural im-
plications. As their technological level
rises, backward peoples must be helped
to adapt their cultural independence... If
you are going to train their hands, you
must also teach their minds."
Recalling that"a strict system of
priorities for all Unesco activities this
year"had been set up, Torres Bodet
s : lid :"We are giving top priority to pro-
jects which directly support the United
Nations plans for under-developed areas."
HE called attention to Unesco's educa-tonal missions in such countries as
Siam, the Philippines and Afghanistan,
to the educational seminars for setting up
campaigns to combat illiteracy in India
and Brazil, and to the clearing-house and
experimental work in fundamental edu-
cation which includes the teaching of
elementary hygiene and scientific agri-
culture.
The Director-General also stressed the
value of Unesco's achievements in estab-
lishing field science co-operation offices
in Cairo, Delhi, Shanghai and Montevideo,
in stimulating scientific research in the
various problems peculia.. to under-
developed areas, in obtaining fellowships
in the more advanced countries for
scholars from under-developed areas, and
in surveying the press, film and radio
needs in these areas.
He pointed out, however, that"the
scope of all this work cannot but be res-
triced because of our lack of adequate
resources,"since Unesco's total budget
is fixed at $7, 780. 000."What is now re-
qü ; red," he added,"is a : 1 effort on an
altogether different scale."
Referring to a recent meeting with
Mr. Trygve Lie, Torres Bodet reported
that he had assured the U. N. chief that
"Unesco will co-operate in this enterprise
to the fullest extent."He announced that
four Unesco officials were participating
1n the preliminary drafting of the Joint
Plan for under-developed areas, which
will ultimately be submitted to ECOSOC.
"We think that from this preparatory
stage onwards,"Dr. Torres Bodet said,
"Unesco is in a position to make a
valuable contribution. The human ele-
ment remains the decisive factor in all
technical and economic progress. If
technical assistance is to produce eco-
nomic effects that are deep and lasting...
it must be based on an effort in the
sphere of education-not merely techni-
cdl education : 1, but also fundamental and
even scientific education."
(Continued on Page Z.)

Unesco.
Under-developed
Areas
' (Continued from Page 1)
He quoted the ECOSOC resolution which
recognizes this need :"paying due atten-
tion to questions of a social nature which
directly conditions economic develop-
ment."
HE pointed out to correspondents thatUnesco s ExecutlVe Bcard, at a special
session convened in Paris on March 24,
had approved several concrete proposals
on the Organization's possible contribu-
tions to the programme for technical
assistance.
These proposals, he said, bear on the
scientific study of regional problems af-
fecting the development of backward
areas, the technical training of personnel,
education of entire populations and cam-
paigns against illiteracy, as well as adult
education in hygiene, agriculture, handi-
ccafts and industry.
SPEAKING in detail on the plan fort-. th ooucat ; on of whole popul tions,
the Unesco chief had said :"Men are
not robots. All human activity is the
necessary outcome of a state of mind.
It is quite impossible to imagine technical
training worthy of the name, that is.
training which is not mere mechanical
filling, without it being based on fun-
damental education and accompanied by
general education. Backward peoples can-
not be taught working methods and the
rules of hygiene, of private and com-
munity life. which the modern technical
age has developed, unless they have suf-
ficient mental training o understand the
explanations and reasons of those prac-
tices. Othclwise man is either unable to
use the instmments of his emancipation
or else he becomes an instrument himself.
The first essential for any technological
and Economic progress is therefore to
raise the standard of education of the
general population."
Other projects outlined by the Director'-
General in Washington included the use
vf media of mass communication, pro-
motion of primary education, and the
promotion of scientific information and
research.
THE Unesco Director-General stressedthe fact that th  plan to aid backward
areas must not be impaired by"mediocre
results".- p
"If a lack of
lufficient resources
were to confine us
to superficial efforts
or token activity"
he told correspon-
dents,"this would
mean an intense
disappointment for
the peoples of the
underdeveloped re-
gions."
In discussing his
meeting with Pre-
sident Truman,
Torres Bodet ex-
pressed pleasure at
discovering that the
President was thor-
oughly acquainted
with the details of
TJnesco's program-
me. It was an"ins-
piration", he said,
o learn that despite
neavy responsabili-
ties as Chief Execu-
tive of the United
States, President
Truman could find
time to keep such
e 1 0 5 e track of
Unesco's activities.
