Population Problems
of India and Pakistan
by Dr. Sriþati Chandrasekhar
II NDIA'S population problem arises
primarily out of an extremely high
fertility ccompanied by high
mortality which is only slowly declining
The resulting increase, which amounted
to more than four million a year in an
undivided India, need. not constitute a
problem if the Indian level of living were
high enough to absorb the additional
population without reducing the level of
living, and if a majority of the population
enjoyed the jcreducible minimum require-
ments of decent human existence in
terms of food, health, clothing, shelter,
employment and leisure for recreation.
But India's level of living. is so low that
any further addition to the number of
poor families may well be disastrous.
Growth of Population
HE population of the combined do-minions of India and Pakistan
today is nearly 450 millions or about
one f1fth of the total world population.
The rate of increase of the Indian popu-
lation, though high, has not been ab-
normal. The problem in India is not
however the rate of increase but the
net addition to the existing population
every decade.
Because of the large number of India's
existing population, even a modest rate
of increase of 10 or 15 per cent yields a
net gain of some 50 millions, in itself
larger than the population of any Euro-
pean country except Germany or Russia,
or any Latin American country. And it
'is this large net addition that constitutes
the problem because it nullifies all efforts
to improve the admittedly very low
standard of living. of the Indian people.
All efforts to increase the production of
food, other commodities and services to
give a better per capita share to the
existing population are largely frustrated
by this increasing addition to the popu-
lation.
Fertility
MONG all demographic factors, the
A rate of fertility is the most im-
portant, for international lack of
balance in fertility constitutes the crux
of the world population problem.
The significant fact about the Indian
birth rate is not that it is one of the
highest in the world but that it has shown
no signs of decline during the last fifty
years. In Western and industrialized
countries, the decline in fertility began
in urban areas, and the rural areas tended
to follow the downward trend after a
time lag. This has been so because in-
dustrialization has been accompanied by
the widespread adoption of the planned
family habit.
Though India may conform to this
experience eventually, it has not been the
case till now. The lower fertility in Indian
urban areas must be explained in terms
of adverse sex ratio where the relative
paucity of females and the absence of
wives constitute a remarkable feature,
which will be discussed later.
Mortality
tj) NDIA'S population growth during thelast century has been conditioned
mainly by the high but fluctuating
death rate. Famines, epidemics, the gene-
ral unsanitary environment and wars
have contributed to the death rate. During
"normal"years the death rate has been
consistently high because of the striking
lack of public sanitation and hygiene,
and widespread mal-and under-nutri-
tion of the population. It can be said with
some truth that famine and epidemics
alone have controlled the growth of
India's population during the last hun-
dred years.
The Indian death rate is high-30 per
thousand. The recorded death rate for
1931 was 24 per thousand and 22 for 1940,
but these are under-estimates because of
incomplete returns. This means that
more than 10 million people die every
year in India.
The most disquieting factor of the
Indian death rate is the high incidence of
mortality among first year infants,
women in child-birth and women of the
reproductive age group. Nearly one-fourth
of the babies born die during their first
year. About half the deaths among infants
occur in the first month and. of these,
nearly sixty per cent in the first week.
Mortality remains high throughout early
childhood. About forty-nine per cent of
the total mortality in any given year is
among those below ten years of age,
while the corresponding figure for. Eng-
land is only twelve per cent.
As for maternal mortality, at least
200, 000 women die every year during
child-birth or 100 out of every thousand !
Health Conditions
THUGS, out of every hundred born, onequarter die by the time they reach
their first birthday. When the fifth
birthday arrives, forty per cent have
disappeared through death, and when the
twentieth birthday is at hand only fifty
per cent are left. By the sixtieth birthday
only fiftcen per cent survive.
But despite the pres-
ent mortality rates, the
average annual addition
to the population of
both the Dominions was
five million. During the
last two decades there
has been, however, a
steady fall in the gen-
eral mortality-rate. A
further fall is bound to
occur if the large-scale
programmes for improv-
ing the health of the
country by various
planning committees are
effectively put into
operation.
It has been calculated
that even a slight im-
provement in the pres-
ent health conditions
can save three million
infant lives. When this
is done, India's popula-
tion will increase by
not five but eight
million a year. And it
is possible that the 83
million increase that
took place between 1921
and 1941 may take place
between 1941 and 1951.
A planned and purpose-
ful control of mortality
without a corresponding
control of the birth rate
can only have dis9S-
trous consequences for
India.
Today, however, the death rate is the
decisive factor in Indian demography.
No comment is necessary on this inordi-
nate and tragic loss of human lives. Nor
is this all. There are many who do not
die but who cannot be counted among the
truly living, healthy, active and gainfully
employed because of the shocking nature
of Indian morbidity.
Social Factors
iE demographic situation of anytm-J region is largely he product of
its peculiar social characteristics
affecting in their turn births, deaths and
migration. The population problem in
India can conceivably be very different
if the social institutions of early marriage.
universality of marriage, the ban on
widow re-marriage and the joint Hindu
family and other institutions and atti-
tudes resulting in an adverse sex ratio,
among others, did not exist.
But as these institutions, with a socio-
religious tradition and sanction berund
them, exist and condition the lives of an
overwhelming majority of the people, the
demographic problem has become what it
is today.
ARLY marriage and universality ofL marriage are dominant features 
the Indian social scene. While child
marriage as such has largely disappeared,
a majority of girls between 15 and 20 are
married. The girls in rural areas marry
as soon as they reach puberty, and begin
bearing children early.
lrHE second factor is the universalityof the married state. Every-one in
India, sooner or later, gets married.
It is a quasi-religious duty. For a repre-
sentative census year like 1931, we find
that 467 males and 492 females out of
every thousand were married. This means,
that taking into consideration all widows,
some widowers, ascetics and mendicants,
almost everyone of marriageable age was
actually married.
Scarcity of Females
A THIRD striking characteristic of
the Indian social situation is the
scarcity of females. There has
been a deficiency of women in the Indian
population within the knowledge of the
country's regular census
DID YOU KNOW ?
* More tban half of all the people
in the world live in Asia and
that more than half the rest are
crowded into Europe.
* Only eight per cent of the
world's land surface-bout foer
billion acres-is used to produce
food.
* Rats and Insects rob the world
of 33 millions tons of stored or", yin
each year-enough to provide the
basic diet of 150 million reople.
* If India's population continuesto increase at its present rate It
will total about 800 million
within 50 years.
* In many parts of China there
are more than 2. 0M people per
square mile.
* All that remains to day of the
"impenetrable forests"in the
Lebanon, mentioned by a con-
temporary of Ramses II, is a
tiny wood belt on a mountain
side in the region of Djebd el
Khodid.
* Fighting against the deadly
rinderpest cattle disease, the
F.. 4.. 0. has immunhed two Chin-
ese provinces by vaccinating
300. (KKT animals.
widows, for the old husband passes away,
leaving behind his young wife a widow.
And, of course, she cannot remarry.
The disproportionate sex ratio and the
resulting deficiency of women keeps up the
custom of early marriage for girls. As
bachelors and widowers have to take brides
of any age they can get, the disparity
between partners is increased. This differ-
ence in age increases widowhood. Since
widows cannot remarry, widowhood in-
creases the already existing shortage of
eligible brides, which means of course the
paucity of women. Thus the vicious wheel
whirls on.
The two significant facts about the
wasteful balance between births and.
deaths in India are the large decennial
increases in the population and the tre-
mendous human cost at which this in-
crease is being maintained in India.
The problem of population has to be
considered in relation to the means of
sustenance. mainly food supply. Nearly 70
per cent of the population is dependent on
agriculture for a livelihood. As the mouths
to be fed every year increase, the area of
productive land diminishes.
What is the way out ?
[To Be Continued1
(In our May issue. Dr. Chandraseklulr..
examine some 0/the possible allSU'ers to the
Indian population problem in terms o/tmproMd
agriculture, industrialization, migration and birtA
control and will sum up his latest findings em
the food and population situation in India).
A rapidly rising population and low level of living are the menacing twin evils of Indian.
