NATIONAL COMMISSIONS'VITAL ROLE
ON August 19. 1949, the Govern--
ment of the Grand Duchy of
'Luxembourg informed Un sco
of the publication of a decree provi-
ding for the establishment of a per-
manent National Commission for
Unesco. This brings the total number
of permanent national commissions in
Unesco's forty-eight Memlber States
to thirty-six.
What is the purpose of National
Commissions and why is it important
that they should be established in
all the Member States of Unesco ?
The answer is to be found in the
conviction of the representatives of
the forty-four nations who attended
the Conference in London for the
establishment of Unesco, held in
November, 1945, that Unesco must not
become, an exclusively governmental
organization. They believed that if
Unesco's purpose-to advance
<&lt;through the educational, scientific
and cultural relations of the peoples
of the world, the objectives of interna-
tional peace and of the common
welfare of mankind. is to be fulfilled,
machinery must be provided within
the Member States for associating
their peoples with the work of Unesco.
It was in this spirit that Article VII of
the Constitution was drawn up.
Article VII states :
1. Each Member State shall make
such arrangements as Guit its
particular conditions for the pur-
pose of associating its principal
bodies interested in educational,
scientific and cultural matter3
with the work 01 the Organization,
preferably by the formation of
a National Commission broadly
representative of the Government
and such bodies.
2. National Commission'3 or natio-
nal co-operating bodies, where
they exist, shall act in an
advisory capacity to their respec-
tive delegations to the General
Conference and to their Govern-
ments in matters relating to the
Organization and shall function
as agencies of liaison in all mat-
ters 01 interest to it."
The citizen's voice
NATIONAL Commissions are thus offi-cial bodies estabilshed by govern-
ments and charged with a certain
measure of legal authority and res-
ponsibility. The diversity of cultures
and educational systems, and diffe-
rences in physical and economic
conditions is reflected in the member-
ship, organization, method of appoint-
ment and degree of authority of their
National Commissions. The member-
ship of all National Commissions has
a proportion-great or small-of
official representatives of the Govern-
ment ; the most successful National
Commissions are those where the
voice of the private citizen, represen-
ting the opinion of the organizations
to which he belongs and of the commu-
nity from which he comes, is clearly
and publicly heard.-
Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, the Director-
General of Unesco, who was himself
a delegate to the London Conference
in 1945, speaking on 1 April, 1949
at the Second National Conference of
the United States National Commission
Teachers learn about Unesco. Dr. E. Aizona. secretary of the Philippines National
Commission, explains the working of the Organization to teachers at Rita ! City. Repubtic
of the Philippines.
in Cleveland, Ohio. defined a primary
duty of National Commissions as
follows :
. Unesco cannot go ahead without
the support of the great masses
which make up public opinion...
The National Commissions must
clearly understand that one of their
main functions is to bring Unesco
into direct contact with the people.
We, in our work, often need spe-
cialists, technicians and experts ; but
the greatest fruits of our efforts must
be enjoyed by the greatest number.
The man in the street must not
remain unaware that Unesco exists
and is thinking of him. His distress,
his anxieties and his desires are the
best reasons for our existence.
"There should not be a newspaper,
a university, a college, a primary
school or an adult organization that
does not know what Unesco is.
There are thousands of teachers and
writers and millions of men and
women who think as you and I do.
Why not go out to them through the
book or the spoken word, the radio
or the film, the press or television ? >&gt;
The task of the National Commiss-
ions is two-fold-to carry out the
international programme adopted by
the General Conference, composed of
delegates selected by their Govern-
ments after consultation with them.
and to ensure that this international
programme is capable of international
application'by advising their dele-
gates in this sense and by developing
programmes for adoption by the
General Conference which involve
the great masses of the people.
Dr. Milton Eisenhower, the Chair-
man of the United States National
Commission, in his address at Cleve-
land, stressed this urgent need for
developing projects and project mate-
rials to make Unesco a people's
agency for peace. He underlined the
point that while the scholarly approach
to the problems of world peace
through understanding must be conti-
nued and accelerated, the high-level
scholarly attack must be supplemented
by concrete projects in which the
peoples in cities and rural areas
throughout the world, can directly and
immediately participate.
National Commissions, if they are
to carry out their role effectively, must
achieve a form of organization which
permits high-level specialists activity
and also action on practical projects
at the community level. The United
States National Commission of one
hundred members, established in
September. 1946,'has gradually deve-
loped a network of panels of experts
and organizaticns to which programme
responsibility is assigned. In addition
to this vertical decentralization there
is also horizontal decentralization. The
holding of. regional, national and
State conferences has stimulated the
establishment of State and Local
Councils and Commissions of Unesco.
The United States Commission has
thus achieved the greatest degree of
popular participation reached SO far by
any of Unesco's thirty-six National
Commissions. The United Kingdom
Commission, which has a membership
nearly three times that of the United
States Commission, united its nine
separate elements-the United King-dom Committee and eight specia : ist
Co-operating Bodies-for the first time
this year, when they met together at
3elrU (In November, 1948, drew up two
resolutions, later adopted by the
General Conference, calling upon
Member States to assure that their
National Commissions were provided
with funds sufficient to enable them
to establish adequate secretariats, to
organize meetings and to accept
their programme responsibilities.
There is encouraging evidence that
many National Commissions are not
only attempting to carry ont projects
assigned to them in the international
programme, but are also taking the
initiative in establishing local pro-
grammes to further the aims of
Unesco in their countries.
Local programmes
I N Australia, for example, the her., tNational Seminar on Education was
organized in January, ! 949. attended
by forty-four teachers from all States
in Australia. Its purpose was to work
out methods and materials to teach
school children about the United Na-
tions and the Specialized Agencies.
Similar seminars and meetings have
heen held in the Phiiippines and the
United Kingdom. New Zealand also
plans to hold a seminar on this subject.
The Kansas State Commission in the
United States has embarked upon a
"Community Affiliation Programme"
for the exchange of people and cul-
tural materials to develop friendship
between towns in Europe and Kansas.
The Australian and New Zealand
National Commissions have developed
Fellowship Schemes to bring scholars
and students from Asia and the Paci-
fic countries to Australia and New
Zealand tor periods of study and re-
search. Many ccuntries which have
had long established fellowship pro-
arammes have developed new schemes
to assist war-dvastated areas.
The need for close and regular con-
tact between the National Commis-
sions and the Unesco Secretariat in
Church House, Westminster on It
April.
Meeting with its advisers on 17
June, 1949, the Danish Commission deci-
ded to increase its membership from
twelve to twenty-four, and to esta-
blish a small executive committee to
00 responsible for the programme bet-
ween meetings.
Commissions reorganize
IN Brazil, which has a Commission (LB.E. C. C.) of one hundred members
seventeen State Commissions have
been set up so far. A National Confe-
rence of these Commissions was held
in Rio de Janeiro from 24-31 August
1949, to inform the general public
about the aims and activities of
Unesco, and to stimulate popular par-
ticipation.
Other National Commissions reorga-
nised this year, or planning establish-
ment on a more permanent basis,
include the Austrian, Hungarian, Ita-
lian, Turkish and South African Com-
missions. The Indian, Luxembourg and
Swiss. National Commissions have
been established during recent months,
and provisional National Commissions
exist in Afghanistan, Burma, Sweden
and Thailand. In Sweden the'esta-
blishment of a provisional National
Commission of fifteen members has
preceded the formal acceptance of
membership of Unesco. National Com-
missions, like all healthy organizations,
are thus subject to growth and change.
It must be admitted, however, that the
thirty-six commissions listed as estab-
lished in Member States have not
all attained that degree of heolth and
vitality which permits them to play an
effective part in the work of Unesco.
Some, in fact exist only on paper,
and have not been provided with the
means of translating their official de-
crees into action. It was for this rea-
son that the Meeting of Representa-
tives of National Commissions, held at
Pans led the Third Session of the Ge-
neral Conference (Beirut, November-
December, 1948) to recommend that
this Director-General and other senior
members of Unesco should visit Mem-
ber States and National Commissions.
The Conference also called for an
extension of the plan to enable seer..
taries of Commissions to visit Unesco
House in Paris. During the course of
1949, therefore, Dr. Torres Bodet haa
attended meetings of the National
Commissions of France, (22 January
Belgium (21 February), United States
(30 March-2 April), United Kingdom
(11 April), and Denmark (17 June
Dr. Kuo Yu-Shou attended the first
meeting of the Indian National Com-
mission (9-10 April) and that of the
Philippines National Commission (7
June). Two Unesco representatives have
also been sent on liaison missions to
Brazi) and Turkey.
Unesco's U roots"
A T the same time the secretaries of theHungarian, Norwegian, and New
Zealand National Commissions and the
Vice-President of the Colombian Natio-
nal Commission visited Unesco Housr
and representatives of the Indian, Mexi-
can, South African and Swiss Com-
missions will arrive shortly. Other Go-
vernments which have indicated their
acceptance of similar invitations are
the Argentine, Austrian and Polish
Governments. The purpose of these
visits is to enable representatives of
the Commissions to study the work of
the Secretariat and to make personal
contacts with senior members of the
Organization.
Measures such as these will be
developed on an increasing scale for
it is realized that Unesco without Na-
tional Ccmmissions would be, as the
Polish Delegate to the Mexican City
Conference put, it,"like a tree with-
out roots"
12
