1ro IWrite about the Indian litera-
H tures of to-day is an undertaking,
in scope and form, comparabl  to
discussing the literatures of all Europe.
One can give an impression only, a
silhouette at best Shrimati Sophia Wadia,
the founder-editor of the Indian P. E. N.,
has written :"A renaissance has been
taking place in modern India under the
impact of the literatures of the West."
It is that aspect which I wish briefly to
touch upon.
There are at least ten important
languages in India, all active and vital.
Among these must be included English,
which is the language of the intelligentsia
and a unifying force* par excellence. Its
importance can be gauged by the fact
that there are a thousand English periodi-
cals in Bengal alone and as many others
in South India. It is significant that the
Hindi and Urdu works of the great novel-
it Premchand, for instance, are very
rarely known to readers in other parts
of India except through their English
translations.
R a bin d ran a t h Tagore is known
throughout India large : y through his
English renderings of his own works ; in
fact, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for
his translation-interpretation would be
more apt-of his own Bengali poems,
Gitanjali. Iqbal, the great poet of the
Panjab, is only known to readers outside
his province due to Herbert Nicholson's
translation of his monumental poem : The
Secrets of Self.
Poetry
II N. what has come to be styled Indo-Anglian Literature, several writers
have made a remarkable, if not al-
ways great, contribution to literature.
R. C. Dutt produced in brilliant hexameters
The Ramayana and the Mahabharata,
and introduced for almost the first time
India's great epics to the English-speak-
ing world. Toru Dutt, whom Edmund
Gosse called"the fragile exotic blossom
of song", produced superb poetry before
she died at twenty. And in the realm of
poetry one cannot omit to mention Saro-
jini Naidu's Sceptred Flute, which has
won world-wide acclaim, the mystic and
lyrical poetry of the sage Sri Aurobindo,
and Rabindranath Tagore's GttanjoH.
High praise must also be Riven to Bharati
Sarabhais'The Well of the People and to
the poetry of B. Rajan and Harlndranath
Chattopahyaya.
The Novel
II N the novel special attention must begiven to Mulk Raj Anand, (whose
Coolie, written directly in English,
has been translated into thirteen lan-
guages), Humayun Kabir's Men and
Rivers, R. K. Narayan's The English
Teacher, Bhabhani Bhattacharya's So
Many Hungers, Raja Rao's Kanthapura ;
in the short story by R. K. Narayan, in art
criticism by Ananda Coomaraswamy's
The Dance of shivs ; in autobiography
by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and in mis-
cellaneous and philosophical writing by
K. S. Srinivasa Iyengar, Swami Viveja-
nanda, Mahatma Gandhi and Professor
Radhakrishnan.
By and large, the literature produced
in English is tinctured by Western techni-
que and is therefore a superb synthesis
and so in many ways much more inter-
national. (1)
AGORE and Iqbal are giants. Bothwere poets of the same stature but
Tagore was a father of many forms :
he was a novelist, short story writer,
INDIAN LI'
And the Imps
In the New Indian Education great stress is put on handicraft training-inspired by
Gandhi (shown above with Pandit Nehru).
BY BALD
Author 01 several works 01 pOetry, essays,
essayist, thinker, artist, musician, dra-
matist and critic, excelling in every genre.
His astonishing genius-because so all-
embracing-has not as yet been fully
evaluated. Both Iqbal and Tagore realized
that culture could not survive without
being re-oriented and re-valuated ; that it
was essential to have it replenished and
invigorated by external influences ; that,
in fact, it was necessary to be a universal-
ist. Tagore was the genius who, while re-
maining completely Indian, was a true
world citizen.
Social conflict is the motif of the
modern Indian literatures and their every
aspect is discussed, treated and empha-
sized. A considerable amount of attention
is being paid to the translation of works
Secutitr scutpture is often found in Indian
temptes. Above. h} :"'ounC'". oman Writing a Love
letter" (8-Jlth Century) is from temple at Orissa.

ERATURES
3t of the West
ON DHINGRA
ays and a forthcoming novel,"Out of Time".
from foreign writers and titans like Shaw,
Kafka, Rolland and Gide are always in
vogue. Short stories, especially French,
American, Russian and English, are spe-
cially in demand, as are also travel diaries
and sketches and modern poetry and lite-
rary criticism. The thirst in short is al-
most insatiable.
The Modern Theatre
lrHiS has been the state of arfairsduring the last few years. Plays
have been written and produced
but these are mostly adaptations, transla-
tions or social farces, sometimes satires
or simply social or political propaganda.
So much attention has been given to the
facile form of the radio feature that the
creative capacity of most playwrights
seems to have been atrophied and
crushed. In the garden of poetry it is
different ; peasant poetry has been written
and lyrics have been sung and fine com-
positions made by Bachhan and Josh
and Hafeez. In the realm of poetry, at
any rate, the inspiration has not been
stilled and some exquisite poetry has
appeared. The general tendency is to
appeal to the masses.
The New India is emancipating itself
slowly from the shackles of foreign
"isms". Literature is to be measured by
the extent to which it enriches civiliza-
tion. Civilization may have its national
features or geographical profiles but it
must transcend all geographical boun-
daries. Literature is an expression of
what elevates man ; its aim the culture
ot the mind and its main effect to
ennoble it.
There must and will be a"rehabilita-
tion of the past"and, to use the words
of Ananda Coomaraswamy,"a process of
creative introspection preparatory to re-
newed activity... In India, as in Europe,
the vestiges of ancient civilization must
be renounced : we are called from the
past and must make our home in the
future. But to understand, to endorse
with passionate conviction, and to love
what we have left
behind is the only
possible foundation
for intellectual and
spiritual power. If
the time has hard-
ly yet come for
the creation of new
values... let us re-
member that time
and suffering are
essential to all cre-
action :'
(1) If one were to enumerate some or the
big names in the contemporary Indian litera-
tures, in the various languages other than
English, onc must mention Bankim Chandra and
Sarat Chandra and Tarashankar from Bengal ;
Prem Chand, Jainendra Kumar from Hindi ;
Iqbal, Josh, Akbar. Ismet Chughtai, Faiz from
Urdu ; K. M. Munshi. M. K. Gandhi from Guja-
rati ; Bhai Viv Singh, Mohan Singh from Pun-
jabi ; Masti Venkatesa Iyengar from Kannada ;
Vallathol from Malayalam. Quite a number of
these writers have happy been translated into
English and may, therefore, reach a wider
public.
