A Valley
How the Peasants oj Marbial
Helped Make the Haiti
Pilot Pro ject a Success.
HIS is a story of an obscure, mountain-bound region in the
Caribbean Island of Haiti called the Marbial Valley.
In this f rgotten, isolated corner of the New W rld, lying
north of the little village of Jacmel on the southern shore of
the island, there live some 30. 000 peasants of African origin. Afflicted
by tropical rainstorms and ruinous droughts, stricken with disease
and impoverished by land erosion, they tried to scrape together some
semblauce of living-or quietly starved. Not famine-which was Loo
oommon-place-but"extraordinary famine"were the words used by
the people of the valley to mark the periods of targe scale starvation.
The children were pathetically stunted and diseased.
Then, in this region of misery, something happened which gave
the people a new hope in life. A new spirit began to blow through the
Valley when a Unesco team arrived to set up a fundamental education
project to help them overcome their illiteracy, raise their living
standards and agricultural productivity and improve their health.
This story is filled with ups and downs, with moments of deep
dejection and despondency, periods when almost everyone believed
that the project would have to be given up as a failure.
Now, after two years of continuous struggle, the picture has
changed. The Marbial project which might have been called"The
Death of a Haitian Valley", has lived and grown.
The heroes in this story are certainly the peasants of Marbial
themselves, who in the darkest days of the project, demonstrated with
huge picket signs reading"Kebe 1'IneSko to"-which in Creole means
"Support Unesco hard."Another hero iI undoubtedly the social
anthropologist on Unesco's staff in Haiti, Dr. Alfred Metraux, who
though striken by fever and with slender funds at his disposal, refused
to admit defeat and rallied the Marbial peasants to his side.
The Marbial experiment began as a lone Unesco-Haiti venture just
over two years ago. Today it is a joint international undertaking, with
the World Health Organization, the Viking Fund, the Rockefeller
Foundation and other organizations taking part.
The Unesco Courier presents the story 0 (a BaitiaD Vaßq.
The turning point in the Haitian pilot Project : the
peasants of Marbial (upper lett) mobilize to prove
that the experiment can work. Their picket sign
reads :"The Fond-Melon Co-Operative ; Support
Unesco Hard !" Above, an aged peasant of Marbiat.
(This photo and aU those on page 6, 7. 8 were taken by
Raymand K'. eboe. Reproduced by kind permission of
PICTURE POST.)
