-,...,. .,...
THE WAY OUT ?
By. SirJohn Russell
MR. HUXLEY'S thesis is extreme-
ly ingenious and well argued.
I disagree compl tely with most
of his conclusions, through there are
some with which I fully concur, in par-
titular, the necessity for more food pro-
duction...
The way of mankind has always been
and in all probability will always be
hard... (and) only by strenuous and
well-directed work can our problems
ever be solved ; but I am convinced that
man can conquer his difficulties as they
ar'se...
I must emphasize the impossibility of
setting any limit to the world's resour-
ces Estimates made forty years ago are
in most cases far below those that would
be made now...
Tt is equally impossible to forecast the
world's population over any long period.
Judging from the past, it seems safe to
assume that where standards of living
r : se, birthrates tend to fall and the pro-
portion of older people tends to increase ;
on the other hand, among peasant popu-
lations where children are an economic
asset the birth-rate is high.
I shall deal mainly with world food
resources : these depend on the amount
of land available, the use to which it is
put, and the size of the population that
has to be fed. The world population is
estimated at about 2, 200 millions and
in present rate of increase at about
20 millions per annum. 1 shall assume
that this rate continues...
The total land area of the world is
about 36, 000 million acres, but only a
fraction of this can be cultivated.
The food problem is most ser : ous in
Great Britain, North-West Europe (ex-
cepting Denmark) and India. The pos-
sibility of trouble'was foreseen by
Malthus in 1798, but the fears were
al'ayed by the opening up of North
America... Fears of impending shortage
have been recently revived by Sir John
Orr, first director of the Food and Agri-
culture Organization ; Sir John has
raised a new problem : the need for rec-
tifying the under-nutrition from which
a large part of the world suffers.
More Land to Grow
Food
Expanding
Into the Dry Regions
THE customary methods of farmingbreak down when the annual
rainfall is less than about 18 inches.
The North American pioneers who
pushed westwards beyond. the 18-inch
legion met the difficulty by developing
methods of soil management which con-
served moisture, and by modernizing the
ancient art of irrigation ; these methods
were all empirical but they worked...
The most effective way of overcoming
dry conditions is by irrigation. Two
general methods are adopted : from
canals and from wells.
Canal irrigation is largely concentrated
around the Himalayan rivers flowing
southwards in India, Pakistan and
Burma and eastwards into China. The
greatest of these schemes is the Lloyd
Barrage in Sind, which waters five
milUon acres of crops. the various Punjab
schemes water nearly 18 million acres ;
it is known that the Tigris-Euphrates
system has great possibilities for the
future.
River valley, developments, on the
pattern of the Tennessee Valley Author-
ity, are under way in many parts of
the world. In such projects as Brazil's
San Francisco Valley Authority, French
West Africa's Niger River Authority,
and Mexico's Papaloapan River Commis-
sion, irrigation is but one factor in a
unified system of cower, flood control
and soil rehabilitation.
The other method, irrigation from
wells, also very ancient, has been greatly
improved by the tube wells first de-
veloped in California and much used by
Sir William Stampe in India... (Stampe
has urged that the possibilities in Africa,
Arabia, and the Middle East should be
investigated.)
One of the most serious troubles fol-
lowing on the so-called"conquest of the
drought"has been soil erosion : for long
it was hardly perceptible... By 1935,
however, it had become so serious that
a Soil Conservation Service was set up
in the United States ; similar services
have been established throughout the
British Commonwealth. Methods of pre-
vention and rehabilitation have, now been
devised and are being continuously im-
proved... Soil erosion is no longer the
menace it was-though constant watch
by experts is needed.
Widening The Temperature
Range
CANADA led the way in pushing the
wheat belt further north into the re-
gions where the summer, though hot
enough for the growth of wheat, did
not last long enough to allow of ripen-
ing... The possibilities of the regions.
still further north are being studied by
the United States in Alaska and by the
USSR. While no surplus could ever be
expected, there is the hope of producing
more and better for those who live there.
At the other extreme, cultivation is
teing pushed into the hotter regions in
Queensland... The most ambitious sche-
mes are in Africa.
Science And Wheat
Production
THE beneficent results of applyingscience to agriculture are well seen
in wheat production. This is really
a dry region enterprise...
The United States greatly increased its
production of wheat during the war,
and from being onlv a small exporter,
Ol even an importer, has during the war
years produced an additional 300 million
bushels, much of which was exported.
There seems every justification there-
fore for expecting that the great wheat-
supplying countries can expand their
production considerably if the need
arises...
Maize, Rice. And Millets
O F the other food grains, the threechief are maize, rice and the
millets Maize is very fully studied in
the United States, its chief producer, and
the remarkable results obtained in recent
years with the new hybrids give hopeful
promise for the future.
The millets have not vet been ade-
quately studied. Their tolerance of hot.
dry and poor conditions make them
extremely important as food in the semi-
arid hot regions of India and Africa...
They are almost a virgin field for the
geneticist and plant breeder, but the
pioneering investigations promise noeasy or spectacular successes.
Rice is more important because rice
taters probably outnumber the wheat
eaters. It has been much studied in India
in recent years and already the yields
on the experimental farms are not
uncommonly double those obtained by
the neighbouring peasants.
The Overcrowded
Lands
A. Great Britain
And N. W. Europe
YIELDS per acre and output per
man (in Great Britain) are among
the highest in Europe and are
three or four times greater than in
Eastern Europe and the USSR ; they are
still rising. No British expert believes the
limit is yet reached...
But our cultivated area is still shrink-
ing. and as the population rises, more
imports will become necessary ; not
however beyond the visible possibilities
of the exporting countries to supply. The
inexorable condition is, of course, that
they must be paid for bY harder work.
Without this the standards of life must
inevitably fall.
(Continued on Pace I)
Sir John Russell

The success of dry
farming methods is
illustrated by the
Indian millet crop,
shown on the left.
For the adjoining
land (on right) dry
farming was not
employed.
Photo. bv permis$ioll
of Sir John Russell
F. R. S.
(Continued from preece Pace)
The countries of North Western Eu-
rope. including Western Germany, art
in a similar position, needing to import
food : they were, however, taken as a.
group, self-sufficient in meat and dairv
produce before the war. There was then
much movement of grain from the
Danubian countries and poland to the
W east that the net Euronean deficit of
wheat and rye amounted only to about
5 per cent of the total consumption... If
the former east-west movement of grain
is restored, Europe's bread supplies will
be secure, but unpredictable political
factors come into play. There is no phys-
icaì reason why North Western Europe
ahould suffer food shortage as long as
there is peace.
B. The Indian Problem
F'ale the food problems of theworld, India's and Pakistan's are
probably the most difficult. The
population has grown rapidly, from
3M millions in 1921 to 338 millions in
1931 and 389 millions in 1941 : increases
of 10 and 15 per cent respectively...
Population increases at the present
rate would, unless yields rose, require an
additional 3 or 4 million acres of food
THE W AY OllT ?
crops each year. There still remains
uncultivated land equal in area to about
70 % of the cultivates land, some of
wbich can be utilized. But the greatest
hop is by increasing the ryots yields.
More irrigation, more fertilizer, better
cultivation and better seed are all being
developed.
India's rainfall, however, is always
uncertain, and importation of rice is
always necessary. There are abundant po-
tential supplies in Burma. Siam and Indo-
China... It seems impossible, however.
for India's food problems to be solved if
the. population goes on increasing at its
present rate.
C. The Double Task
II NCREASING output per man, andM output per acre, in the old occupied
lands, is really the crux of the
world food problem ; for it is estimated
that some 90 0/0 of the world's food is
consumer in or near the land of its pro-
duction and only about 10 0/0 is put on
to the world market ; further, that about

70 0/0 of the world's population are food
producers or their direct dependents.
It is this 70 0/0 who determine the
f ? te of the remaining 30. Presumably
they would be the last to feel the pinch
of hunger, should it come. Most of them
are peasants, their chief produce is
grain, and much of their farming is
very inefficient, with no great possibility
of improvement as it stands.
There no longer are peasants in Great
Britain but there were up to the 18th
century, and their systems and output
were on a level with those of the present
t'a\ peasants of Eastern Europe. Great
Britain then changed its system... Denmark
ef`ected the change later ; the farms had
to be smaller, but a system of co-opera-
tion has been developed which has led
to high efficiency of production and a
standard of living that is the envy of
most of Europe and far above anything
in Eastern Europe and beyond.
The fundamental difference between
the peasant and the Western farmer is
that the peasant is a self-sufficing unit,
producing mainly for himself and his
f&mily, selling only his surpluses, while
the Western farmer is producing for the
market...
One farm worker in Eastern Europe
ard the USSR produces food equivalent
to the needs of some four or five persons.
including himself, but in Great Britain
and Denmark the production per man
is about four times as high, one man
feeding perhaps 10 or 20 persons, who
th".. s become available for other occupa-
tions.
D. New Methods of Farming
N entirely different system, collec-
A, tire farming, has been adopted in
Soviet Russia. This requires large
éfeaf< of land... ; it is perhaps better
suited for grain production than for
livestock.

The first it countries produced 2/3 of the world'a wheat in l9tfi. Thep are
also lare exporters. Many others, especially China, India, Italy and France,
also produce large amounts of wheat, but consume it all at home. Probably
4-ã million acres in Canada, 5 1/2 millions acres in Australia, and larsl
areas ill t. he Arentine. eoulti stiU De cultivated..
Peasant farming can undoubtedly be
transformed into more highlv productive
system capable of producing more food
of higher nutritive value and of raising
output both per man and per acre.
Meanwhile, the steady advance of
sciences and the practice of agriculture
in the more advanced countries can be
applied elsewhere when conditions per-
mit. Drainage, better use of fertilizers,
better seeds, better control of disease,
hp. vo increased the already high rate of
output in Great Britain... The average
yie'. d of milk is 600 gallons per cow, but
the good farmer expects 1, 000 or more.
There are still possibilities of improve-
ment even in the most advanced
countries. Losses due to insect pests and
diseases are still high ; the current esti-
mate (which is little more than a guess)
put : them at 10 per cent in Great Bri-
tain, while livestock diseases are estimat-
ed to lose us about 6 million full year's
rations of meat, 200 million gallons of
milk and 1, 500 million eggs.
The Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion has estimated that mites, pests and
rodents destroy some 65 million tons of
the world's grain per annum-more than
the entire wheat and rye supply for all
Europe before the war...
E. Prospects for the Future
or who sets of problems are involvedin world supplies : the rehabilita-
tion of European agriculture, and
the expansion of our present agriculture
to supply a world population increasing
at its present rate.
The first of these should fairly soon
be accomplished ; first grain supplies.
then, more slowly, dairy produce and
meat should come back to pre-war level...
The permanent expansion of food pro-
duction can be achieved by increasing
the area under cultivation, by increasing
cutput per acre, and by seducing waste
? rd tosses.
Only about 5 to 10 per cent of the
world's land area is yet used for food
production to any extent and there
remain considerable regions in the tropics
that can be utilized with the help of
syrthetic insecticides and modern im-
plements. In all countries there still
remain areas that could be cultivated.
The average output per acre is every-
where considerably less than is obtained
bý the best of the farmers, and much
levelling up is possible by education and
cc-operation ; agricultural science and
engineering are continuously advancing
M) d even in the most advanced countr : es
yields are increasing. The causes of the
wastes and losses are gradually being
better understood and brought under
can trol. As. the need arises, expansion
of food production can continue and it
is impossible to forecast how far it can
go...
F. The Hard Way
HE change that would most increasefood production would be to trans-
form the present predominantly
peasant type of rural economy to a
mixed farm type as adopted in the more
& ("1\ anced countries.
While increases in food production can
be confidently expected, they will cer-
tainly involve considerable work and
much scientific study. There is no pros-
pect of easy living :' the lot of mankind
will always be hard. Each nation must
either produce its own food or produce
goods and services that will induce other
coup. tries to produce it for them.
E is impossible to estimate the rate
of agricultural progress and therefore
impossible to suggest a safe rate of
increase of human population. At pre-
sent rates there is no need to fear'
shortage in our time, except in India.
and parts of Africa. The possibilities of
srirntific advancement are incalcuhble.
What is needed is to put these advances.
into practice, and to treat the problems
; nternationally. The kev to the problem
of FOOD AND PEOPLE is international
oc-operation.
