Professor E. Zerega
FOMBONA
(venezuela)
By drawing the attention of Member States to
the duty of creating and fostering better
understanding between the peoples, Unesco
has induced us to raise the question of human
solidarity in a novel and striking fashion at our
Conferences. The Organization has asked us to
look into our consciences and to reflect on this
sense of solidarity, seeking the most effective means
of carrying into practice tne sprit wmcn msplI'es tne urgamzatIOn
and the aims which it has set itself.
Is not science international, by nature and definition ? Does it not
find its native soil in every land ? A famous scientist is as much
admired and respected abroad as in his own country, sometimes more,
if we believe Christ's saying that"A prophet is not without honour

save in his own country."But this scientific fraternity in its various
forms-exchanges of teachers, student fellowships and the inter-
national recruitment of scientific staff-can have no influence (or
very little) on the growth of a sense of unity in public opinion, unless
the creation of an international public opinion is brought about by
other means.
This sense of solidarity and understanding is indeed already found in
statesmen, philosophers, sociologists, scientists, writers and artists who
are well acquainted with the present-day world. These men feel as
true members of humanity, they are conscious of the interdependence
of mankind, and they can derive happiness, comfort and hope from a
fine and noble action or a scientific discovery, wherever it may take
place. They are tragically and agonisingly afflicted at the idea of
those catastrophes, near at hand or far away, which, if they occur,
will not be local or national but general and universal, like those
foreshadowed in the Apocalypse.
This state of mind and sensibility, which are still confined to a few,
must be developed in all human beings, by giving them access to the
great currents 01 information and opening their hearts to the emotions
of all mankind. That is the duty of the State which Unesco has
asked us to define and hopes to see carried out in practice.
