ILLITERACY AND HUNGER
- TWIN EVILS OF ASIA.
Vital Link Between Education and Living Standard is Theme for 11Mysore Seminar
THE connection between learning to
read and tending a plot of rice
land may seem rather vague-
until you sit down at the table of
a typical illiterate farmer in Asia.
There the tight bond between ignor-
ance and hunger is demonstrated, and
much more forcefully than by any
column of statistics.
Multiply this man by hundreds of
millions and you have an idea of what
education must accomplish in its
indirect role as a farm tool. The land
of Asia can be made to produce more
food, but the men who work it are
isolated, by ignorance, from new and
improved techniques.
This is the reason for the Unesco
Seminar on Rural Adult Education in
Asia, to be held from November 2nd to
December 14th at Mysore under the
joint auspies of Unesco and the
Government of India. For many
years, educators, agricultural scientists,
health specialists and other experts
have been conducting rural education
projects in many areas. Unfortun-
ately, this work cannot be done at a
large, centrally-located university
under the eyes of an international
audience. By its very nature, it is
carried on in more remote regions.
The purpose of the seminar which will
bring together men from such widely-
separated nations as Australia, Saudi
Arabia, China and Great Britain, is to
pool the results of these experiments
and extract the best of the tehniques
tested.
This international meeting in India
is part of a continuous pattern of
Unesco seminars for educators. The
first was held in France a little more
than two years ago ; the most recent
one has just completed its work in
Brazil. The Brazil seminar, which
took up"Illiteracy in the Americas,"
provided a wealth of new material on
adult education which will be brought
into Mysore.
In operation, the seminar at Mysore
will be divided into four sections. The
first is the only one which could pos-
sibly conform to a narrow int2rpre-
tation of the functions of education.
A symbol of Asia's illiteracy problem. This Indian letter writer does a thriving business on
the steps of a New Delhi post office. The typewriter is a modern innovation to deal with
business letters.
(Photo Y. Lasmar.)
There methods of fighting adult illi-
teracy will be discussed In its other
sections, the seminar will cover such
fields as the improvement of farming
methods, better hygiene and health
education techniques, and the training
of the former illiterate to play a
healthy role in society.
The men and women who are run-
ning the seminar are anything but dry
theorists. Typical of the organizers is
Dr. Spencer Hatch of the Inter-
American Institute of Agricultural
Sciences, who will act as chairman of
the group studying the economic side
of rural adult education.
Dr. Hatch has become a leading
exponent of the rural centre, where,
on plots varying from one to fifty
acres, the local farmer is shown how
Í1e can improve his land and his way
of life. A rural centre, as set up by
Dr. Hatch in Costa Rica, Mexico, and
India, usually consists of demonstra-
tions in strip cropping, erosion control
and the proper methods of handling
cattle and poultry. In addition, a
community kitchen is organised for
farmwives, and, in some centres, model
houses have been built out of local
materials-often nothing more than
whitewashed mud.
Dr. Hatch bristles when you describe
his rural centres as"model farms."
These he considers as attempts by
outsiders to do things better than the
farmer could possibly do them himself.
As a rural educator, he is completely
opposed to absentee experiments. He
and his students work and live on the
job they undertake.
In addition to Dr. Hatch, Unesco is
sending two other experts to the
seminar. They are Dr. Frederick Rex
of its Fundamental Education division,
and Dr. Ismael Rodriguez Bou of the
University of Porto Rico. Three other
United Nations specialized agencies,
the International Labour Office, the
World Health Organisation and the
Food and Agriculture Organization-
will send observers to Mysore. Parti-
cipants from eighteen countries are
expected at the seminar.
It is this international mingling of
men and their ideas which is one of
the most important principles of the
Unesco seminar-over and above its
printed agenda. The farmer in Asia,
his wife and his family, for whom the
Mysore seminar has been organized,
may hope for a much better chance to
escape hunger and misery if they have
the educational resources of a good
part of the world working to help
them.
