Torres Bodet's Sorbonne Address
On Declaration of Human Rights
We publish below the full text
of the address delivered on
February 24, 1949, by Dr. Jaime
Torres Bodet, in the large
amphitheatre of ttz, e Sorbonne
on the occasion of the solemn
consecration of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
in the presenc. e of the President
of the French Republic, M. Vin-
cent Auriol, M. Yvon Delbos,
French Minister of National
Education, M. Paul-Boncour,
/orTfter Prime Minister, and M.
René Cassin, Vice-President of
the Conseil d'Etat.
AY I begin by saying how
...., proud I feel to be here
among you on such an oc-
casion.
Within the walls of the University
of Paris, the League of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizen today pays
tribute to what the United Nations
have achieved in their determination
to frame a Universal Declaration of
Human R : ghts. Unesco wholeheart-
edly joins them in that tribute. The
day when our Beirut Conference
learned that the United Nations As-
sembly had adopted this Declaration
the delegates with one voice express-
ed their w'sh that Unesco should
bend its efforts towards publicizing
among all classes of society a docu-
ment which holds out such bright
hopes for humanity. On 29 December
I called upon the Member States of
the Organization, to participate in
this work of disseminatlon. Of all
the answers to my appeal, today's
demonstration is one of the most
significant. In saying that, I am
thinking of the enhanced value
which attaches to the voice of France
by v. rtue of its history, a history that
has been wholly devoted to the ser-
vice of a civilization in which man
shall be able to express himself both
individually and collectively.
Nothing in your country clams to
lie outside the domain of man, neither
the beauty of your monuments, nor
the ordering of your institutions, nor
the clarity of the most famous among
your written works. It would be dif-
ficult to offer mankind a body of
contributions to humanity better cal-
culated than the sum of yours to.
meet the call for freedom and inte-
grity.
Other cultures have attained in
philosophy, in the arts and in litera-
ture, heights which command our ad-
miration. But in that mental atmo-
sphere, lucid yet not frigid and ima-
ginative without being Utopian.. which
is the climate of France, there is
never the feeling that other, cultures
are fore. gn. The realization is ever
present that there can be no health-
ier or more solid foundation for the
peace of the world than agreement
among men in the spirit of justice
and truth. In that spirit of justice
and truth I recognize alike the most
enduring aspect of your striv. ngs
and Unesco's essential goal.
Rights and Dllties
lr HE League of the Rights df Manand of the Citizen as always
been an active force in assuring, the
triumph of that spirit. Its vigilance
has never relaxed ; it has never lack-
ed courage or resolution in denounc-
ing injustice and demanding redress
tor the innocent.
The Universal Declaration of the
Rights of Man has focussed your
labours and our own efforts in their
true perspective, which is the wish
for universal progress. I do not claim
to pass judgment on this Declara-
tion in its details. I am not unaware
of the reservations and even the cri-
ticams that have been made about
it. Moreover, every right connotes a
corresponding duty. Perhaps, from
this standpoint, not enough import-
ance has been attached to the sug-
gestion made by Mahatma Gandhi
on 5 May, 1947, to my predecessor :
"I learned from my illiterate but
very wise mother", wrote the apostle
of non-violence,"that the rights
worth preserving are those which re-
sult from duty done. Thus the very
right to live only becomes ours when
we fulfil our duty as citizens of the
world".
Two Decisive Questions
IH ERE I wish only to put twoquestions, but they are decisive
ones, and ones which each of us no
doubt asks himself. The first is this :
What will be the practical value of
a. Declarat : on which makes no pro-
vision for legal sanctions ? Would it
not have been better to bind the
signatory States by a Convention
which would have had the force of
a contract ? And the other is this :
What interpretation will each people
put on the Declaration-What. mean-
ing will be given in each country to
such general concepts as freedom of
expression and information ?
Do we not run the risk of seeing
the political security of the State in-
voked to justify curtailment of that
freedom ? Worse still, have we not
cause to fear lest certain men, with : n
a political party or government ad-
ministration may take it on them-
selves to decide of their own author-
ity where the polit : cal security of the
State beg : ns and ends ? And. at the
opposite pole, do we not also run
the risk of seeing the masses of the
people acknowledge that freedom of
expression and information is effec-
tively secured in a society in which
news, even though it escapes govern-
ment censorship, rema : ns the raw
material of an industry and trade
which are often subordinated to the
interests of what are in fact mono-
polies ?
These few remarks are by no means
intended to detract from the im-
portance of the Declaration, but
rather to make it clear how closely
Unesco's very future is bound up
with its application. In the absence
of a certain unity in the conceptions
which the various peoples form of the
principles of culture, the practical
results of any international declara-
tion can at best be only uncertain
and precar : ous. That is why, at the
moment, I am not unduly perturbed
by some of its shortcomings.
In the present state of the world,
a more coherent and ambitious mani-
festo would have been no more than
a hypothetical forecast without any
grip on reality. The very thought of
reinforcing the Declaration by a list
of penalties or of g : ving it the legal
character of a convention is a for-
cible reminder to us of the use which
the more favoured countries could
make of the decree of an interna-
tional tribunal, always ready to sum-
mon before it States which are eco-
nomically and milltarity weak, but
usually much less ready to put strong-
er States in the dock.
Á Proclamation of honour
im* HE Universal Declaration of theRights of Man is, in my opinion,
the richest in promise of all the in-
ternational texts to which the govern-
ments have subscribed since 1945 in
order to give life to the San Fran-
cisco Charter and to create a firm
bond between that Charter and the
Constitution of Unesco. It is the first
international manifesto which lists
the rights of the individual and
clearly states the conditions which
all States claiming to respect the
freedom and dignity of the human
personality are required to observe.
It is a proclamation of man's honour.
It comes at the right time to a world
where in all spheres collective forces
are uniting to destroy the human
being, whether with the object of
propagating the creed of a regime or
of preserving a state of society favour-
able to the minorities possessing
power and wealth. It is an urgent
appeal to remind governments that
man exists, that he is not an auto-
maton at'the beck of systems of
political or financial domination, and
that he must be considered as an
end and not as a means, as the one
end which interests each of us to the
same degree.
Such an alarm call brings us a
message from all our brothers, white
and black, Asiatic and Indian, learn-
ed and ignorant, rich and poor. It
must resound in all such precincts
as these, which have been built to
house intelligence, to safeguard man's
creative power, his frail destiny as
a"thinking reed", free and respon-
sible.
T he Seed of Progress
II T is not by chance that the Uni-versity of Paris placed at the
disposal of the League of the Rights
of Man the famous building from
which she dispenses education so
conducive to strengthening the work
of Unesco. We, too, feel in a measure
the beneficiaries of its activity, se-
cure in the knowledge that we also
are pledged to the course which will
help to shed light in that most vul-
nerable, and for that reason often
most inaccessible of citadels, the
heart of man.
But let us be quite clear. Man's
assent to what is best in men-their
capacity for compassion and under-
standing-unfortunately does not
depend solely on intelligence. That ; t
assent is innate in Man and is, as
it were, the seed of his progress. If it
is true that science and culture form
the most favourable climate for the
growth of this seed, it must not be
forgotten that science and culture
are, by nature and vocation, instru-
ments of peace. They must there-
fore dedicate themselves, selfessly
and without reserve, to improving the
lot of the masses. Today, when the
world is passing through a material
and moral crisis, an inner circle of
intellectual Brahmins might open a
dark gulf between man and men, be-
tween peace and justice, between the
intellect and civilization.
A Boy and A Map
AL.'AY I repeat to you a story
which was popular among
diplomats before the war ? An Eng-
lish university don had invited to
his home a few of his intellectual
friends. But their conversation was
continually interrupted by one of the
host's sons, a boy of six or seven,
who kept on pestering the guests
with questions. In order to get rid
of him, his father thought he would
set him a game taking some time.
He tore up a large map of the world
which was lying on the table and
told the boy not to come back until
he had stuck the map together again.
He thought he would get rid of him
in this easy way for some consider-
able time.
He was greatly surprised when the
child returned a few minutes later
with the work completed.
They were not long in discovering
the secret of the young cartographer.
The map had been printed on paper,
on the other side off'which was the
silhouette of a man standing erect.
To put the pieces in order, the child
had no had to rely on his knowledge
of geography, no doubt very inade-
quate. but on something much more
tangible, the visible structure of
human beings. Thus, by reassembling
the picture of the man. he had reas-
sembled the map of the world.
Is there not an important lesson
for us in this story ?
It is only by thinking of Man and
by endeavouring to refashion him (to
refashion his conscious mind, his
love of good) that we shall succeed
one day, without too many hesita-
tions and errors, in giving a new
political contour to the earth, and
in remaking the social and economic
map of the contemporary world.
Towards'If'orld Citizenship
HAT is the duty of, Those who,like you in this University and
ourselves of Unesco, are devoting
their efforts to winning Man, through
culture for the common adventure
of humanity. Unesco's main task is
to find men, individuals, among the
citizens of all nations, among the in-
habitants of all countries. Individuals
speaking different languages, sing-
ing different anthems, rallying to
different banners, but all of whom,
despite the unfortunate disparity of
their resources, endeavour to over-
come the same anxieties : poverty.
fear, ignorance and disease, to the
end that economic and cultural con-
ditions more equitable for all may
enable them to reach self-expression.
Yes, we are looking for individuals.
But amid so many threats and com-
promises, where are they to be found ?
During the war they disappeared,
swallowed up by the Moloch of the
Army. Today, after the signinf of
armistices, when'peace should be
established, we still hear the groans
of the individual behind the ram-
parts of narrow nationalisms.
That voice is drowned by the din
of every kind of propaganda. Often
it reaches us distorted by those who
should be most concerned to trans-
mit it to us faithfully. And, what is
most appalling, the absence of the
individual, his submission to the
dictates of factions, endangers the
working of an international system
whose final end is indeed a universal
policy and economy, but which must
nevertheless rely on local, national or
even regional realities.
Unesco has entered the lists against
the perils of this disappearance, this
submission of'the Individual and has
engaged all its resources in the task
of awakening in the conscience of
the peoples the inner summons to
world citizenship. In such a task the
help of the intellectuals of France
will be of great value to us.
A Solemn Responsibility
The Universal Declaration of Hu-
man Rights confronts us with'a
solemn responsibility which we can-
not evade : it is for all of us to ensure
that each of these rights becomes a
reality in all circumstances and in
all places. It is not by decrees that
we shall succeed, but by a common
effort, in which each will contribute
his part, whether by understandin
or by persuasion. For, in the words of
one of the greatest poets of our time,
"the individuality of Man is price-
less, for it is that alone which enables
us to realize the universal".
Monsieur Ie President de la Reps-
blique :
My last words are addressed to
you, whose presence today, in the
amphitheatre of a University so dear
to us all, has the significance of 3-
testimony of which the world has
never been unheedful.
You show us that France is proud
to acknowledge Man's creative
mission.
Nothing could be in closer har-
mony with the traditions of the
people to whom the world owes the
glorious principles of  789. And the
Universal Declaration of the United
Nations is inspired in many of its
clauses by those principles.
Testimony of such authority is to
Unesco both an encouragement and
a promise. I am grateful for that en-
couragement and deeply stirred by
that prrunisa