FOOD FROM THE SEA
IT has been said that whenever a
shoal of herrings touches the Nor-
wegian coast a village springs up.
This statement is true of many other
lands bordering on the sea. Just as
peasant communities grow up and
prosper where the soil is rich, men
have always settled in places from
which fish can be easily caught.
That this has been so from the
earliest days of mankind is shown by
bone remains and drawing of fish in
palaeolithic caves. But it has often
happened that fishing villages have
decayed and become deserted. The
fish have disappeared and the fish-
ermen have been obliged to follow
suit.
The fluctuation of fish stocks was
long a mystery. Some attributed
the phenomen to sunspots or phases
of the moon. Only in the last
50 years has scientifc method been
applied to the problem. It has been
found that the migration of fish
depends on roughly the same causes
as the migration of men-that is, on
the supply of food, the temperature
and the availability of shelter. A bad
year for the microscopic form of plant
life called plankton may severely
reduce the stock of fish, just as a
drought decimates live-stock ; a heavy
swell can have the same effect on the
sea vegetation as a spring hailstorm on
ally decides what should be cultivated
each year on different kinds of soil
so as to yield the best output, the
fishery experts now strive for the
"optimum catch"-one big enough to
leave just the right number of fish
in the area, thus garanteeing the
maintenance and steady increase of
the stock.
Ninety-eight percent of the world's
annual catch of fish is hauted up from
waters north of the Equator. It is
likely that the North Sea and North
Atlanti. : : are exploited to the limit.
But, as Do. Kask, chief fisheries bio-
10gÍst of the United Nations Food
and Agriculture Organization, told
the recently held Pan-Pacific Science
Congress in Auckland, New Zealand,
the World's greatest ocean, the
Pacific, is virtually untapped. One
rookery of seals in the Bering Sea
consumes four times as much fish a
year as man catches during the same
period in the whole of the Pacific.
ENORMOUS RESOURCES
I T is difficult to assess the foodpotentiality of the ocean depths,
but experts seem to agree that the
resources are enormous. An indi-
cation of the undiscovered possi-
bilities was provided when the
riddle of the so-called false ocean
by Lars LIND
the crops. A change in the water's
temperature forces the fish to migrate,
either horizontally or vertically.
But there are also man-made
fluctuations. Overfishing in one area
may lead to a long period of poor
hauls. Happily, however, man has
also succeeded in increasing the supply
of fish by large-scale transplantations
from one area to another, : by"manur-
ing"the seas and by artificial fertiliz-
ation.
Like agriculture, fishing has now
become a science. The fisherman's
equipment has developed from crude
hooks and spears to the highly special-
ised gear used at the present time.
There is, for example, the"atom-
. trawl", which is able to fish at all
depths, and the echo sounder, used to
locate shoals of herring and cod.
Asdic, the war-time invention used to
spot submarines, probably will soon
be used for the same purpose.
Just as the agriculturist scientific-
bottom was solved. Marine scientists
were long puzzled by the finding of
occasional bottoms where the water
should have bee much deeper. An
enterprising Norwegian sent down a
movie camera and the exposures
revealed that the bottoms really were
schools of cod-fish.
In spite of news techniques and
increased knowledge of the animal
kingdom of the seas, many areas still
remain almost untouched. Modern
fishery methods are applied only in a
limited number of countries. The
main cause for this poor utilization of
the ocean riches in face of the crying
need for increased food supplies lies
in faulty human organization. It is
here that international co-operation
comes in. Since 1902 the Interna-
tional Council for the Exploration of
the Sea, with headquarters in Copen-
hagen. has carried out a good deal of
scientific fishery research. It has also
promoted a number of conventions.

such as those establishing size-limits
for various kinds of fish and provid-
ing for the introduction of closed
seasons.
The Food and Agriculture Orga-
nization of the United Nations also
takes an active interest in fishery
problems, acting as adviser in areas
where primitive methods and gear are
still being used. The organization
supplies the secretariat for the recently
established Indo-Pacific Fisheries
Council. which will seek to alleviate
Asia's acute food shortage. The over-
all aim of these international bodies is
to bring about a rational exploitation of
the vast water-fallows of the world,
covering about three fifths of the
globe.
Realization that the seven seas
constitute larders crammed with food
has led the nations of the wortd.
which not long ago fought each other
over fishing rights, to work together
to develop this important food supply
for the common good.
