Ploughing on a 55-degree Slope at Viani,
THE V ! AN)
ASSOCIATED PROJECT
VI, ANI, in Colombia, is typical of
the communities to be found in
the Andes mount ins. Covering
about j, 500 hectares, it is located in the
upper limits of the coffee belt at an
elevation of 1, 6oo metres. On its steep
and rugge. d landscape the slopes average
between 35 and 50 degrees and reach
down to deep narrow valleys where level
areas large enough to allow the building
of a normal-house are difficu'tt to find.
There are no roads in Viani except
the main street that, goes through the
village, and the 6, 000 inhabitants of the
community have to use an intricate
network of trails up and down the slopes
to reach their widely scattered homes.
For transport, they use horses and mules,
and all farming operations to raise the
principa) crops-coffee, corn, yuca, ani-
seed, bananas and sugar cane-are per-
formed t) yt) and.
After centuries of wear and tear, the
soil of Viani is nearing complete
exhaustion and as the wearing-out pro-
cess continues, the helpless farmers feel
more and more insecure as they find
no means of preventing their soil from
being eroded away.
The salvation of the people of Viani,
as is indeed the salvation of most of the
people of Colombia and other parts of
South America along the Andes moun-
tains, is soil conservation and. particu-
larly the effective control and preven-
tion of soil erosion.
It was because Viani was considered
as a typical rural area of Colombia that
the Colombian Government chose it as
the site for a fundamental education
project, which it called <&lt;Model Rural
Community».
A model community
THE M. inisters of Education. Eco-
nomy and Agriculture agreed on a
joint action to develop on an experi-
mental basis a model community, and
for this purpose they established a cen-
tre of Social Anthropology under the
sponsorship of the school located at
Viani. The new institution, whioh was
named the Civic Centre, was supplied
with adequate buildings and staff any
its director became the ex-officio direc-
tor of the Viani project.
'Finally, the Civic Centre asked that
Unesco establish an Associated. Project
in Viani and last March, on the request
of the Colombian Government, Unesco
sent to Viani Mr Patricio Sanchez, a
young and energetic soil conservationist.
of the U. S. Department of Agriculture.
After studying the community and its
people for several weeks, Mr Sanchez,
in co-operation with Mr Gabrie) 0spi-
na, head of the Viani Civic Centre,
began to take positive action.
'First of alp, he conducted a series of
group discussions with the farmers of
Viani, so as to bring home to them the
magnitude and seriousness of the soi)
erosion problem in their community
and to plan with fhem the practical
steps which they themselves could take
to stop it.
Then, : Mr Sanchez talked to the
school teachers of Viani so as to show
them how eaucation was closely plinked
with the problem and to urge them to
associate the question of soil conserva-
tion with the school curriculum in allgrades.
Finally, ; he organized the rurat youth
of Viani-those aged between f2 and
15 who had completed their-Mtfabe-
tismo !- and for whom there would nor-
ma) iy have'been nothing in store but to
revert back to their traditional exis-
tence. He explained to them that their
future would be of their own making
and that they could be a factor in
making their community a better place
in which to live, To do this, he told
them, they must take on the responsi-
bility of helping to prevent the further
wearing out of their land.
Beginning to realize
ArFTE>R four months, Mr Sanchezreports that the people of Viani are
beginning to realize that they can con-
serve their soil and that they alone can
prevent soil erosion through the imme-
diate, united and consistent application
of effort and intelligence,
HIs plans, however, do not end with
soil conservation for he feels that the
larger problem is human conservation
through education, of which soil con-
servation is only one of the major
means.
What Viani now needs, he considers,
are the services of a practical agricul-
turist who would help the farmers to
raise more and better crops per hec-
tare of and. There is also an urgent
need for a domestic economist to visit
the homes to show the women and girls
how to plan better meals for the fa-
mily. how to care fo !. children, the aged
and the sick and generally how to make
their homes more comfortab'e places in
which to live.
Finaitv, Viani needs a health specia-
list to show the people how disease can
be prevented and an educationist to help
in the reorientation of the educatIOnal
system and the modification of the
schools curriculum so as to make educa-
tion the key to improved living condi-
tions.
As far as possible it is hoped to
recruit these experts locally or from
Central and South American countries.
One of the aims of the project is to
develop local leadership for its further
impiementation. and later, its extension.
to the other Colombian communities
and other parts of Latin America.
