:"STUDY ABROAD"
OVER 10. 500 AWARDS
"tìì ;'\ Fellowship Handbook
A French printer in the little town of Fontenayaux Roses, near
A'Paris, oiled up his presses on November 17, 1948-the same dayas the opening of the General Conference in Beirut-and began
running off final proofs in English of a unique Unesco publication
c : alled"Study Abroad-International Handbook of Fellowships, Schol-
arshipsand Educational Exchance".
The first volume of its kind ever to appear, the Handbook covers

over 10, 500 opportunM'es tor m-
ternational study in 166 subject
fields in twenty-seven countries.
The largest number of awards
is available in the various
branches of science. especiaHy
medical sciences and public
health, engineering, technology
and chemistry. The second sub-
ject is education and the third
social sciences.
In addition, the Handbook con
tains notes on the fettowship pro
aramme of the United Nations
and the Specialized Agencies as
well as summaries on the tech-
niques of fellowship adminisirat-
tion for those engaged in planniD&'
feUow5bip programmes. Fifteen
per cent of the reported topper-
tunities are unrestricted both as
to the naUonaUty ef eli&ible can-
didates and the subject field of
study.
The aim of the publication is
te iacrease the number and qual-
ity of candidates applyiD&'fer
fellowship. to sugrest to pros-
pective donors where new pro-
grammes may be dcvetoped. and
.. bring into perspectift possible
everlappings of emphasis and
areas ! of outstanding need.
The reporting countries are
Australia, Belgium, Burma, Can-
ada, China, Colombia. Czecho-
slovakia, Ecuador, Eire, Finland,
France, India, Italy, New Zealand,
Norway, the Philippines, Portugal.
South Africa, the United King-
dom and the United States of
America. These have also sup-
plied information on seven other
countries.
As Dr. Julian Huxley writes in
a Preface to the Handbook : This
Inaugural edition... is the first
of a series designed to provide
details of all available opportun-
ities for trans-national study and
organized arrangements made in
this fields.
"it should therefore, be of
practical assistance for those
wishing to travel out of their own
countries for purposes of study :'
The Handbook is published in
English and French and will be
distributed to Ministries of Educa-
tion, National Commissions of
Unesco. International non-govern-
mental organizations, universities.
educational periodicals and li-
braries throughout the world. It
is also on sale for individuals at
Unesco House, Paris, and Unesco
sales agents throughout the worid.
at the price of $1, 300 French
francs, or 5 shillings sterling, plus
postage.
