Paris Educators'Conference
Stresses World Point of View
modern type of school, dedicated
A'-tao the teaching of world under-
standing, has been growing in in-
fluence in widely separated parts of the
world during recent years. These"inter-
national schools", such as the Interna-
tional School of Geneva, with students
and teachers from many lands, have been
educating boys and girls for citizenship
not only of their own country but of the
world community.
Last month, the principals of 14 of
these schools in eight countries met at
Unesco House to talk over their exper-
iences and work out plans for closer co-
operation in the future. The conference
was the first of its kind ever to be con-
vened.
Among the subjects discussed were ways
of training teachers for work in interna-
tional schools, practical means of stu-
dent and teacher exchange, and a plan
submitted by one of the delegates,
for the creation of a group of schools
situated in different countries, but united
as one world-wide institution.
Teachers'Training Course
THE greatest difficulty facing"pioneer"- schools which stress international
education in their curricula, the con-
ference agreed, was to recruit teachers
with a real international spirit. To meet
this lack of trained teachers, the con-
ference decided to organize a 6 to 8
weeks'course, in the summer of 1950,
which will provide teachers and pro-
spective teachers with an introduction to
international schools and seek to develop
the international outlook in the teachers.
The schools represented at the con-
ference also agreed to provide a"follow-
up"period of practical experience for as
many as possible Of those who attend
the study course. These teachers will be
attached to existing schools as observers
and may also be called on to assist in
the work...
International Diploma :.' .
THE school directors agreed to experi-ment with the award of an inter-
national diploma to their pupils in 1950,
the minimum requirement for which
would be a satisfactory knowledge of a
second language and the completion of
a thesis on a subiect of international
interest. This would serve as one means
of encouraging an international outlook.
After discussing the possibilities of
instituting an international diploma
which would be valid for college or univ-
ersity entrance in any country, the con-
ference felt that the practical difficulties
involved in such an award were too great
for it to be envisaged at the present time.
Schools Around the Globe
ACCORDING to a plan, submitted byone of the delegates, the new
world educational institution would be
based on the ideas and the interna-
tional outlook of the Werkplaats Inter-
national Children's Community at Bilt-
hoven, Holland, Mr. Kees Boeke, prin-
cipal of the Bilthoven school, explain-
ed the two salient features of the school :
teaching was along modern lines follow-
ing, as far as possible, the interest and
needs of the children themselves, and
decisions were taken only with the un-
animous approval of teachers and pupils.
He pointed out that the entire"chain"
of proposed new schools would work
along the same lines so that students
could easily move from one country to'the other without any loss of time in
their studies.
Learning Ways of Other Peoples
THUS an American boy, for example,could study for a time in Holland or
in England in an English speaking school.
During that time he would study French
to prepare himself for a year or
two in a French speaking school in
Belgium, France or Switzerland. There
he would continue his studies in the
various subjects and in the meantime,
perhaps, concentrate on Spanish to en-
able him to finish his secondary school
training in South America.
All the time he would be in touch with
boys and girls of different nationalities,
would make friends with them and
deepen his understanding and apprecia-
tion of the ways and customs of differ-
ent peoples of the world.
The conference recommended that the
methods suggested by Mr. Boeke be
studied at a future meeting to be held
at the Bilthoven school itself.
From the reports submitted by each
of the school directors and educators,
much valuable information was exchang-
ed and the participants unanimously re-
quested Unesco to call a similar meeting
every year.
