TO BE CREATED
In Heart of Paris
N the seventeenth
century, the part of
Paris liying between
the churohes of
Saint Gervais and
Saint Paul was a
rich and prosperous'
quarter containing
many fine build-
ings. Situated on
the right bank of
the Seine, close to the Islands of La Cite
and Saint Louis where Paris was founded,
it was also the scene of many important
historical events.
But, time and history have changed its
aspect. During the eihteenth and nine-
teenth centuries many of the stately
buildings were transformed into apart-
ment houses and, under a slum clearance
plan put into operation during the Second
World War, dozens of houses were torn
down.
Before the war ended, however, archi-
tects had begun to draw up plans for the
preservation and re-adaptation of the
: remaining buildings for modern needs and
four studios together with flats to which
it may send its artists.
The Cite des Arts will, therefore, go a
long way towards solving the problem
facing many artists from abroad who at
present have great difficulty in finding
accommodations in Paris, owing to the
serious housing shortage.
M. Michel Roux-Spitz, a leading Paris
architect who has drawn up the plans for
the Centre, estimates that be. wees two-
hundred and two-hundred and twenty
studios and workshops, each having its
own apartment of from two to five rooms,
can be provided. The larger apartments
will be for those"students"who decide to
bring their families with them and will
be furnished and decorated in a simple
but attractive way.
The architectural design of the Cité
wit harmonize with its seventeenth
oentury surroundings and the construc-
tion will embody as much as possible the
traces of the past-foundations of former
buildings and the moulding and figures
that have been saJva ( ; (ed from them.
As part of the original reconstruction
The reconstruction plan of the area outlined yin the map above.
The Cite des Arts will cover the largest of the four blocks with
(top, right) the Hotel d'Aumont and its gardens. Artists'flats
and common rooms (bottom) lock out over th Seine.
national students houses. The statutes
of the new centre will be similar to those
of the University City except that it will
welcome both mature artists and art
students
The scheme is being directed by a com-
mittee set UD in France under the patro-
nage of the Academy of Fine Arts and
the City of Paris. Similar committees have
been formed in other parts of the world,
principally in Scandinavian countries,
with the aim of raising cap : tal for the
project which, it is estimated, will cost
about one-thousand million francs.
This sum Is to be split into two-hundred
shares of five million francs each. rep-
resenting the cost of building and fur-
nishing a studio or workshops with its
own flat and will allow for each con-
tributing country to share in the cost of
restoring a former mansion for use as a
"City Hall".
In this way. a country subscribing
twenty-million francs will be allocated
scheme two entire houses of the
Louis XVI period and a third from an
earlier period were taken down stone by
stone, numbered and piled for future use.
Thee three houses will be rebuilt exactly
as they stood two-hundred years ago and
will become the studios and homes of the
artists.
There will, however, be no attempt at
standardization. In following the form of
the original buildings, the architects have
been able to plan varying types of studios.
Generally speaking. sculptors will have
their workshops on the ground floors of
buildings so that blocks of stone and other
heavy working materials can be delivered
to them easily.
Painters, as far as possible, will be
given studios facing the north, on the
first and second floors. Other studios and
workshops are planned for engravers and
architects.
On some of the ground floors is is in-
A 17the century map of Paris showing (bottom) the church of St. Gervais, the River
SeinP and (top right) the Isle of St. Louis. Outlined in black is the central sector
of the ara the Paris City Council plans to reconstruct. The Cite des Arts will occupy
the upper right hand btoctt.
tended to install book, are and antique
shops to serve the needs of the Cite.
The administrative headquarters of the
Centre will be housed in the histor : c
Hotel d'Aumont, built for the Duke d'Au-
mont by the famous seventeenth century
architects, Le Vau and François Mansart.
At the time of the French Revolution
the house was bought by a contractor
who later sold many of its furnishings,
the paintings on the ceilings and even the
staircases. Finally, it became part of a,
pharmaceutical factory, but in 1936 it
was bought by the City of Paris au-
thorities who wished to preserve and
restore it.
Work has already begun on its restore-
tion and a giant woodeR"umbrella"haS
been built to protect it from further
damage by the weather.
In its completed form the new"Cit, y
Hall"Iwill comprise an exhibition hall for
paintings, engravings and other art works.
an art library, administrative offices und
accommodations for the Director of the
Centre.
The huge cellars with their vaulted
ceilings which were formerly the kitchens,
will become a lounge and concert room.
The whole will constitute a sort of In-
ternational Cultural Centre where artists
from many countries will be able to hold
exhibitions of their work and compare
ideas and techniques.
Eventually it is hoped to extend the
Hotel d'Aumont by adding a new win on
the west side. This did not previously
exist but the architects believe that it
fonned part of the plans of the original
builders, and was never completed be-
cause of insufficient money.
Originally the hotel had its own gar-
dens, but these have long since disap-
pearled. It is intended to lay out new ones
following the lines of the former ones and
to plant trees along each side.
On the south side of the Cite, borderingthe Seine, an entirely new building will
be constructed with a series of archways
allowing an unrestricted view over the
river toward the Isle of Saint Louis and
at the same time enabling the passer-by
to see the gardens of the Cite and the
façade of the restored Hotel d'Aumont..
This building will contain a restaurant,
lounges, lecture rooms and a number of,
guest rooms, the whole fronted on the
riverside by a long terrace.
The finial form of the Cite will be that
of a hollow square with gardens, squares
and trees in the centre and the studios
and apartments round three sides. Most
of the fourth side will be open to view
from the street, but enclosed by railings..
Completely self-contained, the Cité will
have a single entrance on the north side
and will be far enough away from the
main streams of traffic to ensure the
calm and quiet required for creative work.
The construction of the Cite has been
embodied in the general plan for rehabi-.
litating this part of Paris, and has, there-
fore, the support of the Paris City
Council. Recently the Council approved
the granting of a ninety-nine year lease
on th ground for the project, and the
French state Council is drawing up fmd.
approving the statutes.
Promises of financial support have
been obtained from several countries and
it is expected that work on the world's
first international City of Arts will soon
be under way.

The Façade of the Hotel d'Aumont, future headquarters of the Cite, as it will appear whea reconstructed

tne construction 01
new ones so as to
house some 5000 peo-
ple-about half as
many as had previou-
sly lived there.
Until recently.
however, only a small
part of these plans
had been carried out
because funds were
lacking.
Now, thanks to an
idea put forward by
a Finnish painter,
M. Eero de Snellman
it is hoped to begin
work shortly on the
restoration of the
central sector of the
area to its former
o. architectural beauty.
M. de Snellman's
idea was for the
creation, partly out
of existing buildings,
of an international
"City of the Arts"to
which painters, sculp-
tors, musicians, en-
gravers and other
artists would come
from all parts of the
world to work and
study in a unique
setting.
Paris already has
its international Cité
Universitaire which
cÖffiorises nineteen
