UNESCO'S
Of all Unesco's activities thost
t tconm'tti with Arts and
'l tters. are. if not the most
difficult, at least the most delicate.
Th'ey are based on a fwndamental
tenet of modern thought-that
appreciation of art is essential to the
mental and moral health of everyone.
Any weakening of artistic feeling in
mankind in general indicates a decline
in the moral sense and prepares the
way for outbreaks of violence. Only
men endowed with some imagination
and, I might almost say. some creat-
ive imagination-which, fortunately,
is within the reach of all-can
understand others : if the artistic
sense were to disap, pear from mankind
or were to become the monopoly of a
jealous and exclusive caste, the world
would be a desert of dreary crime and
bloodthirsty folly.
The preservation of the artistic
sense where it now flourishes, and its
dissemination and fostering where
poverty, ignorance or the mechaniza-
tion of life have choked it, are cl0gely
bound up with Unesco's purposes. It
is principally through their art that
he peoples draw close to one another
and reach intuitive understanding ; and
to induce them to know and love their
fellows through art, in a world in
which artistic appreciation has become
general, is to induce them to iknow
and love what is deepest and most
characteristic in their feHows. The
difficulties are great. While, on the
one hand, Unesco's efforts must be
directed towards the mass of ordinary
people, in order to prepare them to
receive the message of creative minds,
and thus come under the heading of
dissemination. in other restpects. the
Organization's activities border on
creation itself. We know that no rule. ;
can be laid down for creative activity
and that, in every age, artists have
asked only to be left to woI'kj in
, r ; 1eace. But there would ! be serious
gawps in Unesco's work if the Organi-
zation could not secure their wilting
co-operation.
Unesco's Tasks
Unesco is already doing much to
popularize art. We cannot give even
a scanty idea of that wonk in a few
lines ; let it suffice to say that one
of Unesco's most important tasks in
the field of literature is to encourage
and promote the translation and publi-
cation of the classics of every coun-
try's literature, particularly in lan-
PROGRAMME
By Guido
PIOVENE
g-uages in which they have never
Ihitherto appeared. For instance. many
mamerpieces from other cultures will
be introduced into the Arab world. in
this way, it will be possible to incor-
. porate in the life of evlory people
vital elements which have so far been
lacking. The same purpose is served
by travelling exhibitions of eolour
reproductiones of masterpieces of paint-
ing' ; thanks to such reproductions,
which have reached a very high degree
of technical excellence, these master-
pieces will be known in countries they
could never have reached by other
means. : Furthermore Unesco has
undertaken to make a catalogue
of all recordings of classical and po-
pular music, and to foster their cir-
culation throughout the world, thus
opening up new paths for nusical
interchange, which is tun-day 0 diffi-
L'uit (Jne division tn (nescu is'Jeai-
ing with the fundamental problem of
the arts in education. Appreciation of
art must be aroused and cultivated
in men and women from their earl-
iest years, in the schools themselves.
By keeping their artistic sense alert.
we can preserve their mental balance
and give them a potent instrument to
help them to understand and love
others.
Two Fronts
Unesco's work is always carried on.
however, on two fronts. Every one of
its activities must contribute, directly
or indirectly, to the welfare of
mankind as a whole ; but each of
those activities is also designed to
enlist the intellectual leader of the
world in this COITlJT1on task. (Tn"s,, ()
"Museums are becoming an increasingly important factor in the education of adults
and children alike".

must not forget that onf of its dutie :-
is to bring to artists, as to all creative
minds, a new, hope and new influence,
a new persuasive force. Artists have
too often fomented division and hat-
red between men : and it would be
sad if the development of the artistic
sense among the common People
resulted only in opening their minds
to new notions of violence-which
is always a possibility. The. present-
day artist is conscious that. if his
work cannot flourish as a part of
international life but remains confined
within the borders of a single nation,
it has in it something ineffectual, al-
most unreal. Artists of nations which
are less favourably situated, whose
art, has difficulty in overstepping
frontiers, are thus almost inevitably
driven to confuse the radiating power
of art with political might, and to
encourage among their people either
the suspicious isolation of those who
turn their baoks on the world, or the
aggressive tendencies of those who
would subjugate it. It is not for
Unesco to offend artists by vain
preadhing, to whioh they would, in
any case, remain deaf, but to bring
them to live and act naturally as
world citizens, so that the internatio-
nal outlook may become second na-
ture to them. The enquiry which
Unesco is carrying out among artists
throughout the world on the obstacles
of every sort-political, economic,
or moral-which deprive their art
of complete freedom (an enquiry
\\1hich array lead to practical results
by the irresistible force of evidence
alone) is, in our opinion, an instance
of the unobtrusive work which
Unesco can legitimately do to foster
artistic creation. The ultimate aim of
Unesco is to ensure that the defini-
tions. of artists as free citizens of a
world which desires to be free, may
be understood in the fullest sense and
hecame an accepted truth.
