CZECH
Five-Year Plan
for Culture
Czechoslovakia is putting into operation a big cultural develop-
ment scheme as part of its Five Year Plan for improving the living
standard of the Czech people.
Recognizing that to obtain this higher standard of living
requires not only an improvement in economic conditions but also
an extension of existing cultural activities, the Law on the Five-
Year Flan, enacted last year, laid down that"the material and cul-
tural level of the people must be increased in such a way as to
develop to the full their mental and physical abilities".
Details of the cultural side of the Five-Year Plan were given by
"Prague News Letter", a Czechoslovak review, in its issue of
May 19 last.
It reports that 5, 386 million kopecs-over half of the total in-
vestments ear-marked for the cultural plan-will be spent on the
development of educational facilities, including the erection of
3, 700 new schools by 1953-an increase of 12 00 compared with 1948.
The construction of nursery, kindergarten, technical and me-
dical schools ha6 already begun in Bratislava and Kosice.
Basis changes have also been made more class rooms will be pro-
are now divided into four grades and more class rooms will be pro-
vided to house the increa4>ing number of pupils.
The plan also aims at the establishment of a new scientific
library research institutes and the construction or maintenance of
theatres, art galleries, museums and philharmonic rehearsal rooms.
The plan provides for the construction by 1953 of 18 Houses of
Culture and two Halls of Culture in the Czech Lands, while in Slo-
vakia, 72 Houses of Culture are to be built during the same periods.
All the cultural education of the people will be concentrated in these
institutions.
Mobilm libra. rises-some of which a. rue already operating-will
circulate literary works in all parts of the country, plams having
been made for the purchase of 150 motor cars and 30 buses for this
purpose.
New physièa1 culture facilitift, will include 1. 000 gymnasiums,
2. 700 training grounds and playing fields, 40 swimming pools and
15 physical culture centres.
In order to give people a better chance of education and recrea-
tion after working hours th Five-Year Plan'also provides for the
installation of cultural equipment directly in the factories. This will
include factory shools, libraries, cinemas and physical culture centres.
