OF HUMAN RIGHTSUNIVERSAL DECLARA
ARTICLE I All hUman, beings, are born. free
all equal In dignity and rights.
They arc endowed with reason and conscience
<lnd should act towards one another in a spirit
of brotherhood.
ARTICLE 2 l. Everyone is entled to all the
rights and freedoms set forth in
Unis Declaration, without distinction of any
kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, reli-
gion, political, or other opinion, national or so-
cial origin properly, birn or other status
. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made
on the basis of the political, jurisdictionnal
or international status of the country or terri-
lury to which a person belongs, whether it be
independent, trust, non-self-governing or under
any other limitation of sovereignty.
ARTICLE 3 Everyone has the right to life,
 liberty and security of person.
ARTICLE 4 No one shall be held in slavcry
 or servitude ; slavery and the
slave trade shall be prohibited in all their
forms.
 No one shall be subjected tor-
ture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment : \lllllg
 ARTICLE 6 Everyone has the right to recog-
nition everywhere as a person
before the law
ARTICLE 7 All are equal before the law and
 arc entitled without any discri-
munation to equal protection of the law. All
are entitled to equal protection against any dis-
crimination in violation of this Declaration and
against any incitement to such discrimination.
ARTICLE 8 Everyone has the right to an
effective remedy by the compe-
tent, national tribunals for acts violating the
fundamental rights granted him by the constitu-
tion or by law,
 No one shall he subjected to ar-
 bitrary arrest, detention or exile.
 Evcryunc is entitled in full
equality to a fair and public
hearning by an independent and impartial tribu-
nal, in the determination of his rights and
obligations and of any criminal charge against
him.
 ARTICLE II. Everyone charged with a pe-
nal offence has the righL to be
presumed innocent until proved guilty accor-
ding lu law in a public Lrial at which he has
had all the guarantes necessary for his de-
fence.
2. No one shall he held guilty of any penal
offence on account of any act or omission which
did not constitute a penal offence, under national
or international law at the time when it was
COMPLETE TEXT ADOPTED ON 10 DECEMBER 1948 BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF UNITED NATIONS,)
AT THE PALAIS DE CHAILLOT PARIS
2. Everyone has the right, of equal access tu
public scrvicc in his country.
3. The will of thc people shall be the basis
of the authority of government ; this will shall
be expressed in periodic and genuine elections
which sllall be by universal and equal suffrage
and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent
free voting procedures.
 Iveryune, as a member of socio-
ty, has the right (0 social secu-
rity and is enl idcd to realization, through na-
tional elIort and intcmational eo-opcration und
in accordance with the organization and re-
sources of each State, of the economic, social
and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity
and the free development of his personality.
ARTICLE 23 1. Everyone has the right to
 work, to free choice of employ-
ment, to jusl and favourable condilions of work
and to protection against unemployment.
2. Everyone, without any discrimination, has
the right to equal pay for equal work.
3. Everyone who wurks has the right to just
and favourable remuneration ensuring for hun-
self and his family an existence worthy of hu-
man dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by
other means of social protection.
4. Everyone has the right to form and to
join trade unions for the protection of his
interest.
ARTICLE 24 Everyone has the right to rcst
 and leisure, including reasonable
limitation of working hours and periodic holi-
days with pay.
ARTICLE 25 I. Everyone has the right to a
standard of living adequate for
till) health and well-being of himself and of
group unit of society and is entitled to protec-
lion by society and the State.
ARTICLE 17 t. Everyone has the right to own
property alone as well as in as-
sociation with others.
2. NO one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his
property.
 Everyone has the right to free-
ARTICLE 18 dom of thought, conscience and
religion ; lids right includes freedom Lo change
his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone
or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or beiief in
teaching, practice, worship and observance.
 Everyone has the right, to free-
dom of opinion and expression ;
this right includes freedom to hold opinions
without interference and to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas through any me-
dia and regardless of frontiers.
ARTICLE 20 . Everyone has the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly
and association
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an
association.
 I. Everyone has the right to take
part in the government of his
country, direclly or through freely chosen rep-
resentatives
committed. Nor shall a heavier penally be impo-
spd than the one that was applicable at the
time the penal offence was committed.
ARTICLE 12 No one shall be subjected to ar-
bilrary interference with his pri-
vucy, family, nome or correspondence, nor to
attacks UpOn his honour and reputation. Every-
one has the right lo the protection of the
law against such interference or attacks.
 ARTICLE 13 I. Everyone has the right to
 freedom of movement and resi-
dence within the borders of each State.
2. Everyone has the right to leave any coun-
try, including his own, and to return to his
country.
 L Everyone has the right to
seek and to enjoy in other coun-
Lries asylum from persecution.
2. This right may not be invoked in the case
of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-
pobtical crimes 0r from acts contrary to the
purpose and principles of the United Nations.
ARTICLE 15 1. Everyone has lhe right lo a
nationality.
"2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his
nalionalily nor denied the right to change his
natiotiaiity.
 ARTICLE 16 I. Men and women of full age,
without any limitation due to
race, nationalily or religion, have the right to
marry and to found a family. They are entitled
to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage
and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with
Lhe free and full consent of the intending
spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental
his family, indudiug food, clothing housing
and medieal eare and necessary social services,
and the rigllL to security iu the event of
unemployment, sickness, disability. widow-
hood, old age or other lack of livelihood in
circumstances beyond his control
:. 2 Motherhood and childhood are entitled to
special care and assistance. All children
wnethers born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy born in or out of wedlock, shal  enjoy
the same social ; protection
ARTICLE 26 I. Everyone has the righL to
education. Education shall be
free at least in the elementary and funda-
mental stages. Elementary education shall be
compulsory. Teehnical and professional educa-
tion shall be made generally avaible and higher
education shall be equally accessible to all on
one basis of merit.
2. Education shall be directed to the full
development of the human personality and to and to
une strengthening of respect for human rights
and fundamenal freedoms It shall promote
understanding, tolerance and friendship amongl
all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall
further the activities of the United Nations for
the maintenance of peace.
3. Parents have a prior right to choose the
kind of education that shall be given to their
children
ARTICLE 27 1. Everyone has the right freelyto participate in the cultural
life of the community, to enjoy the arts and
lu share in scientific advancement and its
benefits.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection
of the moral and material interests resulting
from any scientific, literary or artistic produc-
tion of which he is the author.
ARTICLE 28 Everyone is entitled to a social
and international order in which
the rights and freedoms set forth in this
Declaration can be fully realized
 ARTICLE 29 I. Everyone dulies to the
community in which atone the the
free and full development of his personality is is
possible.
2. In the exercise of his rights and freedoms,
everyone shall be subject only to such limita-
tions as are determined by law sotety for the
prupose of securing due recognition andrespect
for the rights and freedoms ofothers and of
meeting the just requirements ofmorality
public order and the general welfare in a demo- in a demi-
cratic society.
3. These rights and freedom may in no case
be exereised contrary to the purposes and
principales of the United Nations.
ARTICLE 30 Nothing in this Declaralion may
 be interpreted as implying for
any State, group or person any right to engage
in any activity or to perform any act aimed at
t the destruction of any of the rights and
freedom set, forth herein.