U NE of the most important sessionst in the history of Unesco's Execu-tire board came t   end last
month after a sev'n-day meeting in Par : s
from June 9 to 15. During this period,
the Unesco Executive body approved in
its entirety a programme for this Or-
ganization's participation in the United
Nations plan four technical assistance to
under-developed countries, agreed to the
opening of a Unesco regional office in the
Western Hemisphere, and voted the
allocation of special funds to help refugee
children in the Middle East and Greece.
In addition, the Excutive Board heard
and approved a report on the concrete
and practical work achieved by Unesco
in th* past four months, and approvrd a
draft programme and budget for Unesco
during 1950.
The Board also completed plans for
the Fourth Session of the General Con-
ference which is to take place in Paris
from September 19 to October 5. three
days longer than was originally planned,
in order to allow for a full discussion by
aU member countries of the plan for
technical aid to under-developed coun-
tries.
The Executive Board of Unesco, which
includes 18 members elected by the
General Conference, acts as a Board of
D : rectors for the Conference between its
annual meetings. Though each of its
members is from a different country, the
group represents the Conference as a
whole and its members are elected as
individuals and do not act as representa-
tives for their own governments. Thisyeaf. the Executive Board is being led by
one of India's most distinguished men of
learning, Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan.
and the noted Venezuelan inter-
nationalist. Dr. C. Parra-Perez.
i. Technical Aid Programme
IU NESCO'S plan for an extendedprogramme of technical aid to
under-developed countries was
approved in its entirety by the Executive
Board at its meeting last month.
Other UN SpeciaHzed Agencies such as
the Food and Agriculture Organization.
the International Labour Organization (\
and the World Health Organization have
also been examining the technical aid
plan. and a joint report. cor. Hiding their
views and suggestions along with those
of Unesco will be presented by Trygve
Lie, UN Secretary-General. to the Econo-
mic and Social Council which is meeting
in Geneva on July 4.
The slim suggested for the first two
years of the over-aU programme is
Unesco Board Votes Emergency
Aid F or Greek Refuee Children
<j
$ 85. 000, 000, Unesco's share of which has
been estimated at $ 16, 855. 500.
Unesco's aid programme provides for
assistance in technical, elementary and
fundamental adult education : the pro-
duction and use of materials for educa-
tion. including mass communication
materials, the technical needs of press.
radio and film : training of teachers and
other specialized personnel : plann : ng and
organizing of scientific research and
training laboratories ; and help in the
protection of national cultures.
In carrying out thIS programme. Unesco
will make use of different methods.
depending on the needs and requirements
of the under-developed countries.
The most dip'sect and immediate form
of technical aid that Unesco can offer is
to send advisers and consultants whose
work would range from administrative
advice to direct responsibility for estab-
lishing new types of institutions (such as
teacher training centres or scientific
laboratories) and guiding them for one or
two years.
Other. r methods Unesco can offer
include exploratory misstL. ns. permanent
regional services through field Science
offices, and a broad traming programme
covering fellowships, seminars, symposia,
experimental or demonstration projects
in fundamental education, and regional
training centres. Unesco also hopes to aid
under-developed countries by the distribu-
tion of educational, scientific and tech-
nical books and periodicals, the publica-
tion'of special pamphlets and mono-
graphs. and the setting up of scientific
and technical institutes.
(details 01 Unesco's proposals for
technical development will be found on
Page 11 of this issued.)
If Unesco's General Conference con-
firms the proposals already approved by
the Executive Board and if the Economic
and Social Council ratifies the general
plan for technical assistance, Unesco
will be ready to act in 1950.
