Unesco Creates Regional Office
in Western Hemisphere
 N important step towards giving
6."Unesco a moce direct representa-tion in the Western Hemisphere
was taken by the Executive Board when
it approved the establishment of a Unesco
Regional Office with its headquarters,
for 1949. at Havana. Cuba.
The Havana Office, which is Unesco's
first experiment in regional centres, is
scheduled to open on September 1st. Its
main task will be to make Unesco better
known throughout the Western Hemis-
phere. to increase contacts between
Unesco's Member States and the National
Commissions in the region, and to enlist
their full support in carryir. g out Unesco's
programme of cultural co-operation, since
this work is already being done by the
Inter-American Cultural Council of the
Organization of American States.
(Continued on Page 2)


(Continued from page 1)
The Office is being set up in agreement
with the Cuban Government, which has
offered a yearly contribution of $ 10, 000
towards its cost. Cuba has already placed
at the disposal of the new Office an
impressive building facing the Plaza del
Mayo and the large Havana bay, and has
agreed to provide diplomatic privileges to
the staff as well as customs and postal
franchise.
In the initial stages, the Regional
Office will concentrate its work on the
States of the Caribbean area (Antilles,
Central America, Colombia, Ecuador,
Mexico and Venezuela). Later, when it
has had more experience of regional
problems, this radius of action will De
gr-aduaIly extended. During 1949, the
Regional Office will be limited to a staff
of four, including a specialist in funda-
mental education.
The question of establishing regional
offices or regional centres has been a
subject marked by stormy discussions at
Unesco's General Conferences during the
past two years. Certain delegations have
strongly opposed the idea
of de-centralizing Unesco
through the creation of such
centres. The idea was first
proposed at the Mexico City
Conference in 1947 and after
much discussion agreed to in
principles, subject to consul-
tations and agreement be-
tween Unesco. the United
Nations and its Specialized
Agencies and the Organ : za-
tion of American States
(OAS).
Last year, at the Beirut
Conference, the presentation
of the results of these con-
sultations and a resolution
to create a Regional Centre
in Cuba again found dele-
gates divided in heated de-
bate. When it came to the
vote, however, the Confer-
ence adopted a resolution
instructing the Director-Gen-
eral"to establish as soon
as possible a Regional Office
in the Western Hemisphere"
in consultation with the
OAS and the UN family.
Before the Executive Board
finally approved the setting
up of the Havana Office last
month some of the nesita-
tions which had previously
marked the General Con-
ference meetings again were
felt. Although Mr. Tcnes
Bodet stated that neither the
OAS nor the UN or its Agen-
cies opposed the creation of the Regional
Office, some members of the Board ex-
pressed the view that a Regional Office
in the Western Hemisphere should be set
up with the technical and financial co-
operation of the Organization of American
States, which they pointed out, had great
educational possibilities for America and
"its close co-operation with Unesco would
be the best method of spreading Unesco's
ideas and action in North and South
America."
In agreeing, finally, to the immediate
establishment of a Unesco Regional
Office in Havana, the Executive Board
expressed its thanks to the Government
of Cuba for the assistance and facilities
it was extending for the opening of the
office and asked the Director-Gcneral to
consult with the OAS on the best ways
of collaboration between the two orga-
nizations. The Executive Board also asked
M. Torres Bodet to submit a report to
the Fifth General Conference, to be held
in Florence, Italy, next year outlining the
achievements of the Office, the expe-
rience gained through it and the possi-
bility of entrusting to it creative activities
within the framework of the Unesco
programme.
Aid to Refugee Children
In Greece and Middle East
FOLLOWING an appeal by the United
Nations calming on Unesco for aid
in caring for Greek refugee
children, the Unesco Executive Board last
month approved emergency steps to help
these Children.
The UN appeal, which was communicat-
ed to Unesco by Trygve Lie, following a
report by the UN Special Committee on
the Balkans, reported the news that the
number of refugees in Greece has in-
creased from 18, 600 in January 1947, to
666,000 in January 1949. This represents
one-tenth of Greece population. How-
ever, since this figure covers only those
who have claimed assistance and proved
their need, the actual total of refugees
in the country is estimated at nearer one
million.
The exact number of refugee children
is not known, but it is known that their
situation is one of the most tragic in
Europe today. Since October 1940, Greece
has been racked by war and upheaval.
The little ones under the age of nine have
yet to learn the meaning of the word
"peace". Over two years ago, Unesco
field workers had carried out a shprt
survey of the educational losses of the
country, and one of them reported :"It is
impossible to exaggerate the educational
losses". Unesco's"Book of Needs I".
published in 1947, states,"the saddest
sights in Greece are to be seen in the
institutions and schools for waf-handicap-
ped children."
But what about today, and the thou-
sands of new homeless refugee children ?
The Unesco Executive Board felt that
the United Nation's call for help could
not b= ignored by an organization which
is dedicated to the preservation of real
values in tomorrow's generations.
One fact, however, was sadly clear to
all the members of the Board. With its
very limited Reconstruction budget-
almost all of which had already been
allocated for other aid purposes earlier
this year-Unesco obviously could not
provide the sums needed to meet even
the minimum requirements of these re-
fugee children.
The Board felt, however, that if it
could at least make a small gesture-even
a symbolic gesture-this might spur on
its National Commissions and Unesco
clubs and other national and internation-
al organizations to make other gestures.
And these when added up from all the
groups in different parts of the world,
could go'into a fund which would really
achieve positive results.
The Executive Board, therefore, voted
to make an initial grant, from Unesco's
Reconstruction Fund reserve, of $ 10, 850,
"for emergency help of an educational
and cultural character, as a means of
providing a concrete token of Unesco's
desire to aid these refugees, in the field
The pictureque Cathedral Plaza, in Havana, a short distance from Unesco's Regional Office,
to be set up in the Cuban capital in September.
which is its special concern, and along-
side the other United Nations Agencies
which have come to their aid."
On the recommendation of Unesco's
Director-General, the Executive Board
also agreed that one of its members,
Professor Paulo de Berredo Carneiro, of
Brazil, would go to Greece, subject to the
approval of the Greek Government, to
enquire into the present-day educational
needs of the child refugee victims in the
country. The small sum of $ 10, 850, which
Unesco has voted, will be placed at
Professor Carneiro's disposal for use by
him in the manner and through the
channels he considers appropriate.
In the light of the information that
Professor Carneiro obtains, M. Torres
Bodet will draw up a plan of action
whereby Unesco, its National Commissions
and the international and national or-
ganizations which are associated with its
reconstruction campaign, can contribute
to the solut : on of the educational
problems of the Greek refugee children.
And as soon as the required information
is available, Unesco will launch a special
appeal to these organizations.
[A description of some of the condi-
tions in the Middle East refugee camp
school, written by a Unesco representa-
tive who visited them recently will be
found on Page 3 of this issue along with.
an urgent appeal made by Unesco
to raise $25, 000 order to continue oper-
ation of refugee schools in the Lebanon,
Syria. Transjordan, and in the JerichO
and Gaza areas of Palestine. ]
;
Proposed Programme
and Budget for 1950
HE Executive Board, during its week-long Session last month, had before
it for consideration a proposed
programme and budget for 1950 which
the Director-General had submitted for
its examination. The Board approved the
proposed programme for Unesco's fourth
year of activities and decided to recom-
mend to the Paris General Conference
the adoption of a budget totalling
$ 8. 962, 220, representing an increase of
$ 1, 200, 000 over the 1949 budget.
In its report to the General Conference,
the Executive Board stated its conviction
"that the activities and the funds pro-
posed remain at a moderate sca1e in
relation to the world's needs for educa-
tion, science and culture."
It should be pointed out that the pro-
posed 1950 programme does not represent
any drastic revision of the one adopted
at Beirut, which was designed to cover
at least two years'activities. Adressing
the Executive Board's Programme Com-
mittee, M. Torres Bodet described the
fact that he was presenting a smaller
programme while asking for a larger
budget, as"a realistic move.""Foe if
tangible aims are to be achieved,"he said,
"fewer projects and larger credits will be
necessary."Final decisions as to the
1950 programme and budget will rest
with the General Conference when it
meets in Paris this September.
