merely nominal self-government, where under a very clever camouflage
of so-called people's government the power is in actual fact con-
centrated in the hands of a small group.
In our eastern democracies the decisive influence is held bv the
people and we know very well that our people want peace. We are
trying with all means at our disposal to show to our people that they
are not alone in this peaceful endeavour, but that they have the
support of millions of people from countries of East and West. and
that there is a longing for peace in North and South, East and West
alike. This longing for peace is the only common denominator of
the most divergent sections of mankind. We are daily working for
the intellectual and moral solidarity of men. In this respect our
endeavours are in full accord with the Preamble of Unesco which
reads :.'thai a peace based exclusively upon the political and eco-
nomic arrangements of governments would not be a peace which could
secure the unanimous, lasting and sincere support of the peoples of
the world, and that the peace must therefore be founded, if it is not
to fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind".

Professor F. HERClK
(Czechoslovakia)
THE state is an instrument for governing
which passes through various stages of
historical development. I  di ferent periods
the state served the interest of different classes of
society, as for example, the aristocracy, the bour-
geoisie and the capitalistic class-for all of them
the state was an instrument of government. Under
all these systems the broad masses of the popula-
tion, the really creative part of the community was not properly
respected, its interests were not considered. On the contrary, we were
and we are at the present time, well aware of the fact that in many
countries the creative part of the population, the working class, is
receiving inadequate treatment. Our state system avoids all these
shortcomings, since it is based on the self-government of the broad
masses of the population. It is a real people's government, and not a
