UNESCO COURIER May 1949
WICHITA-ORLEANS
'Grass Roots'Internationalism
Achieves Positive Results
N. Y. T. and A. P.
William T. Salome (right) of Wichita, Kansas, U. S. A., meets Jean
Falaise, Deputy Mayor of Orteans, France.

lr HE town affiliation idea attracted international
attention early this month when war-devastated
Orléans, one of France's oldest ities, joined hands
with Wichita. Kansas, modern aircraft and farming
centre, in a programme of international friendship which
the Kansas State Commission for Unesco is encouraging
between Kansas communities and those of other countries.
The project was formally launched on May 7-8, when
Orleans and Wichita simultaneously celebrated the 520th
anniversary of the liberation of Orleans by Joan of Arc.
In Wichita, the Deputy Mayor of Orleans took part in a
festival which included a reunion of veterans of the United
States 137th Infantry Regiment, the liberators of Orleans
in World War II. This regiment was composed largely of
men from Kansas. Across the ocean in Orleans, the Mayor
of Wichita participated in the traditional Joan of Arc
festival.
Committees in both towns worked out a joint pro-
gramme. In Wichita, radio recordings of the celebra-
tions were made in English and French and exchanged
with transcribed messages from Orleans.
Wichita schools, camera clubs and civic
organizations collected school supplies,
art objects, pictorial materials, manual
training and sports equipment to be
sent to Orleans. Arrangements were also
made to send a group of Wichita citizens
to Orleans in July and August as"com-
munity ambassadors".
Educational Aid
. OME 15 other communit : es in
J Kansas, formerly the centre of
America's"isolationist belt', are
forming friendships with European cities
or towns through the Kansas State
Commission, which now has over 40 Coun-
ty Councils for Unesco affiliated with
it. Shipments of donated education'all
. and cultural materials to schools, uni-
versities and other institutions in Euro-
pean towns will be a feature of this
long-range programme for international
understanding.
The Kansas programme has been for-
mulated with the aid of Operation Demo-
cracy, a non-profit American ageny
which since 1947 has helped to"pair off"
over 250 American and European com-
munities. At this agency's offices at
369 Lexington Avenue, New York, there
is a waiting list of 40 more American
towns anxious to affiliate with comma-
nities abroad.
Most of the"adoption"towns are
located in five European countries-
France, the Netherlands, Luxembourg,
Germany and Italy. Unexplored fields
now being considered DY operation
Democracy are Korea, India and Yugo-
slavia.
Origin of Plan
*) m' HE exact origin of the town affi-liation idea is rather difficult to
trace in the welter of grass-roots
experiments in internationalism which
overtook America during and after World
War II. It is known, for example, that
Hudson, Ohio,"adopted"Souburg, Hol-
land, as early as 1943, Some of the
overseas relief agencies also used the
town-to-town formula as part of their
fund-raising campaigns in the United
States.
The movement gained its greatest
impetus, however, as a result of the
wide publicity given to the"Dunkirk
(New York)-to-Dunkerque (France)"pro-
gramme on Thanksgiving Day, 1946. ln
autumn, 1947, the town of Locust Valley,
Long Island, affiliated with the French
town of St. Mere-EgIise. With no little
optimism, Locust Valley proceeded to
incorporate its committee under the
name of Operation Democracy. The name
was as spontaneous as all the rest-a
peaceful mission on the part of ordinary
people, by and for the people everywhere.
This initial project was immediately
successful and drew many requests for
advice from other American communi-
ties. With voluntary aid. Operation De-
mocracy, in January 1948, established
headquarters in New :'ork, defined a
nation-wide programme and set in mo-
tion the machinery to make it work. The
programme was based on these princi-
ples :
People To People
1. Overseas aid at this stage must carry
a personal message from people to peo-
ple. It must be the forerunner of a two-
way exchange of friendships and ideas.
2. The community is a logical medium
for such an exchange. It can be mobi-
lized for action quickly and completely.
It encompasses all phases of social,
occupational and cultural existence, and
its basic structure is the same everywhere.
3. Community action atone internation-
al lines is in itself an important step
toward the reorientation of the nation's
thinking. It dramatizes and brings home
to the people of"our town"the down-
to-earth meaning of what the headlines
- and diplomats are saying.
Operation Democracy undertook the
following concrete objectives :
1. To encourage and develop interest
in town affiliation programmes through-
out the United States, and to explain
these programmes to communities over-
seas.
2. To provide an information service
for American towns, including details on
Communities overseas, advice on local
organization at home, the shipping of
gifts, liaison with voluntary and official
agencies and programme publicity.
3. To co-ordinate the efforts of affi-
liated communities with a loosely knit,
but basically integrated whole, with
common aims and unity Of pUl-po.
4. To keep abreast of changing condi-
tions abroad, diminishing or changing
needs, new cultural exchange opportuni-
ties, etc., and advise American Commu-
nities on these matters.
Operation Democracy saw cieany that
charity as dramatized by posters depict-
ing a starving child, or a ruined city, was
no longer enough. Such woros and
phases as"friendship","people-to-peo-
pIe understanding","grass-roots diplo-
macy"-these were the new by-words
throughout America. The aQency there-
fore stressed that aid per se should he
regarded as one phase of inter-commu-
nity relationship, a token of friendship,
an act between neighbours, that always
it should be preceded, and followed, by
friendly personal contact between donor
and recipient. Finally, that aid was to
be only a beginning in a long-range pro-
gramme of ever-widening contact between
two communities...
0L :.
Work With Unesco
CLOSE co-operation between Opera-
1'-./tions Democracy and various bran-
ches of the United Nations was
inevitable, and this is best illustrated uy
the present work : ng arrangement with
Unesco. Unesco State Councils in the
three states (Kansas, California and
Iowa), where Unesco is actively experi-
menting with popular participation in ; ts
programme, have recommended the Ope-
ration Democracy programme to its local
county commissions, and many local
groups have led their communities into
town-affiliation programmes. Here. in
line with Unesco's international objec-
tives, the emphasis is almost entirely on
cultural exchange and the sending abroad
of educational material and aid) :,.
As the need for emergency relet in
Europe diminishes, Operation Democracy
will urge-as it is now doing-greater
effort in the field of educational reha-
bilitation and purely cultural exchange
along Unesco lines. It will also attempt
to focus the attention of American com-
munities on areas which have been large-
ly neglected in the past. Above all,
however, Operation Democracy will con-
tin sue to expand its field of co-operation
with ALL GROUPS, and ALL AGEN-
CIES, and ALL PEOPLE working towards
international understanding. It is and
intends to remain a service organization
rather than a"movement". If at some
future date a"movement"based on the
town affiliation idea should arise, or 4
some already existing group such as the
U. S. National Commission for Unesco
should decide to adopt the technique on
a large-scale basis, Operation Democracy
will be happy to make available all the
technical services at its command.
