Delegations to Unesco's Fourth
General Conference this year in-
cluded over one hundred repre-
sentatives of permanent or provisional
National Commissions from the 41
countries where they have been
former.
Advantage was therefore taken of
their presence in Paris to hold two
informal meetings for an exchange of
views and information, and these took
place on September 23 and October 4.
under the chairmanship of Professor
Marcel Florkin, vice-chairman of the
Belgian National Commission.
The main subject under discussion
was the important meeting of repre-
sentatives of National Commissions to
be held in connection with Unesco's
Fifth General Conference in Florence,
next year.
The first official meeting of Natio-
nal Commission representatives was
held last November immediately before
the opening of the Beirut Conference
and was attended by members of 28
commissions. The purpose of such ga-
therings is to enable the members of
Unesco's National Cooperating bodies
to become better acquainted with one
another and to exchange ideas and
experience.
At the recent informal discussion it
was decided that a three day meeting
should be held before the opening of
the Florence Conference on May 22,
and that, if necessary, a further meet-
ing could be called before the confe-
rence ended.
Before the representatives considered
in detail the Agenda for the Florence
meeting, a long discussion was held
on a draft resolution proposed by the
Vice-Chairman of the Turkish Natio-
nal Commission, Dr. Tevfik Saglam.
"The Director-General is instruct-
ed to convene in the near future a
meeting composed of a member
from each National Commission or
National Co-operating Body, with a
view to co-ordinating the methods
of work to be applied in common, in
order to ensure that these National
Commissions, in their relations both
with Unesco and with their Govern-
ments, achieve better results."
The essence of the Tarkish proposal
was that a special expert meeting of
National Commissions representatives
of a maximum duration of three weeks
should be held quite separately from
sessions of the General Conference.
While this proposal was received
with great interest, many representa-
tives considered that the problems re-
lating to methods of work of the va-
rious commissions might be more
easily solved by the sending of Secre-
taries of National Commissions to the
headquarters of Unesco for periods of
study and consultation and by the ge-
neral discussion of common problems
at the annual meetings of National
Commissions held in connection with
General Conferences.
It was, moreover, considered imprac-
ticable to hold such a meeting before
the Fifth Session of the General Con-
ference. Finally, it was agreed that
the Secretariat should prepare a do-
cument on the implications of this
proposal for consideration at the Na-
tional Commissions Meeting to be held
in Florence in 1950.
AGENDA FOR FLORENCE
After a lively discussion, the repre-sent tives agreed that the Agenda
for the Florence meeting should
allow opportunities for reports and
discussion on the programme activities
and organization of the various Natio-
nal Commissions.
These subjects would include :
Organization of National Commission
Secretariats and the financial resources
at their disposal for programme acti-
vities ; action taken by Commissions in
response to requests from'the Secreta-
rill ; action taKen on their own ini-
tiative in support of Unesco's program-
me ; areas of activity in which they
may effectively engage ; methods of
work employed. by National Commis-
sions ; decentralization of activities
and relations between National
Commissions and non-governmental
organizations, e. g. Youth Organiza-
tions, Labour Organizations, Universi-
ties, etc.
The meeting would also consider the
report of the Secretariat on action ta-
ken to carry out the decisions of the
Fourth Session of the General Confe-
pence on liaison with National Com-
missions, and the report on the Turkish
proposal.
It was agreed that a Committee
consisting of the representatives of the
United Kingdom, the United States,
France and Belgium, should assist
the Head of the National Commis-
sions Division, in the drawing up of
the final Agenda for the Florence
Meeting, which should later be cir-
culated to all National Commissions.
The representatives at the Florence
Meeting will, therefore, come prepared
to speak with authority on the various
items in the Agenda, since a sufficient
interval of time will have been allowed
to enable National Commissions to
study these questions in detail.
MESSAGE IN ANCIENT GREEK
Relations between National Commis-sions and th  Secretariat, it was
agreed, had been more fruitful
and generally more satisfactory in 1949
than in previous years. Certain sug-
gestions for improvement in liaison
arrangements and on the subject of
documents for National Commissions
were made by the representatives of
Australia and the United Kingdom.
Mr. Gordon Menzies. the Head of

Central Administrative Services, re-
plying to representatives who had sug-
gested the need for improvement in
the content and distribution of docu-
ments, informed the meeting that a
Committee of Experts on documenta-
tion would meet shortly.
It was hoped, he said, that the find-
ings of the Committee would enable
the Director-General and the Execu-
tive Board to evolve a sound policy for
the future.
The co-operation of the National
Commissions in the distribution of in-
formation documents and publications
of Unesco was essential to the success
of any policy adopted by the Unesco
Secretariat. It was generally agreed
that « a two-way effort>&gt; was required
for the solution of liaison problems.
Before the close of the meeting, Pro-
fessor C. Eustathiades (Greece an-
nounced the creation of the Greek
National Commission for Unesco and
read part of a message addressed in
ancient Greek by the rresident of the
National Commission to the Dlrector-
General of Unesco.
The following Members of Delega-
tions attended the meetings as spokes-
men for their National Commissions
or Governments :
Mohammed Anas Khan (Afghanis-
tan), Mr. A. J. Nelson (Australia), Dr.
Hermann Zeissel (Austria), Professor
Marcel Florkin (Belgium), M. Gustavo
Medeiros (Bolivia), Mrs. Heloisa Al-
berto Torres (Brazil), U Ba Lwin
(Burma) Dr. Mei Yi Chi (China), Dr.
NataÜo Chediak (Cuba.), Mr. Hans
Kjems (Denmark), Dr. Hassan Fouad
El Diwany (Egypt), M. Marcel Abra-
ham and M. Yves Brunswick (France),
Professor C. Eustathiades. (Greece),
Mr Gustav Erdos (Hungary), Mr. P. N.
Kirpal (India), Dr. Zabihollah Safa
(Iran), Professor Samuel Sambursky
(Israel), Professor V. Branca (Italy),
Professor Joseph Naggear (Lebanon),
Professor Carlos Gonzalez Pena and
Dr. Victor Manuel Ruiz Esparza (Mexi-
co), Dr. John C. Beaglehole (New Zea-
land), Professor H. R. Kruyt and Dr.
C. A. Van Peursen (Netherlands), Dr.
Mariano V. de los Santos and Dr. En-
carnacion Alzona (Philippines), Pro-
fessor I. During. Mr. Nils Goude and
Mr. Rune Eriksson (Sweden). M. Emil
Oprecht (Switzerland), Dr. Tevfik
Saglam and M. Nadir Nadi (Turkey).
Dr. A. J. Van Zyl (Union of South
Africa), Mr. F. R. Cowell and Mr. Alan
Thompson (United Kingdom) and Dr.
Milton Eisenhower and Mr. Max Mc-
Cullough (United States of America).
The United Nations and various non-
governmental organizations were re-
presented by observers.
