Unesco To Start Feature Service
For World Press On July 15
STARTING on July 15. and every two
weeks thereafter, Unesco will be
providing a world-wide service t
the press to be called Unesco Features.
This fortnightly service is to be part of
a scheme to supply highly readable ma-
terial about the sciences, education and
culture, to over 2. 000 publications in the
Member States of Unesco, as well as
Germany and Japan. Texts will be offer-
ed in English. French or Spanish.
In addition, Unesco will make available
to publications supplementary feature
articles from time to time.
These may be either original
pieces written excJusiveJy for
the new Unesco service ot pub-
lished articles for which Unesco
has secured reproduction rights.
The new feature service will
offer to the press the same type
and quality of material-
although in expanded form-
that radio networks ace receiv-
ing from the now popular
Unesco World Review which is
being broadcast weekly to au-
diences of millions in 35 coun-
tries. Unesco features has re-
sulted from the same intensive
preliminary research that was
made before the Unesco radio programme
was undertaken.-,
MASS communications experts in fact,
have noted that whi : e some publi-
cations already have excel : ent sections
dealing with education, science and cul-
ture, many others have been unable, un-
til now, to obta'n such material regutarly.
The new feature service, which will be
supplied free of charge to the press, will be
an attanpt to help fill this gap for editors
and the reading public.
Although of interest to newspapers in
large cities, the service will be produced,
in the main, for provincial publications
and especial1y the press in lesser develop-
ed areas.
Each issue of Unesco Fatures will con-
sist of about 5, 000 words, containing short
items, telling of interesting and important
events in educat'on, science and culture,
that occur in various parts of the world,
phasis will be given to st. ories about
techniques used in different parts of the
world which have some particular local
appJication, Le., the successful efforts of
a community to educate children for
better citizenship.
Those of Unesco's activities of general
interest to the public will be included in
the service, as well as features on
Unesco's major themes, such as"Food
and People" and "Human Rights".
It is hoped that such articles will focus
public attention on these problems which
Unesco is currently stressing.
A regular column."World
Books", will review works from
various countries which con-
tribute to international under-
standing. Each issue of Unesco
features will also contain a
section devoted to the science
and their role in fostering world
cooperation.
UNESCO groups in theMember state are being
asked to help the Secretariat
in two ways :
First they can aid in the
distribution of Unesco features
by pointing out to editors
and longer articles, along the same lines.
All of these will be readily adaptable for
use by editors.
The new press service will include spe-
cially written features giving striking
examples of how nations are working
together in the fields of education, science
and the arts and examples of national
achievements in these fields which can
serve as gu : des for other countries. Em-


how its use will further the aim
of governments who wish to foster the
educational and cultural developments of
their citizens.
Secondly, they can forward to Unesco
Features, at Un2sco House in Paris, news
of education, science and culture in their
country which of significance for other
parts of the world. This will permit
Unesco to give wide diffusicn to research
findings, scientific discoveries and cul-
tural experiences that affect every day
life. Such items could come from edu-
cators in their schools, scientists in their
laboratories or even farmers in the fields.
Unesco Features will provide Unesco it-
seit with a ready made service for pro-
moting other programme projects of the
Organization. For example, one of
Unesco's activities is the"popular'zation
of science and its social implications".
The feature service will be one way in
which the media of mass communications
can be used to"diffuse scientific and
technical knowledge among all classes of
the community, so as to increase the un-
derstanding of advances in these fields".
For Unsco Features has been planned to
reach not only publications destined for
the general reading public, but those
devoted to such specialized subjects as
basic education, public health, agricul-
tural extension services, and public admi-
nitration."
It is hoped that the new press service
will provide a form of assistance to under-
developed countries, since many special-
ized publications, operating on meagre
budgets, and almost the whole daily and
weekly press in these countries will be
kept informed of developments in other
parts of the world. Here will be practical
articles telling of successful achievements
in other areas leading towards the elimi-
nation of illiteracy, the eradication of
diseases and the adaptation of modern
technology to agriculture and industry.
Here will be education and science"at the
service of economic progress". Here, in
sum, is a service by which the people
can be helped to help themselves, and by
which the press can fulfil its high ob : iga-
tions towards its readers and the com-
munity.


Italian children listen to a school broadcast. On the blackboard (cut. above. left),
the teacher has written"Repeat the fable you have heard on the radio"...
