UNESCO DIRECTOR-GENERAL
presents budget estimates :
million dollar increase
requested
D IRECTCR-GENERAL Jaime Tor-
res BOOet's Budget Estimates for
Unesco's work in 1950, totalling
8, 847, 000, have been transmitted
to the Organization's 48 Member
States. They will be officially placed
before the Fourth Session of Unesco's
General Conference, which opens in
Paris on September 19,
The Estimates, representing an in-
crease of about one million dollars
over the 1949 financial period, are de-
signed to cover all phases of Unesco's
co-ordinated effort to organize inter-
national intellectual co-operation on
behalf of peace and culture. They
therefore provide for such varied pro-
jects as-to mention only a few-
the cperation of scientific liaison cen-
tr on four continents, a world clear-
ing-house for information on educa-
tional practices and materials,.. fun-
damental"education on an experi-
mental basis in Haiti, the promotion
of adequate translations of Great
Books, the establishment of an Inter-
national Music Council, and the dis-
tribution of a free cultural"feature"
service for newspapers throughout the
world.
In the words of Sir Sarvepalli Rad-
hakrishnan of India who, as chair-
man of Unesco's Executive Board, will
officially present the Director-Gene-
ral's Budget Estimates to the General
conference,"the funds proposed in
this document remain at a moderate
scale in re'ation to the world's needs
in education, science and culture".
This disproportion between needs
and resources is underscored by the
Director-General himself, in his Intro-
duction to the present volume of esti-
mates. Admitting that the peoples of
the world expect from Unesco results
which it cannot honestly hope to
achrwe with the limited resources at
its disposal, Dr. Torres Bodet points
out that a major contribution, in his
view, far more important than finan-
cial contributions, is hoped for from
National Commissions and Co-opera-
ting Bodies.
"They can and must make such
contributions when they have achieved
a degree of effectiveness which, it must
b admitted, has not yet been attained
by all. Nevertheless, the work of the
Secretariat which I do not regard in
any way as separate and independent,
is essential, and it too requires to be
strengthened and extended".
This strengthening of the Secreta-
riat, as proposed by Dr. Torres Bodet.
cannot be viewed as a mere matter of
adding personnel to the staff at
Unesco's Paris headquarters. Unesco's
position at the heart of a world-wide
movement of cultural co-operation
allows expers in the Secretariat to act
as'levers, displacing much greater
weights than their own.
"By their very nature", says the Di-
rector-General,"the progress of (our)
activities does not involve proportio-
nate increases in equipment and staff.
We make no land purchases for the
building of schools ; w are not buil-
ders of University Cities, nor publishers
either of school books or encyclopae-
dias. The best services we can render
take the form of investigations, mis-
s : ons, information, advice and SUgg2S-
tions, and these are all services re-
quiring qualified staff".
It is in this spirit that Dr. Torres
Bodet explains the increase of
gl, 057, 000 which the proposed 1950
Budget shows over that of 1949. The
largest increase in 1950 is in the ap-
propriations asked for under the
chapter of Education. Citing a typical
example, the Director-General says :
"It has been proved that educational
missions can render great services to
the Member States, but only on condi-
t : on that they are endowed with ade-
quate staff... The mere presence in
a Member State of one or more techni-
cians, who can carefully study the
conclusions reached by a mission, may
suffice to convert work half done into
a successful achievement". And, spea-
king of Fundamental Education, Dr.
Torres Bodet again draws attention to
the fact that the requested appropria-
tions will serve primarily to set in mo-
tion a multiplying process throughout
the world.
"In the present disorganized state of
fundamental education the world over,
one of the most useful steps which
Unesco can take is to create a centre
of training and production which can
provide students and specialists with
intensive and speedier training, while
at the same time ensuring the output
of teaching material. If I am propo-
sing by way of experiment to establish
such a centre in one area only-to be
selected by the Conference-it is be-
cause I am sure that success in this en-
terprise will lead in the next few years
to the establishment of similar centres
in other areas".
Answering anticipated objections to
the effect that the increased Budget
for 1950 might delay the accession to
Unesco of States not yet members. Dr.
Torres Bodet points out that he is
anxious to avoid anything which might
adversely affect the Organization's
universal nature. And here he makes
an observation which gives life to
what might otherwise have been a vo-
lume of lifeless figures :-
"Perhaps", writes the Director-Gene-
ra !, the extent of the financial contri-
bution asked for does not explain why
certain States have not yet ratified our
Constitution. What will militate in
Unesco's favour will be the services it
is in a position to render, and it is to
secure better results that I ask f01
increased resources. For Unesco's pro-
gramme to achieve sigirifiance in the
eYEs of the world, it must ba more
than a promise".
There follows a summary of the Di-
rector-General's statement on other
programme activities :
RECONSTRUCTION.
m PART from its emergency reliefprogram es, the most useful help
that Unesco can give to Recon-
struction is in encouraging campaigns
for collecting money. The appropria-
tions of the Reconstruction Depart-
ment have, therefore, been increased
to allow it to take a still larger share
in the campaigns to be launched in
North America.
EDUCATION.
EDUCATIONAL seminars, the Direc-tor-General states, have proved
themselves one of the best ways
of getting the latest techniques known
and applied over large areas of the
world. In order, however, to bear its
full fruit, a seminar must be looked
upon as an opportunity for producing
good teaching material. For that,
experience has shown, seminars must
be furnished with more teaching and
administrative personnel and the work
they do must be carried farther in the
countries which are represented at
them. If Unesco contemplates a long-
term programme of seminars, these
measures are the indispensable mini-
mum.
Further. Unesco has had to increase
its share in the pilot project in Haiti.
to undertake new preliminary surveys
in certain specified areas and to.
develop the already important public-
tions programme of the Fundamental
Education Clearing House. The grea-
ter part, however, of the new appro-
priations asked for under Fundamental
Education are intended for a specia-
lists'training centre and for the pro-
duction of fundamental education ma-
terial.
NATURAL SCIENCES.
As regards the Natural Sciencesprogr mmes, regular work co ti-
nues. In order to prepare for the
establishment of an International In-
statute of the Arid Zones. Unesco must
have sufficient funds to cover meetings
of experts and studies which are ne-
cessary for the completion of this pre-
liminary phase.
Unesco must also have funds for the
task. undertaken jointly with the
World Health Organization, of crea-
ting a Council of Medical Sciences, to
ensure the success of the International
A GROWING COMPANY Name plates of Member States being checked for use at
the General Conference.
Union for the Protection of Nature,
sponsored by Unesco, and to help the
first International Congress of Mathe-
maticians to be organized since the
war.
After an impartial examination of
the work and role of field science co-
operation offices, it has become appa-
rent that their staffs should be in-
creased by recruiting eminent scientists
from the regions concerned to carry
out liaison work with the local scien-
tific institutions and associations.
SOCIAL SCIENCES.
REQUESTS for funds for 1950 forthe Social Sciences also show a
marked increase. The reason for
this is that certain projects already
begun, which are of considerable
importance to Unesco's programme,
must be completed. If funds were not
available there would be detrimental
delay in the application of the pro-
gramme, and part of the ground gained
in preceding years would be lost.
It is Unesco's duty to show its inte-
rest in a whole series of activities of
urgent importance to the construction
of the defences of peace in the minds
of men. Thus, Unesco contributes
decisively towards the formation of as-
sociations in the field of social scien-
ces. It is obvious that Unesco must
support these groups which are further
new instruments of international col-
laboration and which ensure for too
Organization the effective and conti-
nuing assistance of specialists in such
branches as sociology, comparative
law, political economy and social psy-
chology.
By organizing meetings and initia-
ting studies, surveys and observation
missions, Unesco also encourages social
science specialists to take an interest
in the machinery of international ac-
tion and to study means whereby its
operation can be perfected.
CULTURAL ACTfVtTES.
THE budget of Cultural Activitiesalso reflects the proposed work in
hand. In the field 01 Arts, pro-
gress in carrying out the programme
has resulted in the signing of a
contract with the International
Council of Music, which will undertake
important work on behalf of the Orga-
nization, and in the proposed creation
of a Fine Arts Review. In the field
of libraries, in view of the extension Df
the Libraries programme, it is felt that
the Organization should provide for a
study course and a pilot project in
1950.
EXCHANGE OF PERSONS.
THE Director-General's report onthe budget also underlines the
success of Unesco's Exchange of
Persons programme. But much still
remains to be done to ensure that Go-
vernments, in preparing their fellow-
ship programmes, take into account
similar programmes in other countries.
In this connection, Unesco must
confine its attention to centralizing
and disseminating information.
Further, it is essential that Unesco
should co-operate with the Internatio-
nal Labour Organization in giving
further attention to workers'education
and the exchange of workers for edu-
cational purposes. Additional appro-
priations are needed for these two ac-
tivities.
The Director-General also expresses
his conviction that it is necessary not
only to increase the number of Unesco
fellowships, but to see that they make
a definite contribution to the fulfil-
ment of the Organization's programme.
TECHNICAL NEEDS.
FOR several years Unesco has car-ried out surveys of technical needs
in radio, press and film, and has
thus built a large volume of documen-
tary material which, as 1949 draws to
a close, will cover a considerable area
of the world.
It is therefore natural that in 1950
the Organization should adopt for
technical needs a policy which has
already proved successful in education,
namely, the sending of missions. Two
missions will be organized in 1950, one
for school broadcasts and the other for
educational films. In addition, a re-
gional seminar on school broadcasts
will provide an opportunity for those
countries in need of assistance and
advice, to make contact with others,
which have already made considerable
progress in this field.
UAISON WITH MEMBER STATES.
ALTHOUGH. on the whole, thefunds required are not very sub-
stantial, there is ample evidence
of the Secretariat's efforts to stimulate
and direct the work of Member States,
National Commissions and co-opera-
ting bodies towards the implementa-
tion of the Unesco programme.
The programme for the development
of National Commissions, however.
calls for measures other than the ex-
change of administrative correspon-
dence. The report outlines the extra
funds necessary for the activities of
the Bureau of External Relations,
whose services have to be extended, for
Unesco's Liaison Office in New York
and for a better presentation and a
wider dissemination of Unesco do-
cuments and publications.
EXECUTIVE BOARD'S COMMENT.
IN its report to the General Confe-rence on the Director-General's
draft budget for 1950, the Executive
Board states its conviction that the
funds asked for remain at a moderate
scale in relation to the world's needs
in education, science and culture, and
believes the Conference should adopt
it.
The Board notes that the increase
in the budget is allocated almost enti-
rely to programme items, while the
sums allocated to the units underta-
king the central direction and admi-
nistratjon of Unesco remain essen-
tially the same and, in proportion
to the total budget, they are reduced.
Finally, the Executive Board recalls
its previously expressed view that the
programme should not be basically
changed at the forthcoming confe-
rence and expresses the hope that the
Conference will concur in this view
and that it will not increase the num-
ber of activities of the Organization
beyond those presented to the Confe-
rence.
15
UNESCO COURIER
