WE publish below the full text of one of themost important addresses delivered by M.
Jaime Torres Bodet, since he took up his post as
Director-General of Unesco late last year.
Mr. Torres Bodet spOke on June 16. at the
opening ceremony of the Conference on Adult Edu-
cation in Elsinore. Denmark.
YOU are meeting in this
city, renowned alike for
its beauty, and its
hospitality, to consider one
of the most absorbing topics
of our day : adult education.
The basic concept of your
work is characteristic of our
era. In a certain sense, however, it corresponds
to an eternal preoccupation of civiliza-
tion. We need go no further back than
to the time when Athens, under the influence
of Socrates, considered philosophy as a way
of life and living, as teaching, as paideia. The
memory of Plato counsels humility whenever
we catch ourselves believing that our problems
are something new. For did not Plato say that,
in order to educate the citizen, it is necessary
to educate the city ? And was not the city, in
the ancient world, the state ?
I see no inconsistency in reminding you, on the
one hand, that the ideal towards which we are
striving is an ancient one. and in stating, on the
other hand, that adult education is one of the most
important questions of our day and one likely to
have the most far-reaching consequences. On the
contrary, the fact that this problem is both topical
and perennial is confirmation of its importance
and gravity Even before the 1939, war. its impor-
tance was recognized by educationists, by many
agricultural, industrial and academic associations,
and even by certain governments. Extensive
programmes of popular education were indeed
worked out ; in some countries on account of the
political requirements of the totalitarian regimes ;
in others as a result of that desire for emanci-
pation which does honour to democracy.
IT is not for me to consider in detail the
outcome of those efforts. I should like,
however, to draw your att ntio to a fact
which this Conference should certainly not over-
look, for it is at the root of dangers which we
must take into consideration in all our work. I am
referring to the perfidious way in which the
Fascist régimes, both German and Italian, exploited
the most personal and therefore the most inviolable
of the assets usually possessed by adult : the short
time, after their day's work in the fields or the
workshop is done, when they are free to think.
By seizing upon this modest possession, those ré-
gimes managed to change rest into meetings, amuse-
ment into hypnotism, education into propaganda
and propaganda into drill.
There was in this totalitarian activity a sort of
obscure return to the cynical phrase of the Roman
Emperors, "panem et circenses" : a principle of
government the mere ment'on of which would
, warrant a protest. Those leisure hours of the
worker's life that we would like to see filled with
understanding and beauty, with truth and poetry,
are so hard-won that to use them for the purpose
of inoculating him with the drug of mass adulation.
to which all demagog'es resort when thev set out
to anaesthetize their followers, must be considered
as a breach of trust.
To rescue the adult from the third-rate pleasures in
which his wages sometimes enable him to indulge is of
course an excellent motive. But the more excellent the
motive, the more heinous would be the deception if that
motive were invoked with the object of regimenting the
worker's spare time after having ordered his day's work.
There can be no question of substituting for drinking and
gambling the political dance before the tribal gods.
We have seen with our own eyes what H. tler
and Mussol1ni made of the"Dopclavoro" : frenz : ed
masses caught up in noisy, estentatious celebrations.
in aggressive parades \'. hich were bound to end
in the bloody nightmare of war.
THE aim of our Congress is entirely different.for we are convinced that to educate is to
liberate. We hope for no better result from
our work than the awakening in the conscicusness
of every adult of an awareness both of his personal
responsibility and of his
fellowship with the whole the v : hole
This Congress is the fin
held s'nce the end of tt
question with which we a
years, countries found tha
their men and women the]
the adult can learn of life
the midst of deadly dange
tiHies ended than Unesa
proclaimed from the begin
oi peace must be construcH
Unesco was founded inn
Conference in Paris in 19
in 1947. In Mexico City th
following resolution :
"In collaboration with adult
leaders and persons proming
produee materials on intern
adaptation and extensive use
"A conference for leaders and
tor international understandi
sufficient information is ava
War-A Brutal
NO moment couldmore solemn. I.
cance in the fac
meeting today at Elsinore,
the Prince of eternal doubt
of today is forever wonderi ;
From one point of view,
inevitably brings with it t
the use of science to destr
of the priority of might of
hand, the need to build th
and ineluctable. The poss
need for peace, continual
present in our minds, the
dramatic state of anxiety.
the onlooker the impressio
moral obligation were, unft
sloth would insidiously leac
that it is easier to let anot
to build a just peace. F
barbarism, produces a br
does not suicide also produ
that final ?
International co-operatio
during the war by military
appeared, with the return
which cannot be attained
adjustment of conflicting
rayons. Now that the dar
pearing together has subs
wcndering how they can r
THIS phenomenon, so sonational level, is alsc
level, within each c
The fear of death is a more
for joining wills together. We
But we do not all hope in the
one thing : peace demands m,
and also more heroism than d
In time of war, imagin
course indispensable to the
winning of victory. Stratel
of preparation and all sort
ized studies. But the sold
unfortunately learn with
technique of killing and th
In peace-time, on the ot :
to feel that we have equal r
duties. War is thought 0
carried out by their subc
peace all men must unite.
country war always seems t
whereas to consolidate pea
voluntary participation. v
we shall understand how
peace is bound up with t
and the problem of freedo
education.
Our Persona
MAY I quote once rknown words, w"To be or not to
in itself, because at any g
oniy what he aspires to bl
From the day of our birth,
living project ; life lies before
child is an anticipation off
anticipation of the adult. And
is he* Of what future develop
mere anticipation ? This questio
personal equation that is most
That is why we canno
terms. That is, why the pal
yeu are dedicated is so de
It justice, you cannot merE
to the usual educational n
compensation and partly
development of an apprent
deny it ?) re-education
Suppose we have a groU]
Seated under the flags of their countries, adult education
conference delegatw hold their first session in the Inter-
national People's College, at Elsinore.

CATION AND THE'"FUTURE
OUR CIVILIZATION
By JaiDle TORRES BODET
jiving conditions. But we are conscious that they are also
putting : albeit in other terms, a cOD ('ept () f
humanism which will ghe fresh life to cultures.
When I say humanism, I am not using the word
in the narrow sense which has been given to it by
the most_ uncompromising individualists, but in the
far wider. philosophical and philological, sense
which comes from its derivation ; I am using it
with reference to the reconciliation of man and
tellectual and moral
mankind.
international meeting
war to consider !. he
concerned. For long
elves forced to teach
zest painful lesson that
the lesson of fear in
Hardly had the hos-
was established. and
ng ; that the defences
in tre minds of men.
5 and held its first
and in Mexico City
delegates adopted the
education organizations.
in adult education, to
mal affairs suitable for
r adult study croups.
irkers in adult education
shall be ('onvenf"d whep
de. if possible in 194M. to
implification
more aUSDlc. üUS or
d a symbolic signifi-
; hat this assembly is
the castle of Hamlet.
ike Hamlet, the world
: "to be or not to be".
Ie PDSSibility of war
extolling of hatred,
life, the justification
might. On the other
) eace is equally plain
lity of war and the
and simultaneously
produce the most
aterial progress gives
that, if the sense of
lately, to disappear,
len to the conclusion
'war break out than
war, l'ke any other
1 simplification. But
a simplification-and
which was ensured
, Lancers, has now re-
f peace, as an ideal
thout a very delicate
d controversial aspi-
r of their all disap-
; d, the nations are
) age to ! ive together.
) vious () n the in ter-
amble, on the national
try.
active cement than hope-----
fear in the same way.
ne way. woe must realize
skull. more imagination
attics.
In and skill are of
eneral Staffs for the
requires many yearsdetailed and special-
s, unknown martyrs,
e greatest ease the
rt of dying.
hand. we ought all
'onsib'lit. es and equal
by the leaders and
nates. But to make
J the citizen of any
e something coercive,
here must be wholely
accept these premises,
) sell the problem of
problem of freedom.
with the problem of
quatiol1
e Shakespeare's well-
h are as apt here :
'But to be a nothing
moment evervone is
are mere proJeC't, a
like a programme. The
youth ; the youth Is an
adttlt-what. tn reatity,
. t are we, all of us. the
Ivoh'es e,-er)-thin ;- in our
timateandinexpressibte.
nswer it in general
of education to wh. ch
lte ; if you are to do
be satisfied two resort
lauds, for it is parUy
) plement-partly the
'hip and partly (why
, auimrate-
workers or peasants, craftsmen, bureaucrats or
soldiers. With any ideal grcup with which we have
tc deal, what should be the problem of prime
concern to us ? Differences of temperament, as with
children ? D : fferences of vacation, as with young
people ? Certainly, temperament and vocation 8. pre
factors that no teacher, lecturer or artist approach-
ing an adult public should igno :'. But what he
should have in mind bé'fore all els is the spiritual
loneliness in which each. member of his audience
ic always living.
ARELY has this loneliness been so formidable,I< so complete and so unrecognized as m n the
world of today. The child lives within its
childishness as in a protective atmosphere. The
youth comes to know himself more with every
adventure in which his fceLngs or his intellect are
involved, ar. d rejoices, sometimes even in spite of
sorrow, in his discovery of himself. But the adult
has no place of refuge. Cut off from others of his
generation by the relentless uniqueness of his
destiny, and from his own conscience by his fear
of seeing himself in it as he res. Uv is, stripped of
all gloss or illusion, the adult has only two courses
open to him-either to remain himself, isolating
A view of tile moat and massive walls of historic
Kronborg Castle at Elsinore, w ; 1 (re Unesco's Adult
Education Conference was officially opened.
himself from the multitude, or to give up his
individually and to submit to the impersonal will
of the masses. Even for the genius, absolute lone-
liness is a termless punishment. What then shall
we say of the absolute loneliness of the ordinary
man ? Yet his merging in the mass would mean
no less than a cruel renunciation of his very nature
as a man.
In face of this loneliness or this renunciation,
adult education should be based on the idea that
necessarily underlies every international institution.
- the brotl1erhood of human destiny. At bottom,
it is a question not so much of teaching the adult
such and such an art or such and such a science,
as of instructing him in a much vaster subject,
which we foolishly imagine he has already master-
ed-life itself.
Bent over the soil for hours every day, pounded
from morning to night by the ml : { ; hanical rhythm
0.'industnal mass-prcduction, the averalte adult of
our time rare ! y seems to be in any position to ap-
preciate the life going on around him and to guy : asp
the truth about his fellows.
NOTHING, however, is more untrue thanto beEI've that man is by nature mans
I enemy. On the contrary, sociability is. of
all human instincts, the most widespread and
ineradicable. But it has to be admi'ted that the
economic organization of society creates too often.
conditions of life which weaken the fraternal in-
stinct.
Tn a orld where material interests have become the
main spring of action, and where economic success is the
measurin, : : rod of values, individuals, classes. nations act
:... en-mies or rivals rather than as partners : so that it
is seldom that man has been lonelier, poorer and more
unhappy.
At the same time, a concept'on no : le5 destruc-
the conception of a culture whose goals were no
longer grandem'and strEngth, simpLeity of impul. se
and bread ; h of v. sion. bUt were. alas. the difficult,
tne precious, the exceptional, the arbitrary and the
refined. This created a gulf between the ordinary
people and the intellectuals, whose affectation and
over-nicety became more and more foreign to the
crcwd.
In both cases the lack of true culture is obvious
for, in both, contact between I fe and the intellect
has been severed. On the one hand, ignorance on
the part of the masses : on the other, anaemia
among the elite. All the same, such a situation has
iis precedents. In sturdy periods of history, when.
the community is undeniably healthy, culture seems
to men to be an essential part of their system : it
is a manifestation of their being and derives its
lustre from that very fact. To be beautiful, it has
only to meet its problems boldly and solve them
or : ginally, frankly and satisfactorily. But in periods
of moral upheaval culture becomes an ornament
and gradually ceases to be a vital function. In
architecture, as in literature, it aspires to be no
more than a luxury. It becomes a mere decoration,
a flower without roots in society. But a culture
must be judged r. ot by the distance separating it
from the people that produced it. but by the
strength and depth of its roots. In the last resort.
our civilization will be judged according to the
services it has rendered to man, the extent to
which it has made him conscious of his rights, and
the way in which it has taught him to co-operatewitch all his fellow-men in an atmosphere of peace,
which can only be ensure through intelligence
guided by the sense of Justice and faith sustained
by beauty, truth and virtue.
: t-...-"
Education f or ResponstbuMty
WHAT I have just said indicates the
peculiar importance which I attach to
your deliber tions. When you r  discus-
sing adult education, you are in fact discussing no
less a matter than the future of our civilization.
Do we want to educate people for obedience ? Do
we want to educate them for responsibility ? Are
we going to educate the masses as if they were
8-uniform conglomeration in which individuals are
swallowed up ? Or are we going to educate them as
a. group of living beings in which the freedom of
the individual comic'pence to develop is not restricted
by the group mind ? Do we claim to relieve man's
isolation by accustoming him to blind sublr. ission
to the will of the herd ? Or do we wish to bring
him to take a conscious part In a culture which,
while having regard for his personality, will inspire
in him a sincere desire to be one with all his
fellows ?
If we decide in favour of education for respon-
sibility. we shall have chose ; 1 the more difficult but,
as I believe, the only true road. There is no better
remedy for the terror of so'itude than the principle
Of the universal responsibility of man on earth.
"Each of us is responsible for everything to every ne
else", is one of Dostoyevsky's most profoundly
penetrating remarks. Let us make no mistake. If
we choose education for responsibility, we automa-
tically demand a culture based up ; 1 the sense of
responsibility. Such a choice involves more than
what we have to discuss at this Conference ; it calls
for efforts from others than teachers alone.
All forms of human activity are concerned-politics and
ergonomics as well as science and art. When the people
agitate for better organization of work, t fairer distribu-
tion of property, and equality of opportunity, they are,
or course, struck" : for the improvement or their material
A Gleam of Hope
MAN is primary a social being ; he cannottherefore be considered apart from thecommunity to which he owes his upbring-
ing. Now. in the present day, whether he
likes it or not, the community is world-wide. It
therefore imposes, and will continue to impose,
ever widening duties. The contrast between the
number and extent of su : h duties, on the one hand,
and the misunderstanding and hatred we see, on
the other, is so cruel that pessimism would be
justified, if there were not to be seen amid the
chaos one gleam of hope-the hope that at last
a living culture will be established, in which the
masses can have a share although the rights of
the individual are not abated, and in which,
similarly, the individual wi ! ! not appear as the
selfish beneficiary of an inheritance which he
receives as a free gift a uses irresponsibly, but
as Hw essential instrument of the moral solidarity
of mankind.
World-wide aims and freedom in the means of
obtaining them seem to me to constitute the two
guiding rules in any action to foster, by universal
education, a type of culture in which the motive
principle is personal responsibility.
The developments of the first stage of industrial
expansion was facilitated by primary education for
the masses. We must not forget that fact.
It is part. ieularly siKnificant, as aduIteducatlon-wbfch
only the most favoured countries are as yet entitled to
distinguish from primary education-is still today, over most
of the world. at the stage of heroic literacy campaigns
Another reason for remember)", it is that there are dill
people who wonder whether primary education for the
proletal'iat Is danrerous. And above all we must remember
it because the real danger would be to limit our training
of the peoples of the future to the imparting of the
rudimentary knowledge implied in the teaching of reading
and writing.
In the present day world, technical skills are
becoming n`_ghly complex and the desire for
universality grows ever more urgent. Civilization.
can only progress if the masses are trained
systematically and cohere : 1t : y for the task before
them. That is the ultimate aim of adult education.
It is nor exaggeration to say that it is awe-inspiring.
IL ADIES and Gent : emen, in the last few monthsmany voices have been raised to reiterate
that peace is essential. Some people have
been concerned because Unesco has not added its
voice to those others. Such a concern is unfounded.
for if ever any international institution was inspir-
ed with a sincere determination to secure peace,
it 1S the Organization which we established in
London in 1945 to promote understanding ; betwee
all the nations through education, science and
culture. It is not Unesco's business to make
speeches about peace ; it is the Organization's duty
to work silently and modestly to ensure that the
spiritual ! conditions in the world are such that men
may build the peace, and build it advisedly, for
the advancement of justice, good and progress.
Unesco is glad that so many of you have come
to this meeting at Elsinore. Personally, when I
express, on behalf of the Organization to the
authorities and the people of Denmark the deep
gratitude they reserve for the warm welcome they
have given this Conference, I also thank you for
your help and hope most sincerely that your discus-
sions will be crowned with success.
Many eminent personalities attended the Adult Edueaticn Conference at Elsinore, least month
Abov. lIeft to r. ght). Professor \iets Bohr, wold-famous Danish physicist and Nobel prize-winner,
is shown discussing the work of the Conference wHh : n. H : nt\"ig Fri,..'"OC1. nish Minister of Educa-
tion. M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director Genera) of Lnesco and Dr. C. E. Beeby, Assistant sir--
