The Case Against And For
'Comic Books'
/1) N February 19, Unesco's first weekly radio programme"Unesco World Review", went on the air. One o/the
feature stories included in the 15-minute programme
was inspired by recent French discussions on the effects of
the comic strips on children and adolescents. The article
printed below was taken from the raà : io script. It gives
some of the points which have been discussed. recently on
both sides of the Atlantic.
JI UST about fifty years'ago, an unsung artist told a funnystory in a strip of cartoons-and thereby started a giant
new industry, sent educators to bed with nightmares and
changed the reading habits of millions of children-and their
parents.
The latest blast in the storm of protest stirred by comics
comes from France where superhuman exploits and glorified
gungirls were debated on the floor of the French Chamber of
Deputies. The result was a law to protect children and
adolescents by forbidding any publication building up banditry,
stealing, hatred, cowardice and cheating. A committee repre-
senting the government, youth associations and the press will
enforce the law, supported by the Ministry of Justice.
The French measures to protect juveniles from undesirable
reading matter are symptomatic of the rising general concern
about the flood of new publications, the so-called comics, aimed
at young readers. This mounting uneasiness has been noticeable
in the homeland of the comics-the United States-as in most
other countries ; Unesco's Director-General, Dr. Jaime Torres
Bodet, expressed his concern about comics of the Superman
type at a press luncheon recently in Paris.
THE French Minister of Justice stressed that this new lawis in no way an infringement of the liberties of the press.
It has been passed mainly as a result of a campaign by the
French Teachers'League which has taken a special interest
in the fight against the comics. According to the League's
figures, eighty-eight per cent of the juvenile delinquents in
France are ardent readers of comics. The efforts to combat
such publications have undoubtedly been stimulated by the
alarming rise of juvenile delinquency in many countries.
In the United States, an advisory committee has been
established by the Association of Comic Magazine Publishers,
whose members are responsible for forty per cent of the
enormous comics output in the United States, to improve
comic books and use this technique for constructive educational
purposes.
Another example comes from Mamaroneck, New York, where
a group of parents has gone ahead and organized an
independent publishing company-The Once Upon a Time
Press. Its first publication war, a fairly tale by Hans Christian
Andersen, with illustrations.
Complaints against Comics I
Irrealism, Violence and Nightmares
'N7HAT is, then, the case against the comics ?
"That most of them are badly written and badly drawn-
trash in short-is a thing apart. The main charge is the cornice
preoccupation with violence in all its forms. Murder in its most
cruel aspects, sadism, fights, explosions, war on an inter-
planetary scale, these are the main themes of too many of the
so-called comics.
Another complaint is that the comics, instead of popularizing
science, make science everyman's fool and remove it from the
realm of reality and the possible to the land of nightmare and
fantasy,
A third accusation is that the heroes and heroines, withwhom the readers identify themselves, are, in most cases,
gangsters or pin-up girls. The girls can be explained by the
fad the press for adults usually carries comic strips and tries
to catch their interest as well as that of juvenile readers. It
is certain that comics now are far from exclusively read by
children and adolescents. Adults often start their daily paper
with Flash Gordon or Jane, should the front page not carry
a story also revelling-is violence.
Another serious charge is that the comics really are roeant
for illiterates. The text on the whole confines itself to exclama-
tions like Ohhh ! Ugh ! bang, whiz, bump, etc., and the conten
dwindles to nothing.
All this would not be worth serious concern, were it not for
the tremendous popularity and diffusion of these comics. This
popularity shows, among other things, that the technique is a
good technique.
The problem is how to use this new mass medium in a
constructive manner. One way would be to paint a sympathetic
picture of the foreigner and the under-privileged. Thus, the
strips could make their contribution to international under-
standing and tolerance.
