THERE are numerous and important links between the field of popular arts and fun-damental education. The preservation and development of traditional arts present
a series of urgent problems which require a prompt solution. These must be faced
not only for aesthetic or sentimental purpose, but also for practica) reasons. The exis-
tance of popular arts is often closely related to the economic life of societies and contri-
butes substantially to their well-being.
The important part played by the popular arts in the programmes of fundamental
education prompted Unesco to convene a conference of experts in Paris to examine the
whole problem and offer practical suggestions regarding the future activities of Unesco
in this promising field.
The Committee of experts, who met at Unesco House from 10 to 15 October,
discussed the significance of popular arts in three types of culture : tribal, pre-industrial
and industrial. In their reports the experts cited numerous examples of decadence and
disappearance of once vigorous arts and they stressed the need to help the people con-
cerned in saving their cultural heritage.
On the other hand, occasional revivals of popular arts were also noted and their
significance was duly analysed. Some interesting observations came out from the discus-
sions. Thus, for instance, it was remarked that action by governments and private orga-
nizations, though sometimes instrumental in the rebirth of a dying tradition, often created
a danger of formalism and archaism. Interference with the liberty of the artist was
unanimously condemned, for popular arts should reflect the tendencies and aspirations
of the culture which produced them.
Finally, the Committee recommended that Unesco should take the initiative in
publishing a symposium dealing with the main problems of popular arts in the modern
world and should undertake surveys in a few communities where experiments had been
tried out. It further called on Unesco to support efforts to prevent the disappearance
of folk arts and to preserve a valuable part of the cultural heritage of the world. Lastly,
the committee unanimously recognized Unesco to be the most suitable organization
for encouraging the exchange of information and documentary material, as well as orga-
nizing exhibitions on this subject.
