THE CHOICE FOR MAN : A GOOD
LIFE OR AN UNHAPPY DEA TH
time and time
again, through the
activities of press and
radio, a life is savcd
through a newly-report-
ed treatment, a novel
industry or process is
introduced in a new
location, or an old
idea is shown to have
a new application.
IN fact, the under-standing of science
by the people is much
more than the practice
of devotion to truth
or the satisfaction
of intellectual curiosity
and thirst for knowledge.
It is the difference between a good
life and an unhappy death-often for
individual men, women and children,
and, in all probability, for the modern
world and civilization itself.
In the three decades subsequent to
the first World War, great discoveries
have become part of daily life. We are
often, however, to forget the part
that simple explanations of great ideas
have played in moulding the physical
world and the way we think.
Influence of, ;
Einstein-
Einstein's theory of relativity and the
strange ideas of quantum theory have
trickled dramatically into the philosophy
of living, aIthougtJ. the circle of mathe-
matical physicists Is still a small one.
Healthiness as contrasted to illness of
mind-the positive side Of psychiatry-
has received an impetus from those who
brought sanity to the treatment of
insanity and the unshackling of sex by
Freud.
Mechanf. cal and electrical wonders
have been developed-airptanes, automo-
biles. diesels, radio, television, and a
dozen other specialities that after a few
months become so much a !) art of our
mores that we forget how young they
are. We forget that when new-and
therefore strange-these commonp ! aces of
today needed explanation that would
make them plausible.
Diabetes, pneumonia, the venereal
diseases. and a host of other ills with'n
the space of a few years have been
deprived of their ability to sign death
warrants or cause broken lives. No
physician in the early days of our new
era of science understanding would have
dared to hope that a single drug would
by
Watson DAVIS
conquer two-score diseases. Yet the sulfa
drugs and the antibiotics-penicillin.
streptomycin, chloromyctin, aureomycin
- do make these deadly diseases less
troublesome than the common cold.
To the food of the world and the farms
of the earth, new aids and supplements
have come-nitrogen from the air, che-
mical insecticides, better management of
the soil, frozen foods, etc. Vitamins have
been discovered and so have protein
quality and the need of seven classes
of food which will build better minds
and bodies of a better-fed population.
The my-fed third of the world have
at least been recognized. The spotlight
of publicity is playing on the weak and
hungry. Starvation, partial or complete,
is not condoned with hopelessness.
The means of reaching the millions
- the daily newspaper, the popu : ar ma-
gazine, the voices of the radio, the film.
the books of fact and fiction, the
measured cadences of information circu-
lating through official channels, and the
blaring insistence of advertising-all of
these are closing the gap between dis-
covery and application.
Often the public hears through the
press about a new medical discovery and
about the availability of a new drug
before the average doctor has a chance
to study his medical journal.
importance of
Science-W riter
The science writer is often a catalyser
as well as a reporter. When th* fission of
uranium, bas'c to atomic energy, was
discovered in Germany, in 1939. Science
Service, the American non-profit orga-
nization for the Popularization of
Science, called the scientific report to
the attention of scientists : and also told
the public through the press about its
significance, including the vital fact that
an atomic bomb was probable, as energy
for industry could be extraetl'd from the
atomic nucleus-and an uncontrolled
chain reaction would not get started and
wipe out the world.
Insulin for diabetes, livr for anaemia,
sulfanimide tor child-birth fever, strep-
tomycin for tuberculosis-these were
great life-saving stories when they were
new. They are a continuing opportunity
to explain the possibilities of modern
medicine to the people.
Great Stories.
to Come
What has been is only the beginning.
There are great stories of scientific dis-
covery and application in the making.
If such things happen.. it will be
because the people continu to support the
advance of science, spiritually and finan-
ciauy, a. nd the talented have a chance
to do research. We must be confident
that the people will do this if they are
allowed to know the facts and implica-
tions of the most thrilling area of human
advance-modern science-
