PORTR
OF A PE
At. the request of the Governmentof Afghanistan, a UNESCO Mis-
sion recently completed a su,.., ey
of the educational system of that country,
With a yiew to adYising the Government
on possible lines of deYe/Of'ment. The
Mission was headed by Dr Jean Debiesse,
Inspecteur d'Académie, French Ministry
of Education, who was concerned mainly
with the problems of Secondary Education.
With Dr Debiesse were Dr Harold
Benjamin, Dean of the College of Educa-
tion, Uniyersity of Maryland, U. S. A.,
whose field was Primary Education,
Dr William Abbott, H. M. Staff Inspector,
9'rtinistry of Education, England, who
coyered the problem of technfcot eduea-
tion and Mile Jacqueline Aillet, of the
UNESCO staff, who accompanied the
Mission as Secretary.
In the following article, the members
of the Mission haye set down some
Impressions of their two months stay and
At Bomion. in Central Afghanistan, described by a member 01 Unesco's Mission as"an
earthly paradise", the green, fertile valley is surrounded by pink and rose-red mountains.
In the sandstone clills are carved huge Buddha, and innumerable shrines and monastic
cells. The Buddha in the centre of this photo is 180 feet high and the"Lillie Buddha"on
the right is 60 feet shorter.
Bamian. once the centre of a great Greco-Buddhist civilization was conquered first by Islam
and then by Genqhis than. who depopulated the area.
A school scene at Istalii. a village in the mountainous country north of Kabul. Pupils in
Afghanistan's elementary schools start learning the country's two main language, Pushtu
and Persian, in the primary grades. In this class, where the boys have close cropped heads
and wear their caps during lessons, one of them is reading aloud from a Persian manual.
have described the general educational
situation in Afghanistan, for the improve-
ment of which they will formulate recom-
mendations in their report.
WHILE it is true that Afghanistanis still at a primitive stage in
its development, its reputation
of being a dangerous and
savage country found no confinnation
in the experiences of the Mission,
each of whose members returned
with the impression that it would be
quite safe for him to travel freely and
alone anywhere within its borders.
The Mission had its headquarters in
Kabul, the capital, but completed an
extensive tour of the country so as to
obtain not only first-hand knowledge
of the existing schools,'but also of the
general physical and social conditions
found throughout the country to-day.
This tour took the members to such
towns as Faizabad, Konduz ; Mazar-i-
Cherif, Maimanah, Herat, Ferah,
Kandahar, Ghazni, Gardaiz and
Djelelabad, and enabled them to as-
semble a great deal of on-the-spot
information and considerable back-
ground'knowledge, all of which will
make its report strongly factual and
in no sense an"armchair"one.
During its tour, the Mission was
accompanied by Dr. Achmed. Afghan-
istan's Director of Primary Education ;
Mr. Aslam, Director of School Equip-
ment ; Mr. Rahim, who is responsible
for Unesco affairs in Afghanistan ;
Mr. Aziz Mohammed, Inspector of
Schools ; and Dr. Bashir who looked
after the health of the party.
Fantastic colours,
dedlish shapes
S SERVANTS and mechanics travelledin an accompanying truck, carry-
ing baggage, petrol, oil and spare
parts, the latter being needed all too
often.
Afghanistan has no railways. The
poor surfaces, loose stones and ever-
present dust of its roads are not
conducive to the longevity of automo-
biles. At times the party was maroon-
ed with empty radiators, bogged down
in deep sand or awash in river fords
which were deeper than expected. No
major trouble overtook the Mission,
but the number of minor breakdowns
was exasperating.
The scenery of Afghanistan is often
grand and in places awe-inspiring. The
gigantic ranges of the Hindu Kush are
naked and snow crested. The melting
snows create a number of large rivers,
Kabul and during its 2500 miles tour
of the country, the Mission was able
to establish a comprehensive picture of
existing educational resources.
No women
university students
OUT of Afghanistan's population,which has been v riously estimated
at something between 8 million
and 15 million-the actual figure is
probably around twelve million people
- there are about one and a half mil-
lion children of elementary school age.
To-day, about 86, 000 children, most-
ly boys, are being taught in 289 ele-
mentary schools. There are also 40
secondary schools, but a large pro-
portion of the pupils are actually in
the elementary stages of combined
elementary-secondary schools.
In Afghanistan, there are no mixed
classes, and the total number of girls
the flow of which is greater in summer
than in winter.
Some of the mountain scenery is
fantastic, both in colour and in
contour ; pink, rose red, brown and
black are combined with devilish
shapes that appear to have cooled to
their present forms only yesterday.
The plains of Afghanistan are fer-
tile and produce good crops whenever
water is made available by irrigation.
No rain falls during the long summer
and autumn months, and cloudless
blue skies greeted the Mission day
after day. High midday temperatures
- up to 119 degrees F.-were found
bearable because of the dryness of the
air.
In the north and west the major
industry, apart from agriculture, is the
raising of sheep for the karakul lamb
skins. These are dried on the hot de-
sert sands, and the orderly rows of
skins with their white undersides up-
permost give the impression from a
distance of large military cemeteries.
In the south, is Kandahar, a city
surrounded with most extensive orch-
ards, comparable to Damascus. Its
fruits are famous anS* find a ready
market in Pakistan. A new road has
been built by American engineers
from Kandahar to Chaman in Pa-
kistan, and along it pass trucks with
their valuable loads Of grapes, peaches,
apples and melons.
From the information it obtained in
attending schools is around 3, 000. At
Kabul University, which has faculties
of Medicine, Science and Arts, there is
not a single woman among the 300
students.
English is becoming the most widely
spoken foreign language used in the
country, and, apart from two secon-
dary schools in Kabul which give in-
struction in French and German, all
others teach English, along with Af-
ghanistan's two main languages.
Pushtu and Persian.
In conformity with the government's
aim to make all Afghans bi-lingual.
children start learning Pushtu. and
Persian in the first elementary school
grade.
There are* also Moslem schools
where the Koran and Islamic customs
and history are taught, together with
arithmetic and reading and writing in
Arabic. This is useful for the study
of Persian and Pushtu which are both
written in Arabic characters.
While investigating Afghanistan's
general educational needs, the Mission
also examined those of technical edu-
cation.
Urgent need for
industrial development
THE country has still only smallscale i dustries and all tho e of
importance, including textile fac-
tories, sugar beet plant, power stations
and coal mines, were visited. Any great
extension of industrialization, which
would seem to be urgently necessary,
would involve the provision of much
more electricity-for which water
power is available in abundance-and
a major development of technical edu-
cation-a matter on which the Mission
will advise.
It intends to report on the type
and extent of technical education re-
quired for existing industries and also
what will be required if the country's
resources are to be developed. A
questionnaire has therefore been sent
to the Afghanistan government, asking
for information on development plans
over the next 10 to 20 years, so that
the mission can indicate what will be
needed in the way of technical colleges
and what their curriculums should be.
The total in trill labour force of
Afghanistan is way estimated at less
than 10, 000, so t t present\technical
training needs are not considerable.
There is already a colle for training
craftsmen, and Afghans who have been
trained abroad, together with a number
of foreign specialists are also available
to give technical instruction. Between
these two means of training there is
a void which somehow must be filled.
Lazy elements
"Go under"
THE people of Afghanistan arei devout Muslims, leading simpl
and laborious lives. They have a
proud bearing and are obviously inde-
pendent in spirit. Many of tñem are
fine physical specimens. They dis-
played an exemplary courtesy to the
members of the Mission and were al-
ways ready to give help and advice.
They were naturally most curious
concerning : the, to them, strange look-
ing foreigners ; but, then the foreigners
were equally curious about the Af-
ghans.
Each member of the Mission has
conceived an admiration for these
people, and believes them to be well
worthy of the assistance which more
developed countries can give them.
When people live for centuries under
hard conditions, in a harsh climate
amid rugged mountains, most of the
shiftless or lazy elements are elimi-
nated. You then get a people with
great drive and energy. With the help
of education, they will go farther than
other people who have lived in"softer"
countries and climates.
The Mission's report should be
completed early this month and will
be transmitted by Unesco to the Go-
vernment of Afghanistan, who, it is
hoped, will eventually authorize its
publication in whole or in part.
A it
OPLE , >
