IU NESCO, the educational, scientific and Cultural'
agency at the United Nations, IS now cnterz : zg
on its third year.
It has before it ! t new world programme and at its head
a new Director-General, Dr. Jaime Torres Bodet, a
Mexican poet and former Foreign Mm : ster and Minister
of Education. A noted Indian philosopher and educators-
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrislman-is now the new Chairman
vf its Executive Board.
The new Unesco programmes, the resu ! t o/three aKd a
halt weeks of careful deliberation and study by the Th'ra
Session of the General Conference which met in Beirut,
'Lebanon, from November 17 to December 11, is a more
closely knit, more integrated attempt to get people working
together across national frontiers through education,
science and culture-and thus to get a little sanity tn. M
the"minds of men".
To carry out this task. Unesco has been given a 1949budget of $ 7, 780000, an increase or 97, 363 over 1948.
Of thus $ 7, 780, 000 total, the Beirut Conference voted
$ 4, 357, 936 vhich will be used, for the development, ot
Unesco's s'x major programme activities as fol ! aws :
Reconstruction S 420, 638
Education............................... ;..... 810. 165
Natura ! Sciences........................ 679, 505
Social Sciences and Humanities...... 405, 913
Cuttura ! Activities...................... 5M. 667
Communications (Exchange of Per-
sons and Mass Communications)... 1. 51b, 048
In addition, the sum of $275, 700 will be used by Unesco's
Bureau of External Relations to encourage a greater
t) arf ! c ; pat ! 0 ? : ! ? t7te OratttsattOK's MorA : &J/ ! <s Me ; berf} rticipation in the Organization'  work by its ember
tatfs, their National Commission, and private inter-
national organizations, and to extend 1Jarts of its pro-
gramme to occupied countries such as Germany and
Japan. and to autonomous and Trust territories.
Unesco has found that the National Commission is an
essential vehicle for getting its message directly to the

people. By January 1949, thirty-three Commissions had
been set up out of a total of 45 Member states. Unesco
is working four the development and strengthening of
those already in operation and. towards the formation of
similar Commissions in the remaining 12 countrs.
Unesco is now ready, too, after a preliminary study
of the problem in Germany and Ja ; pan, to extend parts
of its programme to these countries. During the coming
months, Unesco will launch a plan to help develop
democratic ways of thinking in Germany and Japan by
encouraging renewed scientific, educational and intellec-
tual contacts between the occupied countries and the
rcst oj the u : orld. Nor will the Organization neglect
action on behalf of the non-autonomous and Trust terri-
tories which come within its scope.
As a member of the United Nations family, Unesco
w'Zl continue to build a spirit of close co-operation with
its parent organization and the other Specialized
Afj ! : llcies.
IN this special Supplement, the Unesco Courier presentsthe n w program  of Unesco. T is programme,
c : i : lpted by the General Conference at Beirut, is ! 7nesco's
"Operation Education Science and Culture"for the year
1949. And yet it is more than just that.
In many respects it is a continuation of the basic
programme adopted in 1947 by the General Conference
at Mexico City and as such emphasizes the long-term,
continuous nature of Unesco's work.
But above all,"Operation Educat : on, Science and Cul-
ture"is Unesco's, only in the sense that its Director-
General and its Secretariat are the international servants
or all the peoples throughout the world, whether they be
Lebanese, Indian, American, French. or Chinese.
As Dr. Julian Huxley recently remarked :
"Alone, Unesco can accomplish nothing. Just as this
Specialized Agency of the United Nations is a product of
increasingly widespread belief in the necessity and the
practicabii. ty of an ordered world, so the activities under-
taken to implement that belief cannot be carried out alone
by a secretariat in Paris. The measure of Unesco's progress
and the measure of its worth will be the degree to which
there is co-operation and participation in its work by too
people of the world."
