United Nations Day-24 October
r ACH year. United Nations Day becomes more and
more a truly international festival, an occasion on
which people gather together in every part of
the world to voice their longing for peace.
It capital cities, provincial towns and in the coun-
tryside, men and women of all races and creeds meet to
celebrate the birth of the United Nations Organization
and to affirm their belief in its future.
IN PARIS, this year, important ceremonies brought
together many distinguished Frenchmen and women to
take part in the various celebrations arranged by the
United Nations Information Centre. Those attending
a reception at the Paris Hotel de Yille heard a speech
from M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of
Unesco, in which he outlined the purposes of the United
Nations and described Unesco's important contribution
to its work of peace.
In addition to a formal gathering in the great amphi-
theatre of the Sorbonne, the press, radio, cinemas and
many of the Paris theatres all collaborated in honouring
United Nations Day.
IN THE ARGENTINE, important ceremonies, in
which educational institutions of all kinds were particu-
larly prominent, were organized at Buenos Aires.
THE PRESS IN COPENHAGEN published special
articles, and all Danish radio stations broadcast
feature programmes which included educational and cul-
tural subjects.
THE BRITISH fOREIGN OffiCE, the Ministry of
Education, the Specialized Agencies and non-govern-
mental organizations arranged a United Nations Week
in Great Britain, covering London and the rest of the
country../.. ..,. "
IN INDIA there was a happy coincidence in the fact
that United Nations Day fell on the same day as the
< : Divani  or < (Festival of Slight)), a great Indian
fraditional holiday. Local authorities there organized
many joint ceremonies to honour the two occasions.
AUSTRALIA, which had established a National
Committee for United Nations Day, marked the anniver-
sary with ceremonies in big cities and remote township
throughout the country.
IN THE UNITED STATES, a National Committee was
responsible for a big programme of commemoration held
simultaneously in the forty-eight States. An address
by President Truman and proclamations by all State
Governors were widely disseminated with the help of
3. 500 local authorities. Tens of thousands of posters
were displayed and hundreds of thousands of leaflets
distributed.
Thus, all over the world, with the growing support of
more and more peoples, the custom is being established
of setting aside October 24 as the day for spreading
the aims and ideals of the Uniied Nations. In years
to come this symbolic day will become for future gene-
rations the Festival of Nations.
