Unesco Sponsors Camp School..
For Middle East Refugee Children
THIRTY-ONE Unesco-sponsored schools are now
providing educational facilities for over 11, 000I refugee children in the Lebanon, Palestine. Syria,
and Transjordan under Unesco's programme of assistance
to Middle East refugees. Teachers have been recruited
from among the Palestine refugees themselves.
Unesco's contribution to relief work in the Middle East
was made at the request of the Third General Conference
at Beirut, last December, which led to the creation of
a $45. 000 fund to support the"Unesco"schools.
From its own budget, Unesco gave $15. 000. A further
$20. 000 was provided by the Lord Mayor of London's
Fund while the Norwegian United Nations Appeal for
Children (UNAC) Committee made a donation of $10, 000.
This fund was designed to allow the schools to operate
until August 31. at which date the United Nations Relief
Programme in the Middle East was also due to end. As
this Programme will now probably be carried on until
the end of 1919, Unesco is trying to raise a further
$25, 000 to maintain the schools programme until the
same date.
After hearing a report on the Middle East situation,
at its meeting last month. Unesco's Executive Board
made an appeal to the Lord Mayor of London's Fund for
. further donation of $20, 000 which would allow the
schools to remain open until November 15.
The Board also asked Member States to raise the
remaining $5, 000 which would provide for the needs of
the schools until December 31.
The"Unesco"schools, for which these funds are
intended, are being operated by the three voluntary
agencies in charge of the United Nations. Relief for
Palestine Refusees : the League of Red Cross Societies.
in the Lebanon. Syria and Transjordan ; the International
Committee of the Red Cross, in Palestine ; and the
American Friends Service Committee in the Gaza Area
of southwest Palestine.
The voluntary agencies have found that education is
vitally important to their work, now that regular food
supplies and shelter are being provided under the United
Nations programme. Schools have greatly raised the
morale of camps where they have been established and
are everywhere in great demand by the refugees them-
selves.
Schools have been started by the Palestine Committee
in the Jerusalem, Nablous and Bekaa areas, and by the
refugees themselves with the aid of Voluntary Agencies.
All these schools need basic equipment, such as black-
boards and exercice books, and will have to close down
if more outside help does not materialize.
