w. F. 0. Stresses Importance
Of Joint Action With Unescô
or the year 1919 finds the human race at grips with the gravest and the most desperate task it everhas h d to tackle. What is at stake today is, quite simply, humanity's survival. On all of us
wherever we live, whatever we are doing, from wherever we come, will depend the answer to this ques-
tion : wU) the weapons put at our disposal by modern science spell the end of the human race or the
beginning of an era of lasting peace and greater happiness ?
The spotlight of the news continues to be focused on various-so far mostly unsuccessful-attempts
made in the last three years to unite the world politically.
Acceptance of such a joint un-
divided responsibility presup-
poses, however, the emergence of
a true feeling of world citizenship,
the willingness of all men to live
together as citizens in a world
community in which local and
national loyalties are compatible
with the higher loyalty to hu-
manity as a whole. In order to
attain this goal nothing less than
a radical transformation of the
traditional patterns of both in-
dividual and collective human
behaviour is needed. In short,
fear and insecurity must be radi-
cated as predominant elements
in human relationships.
Such a task obviously will be
long and very arduous. To ac-
complish it we :- shalt have to eli-
minate belief in the superiority
of one national or racial group
over such-a belief which always
goes hand in hand with con-
tempt and hatred of others. We
shall have to correct the distort-
ed picture which the majority of
people have of the world outside
their own little spheres. We shan
have to put and end to attitudes
which unavoidably lead to re-
sentment, aggresiveness and ten-
sions.
Viewed against this appraisal
of our problems today, the con-
tribution which such agencies as
Unesco and W. H. O. can make to
the solution of these problems
can hardly be overestimated.
Unesco, which from its inception
has recognized that war starts In
the minds of men, is devoting all
its resources to the use of educa-
tion, science and all branches of
culture as a means for establish-
ing understanding among the
peoples of the world and for free-
ing men from the slavery engen-
dered by insecurity and fear.
W. H. O. considers as its specific
task to give to all peoples"the
highest possible level of health".

live harmoniously in a changing
total environment"and at foster-
in"activities in the field of men-
tal health, especially those effect-
ing the harmony of human rela-
tions.
THE"TenSIOns Project"startedby Unesco in 1948 is probably
one of the best examples of how
the two agencies can work joint-
ly for international co-operation.
The value of the project for our
time is clear from the very defi-
nition of its general purpose : to
provide a means by which social
scientists in all countries may
contribute the knowledge and
experience of their respective dis-
ciplines to the advancement of
international understanding. In
1949 and succeeding years Unesco
will prepare a series of mono-
graphs on the"Way of Life"of
the principal nations of the
world. It is hoped that the result
of such an enquiry will stimulate
the sympathy and respect of na-
tions for each others'ideas and
aspirations and the appreciation
of national problems. Another
essential teature of the same
project is a combined effort by
experts in the fields of sociology,
psychology, psychiatry, econo-
mics and philosophy to explore
the conditions which must be
created if attitudes leading to
international aggression are to be
replaced by those leading to co-
operation among the people. The
phrase"Tensions project"sounds
rather cold, technical and aca-
demic. But behind it is nothing
less than the mapping out of a
concentrated and integrated at-
tack on the cause of the ten-
sions now standing in the way
of international understanding.
ANOTHER example of planswhich Unesco intends to de-
velop in 1949, with the active
support of W. H. O., can be found
in the effort to enable Universi-
ties and other institutions of
higher learning to adapt them-
selves to the needs of modern so-
ciety and thus to play their part
in the formation of a spirit of
true world citizenship in all coun-
tries. The foundation for this
work was laid in discussions held
in Utrecht in the summer of
1948, when University professors
from 32 nations studied such
vital issues as the changing role
of the university","the univer-
sity as a force in world co-oper-
ation","Relations between higher
education and the State", etc.
In the beginning of April 1949
an international conference joint-
ly sponsored by Unesco and
W. H. O. will meet in Brussels to
take concrete steps for the co-
ordination of Medical Science
Congresses. For the first time in
history a permanent Council will
be established for that purpose
which will see to it that, through
the channel of medical con-
gresses (mankind as a whole may
benefit from the progress achiev-
ed by physicians in individual
countries of individual branches
of their science.
It is through projects like all
of these that Unesco, W. H. O. and
their s ; ster U. N. agencies intend
to serve the cause which must
transcend all our other concerns :
the building of a physically and
mentally healthy and stable One
World.
6
Meanwhile, there is in all countries a growing awareness that the
challenge will be met only if governments and peoples live up to their
responsibility to ensure, through effective international co-operation,
a decent standard of living to every human being regardless of race,
religion or political belief.

