Benefits to Man-in-Street Seen
In World Medical Council
......, XT April 4, scientists representing over 50 international
medical organizations will gather at the Palais des Academies
in Brussels to set up what, to the layman, may sound like : : I.
forbidding body : a Permanent Council For the Co-ordination of Inter-
national Congresses of Medical Sciences.
In reality, this new council may play an important role in making
the latest results for treating tuberculosis, cancer, heart troubl,
rheumati1jm and other prevalent diseases more widely known to
medical men in different corners of the globe.
WHAT does the Medical Science"Congress hope to accom-
plish ? Perhaps the following
story may explain its proposed
function, in part :
In the summer of 1947, several
important international meetings,
all devoted to related fields of
medicine, were held simultane-
ously in widely separated cities
of the globe. One was a congress
on cancer meeting in St. Louis,
in the United States. The second
was on microbiology in Copen-
hagen, another on physiology was
held at Oxford, and the fourth
on cytology at Stockholm. These
were all meetings dealing with _
medical subjects in closely asso-
ciated fields, and many of the
scientists attending one of the
congresses keenly desired taking
part in several of the others.
Obviously, however, they could
not be in different parts of the
world at the same time.
Through the new Medical Con-
gress Council it is hoped that
future international meetings sun
related fields of medicine can be
so arranged for time and place
as to present no conflict for me-
dical scientists wishing to attend
various congresses.
Medical Council will include ma-
terial assistance to congresses by
helping in the transfer of funds,
facilitating international travel
of their members and by support-
ing the publication of their
proceedings.
Professor J. Maisin, General
Secretary of the International
Union against Cancer, will be
chairman of the new co-ordina-
tion committee.

The new medical organization
will be sponsored jointly hy
Unesco and the World Health
Organization, both of which will
contribute an equal amount for
its operation.
The Permanent Council is
however planned as an indepen-
dent non-governmental body.
In addition to co-ordinating
congresses as to dates and places,
the Council will provide informa-
tion to and on medical congressês
both on their programmes and
on the technique of holding con-
gresses.
An important function of the
