UNESCO COURIER
INTE, RNATION AL
CIRCULATION
OF PUBLICATIO, NS
FREE exchange of ideas and
knowledge between peoples is
on of the main conditions of
intellectual progress and under-
standing and, consequently, of the
establishment of world peace. It is,
therefore, a matter of primary impor-
tance to facilitate thy free circulation
of publications, since, of all media for
the interchange of ideas, the printed
word in all its forms commends itself
by reason of its long-established
use and is still-as regards both
duration and accuracy of expression,
one of the most effective instruments
of intetlsctua ! intercourse and mass
education.
The draft agreement on the inter-
national circulation of publications.
therefore, provides that contracting
parties undertake not to institute or
maintain any limitation on the entry
into their territory of publications.
Under various articles, the agree-
ment takes into account the legislation
particular to individual states but
provides for the arbitration of Unesco
and the International Trade Organ-
ization should the restrictions imposed
by one of the contracting states give
rise to representations from another
contracting state.
VISUAL AND AUDITORY
MATERIALS
THE draft agreement to facilitate
the international circulation of
visual and auditory materials
of an educational, scientific and cul-
tural nature was submitted by Unesco
to member states for signature but
has so far been signed by no member.
This agreement is designed to
remove all customs duties and quanti-
tative rstrictions on the importation of
This provides for the abolition of all
customs duties on publications coming
from another contracting party and
includes the waiving of all costs, taxes,
charges or dues which are not levied
to the same extent on publications of
national origin. It does not, how-
ever, entail the abolition of taxes,
costs, charges or dues relating to the
importation of any articles whatsoever,
including articles imported duty-fre :.
and in particular of statistics and
stamp duties.
The agreement further provides
that no quantitative restrictions would
be imposed by the contracting states
whose legislation does not establish an
exchang control system, and makes
provision for laws and regulations in
force in these states.
The-publications concerned include
all which are of an educational,
scientific and cultural character, and
many others intended for public li-
braries and collections, for the libra-
ries and collections of public educa-
tional, research or cultural institutions,
and private institutions of the same
character. The agreement also covers
publications intended for bureaux or
centres for the exchange and distribu-
tion of publications, official govern-
ment documents, publications of the
U. N. and its Specialized Agencies,
material distributed by Unesco and
reading matter in raised characters for
the blind. Finally, publications in-
tended to promote tourism (on condi-
tion that they are published or spon-
sored by an official tourist organization
and addressed to it by a similar natio-
nal organization for free distribution
and that they contain no private com-
mercial advertising matter) also come
under the terms of the agreement.
films and other auditory and visual
materials which have been certified to
be of such a character. Including
filmstrips and microfilms, sound record-
ings of all types and forms, glass
didres, charts, maps and posters.
In all cases, the primary purpose
of this material must be to instruct or
inform or to maintain, increase or
diffus knowledge, and augment inter-
national understanding and goodwiH.
To obtain the exemption provided
under the agreement, the materials
concerned must be accompanied by a
certificate that such material is of an
educational, scientific or cultural cha-
racter. The certificates can be issued
by the appropriate governmental
agency of the State wherein the ma-
terial originated or by Unesco.,
The agreement also provides that
the contracting states undertake jointly
to consider means of reducing to a
minimum the restrictions that are not
removed by the agreement and which
might interfere with the international
circulation of educational and scientific
material.
All disputes arising out of the inter-
pretation or application of the
agreement can be referred to the In-
ternational Court of Justice or to an
arbitral tribunal unless it is agreed to
have recourse to another mode of
settlement.
G. A. T. T. TEXT
WHILE Unesco was preparing
the agreement on the importa-
tion of books newspapers and
periodicals, certain parallel develop-
ments took place which are being
brought to the attention of the General
Conference.
AT its session last year, The General Conference of Unesco asked the
Diredor General to prepare a draft agreement on the importation of
book :, newspapers and periodicals. This text was prepared by the.
Secretariat in consultation with the legal Department of the United Nations
and will be presented to the General Conference's current session before
submission to governments for sgnature.
This draft agreement is a sequel to a similar draft accord for facilitat : ng
the international circulation of visual and auditory materials of an educational.
scientific and cultural nature which was approved by the General Conference
last year and has since been submitted to member states for signature.
These two agreements are designed to promote the free flow of ideas by
word and image and to encourage the understanding of peoples in confor-
mity with the alms of Unesco.
The Contracting Parties to tIre
General Agre ment on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT) which held their
third session at Annecy, France, dur-
ing the spring, received from the
Director-General of Unesco a « Me-
morandum on Trade Barriers affect-
ing the Import and Export of Educa-
tonal. Scientific and Cultural Mate-
rials. >&gt; (See also page 7.)
After carefully examining the me-
thods of reducing trade barriers to the
international circulation of such ma-
terials, a special Working Party con-
cluded that a most effective method
for Unesco to accomplish its objective
in this field would be to sponsor an
international agreement, consolidating
and extending the favourable trade
treatment at present accorded to this
kind of materials in many countries.
The Working Party then proceeded
to draft the tentative text of an
Agreement on the Importation of
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Materials, covering the following ca-
tegories : (a) books and publications ;
. (b) DJod (s of art and other objects of
'an educational, scientific and cuJtural
character ; (c) visual and auditory
materials of an educational, sc : en-tific
and cultural character.
This draft text is also being sub-
mitted to the General Conference for
discussion. But in a report, the Se-
cretan ? at of Unesco points out that the
text prepared by GATT makes pro-
vision for the materials covered by the
two draft agreements mentioned above
as well as for certain other materials
under the cat°_gory of works of art.
It will therefore, be up to the General
Conference to decide whether to act
on separate agreements or on one
broad agreement to facilitate the
international circulation of a wide
variety of educational, !, scientific and
cultural materials.
