A MANIFESTO
'&..../E publish below the partial text of th. e
we Manifesto recently issued by the Inter-
national Music Fund, set UIJ by the
American Section of the International Society
oj Contemporary Music (ISCM) to aid com-
posers and composers'societies in Europe.
- "-.'-. ./-
Of The international
THE International Music Fund has come into existence as anAct of Faith on the part of America's composers, artists and
educators-faith in the regenerative powers of creative thought.
and the exchange of creative thought, and faith in their own ability
to form, in an epoch teeming with materialist implications, an
organization that could rise above all ideological and spatial frontiers,
and demonstrate in terms of action the enduring validity and urgent
priority claims of the things of the spirit.
As in Europe, here too in America, the creative artist feels himself
to be working in a spiritual wilderness, for the darkness is a world-
wide darkness-a flood-tide of materialism, prejudice and suspicion
that threatens to engulf all other values.
Much has been written and said of the urgent necessity for a
physical and material rehabilitation in war-shattered areas of Europe ;
little is heard of the spiritual exhaustion, the psychic devastation.
the despair that is attendant upon these conditions-a spiritual
chaos that has undermined the dignity and serenity of artists aid
thinkers everywhere.
A.'Still Small Voice'.
It is in answer to this"still small voice'that the International
Music Fund speaks forth, an answer to that precious minority of
creative people who always did, always will place the eternal values

Music Fund
of the mind, heart and spirit before the transient ones
of the body, and to whom assistance that is designed to
enable them to formulate and bring forth a renaissance
ef their own creativity, will be hailed as the greatest
service that in this country can render them.
How Fund W ill Work
rUCH people as the Fund will seek to discover and assist, will notJ misco7stru its intention, will not mistake fellowship and good-
will for a gesture of charitable philanthropy, but will read in every
Ideal and rule set forth for the Fund's guidance a deep desire on the
part of some individuals to re-distribute more evenly such wealth
of the world as is the prerequisite for the liberating of creative minds
for their destined work in that world's service.
The organizers of the Fund have accordingly gone to work to
inaugurate a nation-wide series of Benefit Concerts and other musical
activities to raise a budget that will be collected through the U. S.
Section of the ISCM, (International Society of Contemporary Music),
and distributed to European composers and composers'organizations
through the Paris office of Unesco.
A committee has been set up in New York, and a groUlp of European
Regional Advisers are being appointed, to recommend, and make apple.
cations through the Paris Unesco headquarters, which, after due
consultation with the N. Y. Committee, wiU allot the funds raised.
Dr, Carleton Sprague Smith, Chair-
man of the American Committee of
the International Music Fund
The sponsors of the Fund will not seek to Interfere. with, or
dictate the allocation of the money, but rather-twill endeavour to
assist such activities or projects as are already in existence, or under
way.
Many types of application will be considered. It will be the desire of
the Fund to facilitate wherever possible the movement and circula-
tion of composers, and of their work from one country to another ;
to supplement the budgets of organizations wishing to perform or
commission works by living composers ; to undertake the copying of
parts or the duplication of scores ; ultimately it is hoped that exchange
of scholarships may be arranged, so that it will be possible for the
Regional Advisers to make application for such scholarships enabling
European c
omposers and student composers to visit the United States.

<Koussevitsky Pledges
Support
) f\R. KOUSSEVITZKY, asHonorary President of the
U. S. Section of the ISCM,
has pledged his full support and
has promised his assistance in
every way, and he himself con-
ducted the Inaugural Benefit
Concert with the Boston Sym-
phony Orchestra at Tanglewood
on 3 August 1948, when a group
of speakers representing the arts
and letters spoke for the cause,
and where Mr. Archibald Mac-
Leish was present in both the
capacities of Master of Ceremo-
nies and as U. S. representative
for Unesco.
On that occasion, Mr. George V. Allen of the State Department
wrote"that private groups take the lead in such efforts is highly
desirable. The most effective means for establishing lasting inter-
national ties among peoples is found in privately initiated activities.
It is of paramount importance that international cooperation be
developed and expanded in every way possible. The American Section
of the International Society for Contemporary Music with Dr. Serge
Koussevitzky at its head is working in a field of great significance."
Speaking at the opening of the Berkshire Summer School at
Tanglawood last year, Dr. Koussevitzky expressed similar concepts
in his own inimitable way :"The physicist calls it the atomic age,"
he said."The mystic sees in it the approach of apocalyptic times ;
it is surprising to note how little faith is shown by present-day
leaders of humanity in the creative and regenerative capacity of
cultural and spiritual values.
Lin Yutang and Correa de Azevedo, of Uneseo, discuss work of Music
Council with Harrison Kerr of U. S. Composers'AUiance, Mr. C. Seegher
and Mr. C. Sprague Smith.
"We read of millions of dollars being assigned for the vast European
Recovery Programme, but all is for physical needs-none for the
relief of the spiritual vacuum and cultural hunger of a sick mankind.
Man has indeed lost himself in the conflict with life ; he is demoralized,
and stands on the verge of spiritual failure."
The American musicians who join forces to create this Fund, work
not with any sense of patronage for their superior strength on a
material plane, nor from a sense of inadequacy and inferiority in
the creative field. For"In the field of Art,"wrote Romain Rolland
to Carleton Sprague Smith in 1939."there should not be any rivalry
between the Nations. The only combat worthy of us is that waged
in every country, at every hour, between culture and ignorance,
between light and chaos. Let us save all the light that can be saved ;
there is none more refulgent than music. It is the sum of the inner
universe."
