II rejoice that my first official
journey as Director-General of
Unesco should be to your country.
The nearness of our headquarters in
Paris was not the sole factor which
guided my choice. To my mind there
are spiritual considerations which
outweigh mere geographical proxi-
mity. The first of these is the in-
terest which Belgium has always
shown in the international work of
intellectual cho-operation and which
has already taken the form of a
major contribution to Unesco's ac-
tivities.
Even before the 1945 Conference.
the Belgian Government, established
throughout the war in London, took
part with disinterested zeal in the
meetings of the Allied Ministers of
Education, whose labours were to
provide an excellent basis for the
United Nations Educational, Scienti-
fic and Cultural Organization. At the
Conference of 1945, where I had the
honour to represent Mexico, I was
able to appreciate the full value of
the assistance given us by the Belgian
delegation under M. Buisseret and to
note that intense vitality which,
despite the sacrifices demanded by
the war, remains the outstanding
quality of the Belgian people. Later.
in Mexico in November 1947, and at
Beirut in 1948, the delegations chair-
ed with such distinction by M. Camille
Huysmans, deeply impressed the Con-
ferences by the vigour of their con-
tributions and by the'r manifest and
entirely logical conviction of the
noble task that is Unesco's.
Worth of the SiÛrit
it 0 the support which Belgium hasever given to Unesco I would
add two other factors in explana-
tion of my eagerness to make this
particular visit, one of them his-
torical and the other intimate and
personal. The historical factor IS
this : if there be a people in all
Europe which may be deemed to
have reached a degree of maturity
sufficient to attain Unesco's goal, it
is the Belgian :
Their position on the map has
made them the predestined victims
of a succession of war-like adven-
tures which they endured heroically
without ever in their turn seeking to
subject others to their own ambi-
tions. All Belgium sought was to
save the honour of its flag. There
are few countries in the world
which have proved as thoroughly as
Belgium the wo. rth of the spirit in
the face of force or how justice over-
tops the invader's lust for domina-
tion. The shells which more than
once have torn Belgium's soil could
not breach the virtues of its people,
its love of work, its compassion for
the humble, its concept of impartial-
ity and honour. That is a noble
exemple, to which I am glad to do
reverence, and in itself is a source
of living hope for Unesco.
Personal Factor
II mentioneq an intimate personal! t fact r. It is my full appreciation
of your ideals and your anxieties.
From my earliest years, in the far-
off country of my birth, beneath a
sun which every evening gilds the
pyramids of Teotihuacan and every
morning brings back the emory of
Queltzalcoatl, I have felt drawn
towards your hard-working and
poetic land, mystical and practical at
once, able to enjoy realism even in
th opulent mythology of a Rubens,
but able also to escape from it in the
dreamboat of a Rodenbach along the
moonlit canals of Bruges.
In 1937, I came to live among you
as the diplomatic representative of
the United States of Mexico. On 26'November. 1948, the General Confer-
ence of Unesco, meeting in Beirut,
did me the honour to appoint me
Director-General in the place of my
illustr : ous friend, Dr. Huxley, and on
11 December I assumed my present
office. Since that day I have not
ceased to meditate on the great
THE MISSION
--. d
OF UNESCO
, ,.",
By J. TORRES BODES'
On February 21, at the magnificent Palais des Académies
in Brussels, the Belgian National Commission for Unesco
was officially installed in the presence of many of the
most distinguished representatives of Belgian education,
science and culture.
Impressive ceremonies and various other celebrations.
both in Brussels and at the university centres of Louvain,
Liège and Ghent, marked the occasion and testify to the
growing importance which public opinion attaches tq the
National Commission as the active arm of Unesco in each
country.
Making his first trip abroad for this occasion since hi'
took over his post in Paris, Dr. J. Torres Bodet spoke to
the Commission and the people of Belgium on"The
Mission of Unesco". In view of its major importance and
its fundamental probings into the meaning of Unesco, t, he
Courer is reproducing the full text of this address in this
spec : a7 Supplemen't.
difficulties Unesco has met in its
course. Some of them are temporary
and internal, their source a kind of
growing pains. Two years ago Unesco,
to all intents and purposes, did not
exist ; today it is a great international
institution. What wonder then if
everything is not yet exactly right
in a machine put together in such
haste and in charge of so complex,
so vast and to diversified a pro-
gramme ?
Time and Experience
) t N face of a new internationalmechanism, our first impression
resembles what Saint-Exupery felt
when he compared an aeroplane of
Bleriot's time with a modern stream-
lined aircraft. Disheartened by the
difficulties of detail and the complica-
tions of the structure, dazed by the
innumerable springs, levers and
brakes, we stand perplexed in front
of a collection of parts which do
not yet make up a living whole. Let
us not despair on that account. There
is no success which does not follow
on time and experience. Unesco will
gradually acquire the organic flexi-
bility it now lacks,. and, the simpler
it becomes, the better it will fulfil
its functions.
"It appears :' Saint-Exupéry sa : d
in speaking of his aircraft,"that the
whole industrial effort of man, all
his calculations, all his nightly toil-
ing rover plans had their visible con-
clusion in sheer simplicity, as though
it needed the experience of genera-
tions to arrive little by little at the
curve of a column, a hull or fuselage
of a plane, and give to them the
elemental purity of a breast or
shoulder. It appears that perfect : on
is reached, not when there is nothing
more to add, but when there is
nothing more to take away. When
it is finally completed, the-machine
is hidden".
That is how we must go to work
with the administration of Unesco :
simplify it as much as is necessary
in order that the machinery may be
concealed and the Organ ; ration be-
come humanized as we intend it
shall.
&commat; &commat; &commat;
Such internal difficulties can and
will-be overcome by the Executive
Board and backed by the support
and goodwill of the General Confer-
ence. There are, however, other dif-
ficulties inherent not in Unesco as
a Spec : alized Agency of the United
Nations, but in the United Nations
2themselves and, through the United
Nations, in every government and
every people. I mean the difficulties
arising in every country from the
clash between the imperative of the
national will and those of a construc-
tive internationalism. This is a dif-
ficulty which is not peculiar to
Unesco ; the same state of affairs is
found, in the transitional period
through which we are passing, at all
levels of world co-operation.
HE peoples yearn for collectiveagre ment, but fear that if that
agreement is arrived at it may not
take account enough of the legitimate
interests of each individual commun-
ity. With their lips they declare that
no practical international work can
be accomplished unless States agree
to a limitation of their sovereignty.
But each of them asks in his heart :
"Who will agree to surrender part of
his sovereign rights ? All of us ? Then
how much ? Some of us only ? Who ?
Only the weak ?"
Economic and political agreements
alike justify such doubts. Those
doubts are still more justified in
Unesco's case for, if there is any-
thing which governments are not
entitled to surrender, it is the cul-
2urge of their peoples. Their culture
is the very soul which gives them
life, the secret of their individuality
as units in civilization. That indivi-
duality is the fruit of their history,
fashioned through long centuries by
tradition and custom, by suffering
and conquest, and to seek to assail it
would be to outrage in peace a sanc-
tuary which the most ambitions ag-
gressors have seldom dared to violate
in war.
Unesco did not come into existence
to plot that assault. Far otherwise ;
its task is to work towards better
understanding between the peoples
by showing each of them all it has
to gain by knowing and respecting
foreign cultures, so true is it that
foreign cultures serve to broaden our
own concept of life and our own idea
of civilization. Public opinion must be
warned against the mistake of think-
ing Unesco capable of conceiving a
civilization where unity would result
automatically from the application
of uniform rules and purely mechan-
ical adjustment.
. Intellectual Path to Peace
HE intellectual path to peaceand human brother ood does
not lie through any doctrinaire sim-
plification of historic cultures. In
any case such a simplification-
where each culture would lose its
special savour-would bring with it
immeasurable impoverishment. It
would be rather like the artificial
language offered to us from time to
time as a universal vehicle of
thought.
However useful they may be for
that purpose, they are never more
than a collection of bloodless convey-
tions, and only blind optimism could
imagine their ultimately replacing
the real languages, whose vocabulary
has slowly gathered treasure from the
lived experience of a people, from the
joy and grief of its poets and the
thought of its philosophers, and
which have been given their folk
and colour by the innumerable thicks
making up daily life, a particular
kind of daily life. a particular way
of living, in a word, a unique civiliza-
tion.
It would be perilous for Universal
culture to become a kind of vc. 3t
haberdashery counter, where dilet-
tantes could choose at will wht
seemed to them rarest, most curious,
most exotic. And there is Another
kind of uni"ersalism whose victors
would be no less fatal, one in which
the impossible came to pass and all
became interchangeable. There world
be little profit in that save for tea
slothful minds which had created it
by selecting everywhere the items
they thought best calculated to sa-
tisfy the most people most quickly.
and which would necessarily be the
crudest and the worst,
Universalism
j f\ UR heritage is marvellous in itsdiversity and we must lose
none of it. Nevertheless, we must
make it the possession of the whole
world or, at the least, make possible
the interpenetration of cultures
ra'ther than rejection or ignorance.
sometimes even hatred and scorn.
one of another. The first goal to be
attained is sympathy, and, after that.
mutual enrichment ; not a collection
of samples, nor a catalogue, nor an
amalgam of mediocrities, nor some
sort of highest common factor. lit is
not, of course, impossible to break
down the different civilizations into
their prime factors, but it may be
neither so easy nor so quick to re-
build anything strong and viable
from those prime factors, once am-
putated from the living and life-
giving body.
Unesco's object in this field is in
very truth to breathe into each cul-
ture the spirit of universalism, by
inspiring it with the desire for un-
derstanding and exchange ; by pre-
senting to its gaze the peculiar qua-
lities of other cultures in brotherly
emulation, to lead it to awareness of
its own, and to an effort to pro-
claim and to perfect those special
qualities, avoiding both aggressive'
rivalry with others and the sacrifice
of its own values to an idol made by
many hands.
Classics and Culture.
IH OWEVER difficult this task mybe, it is not beyond our chiev. -
ment, for every culture, national or
regional, has its roots in Man, a ;.. act
no better medium can be found for
the fellowship of men than the fel-
lowship of cultures. To become ccn-
vinced of this, it is enough to glare
at the classics most typical of each
culture.
What could be more typically Spa n-
ish than the character of : CJ ! 1
Quixote, what more Russian tt,) n
Dostoiewski's characters, more !'-
gentine than Martin Fierro, m :,'
German thah Faust, more FIem 
than Tyll Ulenspiegel ? And yet thc ^.
the most completely national ty : ? s
of each literature, are also those b : sot
known beyond the borders of the la-id
that gave them birth, those who, ; ?
universal value is most readily per-
ceived. And the explanation ? Simply
this : it was by seeking out all than
was most original in their tongue
and in the traditions of their ra Je.
by rummaging in the national store,
that the creators of these charac-
ters managed to attain to term :
man. In other words, though cultur :,
may be at variance on the surface
and in the outer form of things, yet

the similarity of their ultimate ob-
jec-ive impels them af'least as
strongly to come together.
L'quilibrium Between Symbols
II N wartime everything becomes thesymbol of conflict, right down to
the best-known characters of a na-
tic i's classics. Yet not all the symbols
figit for the regime in power in
their motherlands. An example I
have in mind is how in the last war
the first bars of the Fifth Symphony
acquired the status of the anthem
of democracy. Beethoven against
Hitler !'
Can the sight of such protagonists
fall to teach us faith in the incorrup-
tib'e power of culture ? Above-and
bel,) w-the governments there are
two forces whose conjunction is ever
possible : they are, firstly, the peoples
themselves and, secondly, the heroes
in whom the peoples see the in-
cat nation of their race.
Thus it was that Paul Valery's
luc d genius led him to say that peace
is primarily a state of equilibrium
between symbols. It ii the reason,
too, why, at the war's end, the United
Nations resolved to set up an
organization"for the purpose of ad-
vancing, through the educational
and scientific and cultural relations
of the peoples of the world, the ob-
jectives of international peace and of
the common welfare of mankind..."
It is interesting to read again the
preamble to the Constitution signed
in London on 16 November, 1945. This
preamble says, among other things :
That ignorance of eaWL other's
ways and lives has been a com-
mon cause, throughout the his-
tory of mankind, of that suspi-
cion and mistrust between the
peoples of the world through which
their differences have all too often
broken into war ;
That a peace based exclusively
upon the political and economic
arrangements or governments
would now be a peace which could
secure the unanimous, lasting and
sincere support of tie peoples of
the world, and that the peace must
therefore be founded upon the in-
tellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind ;
That the wide diffusion of cul-
ture, and the education of Human-
ity for justice and liberty and
peace are indispensable to the
dignity of man and constitute a
sacred duty which all the nations
must fulfil in a sp : rit of mutual
assistance and concern.
For these reason-the text goes
on-the States parties to this
Constitution, believing in full and
equal opportunities for education
for all, an unrestricted pursuit of
objective truth, and in the free
exchange of ideas and knowledge,
are agreed and determined to
develop and increase the means of
communication between their
peoples and to employ these means
for the purposes of mutual under-
standing and a truer and more
perfect knowledge of each other's
lives.
Unesco's Ac1lÏevements
HAT then, has Unesco done
V two translate so rich a pro-
gramme into acts ? I will try to tell
you briefly.
In the field of Reconstruction,
Unesco has first sought to establish
the educational, scientific and cul-
tural needs of the war-devastated
countries ; The Secretariat keeps im-
portant information on this subject
regularly up to date and disseminates
it through various publications, such
as the monthly"Bulletin of Recons-
truction", which appears in English,
French and Spanish, and the"Book
of Needs", of which two volumes
have been issued. Illustrated booklets
have been published on special sub-
jects, for example"Universities in
Need", and"Suggestions for Science
Teachers in War-Devastated Coun-
tries". The last in particular has prov-
ed extremely valuable even in coun-
tries not devastated by the war, but
where public educatior still possesses
only rudimentary equipment. It is at
the request of those countries that
we are now undertaking to issue
Spanish. Chinese and Arabic editions
of this pamphlet. Other pamphlets
are being prepared on devastated
libraries, laboratories and art gal-
leries. A documentary film has been
made on university reconstruction,
and a very moving exhibition of
photographs of children in Europe
has just been sent to America.
g-\ N the basis of all this informa-tion Unesco has helped to
launch and co-ordinate nation-
al and international campaigns to
collect the money for meeting such
enormous needs. It has promoted the
establishment of, and furnished the
Secretariat for the Temporary Inter-
national Council for Educational Re-
construction, which groups together
the chief private organizations con-
cerned in this b : g task.
We owe thanks to Belgium for
having found 10 % of the funds
placed at our disposal, as the result
of the campaign by the Belgian Com-
mittee of U. N. A. C.
From its own budget Unesco finds
the means of providing emergency
aid : in 1948 $395, 000 and in 1949
$175, 000 were devoted to the purchase
of teach ; ing equipment. This year a
special effort will be made on be-
half of the 200, 000 children among
the 800, 000 refugees from the Middle
East.
However, the problem cannot be
solved simply by sending material,
however necessary. The havoc
wrought by the war in people's minds,
and especially in children's minds, is
even more serious than the material
destruction. The problem of the re-
education of child victims of the war
is one of those to which Unesco in-
tends to devote closest concern.
In the first place we have to res-
tore to these children and young
people, whose minds are obsessed by
so much violence and poisoned by
so much hatred, the desire to re-
construct and to share the experience
of human brotherhood. In 1947
Unesco sponsored four international
volunteer work camps in Belgium.
France, Czechoslovakia and Poland.
In 1948, it called a conference of or-
ganizations interested in the work
of these camps, to co-ordinate and
back up what they were doing. Books
were collected and distributed among
thirty work camps. In 1948 more than
50, 000 volunteers furnished 3, 000, 000
hours of work in 135 camps.
Further, Unesco sponsored in 1948
a conference of Directors of Chil-
dren's Villages, which met at Trogen
in Switzerland and ended in the
establishment of a special Federation
for the development of this undertak-
ing. The vice-president of the Fe-
deration's governing body is a coun-
tryman of yours, M. de Cooman.
Jr OME other countries escaped de-vastation by the war, but have
for centuries been denied their birth-
right or otherwise victimized by the
facts of History. It is to those coun-
tries that we are applying our pro-
gramme of Fundamental Education.
In the valley of Marbial, in Haiti, a
pilot project is now being carried out
in co-operation with other Specializ-
ed Agencies of the United Nations,
like the Food and Agriculture Organ-
ization and the World Health Or-
ganization. Begun last year, this ex-
periment quickly stirred the en-
thusiasm of the local inhabitants, it
is in full swing and has already fur-
nished valuable lessons.
That is only one example and, in
this and in all the other fields Unes-
co's activity is not confined to under-
takings for which it assumes direct
responsibility. It has made it its
business to stimulate, aid and ad-
vise a whole series of experiments
and kindred projects organized by
others, if it is only by ensuring the
exchange of information and special-
ized knowledge.
In countries where education is
well developed, practical study
courses, also known as seminars,
have proved an excellent method of
joint comparison and research. The
first course was held at Sevres, out-
side Paris, in 1947. Its subject was
the examination of studies best
adapted for developing international
understanding, and its success en-
couraged Unesco to repeat and ex-
tend the experiment.
Last year four seminars were ar-
ranged simultaneously at Ashridge
(England), on the training of teach-
ers, at Adelphi College (United States)
on teaching about the United Nations
at Caracas (Venezuela) on certain
educational problems peculiar to
Latin America, and at Podebrady
(Czechoslovakia). For this year two
such courses are being prepared, one
will be at New Delhi and will be
devoted to adult education in rural
areas, the other in Brazil where the
subject will be the campaign against
illiteracy. These international courses
are not only useful for the perfecting
of educational methods, but also
constitute highly encouraging ex-
periments in international under-
standing.
Educational Missions
A POTHER technique characterlz-
A ing Unesco's educational work
is that of educational missions. Up
to now we had not been able to make
a start, but I am glad to tell you
that this year four countries have
already asked for our help. The first
mission has begun its work in ! she
Philippines where, under the direc-
tion of an American expert it is res-
ponsible for the study of primary
and secondary education. The second
mission, headed by an Englishman,
has just arrived in Bangkok. It is to
advise the Siamese Government in its*
campaign against illiteracy. The
other two missions are now being
fitted up and will proceed, one to
Afghanatan and the other to Syria.
All these missions are sent at the
request of the countries concerned,
which share the expenses with Unes-
co. They are made up of experts
chosen by Unesco from the most
highly qualified specialists in that
field in which they are asked by the
inviting governments for their ad-
vice. Here again international soli-
darity marches side by side with
social advancement.
Certain other achievements or
projects now in the course of plan-
ning I must pass over rapidly, in-
teresting though many of them are.
Thus I can only mention in passing
the establishment of an interna-
tional Universities Office, set up as
a result of the Congress summoned
by Unesco last year at Utrecht in
conjunction with the government
of the Netherlands and which was at-
tended by two hundred universities
from thirty-two countries. Nor can I
do more than name the forthcom-
ing Conference on Adult Education,
which Unesco is arranging in co-
operation with the Danish Govern-
ment to meet in June at Copenhagen.
Belter Textbooks
II j MUST, however, dwell for onemoment on a project particularly
close to my heart. That is the im-
provement of school textbooks, and
when I say improvement I am speak-
ing of a juster presentation of hu-
manity's profound solidarity, both in
time and space.
This is a task which has been long
under contemplation but has been
constantly postponed ; the present
state of the world, however, gives it
an urgency to whic h we can no longer
close our eyes. That is especially true
of history and and geography text-
books, whose authors too often
emphasize the differences between
men far more than their points of
resemblance ; the grandeur of their
common destiny is wantonly distorted
by the weight attached to their con-
flicts.
Let me not be misunderstood. We
are not trying to establish, still less
to impose, uniform textbooks for all
the world. We acknowledge and res-
pect the diversity of national condi-
tions and traditions. All we want to
do is to stimulate and help the res-
ponsible authorities in each country
to undertake on their own account a
revision of school books in the direc-
tion of that international understand-
ing I have just defined. For this
purpose the Secretariat, after very
careful work, is now completing the
formulation of objective criteria and
general advice, from which, we be-
lieve, all may benefit. It is, in the
last resort, for each to undertake his
own reform.
Field Science Offices.
IN the field of the Natural SciencesUnesco has already accomplished
a remarkable task of international
organization.
Since 1947 it has established four
regional offices for international
co-operation-at Cairo, Shanghai,
Delhi and Montevideo-in order to
create closer contacts between scien-
tists and scholars who sometimes work
far from their main centres of re-
search. The functions of these offices
vary with the conditions in each
region : contacts with government
ser. vices, scientific societies and insti-
tutions and individual scientists ;
technical advice, co-ordination of
research work and the mutual com-
munication of results obtained, in-
formation about documentation and
scientific equipment ; census of needs
and the search for the means of
satisfying them, exchanges of inform-
ation and surveys, etc. Now with-
drawn to Shanghai, the East Asia
Office is completing the scheme of
scientific and industrial equipment
left behind by U. N. R. R. A. ; it is dis-
tributing laboratory material among
Chinese institutes. In Southern Asia
the Delhi Office is studying the pos-
sibilities of manufacturing rubber and
penicillin, not for commercial but for
scientific and social purposes. The
Cairo Office has been equally pro-
ductive in the fields of both pure and
applied science.
The Montevideo Office has spent
most of its time on the setting up
of the International Institute of the
Hylean Amazon and its Constitution,
which was signed by the founder
states at the Iquitos Conference held
last August under Unesco's auspices,
is now in course of ratification. This
damp and marshy tropical forest,
rich in raw materials, oilfields, hevea,
medicinal and nutritional plants and
broken up by big rivers, extends over
more than 5, 000 kilometres in length
and covers more than 7, 000, 000 square
kilometres between the Andes and the
Atlantic.
While respecting the customs of the
natives, who are struggling for sur-
vival in these deadly areas, the Ins-
titute's aim is to open up these in-
comparable reserves to the work of
man. There is a host of problems to
be faced, ethnological'and sociolo-
gical, zoological, botanical and clima-
tological, health problems, agricultu-
ral and hydrobiological problems, not
to mention the political difficulties
in the way of essential international
co-operation. Through the Institute
and helped by the enthusiastic aid of
several countries and specialized
organizations, Unesco's business is to
solve these problems. Upon the suc-
cess of its efforts depend in great
measure the opening up and the ra-
tional development of a vast stretch
of territory.
Conservation of Natural Resources
II N a similar connexion I mustrefer to the efforts of Unesco
towards the protection of nature and
the conservation of natural resources.
Last year's conference at Fontaine-
bleau led to the establishment of an
International Union for the Protec-
tion of Nature, to which our help Is
promised. At present we are actively
engaged, in conjunction with the
E. C. O. S. O. C., in preparing for a very
important conference to be held next
August on the conservation of natu-
ral resources, this being one of the
most burning and also most difficult
problems of our time. Lastly. I must
not fail to mention the Congress
which, thanks to the hospitality of
the Belgian Government, will meet
in April in your capital and which,
jointly organized by Unesco and the
World Health Organization, aims at
preparing for the establishment of a
permanent Council for the co-ordina-
tion of international congresses of
the medical sciences. If there is one
field in which humanity should
affirm its solidarity, it is surely in
the campaign against disease.
Social Sciences
ITH regard to the Social
V {f Sciences, we have experienced
much dificulty in framing a pro-
gramme and putting it into execution.
Besides, the problems here are more
complex, the methods less approved
and the collaboration of specialists is

of more recent date. Nevertheless,
here also our work is beginning to
bear fruit.
Economists, sociolog ; sts and special-
ists in political science and compa-
rative law, invited from the different
countries, are organizing themselves
in response to our appeal and with
our aid. The Secretariat in its turn,
helped by many outside consultants,
is undertaking various surveys which
before the year is out, will result in
publications of a quality which I
hope will do us credit.
Among these studies I will mention
two on the state and the method-
ology of the political sciences ; a vol-
ume on"Aggressive Nationalism"
(with chapters written by eight
savants representing five countries) ;
a series of monographs on the"Way
of Life" (from eight countries), on
the ideas which people of one coun-
try hold concerning their own and
other nations (in nine countries), *and
finally on the methods for changing
the mental attitudes of communities
in their relations with one another.
All these very concrete studies will go
beyond purely scientific investiga-
tion ; they wil aim at developing a
rational understanding of human
groups such as may lead to better
inspired work in the cause of closer
international understanding, toler-
ance and peace.
Translation of classics
IN the kindred field of philosophyand associated sciences, interna-
tional organization is still farther
advanced. Last month, on Unesco's
initiative, an international council of
philosophy and humanistic sciences
was set up. That success I am glad
to be able to associate with the name
of this city, which has once again
manifested its concern for enterpr ; ses
serving the cause of international
co-operation.
In the field of the Arts, the Inter-
national Theatre Institute, a creation
of Unesco, began its life on 1 January
of this year with a detailed pro-
gramme of work.
A great deal of work is being done
as regards translations. A list of
translations and translators has been
methodically prepared and put at the
disposal of Member States, and
Unesco also has in hand a programme
of translations on its own account.
These are translations of the clas-
sics and of important classical works
which, whilst being truly representa-
tive of the culture from which they
originate have also, by reason of their
value and wide appeal, attained uni-
versal interest. These books must be
made accessible to all men in all lan-
guages, for they are a common treas-
ury of culture and spiraual libera-
tion. Unesco has initiated a two-fold
programme which will be spread over
several years, beginning in 1949.
One part of this programme, which
concerns the Arab world, will include
the translation into Arabic of world
classics and the translation of Arabic
classics into several well known lan-
guages. The other part is more parti-
cularly concerned with the transla-
tion into English and French of the
most important works of Latin Amer-
ican literature. Both will provide
plenty of material for fruitful intel-
lectual relations.
.-The same may be said with regard
to the visual arts and music, thanks
to the collections of reproductions
and recordings for which Unesco is
organizing dissemination and ex-
changes on a large scale.
In the field of museums, where we
work in close collaboration with the
International Council of Museums,
Unesco has made a notable contri-
bution in the publication of a quarter-
ly review entitled"Museum", of
which the second number has just
been issued.
In this connexion the programme
adopted at Beirut includes an simper-
tant resolution regarding measures
to be taken for ensuring the preserva-
tion, and possibly the restoration, of
historical sites and monuments. Thins
seems to me to be a duty which is
incumbent upon all civilized nations
- a duty involving both respect for
the past, to which we owe all that
we are, and the education of future
generations to whom we must pass
on the precious heritage of civiliza-
tion, of which we are the trustees.
Books and Libraries
() UR Organization has from thebeginning taken a particular
interest in libraries. For nearly two
years the Libraries Division has
published each month a Bulletin for
Libraries which is sent free of charge
to 6, 500 libraries. This Bulletin has
been most useful in connexion with
the re-establishment of contacts in-
terrupted by the war. A very success-
ful Summer School for Librarians was
organized last year in Manchester
and London. Twenty countries were
represented.
The most interesting of the projects
that should be mentioned is, however,
the institution of an international
Book Coupons Scheme, which enables
buyers in"soft currency"countries to
pay in their own currency for orders
placed with booksellers in"hard cur-
rency"countries, through the inter-
mediary of Unesco acting as a clear-
ing house thanks to its own resources.
The scheme began to work on an
experimental basis at the beginning
of December ; it concerns thirteen
countries and has a ceiling of $150,-
000, of which $50, 000 have been re-
mitted in the form of coupons to ten
countries. Its success was immediate
and striking. France's share, for
example, was absorbed at once. In
Czechoslovakia, the distribution of
coupons gave rise to official demon-
strations. The effect was the same
in the United States of America ;
numerous orders for. foreign books
were placed at once.
As regards copyright-in which
Belgium has always taken an active
interest-a methodical enquiry has
been carried out during the last two
years. A great many documents have
been collected. We have just pub-
lished the second number of an In-
formation Bulletin which will form a
link between specialists on this sub-
ject and the numerous professional
associations concerned. Once the
work of collecting documents and
making contacts is finished, we shall
have arrived at the stage when the
question of a Universal Convention on
Copyright should be considered-and
it will be considered.
The Department of Exchange of
Persons published last month an
International Handbook of Fellow-
ships, which concerns twenty coun-
tries and in which more than 10, 000
fellowships and other facilities for
studies abroad are listed. Unesco now
has its own programme of fellow-
ships, however, paid for either by our
Budget or by endowments whose
administration is entrusted to us. The
number of fellowships for which
Unesco is directly responsible is now
220. They were at first reserved for
war-devastated countries but will be
extended this year to economicalìy
backward countries and trustee terri-
tories.
II') UT our greatest efforts must beHe devoted to mass communication
- by press, radio and films-if we are
to : fulfil our task of promot : ng inter-
national understanding and better
social conditions.
Work in this domain was begun by
a far-reaching enquiry into the tech-
nical needs of the press, radio and
cinema. This enquiry was carried out
in 1947 in twelve war-devastated
countries of Europe and the Far East
and has since been steadily extended
to other parts of the world. Seventeen
countries in Europe, Asia and Amer-
ica were covered in 1948. Fifteen
others will be covered this year, in-
cluding some in Africa. The results
of this enquiry have been published
in two volumes which constitute a
mine of information such as has
rarely been collected hitherto.
On the basis of this information, a
Committee of Experts which meets
annually has recommended a series of
measures designed to remedy the lack
both of equipment and of trained
personnel which appears to be gen-
eral. It must be admitted that our
efforts have not so far produced any
tangible results.
An Organization like ours is in
fact somewhat poorly equipped for
overcoming the economic, financial,
and even political, obstacles with
which this problem bristles. But we
do not despair of making ourselves
heard, once it has been realized by
the professionals and by public opin-
ion that our cause is also theirs.
This is the spirit in which we are
now busily preparing a series of
pamphlets on special subjects, special
that is as regards their technical
terms, but of very wide range, such as
the professional training of journal-
ists, the production and distribution
of newsprint, the use of radio in edu-
cation and the manufacture of cheap
receiving sets and cinema projectors.
And this is the spirit in which Unesco
is preparing to take part in the Con-
ference on Wood and Wood Products
convened by the Food and Agricul-
ture Organization next April in Mont-
real, at which we intend to put for-
ward the extremely important ques-
tion of the production and distribu-
tion of paper.
Press, Radio and Film
A S regards the free flow of infor-
, 4` mation, the Conference at
Beirut adopted the text of a Conven-
tion whereby visual and auditory
material (gramophone records and
films) of an educational, scientific or
cultural nature may henceforth be
imported free of customs duty. This
is the first international agreement
to be drawn up by Unesco. Other
'agreements are already under con-
sideration, for it seems to me that
an inter-governmental Organization
like ours possesses here a legal tool
which has perhaps not been suffi-
ciently used in the past. We are
engaged, in particular, on a draft
convention concerning the duty-free
importation of books, newspapers and
periodicals, which has been drawn up
by a Belgian expert and is sure of a
welcome in this stronghold of free
exchange.
Finally, a special service has been
set up to ensure a fuller use of the
immense informative and persuasive
possibilities of the press, radio and
cinema for the promotion of the
ideals which Unesco was created to
serve. After a long, hard preparatory
period, this service has at last
reached the productive stage. A week-
ly bulletin of information suitable for
broadcasting on educational, scien-
tific and cultural events and topics-
the most important events and top : cs
of mankind's real mission, and yet
the least known, the least appreciated
- has recently been published. It is
sent free of charge to some hundreds
of broadcasting stations throughout
the world and we hope that a good
deal of its contents will be dissemin-
ated. I should like to mention that
this bulletin is the result of recom-
mendations made to Unesco by
broadcasting directors from seven-
teeQ countries who met in Paris, in
October 1948, under the chairmanship
of M. Fleischmann.
We mean to concentrate this year
on two main subjects :
1. Food and People ;
2. Human Rights.
I have already touched on the first
of these subjects in connexion with
the conservation of natural resources.
The second sums up, justifies and
'conditions all the rest.
Human Rights
I N 10 December 1948, the GeneralAssembly of the United Nations
approved, in Paris, the Universal De-
claration of Human Rights. Unesco
was bound to welcome with enthu-
siasm a document of such scope. The
General Conference at Beirut ins-
tructed me, by acclamation, to stimu-
late the dissemination of information
about this declaration and to advo-
cate its inclusion in the teaching
regarding the United Nations given
in schools.
In accordance with this decision, I
suggested to the governments of
Member States and the National
Commissions that, in order to impress
on the minds and hearts of young
people the memory of the historic
moment when the value of the
human person was universally pro-
claimed, the 10th December should be
observed each year in all school as a
day of recognition of the principles of
the liberty and dignity of Man.
I added, in particular, in my com-
munication that the world was long-
ing for an era of peace which would
enable every man to develop his
creative powers to the full for the
benefit of all and in the cause of
progress. Peace and justice require,
Indeed, above all things the streng-
thening of that intellectual and
moral solidarity without which, as
Unesco's Constitution states, the eco-
nomic and political arrangements of
governments would not secure the
unanimous, lasting and sincere sup-
port of the peoples of the world. One
thing is needful if this solidarity is
to spring from a real harmony of
minds and not from a passive inter-
dependence of wishes : respect for the
human being in his essential integ-
rity and his multiple diversity.
Unesco therefore finds support and
encouragement in the Universal De-
claration of Human Rights. The
recognition of the principles affirmed
in the Declaration and the dissemi-
nation of those principles through
teaching will help to strengthen the
faith of every human being in the
dignity of his existence and to foster
the fraternal impulse which bids him
join with all his fellows to save by
united action the heritage of civiliza-
tion.
I have given a rough outline of
Unesco's task. It will be difficult, no
doubt, for obstacles arise in our path
at every step. But if we succeed, our
success, important enough in itself,
will also be a pledge of the success
of the entire international system
which originated in the Charter of
San Francisco.
Fellowship Between Nations
"HEN we met in London, in 1945,
"<'''f to establish Unesco, I ex-
plained what I thought was the most
burning problem of our time : how to
raise the standard of the masses
without lowering the dignity of the
individual. May I recall the words I
used on that occasion ? Never have
we been so deeply indebted to the
ordinary people, whose mute heroism
has once again been the means of
saving the human race ; and never
have the ordinary people been so in-
debted to their leaders. Without the
General Staffs of engineering and
science, how could they have secured
the triumph of their ideal ? This two-
fold debt now owed by the world
(both to the general public and to the
men who forged the very instruments
of victory) lays upon us the duty of
trying to construct some form of so-
ciety in which the masses will not
be neglected in favour of exceptional
figures which may arise, any more
than individuality will be smothered
by the progress of the masses. The
only solution is perhaps to reconcile
these rival claims, keeping in mind
the need to replace the conflict be-
tween the Rights of the individual
and the Rights of the community by
a social structure in which the best
citizen is also the most complete man.
I see that I have given there a defi-
nition of the ultimate aim of Uneseo
That aim is to promote, through edu-
cation, science and culture, such
fellowship between the nations of the
world that each country will give its
highest esteem to those of its sons
who best serve the cause of humanity.
Today, when the Belgian Commis-
sion for Co-operation with Unesco has
honoured me by its welcome, what
else could I wish for than to see all
its members working, each in his own
sphere, to hasten the advent of that
new man, the perfect citizen of his
own country and perfect citizen of
the world ?
Belgium has always advocated
peaceful settlement in times of strife.
This country, so heroic in its resis-
tance, has nevertheless always been
prompt to lend its voice to counsels
of wisdom and persuasion. Unesco
therefore has every reason to expect
from it most valuable assistance. Your
help will encourage us to persevere.
In conclusion, I would like to quote
the noble words of one of your great
poets who said, forty years ago :
"If, in the evening, you climb a
fountain, you see the trees, houses,
village church, meadows, orchards,
the highroad, even the river, getting
smaller and smaller until at last they
are swallowed up in the encroaching
shades of the valley. But the tiny
points of light which twinkle in the
blackest night, wherever there are
human habitations, do not grow
dimmer as you climb. With every step
that brings you nearer to the summit,
you discern more and more lights in
the villages sleeping below. So it is
with our spiritual lights when we look
at life from a higher plane."
In our day, so full of encroaching
shadows, we have come to realize
how precious are those spiritual
lights. Let us see to it that they are
kept burning : this is our most im-
perative task.
