TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE :
. \
A TWO-WAY TRAFFIC by pearl S. Buck
WE are today approaching the dawn of a worldwide renaissance.
Never before in history has the whole world, at one time, come
W within the range of such potentiality. Throughout centuries
there have been interchange and mutual stimulation between
sections, regional responses which brought Chinese ideas as well as goods
to Greece, and Greek ideals and art to China. The similarity between the
philosophies of a Jewish Jesus and a Chinese Confucius are not
accidental. Greece had her day in India, and Persia made the amalgam
But today is unique. Perhaps any
age seems unique to those who live in
it, and yet I think that we who live
now have a peculiar right to use the
word.
Never before has the earth been a
whole, as it is today, nor has it tap-
peared So to as many people. Slowly
everywhere men and women, often
unwillingly it is true, are coming to
understand that peoples cannot be free
of one another.
This understanding is the basis of
what has come to be called the"tech-
nical assistance programme"of the
'Reluctantly even the prosperous are begin-
ning to understand that"backward peoples"
must be educated, the underdeveloped areas
developed... Once begun, we may trust to
the peoples, however backward they may be
considered, to shape the process as it goes
on, and in that shaping we shall all be
modi&ed."
United Nations and such Specialized
Agencies as the Food and Agricultural
Organization, the World Health Orga-
nization and the United Nations Edu-
cational, Scientific and Cultural Orga-
nization. Sooner or later, depending
upon economic pressure from peoples,
the world will function as one.
Reluctantly even the prosperous are
beginning to understand that"back-
ward peoples"must be educated, the
undeveloped areas developed, if not for
their own sake then for the sake of
those who wish to maintain their pre-
sent standards of living. Countries
such as the United States, which pro-
duce more than their people can buy,
at least at present prices, must be able
to sell to outside peoples, and those
peoples must be educated to the point
of wanting the new goods and develop-
ed to the degree of being able to buy
them. Crudely put, this is the vague
idea behind much of the planning to-
day.
Greater Western Change
ONCE begun, we may trust to the
peoples, however backward they
may be considered, to shape the
process as it goes on, and in that shap-
ing we shall all be modified. It will
be impossible to have the Chinese
peasant educated without his also edu-
cating us. The Chinese have educated
more people than have ever educated
them. India has already shown the
unconquerable independence of her
mind and spirit.
In the contact that is now inevit. : tble
between the peoples of Occident and
Orient the greatest change will come
in the Occident. It will not be so
visible, at first, as the change in the
Orient. A refrigerator is a mon-
strously visible thing, but the change in
a man's attitude toward life is far more
important and powerful.
Nearly everyone recognizes that in
all countries there are spots of modern
civilization, individuals of profound
culture. There is no lack of admir-
ation for these, no unwillingness to
grant their superiority. In the average
American, for example, there is today
a humility almost touching toward
such figures as Gandhi and Nehru.
Humility and wistfulness promptly
disappear, however, when we contem-
plate the hut of the Indian peasant,
the dusty village home of the Chinese.
One reason why we are sometimes un-
able to grasp the greatness of the saint
or sage is that we can consider the in-
instruments of his life absurd. When
Gandhi drank goats'milk and ate
boiled spinach and a handful of beans,
few of us understood or believed that
he really preferred to do this, and that
to him it was a better way of life than
roasted meats upon a silver spread
table.
The Worldly Wise Folk
WE must not think that the people
sometimes spoken of as.. back-
"ward"consider themselves so
for one moment. The Chinese, while
pleased to observe western machines,
will be discriminating in his choice and
use of them and will not permit irrele-
vant gadgets to complicate his life.
Having achieved the height of sophis-
tication, which is the ultimate in sim-
plicity, it is not likely that the ancient
peoples of the East'twill allow their
ordered lives to become confused by
machinery not adapted to their needs.
The backward peoples are, in fact,
not backward at all. Being old, they
are clever and intelligent and worldly
wise folk, whether or not they read
and write.
Literacy has not been a necessity for
developing the mind, among most of
the earth's peoples. The mind deve-
lops itself, if it is there.
I believe in universal literacy and
consider it the primary duty of such
bodies as UNESCO to bring it about,
for only when the world's peoples are
all literate can there be world commu-
nication through literature and news.
Universal literacy is essential for
peace and understanding. To the in-
dividual mind it adds resources, but it
is not an essential. Some of the wisest
and most sophisticated minds I have
known belonged to persons who cod
not read and write and were far less
backward actu. a. lly than I was myself.
Peace and Better Roads
Iris a widespread myth that the
chief problem of the Chinese people
is hunger. This is not true. The
primary need is not for food, but first
for peace and then for better roads.
China has or can have plenty of food.
She has the richest soil in the world,
generally speaking. Anyone who lived
in China before the last war must have
been impressed daily with the wonder
and variety of the food markets.
China is a land rich in food and the
Chinese are generous feeders. Their
famines have always come not from an
actual shortage of food but from di-
sasters such as flood, drought, or war.
Communications are so poor that food
cannot be supplied from another region
quickly enough or easily enough to
mend local damage. It was actually
cheaper, in the last famine in which
I took part in relieving, to ship grain
across the Pacific Ocean from the
United States than it was to carry it
on donkey and man h3. ack from another
province three hundred miles away,
where there was plenty fo food for
sale.
China needs roads. A network of
good motor roads and the vehicles to
use on them in addition to a few vital
railways and airlines would solve her
food problems. Her agriculture is
THE DAMODAR VALLEY PROJECT
India has planned and is putting into effect
a project to control the Damodar river and
its tributaries and to use them to irrigate
lands, exploit minerals, work factories and
turn the valley into a prosperous land. The
figures above illustrate the improvement in
irrigation, power and food production that
can be expected under this scheme of tech-
nical development.
highly developed. Modem agriculture
has not much to teach the Chinese
farmer, beyond some methods in seed
selection and insect and disease con-
trol.
Nor is land distribution a primary
problem in China. In spite of much
talk to the contrary, comparatively
little of China's land is in the hands
of big owners. The average farm IS
small and intensely cultivated. The
lesson we must learn is that the CM-
nese are not backward at all.
India is very different indeed from
China. There the agriculture is
really undeveloped, and the soil has
not been made to adapt itself to the
difficult climatic conditions. I shall
never forget my dismay once when
visiting India in February to discover
that in spite of heat, in which crops
could certainly grow and mature, vast
areas were dry and useless, supporting
not even the bone-thin cattle that
"China lacks good roads."'41n India vast areas are dry and useless for lack of water."
These then are two priority needs that technical assistance must help to satisfy. Already a
start has been made by Asiatic countries on the"selfahelp"basis. Here. a party owt sura
veyors is mapping out the area of a projected dam on the KOllar River. India.
.'Buddha's Pen-
ance"a sculp-'ture of the Gaa-
dhara school in
India, which mingled Indian and Graeeo-
Roman Art in the service of the Buddhist
laith."We do not understand that one
reason why we are unable to grasp the
greatness of the saint or sage is that we
consider the instruments oi his life absurd".
says Pearl Buck.
wandered upon their surfaces. Water
was the lack. Yet to-day there need
not be lack of water anywhere.
Science can and should work to pro-
duce water from reservoirs and seas,
and deep wells can be driven by coope-
rative means.
Need to Serve Mankind
PRIMARY in the Eastern countries,
too, and especially in China, is
the need for the development of a
spirit of service to mankind, which will
provide satisfaction sufficient for
educated young men and women to be
willing to undergo the isolation of
living in country places. In addition
to the skills taught in great modern
medical centres, where every facility
has been developed, we need even more
the greater skills which can teach a
graduate of such a centre how to use
what he knows in an Indian or Java-
nese village, where he must fashion
his own tools and build his own hospi-
tal.
And will there not be more people
then than the earth can support ?
This is said often and much discussed,
but actually it is the master myth of
our times. Robert Owen, the great
English industrialist, said in his book,
A New VIew of Society, published
in 1812,"The fear of any evil to rise
from an excess of population until
such time as the whole earth shall be-
come a cultivated garden, will, on due
and accurate investigation, prove a
mere phantom of the imagination, cal-
culated solely to keep the worker in
unnecessary ignorance, vice and crime.
... It is the artificial law of supply and
demand, arising fro the principal off
individual gain in opposition to the
welbeing of society, which has hi-
therto compelled population to press
on subsistence."
Truer words were never spoken,
truer to-day than then. A smalJ
but honest group of scientists today
are struggling to make themselves
heard in corroboration of what Robert
Owen said more than a hundred years
ago. They are tellinr us that the earth
is not overpopulated, that far more
food can be grown on the land, that
the sea is a vast storehouse of food
scarcely touched, that science has only
just begun to produce food.
Great Unused Lands
ALL large countries, including the
United States, have great unused
territories, not to speak of the
areas which are carelessly and wicked-
ly farmed. South America is scarcely
touched agriculturally. It is said that
Brazil alone, if adequately farmed,
could feed the world. Even in China
there are lands which could be used
for food and are idle. In India, as I
have said, the land is producing a
minimum of what it could. The same
is true of Australia.
While I do not believe that there are
any backward peoples, I know that
there are great undeveloped areas in
our world. The emphasis needs to be
put upon the development of these
areas, physically in communications,
food and public health ; mentally in
literacy and cultural interchange, and
spiritually in mutual understanding
and willingness to sacrifice. I know,
too, that there is the means for this
development, and it is simple in action.
This is the purpose and meaning of
"technical assistance".
The United Nations and its agen-
cies can direct the development of food
and plenty, with young men at their
command. Of public health we know
well enough how to drive major
diseases from the globe. James Yen
in China has devi : ed and proved a
simple means to literacy, and others
have done as much in other countries
We are ready to march forward, as
soon as, in the words of Robert Owen,
"the artificial law of supply and dex
mand, arising prom the principal if
individual gain in opþosition to the
wll-b9zng Of sXiety", allows it.
