ARLY last month. Maria Montessori. the distinguished Italian woman educa-
tionist, made a short visit to Paris for consultations with Unesco's Department
01 Education. The first woman in Italy to graduate in medicine, Maria Montes-
sori developed the"Iree discipline"method of educating children which has since
had a world-wide effect on teaching practices. Today, aged 79. she is still engaged
in the work she began nearly 50 years ago.
During her stay in Paris. Maria Montessori was honoured by the French Govern-
ment which made her an Officer 01 the Order 01 the Legion 01 Honour.
On December 7. during a reception in her honour at Unesco House. M. Torres
Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, paid tribute to her life's work. when in the
course 01 a speech he said :
"THE new education, so stronglymarked since its inception by
tile impress of your thought
can property be described as revolu-
tionary -and I think the main reason
wily it is so, may well be that many or
its pioneers were doctors like yourself.
It was the dtudy of the abnormal child
and appreciation of the impossibility
of applying to the backward or men-
tally deficient, the methods of elemen-
tary education then in vogue that
brought you to devise - originally for
their benefit - a new technique and a
new equipment. Nevertheless your
mo. most most important innovation was a new
approach. Your ideas, like all great
ideas, were simple ; but what you
advocated for the teaching of back-
ward children proved so fruitful of
results that its suitability for all young
children was at once apparent-the
doctor became a great leader in edu-
cation, and the whole of education
reaped the benefit.u "Your primary idea, comprehending
in itself all the reemainder, was that
detion precedes thought and that
thought is the child of action. Its
direct consequence was emphasis on
notor adjusment and the co-ordination
of movement and perception; and ; and
equipment of your devising taught the
child to do things involving the first
beginnings of geometry and perhaps
even of logic. But there were other
consequences : the whole legacy of
outmoded methods of format, merety
verbal, teaching was explored; the way ; the way
was opened to an active method of
education ; and it was sh own that the
pupil - whatever his age - is not
just a brain to be stuffed, a many-
sided being, needing full play for all
his faculties."
"... Alld there is yet a further tribute
of thanks and admiration to be paid to
one who brought so clear and keen a
rision to the problem of peace ; for it
was you who reminded us all that care
lavished on the child would all be
wasted unless it made him a respon-
sible citizen, strong-tao meet the chal-
lenge of our age. Here your concerns
and ours are one : our task is to help
the teachers of all nations to train
those future citizens of the world
without whom all our undertakings
must rest sterile. Madame Montessor,
Unesco accounts itself honoured by
your presence."
