Report on the desert : RITCHIE CALDER BEGINS
t new kind of desert war is on. It is not a battle of men against men, of weapons against
weapon. It is a fight against the sands of the arid zones of the world.
To tell the peoples of all nations about the progress of this vital battle, Unesco has
developed a unique educational and information project in co-operation with the U. K. National
Commission, the London"News Chronicle"and Ritchie Calder, science editor of that paper.
Mr. Calder left Paris last month on a seven weeks trip to gather material for a report on
the desert.
He will tell the story of the struggle which many old civilizations have lost, now being waged
by scientists and other experts in remote stations. More than a quarter of the earth's surface
is desert land, covering parts of Asia, Africa, North and South America and Australia
These vast expanses of land can play a vital part in solving the world's food problems. Each
daY new soil is being lost by erosion and by tbe march of the deserts encroaching on fertil"
land.
What can be done now to reclaim there areas ? This is the problem facing the nations of
the world. As the Scientific body of the United Nations. Unesco has already begun to tackle
it and is collecting information on reclamation research going on in the science outposts
of the desert. Mr. Calder will visit a number of these outposts and tell the story of the
modern"legionnaires of science"who live and work in them.
On January 10 he left Paris for North Africa following an interview with M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, D : rector-General of Unesco."The problem of developing for human use the vast desert
surfaces of our planet is one to which Unesco attaches special importance", M. Torres Bodet
told Ritchie Calder,"Your articles, by awakening the public imagination to the challenge
and p03sibility of the desert will render a valuable international service. They should prove
particular : y useful in making the experience of scientists and engineers in the regions you visit
known to readers in other countries where similar conditions exist."
This is the route Ritchie Calder will follow on his 5. 000-mile tour of the deserts.

World-Wide
"Running Commentary"
RITCHIE CALDER'S journey istakmg him over 5, 000 miles
through North Africa and the
Middle East, from Carthage to
Babylon, and the high deserts ot
Persia. His first objective was a
Saharan outpost south of Algiers, on
the Frontiers of Morocco. Then he
panned to visit Carthage and to travel
eas. ward through the wartime battle-
fields of Tripolhania, Cyrenaica and
the Western Desert of Egypt.
Eastwards from there he will go t
the Sinai desert to study research
projects. The great areas of the
Euphrates and Tigris where irrigation
projects have been recommended as
part of the UN Technical Aid to
Underdeveloped-Areas is next on the
trip. In Persia, he will survey the
territory, where it is planned to use
f200, 000, 000 to plough back the wealth
coming from under the earth, before
his trip finally ends in Israel.
These areas are only part of thr
Arid Zones which extend over the
world. But, they form the great
classical desert in which ancient
civilizations have been buried. By
finding out what is happening in these
desert stations and by publ1cising
examples of useful experiments, this
research tour will be a guide to action
and study for future projects in other
parts of the world.
As part of the extensive press and
radio coverage, Ritchie Calder will
write a "running commentary" to be
published in the "News Chronicle" and
in a series of newspaper throughout
the world. The British mass circula-
tion publication,"Picture Post", IS co-operating by sending a photographer
on the trip. Through the B. B. C..
Ritchie Calder's voice will be heard
telling of his experiences.
Schools to Follow
Desert Journey
THE educational aspects of thissurv y h ve lready aroused great
interest in Britain. In this
connection the U. K. National Commis-
SIon for Unesco is promoting an
educational project in schools and
adult education organizations.
Plans include a series. of articles un
the essential facts of the trip to be
published in educational journals, a
special wall map produced by the
"News Chronicle"fer use in schools.
showing the routes with pictures of
the principal places to be visited,
supplemented by an illustrated pam-
phlet and periodical reports of the
desert survey.
The conclusions drawn from the in-
vestigations will appear in special
articles in a British weekly"New
Statesman and Nation ". Finally, as a
permanent record, a presentation of
all this material will be. published as
a text-book suppiemented by visual
aids.
Ritchie Calder has had discussions
with some of the experts who met at
Unesco House recently to consider
plans for an Institute of the Arid
Zones. These experts proposed that an
International Council for Research in
the Arid Zones be created to co-relate
information on projects bemg carried
out in the desert areas of the world.
to promote ether types of investigation,
where they are lacking, and to encou-
rage fundamental research in academic
and other institutions.
The report on the desert made by
this well-known British science writer,
will help us to see this urgent problem
in its perspective. and to reinforce the
action that the nations must take for
its eventual solution.
