UNESCO during 1951 will stimulateshe movement for mass educa-
tion in many parts of the world
chiefly by helpinq member states
to develop and improve their work in
such fields as fundamental and adult
education. Unesco will therefore pre-
pare teaching materials, organize se-
minars and educational conferences,
help to train teachers at regional cen-
tres and develop educational co-opera-
tion through missions and the exchan-
ge of information.
Three educational missions will be
sent to member states and inquiries
into language and science teaching
will be continued with the Internatio-
nal Bureau of Education. The probiem
of expanding and lengthening free
education and the effect of this on
labour and industry will be discussed
with the International Bureau of Edu-
cation and the International Labour
Office.
Unesco will give advice and provide
technical facilities for the United Na-
tions Technical Assistance Program-
me. The pilot project, started in Hai-
ti between 1948 and 1950, will be
further developed. The Government
of India plans a pi10t project in as-
sociation with Unesco. A seminar on
fundamental and adult education is
planned for the Near East.
Unesco will continue a comparative
study of curricula in use in the va-
rious countries of the world in the
teaching of history, geography and so-
cial studies. It will issue a publica-
tion on the teaching of history and
a Teacher's Guide to the Declaration
of Human Rights. Studies on history
and geography textbooks used in va-
rious countries will be continued, and
an international seminar on the
teaching of history in primary and
secondary schools will be held.
To meet a request from the United
Nations and its specialized agencies,
Unesco will investigate measures to
reduce illiteracy, to use native langua-
ges in teaching, and to stimulate in-
ternational action to break down bar-
riers to the access of women to edu-
cation.
Special efforts will be made to de-
termine and encourage the application
of the most effective ways of teaching
children about the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights and about the
United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies.
NATURAL SCIENCES
THE 1951 activities of Unesco inthe field of Natural Sciences will
particularly concern the develop-
ment of international scientific co-
operation, assistance to research for
the improvement of the living con-
ditions of mankind, and the teaching
and popularization of science.
Approval has been given to study a
plan to set up regional research cen-
tres, with funds to be obtained out-
side Unesco's budget. One example
suggested was for a centre of research
in physics and other sciences in
ON this and the following page, the Courier presents a sum-mary of the main Unesco projects for 1951 approved by
the Fifth Session of the General Conference. From this
programme, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General
has been authorized to select immediate priority projects so as
to carry out Unesco's work in the most effective and concen-
trated manner.
The Unesco work plans for 1951 have been allocated a budget
of $8, 200, 000, but in addition to the regular annual budget, finan-
cial resources may be increased through voluntary contributions
from member countries. These extra funds would be used to
finance special projects outside the ordinary programme, which
are to be worked out by the Director-General and the Executive
Board.
Western Europe as an attempt to over-
come difficulties arising out of the
high cost of research into higher phy-
sics.
Grants-in-aid and services will be
given to international organizations in
the fields of engineering, science, me-
dicine, agriculture, biology and the
protection of nature. Discussions will
be promoted on scientific problems of
regional importance ; and action taken
to organize the exchange of scientific
information, personnel and material.
Recognizing the value of Unesco's
Field Science Co-operation Offices, the
Conference voted to increase the bud-
get allotted to them. These offices
will help the execution of the Plan of
Technical Assistance to under-deve-
loped areas.
Unesco will also make a special ef-
fort to encourage scientific and tech-
nical research and development of arid
and semi-arid areas, in co-operation
with the International Arid Zone
Research Council and with the United
Nations.
Unesco also aims to bring science
into the lives of ordinary men and
women by fostering science clubs,
scientific exhibitions, discussions
among workers'groups about the ef-
fect on their work of scientific pro-
gress, and world-wide discussions on
themes related to the inter-action bet-
ween Science and Society. The Orga-
nization will help publishers to pro-
duce cheap attractive books on science,
and will distribute popular scientific
articles to newspapers and magazines,
and filmstrips for use by lecturers to
non-scientific groups. It will help as-
sociations for the advancement of
science in war-devastated and other
needy areas.
Finally, Unesco will promote closer
international collaboration between
science teachers, particularly in science
teaching methods and the develop-
ment of a scientific attitude in pri-
mary and secondary schools.
SOCIAL SCIENCES
UNESCO'S Social Sciences program-
me has three main sections : aid
to international scientific colla-
boration, studies of social tensions,
and studies of international co-oper-
ation.
The studies of social tensions will
include an investigation of race con-
tacts in Brazil, to determine factors
contributing to harmonious race rela-
tions.
Unesco plans a study of population
problems in countries in process of in-
dustrialization, win organize a study
of tensions resulting from over-popu-
lation, and will continue the enquiry
into tensions resulting from shifts of
population. Unesco will also arrange
a"tensions"investigation among Ja-
panese youth.
Unesco will encourage the develop-
ment of international associations in
the branches of sociology, political
science, economics, comparative law,
and international studies, and will
entrust them with work correlated to
its programme. It will publish a perio-
dical for social scientists and will en-
courage the development of social
sciences'documentation services.
Studies will be made in the field of
international co-operation. In one of
these Unesco will seek to determine
how greater public support can be ob-
tained for the United Nations.
Finally, Unesco will study the tech-
nique of international conferences
based upon exploratory surveys car-
ried out during 1949-50, and will pu-
hlish the'results.
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
WITH the aid of the Internatio-nal Council of Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies, UNESCO
will assist studies already in progress
on the native cultures of America,
Africa and other regions. Another
plan to be carried out is the pre-
paration by an international group
of experts of a history of the scien-
tific and cultural development of hu-
manity, showing the exchanges which
have taken place throughout the ages
between different peoples and cultures
in science, technology, philosophy, the
arts and other branches of cultural
life.
In addition to assisting the develop-
ment of modern cultural relations,
UNESCO helps to preserve the cultu-
ral heritage of the past through the
maintenance of libraries and museums
containing Books and works of art
which constitute this heritage. The
rights and the material and moral in-
terests of the authors of literary and
artistic creation must be defended.
UNESCO will also endeavour to bring
the most important works and expres-
sions of world culture to all peoples.
UNESCO will continue its efforts to
co-ordinate fiiò1iographical services on
an international basis. Furthermore,
it will study the problem of the mi-
crophotographic reproduction of rare
periodicals anõ the practical aid to be
given to certain States for the repro-
duction of important documents.
In the field of the visual arts,
UNESCO will conduct an enquiry on
the place held by the arts in the edu-
cational system of various countries.
In order to famiIiarise the masses
with art, impulse will be given to the
photographic reproduction of the
works of art of all countries.
Under the auspices of the Interna-
tional Council of Music, international
music festivals will be held, scholar-
ships and grants awarded, and music-
al scores of special importance co-
pied, reproduced, and lent from one
country to another. The work of ca-
taloguing recorded music will be con-
tinued, and UNESCO will increase it
by a collection of important musical
works which have not yet been record-
ed on a commercial scale. It will
also encourage the recording of folk
music.
UNESCO will continue to collabo-
rate with the International P. E. N.
Club. It will also publish information
on the translations of foreign books
published in each country and in the
Index translationum, an international
analytic catalogue of translations.
The translation of the chief literary
and cultural works of every country
into the greatest possible number of
languages will be chiefly concerned, in
1951, with Italian, Arabic and Latin-
American literature.
UNESCO will also work for the esta-
blishment of a Universal Copyright
Convention, and will prepare the con-
vening of an inter-governmental con-
ference to decide on the text of this
convention.
EXCHANGE
OF PERSONS
UNESCO will continued an enquiryinto means of removing obsta-
cles to the free movement of
persons. A new edition of a spe-
cial supplement to"Study Abroad"on
study opportunities during vacations
will be published. The basic work,
"Study Abroad", of which successive
editions were published in 1948, 1949
and 1950 constitutes a general guide to
existing openings of study abroad. In-
tended originally to provide a fun list
of international fellowships, the con-
tents have been progressively augment-
ed to include other categories of ex-
changes as, for example, industrial
and agricultural workers, and young
people.
While assembling information from
Member States and from non-govern-
(Continued on page û)
Some of the delegates to Unesco's Fifth General Conference. Above (left) are members of the United States delegation. From left to right : Dr Howland H. Sargeant
(Chairman of the Delegation) ; Mrs. Charles Reed (wife of the U. S. Consul General) ; Mr. Charles Reed, Miss Bernice Baxter. Dr. George D. Stoddard, Dr. L L Rabi
and Dr George F. Zook. In the photo (above, right), are : H. E. Dr. Jose Pezet (Panama) Dr Riazuddin Siddiqui (Pakistan) ; Dr. J. C. Beaglehole (New Zealand) and
Mr. Hans Mohr (Norway).

PHILIPPINES
New York Office: Mr. Ger

gmp

BRAZIL : H. E
dent of the Delegation)
Cameiro and Mme.


: From left to right : Mu.
aldo Flores.
(Vice-President of the Delegation) and Mr,

Clemente Mariani Bittencourt (Presi.
Professor Paulo de Berredo
Mariani Bittencourt.

-

S. Amaldo

of Unesco's

Senator Geronima Pecson

Cecilio Putong

-r a

FRANCE

THE LEBANON

: From right to left.
Joxe. M. Leopold Sedar Senghor,
Seydoux and M. Marcel Abraham.

: M. Abij

Jean Maroun.

aoude and Monseigneur

¥

M. Francois Mauriac, M. Lous
M. Julian Cain. M. Roger

mental organizations on the granting
and administering of international
study grants, and making this infor-
mation available to individuals, groups
and governments, UNESCO will also
help to bring about adoption of com-
mon methods and techniques in the
administration of scholarships and
the planning of new programmes.
As budgetary limitations prevent
UNESCO from allocating large sums
for the creation and administration of
scholarships, the programme for 1951
aims to encourage exchanges of per-
sons by co-ordinating activities of or-
ganizations which award fellowships
and study grants.
Help to intellectual refugees is cov-
ered by an International Student Ser-
vice proposal sponsored by the Ne-
therlands Conference delegation, pro-
viding for the creation-with UNESCO
help-of a fund for the use of refugee
students.
UNESCO will itself during 1951
grant 55 fellowships for citizens of its
Member States. These will allow spe-
cialists to study activities related to
the UNESCO Programme. After the
beneficiaries have finished their work
and returned to their home countries,
UNESCO remains in close contact with
them so that the knowledge they have
acquired may be used in the applica-
tion of UNESCO's programme.
MASS
COMMUNICATIONS
To bering about the widest possiblepublic participation in its pro-
gramme and an understanding
of its aims by action through the
world's press, radio, films and other
media of communications will be one
of the main Unesco tasks for 1951.
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE FAR EAST THE MIDDLE EAST, LATIN AME.
RICA AND EUROPE AT UNESCO'S FIFTH GENERAL CONFERENCE
The aim will be to present these
activities so as to focus them upon the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and within this framework, to
highlight the right to education, the
benefits of scientific progress and in-
formation. Emphasis will be put on
material illustrating : Fundamental
education for all people and education
for international understanding ; the
right of all peoples to enjoy the bene-
fits of scientific progress and the rela-
tionship of the work of scientists to
peace and human welfare ; the strug-
gle to resolve racial and other pro-
blems, and the methods and achieve-
ments oi international co-operation ;
the part played by creative artists in
such co-operation ; freedom of infor-
mation and the free exchange of ideas.
The organization will examine the
possibility of creating an Internatio-
nal Institute of the Press and Infor-
mation through consultations with
national and international organiza-
tions.
The replies from these groups will
be discussed by an experts'committee
set up by Unesco. On the basis of the
replies, Unesco will be able to decide
whether a conference to create the
Institute should be called.
The General Conference also ap-
proved a number of projects to helpUnesco's efforts to reduce obstacles to
the free flow of information. One of
them is to secure from the contracting
parties of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade further reductions
of customs barriers to the internatio-
nai circulation of educational, scienti-
fic and cultural materials.
Unesco will also co-operate with the
Regional Economic Commissions of
the United Nations in the encourage-
ment of the domestic production, the
promotion of the exchange, and the
facilitation of trade agreements in-
volving educational, scientific and cul-
tural materials. It will seek, in con-
junction with these commissions, spe-
cial dispensations for categories of
persons engaged in educational activi-
ties with regard to visa and frontier
formalities, labour permits and simi-
lar facilities. Unesco will work for
wider application of schemes initiated
by the Universal Postal Union to per-
mit payment in national currencies
for subscriptions to foreign newspa-
pers, and for a 50 per cent reduction
on postal charges for printed matter.
The preparation and dissemination
of a study such as"World Press Co-
verage of Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Information"will also be un-
dertaken.
An international agreement reduc-
ing or abolishing economic controls on
the movement of books, newspapers,
works of art, documentary films and a
wide range of other educational mate-
rials, was adopted by the Conference *
During 1951, Unesco will also carry
out intensive work as a clearing
house for the collection, analysis, diss-
emination and exchange of informa-
tion and experiences in the techniques,
uses and effects of the press, film, ra-
dio and allied media in the fields of
education, science and culture.
Expert aid missions will be underta-
ken to advise and assist in the im-
provement of mass communications in
under-developed or war devastated
countries.
The world survey of technical faci-
lities, already carried out in 52 coun-
tries or territories, will be completed
and extended to 33 other countries
and territories. The Member States
will be invited to set up within the
framework of their National Commis-
sions standing consultative commit-
tees on technical and professionnal
problems.
Finally, Unesco will continue its ef-
fort to bring about world unification
in Braille. A world Braille Council
will be created and conferences will be
held for experts in Arabic and Spa-
nish-Portuguese Braille.
. See page 7 of this issue for a
report on this agreement.
RELIEF SERVICES
THE Relief Assistance Service ofUNESCO, set up five years ago
as the Reconstruction Depart-
ment to help war-hit countries, has
now extended its programme to meet
the needs of any country requiring
relief.
War damage is being repaired, but
new emergency situations requiring
the assistance of an international or-
ganization such as UNESCO still arise.
The wars in Palestine and Greece left
many refugees to be cared for as did
the earthquakes in Ecuador last year
and in Peru this year, when numerous
schools and buildings of great histo-
ric and artistic value were destroyed
The General Conference considered
two such problems in particular : tñe
situation of refugee children in Greece
and the Near East, which continues to
be extremely serious. As no really ef-
fective help could be given from
Unesco's limited budget, the Confe-
rence decided to appeal to the govern-
ments of the 59 Member States to
contribute funds sufficient for effec-
tive action.
Unesco's Relief Service will continue
to assemble information on the needs
of countries and use it to prepare for
the provision of direct assistance or
the organization of voluntary aid cam-
paigns. It will also allocate credits
from the Relief Fund to needy coun-
tries and will assist them to purchase
and transport equipment and help to
secure import and export licences and
customs exemptions.
As UNESCO's funds are insufficient
for this work, the Service will work
with Member States to focus public
opinion and sympathy en the needs of
devastated areas and organist cam-
paigns for voluntary assistance. Fi-
nally, it will aid co-ordination inter-
nationally-and, through National
Commissions, nationally-of the ef-
forts of the voluntary associations
participating in UNESCO's relief work.
