TO FREE ART, FIRST FREE
MENUS'MINDS
ARE there one or more censorship controls in your country and what
form do they take ?"
This questi n has b en put by Unesco to the writers and artists
01 five continents. Censorship is all awesome word, carrying our
minds bank to half-forgotten stories of historical struggles for freedom of
thought and expression.
It will always be branded with the stigma of governmental tyranny, reli-
gious intolerance, militarism and the social imperatives. Men who live for
art, whose one aim is frankness and independence, are bound to find
censorship a galling encroachment of authority on the freedom of the mind.
Yet it would be idle to attempt an
analysis of this problem solely on the
replies to the Unesco questionnaire.
Some authors who volunteer detailed
information on the circulation of their
works, unfair taxation or the lack of
gime, landscape artists no doubt enjoy
t11e utmost freedom of expression.
They may in all sincerity imagine
that under a different government they
would still paint nothing but lands-
capes.
Cervantes lived most of his life in extreme poverty. And it was iai prison (above) where he was
sent for debt that the already famous but impecunious author wrote part of Don Quixote. The story
is told of two young Frenchmen, who at that time met the Bishop of Toledo and asked how
Cervantes was taring. On being told of his misfortunes one Frenchman remarked that a man of
such talents deserved better treatment. The other, however, intervened."He needs to live under
difficult conditions in order to produce such masterpieces,'"he  said. The only person never to
be consulted on this question was, naturally, Cervantes himself.

But we are concerned with peacetime
democratic government.
"Our government is above reproach
so far as censorship is concerned" ; re-
ported one lady-the author of books
which attack no prevalently accepted
attitudes, and which have therefore
been immune from attacks by those
possessing such attitudes.
State's Undoubted Right
YET all States reserve an unchallen-geable right-sometimes
expressly mentioned in their
Constitution-to impose silence on
all who abuse the freedom of speech
(though the exact meaning. of.'abuse"
is not always defined).
Thus, the United Kingdom Arts
Council, reports that, in Great Britain,
"the Lord Chamberlain has unlimited
powers of censorship in the theatre,
both as to the script and to the pre-
sensation". But in every country, there
is some such control of public morals,
normally exercised without any strong
protest.
Most writers and artists of every na-
tionality are fully aware of the bar-
riers society places in the way of their
freedom. R. Ulises Pelaez, a Bolivian
author, speaks of political censorship
in the following terms : "there are
unacknowledged forms of censorship-
religious, social, patriotic and military
land, above aM, that dtctated by econo-
mic interests".
Hundreds of his fellow writers tell
the same story, and here are some of
their remarks, which the Courier is
quoting.
From one country a painter reports :
"The Rector of the University, who
controls the exhibition halls, has ban-
ned the hibition of both nude and
seni-nude figures... when I have
written articles on raising the stan-
dard of art and have shown reproduc-.
tions of Picasso, Matisse, Jankl, Adlcr,
etc., I have had letters protesting that
I am corrupting the youth..."
A compatriot of his tells Unesco :
"In writing stories, the natives of my
country must only appear as servants
and cannot have individual lives, fami-
lics, etc. They cannot have parts in
play".
The reader's prejudices naturally
are commonly stimulated by those of
the shopkeeper :.'A great number of
booksellers", reports a famous author,
"refuse to sell my works, not so much
on account of their contents as because
of my social and political background".
Individuals react in endless dif-
ferent ways to the same situation.
According to Dos Passes :"There's a
certain intermittent censorship-
grounds of"decency", which is often a
prevailiny censorship of the fads and
fashions of the moment. On the whole,
there is less censorship in the USA at
the moment than is normal in human
societies".
Glenway Wescott, on the other hand,
holds that in the same country"there
are various groups organized to oppose
and persecute. writers for any real
boldness in this field (subject matter,
sexual behavior)".
Very Essence of Folly
THE film world, the meeting ground
of art and industry, appears to be
a special disappointment to ar-
tists who stand for independence and
aesthetic values. Maxence Van der
Meersh, author of the novel "Corps et
Ames", protests that.'film companics, s
utterly ignore the moral right of au-
thors to control film adaptations of
their'works".
For centuries ignorance and bigotry
have tried to stifle genius and despite
the consolatory praise that is lavished
on the dead, their methods have often
succeeded. Yet, to make assurance
doubly sure, the censors also resort to
ridicule. If we cannot refuse to see and
hear, we can at least laugh at what we
do not understand.
This is the very essence of folly.
Painters, sculptors, writers and com-
posers ail agree on this aspect of cen-
sorship, pointing to complacent igno-
rance as the one eternal enemv. A
painter wriles :"The greatest disad-
vantage here is the general lack of
cultural awareness and appreriation of
any form of'art".
Another painter says :"Many peo-
ple... believe that the real'national'art
of this cOuntrY is the art of sunlit
landscapes and that any art referring
to human problems is unhealthy". Si-
milar warnings are issued by artists
of every country.
must educators be expected to free
men's minds unaided ? Does such free-
dom mean merely the removal of those
traditional evils :' intolerance, prejudice
and ignorance ? Or is there yet another
obstacle to intellectual and aesthetic
freedom-the uncertainty of peace ?
"Present conditions arc not all that
matter", says René Barjavel, a French
writer..''We also have to reckon with
the future."
Honoré Daumier (1808-1879). one of whose lithographs is shown above. was a giant
among those artists who have known how to instill both authenticity and striking huma-
nity into their works. Oil painter. water colourist, draughtsman, sculptor and lithographer,
he was obliged to use up in pot-boiling, an energy he would have preferred to use in
a more individual realization of his artist's desires.
When he died in 1901. Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec left a large
number 01 drawings, 350 lithographs of amazing quality and
over 500 paintings. But, as this Paris theatre programme
lor 1893 shows, the initials''TL frequently appeared on
posters and other commercial publicity materials.
HISFREEDOM
