The textbooks for adults displayed at
Unesco's Exhibition in Paris had a
special interest for M. Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General (left).
Through the intensive campaigns
against illiteracy which as Mexico's
Minister of Education he initiated
and developed from 1943 to 1946,
more than 1. 200. 000 Mexicans learned
to read and write.
'GUIDE BOOKS'
TO A BETTER
WAY OF LIFE
TEXTBOOKS in dozens of little known languages, through which Unescois helping to bring to millions of people in Africa and Asia the
knowledge which spells a better way of life, were on display in Paris
and Brussels, last month.
The exhibition opened under the auspices of the French National Com-
mission for Unesco at the Musée Pedagogique, in Paris, on February
2nd, and comprised textbooks already in use in Fundamental Education
projects in Africa, Indo-China and Indonesia.
Some of these books, printed in esoteric languages, vernaculars or
dialects, show the stages of progress already made in advancing illiterate
people through reading and writing to courses in crafts, hygiene, agri-
culture, nutrition and vocational subjects. They are being displayed so
as to stimulate the preparation of similar works for new Fundamental
Education projects, part of Unesco's world-wide programme in aid of
literacy and citizenship training.
Reflecting the areas of interest, activity and need in adult education,
exhibits range from a crossword puzzle book for new literates to a « First
Aid Illustrated)). used by mine workers in Northern Rhodesia. Some of
the literacy primers are printed in large, simple type, for where there
are no schools, adults are often obliged to study in poorly lit homes.
Other books are intended for town criers, for use in newspapers, by
radio and in films.
The exhibition, in whose preparation, Unesco and its French, Belgian
and British National Commissions were assisted by the Indonesian and
Netherlands Governments was taken from Paris to Brussels where it
stayed until the end of the month. It can be seen in Amsterdam from
March 6th to 14th and in London beginning March 20th.
