The Cultural Heritage of Korea
"Land of the Morning Calm))
KOREA'S FLAB
w of the world's most beau-tiful flags, that of the Repu-
lic of Korea has in its centre
a circle of brilliant red and blue
on a white background. Both the
circle and the black bar designs
in the corners are rich in symbo-
lism.
The circle represents the Abso-
lute, or the essential unity of all
being. The Yang and the Yin
divisions within the circle repre-
sent eternal duality ; good and
evil, male and female, night and
day, life and death, being and not
being, etc. The presence of dua-
lity within the Absolute indicates
the paradox of life and the im-
possibility of ever comprehending
it completely.
The bar designs in the four cor-
ners have many meanings. They
represent the Father, the Mother,
the Sons, and the Daughters. The
bar combinations also represent
the four points of the compass,
and the four seas which bound
the universe. The fact that the
bars are of only two kinds (long
and short) yet may be arranged
into many combinations-of
which the four are but samples
- indicates the diversity which
can arise out of basic simplicity.
Actually, the symbolism of the
flag has an endless meaning. It
is sometimes used as an exer-
cise in reasoning, or in develop-
ment of the poetic imagination, as
students interpret the design in
manifold ways. For instance,
the Yang and the Yin, within the
circle, may be likened to the sun
and the moon, to heaven and
earth, to old age and youth, to
beauty and ugliness, to truth and
deception, to success and failure,
to happiness and misery, etc.
From the bar arrangements,
varied moral lessons may be
drawn. Thus the weaker (two
short) bars should be protected
by the stronger (two long ones) ;
but in the opposite corner, the
more precious (long bar) should
be protected by the less worth
(short bars). Like should cling to
like, as in the three long bars
together ; but also, tolerance
should sanction the grouping of
unalike, as in the other two bar
designs.
The significant fact about the
Korean flag is not to draw from
it any one specific meaning, but
rather to recognize that it is a
symbolic and philosophical repre-
sentation, encouraging the mind
to observe and interpret all the
varied meanings of the universe.
It ts this function of the Korean
flag that makes it unique amoag
all the banners of the world :
AND who are these Koreans ? Anonymous John Smith wants toknow-and finds himself repeating like a chant the question of
Walt Whitman :"Yellow man, yellow man, where have you been ?"
Where were the Koreans before the cannons, before the tanks, before the
bombers ? For, just three months ago, Korea became the centre of the
world ; it rose up suddenly, covered
with blood. Rose up from'what
historical past ?
Not so very long ago this past was
little more than a phantom to most
people around the world. A fine co-
lony, whose inhabitants were ordered
to forget their past, their national
soul, even their language which it was
forbidden, under penalty of the whip,
to use in schools, even in playtime.
At the end of the 14th Century,
there was the kingdom of Tyo-Ssyen,
Land of the Morning Calm, with its
capital at Seoul. The land was gov-
erned by a vassal of the Chinese Ming
Dynasty. The rare travellers who
tried to tell the rest of the world about
the treasures of this kingdom attri-
buted a Mongolian origin to this
homogeneous people. They remarked
THE TRADITIONAL DRESS OF THE
COUNTRY, worn by the elderly Korean
examining this ancient bell, was adopt-
ed from the Ming dynasty of China.
For the men it consists of loose white
robes and baggy trousers. Women
wear short, close-fitting jackets and
vividly coloured flowing skirts.
on the individuality of the language
and the simplicity of its alphabet of
25 letters. They recounted a formi-
dable list of discoveries and inven-
tions :
Long known as the"Hermit King-
dom", Korea is said to have evolved,
quite alone, many things which other
nations produced only by united effort :
the spinning wheel, the art of pottery,
movable metal type, paper monkey, the
barometer, even the armour-plated
ships used by Yi Soon-sin to defeat
Japanese invaders in 1592.
The Travellers'Tales
ANCIENT travellers told how educa-tion flourished. They actually
meant Chinese education, for the
Koreans, it seems, did not consider
themselves learned unless they could,
with the light strokes of a brush, show
themselves conversant with the langu-
age of Confucius and work their way
up in the administrative hierarchy,
relying only on the Chinese classics.
They judged their own fine alphabet
too simple, and good enough only for
children.
What high ramparts enclosed this
people ! Only the most poetically in-
clined historians were interested in
them. Records provide a description
of thatched cottages where the Ko-
rean peasant lived, the marriage cere-
monies and a few ritual dances and
traditions of native cooking. Most
travellers gave only a superficial pict-
ure of their own adventures in Korea.
THE SOUTH GATE OF SEOUL. The first king of the Yi dynasty conscripted
200. 000 workmen to construct a : great wall around Seoul, his new capital. Ii
was seven miles long, up to 20 feet wide, from 10 to 20 feet high, and contained
four great gates and four smaller ones. Today, the remains are well inside
the city, which has grown to over a million in inhabitants.
Only a few of them recounted Korean
proverbs.
Yet Korea has a rich collection or
folklore, fables and fairy-tales : Cinde-
rella is called Kongji ; little Red Riding
Hood will be eaten up by the tiger.
Both the tiger and the tortoise figure
as prominently in Korea as in China ;
the genii or jinns are as powerful as
those in Norway.
Well, in what niche at last can be
pigeon-holed this"culture"of the old
ancient lords, of peasants always in
white, always in mourning, of berib-
boned dancers and of the silent silk-
worm breeders crouched on the mud
floor unwinding the silk that they will
never wear ?
Old Beliefs Die Hard
RELIGION may give an answer.There are learned men who give
this explanation : about two
thousand years ago, Buddhism was
introduced into the kingdom of Silla,
accompanied by a now of Chinese
ideas. Buddhism spread its influence
through the princely courts in mar-
vellous works of architecture, piety and
philosophy ;. the temples, still rising
noble and serene above the fir trees
are favourite subjects of the modern
photographer.
Then, Confucianism replaced Bud-
dhism : and the official doctrines of
family and national loyalties were built
on the ruins of monasteries where the
monks eked out a miserable existence,
though still receiving the humble de-
votion of the womenfolk. The ancestor
cult was confined to the educated
class : the masses undoubtedly never
abandoned their old beliefs, their
sacrifices to Heaven, their rites in
honour of the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars. Holy places are still revered,
mountains shelter genii, and under the
sacred trees the passer-by still places
pebbles... In the 15th Century, Korean
learned men compiled an encyclo-
paedia in 112 volumes, but it is doubt-
ful whether they even wrote about
these daily practices of the common
people. In any case, the average Ko-
rean would not have access to these
works, for, like the Official Public
Records, they were not written in his
language.
Yet, for more than a thousand years,
many aspects of Korean art have been
truly great. Experts have spoken of
the pottery of the country as the finest
in the world. It is known that Japa-
nese sculpture developed in the 6th
Century from Korean art and that,
generally speaking, Korea was an
indispensable channel through which
civilization was introduced into Japan ;
for many centuries the Japanese called
Korea the Treasure Land of the West.
What System of Vo/ues ?
TODDY, the sparse accounts ofhistorians and adventurers are
being supplemented by the stories
of war correspondents with their
despatches which describe the extent
of the ruins, the weight of arms, the
thousands of fleeing refugees. The
sufferings of these refugees, some with
hope in their hearts others dulled with
misery, can easily be imagined.
But what system of values have they
now ? Beyond hunger and fear, what
A KOREAN STATUETTE depicting one
of Buddha's disciples.
fantasies fill their dreams ? What do
they think about in their waking mo-
ments ? For already they are begin-
ning to think of the future and their
thoughts will not be created out of
nothing ; the past is still with them
and whatever the future holds will be
influenced and coloured by that almost
forgotten heritage from their ancestors
- in short, by their culture.
It is the duty of every thinking
person to try to understand this people
that war has so brutally thrust into
world prominence, to study the records
of their philosophy and an art of the
highest kind which is still existent
today. He will gain far more than
just an historical background. He will
discover the character and manner of
life of present day Koreans living
under the symbolic nag, in which the
yang and the yin, fire and water, sun
and night, life and death are myster-
iously intertwined.