THAT ALL MAY LEARN is a film made under supervision of the United Nations Film Board, to show
the world-wide fforts of Unesco in the fight against illiteracy. Set in a small Mexican community, the
film demonstrates the down-to-earth values of being able to read and write. Here, peasants are being
told by an educated member of their community what they must do to reclaim land that belongs to them.
Bare literacy is not the end and may not even be the beginning of education, yet the printed word is a potent
means of conveying ideas. The mind of the illiterate is often closed to ideas which are essential to eco-
nomic and political development.
BEFORE the end of next year, 250 Libyans-some of them now illiterate-
will have learned enough about Arabic typing and shorthand so that
their country, n w a Unit d Nations tru teeship, will have clerks to man
government offices when it gains its independence in 1952.
During the same period, an engineer will have surveyed the length
and the breadth of the major rivers of Ecuador to determine the best sites for
future dams to tap their hydro-electric resources.
And, also by the end of 1951, farmers in Ceylon will be learning how to
read and, at the same time, how to produce more food from the same amount
of soil, thus preparing themselves to be shock troops in their country's peaceful
campaign to recapture three fourths of its land area from the jungle.
These examples from three
continents are culled from a new
programme of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. They represent the
realisation of part of a world scheme
of"technical assistance for economic
development", now being carried out
by the United Nations and its agen-
cies, nations and organizations.
Haw is a technical assistance project
set in motion ? The administrative
machinery set up by the Unit d
Nations for its programme is extra-
ordinary in its simplicity.
Basically, the process of asking inter-
national aid for economic development is
no more complicated than that of writ-
ing a letter. In this case, the letter out-
lining what is wanted is written by a
government and sent to Unesco or one of
the United Nations agencies.
In every case, the letter is turned over
to the United Nations Technical Assist-
ance Board, which is charged with the
responsibility of finding exactly the right
Agency-or Agencies-to deal with it.
TQ cope with the question of priority,
the Board and the Agencies have before
them six basic standards by which to
measure the importance of any request.
These are :
1. The relation of a project to economic
development or to the betterment of
soolal conditions essential to economic
development ;
2. The increase) In productivity which the
project would bring about ;
3. The utent to which the requesting
nation can help In the execution of theproject ;
4. The financial ability of the requesting
government to continue the work begun
by the UN after the asslstenoe has
ended ;
6. The possibilities of applying the bene-
fits of the projeot to other countries In
the same region ;
8. The urgency of the aid requested ;
7. The equitable distribution of aid to the
different regions of the world.
The responsibilities of requesting gov-
ernments are mainly financial. They
include the payment of subsistence allow-
ance to cover the living expenses of
experts ; the payment of such costs as
transportation and medical expenses ; the
provision of office facilities ; and sharing
in the cost of fellowships and scholarships
offered as part of the aid programme.
UNESCO FIELDS OF ACTION
THE formulation of requests by govern-ments is n t a difficult procedure.
Unesco and the other Specialized
Agencies have made clear just what they
are prepared to do to aid the economic
development of a country. Unesco's fa-
cilities for technical assistance, which is
usually provided in co-operation with the
other UN agencies, can be summarized
under the following headings :
1. ELEMENTARY EDUCATION. The
Organization is prepared to help in
educational administration and finance,
curricula and teaching methods, text-
books, school buildings and equipment,
the planning of compulsory education
programmes and the adaptation of
educational systems to meet changing
community needs.
2. FUNDAMENTAL AND ADULT
EDUCATION. To raise the standard of
living of the people through education,
Unesco offers aid in literacy campaigns,
education in health and agriculture, the
development of co-operatives, and the
encouragement of small industries and
handicrafts.
3. TECHNICAL EDUCATION. Unesco
has interpreted this term to mean
education and training for industries,
trades, agriculture and commerce from
the primary school to the university level.
Aid is available in the organization and
financing of such schools, and on
problems relating to their buildings and
equipment, textbooks, the selection of
staffs, and the co-ordination of their
programmes with the country's overall
economic development.
4. BASIC AND APPLIED SCIENCES.
This extremely important phase of
Unesco's technical assistance covers both
teaching and research in the Natural
Sciences. Physicists, chemists, mathema-
ticians, biologists... all are essential to eco-
nomic development.
5. SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION. This
field is a broad one, covering various
forms of documentation needed for scien-
tific and technical education for carrying
out research and for developing industry.
SERVICES UNESCO OFFERS
THESE are the fields in which Unescois prepared to offer aid. Gov rn-
ments requiring assistance in one or
several of these fields, normally indicate
the form of aid they feel will be most
effective. Here again, Unesco has drawn
up a simplified list of the methods avail-
able to governments seeking technical
aid. They are divided into four main
types of services, as follows :
EXPLORATORY MISSIONS. These
are teams of specialists intended mainly
to aid countries on fact-finding projects
in education and the natural and social
sciences. The exploratory mission is
usually of short-term duration and, under
normal conditions, completes its work
within six months.
ADVISORY SERVICES. This form of
aid is intended for countries which have
already carried out their own exploratory
missions and gathered the preliminary
UNESCO'S SHARE II
TECHNICAL ASSIST
The meaning of Technical Assis-
tance and the desperate, almost
world-wide, needs it is designed to
serve are dealt with on Page 5 of this
issue of the COURIER.
Of the total funds, $ 20, 012, 500,
pledged by fifty countries for the
whole programme of the United
Nations and its Specialized Agencies,
Unesco has been allocated 14 0/0,
S 2, 300, 000, for its share in the work.
TWELVE REQUESTS ANSWERED
IN the case of Unesco, as well as1 t at of the other United Nations
Agencies, there was no shortage of
request. s to put the money to work.
In July of 1950, the Technical Assis-
tance Board reported that it had
received requests from fifty-seven
countries. Unesco, at present, has
requests from nearly two dozen coun-
tries on hand, and it has already taken
action on twelve of them.
These twelve countries, are Ceylon,
Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Le-
banon, Liberia, Libya, Mexico, Pakis-
tan, Persia and Thailand. in their
requests, they produced twelve diffe-
rent intepretations of"Technical As-
distance for Economic Development"
that is, interpreting it to fit their
own immediate needs.
These varied interpretations are
completely in line with the United
Nation's conception of technical aid.
This programme has no intention of
setting up a production line from
which would stream prefabricated
economies and, even worse, stan-
dardised societies and cultures. The
new economies will be fitted into the
needs of the countries-not vice
versa.
data needed for a proposed project. In
this case, a government may request an
advisory mission to guide it in projects
in education, basic and applied sciences
and the use of the radio and visual
material for educational purposes.
Unesco's experience in operating re-
gional scientific offices around the world
suggested a longer-term type of advisory
service-the Advisory Science Office. If
requested by a country, such offices will
be set up to supply scientific and technical
information.
TRAINING. Unesco is prepared to
help in the training of teachers, scientists
and other needed personnel by facilitating
study abroad through fellowships or by
assisting in the establishment of training
centres within a country. Unesco is also
prepared to call study groups for short
intensive studies of problems arising in
technical assistance, and may help set up
demonstration projects to show people by
example just what the use of new
educational and scientific techniques can
do for a region. Unesco is also equipped
to aid governments in setting up centres
for producing educational films and radio
programmes.
RESEARCH TEAMS AND INFORM-
ATION SERVICES. The research team,
as defined by Unesco, consists of a group
of scientists who will aid a country in
research on technical or scientific prob-
lems standing in the way of economic
development. One of the main inform-
ation services offered is the biblio-
graphical centre, including a library
designed to collect, classify and digest for
ready use, scientific documentation on
problems of technical assistance. The
information series will also include a
photographic reproduction office to handle
microfilmed documents. The biblio-
graphical centre will make its services
available to United Nations Agencies
working on technical assistance problems
and to scientists and industrialists in the
entire region. The information services
available through Unesco also cover public
information teams ; that is, press and
radio specialists to aid countries in telling
the largest possible number of people the
aims of specific technical assistance pro-
jects.
The above categories of technical assist-
ance teams and facilities are available to
under-developed countries for 1950-51.
But here again, Unesco's view of tech-
nical assistance is an elastic one. This
"prospectus"does not necessarily mean
that the Organization's activities will be
limited to such services. If the needs of
countries call for other techniques, the
way is not barred to their use. In a sense,
it will be the countries receiving aid who
will help determine what Unesco's future
technical assistance programmes will be.
This principle explains the em-
phasis which the United Nations and,
in particular, Unesco have placed on
the educational side of technical as-
sistance. If a nation does not have
an adequate number of trained scien-
tists and educators to pick up the
work begun by specialists from
abroad, technical assistance will
merely die of inertia.
It also should be remembered that
$ 20, 000, 000 is all that the United
Nations has available at the present
moment for the needs of the entire
world. With that sum there will be
no deserts blooming overnight, or mud
huts mushrooming up into skyscra-
pers. Therefore, Unesco has decided
that the amount of money it has on
hand will give a greater return if it
is invested in men instead of in
drawing up grandiose paper projects.
Unesco cannot build dams, but it can
train engineers and teachers of engi-
neering. When the money for the
dams is available, the men-native,
not foreign-will be there to build
them.
TECHNICAL AVID PHILOSOPHY
THIS might be called the philosophyof technical assistance as conceiv-
ed by Unesco and the United
Nations, Here, in twelve coun-
tries, is how it is being transformed
from a philosophy into a programme
of action. Space does not permit
detailed treatment for each of these
twelve countries. The single case
history of Libya, described in a sepa-
rate story on this page, will serve to
illustrate many of the principles and
methods to be used by Unesco in its
part of the work of technical assis-
tance.
CEYLON. This country, on its own
initiative, launched a large-scale pro-
gramme to reclaim its so-called"Dry
Zone", which makes up 75 per cent
of its land area. Unesco is aiding
this programme with a fundamental
education centre, emphasizing, literacy
training and better farming methods.
Ceylon also will have the services of
two geologists to make an inventory
of its mineral resources.
ECUADOR. Here, a four-man team
of scientists and educators will be sent
into the field. One member of the
team, a chemical engineer, will assist
in setting up a chemical engineering
institute to put added research faci-
lities at the disposal of Ecuadorian
industry. The second will work with
Ecuadorian educators on improving

the organization and the curricula of
the country's universities ; the third
will assist the country in its literacy
campaign, and the fourth will be the
electrical engineer previously men-
tioned. In this joint mission, the ILO
will send three advisers on industrial
education and handicrafts.
INDIA. At a cost of $ 229, 200,
Unesco is helping India in its na-
tional programme of improving faci-
lities for scientific research and train-
ing. As one phase, Unesco is sending
seven experts in such fields as plas-
tics, dam design, electrical engineer-
ing and low temperature physics.
The second part of the programme
will see Unesco help India to set up
a bibliographical centre for scientists
working in India, in technical assis-
tance programmes in the region and
in all of South-east Asia. At present,
India has a tremendous number of
scientific documents on its hands
with no adequate facilities for putting
them into a condition where they can
be readily used.
INDONESIA. Unesco will help In-
donesia set into motion a training
programme for teachers in resettle-
ment areas, as well as. to establish
an adequate primary school system (at
present only 25 per cent of the coun-
try's school-age children are in class-
rooms).
IRAQ. The University of Baghdad,
building up its science department, is
suffering from a shortage of teachers.
In response to the government's
request, Unesco is sending out a biolo-
gi-st, a mathematician and an indus-
trial chemist to become temporary
members of the faculty and, from a
long-term viewpoint, is providing- fellowships to enable Iraqui science
teachers to study abroad.
LEBANON. Here Unesco, during
1950-1951, will make a study of the
country's technical assistance needs,
especially in the field of scientific and
educational research.
LIBERIA. This African country
presents a strange picture of economic
development far outstripping what
might be called human development.
To enable Liberians to reap the full
benefits of the tremendous changes
'being made in their country's econ-
omy, Unesco is helping their govern-
ment with a broad educational pro-
gramme. This scheme will concen-
trate on the expansion of facilities at
Liberia College, the country's only
higher educational institution and, at
the same time, will work out methods
of raising educational standards
throughout the country-not an easy
task since Liberia's population of
1, 500, 000 is divided into nearly twenty
language groups.
LIBYA. By January 1, 1952, this
country will become independent, but
it is desperately short of civil servants.
Unesco is helping in the operation of
what can only be called a clerical and
typing school and, in addition, is sup-
plying funds to enable prospective
holders of higher governmental posi-
tions to study abroad. (For addition-
al details of the programme in Libya,
see separate story on this page).
MEXICO. Here Unesco, in coopera-
tion again with the ILO is planning
to assist Mexican industrial training
schools. At the same time, a biblio-
graphical centre very much like the
one planned for India will be set up
to serve countries throughout Latin-
America.
PAKISTAN. Two missions are
to be sent to this country. The first,
a team of four scientists specialised in
seismology, atmosphere and magnet-
ism research, will help set up the
first institute of geophysics in Asia.
Once it Ls in operation, its initial task
will be to survey Pakistan's vast desert
area to assess the possibilities of
salvaging land, through irrigation, for
food production. The second mission
will seek to develop radio broadcasting
and receiving facilities in Pakistan in
order to make them effective media
for adult education.
PERSIA. A scientist sent out by
Unesco will advise the Persian Go-
vernment on its seven-year economic
development programme and will help
determine where Unesco's technical
aid facilities can fit into this pro-
gramme.
THAILAND. A team of educators
specialised in primary school training,
vocational education, and the teach-
ing of science and the English lang-
uage, is going out to Thailand to
help cope with a shortage of 20, 000
teachers in a country where only one-
third of the 70, 000 available teachers
have had adequate training.
In all of these countries, every
foreign specialist will have his count-
erpart studying abroad on a fellow-
ship to replace him at the end of his
mission. In most cases, too, the accent
has been placed on training teachers
rather than students. Unesco does
not want to become an international
faculty : rather, it wants to give
educators in individual countries the
initial impetus they need to get their
own systems under way.
TECHNICAL AID IS NOT A NEW DEA. Unesco and other United Nations Specialized Agencies have
been straining their limited resources for several years to carry out their own"technical aid"programmes.
Unesco has given aid in education, science, mass communication, and in various cultural fields. To pre-
pare audio-visual materials for fundamental education, for example, Unesco set up an experimental centre
in China. Filmstrips, posters and pamphlets dealing with health precautions were tested in local villages.
This photo shows members of a Unesco team preparing for a film show. The materials and lessons
learned from the experiment will be available to educators all over the world.
IN March 1950, Adrian Pelt, theUnited Nations Commissioner in
Libya, sent a letter to Unesco
asking for help. Mr. Pelt's assign-
ment in the former Italian colony was
to put into effect the resolution of the
United Nations General Assembly pro-
viding for the establishment not later
than January 1, 1952, of a constitutional
government in a free, united Libya.
The area involved was under three
different administrations : Tripolitania,
administered by the British, with a
population of 800, 000 ; Cyrenaica, with
a semi-independent government advised
by a British Resident, and a population
of 200, 000 ; and Fezzan, with a popula-
tion of 40, 000 under French administra-
tion. Mr. Pelt needed help in training
a corps of Libyan minor civil servants
who would be prepared to carry out
their tasks as soon as the new govern-
ment began functioning.
Mr. Pelt's first requirement was for
helpers well below the level of minis-
terial rank. He merely wanted persons
who could help him provide the new
nation of Libya with enough file clerks,
stenographers and typists to carry on
the normal business of government.
Unesco responded at once to the
appeal, sending to Libya a representa-
tive equipped to make for Mr. Pelt an
expert survey of the situation. The
Unesco expert reported that Libya had

not produced a secondary school gra-
duate since 1939. Before 1939, the
general level of education had been very
low because of economic backwardness.
It was only in 1947 that secondary
schools were opened again in Tripolita-
nia and Cyrenaica. No students would
therefore graduate until 1951.
FIRST TASK LITERACY
THE task of training Arabic typistsand stenographers seemed relati-
vely simple until it was discovered that
the available personnel was illiterate
and would, first, have to be taught to
read and write.
The Unesco report also showed that
the prospective nation's deficiencies in
competent government personnel were
equally great in the higher brackets.
To remedy this lack, it was suggested
that fellowships and scholarships for
study in foreign countries as well as in
Libya be provided. These were pro-
posed to cover courses in local govern-
ment methods, forestry, customs admi-
nistration, police work and accountancy.
It was also suggested that seven Libyans
with teacher training be offered an
opportunity to make further studies in
England, for three or four months. The
shortage of teachers in Libya was so
grave that they could not be spared
for a longer period.
Acting on the basis of the report, and
on requests received from the adminis-
trations of the three areas which will
form United Libya, Unesco decided to
help in three ways : first, by esta-
blishing a clerical training centre ;
second, by providing scholarships to
enable prospective holders of higher
governmental positions to prepare
themselves for these new duties through
study ; and third, by providing scholar-
ships in education to ten men and
women from the Fezzan.
TRAINING CENTRE OPENED
THE total cost of this project is$ 57, 500. In common with all the
other technical assistance projects un-
dertaken by Unesco, the sum is to come
from resources outside the Organiz-
ation's normal budget. The clerical
training school will cost Unesco $ 32, 000
to operate during the year 1950-51, a
figure which includes the salaries of a
principal and thirteen teachers. Unesco
and the United Kingdom will share the
other costs of operating the centre.
These include subsistence allowances for
pupils, the purchase of thirty-one Ara-
bic and thirty-one English typewriters
and the repair of the school building.
The training centre is already operat-
ing in Libya. Literacy training plays
as important a part in its curriculum as
the proper techniques oft writing a bus-
iness letter.
The case of Libya is an example of
the kind of technical assistance which
Unesco can offer, for it represents the
maximum utilization of a small amount
of funds to accomplish a definite pur-
pose within a given time.
