This. engrCITÍDg. published In 1874.
shows four InvenûolI8-the power-
driven printing press. the telegraph.
the railway locomotive end the
tteeanahip-which mctde their ism-
pact on men'. way of life d"rlDg
the 19th c : entury. Today. at the mid
point m the 20th century, the apeed
with which zcientiHc developments
are changing our lives is measured
in terms of jet engines and atomic
energy.
SCIENCE AND MAN : 1950
J Ut. IUS CÆSAR could send a letter just as
swiftly as Napoleon could. As late as
1834, Sir Robert Pe l, c lled post haste
from Rome to London by a Cabint
crisis, took 13 days for the journey-preci-
sely the time allowed for a Roman official
18 hundred years ago. Today, anyone can
travel between these two capital cities is
two days hy rail and cross-channel steamer,
in six hours or less by airplane.
This is an example of the way in which
the application of scientific knowledge is
changing our lives.
Harvard's Professor Kirtley F. Mather,
President-elect of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, discusses
some aspects of the international and social
implications of science in a report specially
written for Unesco's Division for the Popu-
larization of Science.
Vividly he shows, for example, how science
accelerates the rate of change :
PEOPLES ARE CLOSER
"TOUAY, everybody is aware of changeThe cont ast between the ways of
living at this mid point of the twen-
tieth century and at its beginning is vividly
recorded in the mind of every elderly person
and reported in vigorous words to every
yougster.
"Responsible for this is the application of
scientific research to everyday life. But this
is by no means as well understood and as
widely known as it should be."
The new technology of travel, transport
arid communication has resulted in the
peoples of the world being brought closer
together-in technological terms. This has,
however, led to an increased dependence
upon the natural resources of the earth.

"BACK TO HORSE AND BUGGY WAYS"
P IWFESSOH Mather'shows how, as peoplehave taken dvantage of the contribu-
tion of science and tecllllology to 1111-
man comfort and efficiency, there has been
an increase in energy requirements. We
are now dependent upon coal, petroleum, na-
tural gas and water power."Cut off the
supply of mineral fuels, and most of us
would have to revert promptly to the horse
and buggy ways of a century ago", he says.
with the increased dependence of man upon
the earth's mineral and agricultural resour-
cues, there has been a tremendous increase in
population.
"It is against the background of facts such
as these that the social implications of
science must be examined", says Professor
Mather."Especiall)'in this time of rapid and
drastic change, it is imperative that men of
intelligence and goodwill give careful consi-
deration to the social trends resulting in
whole or in part from the impact of science.
It would appear that in the long history of
geologic life development, man is the first
creature possessing the ability to determine
his own destiny."M. G.
Copies of this stimulating and timely report
(UNESCO/NS/SIS/5) and others in the same
series may be obtained on application to
Unesco House.
