BALZAC
AND THE HUMAN COMEDY
FEW writers ha'Ye had such a great influence on the literature of all countries as Honoré
de Balzac, who died in Paris, on August 18th, 1850.
Balzac's true literary career started in 1829 after ten years of trying and discourag-
ing apprenticeship. It had exactly twenty. one years to run, yet during this time Baltic,
working with a furious energy, produced an immense and'Yaried total of nO'Yels and phil-
osophical and analytical studies in which, using his gifts of obser'Yation and imagination
and on a scale ne'Yer achie'Yed by any other nO'Yelist, he portrayed the life of his time.
Balzac openly, publicly and proudly pursued fame and money. He affected at times
to hold mankind in contempt. Some critics have asserted that these attitudes were the
whole basis for his work. That work itself, howe'Yer, in its profundity and integrity, giyes
a sufficient answer to the lesser critics-and e'Yen to Balzac himself-for contending
that it could bave had so mean an origin.
In 1842, Balzac carried out the idea of building his work into one structure to which
he gave the name"La ComMie Humaine", and in a preface written for the first'Yolume
of this"Human Comedy", he ga'Ye his own interpretation of his books.
As a tribute to Balzac on the centenary of his death, the Courier publishes on this
page extracts from the preface in which the nO'Yelist, explaining his title for the work,
sets out to"state its purpose, relate its origin and gave some explanation of its plan."
HONORE DE BALZAC
A portrait by the French painter Court.
IN giving to a work, begun nearly
thirteen years ago, the title of
.. The Human C medy", it is
necessary that I should state its
purpose, relate its origin, and give
some explanation of its plan ;
endeavouring to do so as if I had no
personal interest in the matter. This
is not as difficult as the public might
imagine. The writing of a few books
makes a man self-sufficient ; but
much labour and hard toil bring
humility. This reflection explains
the survey which Corneille, Moliere,
and other great authors made of
their writings. If it is impossible to
equal them in the grandeur of their
conceptions, at least we may share
the spirit with which they examined
them.
The leading idea of this human
comedy came to me at first like a
dream ; like one of those impossible
visions which we try to clasp as they
elude us ; a smiling fancy showing
for a moment a woman's face, as it
spreads its wings and rises to the
ideal heavens. But soon this vision,
this chimera, changed, after the
fashion of chimeras, into a living
shape with compelling will and
tyrannical power, to which I yielded
myself up. The idea came from the
study of human life in comparison
with the life of animals.
It is a mistake to suppose that the
controversy which in these latter
days has arisen between Cuvier and
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire rests upon a'
scientific innovation. Synthetic unity
filled, under various definitions, the
greatest minds of the two preceding
centuries. In reading the strange
books of those mystical writers who
drew science into their conceptions
of the infinite-such as Sweden-
borg, Saint-Martin, and others ; also
the writings of the great naturalists,
Leibnitz, Buffon, Charles Bonnet,
etc.-we find in the monads of
Leibnitz, in the organic molecules of
Buffon, in the vegetative force of
Needham, in the encasement of
germs of Charles Bonnet, who was
bold enough to write in 1760,
"animal life vegetates like plant
life"-we find, I say, the rudiments
of that strong law of self-
preservation upon which rests the
theory of synthetic unity.
Society Makes The Man
THERE ITS but one animal. The
Creator used one and the same
principle for all organized
being. An animal is an essence
which takes external form, or, to
speak more correctly, takes the
differences of its form from the
centres or conditions in which it
comes to its development. All
zoological species grow out of these
differences.
The announcement and pursuit of
this theory, keeping it as he did in
harmony with preconceived ideas of
the Divine power, will be the lasting
glory of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, the
conqueror of Cuvier in this particular
branch of science-a fact recognized
by the great Goethe in the last words
which came from his pen.
Filled with these ideas, I had
perceived, long before this discussion
arose, that Society in these respects
is like Nature. Society makes the
man ; he develops according to the
social centres in which he is placed :
there are as many different men as
there are species in zoology.'rhe
differences between a soldier, a
workman, a governor, a lawyer, a
man of leisure, a scholar, a
statesman, a merchant, a sailor, a
poet, a beggar, a priest, though more
difficult to decipher, are at least as
marked as those which separate the
wolf, the lion, the ass, the crow, the
shark, the seal, the lamb, etc. There
have always been, and always will
be, social species just as there are
zoological species. If Buffon
achieved a great work when he put
together in one book the whole
scheme of zoology, is there not a
work of the same kind to be done
for Society ?
Mankind's Complicated
Struggle
NATURE imposes upon the animalKingdom limitations which do
not bind the social realm. When
Buffon had described a lion, he
could dismiss the lioness with a
word ; but in the world of men,
woman is far from being the female
of the male. Two species of
mankind may exist in one household :
the wife of a shopkeeper is some-
times fit to be the wife of a prince ;
often the wife of a prince is
unworthy to be the companion of the
meanest labourer. The Social king-
dom has uncertainties and accidents
which are not to be found in the
natural world, for it is itself Nature
plus Society. Any description of the
social species, consequently, doubles
all description of the animal species
in the matter of the sexes alone.
... Buffon found the life of animals
extremely simple. They have no
belongings, neither arts nor sciences ;
while man, by a law still un-
explained, feels the need to set the
stamp of his habits, his thoughts, his
being, upon all that he collects to
meet his wants. Though Leuwen-
h o e c, Swammerdam, Spallanzani,
Réaumur, Charles Bonnet, Muller,
Haller, and other patient zoologists
proclaim the interest which attaches
to the habits of animals, yet to our
eyes at least they remain perpetually
the same ; whereas the habits,
clothing, methods of speech, the
abodes of princes, bankers, artists,
citizens, priests, and paupers, are all
widely dissimilar, and change with
the whims of civilization.
For these reasons my ideal work
took on a triple form,-men,
women, and things ; that is to say,
persons and the material represent-
ation which they gave to their being :
in short, man and his life.
Portrait Of An Epoch
IT has been no light task topaint the three or four* * * thousand salient figures of an
epoch,-for that is about the
number of types presented by the
generation of which this human
that social antithesis-furnished the
data.
Some years after Balzac's death, the"Socié-
té des Gens de Lettres" (The French
nuthors'Association) commissioned Rodin,
the famous sculptor, to execute a statue of
the novelist. Rodin carried out a great deal of
research, studied lithographs and engravings
and read Balzac's works for he aimed to
portray the character of the novelist rather
than his physical likeness. The final result
(shown in the photograph above) was a
synthesis of the two, but the French writers
refused to accept it. It was not until 1939
that a bronze was cast and this now stands
at the junction of two Paris streets while the
original work is preserved in the Muse
Rodin. in Paris.
comedy is the contemporary and the
exponent. This number of figure,
of characters, this multitude of por-
traits needed frames, permit me even
to say galleries. Out of this neces-
sity grew the classification of my
work into Scenes-scenes from
private, provincial, Parisian, politi-
cal, military, and country life. Under
these heads I have classed all those
studies of manners and morals which
form the general history of Society
and of its"conduct of life and noble
deeds" (faits et gestes), to use the
language of our ancestors. These
six divisions follow a general idea ;
each has its meaning and signific-
ation, and represents a distinct phase
in human life. The"Scenes from
private life"are those of childhood
and of youth, just as the.'Scenes
from provincial life"represent the
age of passions, calculations, self-
interest, and ambition. The"Scenes
from Parisian life"draw the picture
of tastes, fashions, sentiments, vices,
and all those unbridled extravagan-
ces excited by the life of great cities,
where meet together the extremes of
good and the extremes of evil. Each
of these three divisions has its local
colour. Paris and the provinces-
Society In Convulsion
AFTER drawing these three
sections of Society, I wished
'''two show certain other
phases of life which unite the
interests of some or of all. and yet
are partly aloof from the common
order. Out of this desire came the
"Scenes from political life", also
the"Scenes from military life" ; in
the latter I have sought to show
Society in convulsion, carried out of
itself either for conquest or for
defence. Finally, the"Scenes from
country life"are, as it were, the
evening of my long day's-work, if I
may so call this social drama. In
this division will be found my purest
characters ; also the application of
the great principles of order, of
patriotism, and of morality.
Such is the structure, teeming with
life, full of comedy and of tragedy,
on which I base the,"Philosophical
Studies"which form the second part
of my work. In these I have shown
the keynote of that vast assemblage
of all that strikes the eye, that
captivates the mind or touches the
heart ; I have shown the havoc that
has followed thought, step ; by step,
from emotion to emotion.
The Public Will Decide
ABoVE these again will be
f 0 u n d the"Analytical
... Studies", of wh ch I shall
say nothing, as only one of them has
been published. Later, I hope to
give other works of the same class,
- the., Pathology of Social life"the
"Anatomy of Educating bodies", the"Monopraph of Virtue", etc.
Looking at the work still to be
done, perhaps my readers will join
my publishers in saying,"May your
life be prolonged !" may own prayer
is that I may not be so tortured by
men and events as I have been in
the past, since the beginning of my
great and terrible labour. Yet I have
had one support, for which I return
thanks to God. The highest talent
of our day, the noblest characters, the
truest friends, have clasped my hand
and said to me,"Take courage !"
Why should I not ; own that such
proofs of affection, such testimonials
given now and then by strangers,
have upheld me in my career in spite
of myself, in spite of unjust attacks,
in spite of calumnies that have
pursued me,-upheld me against
disheartenment, and also against that
too-vivid hope, the expression of
which has been mistaken for exces-
sive conceit.
The extent of a plan which em-
braces both the history and the
criticism of Society, which analyzes
its evils and lays bare its hidden
springs, justifies me, I think, in
giving to my work the title under
which it now appears,-"The
Human Comedy". Is it ambitious ?
Is it not just and legitimate ? The
public, when my work is done, will
decide.
