S a specialized agency of the United Nations, Unesco has aworld-wide task which leads it into widely different
geographical areas, some of which, however, have a com-
mon linguistic bond.
One of these regions is the Spanish speaking part of America
where ethnological, political, social and economic causes give an
importance and urgency to educational and cultural problems
in the 18 countries it comprises.
The first major step in arousing the interest of the peoples in
these t8 countries in Unesco and its work was the holding of
the Organization's Second General Conference in Mexico, in 1947.
The following article shows how interest in Unesco's aims and
achievements has been developed since the Mexico City Confe-
rence, and particularly during a six week period (September 15
to October 3)) fast year.
Panama, which recently decided to join Unesco, has had a distinctive and picturesque history. During
the early Spanish regime its capital was the storehouse of gord and silver from South America and treasures
from the Orient. In 1671. however, the city was destroyed by pirates, although traces still remain to-day as is
shown in the above photo 01 the Cathedral ruins. The city was rebuilt in 1673 five miles to the West 01 the
old site.
On 15 October representatives from
45 universities were present at
the opening of the first Latin
American Congress of Universities in
Guatemala, to which Unesco had sent
Dr. Jose de Benito and Dr. Pedro
Bosch-Gimpera as observers. A spe-
cial message from the Director-Gener3l
of Unesco was read in the Great Hall
of the University of San Carlos, broad-
cast throughout Central America and
reprinted by the Latin American press.
Unesco had already established
contacts and had been working for the
founding of a World Association of
Universities, and in their speeches.
Dr. Carlos Martínez Duran, Rector of
the University of San Carlos, and Dr.
Raul Osegueda. Guatemalan Ministry
of Education, made numerous referen-
ces to Unesco's work in this field. Yet
so far there had been no hint of the
possibility of the Congress passing
resolutions or agreements establishing
regular and permanent co-operation
between Latin American universities as
a whole and Unesco.
New World University Links
TWO points in particular relating tothe union of Latin American Uni-
versifies are of outstanding inte-
rest for Unesco and for the future of
the World Association of Universities
now in course of formation. Paragraph
(a) of Article I of the Union's objects
reads :"to improve, consolidate and
encourage mutual relations between
Latin American Universities and rela-
tions between those universities and
other cultural institutions and bodies
such as Unesco and the Inter-Ameri-
can Cultural Council of the Organiza-
tion of American States". Another
object is :"the establishment within
the Executive of the Union of. Latin
American Universities of a special sec-
tion for the purpose of promoting the
closest co-operation with international
bodies of a similar kind. preferably
with Unesco".
The application of these provisions is
already becoming a fact. Many Latin
American universities have ratified the
agreements reached at the First Con-
gress and have joined the Union. The
Union's Secretary-General is in contact
with Unesco's Secretariat in Paris and
with the Preparatory Commission of
the World Congress of Universities to
be held at Nice in 1950. The Congress
is being organized by Unesco as a
sequel to the Utrecht Congress of 1948
and all the indications are that, unlike
the Utrecht meeting, which was not
attended by delegations from Latin
American universities, the majority of
those universities will be represented
on this occasion.
In the same six week period last Au-tumn the Information Department
of the United Nations organized
three Latin American regional confe-
represented by M. Asdrubal Salsamon-
di, and Unesco by Dr. Jose de Benito.
Delegates learned a great deal about
the organization and functions of
Unesco, and passed four resolutions
assigning it important tasks.
The Second Conference, held in San-
tiago de Chile from 15 to 18 October.
was attended by representatives from
137. organizations. including 10. 3 dele-
gates and 202 observers, and the Third
Conference, held at Montevideo
between 27 an 30 October was attended
by more than a hundred delegations
from non-governmental associations in
Argentina. Uruguay and Brazil. Both
these conferences adopted resolutions
which should assist the progress of
Unesco's work in Latin America.
visional Government, Don Jose Figue-
res. and as this government was vested
with extraordinary powers, the ratifi-
cation of Unesco's Constitution was
promulgated by decree. On October 11.
the Minister of Justice informed the
press that the Cabinet had approved
Costa Rica's accession tao, Unesco.
High Altitude Studies in Peru
Since the holding of the second Gen-eral Conference in Mexico at the
end of 1947. Unesco's work has
gained in scope, weight and effective-
ness among the Latin American peo-
ples. The Marbial Valley pilot project.
in Haiti, a report on which appeared
in Vol. II, No. 5 of the Courier last
One of the three Central American countries which have recently
taken steps to join Unesco is Costa Rica. This photo, taken in the
Presidential Residence at San Jose de Costa Rica shows (from lelt
to right) Dr. Gonzalo Facio (Minister of Justice). Professor Jose de
Benito (Unesco's Representative). Don Jose Figueres (President 01
the Government). M. Daniel Oduber (Secretary of State) and
M. Alberto Canas (Director of the National Bank).
Unesco's Latin American Science Co-operation Office. formerly
situated in Rio de Janeiro. has now been re-opened in Montevideo.
under the direction 01 Prolessor Establier. The Office, part of whose
premises are shown above, has been asked to prepare plans for a
science museum to be opened in Montevideo. Three volumes of the
Directory 01 Scientific Institutions and Scientists 01 Latin America
have also beeJ ; L issued by the office.
rences of non-governmental organiza-
tions concerned with information in
Panama, Santiago de Chile and Mon-
tevideo.
The first of these conferences which
between them covered all the countries
of Latin America, took place at Pana-
ma between 23 and 26 September and
was attended by 37 organizations from
5 countries, the United Nations being

Until recently Panama, Costa Ricaand Guatemala had not ratified
Unescc's Constitution. Now, wi-
thin a period of 22 days, all three of
these Central American countries have
approved and promulgated the neces-
sary laws to enable their instruments
of ratification to be deposited at the
British Foreign Office.
On 20 September the Guatemalan
Parliamentary Committee for Educa-
tion and Home Affairs approved a
report commending the Bill for the
ratification of the Unesco Constitu-
tion. The passage of this bill into law
was delayed until November as a result
of the catastrophe suffered by Guate-
mala following torrential rains which
caused hundreds of deaths and serious
damage. When normal life was res-
tored, the Parliament was once again
able to turn its attention to the bill
and give it the three readings required
by law ; following which it was pro-
mulgated by the President of the Repu-
blic and published in the official
gazette.
Making History in Panama
In Panama. almost before the workof the first Latin American Re-
gional Conference on Non-Govern-
mental Organizations was over, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs drafted a
bill for Panama's ratification of the
Unesco Constitution. On Monday.
3 October, the first day of the new
parliamentary session, the bill was
tabled. By the following day, a favou-
rable report on it had been submitted
by the Foreign Affairs Committee and
a number of articles added respecting
the formation of the Panamanian
National Commission for co-operation
v ; ith Unesco.
The amended text was passed at its
first reading the same day, and after
two more readings it had become law
in a total cf three days. The speed
with which the BiU became'aw is
unprecedented in Panamanian parlia-
mentary history.
In Costa Rica the first move on the
question of the country's joining Unesco
came from Dr. Gonzalo Facio, Minis-
ter of Justice and former Minister of
Foreign Affairs. His suggestion was
welcomed by the President of the pro-
June, is just one aspect of this work.
A seminar on education and illite-
racy was held at Caracas in 1948 and
its work continued at a further semi-
nar in August and September of this
year at Quitandinha (Rio de Janeiro'.
Chile has-1ately been the seat of a
Congress on Marine Biology, while in
Lima a symposium on High Altitude
Biology is now in progress. In Mexi-
co, the Government is launching a
major experiment in fundamental edu-
cation in the State of Mayarit, and
Unesco's 1950 programme provides for
the opening of a Unesco Regional Cen-
tre in Havana to co-ordinate the Orga-
nization's work in the countries of the
Western Hemisphere. In Colombia
another fundamental education experi-
ment has already begun to yield
results.
Hundreds of newspapers are already
regularly receiving articles, news and
stories on advances in science, art and
culture supplied by Unesco. The Orga-
nization is using the four short-wave
bands of the United Nations broadcast-
ing station at Lake Success for educa-
tional and cultural programmes, which
are re-transmitted by mum'serous Latin
American stations.
Lastly, the work of the Regional
Field Science Co-operation Office,
which its now at work in Montevideo,
deserves special mention. One of the
best examples of the kind of practical
work tills Science Co-operation Office
has been doing is the help it was able
to give the Philippines whose maize
fields had been ravaged by locusts.
The Montevideo office was consult-ed, and after carrying out in-
vestigations it forwarded supplies
of a variety of maize immune to lo-
custs which is utilized in Mexico.
From these supplies it has been pos-
sible to grow seedlings for planting so
that much of the maize sown in the
Philippines next year will be safe,
from this pest.
An indication of the speed at which
Unesco's work is being done among the
peoples of Latin America is that the
programme laid down for this Centre
by the meeting of Scientific Experts
on Latin America, and estimated to
require two years, has been completed
in less than seven months.
UNESCO
