UNESCo is undertaking an intensive campaign to improve the teach-
ing of the principles of the United Nations in schools, adult
classes and universities of Member States throughout t  world.
Particular emphasis is being put on the necessity for collective
security, based on respect for law.
The campaign, while continuing Unesco's normal activities as an
organ of education about United Nations principles of peace through
collective security, is intended to encourage more effective and dynamic
methods of teaching these principles.
To assist members of teaching staffs, adult educators, university
professors and others concerned with teaching, Unesco is asking dis-
tinguished writers in a number of countries to prepare in close collabor-
ation with the United Nations, written and audio-visual teaching mate-
rials. These include pamphlets, books, maps, charts and bulletins
adapted to the various levels of instruction, ranging from those designed
to present the case for collective security in an elementary school manner
to scholarly studies on the concept of international law written. by leading
experts.
Teaching Aids For All Levels
THREE types of written material are being prepared in the French,English and Spanish languages for distribution to Unesco's Na-
tional Commissions. These will include a pamphlet designed for
use in high schools and adult classes ; a simplified version of this pam-
phlet supplemented by advice about practical class room methods for the
teaching of collective security and other UN principles ; third, a book
for a public on a more advanced educational level.
The visual teaching materials include wall charts and coloured maps
which can be reproduced in black and white to permit wide class-room
distribution. lIt is expected that National Commissions in. countries
where instruction is given in languages other than French, Spanish and
English willrrange for translations and adaptations., 
Unesco is arranging for an initial printing of 10, 000 copies each of
the two. kinds of pamphlets, and of 12, 000 for maps and wall charts.
But the programme is based on the assumption that National Commis-
sions will arrange for reprinting and distribution of many times these
totals.'
In carrying out the educational campaign Unesco will not only be
putting into effect the unanimous decision. of its Executive Board that
the Organization should, within its resources and province of activity,
develop teaching about the UN. It is also using the present international
situation as the point of departure for increased activity in an area
assigned to it by its Constitution r-help for teaching that tends to
lead toward the abolition of war, the replacement of violence by reason,
and the substitution of solidarity for international rivalry.
Unesco is also carrying out the instructions of its Executive Board
that it put at the disposal of the Secretary General of the United Nations
two specialists in the field of education with orders to co-operate with
the UN Secretariat in order to assemble relevant documentation in
connection with the United Nations action.
