EXPERTS TO SEEK BEST ADUlT EDU[ATION METHODS
AT UNESCO SPONSORED SEMINAR
IN a quiet country hotel on the shores of Lake
t Mondsee in the Austrian Alps, education specialists
from me twenty countries will meet this month
for a seminar on adult education organized by Unesco.
From June 18th to July 29th these educationists,
gathered at the Waldhotel, in Kreuzstein, about 25 miles
from Salzburg, will continue part of the work begun last
year at EIsinore, Denmark, by the first International
Conference on Adult Education to be held since the war.
Embracing every kind of study and every form of
technical and cultural knowledge, adult education has
become one of the most important modern problems, and
one of the most universal.
But it has an over-riding purpose-to defend the
cause of peace in men's minds, to"awaken", asM. Torres
Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, told the Elsinorf'
Conference,"in the conscience of every adult
an awareness both of his personal responsi-
bility and of his intellectual and moral fel-
lowship with the whole of mankind".
It was with these words in mind that the
Elsinore Conference laid down two funda-
mental principles for adult education-unity
of aim and free choice of methods,"that
should lead, through education, to a type of
culture in which the motive principle is per-
sonal responsibility".
SINCE 1947, Unesco hasinstituted a new kind of
conference-the Seminar.
The Seminar brings together
educators from a number of
countries to examine important
educational problems. These
educators make plans. of action
applicable to their respective
countries and prepare in-
formation material which can
be used on a national or
an international scale. The
Seminar, as well as being a
real international gathering, is
a means of education in in-
ternational understanding.
Apprenticeship and re-education.
THE most effective ways of achieving thiswill be sought by the speci lists meeting
at Kreuzstein, this month. They know
that in adult education the best results are
not realized through conventional educational
means. Adult education is to some extent
both a complementary and a compensatory
process ; it is partly an apprenticeship and
partly a work of re-education.

Educators from about 20 countries will meet in this lakeside hotel at
Kreuzstein. in the Austrian Alps, from June 18th to July 29th. for Unesco's
Seminar on Adult Education.
The problem is not so much how to teach a given subject
or to impart a given technique but rather how to co-
operate in helping men and women to develop a wider
understanding and use of life.
The Kreuzstein Seminar will therefore be more than an
opportunity for the experts to compare methods and
exchange views ; it will offer them a chance to give on-
the-spot demonstrations of adult education methods.
At Kreuzstein, they will study the many adult education
methods used in different countries and their discussions will
be combined with practical demonstrations such as exhibitions
and film shows.
The experts will be divided into four study groups under the
Seminar leader, Dr. Sven Bjorklund, Dean and founder of
the Stockholm University for adult education, and world
famous authority on the subject.
Towards A Community Spirit
THE first group will study the ways in which adult educ-ation is organized an  administered according o local
and national needs. Through the exchange of ideas and
experiences their work should produce a useful guide to both
the organization of adult education programmes and enlisting
of support for them.
The second group will study the"intellectual and scientific
training"of adults through classes, lectures, study-circles, films
and radio. It will also examine questions of specialization in
subjects connected with the stuBent's work and the popula-
rization of science.
"`social and economic training"will be the concern of the
third group, in which the experts will consider the best ways
of developing among adults a community spirit and an inter-
national outlook.
The fourth group will deal with the arts, and with the pro-
blem of leisure-hours.
The four group leaders who have already been appointed,
are : M. Jean Le Veugle (France), Mr. S. Whitman (United
States), Mr. Alex Sim (Canada), and Sig. Joannes Carlo (Italy).
The seminar will consider the possibility of establishing an
international centre for adult education, which would not only.
serve to train educators, but would also bring them into touch
with statesmen, writers and trade-union leaders.
The results of the seminar will subsequently be published as
a brochure for the guidance of educators throughout the
world.
