Fifth Session of Unesco's
General Conference Opens, ?
is Florence
FIRST SPEAKERS URGE
'GREATER UNESCO
: _   : : _,."
:   : CONTRIBUTION TO
PEACE EFFORTS
THIS issue of the Courier went to press during the first days of the GeneralConfer nce, with virtuaIly the whole of the age d' !, remaining to b  de lt
with. Awaiting discussion and action,. for example, was the whole
programme of the Organization for 1951. Beyond this, the delegates were
to consider the entire role of UNESCO in relation to efforts of the United
Nations to preserve world peace, and were to project a long-range, permanent
programme for the Organization. To present fragments of the early dis-
cussions or fragmentary and inconclusive reports on changing situat'. ú'lS,
would be incompatible with the duty of the Courier to give a balanced view
of the Conference and its work. At press time, for example, questions resat.
ing to the proper representation of China, and of the participation in the
Conference of Hungary and Czechoslovakia had not been resolved. In this
issue are included only repoTu and statements made to the delegates, before
their deliberotWn3 began.
A FANFARE of trumpets resoundithrough one of the largest and
most beautiful rooms in the
world-the Hall of the Five
Hundred of the Palazzo Vecchio in
Florence, Italy, heralded the opening
of the fifth session of Uhesco's Gene-
ral Conference on May 22.
As the four trumpeters, dressed in
picturesque 14th century costumes,
blew the fanfare, delegates from 56
countries rose from their seats to
greet the entry of Signor Luigi
Einaudi, President of the Italian
Republic, who had come to Florence
to welcome them.
More than 500 delegates from 56
member states-among them nine
ministers of education-as well as
representatives from other United
Nations Specialized Agencies and
non-governmental organizations
were gathered in Florence for the
opening of the Conference which
was scheduled to continue until
June 18.
The significance of this fifth
Unesco General Conference as an
occasion for re-defining Unesco's
role in the world and examining how
it can contribute more vigorously to
the United Nations mission of peace
was underlined by many of the open-
ing speakers. It was especially
stressed by M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General, when
presenting his report to the Confer-
ence. (M. Torres Bodet's speech is
reported on pages 1 and 10 of this
issue.)
TRUSTEE OF PEACE
COUNT Stefano Jacini (Italy) whowas elected conference resident
in succession to Dr. E. Ronald Wal-
ker (Australia) told the delegates :
"After five years of praiseworthy
efforts, of successes and failures,
both useful and instructive, we have
come to a turning point in Unesco's
history.
"We must now adopt once and for
all a particular line and method", he
said. Describing Unesco as"the
trustee of a world-em bracing-notion
of peace and progress", Count Jacini
urged the desirability of concentrat-
ing Unesco's work on a few chosen
projets.
Sir John Maud, Chairman of
Unesco's Executive Board, presenting
the Director's General's activities
Signor Luigi Einaudi. President of the Ita-
lian Republic, welcoming the delegates at
the auqural session of the Florence
Conference.
Nearly 600 delegates from Unesco's Member
States arrived in Florence to attend the Filth
Session of the General Conference. Some
01 them are shown here listening 10 the
opening speeches in the Hall or the Five
Hundred, at the Palazzo Vecchio.
Speakinq to representatives of Unesco National Commissions who. met before
the openinq of the General Conference, M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director
General declared :"The letters which reach me from time to time-sometimes
from very humble people who have heard about Unesco on the wireless or have
seen one or another of our publications-prove to me that there are in our
Member States forces oi enthusiasm, idealism and self-sacrifice which ask no
better than to devote themselves to our cause if we give them the chance."
"But how could the Secretariat in Paris reach the unknown millions who
are our real friends ?"asked M. Torres Bodet. ! t iz here that the National
Commissions have an essential task", he said.'''To the extent to which they
are really representative of all the forces in their own countries, they can give
Unesco a hold, a degree of influence, on the workings of men's minds and on
public opinion."
report, declared emphatically that
Unesco was already contributing to
peace, but he urged delegates to ask
themselves whether Unesco could not
make a larger and more immediate
contribution than it had made so far.
It was against fear, hatred and
misunderstanding which prevailed in
the world today that Unesco's activ-
ities should be set, said Sir John.
"They are modest but solid", he
added,"and they are the result of
countless acts of faith wrought by
men and women who have worked
for Unesco up and down the world
in the last few years".
Addressing the Conference on
behalf of M. Trygve Lie, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, M.
Henri Laugier, Assistant Secretary-
General, UN Department of Social
Affairs, said that had M. Lie been
able to attend, he would have
appealed to the governments repre-
sented at the Conference to give full
support to the UN Specialized Agen-
cies,"all of them victims, in varying
degrees, of the results of the cold
war".
Before the Conference opened a
number of important meetings were
held in Florence. The first of
these took place in the Palazzo Pitti,
where Unesco's Executive Board
. discussed and approved the provi-
sional conference agenda.
The draft programme before the
delegates consists, in fact, of two
programmes : a basic one which will
hold good for several years to come
and the programme for 1951, repre-
senting the part of the basic pro-
gramme to be carried out first.
100 ORGANIZATIONS
ACTIVITIES proposed for 1951require a budget of $ 8. 150. 000
- an increase of $ 150. 000 over the
1950 budget. (An outline of other im-
portant matters to be dealt with by
the Conference was given in the
last issue of the Courier.)
The second of the pre-conference
gathering was to enable representa-
tives of Unesco National Commis-
sions to discuss and define the most
effective means of co-operation in
carrying out Unesco's programme.
Finally, after the start of the Con-
ference, representatives from many
of the 100 non-governmental organ-
ization which have consultative
arrangements with Unesco, met for
the first time to consider the best
ways of future collaboration with
the Organization.
