"LEADERS OF WORLD
ORGANIZATIONS MUST
OVERCOME INVISIBLE
OBSTACLES IN THEIR
WORK FOR PEACE'
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Direc-
tor-General of Unesco
HOW can it possibly be that there is talk of war and thethreat of war, when all the peoples of the world want
peace ? Never before has the primordial horror of war
appeared in an uglier shape. Yet-never before has man had,
within the reach of his arm, greater power for the achievement
of a better, happier and nobler life. Why, then, is there need
to.. work"for peace-to"fij (ht"for peace ?
Mr. Trygve Lie. Secretary Gene-
ral of the United Nations
This staggering paradox is not simple to resolve.'To"save succeeding enerations from the scourge of war". the peoples of the
earth entrusted their dream of peace to the United Nations and its related agencies. These agencies, by practical daily work, are striving
to build a more secure society. One of them. UNESCO, especially concerned with eradicating the ignorance, fear, suspicion and hostility
which permit war and accompany war, is opening the Fifth Session of its General Conference in Florence Italy, this month. The General
Conference has been asked urgently by its Executive Board to consider action designed"to nab ! e UNESCO, as an organization of states, to
contribute vigorously, in the present as well as in the future, to the United Nations mission of peace".
One of the known obstacles to peace is the actual lack of comprehension between peoples and between their spokesmen, which are des-
cribed in the article on this page."They Don't Do it Our Way"was written for UNESCO by Dr. Ina Telberg. employed during 1947
and 1948 as simultaneous interpreter for the United Nations. Dr. Telberg, sociologist and anthropologist, has lived and worked in the
United States, the Soviet Union, India and France.
that many of my friends in America and
England were listening. In a few mi-
nutes, however, I lost every trace of
self-consciousness as Mr. Vishinsky's
Russian carried me away by its sheer
beauty, force, and richness of expression.
Latin quotations, Russian proverbs, even
Shakespearian poetry, were utilized for
the purposes of his attack on the
British and the American positions.
Next day I was startled by the press
reactions. I myself even received some
fan mail : a couple of letters that
denounced me as a Communist for
having interpreted the speech with such
fervor, and another one that praised me
for same. I realized then how unneces-
sarily vitriolic, aggressive, and offensive
the address was when translated : in
fact, how ill-adapted was the Russian,'
oratorical style to delivery in a foreign
tongue. It was not the language-itself,
"W HAT the Distinguished LarJy Representative has just sugges-
ted proves that women can be more than decorative-they
, call also be useful."With this jovial remark, a United States Delegate looked at
his Soviet Colleague in the Population Commission of the United Nations
and awaited a smile of response. None came. The Russian sat stiff and
unsmiling. In Russia there are no jokes about women drivers or women
delegates, so beloved by the Americans. The Russian conception of
courtesy, therefore, forbade the Soviet Delegate to do anything but freeze
into a silent disapproval. The well-meaning American attempt to find
common ground by means of a joke thus increased, rather than decreased,
the psychological distance between the two delegations.
The foregoing instance of a difference
in the sense of humour illustrates one
of the aspects involved in the problem
of cross-cultural understanding, which
is today preoccupying social scientists
and which may well affect every
individual's day-by-day life. What the
social scientists mean by culture is not
the arts of a nation, in the sense of
painting, sculpture, or poetry, but the
totality of the patterns of thinking and
acting transmitted through generations
from father to son, and absorbed, with
deviations and in varying degrees, by all
participants in the life of the nation.
So deeply rooted is our cultural
heritage that we are rarely conscious of
it. To us, it is the"human"way of
behaving, the"natural", the proper and
the expected. Any other behaviour we
are apt to consider"difficult","pecu-
liar","unreasonable", or"unpredic-
table".. tao social anthropologists,
however, each culture has its own inner
consistency, its own inherent order,
which makes it, in a lesser or greater
measure, workable, predictable, and
comprehensible.
One Man's Meal...
ONE of the most deeply rooted, andlargely unconscious, features of
any culture is what the psychol-
ogists call the time perspective. Within
the United Nations, at least three diffe-
rent time perspectives operate.
"Gentlemen, it is time for lunch, we
must adjourn", announces the Anglo-
Saxon chairman, in the unabashed belief
that having three meals a day at regular
hours is the proper way for mankind to
exist.
"But why ? We haven't finished what
we were doing", replies-in a puzzled
manner that grows rapidly more impa-
(FROM"RACES OF MANKIND"BY RUTH BENEDICT ANDGENE WELT WISH),
tient-an Eastern European Delegate,
in whose country people eat when the
inclination moves them and every
family follows its own individual time-
table.
"Why, indeed ?" placidly inquires
the Far Eastern representative, hailing
from a country where life and time are
conceived as a continuous stream, with
no man being indispensable, with no
life-process needing to be interrupted
for any human being, and where
members of electoral bodies walk in and
out of the room quietly, getting a bite to
eat when necessary, talking to a friend
when pleasant ; but where meetings,
theatre performances, and other arrang-
ed affairs last without interruption for
hours on end, while individuals come
and go, are replaced by others, meditate
or participate as the occasion requires,
without undue strain, stress, or nervous
tension.
As one or the other group persists in
its own conception of the time per-
spective, as the Anglo-Saxons demand
that the duration of meetings and
conferences be fixed in advance and
that meals be taken regularly at fixed
hours, and as the Russians sit irritated
and the Latins puzzled and the Secre-
tariat frantic-as this condition
continues, mutual friction grows, mur-
murs of"unreasonableness"are heard
around the room ; and, when the issue
under discussion is an important one,
overt accusations are hurled across the
room of,"insincerity",., lack of a
serious approach to the problem", and
even"sabotage".
Irony Or Poetry
ANOTHER frequent source of irritation,rooted deeply in the cultural dif-
ferences among nations, is the
length and the style of oration.
The Latins are usually accused of
unnecessary length and of equally
unnecessary flights of poetic fancy. The
Russians are disliked both for the length
of their speeches and for the irony and
sarcasm of the speeches'content. The
utilization of irony in political speeches
is a long-standing tradition of public
oratory in Russia. It has nothing to do
with the Soviet Government. Mr. Vi-
shinsky, for example, most noted for
this type of oration, was born, trained,
and had had considerable success as
trial lawyer and political orator, long
before the establishment of the Soviet
Government.
It was in November, 1946, that I was
flown to Lake Success from the
Nurnberg Trials. I was tired, sleepy, and
a stranger to the United Nations. On
November 15th Vishinsky was deliver-
ing his now-famous veto speech in the
Political Committee at Lake Success. A
regular interpreter failed, and I was
rushed to the microphone in the middle
of the speech. I remember how my
voice trembled when I first began to
speak. I knew that I was on the air, and
however, that was the obstacle. It was
the tradition behind the language ; what
I have since learned to call speech eti-
quette..-
Settling A"Grave"Issue
THE Latins, on the other hand, farfrom employing sarcasm, prefer to
sprinkle their speeches with a
liberal amount of poetic imagery, meta-
physical expressions, and literary allu-
sions.
During the General Assembly meet-

Ina TELBERG
ings in Paris, a Latin-American dele-
'gate pleaded for the inclusion of the
phrase,"from the cradLe to the grave",
in the Article of the Declaration of
Human Rights dealing with social secur-
ity. He wanted to insure that a worker,
or, rather, a citizen, should be covered
by measures of social protection in just
'that manner : from the cradle to the
grave. He meant precisely, literally,
what he said.
"Such phrases have no place in a
serious document", pronounced a West-
, ern European delegate.,
"But the DecLaration shouLd be beau-
Latin-American Way
His difference in both the styles oforatory and the time concept was
once forcefully brought to, the
attention of the Assembly at the meet-
ing of the Social Committee in Paris.
There, a Cuban delegate, tired of
constant interruptions from the Chair-
man of the speeches of his Latin-Am-
erican colleagues, pleaded that :
"Not being all Nordics and Anglo-
Sa. rons, tue cannot fit into the pattern
of brevity, terseness, and conciseness
which you demand of us, Mr. Chairman.
Such patterns befit the Northerners, but
we like an orator to be imaginative,
emotional, moving... From our point of
view we are not deviating from the
substance of the matter, as it is our way
of dealing with the matter."
ti. fuHt/ worded", argued another Latin
, delegate.
,"It's a. legal document-not a
poem", muttered a Benelux member.
A member of the United States Deleg-
ation whispered darkly into a neigh-
bor's ear :
"Why not'from womb to tomb' ? At
least it rhymes !"
Before the final text of the Article
was settled upon, several other poetical
versions were suggested. Some others,
quite unprintable, shortly made the
rounds of the corridors outside the
conference rooms.

English-language speeches, conversely,
fall flat on both the Slav and the Latin
ear. English understatements-and
almost all English language speeches
are understatements from the Slav and
the Latin points of view-need to be
interpreted with particular skill into
Spanish and Russian, if they are to be
convincing. Rendered into Russian,
they particularly lack emphasis,
although there are some notable excep-
tions.
Ii is, for instance, impossible for any
of Sir Carl Berendson's remarks to lack
emphasis. It is equally impossible for
Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit of India
to be either misunderstood or unappre-
ciated when she speaks in English and
is simultaneously interpreted into Spa-
nish, French, Russian, and Chinese.
These rare combinations in the same
speaker, however, of Latin fire, Russian
irony, and Anglo-Saxon precision are
exceptions to the rule.
Hospitality May
Cause Hostility
STILL another aspect of the problemof cross-cultural understanding
which looms large on the inter-
national scene lies in the differing
concepts of hospitality. When a social
anthropologist enters a new area his
first project usually consists in fam-
iliarizing himself with the hospitality
patterns prevailing within the group he
has come to study. The understanding
of such patterns provides him with a
key to social intercourse. In the United
Nations, differing concepts of hospital-
ity as between the East and the West
have been noted by this observer as
contributing to increasing coolness bet-
ween Delegations, and even as being
subject to sinister interpretations.
I remember the party at which this
was first brought home to me. It was
an afternoon when the American Deleg-
ation was host to other Delegations,
and the cocktail lounge was filling
rapidly as meeting after meeting was
breaking up. The bar was crowded with
trays of hors d'oeuvres, ice-bowls, and
bottles. The Delegates were jostling
one another, pushing jovially,'shouting
their orders at the servers. The Russians
stood stiffly, not touching either food or
drink. I tried to get one of the Soviet
Delegates a glass of vodka, but he
clutched any sleeve in an agony of
embarrassment.
"No, no, you mustn't. How can you ?..
It is not pottte..."
No Russian will take drink or food
offered by others unless he is repeatedly
and urgently pressed to do so, by his
hosts. This, like. the demands of platform
eloquence, has nothing to do with the
Soviets. This is a matter of the Russian
"culture", the code of behavior that is
part of the total pattern of living, and
has been for ages past. To disregard
it, in the giving and receiving of hospi-
tality, is a sign of immodesty, forward-
ness, rudeness, and, in general, extre-
mely bad manners. The Russians left
this party early ; as inter-cultural hos-
pitality, it was not a success.
This strict code has its other side
also : just as the guest can take
refreshments only from his host, so
the host must offer his hospitality
repeatedly before it is accepted. The
casual patterns of American hospitality,
administered with jcvial good humor,
have no counterpart in Russia. There,
the first offer of food or drink is merely
perfunctory ; it is only when the second,
third, fourth, and fifth come that the
Russian knows he is welcomed. This
phase of Russian culture has on occasion
been satirized by various Russian
writers, the most noted example being
Krylev's"Demian's Fish-chowder".
In that story, the guest is pressed to eat
and drink to the point where in despe-
ration he grabs his hat and flees. I have
also heard repeated complaints and
even sinister interpretations of this
Russian custom, from American visitors
to Russia. A number of diplomatic
memoirs mention that Russians press
food and drink on their guests while
eating sparingly, and drinking even less,
themselves. That, of course, is quite
true. But hospitality offered in the
casual Western manner can only mean
a studied insult to a Russian.
The Origin Of Man
LIFE itself is prized differently indifferent cultures. To die of
peaceful old age is the ideal
life pattern in some parts of the world.
Death for a country or an ideal is the
desirable social behavior in others.
Nowhere have these differences been
made so manifest as in the drafting of
the Declaration of Human Rights.
"Man is of divine origin, endowed by
nature with reason and conscience",
argued several Latin-American dele-
gates.
"At life is of divine origin, not only
human life", a representative of a
Buddhist state murmured gently."Is
it not vanity to attribute divine origin
to human life alone ?"
"Man is not divine. He is rooted in
the very land he tills, in the soil that
bred him", once stated an Eastern
European Delegate from a preponder-
antly agricultural area. The Soviets
suggested tactfully that science had
reservations on the whole subject. The
Anglo-Saxon bloc, evidently not quite
definite on the subject of human divi-
nity, kept still. ,''t.,-<
Confusion Over China
HUMOUR relief is not infrequentlyprovided by the very cultural
differences that are usually so
productive of misunderstandings.
On one occasion, a misunderstanding
was particularly startling :
"Gentlemen, gentlemen, let us not act
in this matter live an elephant in a china
shop !"
As this remark was being rendered
from the Russian into English, a lan-
guage in which the Chinese Delegate
was following proceedings, he promptly
raised his hand.
"Mr. Chairman, I should life the
Soviet Delegate to explain just what
China has to do with his objections".
"Mr. Chairman, I said nothing
whatever about China. The Chinese
Delegate must have misunderstood".
"Mr. Chairman, I distinctly heard my
country mentioned. I request an e. rpta-
nation".
To the social scientist, misunder-
standings such as those cited here are
less humorous ones than they are tragic
and deplorable. In a world already
strained with conflicting economic in-
terests and political ambitions, misun-
derstandings based on cross-cultural
ignorance can scarcely be excused. The
social sciences of today-social psy-
chology, cultural anthropology, sociol-
ogy-provide tools for interpreting and
gauging human behavior, regardless of
how alien a culture may be. During
the war, these tools were used, many
with quite startling success, in psychol-
ogical warfare. They can be used for
peace as well.
Anyone can learn any language, but interns-
tional understanding requires more than a mere
knowledge 01 tongues.
("FROM PEOPLES OF THE EART"BY EDWIN R.EMBREE).
by
