AMEETING of six men and womenin Unesco House last month
set in motion plans which
with have profound and lasting
effects upon almost every child
who will be attending schoot, in
must countries of the world, in
1951 and thereafter. The event
my was the seventh meeting of the
Joint Committee of Unesco and the
International Bureau of Education.
Together, the conferees planned
a major part of the Agenda for the
Thirteenth Session of the Inter-
nationai Conference on Public
Education to be held in Geneva
from Ihe 6th 10 the i4th July this
year.
To record the educational develop-
ments of 1949-1950 in about 50 nations
which submit reports to the I. B. E., so
that the best and most effective of them
may be distributed and studied by
teachers throughout the world, will lie
the first point on the Conference
Agenda. These reports will be contain-
ed in the International Yearbook of
Education, published regularly for the
past fifteen years.
The Conference will deal with the
best means for introducing children 10
the rich and engrossing world of
mathematics ; how to increase their
grasp of a study which can do so much
to make them more effective men and
women, to discharge a greater part of
the work-load which awaits their ge-
neraUon with greater ease.

As a resull of the meeting of the
Joint Committee, the Conference will
take up the question of teaching
handicrafts in secondary schools, and
thus will help extend the satisfactions of
creative work to countless children.
immediately and in the far fll'ure-
carrying forward discoveries of great
educators in the past about the true
relation of hand and brain.
Preparing A " Charter " Charter
To help broaden the outlook andimprove the value of teachers to
their pupils, the Conference will
take up a question of increasing the
international exchange of teachers-a
question which has been the subject of
special studies by Unesco. On all these
points, the Conference will make recom-
mendations directly to Ministries of
Education, urging the adoption of prac-
tical measures to implement the prin-
ciplcs involved.
During 1950, the I. B. E. is expected to
continue work already under way, in-
volving standards of training and of pay
for school-teachers. Specifically, the
Organisation will finish its enquiry into
the remuneration of primary teachers,
and will begin its study of the training
of secondary teachers. an enquiry into
The training of primary school-teachers
has already been completed. Results of
these studies will constitute elements in
a Teachers'Charter, eventually to be
published by the I. B. E.
Other matters will include research in
the fields of psychology and of compul-
sory school attendance.
Passing On The " Know-How "
T HE year 1950 marks the 25th anni-versary of the I. B. E. During its
quarter century, the Organization
has issued more than one hundred
works dealing with educational develop-
ments in some fifty countries, seeking in
each field to keep all countries abreast
of the latest advance. Its publications
have dealt with such matters as school
buildings, rural education, teaching of
living and classical languages, school
inspection, geography teaching, organi-
zation of school libraries, physical
education, hygiene, and many others.
Unesco and the I. B. E. have worked in
the closest consultation since an agree-
ment between the two organizations was
initialled in Paris on 12th november
1946, even before the first scssion of the
Unesco General Conference. The Di-
rector of the I. B. E., Prof. Jean Piaget,
accepted the temporary charge of
Unesco's Department of Education to fill
the vacancy left by the recent departure
of Dr. Clarence Beeby.
