UNESCO COURIER-Page 8 DECEMBER 1950
FILMS-A UNIVERSAL MEDIUM
TO PROPAGATE A UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
THE good fight to gain and defend human rights calls for the full powers
j of man-and aU the art and skill which can extend those powers. To
the man or woman who shouts the truth from the housetops, the mega-
phone. the microphone and the tape recorder are handy things-sparing the
throat for future use and multiplying the voice a millionfold. The man who
expresses truth with pen or paintbrush is not baffled by the use to make of
typewriters, printing presses or cinema cameras. Now the motion picture.
which speaks so powerfully to the mind and heart, is increasingly devoted to
the heroic themes of human rights.. Along with nobly conceived commercial
films. there are a number of documentaries. Several of these have been
produced by or in consultation with the United Nations. Stills reproduced
10 December 1954
ANNIVERSARY OF THE
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
OF HUMAN RIGHTS
Message from M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Director-General of Unesco
(Continued from Pay 5)
THE Declaration charts a long andhard road. It is significant that
it uphold. side by side, civil
rights, political rights, social and cur.
tural rights, for in'practice there can
be no separation among them. Does a
people have political freedom if it can-
not gather the profits of a prosperous
industry and agriculture ? Can a people
develop its economy and improve its
social (organtzatton if its children
remain illiterate, and its resources of
leadership inadequate ? The domain
of Human Rights is indivisible. It is
the whole problem of the improvement
of the lot of human beings that calls
us to action.
Noone can any longer be tempted to
complacency by the illusion of security
and of uniformity. One people may
seem to enjoy most of the rights set
forth in the Declaration. But can such
a people really have the rights if its
neighbours lack them ? Can it be sure
of keeping them if it fails to take an
active part in the common struggle four
the recognition of the rights of all peo.
ple ! ? There is no human event which
does not affect the whole world. No
one can live outside history ; and the
history of our time is the crisis of man-
kind in the throes of achieving its mate-
rial and moral unity-of mankind
which will know neither peace nor re6-
pite until man's elementary aspiration
to the universal recognition of his dig-
nity is satisfied.
A Hope Drives Man Forward
WHEN we live in a time fraught
 2cith so many dangers and face
a future full of so many new
perspectives ; when it is so plain that
man will find his salvation only by
subordinating to his ideal of justice the
prodigious conquests that nolC threaten
to dominate him, how can our clarity o/
intelligence yield to the temptation of
discouragement ? The proclamation of
Human Rights takes up. the cry of the
victims, of the enslaved, of the hungry
and the workless ; it reveals the pre-
sence in man of a hope that drives him
forward on a path where rest would
be the accomplice of death. No doubt,
the centuries before ours were wrong
to believe that uninterrupted progress
would be easy. Mankind does not
advance without setbacks, without re-
treats, without grave crises. No doubt,
we pay dearly for the power given tv
man, for the achievements of technique
the increase of wealth, the attainmen :
br all peoples of self-determination, the
birth oj a real human community ; but
ij we succeed in solving the problems
that beset us, we shall be able to build
upon them a civilization at long last
truly Universal.
The Leat'en Of Universality
THus an apPt'al which bursts fromthe very heart of reality calls us
to this struggle. Let us conduct
ourselves in a way that will make every
body share in the struggle ; let us create
a militant state of mind throughout the
world. Let us enlighten men's con-
science. Let us speak to men of their
rights, and also of the duties which will
make them worthy to enjoy the rights.
Let us show them that no selfish claim
is enough, that the conquest of rights is
a struggle in the name of all men and
carries within itself the leaven of uni-
versality. Above all, let us teach them
the ugliness of injustice, of violence alld
of oppression. Let us tell them that
these dangers threaten us more then
ever ; but that also more than ever it
depends upon man, and only upon man,
to defeat them and gradually to estab-
lish an order u ; hich fulfils our aspira-
tions in conformity with the circum-
stances of our epoch. We shall then
have played our part in the achievement
of that ideal which is made the more
glorious by the obstacles it must over-
come ; and in hastening the advent of
a policy in which peace and progress
are inseparably linked-
above were chosen from two such films. (1) The United Nations film"Of
Human Rights", for example, shows how lack oi tolerance can cause open
hostility among the children of a small town. Living on opposite sides of a
river, two groups had previously regarded each other as"different"and
carried on a traditional"war". At left, editor of the local newspaper acts as
peacemaker between them and tells them about the Universal Declaration oí
Human Rights. (2)"Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate
for the health and well-being oi himseli and his family..." (Article 25, Universal
Declaration of Human Rights)."Au Carrefour de la Vie" (The Crossroads of
Life), a film produced for the United Nations by Henri Storck, shows how bad
living conditions become the root cause of juvenile delinquency.
UNESCO FILMSTRIPS AID WORLD-WIDE
TEACHING OF HUMAN RIGHTS PRINCIPLES
To help propagate the principles of the human rights, Unesco has produced
and is distributing a series of six filmstrips on themes suggested by the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for use in schools and
in adult education.
The first.. Vilestones, Is a general study of the historical development of the
concept of human rights and each of the other tlve-Abolition of SlaL'ery, Eman.
cipation of n'omen, Freedom of Thought, The Right to Education, and Arts and
Life-decals with a single article in the Universal Declaration.
Cnesco is distributing them with explanatory notes In English, French. Spanish,
arabic and German. These include practical instructions in the use of fiimstrips,
a copy of the Preamble to the Universal Declaration and a sentence or paragraph
of explanatory exposition tinned with each of the thirty visual frames of each of
the six filmstrips.
Six hundred prints of each filmstrip have been made and are being distri-
Imted to Unesco Member States, Lnesco National Commissions and to Ministries of
Education or other Government departments. Additional copies, obtainable from
Unesco. cost $3, U or 1, 000 French francs for a set of six, while individual film-
strips are available for 50 cents, 3/G or 200 francs. Next year jt is planned to
supplement the series with li1les dealing with other. aspr'l'ts of 1111111an rlghf$.
THE ABOLITION OF SLAVERY, bracts
from a Unesco filmstrip : 1. Conditions on a
slave trading ship were appalling. For every
negro torn from his native place who arrived
safely at his journey's el1d, four died because
of maltreatment. 2. Slaves had no rights.
They were sold by auction in the slave market.
Their owners had the power of life and death
over them. 3. Whether the slave was to be
well or ill-treated depended entirely on his
owner.
FREEDOM OF COMMUNICATION. Extracts
from a Unesco filmstrip : 1. The invention of
the printing press in the 15th century was one
of the most important developments in the
communication of ideas. 2. The seizure and
destruction of the press of"le Temps"was
one of the causes of the Revolution of 1830
which ended the Bourbon dynasty in France.
3. In our own time, the Nazi regime in Germany
revived the burning of"dangerous"books as
a measure of repression.
