New uses of a key-medium
of mass communications
show thai...'.
COMIC STRIPS MUST
BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY
The comic strip is here to stay. In one country alone, the United States,between 300 and 400 titles are now on sale. Some 60, 000, 000 copies
are sold monthly. Translated into more than 30, of the principal
languages of the world, they are now widely read in more than 100
countries.
These were facts given by Dr. Lawrence A. Averill in New York at a recent
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. His
conclusion was that old and young were through the comics finding"escape
from too deep concern with the deeper problems of the development of inner
control and tne cultivation of ethical value-in an age that desperately needs
them".
It is around this question 01 the social implications of comic strips that
controversy has developed. One immediate, emotional reaction has been that
comics are unsuitable reading for children. This may certainly be true of many
strips. The important thing, however, is to recognize that the comic is a key-
medium of mass communication and that it is necessary therefore to increase
its social usefulness.
To do this, there has been set up in the USA the first coLlege course on how
to create comics that stress education and information rather than murder and
sensationalism. The course is conducted by Professor Harvey W. Zorbaugh,
Chairman of the New York University Department of Educational Sociology.
He declares that the reading of comic books does not necessarily stultify a
child's interest in reading the classics or other media, but often stimulates it.
studies have shown that children may learn to read more rapidly from the
comics than through other methods.
The students at New York University are divided into teams of three : an
artist, script writer and a researcher. They work in collaboration with the
school's art, sociology and communications departments. A representative of
one of the largest comic book pUblishers in the USA provides technical informa-
tion on how to capture the interest of the reader.
Industrial, government and social welfare organizations are extremely inte-
rested in the"message-spreading possibilities"of the comics. For example, an
automobile-licensing bureau would like to get across the message of safe driving ;
an agricultural agency wishes to promote 4-H clubs (organizations for the sons
and daughters of farmers) ; and a social welfare organization seeks to develop
goodwill activities among racial and religious groups.
The Division for the Popularization of Science (in Unesco's Natural Sciences
Department) is making a survey of comic strips that stress education and
information rather than melodramatic violence. During this survey, it was
found that General Comics, Inc., is issuing a series of comic strips dealing with
science. These are"Adventures in Electricity,""Nuclear Physics,"and"Jet
Propulsion."
Permission has been obtained by Unesco to distribute these. Authority to
use them may be obtained gratis on application to Unesco.
The Division wishes to develop this scheme, and would be interested to
receive offers of similar material from organizations in other countries thus
helping to advance the constructive use of the universally-present comic strip.
