A joint campaign by Unesco and the World Federation of United
Nations Associations to help the cause of peace by better teaching
about the vital importance of the United Nations has been further
advanced by a seminar recently held at Teheran, Iran.
Earlier seminars devoted to the same
purpose have been held in France,
Cuba, Italy and the United Kingdom.
Others are to take place won in Den-
mark and the Lebanon. The Iran
session was arranged especially for
secondary school teachers.
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-
General of Unesco, sent a message to
the Seminar, whose opening and clos-
ing sessions were attended by the
Prime Minister, the representative of
his Majesty the Shah, and members
of the government. Five nations-
Dr. Matine-Doitary, President 01 the Iranian
Association for the United Nations (above)
opens the Teheran Seminar on reachingabout the United Nation*.. :.
Afghanistan, India, Iraq, Pakistan and
Turkey-sent observers to study
possibilities of organizing similar semi-
nars in their own countries. Repre-
sentatives of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) and International
Labour Office (ILO) also attended.
Seminar Learns
From Films
O RGANLZED on the initiative ofBran's Association for the United
Nations whose honorary president
is the Shah of Iran, the seminar was
held in co-operation with the Ministry
of Education and the Iranian National
Commission for Unesco. The work of
the 59 teachers who attended the
Seminar was directed by Dr. Mehran,
president of the UN Association's Cul-
tural Committee, and M. Sadighi, a
member of the National Commission
for Unesco.
Meetings were held each evening in
the great hall of the Archaeological
Museum where between two and three
hundred people listened to lectures by
well-known penonalities of the edu-
cational world. A film on the United
Nations accompanied each lecture.
Seminar members then divided into
study groups to discuss means of intro-
ducing information about the UN into
their school programmes.
The Iranian Ministry of Education
is publishing in Persian a collection
of speeches made during the seminar
and a report of the work of the study
groups. This means that the teachers
of Iran will now have a wide docu-
mentation on the United Nations and
Unesco in their own language. Their
task of helping to carry out Unesco's
work for international understanding
will thus be greatly aided.
UNESCO COURIER-Page 2
) RAN S TEACHERS PREPARE
a lesson four
World Peace
