THE SIGN
THE most coveted possession inthe Brazilian town of Cachoei-
ro do Itapemirim is a simple
cardboard sign tacked on a front
door. It reads,"Nesta casa nao ha
analfabetos" ("In this house there
are no illiterates"). What it means
is that every man, woman and child
in that house has learned to read and
write.
That cardboard sign is just one of
the weapons which Dona Zilma
Coelho Pinto uses in an energetic
campaign to educate the people of
Cachoeiro. Her ambition is to pin it
on to every front door in the town
and ultimately to stimulate similar
action in every town in Brazil.
Her's is not the biggest town in the
State of Espirito Santo, but already
Dona Zilma's efforts have made it
one of the best known. While a
literacy campaign is being conducted
all over the country, Cachoeiro
presents perhaps the most spec-
tacular example of achievement-
and of individual accomplishment.
For it has been due chiefly to this
one woman's enterprise that 32 lite-
racy classes are now running for
grown-ups and for. children. It is
she who finances them by collecting
contributions and she who finds and
pays the teachers.
Dona Zilma has been called many
things :"A'Louco de Itapemirim"
("The Mad Woman of Itapemirim"),
and the town's No. 1 Beggar. The
harsh names come from some of
those whom she approaches for
financial help, but she finds adequate
compensation in the happiness and
gratitude of the hundreds of students
of all ages whom she has helped to
find the chance for a new life.
"Beggar"On Horseback
ON horseback and on foot, shemakes the round of homes and
offices, collecting 5 cruzeiros
here, 10 there, to finance her classes.
In 1949 she managed 32 full subs-
ON THE
FRONT
DOOR
criptions. That meant 32 classes,
each bearing the name of the donor
whose contribution paid the teacher's
modest fees. As for premises, rooms
are found in factories and schools for
night classes, and even in private
homes.
A Little"Pep"Talk
BUT Dona Zilma is not contentmerely to teach the towns-
people how to read and write.
She strives also to better their con-
ditions, for she knows only too well
that learning is no match for hunger
and sickness. That is why, when a
student is repeatedly absent from
class, a teacher is sent to visit his
home. If she finds that the cause is
simply laziness or lack of interest,
she administers advice and a little
"pep"talk. If it is sickness, she
advises the Organization's Health
Centre.
Hygiene is taught by the State
Health Department. Local doctors
and laboratories co-operate by pro-
viding each student *u) ith a. free
yearly X-Ray f ! xamination, vaccina-
tion and free medicine, while dentists
attend to their teeth.
Material aid to the poor depends
on the amount Dona Zilma is able to
collect-not only in cash, but in
garments food, and a variety of
immediately useful things. A tooth-
brush, a tin of condensed milk, a
broom to keep the floor clean, an
odd scrap of cloth, all are welcome.
And for those who learn to read and
write, there are prizes : old maga-
zines for the men and dressmaking
lessons for the women.
A new life is taking shape for the
people of Cachoeiro. To the grown-
ups who have known what it is to be
ignorant and ill-cared for, it is more
exciting than it is for their children,
who sit on the same school benches
and take their opportunities for
learning much for granted. But all
over the vast country of Brazil the
excitement is spreading. The hunger
for knowledge, aroused by the natio-
nal literacy campaign, is being fed.
This campaign, launched in 1947,
has already done a great deal towards
On horseback Dona Zilma Coelho Pinto (above) makes the rounds of homes and offices in
the Brazilian town of Cachoeiro do Itapemirim to raise money for the literacy classes he has
organized. Already. 32 classes for adults and children are running thanks to her energetic
campaign to educate the people of Cachoeiro.
decreasing the illiteracy rate in
Brazil which, according to the 1940
census, reached over 55 per cent.
But actually it is not so much
concerned with the figures of those
who read and write as with the state
of fundamental education as a whole
in Brazil, and with the insufficient
school attendance. Eighteen months
is the average school life of Brazilian
children.
Professor M. B. Lourenco Filho,
Director-General of the National
Education Department and Director
of the literacy campaign, made it
clear at the beginning that the
government was embarking, not
merely on a literacy drive, but on a
campaign for adult education. The
object to be kept in view was to
raise the living standards and cul-
tural levels of a large section of the
population by disseminating know-
ledge and popularizing techniques
which would help them make the
most of their environment and their
capacities. Reading and writing
were just a means to that end.
"Freedom"For A Million
THREE years of the literacycampaign have cost'the Bra-
zilian Government about 100
million cruzeiros, or the equivalentof  5, 000, 000. In that time, over a
million people have been taught to
read and write, 2, 000, 000 adolescents
and adults have enrolled for night
classes and there has been a marked
improvement in normal schools
attendance. Education, once consider-
ed in Brazil to be the prerogative
'of the privileged classes, has become
accessible to all. And what is more,
teaching is not confined to profes-
sionals : Individual volunteers are
constantly being sought to teach one
or more illiterates in their own
homes. They are supplied with the
necessary material by the national
and regional services (more than
200, 000 copies have already been
sent out in this way) and during the
three years of the campaign, more
than half a million letters and
circulars have been posted to induce
people to volunteer.
An important milestone in Brazil's
campaign against illiteracy was the
seminar organized at Quitandinha
near Rio de Janeiro in August 1949
by Unesco. Brazilian educators
were brought into contact with
colleagues from the other South
American countries, from England,
France and Egypt. They discussed
old methods and learned new ones,
and thanks to this experience, the
campaign has made even greater
strides in conquering ignorance and
the misery which accompanies it
like an evil twin.
Dona Zilma (shown above with two pupils in one of her
literacy classes) not only finds and pays the teachers, but
also tries to better the conditions 01 the townspeople, lor
learning is no maich for hunger and sickness.
"A new life is taking shape for the people of Cachoeiro.
I'o the grown-ups it is more exciting than for their children.
who sit on the same school benches and take their oppor-
tunities ior learning much more for granted."
For those who learn to read and write in the classes at
Cachoeiro there are prizes. The men receive maqazines
(being selected by teachers, above) and the women are
given dressmaking lessons.