.. It was just a year ago to-day... It was ten
years ago... This is our Golden Jubilee... This is
the centenary... Just about a thousand years
ago..."
The birthdays of a child, events in the lives
of individual men and women, commemoration
of the births and deaths of men and women
who have lit torches along the road of history,
red-letter days marking the advance of mankind
- these are dates traditionally noted in the arbi-
trary system of reckoning which we call the
calendar.
Not forgetting the unknown and unsung per-
sons and events, perhaps of equal greatness
making no claim at completeness, here are some
note-worthy dates in October, tenth month of
the Gregorian calendar.
"THE GREAT ENCYCLOPAEDIA"
Two hundred years ago a Paris bookseller
issued a prospectus announcing the early public-
ation of an extraordinary work-a record of all
human knowledge. Subscribers were not disap-
pointed. In a few years, in the face of censure
and legal disputes,"La Grande Encyclopedic"
was brought out as 22 folio volumes with eleven
volumes of plates. The main contributors were
d'Alembert, d'Holbach and Voltaire. But the
moving spirit was Diderot who threw himself
heart and soul into the work. He had become
the servant of". Reason", and his encyclopaedia
remains the boldest monument raised by the
eighteenth century to the glory of scientific
thought.
THE FIRST AEROPLANE
On 24th October 1890,
after 50 years'research, Cle-
ment Ader thought that his
aeroplane, christened"Eole",
was ready for trials. It was
a faithful reproduction of a
large Indian bat, had a
steam engine and retractable
wings and was 21 feet in
length and 45 feet in
breadth. It took off and"---.. 1"...-..
glided for about 55 yards at a speed of 17 yards
a second. For eight years, he made regular tests
and further improvements, but each attempted
flight was a dismal failure. Clement Ader lost
heart, but he watched without envy the work
of his more successful rivals, Santos-Dumont
and the Wright brothers.
GEOFFREY CHAUCER
On 25th October 1400,
Geoffrey Chaucer died under
the shadow of Westminster
Cathedral where he was
buried in the chapel known
to-day as"The Poets'Cor-
ner". Eustache Deschamps,
one of his French contem-
poraries said of him :"he is
the great translator whose
poetry illuminated the reign
of Aeneas". But Chaucer was far more than
a translator : his"Canterbury Tales"belong
not only to his people but to the literary
treasure-house of mankind. Dryden said of
the Tales :"they reflect the varied manners and
moods of the whole English people". In writ-
ing them, he made a selection unheard of in
his day ; his characters were men instead of
mere symbols.
THE SECOND OLYMPIAD
The second Olympic games, inaugurated a
few years previously by Baron Pierre de Cou-
bertin, ended in Paris on 28th October 1900. It
had not been easy to overcome public indiffer-
ence and national jealousies. Greece had been
determined to make Athens, the home of the
first games, the permanent centre of these sport-
ing contests. But Coubertin was adamant :"If
they are to be ultimately successful", he declar-
ed,"the Olympic games must be strictly demo-
cratic and international."But, he had to
persevere for years before sportsmen all over
the world had accepted the ideal he summed up
in the famous statement :"What matters in life
is not victory, but the struggle ; the essential is
not winning but fighting a good fight. In
spreading these principles we will teach mankind
to be more courageous, stronger, more scrupulous
and more generous."
