"Wha't is not good for Humanity as a whole cannot be
good for any nation, race or individual"
Jaime Torres ßodt, t
Addressing the final session
of UNESCO's Fifth General
Conference, M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, Unesco's Director-
General, summed up his im-
pressions of results achiev-
ed. Below, we reproduce
the full text of his speech.
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, speaking at a plenary session of the
Fifth General Conference. in the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence.
MAY I say how pleased I am at the adoption of the
resolution you have just passed unanimously. In
all sincerity, I believe that is is the perfect
complement to that approved by the Programme
and Budget Commission yesterday evening on the
motion of a number of Delegations and confirmed by
yourselves this morning. Taken together, the two
resolutions. reveal a will to peace which does honour to
this Conference and testifies to the fidelity of all of us
to Unesco's supreme ideal.
At this stage, when you are bringing your work to a
close, I feel it to be necessary to give you my absolutely
frank opinion on the results achieved. I had hoped that
this session of the Conference might mark a decisive
stage in the development of our Organization. It would
be going too far to suggest that that hope has been fully
satisfied. The characteristic note of this Conference has
been less one of decision than of heart-searching and,
in certain matters, of clarification. That, of course, is
not all that we could have wished, but it is a great deal.
As trees are judged
YOU have defined a basic programme which hadnever previously been explicitly stated. You have
defined a list of methods, which had not previously
been made. You have defined a policy of recc-mmend-
ations and conventions which will, I am convinced, be
fruitful in the years to come. An excellent instance of
what we can secure by these means is the agreement
on the free importation of educational, scientific and
cultural material, whose ratification you are recom-
mending to your governments. You have recorded your
intention of inceasing Unesco's resources and have
p : omised to do it by trying to overcome the financial
difficulties arising from arrangements necessarily tem-
porary, but which could not be better in view of the
criteria adopted regarding the establishment of a budget
ceiling.
It would be premature to express any views as to the
wo'th of these results. As trees are judged by their
fruit, so the resolutions of an international conference
are judged by the action in which they issue. What
happens in the year which lies before us will, in my
view, be of vital importance to this Organization. We
must be vigilant to ensure that the work of the Secre-
tariat and the activities of Member States in matters
within Unesco's sphere are more effectively integrated
than they have so far been. We must plan bo ! d amd
simple tasks, for the better service of peace through
education, science and culture. We must secure action
within each Member State to spur rulers and private
bodies to augment the slender financial resources at our
disposal.
All defiøitioD is difficult
FOR all this two things are essential : mutual trustand mutual understanding. But can we really do bt
that we shall find that spirit of trust and under-
standing ? We are met in a country which, in its
greatest epoch, was governed by a sage, the philosopher-
emperor Marcus Aurelius, the author of the profound
epigram :"What is not good for the hive, cannot be
good for the bee". Its application to our own age is
obvious. What is not good for humanity as a whole
cannot be good for any nation, race or individual. That,
surely, is an exact definition of the intellectual and
moral solidarity of the peoples to which Unesco is dedi-
cated.
This has been a difficult Conference, because all
definition is difficult. Let us, then, pray that the diffi-
culties may lead to a more conscious effort to see clearly
in the future so that we may all more effectively serve
the noble aims of Unesco.
It is with that prayer in my heart that I thank you
for your work and offer to Italy, in the person of Sena-
tor Jacini, our warmest gratitude for the generous hospi-
tality she has afforded us.
. The texts of the two resctutions refen-ed to by the
Dtrector-GeTter'aZ will be sound on page 7 of this issue.
