U. N. TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE MISSION
SURVEYS NEEDS
OF INDONESIA
The United Nations and specialized
agencies have assumed certain
broad responsibilities for helping
their members to obtain the techni-
cal assistance needed for their economic
development. To carry out these responsi-
bilities, they have created machinery, within
their organizations, initiated studies of the
types of assistance required and provided,
on many occasions, the technical advice or
other assistance for which the requests
were received.
Today, the United Nations and special-
ized agencies are preparing an expanded
co-operative programme of technical assis-
tance to under-deveioped countries. The first action
under this programme was the recent despatch to
Djakarta, capital of the young Republic of Indonesia, in
answer to a government request, of a joint technical
assistance mission of experts.
Headed by Dr. Ansgar Rosenborg, Special Assistant
to the UN Assistant Secretary-General in charge of
Economic Affairs, the mission was last month consulting
with the Indonesian authorities on their existing plans
for economic development and. seeking to determine in
what field assistance was most needed.
FOUR UNESCO FIELDS
ir T NESCO'S representative on the mission, Mr M.tj Akrawi, formerly a senior official on the Irak
Ministry of Education, helped to conduct a survey
of educational systems in Arab
The National Emblem of the
Republic of Indonesia.
those fundamental social questions
which beat a close relation to
economic developments.
NEED FOR
, SOCIAL ENGINEERING'
"If is fitting that Indonesia shouldhave been chosen as one of the
first countries-if not the first
- to be surveyed in connection
with the United Nations plan for
technical assistance to u n d e r-
developed areas. The Indonesian
question was one of the first matters
to be taken up by the Security
Council which, through its Commis-
sion, continues to keep a watchful
eye upon the progress of the new
state which it had so much to do
with bringing to birth.
"As you will see for yourselves",
Mohammad Hall. Intone.
sia's Prime Minister.
President Sukaino oi
Indonesian.
states between 1945 and 1947.
Mr Akrawi Iwas also a member of
the Unesco Educational Mission to
Afghanistan, last year.
In Indonesia, he has been
consulting with the Government
on the provision by Unesco of
technical assistance in fundamental
education, natural and applied
sciences, mass communications and
the provision of international
training facilities for Indonesians
in these fields, as part of the total
plan for the economic development
of Indonesia.
Reflecting the broad scope of
technical assistance was the
inclusion in the mission of
representatives of three UN special-
ized agencies-a point stressed by
Mohammad Hatta, Indonesia's
Prime Minister, when he welcomed
the group at the Indonesian Fo-
reign Office.
"You gentlemen are here", he
continued,."primarily to explore the
possibilities of such collaboration in
the economic field. The composition
of your mission-including as it
does experts in agriculture, education
and health-indicates, however,
that due attention will be paid to
FOOD Cultivating rice-Indonesia's basic article of food. Each year the people 01... Indonesia a e faced with a serious nd cumulative shortag  of ric , for which
the only practical solution appears to be the extension 01 irrigation and other agricultural
measures. A precarious rice situation, however, is not peculiar to Indonesia. It is a
universal problem. In a special report, the Food and Agricultural Organization has pointed
out that in the period between the two world wars. the production of rice in South East Asia
increased by 10 % only, whilsf the population increased by 2N %.
said the Indonesian Prime Minister
"we do need a good ideal of help.
For nearly a decade, large areas of
Indonesia have been cut off from
normal contact with other coun-
tries and at the same time have
suffered heavy destruction. There
is urgent need of rehabilitation and
technical assistance in industry, in
agriculture, in education, in public
health, in what might be called
"social engineering"generally.
.., Fortunately, we have bee n
blessed in Indonesia with a generous
share of natural resources. The
problem with which we are grap-
AND PEOPLE The problem of.... feeding a rapidly
growing population became critical during'
the wartime occupation of Indonesia and
was further complicated by the unsettled
period which followed. This photo, taken
at that time and showing an emaciated In-
donesian woman waiting to receive a bowl
of rice from a relief service truck, illustrates
more eloquently than any statistics the dis-
parity between food produced and mouths
to feed.
pling is the development of these
resources for the benefit, not of a
priveleged few, but of the population
at large. We wish to see the general
standard of living of the Indonesian
people raised to a decent and
dignified level.
"But", Mohammad Hatta
concluded,,"we are mindful also of
our responsibilities as a member-
however new and inexperienced as
yet-of the family of nations. Itis our fervent hope that as time goes
on we may be able to make an
increasing contribution to the welfare
of our neighbours and all other
members of the world community."
., We Indonesians", he said,
"recognize that it is only through
properly integrated collaboration on
a world-wide scale that peace and
prosperity can be assured.
