THE FIRST
"HUMAN RIGHTS"
ANNIVERSARY
The Universal Declaration of Hu-man Rights was adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly
on December 10, 1948. A few hours
after this historic decision, Unesco's
Third General Conference, meeting in
Beirut, Lebanon, passed a resolution
instructing the Director-General to
"stimulate the dissemination of infor-
mation about this Declaration... to en-
courage its incorporation... in teach-
ing about the United Nations in
schools..."
Since then, Unesco has used every
available means to make all men
know and understand the principles
enshrined in the Declaration.
In addition, M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General, in a widely
circulated letter, proposed setting
aside December 10 each year for the
celebration of"Human Rights Day".
For Many-The
First Time
festival was given by. Foreign and
Education Ministries, by officially
designating it as Human Rights Day
and by arranging for it to be celebra-
ted in universities and schools, and
by distributing documentary material.
Special articles on the subject were
published in the daily press, some
newspapers reproducing the text of
the Declaration. Films which helped
to publicize Human Rights, included
a short documentary prepared by
Unesco for its Human Rights Exhibi-
tion in Paris, and since. copied for
screening in public cinemas.
Human Rights Day 1949 marked the
end of a year's efforts in the struggle
to convert the principles of the Decla-
ration into facts everywhere in the
world. It was also the prelude to
new and increased endeavours for, as
M. Torres Bodet, Director-General of
Unesco, declared in his anniversary
message :"It is not enough to set
aside a day in commemoration of the
principles that we are now celebrat-
ing."

Since adopting this suggestion, au-thorities in countrie  throughout
the world have been planning the
most appropriate and effective ways of
observing the first anniversary of the
Declaration's adoption.
As these plans were put into effect
on December 10, millions of people
listening to radios or attending public
meetings were told, many of them for
the first time, of the nature of their
rights as men and women as well as
their corresponding duties.
Lack of space prevents the"Cou-
rier"publishing individual accounts of
events in countries where Human
Rights Day was celebrated, but these
reports. coming from all parts of the
world had one thing in common ; they
all confirmed the importance of De-
cember 10 1949 as a milestone on the
road to making Human Rights come
alive.
In tiny village schools and the large
modern ones of big cities teachers read
and explained the Declaration's 30
articles and emphasized its importance
as a landmark in the fight for free-
dom.
Spreading Human
Rights Message
The leading citizens of many coun-tries spoke on human rights
through the radio and at public
meetings. Leaflets, pamphlets and
books, bearing the full text of the
Declaration were widely distributed.
Special ceremonies, including dra-
matizations of the Rights, and concerts
in which artists and musicians from
different countries took part, were
organized by Unesco National Com-
missions and non-governmental organi-
zations in many parts of the world.
Full support in the efforts to make
December 10 a truly international
