UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
PRAISES UNESCO'S PRIORITY WORK PROGRAMME
A CTION taken t) y Unesco toconcentrate and co-ordinate i s
work through the adoption of a
system of priority tasks was strongly
approved by members of the Co-
ordination Committee of the U. N.
Economic and Social Council at
Geneva on July 21st, following presen-
tation of Unesco's annual report by
M. Jaime Torres Bodet.
M. Georges Boris (France) said that
Unesco's report and the decisions of
its General Conference at Florence
showed that it had explored the whole
of the province committed to it. It
had also gained an awareness of the
techniques and methods which it must
apply in order to achieve effective
results. The French delegation, he
said, wished particularly to congratu-
late Unesco on results it had obtained
in the field of specialist collaboration
and exchanges of technical informa-
tion.
Mr. Kotschnig (United States)
remarked that even as recently as this
year's Florence Conference as many as
200 new projects had been proposed.
Seen against such a background, the
most striking characteristic of the Or-
ganization's report was the great
progress made in concentrating pro-
grammes. Unesco was moving towards
the establishment, not only of prior-
ties, but of the classification of its
major programmes in terms of its
limited resources. Unesco, he said,
was the proper international organi-
zation to concentrate upon the promo-
tion of the effective methods of
educating the peoples of under-
developed countries... _
Threefold Technical
Assistance Work
Q EVERAL. speakers referred toUnesco's part in Unit d Nations'
technical assistance activities. Mr.
Entezam (Iran) declared that through
scientific research, the modernization
of education and the dissemination of
educational and cultural material
Unesco was already making a very
considerable, if indirect, contribution to
the welfare of under-developed coun-
tries. Pledging Belgium's support for
Unesco's technical assistance work,
M. Delhaye reiterated his country's
desire to see qualified refugee intellec-
tuals associated in the programme.
Unesco's initiative in undertaking
the creation of an International
Copyright Convention and its efforts to
publicize the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights were welcomed by Mr.
de Alba (Mexico) and Mr. Cabada
(Peru).
Contribution To Peace
and Security
-UNESCO'S work was the subject ofseveral resolutions adopted by the
Economic and Social Council on
August 9th.
The first of these commended
Unesco's efforts to establish priorities
in its work programme and invited its
members to concentrate in future pro-
grammes on projects designed to ad-
vance Unesco's contribution to peace
and security. The same resolution
expressed the hope that this concentra-
tion of effort would result in a reduc-
tion of the number of meetings and
conferences to allow adequate prepara-
M. Georges Boris (France) shown here with
M. Henri Laugier, Assistant Secretary Gene-
rod. United Nations Department of Social
Affairs (right), addressed the Co-ordination
Committee of the Economic and Social
Council during its consideration of the Unesco
annual report. In the face of the special
difficulties 01 the existing international
situation, he told the Committee. Unesco.
and especially its Director-General. were
trying to bring the work which Unesco must
carry out for the peace of the world, into
closer touch with present-day realities.
tion and proper implementation of
their findings. The resolution asked
Unesco to give special attention to the
programme of technical assistance for
under-developed countries.
Other Council resolutions were
aimed at co-ordinating activities relat-
ing to the freedom of information
carried out by the United Nations and
by Unesco and to drawing attention of
Member States to the practical value
of the Unesco Agreement designed to
abolish import duties on educational,
cultural and scientific materials.
