DIREtTOR. GENERAl OÐTlINES
BAtKGRODND FOR AM ! ON
ADDRESSING Unesco's Executive Board at the opening
of its meeting on August 26th, M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
irector General, stressed the important responsibilities
which fell on Unesco, as a Specialized Agency of the
United Nations, in the present situation in Korea. He said,
in part :
"May I, firs of all, say how glad I am that the Executive
Board has advanced the date of its summer session in order
to consider how Unesco can best assist the United Nations
in the Korean question. The grave events which led the
Security Council, on 25 June, to adopt measures for the provi-
sion of military assistance to South Korea in obedience to
the principle of collective security and in defence of in-
ternational law, confront Unesco with problems which demand
the immediate attention of its executive body. In the present
situation, Unesco, as a Specialized Agency of the United Na-
tions, has important responsibilities ; it will bring to their dis-
charge a clear appreciation of its resources and a firm
consciousness of its duties. Your meeting is, in itself, an
eloquent proof of that intention...
"... The problem raised by the armed attack of which the
Republic of Korea, one of our Member States, is the victim
does not concern Unesco alune : the whole system of the
United Nations and Specialized Agencies has taken cognizance
of it..."
(Continued on page 8)

"A SSIST ANCE by Unesco to theSecurity Council, under the
arrangements for co-operation
between the Economic and Social
Council and ourselves, is covered by
Article VIII of the Agreement between
Unesco and the United Nations, which
reads as follows :
"'The United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
agrees to co-operate with the Economic
and Social Council in furnishing such
information and rendering such assist-
ance to the Security Council as that
Council may request including assist-
ance in carrying out decisions of the
Security Council for the maintenance
or restoration of international peace
and security.'
"The procedure for giving effect to
recommendations of the United Na-
tions is laid down in Article V of the
same agreement, of which the first pa-
ragraph stipulates more particularly :
"'The United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
having regard to the obligation of the
United Nations to promote the objec-
tives set forth in Article 55 of the
Charter and the function and power
of the Council, under Article 62 of the
Charter, to make or initiate studies
and reports with respect to interna-
tional economic, social, cultural, edu-
cational, health and related matters
and to make recommendations con-
cerning these matters to the Specializ-
ed Agencies concerned, and having
regard, also, to the responsibility of
the United Nations, under Articles 58
and 63 of the Charter, to make re-
commendations for the co-ordination
of the policies and activities of such
Specialized Agencies, agrees to arrange
for the submission, as soon as possible,
to the appropriate organ of the Orga-
nization of all formal recommendations
which the United Nations may take
to it.'"
(Continued from page 3)
A Vast Job To Be Done
"THE Secretary-General of theUnited Nations formally notified
me of the resolution of the Eco-
nomic and Social Council by letter
elated 22 August. Yesterday after-
noon, Mr. Benjamin Cohen, Assistant
Secretary-General for Information,
whom I am glad to welcome among
us, handed to me a letter from
Mr. Trygve Lie, the relevant passages
of which I should like to read to you :
"'I should be glad to make available
to Unesco information collected and
material already prepared by the Se-
cretariat so that Unesco could both
assist in distributing this material and
also use it to prepare its awn material
for distribution through its channels.
'"There is a vast job to be done in
educational circles-among the schools,
colleges, universities, and learned so-
cieties of the world-and Unesco will
be playing a very vital role if it can
effectively inform these circles.'
"Mr. Cohen will explain to you that
we have discovered a similar need
among the armed forces in Korea and
I have taken steps to make available
to the armed forces a highly competent
person thoroughly acquainted with the
United Nations to assist the Unified
Command in acquainting the armed
forces in Korea with the aims and
purposes of the United Nations and
especially with the nature of the
action being taken in Korea...
"... In a. world torn by anxiety, daily
threatened by new dangers, further
effort is daily required. I am persuad-
ed that the Executive Board will have
at heart the wish to show that, within
its proper sphere, Unesco is up to the
measure of its duties."
