FIVE YEARS'WORK FOR VICTIMS OF WAR
UNESCO'S Relief Assistance Service which isto be responsible for some of the ork the
Organization will carry out in support of
As part of its relief work since 1946, Unesco has given
special assistance to the children's communities in which
war handicapped children are helped and re-educated.
At one of these communities. The Children's Republic,
at MouIin-Vieux, France, the boys, shown above in their
printing shop, prepare and publish their own newspaper.
United Nations action in Korea, has already five
years'experience of co-operation in the rehabi-
litation of education in devastated countries.
During this time, it has stimulated and co-ordi-
nated the reconstruction work of international
organizations, and in cases of particular urgency
has distributed immediate relief.
To raise funds for reconstruction, Unesco has
organized campaigns which have brought in large
sums of money. In 1948 and 1949 it published
the"Book of Needs", the first volume of which
deals with Europe and the second with Asia.
They give a full and authoritative account of the
losses suffered by the educational systems of each
country as the result of the war, and showed
more fortunate peoples how their generosity could
best be applied.
There were many other special publications,
calling attention to the specific needs of schools,
laboratories, universities, libraries and museums
which had suffered wartime destruction.
Two types of relief have been provided for emer-
gency relief drawn from the regular budget of
Unesco and funds raised through the Organiz-
ation's appeals or campaigns or from direct gifts
to Unesco. The following sums have been distri-
buted :
1947 1948 1949
From Unesco's regular budget $375, 381 310, 000 198, 000
Gifts forwarded to Unesco.. 22, 830 223, 433 217, 290
Gifts in kind.............. 60, 000--
$458, 211 533, 433 415, 290
EMERGENCY relief was provided for childrenin Greece and in the Middle East. In
Greece, grants were allocated to ten primary
schools, while in the Middle East thirty-nine
temporary schools were opened for children in
refugee camps immediately after the war in Pa-
lestine. Thirty-three thousand children are given
a primary education in these schools by six
hundred and thirty-eight teachers, themselves
refugees.
Unesco has strongly supported the International
Voluntary Work Camps whose work helps mate-
rial reconstruction and develops international
understanding.
Special help has been given to the International
Federation of Children's Communities whose
work and aims Unesco publicizes. Unesco has
also sponsored this Federation's activities, such
as the International Children's Camp organized
at Moulin-Vieux in the Isère Valley, France, in
1949.
Since the establishment of the Reconstruction
Department, now replaced by the Relief Assistance
Service, 17 pamphlets, designed to solicit help for
the cultural reconstruction of devastated coun-
tries, have been published. Unesco has produced
a film on the problem of neglected children, and
has made twenty-two radio recordings dealing
with the work of cultural reconstruction. Tra-
velling exhibitions have been prepared and
despatched to the United States of America, Ca-
nada, the Netherlands and Germany in support
of reconstruction campaigns. An exhibition deal-
ing with the International Voluntary Work Camps
was held in Belgium and several panels illustrat-
ing the work of the Service have been exhibited
in the Salon de I'Enfance in Paris.
