THE International Theatre Institute (ITI) is one of the specialized"non-governmental"organizations, set up within the framework
of the United Nations. It was founded in 1948 under the auspices of
UNESCO after a series of consultations between UNESCO's Theatre Ser-
vices and individuals prominent in the international theatre. The ITI
is made up of National Centres representative of the theatrical life of
each member country. Official delegates from these Centres constitute
the annual Congress, which is the governing body of the Institute.
The goal of the organization is to
encourage and facilitate"inter-
national exchange of knowledge
and practice in theatre arts"
through exchange of information,
by facilitating international circu-
lation of theatre people and by
helping to arrange tours for young
managers, directors, authors, desi-
gners, etc., desirous of completing
their studies by a period of work
abroad.
"sine theatrical art is a univer-sal expression of mankind
and possesses the influence
and power to link large groups of the
world's peoples... we have decided to
form an autonomous international
organization... whose purpose is to
promote international exchange of
knowledge and practices in theatre
arts..."
When the International Theatre
Institute (ITI) from whose charter
the above extracts are taken, was
founded at Prague in 1948, eight
nations signified their belief in its
purpose and worth, by signing the
Charter,
Today, the ITI has 25 member
countries and to its Third Annual
Congress which ended in Paris on
June 29th, ten other nations sent
observers. But, equally important,
is the progress made by the National
Centres towards"promoting inter-
national exchange of knowledge and
practices of theatre arts"thereby
helping international understanding.
Already this year many centres
organized an International Theatre
Week-in the United States the
"Week"became a Theatre Month in
48 states-and it is planned to
extend these celebrations to many
more countries during the first
quarter of 1951.
Under one of the plans adopted by
the Paris Congress, to give a more
universal tone to next year's Theatre
Week, the ITI will choose an author,
probably from Norway, where the
1951 Congress is to be held, and will
distribute a list of his plays to all
"c AN we in 1950 he satisfiedwith a theatre reserved
for a tiny fraction of the
world's population ? Can we
limit our efforts to defending
and giving lustre to the theatre
on the stages, official or
otherwise, of the great cities of
Europe, America and Asia ? The
theatre has been described as
the most effective instrument cf
culture, the living element of
education and one of the surest
ways to international under-
standing"
"... What then is the situation
of the enormous rural masses,
the industrial populations the
suburbs and the innumerabie
villages which have been so
long neglected by even the most
enterprising theatrical touring
companies ? What is to become
of the vast regions where the
theatre dies before it has even
evolved from its most primitive
form ? These are tremendous
problems, but ones which your
Institute cannot ignore."
Jaime Torres Bodet.
Director-General of
Unesco, in a message to the
Third Congress of the Interna-
tional Theatre Institute.
member countries. One of these
plans, having a universal idea pro-
moting international understanding,
will be suggested for production
during the Theatre Week.
A proposal by Yugoslavia for
presentation in 1951 of a series of
plays stressing the ideals of peace
was also adopted.
The Congress asked national
centres to form"ITI Clubs"whose
members would help publicize the
movement, assist visiting foreign
players, and arrange international
Theatre Weeks and Festivals.
The Congress also proposed that
the term"`work of art"be defined by
legal authorities working on Interna-
tional Cultural Agreements to inclu-
de all items of theatrical equipment,
decors, drapes, curtains, properties,
costumes, musical instruments and
all electrical equipment, It was sug-
gested that exemption from taxes be
discussed by countries which have
signed cultural agreements, with a
view to including such exemptions
Qn a reciprocal basis. Non-profit per-
formances for school-children would
be exempt from national and local
taxes.
Among other projects approved by
the Third Congress were : full
support for Unesco's efforts in
drawing up a new Universal Copy-
right Convention ; assistance in the
publication of a glossary of technical
theatrical terms in five languages ;
a study of children's theatres
throughout the work by the next
Congress ; an enquiry into the possi-
bility of creating an International
Theatre in Paris and the provision
of grants in aid for the exchange of
theatre professionals between ITI
Centres.
Before the opening of the Congress
by Dr. Emile Oprecht (Switzerland),
a former ITI chairman, a Conference
of Experts on Modern Theatre
Architecture, was held from June
19th to 21st.
For the first time, a group of Ger-
man experts took part in this confer-
ence on modern theatre architecture
along with the member states. The
debates of the technicians and artists
were illustrated by an Exhibition
which proved a great success with
members of the public. This exhi-
bition will be taken over by certain
centres and the German technicians
are presenting it tin Berlin when
they hold their annual meeting this
year.
