AN INDIAN GIRL WITH A
LESSON FOR HUMANITY
ON July 18, Unesco issued a statement-the. work of twenty
scientists-designf'd to expose the hateful myth that one
.'race"is inherently superior to another.
On the basis of known facts about human race the anthro-
pologists and sociologists were unanimous in their opinion that racial
discrimination has no scientific foundation in biological facts.
To make known this important statement-the first step in a cam-
paign against racial prejudice and ignorance-Unesco mobilized all
its resources. The radio division sent out more than 400 releases, and
special recordings in ten languages reached 48 countries. Feature
articles went to more than 1500 newspapers around the world while
press releases were sent to newspapers, magazines and all United
Nations and Specialized Agency offices.
Thus, millions of men and women in all parts of the world read the
following assertion in one paragraph of the declaration :
"according to present knowledge, there is 110 pl'00t that the gl'OUpS
IN the Parana forests of Paraguaylive the Guayaki Indians, one of
the most primitive and least
known Indian tribes of South
America. M. J. Vellard, a French
ethnologist working for the Musée de
1'Homme in Paris, had spent many
months wandering through the
forest in search of these Indians
when, exactly eighteen years ago, he
unexpectedly found himself face to
face with them.
He went toward them, but the
answer to his gestures of friendship
was a flight of arrows ; his Para-
guayan guides opened fire and the
Indians fled in terror into the
undergrowth abandoning their stone
axes, their primitive huts and their
enormous arrows pointed with wood.
A few hours later Vellard's guides
returned with an unusual prize.
They were carrying, slung on a pole,
a small brown creature which Vel-
lard at first took for a monkey. To
his astonishment and indignation he
discovered that it was a little girl of
two whom his men had gagged with
leaves and whose arms and legs they
had bound so as to carry her more
easily. They were hoping to sell her
to some farmer in the district for a
hundred pesos or so.
The Guayaki Indians are the last
representatives of a very primitive
and rudimentary culture. Like their
neighbours they speak Guarani, but
unlike them are not sedentary. They
live almost exclusively by hunting
and gathering fruits, and wander at
large in the forest. Their hunting is
done with bows and arrows, the
latter being among the longest in the
world, while they use stone axes to
open up tree trunks and extract
honey, of which they are particularly
fond.

THEIR worldly goods are very few
- baskets which they make
water-tight with wax, tools of
bone, a few necklets and lengths of
rope. Their dwellings are huts of
One ot the few photographs ever taken of a
member of the Guyaki tribe. Roaming the
dense forests of eastern Paraguay this man
and his fellows are limited by circumstances
to a primitive life. Yet, as a child he
possessed all the latent capacities for civil-
ised life in any part of the modern world.
boughs which they can erect in a few
minutes in the deep forests where
they live withdrawn from other
men. Probably their way of life is
very little different from that of the
first bands of men who colonized the
empty spaces of South America,
thousands of years ago.
As a result of being hunted by
other Indian tribes and Whites alike
the Guayaki have become timid and
suspicious. Today we know little
more about them than was known
to the Jesuits who tried to convert
them in the l7th century, and we
have only been able to secure a little
hazy information about their customs
from the few captives serving
farmers or settlers in Parana as
slaves.
Their primitive state might be
logically ascribed to racial inferiority,
but it is here that the story of the
captive ! child takes on its full
significance.
Out of pity, Vellard bought her for
a few pesos without thinking much
about what he, would do with her.
It was only later that he began to
wonder whether chance had not
given him an opportunity to show
that education and cultural back-
ground were more powerful than
the so-called laws of race alleged to
govern the development of the
individual.
Like A EuropelUl C'd'If
HE had grown fond of the childwith her gentle face and
friendly eyes. So, the little
Indian was christened Marie-Yvonne
of mankind differ in theiJ. innate mental charactel'istics. whether in
respect of intelligence 01'temperament. The scientific evidence indi-
cates that the l'ange of mental capacities in all ethnic groups, is much
the same".'
Reading these words, many people wanted to know if there are
actual case histories which can'''p1'Ove''to laymen the facts known
to the scientists. On this page the Courier presents the remarkable
story of Marie-Yvonne Vellard, a child of one of the most primitive
tribes on earth, found as a baby in the Parana forests of Paraguay 18
years ago. Today, aged 20, she works as an assistant to her adoptive
father, the French ethnologist who found her, and is regarded as
"superiOl"Ito most white girls of hel"age'in intelligence and agility"
The story of Marie-Yvonne Vellard is far from unique, for the
whole world is full of proof that :'''... given similar degrees of cul-
tural opportunity to l"ealize theil'potentialities, the average achieve-
ment of the members of'each'ethnic group is about the same"
and brought up by Vellard's* mother,
exactly like a French child. A few
months after her capture and
adoption she was already beginning
to speak a few words of French and
behave like a European child of the
same age. With her high cheek-
bones and black eyes she could have
passed for a Japanese or even a
child from the Northern provinces of
Argentina.
Less than a year after the start of
her new life her speech and manners
were better than those of a European
child of the same age. At the age
of seven she was already speaking
French and Portuguese and liked to
ask questions about Greek my-
, thology.
Art among the Guyaki people is
limited to the decoration of weapons,
calabashes and implements with dots,
dashes and strokes, yet, at an early
age, Marie-Yvonne was able to draw,
although she had never received in-
struction.
SLAVE OR SCHOLAR ? For this little Guyaki
girl, whose photograph was taken about
1899. the answer was probably slavery.
There was a happier answer for another
little Indian girl found eighteen years ago
in a Paraguay forest by the French scientist
Jehan Vellard. She is now his adopted
daughter and a member of a cultured socie-
ty. The only difference was... opportunity.
A European scientist who has
followed the case of iMarie-Yvonne
from the time she was brought back
to Lima, Peru, where she still lives,
has described her as"perhaps
superior to most white girls of her
age."She was, in fact, usually top
in every class at school and today,
as a biology student, she assists her
adoptive father in his laboratory.
Cultural Transformadoll
SHE was brought up exactly as awhite girl and though she is
completely aware of her* origin,
she takes no notice of the fact that
her skin is of a different colour to
that of her white friends.
Today, the Indian child, whose
kinsfolk are perhaps still hunting in
the Parana and felling trees with
stone axes, is an attractive, intelligent
girl of twenty and a typical product
of the cultural environment in which
she has lived for 18 years.
The story of Marie-Yvonne is not
unique. Hundreds of similar cases,
involving young native children born
among what are judged as extremely
primitive peoples, can be cited.
Providing a child is removed from
its cultural environment before it is
old enough to have been influence,
it can be completely assimilated into
"THE ONE STRAIT WHICH ABOVE
ALL OTHERS HAS BEEN AT A
PREMlUM IN THE EVOLUTION <JF
MEN'S MENTAL CHARACTERS HAS
BEEN EDUCABILITY, PLASTICI1T.
THIS IS A TRAIT WHICH ALL
HUMAN BEINGS POSSESS. IT JS,
INDEED, A SPECIES CHARACTER
OF HOMO SAPIENS,"
Extract from the Unesco Declaration
on Race, July l8th, 1950.
new surroundings. Like all human
beings it has innate aptitudes, but
none which can be considered as
belonging exclusively to the race of
which it is issue.
The lesson taught by the story of
Marie-Yvonne and hundreds like it
is that all human beings of normal
intelligence are capable of playing
their part in any form of civilization.
And it highlights one of the state-
ments made in the Unesco Race
Declaration-"The myth of race
still prevents the normal develop-
ment of millions of human beings
and deprives civilization of the
effective co-operation of productive
minds."
