ONE among every dozen persons in the world is to-day being helped toattain a better life through shared learning in co-operative organi-
zations. In India alone there are some 175, 000 co-operatives, with a
membership of well over 10, 000, 000, getting the elements of fundamental
education as part of various forms of economic community. On all five
continents, from central Australia to Zululand, from Germany and Gary,
Indiana, to Papua and the Gold Coast, vast numbers of men and women
are living out the intimate connection between"Co-operatives and Fun-
damental Education".
This is the title of a booklet
prepared for Unesco by Maurice
Colombain, for many years head of
the division of co-operation of the
International Labour Office. It is the
second of a series, Monographs on
Fundamental Education, published by
Unesco, each dealing with a single
topic or problem in the field of
fundamental education. The first,
published in 1949, described the field
and what Unesco is doing in it to
create a common ground of human
advancement for all peoples, especially
those less favoured by historical and
other circumstances.
Co-operative organization was chosen
as the subject of the second booklet
because of its unusually wide
application. In the century since
co-operatives were first founded, at
places such as the Westerwald in the
German Rhineland, they have grown
to number hundreds of thou, sands in
all parts of the world ; and they have
become for their members-in 1939
more than 143, 000, 000, and now much
greater-an opportunity for the living
experience of active education.
Struggle Against
Ignorance and Inertia
THE Co-ope- :-ative Society is formedto serve man's economic needs.
The problem of earning a living
is common to all men and the message
of the co-operative movement is that
men, by grouping themselves in a
society, produce and sell more effi-
ciently. Thus, when a co-operative
movement is formed the members are
striving to improve their economic
conditions. This has a two-fold
educational effect. First, working
together in a group is itself a most
valuable form of adult education and
second, a rising standard of living
means that better educational facilities
can be provided for the rising gene-
ration.
"The co-operative movement",
Mr Colombain points out,"can be
regarded as a firm any in the struggle
against ignorance and inertia. The
earliest acts of co-operators have al-
ways and everywhere been to procure
for themselves and for their children
the means of education. Experience
has shown that among backward po-
pulations, co-operatives simply through
their working, and independent1y of
their economic results, have contribut-
ed to the intellectual, moral and civic
training of their members. To work,
purchase, sell and create together is
to think together, and to thi8k toge-
ther is to form communicable ideas,
that is to say rational ideas".
In French West Africa and in the
French Cameroons, for example, school
co-operatives are training children in
handicrafts. Among the 3, 000, 000
Gonds, a tribe living primitively in
the jungles of the Central Provinces
of India, a co-operative called the
Gond Sewak Sangh works with the
government to set up primary schools
where children are taught crafts and
trades ; to win over the consent of the
adults-a primary element in funda-
mental education-the ancient Karma
songs and Shails dances are used
as part of the methods of ; group
persuasion.
Keeping Community
Spirit Alive
"c O-OPERATIVES and Funda-mental Education" escribes
how, in underdeveloped regions
and communities, the educational me-
thods of the co-operatives help esta-
bluish new social tissues to replace old,
dying ones, and provide new bases in
better living for the community spirit
kept alive by ancient traditions.
Many of the old groupings are used
in the creation of new ones : the Ti-
meigida of the Berbers, the Hoh-Hui
of China, the Chittis of India, the
secret societies of Equatorial Africa,
and the organizations of the BraccÌl : thti
based on co-operation, not only with
of Italy to nome only a few.
The second of Unesco's monographs
on fundamental education is itself
based on co-operation, not only with
the International Labour Office
(ILO), but also with many experts
who showed the value of close colla-
boration in the associated fields of
fundamental education and forms of
economic co-operation. Some 45 re-
ports went into the preparation of the
booklet to make it a reference work
on experiments throughout the world
for the benefit of specialists and field
workers in fundamental education.
While the co-operatives are an
economic movement that uses educa-
tion as an instrument, they are at the
same time an educational movement
that stresses the economic bases of
learning, especially among primitive
peoples."The main aim is not to
make money but to make men", said
Father Bernhard Huss who was
largely responsible for developing
credit co-operatives among the Bantus
of South Africa. Co-operation, said
C. F. Strickland,"is adult education
in the business of life". These views
are supported by countless examples
in the text of the new Unesco booklet.
Education Defeated
SU ! Jar Crisis
ON the Ivory Coast, Africans havebett red their lives by learning
how to use modern methods of
preparing palm oil. In Kenya, edu-
cation taught that cattle breeding
could serve a better purpose than the
traditional display of wealth. On the
island of Maur-itius, education defeated
a sugar crisis by spreading knowledge
of mixed farming. In India and
Indonesia it taught the advantages
of new crop composts and chemical
fertilizers, in the Punjab and Bengal
of land reform and irrigation.
The nature of the co-operative move-
ment prom0tes all forms of education.
This, the Unesco booklet makes clear
by describing examples among the
manifold varieties of credit, producing,
buying, selling, health and hygiene
co-operatives now functioning. The
decision to establish a co-operative
society or to join one, and the co-
operation which is necessary for its
running, require knowledge and a
suitable standard of intellectual and
moral qualities.
Dr. Spencer Hatch, a veteran adult
education leader, is quoted as summing
up the problem of fundamental edu-
cation in backward areas in the
formula : spiritual, mental, physical,
social and economic poverty form a
single whole which must be attacked
from all sides at once.
In advanced areas, the great task
of the co-operatives in the field of
education is the teaching of leaders
and teachers. The extraordinary
work being done to this end is shown
through descriptions of activities of
such institutions as the Extension
Department of Social Education at
Laval University, Quebec ; the educa-
Union of Great Britain ; the Bombay
Provincial Co-operative Institute in
India, and many others. Moreover, is
at least twenty-six countries, for the
most part in Europe and the Ame-
ricas, there are school co-operatives
whose purposes are directly educational
and cultural.
Self-help in World's
Backward Areas
BUT it is in the backward areasthat the effec s of the co-operative
movement are closest to the
primary goal of fundamental educa-
tion department of the Co-operative
tion : to help people to help themselves.
The booklet describes how the peasant
co-operatives of the African Gold
Coast, Nigeria, Tanganyika become
practical professional schools for small
farmers ; how improved living, working
and thinking grow out of the co-ope-
rative schooling among the scores of
millions of members of co-operatives
in India, Ceylon, China, the Federated
Malay States, Australia and the South
Sea Islands.
Chan ! jill ! j Faulty
Living Habits
IN such regions men are not onlyfreed f om u erers and pr fiteers
but from themselves and their own
bad habits-from faulty habits of liv-
ing, lack of hygiene, inefficient me-
thods of farming, competitive extra-
vagance of ceremonial expenditures.
Instead of squandering wealth on fire-
work d ;,. plays, elaborate festivals and
tribal rituals, primitive peoples learn
orderliness, foresight, punctuality, and
a strict respect for engagements enter-
ed into. They send their children to
schools, vaccinate them, improve the
general health by sanitation and
hygiene.
"By placing them without dis-
tinction of class or sex within a
simple framework of self-govern-
ment in which they become fami-
liar with democratic procedures",
the booklet says, this process
"trains them in their civic duties,
reconstitutes a new social fabric
which prolongs or replaces earlier
forms of collective life gradually
dying out, and without destroying
what is original and fruitful in
their national cultures, tends to
establish a natural and free com-
munication between their cultures
and the modern world".
