Pietro Cuieva, says :"The problems raised
by customs regulations make it more and
more difficult to hold exhibitions abroad."
The sugestions put forward by artists
for remedymg the situation are indeed sur-
prisingly similar. Only a few are dif-
fident, like the American W. H. Auden,
who says :"l'imagine that no one is going
to pay any attention to what artists say."
Some propose positive measures, and, if
these should appear to some as beyond the
realm of possibility, they quote instances
from both the present and the past.
They demand, for example, that young
artists should receive more effective help
than scanty fellowships or arbitrary re-
wards. Musicians shoud be given grants
to enable them to have their works printed
and performed at concerts ; and exhibition
halls should be placed free of charge at
'1894 EXHIBITION-Ist PRIZE'
Official taste in the latter part of the l9th
century preferred this kind of art to the work
of the Impressionists.
acknowledge that"art is necessary to
public life, and the artist should be consi-
dered as a defender of civilizations".
They therefore ask that the State should,
help the artist to obtaIn his instruments off
work, and enable him to exercise his art.
As in the Middle Ages, their thoughts turn
to the municipalities, of which many have
indeed revived excellent traditions :
"The town of Zurich has made a rule
that 25 per cent of the cost or constructing
new public buildings (administrations, :
schools, hospitals, swimming-baths, etc.)
shall be earmarked for the visual arts, i.e.
for orders for mural paintings, stained-
glass windows, mosaics and sculptures."
Zurich is fortunately not the only town to
give proof of such a generous spirit, and it
IS to be hoped that the practice will be-
come general in many countries..
TWO INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS
THE reform of copyright and the aboli-tion of customs barriers are intern-
tional problems."unesco can gice
valuable help in connection with the pro-
blem of copyright", writes Harrison Kerr,
professor of composition in Oklahoma."I
am convinced that if Unesco can get all
countries to accept universal copyright le-
gislation, it will have done a great work..."
Unesco has already gone to work on this
problem. Ever since its establishment, it
has been examining the copyright law of
various countries, and is preparing an.
international convention under which the
interests of artists and writers will at least
he reasonably protected.
Moreover, negotiations are well advanced.
for ensuring the free movement from
country to country of books, works of art,
films. gramophone records and, generally
speak'ng, any objects that can be consi-
dered as cultural. These negotiations have ;.
resulted in the drafting of an international
agreement.
When this has been signed bY a suffi-
cvent number of governments, artists will
discover, to their astonishment, that their
works can travel without payment of the
exorbitant customs duties that are the sub-
ject of such bitter complaint today
These measures, alone, cannot of course'
completely remedy the situation of the
artist. But they will help enormously to
make the freedom of the artist more real,
more effective. As a result, he will be
able, to quote one sculptor,"to talk without
laughing of that freedom that costs us so
much...".

professional unions, are silent on the
subject of censorship, or merely voice
vague misgivings. This might be ex-
plained by some apprehension of be-
coming unconscious victims, or else,
maybe, a reaction against the unexpec-
ted bluntness of the questionnaire !
Obviously, the effects of censorship
vary with the poet and the painter,
the novelist and the architect, the
young beginner and the acclaimed mas-
ter. Even under the most harsh re-
But we must look deeper into the
special meaning censorship has for
those who close their eyes to the
complications of what they generously
call politics : to them censorship
means no more than attacks on
journalists and pamphleteers, which
they quite naturally feel have nothing
to do with them. Admittedly, if cen-
sorship were confined to wartime
safeguards of public morale and pa-
triotism, there would be no grounds
for complaint.
