GOODBYE TO ANOTHER ILLUSION
t-THE RA ! NLESS DESERT
THE WELL OF IGLI (last, 30'40"N.
long. 0'20"W). S choolday illusions about the Sahara
disappear quickly in the Sahara.
Indexed, the only'. illusion" which is
real is the mirage.
The illusion which I resent most is the tis the sands of the desert grow cold"
ideas. I have been colder in the Sahara than I was in Greenland.
I have been wearing a windproof coat, a camel-hair undercoat, a tweed suit, a
pullover and winter underwear, and at high-noon, as we drove in the command car, my
teeth have been chattering.
Believe me, it is winter in the Sahara, with a north-east wind which cuts like a
knife. The French officer who is escorting us is wise : he wears an Arab burnous, that
all-service garment of the nomad, a heavy, hooded cloak of camel hair which is at
once an overcoat, a blanket and a self-contained tent.
Frost 011 tlte Desert
The cold has made George, the geo-j. physicist,"hopping mad". He despe-
rately wants a photograph of"la
dune blanche"which means a sand dune
covered with hoar frost. He wants it as
visible proof of the dew in the Sahara, of
water in the"arid"sand.
It explains a great deal of the mystery
of the hydrological cycle-water-evapora-
tion-condensation-water-wells-in whichthe scientists here are convinced that they
have a practical answer to the desert
problem.
What annoys him is that Sergeant ! Wal-
ter,. the keeper of the barrage at Igli, 70
miles north of Beni Abbes, has been seeing
"la dune blanche"for a week, for ten mi-
nutes at a time.
Sergeant Walter is a classic example of
"man against the desert". He is a giant
German who at 65 has the poker-back of
the legionnaire. In 1913 he quarrelled
with his father, left Germany and joined
the Foreign Legion-in the violent, ruth-
less days of Beau'Geste, and of men who
chose to be forgotten.
At the time of a"crue"or spate it races
from the Atlas, a wall of water which may
be ten feet high. For a few brief days it
courses as a river, spreads itself over the
valleys and disappears eventually into the
sand wastes to the south.
His Job at the barrage is to see that the
flood-wasters are directed into irrigation
canals and basins where it will linger a
little longer.
He produced for me a"sand rose"as big
as a newer-show cauliflower. George will
tell you that this"rose"is another proof
of the abundance of Sahara dew, for it is
an aggregation of sand-crystals, with
"petals"with fine veins, but as hard as
quartz. These crystals grow from a com-
bination of dew and sand and sun.
. Rain-Makers  Visit
Our mission may become legendary inthe desert-as the visit of the"rain-
makers". We brought the first rains
to North Africa, the first snows to the
Atlas, hail and rain to the High Plateau,
and as we journeyed south places which
get less than two inches of rain in ten
years have had a millimetre or two as
our"baksheesh".
At one place, under a cloudless sky, an
Arab was frantically making irrigation
canals. To our surprised interpreter he.
said a"crue"was coming. He must'have'
smelt it. Two hours later there piled up
the blackest, most sinister, thunderstorm
I have ever seen, turning daylight into
night.
'We caught the flounce of its rain, but it
broke over the mountains.
Lightning in the desert does extraor-
dinary things. As the fork strikes the
dunes it fuses the sarld into glass. I have
a hollow glass tube as a souvenir of
"lightning-glass". One of George's jobs in
this remote outpost is to study electric
storms.
FOSSATUM AfRíCAE.-Among the first men
to fight against the desert were the Romans. In
Southern Algeria, on the frontiers of their Afro
can possessions they erected fortifications, around
which colo. ! !. ies alew up. This aerial photograph
shows traces of irrigation works comprising low
stone walls which retained flood waters, thus
preventing it from being quickly lost and eroding
the soil. (Photo taken from <&lt; Vue Aérienne de
L'Orgaaisation Romaine dans Ie Sud Algérien >&gt;).
All his life was spent in the desert and
when he retired he could not leave it.
.. Sand Rose"In Crustal
Now he is a solitary white man, keeperof the w ters where Oued Cuir joins
Oued Saoura. An"oued"is what
appears on maps farther east as a"wadhi"- a river which news intermittently.
No Slaves To Sacrifice
son, on our transitory experience of thispart f the Sahara another illusion--
the"rainless desert"-has gone.
The sparse rain itself is no solution,
except accumulatively and in the mecha-
nism of desert dew. Rain on the rocky
desert evaporates and is gone, but in the
Vast sand dunes it is not necessarily so.
The dunes are like a sponge, which
aDsorbs water two ways (probably), by
rain (recondensed as dew and reabsorbed)
and by upward seepage from the water-
bearing strata.
This"sponge"explains the"foggara-,
the mine-shafts which one sees in the
cliff-faces from which a steady now or
water persists at all seasons. These tun-
nels go many miles into the earth, drain-
ing the water. They are age-old, tunnell-
ed by slaves into the collapsing earth.
Now they are choking up. There are no
slaves to be acrificed and no mechanised
equipment.
WASTELANDS OF THE WORLD.-Egypt is about 96"ó arid. Of nearly one million square kilo-
metres, only 35. 000 are arable. Twenty million people live on this arable land which thus sup-
ports 570 inhabitants per square kilometre. In the arid zone there is one inhabitant for every
: ; square kilometres. Facts such as these, revealed at the recent meeting 01 the Committee 01 Experts
on the Arid Zone project of Unesco, illustrate the immensity of the"food and people"problems
in the arid and semi-arid regions of the world. One of the recommendations made by the experts
Gimed at pooling world experience to attack such problems was for the creation of an International
Council for Arid Zone Research.
