FILMS
TO
a renaissance of art-appreciation.
More and more people of all ages,
social classes, countries and races
want to see and appreciate art trea-
sures of the past and present. This
is a. growing cultural need calling for
the employment of new techniques.
THERE are, of course, museums inmany parts of the world with re-
presentative art collections of the
most brilliant periods. There have
been travelling exhibitions and experi-
ments with shows of specially pro-
duced and selected high-qualhy repro-
ductions. But all this is limited in
scope, and certainly far from com-
mensurate with the needs of a poten-
tially unlimited public-countless men
and women or all countries.
Radio has done much to bring music
to the people. Now another of the
media of mass communications, the
cinema, is beginning to do the same
for the pictorial arts. How effective
the cinema can be in bringing the arts
to the people was impressively illus-
Portrait of Rubens (circa 1623) from the
collection of the UUizi Gallery. Florence.
It was between 1611 and 1625 that Rubens
painted the greatest number of pictures.
including many official works. His more
persona] period came in later years.
In the following article. Peter Urlik
describes some of the art films that are
today helping"the many as well as
the few"to develop a sense of aesthetic
appreciation.
* *
MOST of the world's finest art
treasures are still'enjoyed
by too few people. The
reason is not that people
generally are insensitive to beauty,
but that works of art are often diffi-
cult of access. This holds true even
for countries exceptionally endowed
with art treasures, like Italy or
France.
For centuries, many of the finest
works of art-enduring testimonies of
man's skill and aspiration towards
beauty-have thus remained reserved
for the few. Architectural monu-
ments, sculptures and paintings can-
not be moved easily, nor is it desirable
that they should be removed from ori-
ginal and natural settings. Often
such art treasures are the private pro-
perty of nobility or clergy, or are
placed in museums in a few big cities.
In any case, only a comparatively lim-
ited number of people will be able to
admire them.
With the increasing educational fac-
ilities of modern civilization, man's
In the Belgian iilm, Rubens", Henry Storck and Paul Haesaerts. have used many new
devices to draw out the very essence 01 the artist's work and 10 highlight his intentions.
Following the close-up (above) 01 Rubens'eye, from his famous self-portrait at Windsor
Castle, the producers have shown four portraits o ! Rubens, as he saw himself at various
periods in his live.
awareness of the place of art in his
life has been re-awakened. It would
probably not be amiss to speak of
An example of how the camera helps to''rediscover"a work of art. Fra Angelico's"La Leggenda
dei Santi Cosma e Damiano", showing the technical indications of Luciano Emmer, leader of the
interpretative school of art film production in Italy. Emmer uses the camera to select. isolate and
magnify the details of a painting and with ingenious cutting and appropriate musical background.
.,. gives life and mobility to the whale.-
trated during the recent Tenth In-
ternational Film Festival in Venice,
when about 20 outstanding document-
ary films on art subjects were shown.
Whether produced in colour or in black
and white ; whether lasting one hour
or only a few minutes, the best among
them make it possible for the layman
to appreciate and wholeheartedly enjoy
the masterpieces in painting, sculp-
ture or music.
These films came from France, In-
dia and Italy. They were certainly
not the first art documentaries ;
yet some of them marked a new
technique of making paintings, sculp-
tures, architectural monuments and
music come to life for the specta-
tor with a particular intensity. To
take one example : an Italian film on
the great Florentine master, Sandro
Botticelli, by Luigi Cristiani. A new
coiour-technique contributed to its
pictorial excellence, but its most strik-
ing feature was the intelligent scenic
interpretation of the poetry, mysti-
cism and mastery of Botticelli's art.
No visit to a museum could bring
the spectator so near the very essence
of artistic creation, nor convey so di-
rect a visual understanding as these
film sequences which show such works
of world renown as the"Birth of Ve-
nus","Primavera","Magnificat",
"Adoration"and the"Madonna of St.
Barnabas". Similarly successful film
ventures are"Michelangelo's Last
; :-
BRIG
THE
by J. P. URLIK
Judgment"and"Lorenza the Magni
cent", produced with great care anc
discrimination by an Italian film stu
dia specializing in the production 0
films on art.
Films are also showing to increas
ingly large audiences such resplenden
examples of architecture as, fo
instance,'''Santa Maria della Salute"
a film about the baroque basilic :
built by Baldassare Longhera in 1631
to express the gratitude of th
people of Venice for their escape from
annihilation by pestilence.
Thanks to this film, the majesti
cupola of this church, which rises a
a landmark of singular beauty at thl
entrance of the Grand Canal i)
Venice, will be seen by man ;
thousands of people, who migh
otherwise never have even dreamt 0
buildings so perfect and glorious.
Italy's lead in art documentaries i ;
understandable, for Italy is a countr ;
of unequalled art treasures and tra
ditions, but other countries are no
lacking in films of quality and interest.
A Frenchman, J. K. Raymond, has
made a delightful short film on
"Islamic Art". An Indian, G. M.
Bhavnani, produced the remarkable
film"Saga in Stone", shown for the
first time in Europe at the recent
Venice Film Festival. This picture
will acquaint the public of the world
with fascinating examples of Indian
architecture of the classical 15th and
16th Centuries, with temples and
intricate façades that seem to be alive
with sculptured gods and godesses of
Indian mythology.
THESE are but a few examples of anew kind of art docum ntary.
which can contribute greatly to-
wards a more general enjoyment and
understanding of works of art, no
matter where they originate, or what
language the spectators speak. Two
recent art films even succeeded in !
making language entirely superfluous.
One of them might almost seem a ;
"tour de force, for white the specta-'
tor's ear is filled with the music ofj
Bach's St. Matthew's Passion, his eyes
participate in the visions of some of
the greatest painters of all times, who

depicted the scenes musically told in
the great oratorio.
Another composer, Mendelssohn,
speaks wordlessly to people every-
where, and he does so in a new and
exciting manner in the film"Romance
without Words". Harmonies of
sound and sight are blended with
startling effect as three piano works
by Mendelssohn are played while the
architectural scenery of Venice un-
folds before the eye, with the same
palaces, canals, and gondolas, with the
same play of light and shade on
sculptured ornaments, which inspired
the composer to write his music dur-
ing his stay in Venice in 1830."Ro-
mance without Words"lasts only
12 minutes, and yet the impact of its
visual and musical harmonies is such
as to make the spectator momentarily
lose his sense of time.
These are indeed striking examples
of the way in which the cinema is
opening up new possibilities of aes-
thetic appreciation, for the many as
well as for the few.
