UNESCO AIMING FOR QUANTITY AND QUALITY
IN CLASSICS TRANSLATIONS
MANY translations give a distortedvie 01 the works they wish to
make known and, as a result, oj
the peoples 01 which these works are
an expression.
No translation, it is admitted, can be
absolutely identical with the original.
but it can provide a satisfactory equi-
valent.
And, at a time when man has never
had greater need to extend his horizon
and develop his understanding of
others, the importance 01 clarity in
spreading the messages of the human
mind has never been greater.
IT is for this reason that Unesco,in agreement with the United
Nations, is working both to add to
the translations of the world's great
books in every language and at the
same time to gradually bring them up
to the highest possible standard.
To assist in this work, Unesco re-
cently called a meeting in Paris of an
international committee of experts to
discuss plans for carrying out, under
Unesco's sponsorship, the translations
of the world's most important literary,
scientific and philosophic books.
Among the works which can be des-
cribed as classics, some are still too
little known and these Unesco proposes
to have translated into a few of the
chief world languages to bring them
before the cultivated public.
Others, on the contrary, are world-
famous as the common heritage of
mankind and these Unesco will try to
have translated into as many lan-
guages as possible.
The Committee of experts, who were
holding their second 1949 meeting.
submitted a number of recommenda-
tions to Unesco including one for the
establishment of an International
Bureau of Translations and another
for the publication by Unesco of a
quarterly Bulletin of Translations.
(In its last issue, the « Courier >&gt;
announced that Unesco had re-started
the publication of the Index Transla-
tionum.. handbook", and a report on
the Committee's proposal for a
"Translators Charter"is published
elsewhere on this page).
The Committee, which grouped ex-
perts from 14 countries under the
chairmanship of M. Julian Cain. Di-
rector of the Bibliotheque Nationale
in Paris, also approved two important
projects on which Unesco has already
started work.
The first of these is for the transla-
tion of the great books of the West
into Arabic and of the great Arab
classics into Western languages. This
work is being carried out by an Inter-
national Commission set up in Beirut
by the Lebanese Government and
Unesco, and which it is hoped will be
joined by other Arab States. Prog-rests
has already been made with the
translation into English French and
Spanish of Algazel's poem.. Ayuha'l
Walas. and of.. Don Quixote"into
Arabic.
The second project is the collection
of Latin American works in French
and English translations, made in
collaboration with Unesco's Member
States in this continent.
A plan has also been prepared for
the translation of great books into and
from Italian and in the near future
Unesco hopes to extend its translation
plan to India.
A CHARTER FOR
TRANSLA TORS
S THESSl :'\G tilt'cullu"lIl illl} JO/"ttll.'CI'uf good II'IIIlslatiuns, ['nescu
pulnled out it a report 10 twee
Ecunomic alld Social COIlIlCil of IIII'
United Nations tllat 0111'calise for tile
IWCI'fllt'lIcc of mellioac trail slalioll s
is Ihat ill mallY CI1.'/','Irallslators
111'/'lJUOI'Iy paill amI insllfficiently
pl'oll'cled.
At the recent lU/'etin[J in r. ; l/esc ()
House or experts on the translation
of great books Ihese qllestions 1/'1'1'1'
discussed on the basis of Opil/iolls
held by leading cOl/temporary writel','
such as André Gide, I'alery Larballd
and Santayana. these and mallY
othel'wrilers cOl/sider that a trans-
lation is"aI/origillal Icol'k of 111'1"
and that tllc primary qllalificatiul/
fOI'a translalor is thl1l III'sllould
himself be II 1/'rill'r.
Tile Committl'c thercfot'e consirl/'/'-
illY Ihal a prol'I'I'stallls 1/'ollld be
all IlIc morl'readily cOllfl'I'rcd 011
Il'al/slalors as theil'profl'ssiol/111 tl'aill-
ing gal'c better gllaral/lecs, slIggesl-
eel Ihal ill cOllllectiun witll lallllllayl'
1,'aiuillY, special llllil'el'sity t1'Oillill ! J
fol't/'llllslalors 1/'as elesira/)/e alltl
('ould be stullied by Mcmbl'r Slales
of Ullesco.
UI/esco, they Sllggested, sllolllll
prepare a Draft Chartl"/'for T7'IIIISIII-
10/'8 whuse prillcipal aim sholllel be
to define a minimum of ecollomic,
It'yal and mural gllal'alllees to 1/'hicll
the Iranslators should be elllitlcel ill
all countries.
"HAVE YOU READ BARUCH ?"
f A Fontaine, it is said, was so impressedby the apocrypha !. books of Baruch that
for some time after reading them he
asked everyone he met : <&lt; Have you
read Baruch ? >&gt; and was surprised when
hardly anyone answered « Yes N.
To-day, if one asked of many people,
<&lt; Have you read The Dream of the Red
Room'or'Fortunata cmd Jacinta'by Gal-
dos' ? s or again <&lt; Have you read Charles
Doughtys's'Travels in Arerbia Deserta'
the answer would probably be <&lt; No ! >&gt;
For, although <&lt; The Dream of the Red
Room t is one of the great works of Classical
Chinese literature, scholars, other than those
capable of understanding the Chinese text.
have only been able to read an inadequate
translation, so abridged that only about one
sixth of the work can be appreciated.
<&lt; Fortunata y Jacinta. was written by the
l9th century Spanish writer, Benito Perez
Galdos, who has been described as the
greatest Spanish novelist since Cervantes.
Some of Galdos works have been translated
into several languages, but this, his most
important book, has been ignored by trans-
lators.
Doughty's <&lt; Travels in Arabia Desert..
one of the most unusual books on travel
and exploration, was also a long work and
was published at a very high price by its
author, who was not interested in fame. For
years it remained almost unknown to the
public until a second edition was published
in 1921 with a preface by Colonel T. E. Law-
rence.
<&lt; Lawrence of Arabia o said he had con-
stantly used the book as a guide while in
Arabia because of its accurate descriptions
of the country and its interpretation of the
Bedouin character.
it would be possible to quote many other
examples similar to these three to emphasize
the importance of the recommendation made
by the United Nations that Unesco should
arrange for a colledion of great works of
world-wide interest in as many languages
as possible.
