DECEMBER 1950 Page IN-UNESCO COURIER
NDONESIA PLANS EXPANDED E'DUCATION PROGRAMME
ALMOST a year ago, on December
27, 1949, Indonesia became all
independent state and, as the
Republic of the United States of
Indonesia, took its place among the
family of nations. During the previous
decade, large parts of it had been cut
off from normal contact with other
countries and had suffered heavy
destruction through the war. Indonesia
was therefore in urgent need of reha-
bilitation and technical assistance in
education, public health, agriculture
and in general, of what its Premier,
Mohammed Hatta described as"social
engineering".
Facing up to such needs and recog-
nizing that the prosperity of a
country depends on the qualities and
abilities of its people, the Indonesian
Government is today seeking to provide
the country with an efficient system of
education and training.
Unesco, whose Fifth General Con-
ference admitted Indonesia as a
Member State this year, has already
taken an active part in helping these
efforts. Last May, a Unesco represen-
tative was among the members of the
United Nations Joint Technical Assis-
tance Mission sent to consult with the
Indonesian authorities on their existing
plans for economic development and to
determine in what fields assistance was
most needed.
Today, Indonesia is one cf the 12
countries which Unesco is helping
under the first part of its technical
assistance programme. An education
team is setting in motion a training
programme for teachers who will be
needed in re-settlement areas and as
part of a joint United Nations mission.
Unesco is drawing up a fundamental
education demonstration project and a
teachers'training centre for schools
which will be needed in those areas.
Unesco will also help the Indonesian
Government to establish an adequate
primary school system. (At present
only 25 per cent of the country's school
age children receive instruction and
the adult illiteracy rate is estimated at
from 50 to 90 per cent.)
UNIVERSITY LIFE IN INDONESIA
TODDY, Indonesia is stimulating and encouraging all forms of higher education to ensure thetraining f the experts it will nee  in every held of its future economic development. The main
centres of higher education are two universities, the"Gadjah Mada"University, a national found-
ation established in Djogjakarta, and the University of Indonesia, established in 1'946 at Djakarta. In ad-
dition, there are seven academies and institutes providing instruction in political sciences, forestry,
meteorology, physical culture, mathematics, chemistry and physics, drawing and economic science, as
well as a teachers'college, all of which are attached to one or other of the universities.
Some aspects of the life and work of Indonesian university students are shown in the photographs
published on this page, which were taken from an album prepared by the Indonesian Government as
a gift for Unesco and presented to M. Jaime Torres Bodet, the Director-General, by H. E. Mr. Nazir'
Satuk Pamontjak, Indonesian Ambassador in Paris.
0 Young students studying in the art library which is
being established at the University of Indonesia, encouraged
by gift books from Unesco. 6 Microtomic work being
carried out at the laboratory for pathological anatomy-part
of the Medical Faculty situated at Djakarta. 0 The"Divine
Master"and his Indonesian"pupil"-a student of archae-
ology at the Faculty of Literature and Philosophy. 0 The
observatory at Lembang which has been put at the disposal
of the University of Indonesia by the Astronomical Asso-
ciation. This observatory's telescope is of unique impor-
tance because of the sector of the sky it covers-the transit
of the Northern and Southern Hemisphere.
Mew have not yet won all therighôs stated in the Universal
Declaration ; and even those
which seem most secure were not
come by easily. Leaders were needed
to define each 01 our liberties and
men with open and generous minds
were especially wanted to formulate
them. Among the anniversaries lor
this month 01 december some names
have been chosen here which sym-
bolize the age-long struggle or
humanity tolerance, peace and
justice.
MICHEL VOROSMARTY.
"Every individual is entitled to a nation-
ality."But when this Hungarian poet
was born on 1st December 1800, his people
had not the right to claim Hungarian
nationality. Vorosmarty helped by worthy
colleagues, worked all his life to arouse
his country from somnolence and servitude.
He wrote an epic,"The Flight of Zalan"
to celebrate the. heroic conquest of the
plains of the Tisza and Danube by the
ancient Magyars He revealed Hungarian
letters to the world, translated Shake-
speare, and adapted the French Roman-
tics. As a deputy in the 1848 Revolution,
he fought till the last day for liberation
and, after his country's defeat, spent two
years in prison. His funeral was the
opportunity for a national protest against
the Hapsburg domination and his centen-
ary was feted gloriously throughout all
Hungary.
"THE ADVANCE OF HUMAN
THOUGHT".
Without real hope for the future advance
of society it is doubful whether men
/MMM/91 hopp12md
in (/) JH : Jl.In6...
would fight very hard for their liberties
and their rights. A certain optimism is
needed. On 11th December 1750, Jacques
Turgot, spoke in Latin at the Sorbonne on
"The successive stages in the progress of
human thought" :
"The language and the writing.... from
all the special branches of learning
create a common treasure that one gener-
ation passes on to the next. so that the
heritage is constantly increasing."
"Even in the midst of havoc... people
become more civilized, the human mind
becomes enlightened, isolated nations
come closer together, commerce and poli-
tics finally unite all parts of the globe.
and mankind as a whole continues to move
forward through alternate periods of calm
and trouble. Progress may be halting, but
it is always towards greater heights".
 EVERY PERSON HAS THE RIGHT
TO WORK..."
... To free choice of employment... to
protection against unemployment..." (art.
23). To help make these rights a reality
is the responsibility of the International
Labour Organization which four years
ago, on 14th December 1946, joined forces
with the United Nations. But, the Or-
ganization, under a slightly different
name, had already been in existence
27 years and had never ceased fighting
for the principles that the United Nations
were to restate in the Universal Declar-
ation. Since 1919, the Organization has
continued to declare that work is not mer-
chandise ; that freedom of expression and
assembly is essential to progress ; that the
wretched plight of workers in one country
threatens the prosperity of workers in all
other countries, that the light for just and
favourable conditions of work requires the
joint efforts of all governments and all
workers.
ARSNE D'ARSONVAL.
When d'Arsonval died on 30th Decem-
ber 1940, more than one journalist hesit-
ated before the long list of this learned
man's works. It seemed scarcely credible
that one man should have been respons-
ible for so many discoveries. He worked
with Claude Bernard and Pasteur, but he
was also distinguished as an electrical
scientist. He invented the galvanometer
with a mobile circuit, used in canalyzing
the electric currents of the brain. Noted
as one of the founders of endocrinology,
he was also known as the designer of one
of the earliest glides and as the inventor
of a battery for submarines. But his chief
fame rests in work which led to the in-
mention of an"electrical bistoury", a
scalpel for surgeons. All his work was
devoted to giving a concrete meaning to
this"right to health"about which men
would know so little, if learned men did
not work to make it a reality.
If PROMOTE UNDERSTANDING
TOLERANCE AND FRIENDSHIP
AMONG ALL NATIONS."
Three hundred and fifty years ago a
poet died whose work and life give ad-
mirable evidence of the philosophical and
religious tolerance which made sixteenth
century India so noteworthy. Work went
beyond mere.. tolerance" and contributed
to Dadu's mutual understanding of the
highest kind. Some say he was born into
a Brahman family ; others that his father
was Moslem, but all agree that this mys-
tic belonged to the Hindu faith during his
life. This did not deter him from his
affection for the great Moslem poet Kabir :
"The words of Kabir are as true to the
spirit as they are pleasant to the ear. They
bring me happiness". He spent his life in
travelling across the Indian empire and
composed his poems in Hindi, In Pujani, in
Sanskrit... As was true of Kabir's work,
Dadu's poems transcended all the bonds
of orthodoxy. Dadu continually stressed
the universality of love :"The world is
full of divine truth"he used to say. He
died at Naraina, in the Rajputana, mur-
muring one of his poems :"Spirit. 0 my
spirit, for the love of your Lord, you have
shaken oll all seeming..."
