1950 UNESCO SEMINARS MARIA WAY
TO WORLD UNDERSTANDING THROUGH
IMPROVED EDUCATIONAL TECHNIQUES
UNESCO has developed a special form of international study meeting or
.. seminar", where educators from many countries are brought together
to make extensive studies of specific educational problems, to draw up
plans and suggestions for action in their respective countries, to prepare materials
for national and international use.
The most important feature of each Seminar is the s"T1all, informal study group
in which information is exchanged, ideas and methods are discussed and solutions
to problems are suggested. The usual techniques of conferences, with commiStees
and formal voting, are not employed. The Seminar is a working party of practical
people who pool their resources for the solution of common problems, and the
participants come as individuals, not as delegates representing an institution or
a particular point of view. They are workers in a common field, where
everybody's contribution is valuable and the results will be the product
of everybody's thinking.
Unesco's seminar on the improvement of textbooks is being held in the Cite Universitaire
Paul Héger (above), which forms part of the Université Libre. in Brussels. The Cite Uni-
versitaire provides board and lodging, at exceptionally low rates, tor foreign students and
for Belgian students whose homes are far from Brussels. The Université Libre de Bruxelles
is one of Belgium's four Universities, the three others being the University of Louvain (a
Catholic foundation), and two State Universities (Liege and Ghent).
Over fifty librarians and experts in adult education met in the Malmö City Library, (above)
at the end 01 luly, for the Unesco seminar on the role 01 libraries in adult education. Maims,
Sweden's third city. was chosen as the seminar site because 01 the excellence 01 its library
facilities and their rural extensions.
ON the afternoon of July 12th
educators from 24 countries
gat red at the Cité Universitaire
of the Université Libre in
Brussels. Six hours later and some
3, 000 miles away in Canada, a similar
group of about 50 educators began to
assemble at Macdonald College-part
of McGill University-near Montreal.
The men and women in both groups
- participants in two international
educational seminars organized by
Unesco-had travelled to Canada and
to Belgium to spend six rweeks
together, to study two closely related
aspects of the same problem-how
to make the most effective use of
education in developing international
understanding.
While members of the Brussels
Seminar discuss practical means for
improving textbooks, particularly
history books, their colleagues in
Canada are examining ways in which
geography teaching can help to
develop international understanding.
Both seminars will end on August
23rd.
. International'National History
Books
SINCE 1946 Unesco has worked forgreater mutual tolerance, har-
mony and understanding between
the peoples of different nations by seek-
ing to improve textbooks and teach-
ing materials. In the Brussels Seminar,
educators are going beyond purely
theoretical study to examine practical
classroom problems, concerning the
evaluation and use of textbooks, which
face their colleagues in all countries.
In its study of methods for analys-
ing and improving textbooks, the
S e m i n a r is applying Unesco's
"Model Plan"to sample material.
This plan, prepared by Dr. I. James
Quillen, of Stanford University,
provides many practical proposals for
"testing"books and encouraging
higher standards of writing and
selection.
By dividing themselves into four
working groups, members of the
Seminar are able to pool their
specialized knowledge, skill and
experience to solve technical and
professional problems of textbook
writers as well as teachers, and to
Macdonald College, where the Unesco Seminar on Geography teaching as a Means of
Developing International Understanding opened on July l2th, houses the Faculty 01 Agri-
culture 01 McGill University, with which is included the School 01 Household Science.
Accommodation is also provided for the School for Teachers where young men and women
are prepared for the teaching profession in the elementary and intermediate schools 01 the
Province 01 Quebec. This aerial photo, showing part 01 the College, includes (1) The Men's
Residence (2) Day School (3) Chemistry-Physics building (4) Main building. where Unesco's
Seminar is being held (5) Biology building (6) Women's residence (7) Men's campus.
deal with the varied educational and
psychological problems involved in
attempts to improve international
understanding.
One group is dealing with the ques-
tion of generally raising the level of
all textbooks, while the second group
discusses the best ways of using books
in classrooms.
The third group is seeking answers
to such questions as"Can national
history textbooks be written from an
international viewpoint ?"
World history textbooks will be
dealt with by the fourth group whose
work includes a comparative study of
the terms of national, general and
universal history and the history of
civilization in relation to international
understanding.
An important objective for the
Seminar, whose director is M. A : Wei-
ler, headmaster of the Experimental
Secondary School at Montgeron,
France, is to produce studies, biblio-
graphies and other materials for us
in future textbook improvement
campaigns.
Geography Creates Community
Spirit
GEOGRAPHY, when well taught.can make a child realize that he
is a member of a great human
community, in which he has both
privileges and obligations. Geography
teaching can and should help to
increase respect for others, and above
all, the sense of community on
regional, national and international
levels. For the experts meeting at
Unesco's seminar in Canada, the
problem is therefore to define
methods which can be used in
geography teaching to encourage
world-mindedness and international
understanding.
To do this they will make compar-
ative studies of geography teaching
in the schools of the various countries
represented at the Seminar, par-
ticularly in primary and secondary
schools, explore the possibilities for
improving the professional and
technical training of teachers and also
suggest specific ways in which
geography can lead towards intern-
ational understanding.
Four of the five study groups are
dealing with these factors in relation
to the needs of children and students
in different age groups. For the
youngest children, particular attention
will be paid to the use of films, radio,
books, folk tales and other methods,
to broaden the children's interest
beyond their immediate environment
Dr. Elsayed Mahmoud Zaki. Egyptian delegate to the Unesco International Seminar on Methods
and Techniques of Adult Education. (fifth from left on this photo) explains the methods used
by organizations in his country, to a group working at Kreuzstein. At the daily group
meetings, participants benefited from the experiences of their colleagues in other lands.
- and to show more of the relation
of their home towns to towns and
cities in other parts of the world.
Another group, dealing with the
needs of students from 12 to 15, is
examining special teaching methods
and psychological approaches most
suitable for them.
During the course of the Seminar,
plenary sessions are held, at which
group leaders report on the work
carried out, so that other group
members get an overall picture of
progress made and also join in
discussions of the problems which are
outlined.
The reports and studies produced by
the Seminar are to be published by
Unesco as guides to educational
authorities and teachers in all parts
of the world.
Libraries Serving Adult Education
T TWELVE days after the opening ofthe two Unesco seminars on
education for international un-
derstanding, about fifty professional
librarians and experts in adult
education met in Maims, Sweden's
third largest city, to study the role
of libraries in adult education.
Although a library seminar-
Unesco's second-the Malmö
"workshop"is a direct outcome of
recommendations made at the Elsinore
conference on adult education last
summer, and is closely linked with the
seminar on adult education techni-
ques, just concluded near Salzburg,
Austria.
The experts brought to Malmö
reports on library adult education
techniques, methods, policies and
programmes in their own countries.
These reports, together with the
booklet,'''Adult Education Activities
for Public Libraries", just published
by Unesco, give a broad picture of
what libraries are doing in the service
of adult education.
. Mankind Is On The March'
-UNESCO'S fourth 1950 Seminar, unmethods and techniques of ad lt
education, took place at Kreutz-
stein, about 25 miles from Salzburg.
Austria, from June 18th to July 29th.
Over 70 men and women from 20
countries constituted a temporary
international community, living and
working in a lakeside hotel, exchange-
ina their experiences-both successes
and failures-in adult education, to
provide a full picture of its present
state in various parts of the world,
and a basis for future action.
Dr. Lionel Elvin, recently appointed
head of Unesco's Education Depart-
ment, was present at the opening of
the Seminar, when delegates werr
welcomed by Dr. Hurdes, Austrian
Minister of Education. Dr. Elvin
read Ii message from M. Jaime Torres
Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, in
which the latter stressed"the un-
challengeable evidence that in adult
education mankind is on the march"
Director of the Kreutzstein Seminar
was Dr. Sven Bjorklund. Dean and
tounder of the Stockholm Peoples
University and one of the outstanding
figures in the Scandinavian adult
education movement.
Under the direction of M. Jacques
Brunet. of Unesco's Film Division, one
seminar group prepared a film on the
methods and techniques of adult
education as applied at the Seminar.
Other successful seminar projects
were a radio programme, a bi-weekly
newspaper, a mural journal, and a full
report of the Seminar's work to serve
as a guide to adult education groups.
These and other aspects of the
Seminar's work are already being put
to practical use in hundreds of
neighborhood clubs, union halls, rural
centres, schools, colleges, etc. in all
parts of the world.
