THE ART FILM
IN ITALY
TODAY more people than ever before are learning both to enjoyand understand art, thanks to the cinema. The recent rapid and
widely international development of art films was demonstrated
last February, for example, at the Second International Congress of
Art Films in Brussels. Delegates were able to see and judge over 40 films
produced in 15 countries since 1948,
Although the production of art films in many of these countries
is a comparatively new development, it dates back in Italy to the 1920's
when the producer Bragaglia made a documentary on the Etruscan
city of Tarquinia.
Most of the early films, however, were intended. to serve educa-
tional purposes ; they were not conceived by artists and made no claim
to being artistic productions.
Among the first Italian efforts was a series of films which brought
to the screen the works of such celebrated Italian masters as Titian,
Tintoretto and Paolo Uccello.
A"Dead-End"Technique
THIS was àn"art album"approach to the production of art filmswhich told no.'story"and t us cons ituted a kind of"dead-end"
with little prospect of development. The real future lay in films
having an aesthetic appeal of their own, in addition to presenting a
succession of photographs of paintings, statues and monuments.
Thus, in a second type of document-
ary, works of art were compared with
the actual landscapes that inspired
them. A typical film of this kind was
the fine documentary on the work of
the 18th Century Italian engraver
Piraneso, produced over 15 years ago.
An Interpretative School
E second technique is obviously a
marked improvement on the first.
Greater life is infused into the film
by this alternation between the work of
art and the source of its actual inspi-
ration. Some idea of movement-
though of the simplest kind-is also
introduced, and the canons of cinema
art are thus more faithfully observed
than in the case of mere inert photo-
graphy.
In 1940, however, two young pro-
rHE BIRTH OF A WORK OF ART AND HOW
IT TAKES FORM IN THE ARTIST'S MAGI-
NATION ARE CLEARLY REVEALED IN THE
ITALIAN ART FILM BASED ON"THE DEPO-
SITION", BY RAPHAEL, This painting.
(left) with Ra-
ducers, Emmer and Gras, struck
out along completely new lines by
treating the picture not as an indivi-
sible whole, but as an object whose
qualities can be brought out brilliant-
ly by the film through skilful cutting.
In earlier types of documentary art
film, the commentary was of no ar-
tistic value, while the musical ac-
companiment was meaningless, bearing
no aesthetic relationship to the subject
treated.
Each of Emmer's films (BotticeUi,
Giotto, Beato, Angelico, Carpaccio,
Bosch) has music specially composed
for it, whilst the commentary is
usually spoken by artists, who bring
to the task their imagination and
special knowledge.
This new development has spread
abroad, and in France, England and
America, many producers now use
Emmer's methods for documentaries
on paintings. This is a triumph of
film technique and one of the most
interesting contemporary experiments
in the interpretation of one art in
terms of another.
