ONE summer afternoon 20 years ago Jean Painleve, son of the late French
Premier and already famous as a producer of scientific films, hurriedly
entrained at the Gare du Nord in Paris for Brussels. His only luggage
was a large case of his films, which King Albert and Queen Elisabeth of
the Belgians had invited him to show at a palace reception that evening.
When the train reached the border a few hours later, M. Painlevé disco-
vered that he had left his passport behind. But he was able to show Belgian
customs officials his identity card and the invitation from King Albert. The
officials were satisfied-certainly he could pass through. But the aims-
that, unfortunately, was another matter. He'd have to pay a heavy duty on
each one of them, since the Belgian tariff made no distinction between educa-
tional, scientific or cultural films and purely commercial ones ; not even if
they were to be shown before the King himself.
M. Painlevé protested, but the offs-
cials were adamant. So he went on
to Brussels, and his films stayed at the
border.
"It's a crazy situation, Your Majes-
ties", he told the disappointed King
and Queen that evening."A film man
such as myself has been allowed to
cross the frontier without a passport,
but my films, the expression of my
ideas, cannot enter without being
taxed.
Campaign To Break
The Barriers
FROM that day M. Pa. inlevé foughtto free educational l"lnd kindred
films from import duties. When
asked to show his films to interna-
tional conferences, he would take them
as far as the border, and, if asked to
pay duty, would leave them there.
Travelling on to the conference centre,
he would Explain his problems to the
delegates and ask them to aid his
campaign to free educational 61ms.
The International Institute for
Intellectual Co-operation was mean-
while making a survey of educational
film problems through its technical
agency, the International Institute for
Educational Films, in Rome. It found
that, in general, films of high educa-
tional but doubtful commercial value
were liable to the same duties as
"entertainment"films likely to show
a profit. One effect of this obstacle
to the international exchange of edu-
cational films was to discourage pro-
ducers from making such films.
The work of the international agen-
cies resulted in the drafting by the
League of Nations in October, 1933 of
the"Convention to Facilitate the
International Circulation of Educa-
tional Films", under which countries
would exempt imported educational
films from customs duties and grant
them the same tax privileges as might
be enjoyed by locally produced films.
The Rome Institute was authorized
to act as executive agency for the
agreement and to issue certificates for
films it approved as being educational.
By December, 1937, 24 nations had
signed or ratified the agreement and
educational films were beginning to
move more freely. Then, Mussolini
took Italy out of the League and closed
the Rome Institute. To keep the
agreement in force, the other signa-
tory nations met at Geneva in Sep-
tember, 1938 and authorized the Inter-
national Institute for Intellectual
Co-operation to carry on as executive
agency, but with the outbreak of
World War II, the agreement fell into
abeyance.
In June, 1946, six months before
Unesco came into operation, an
international meeting of mass com-
munications experts recommended
that the new agency should sponsor
a fresh agreement which would take
the place of the League of Nations
Convention. This agreement they
suggests should be broadened to
include sound recordings and other
audio-visual materials as well as films ;
it would free these aids from quotas
and other quantitative restrictions as
well as customs duties ; and it would
provide for a decentralized system of
certification in place of the pre-war
centralized one.
It took many months and many
meetings of experts to draft an
agreement likely to be generally
acceptable, but the text was finally
approved by the Unesco General
Conference when it met at Beirut in
November, 1948. This first inter-
national agreement to be sponsored by
Unesco was circulated to governments
early in 1949 and was opened for
signature last July.
Nations Support New Pact
W [TIUN six months, 16 nations had
signed it, and the first to ratify it
recently was Norway. Several
other governments are also pre-,
paring ratification, and it is expected
that the total of ten needed to put the
agreement into force will be obtained
in the near future.
The agreement will remove customs
duties, quotas, licences and other
obstacles to the exchange, not only of
educationai, scientific or cultural films,
but also of film strips, microfilms,
sound recordings, glass slides, models,
wall charts, maps and posters, to
name the more important items. It
will mean that school children in
devastated Greece, for example, will
have the latest American maps and
wall charts sent to them quickly an5
cheaply ; that villagers in the Philip-
pine mountains will learn, through
films, of the life of other villagers in
Ecuador or the Lebanon ; or that
teachers and scientists in Brazil will
keep in touch through microfilms or
recordings, with the work of their
colleagues in Norway and the Nether-
lands.

Educational, scientific and cultural
groups regard the agreement as a
valuable aid for the removal of the
many existing barriers to the free
exchange of ideas. Almost every
week Unesco receives complaints from
educationists and scientists who have
been prevented from obtaining films
for their studies and conferences
through high import costs and quota
restrictions. Meanwhile veteran pro-
ducers like Jean Painlevé look forward
to the day when their young successors
will have real encouragement to
produce films of value, films which
will be able to circulate internationally
without being taxed, delayed or other-
wise obstructed.
Film Coupon Scheme Planned
THE ending of legal barriers willi almost certainly be ccompanied by
even more positive action to make
such material available to those whose
access to it has been barred by
economic obstacles. This would be
done through a"Film Coupon"scheme,
on the lines of Unesco's Book Coupon
system which enables"soft"currency
countries to purchase from"hard"
currency areas. It is expected that
participation in such a scheme will
soon be agreed to by Unesco's Member
States. This currency facility will
apply to prints, negatives and lavenders
of educational, scientific and cultural
films, as well as to 16 mm. raw stock
for printing such films.
Unesco is meanwhile sponsoring a
second international agreement which
would grant duty-free entry to a wide
range of educational, scientific and
cultural materials. They would in-
clude books, newspapers, periodicals,
travel literature, museum materials,
paintings and sculpture, as well as
scientific equipment and audio-visual
items for educational institutions.
Under it, countries would also grant
licences and foreign exchange for the
import of United Nations and govern-
ment publications, as well as for
publications consigned to public
libraries and other institutions.
The Unesco General Conference
decided last October to circulate the
text of this agreement to Member
States of Unesco and of the United
Nations. On the basis of their
comments, a revised text will be
prepared for submission to Unesco's
General Conference at Florence next
May.
The problem of books is perhaps
even more urgent than that of films.
Before the was, scarcely any country
taxed imported books ; today over
50 countries impose customs duties,
licence systems, postal taxes or other
restrictions on their international cir-
culation. It is evident that a for-
gotten lesson must be learned again-
that knowledge is a thing no country
can afford to hamper, limit or tax.
