“IT REMAINS TO DETERMINE THE COURSE OF OUR
ACTIVITY IN RELATION TO PEACE THE SUPREME
OBJECTIVE AND MAIN JUSTIFICATION OF UNESCO."

M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director General of
Unesco. at the 20th Session of Unesco's Exe-

Major Discussion Proposed
for Florence Conference
UNESCO'S CONTRIBUTION
UNITED NATIONS
PEACE MISSION
A general view of Florence, where the Fifth Session of Unesco's General Conierende wiU open on May 22nd.
In the background (centre) is the Pallazo Vecchio. where plenary sessions of the Conference will be held.
IN three weeks time over 1000 men
and women-delegates, official
observers, members of Unesco's
Secretariat and journalists-will be
gathered in Florence, Italy, for the
opening of the Fifth Session of
Unesco's General Conference.
Meeting from May 22 to June 17 at
plenary sessions in the renaissance
setting of the Palazzo Vecchio and at
committee gatherings in the 15th
century Pitti Palace, delegates will
consider how Unesco can best carry
out its work as the world organiz-
ation for education, science and
culture.
One question standing out above
all others in the minds of the dele-
gates will be that posed by Unesco's
Executive Board at a recent meeting :
what action can Unesco take, apart
from that already proposed in its
1951 programme resolutions, to con-
tribute vigorously, in the present as
well as in the future, to the United
Nations Mission of peace.
This question was raised at the
Executive Board meeting by M.
Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Direc-
tor-General."There are turning
points in the lives of institutions just
as there are in those of individuals",
he said."I believe that the next
session of the'General Conference
will represent such a turning point
for Unesco, at once for reasons con-
nected with the tnternat strMctMre of
the Organization and for reasons
external to tt.
Peace Today Or
A Future Peace ?
"THE difficulties and the dangersc, vershadowing the world have
become so dressing". M. Torres
Badet pointed out."that it is now
essential for Unesco to shoulder the
responsibilities imposed upon it't5y its
Constitution, as a part of the maehi.
nery of the United Nations and Spe-
cialized Agencies, in the promotion of
peace.
"What exaetly are those responslbi-
lities How can we carry them out ?
And with what peace are we concern-
ed-peace today or peace four a more
or less distant future ? These supre-
mely important questions cannot be
evade", said the Director-General.
"Impelled alike by the process of zits
own development and the condition at
the world, Unesco can and must sub-
ject its methods and aims to a thor-
ough and critical examination, I am
convinced that the fundamental object
of the next session of the General Con-
ference shoulâ be to carry out such
an examination", he added.
To carry out its tasks Unesco follows
a programme planned at three levels :
information and exchange of docu-
mentation and news ; research, in-
vestigation and enquiry aimed at
helping men and women to contribute
actively to mankind's progress ; and
action, either by Unesco directly, or at
its instigation, to assist all countries
to contribute, through culture, educ-
ation and science, to peace.
As there are some tasks which
Unesco cannot undertake immediately
because of lack of funds, but which it
cannot renounce, a Basic Programme,
covering a number of years, has been
prepared and this, together with a
detailed annual programme outlining
the part that can be carried out in
each financial year, will be presented
to the Florence Conference.
Programme activities proposed for
1951 require a bUdget of $ 8, 150, 000-
an increase of $ 150, 000 over the 1950
budget.
How close a co-operation between
Unesco's Member States and its Secre-
tariat is required to carry out such a
programme was recently emphasised
by M. Torres Bodet,"Only through
the will and acts or Member States
can Unesco fulfil its true purpose-

as a network of mutual services, the
value of which is self evident, asa
collective force working for the trans-
formation of the world,"he stated.
"The Secretariat, no matter how zea-
lous, cannot make up for any apathy
on the part of Member States, for it
can do no more than ser" thelr will
- the motive power for all its work."
Proposals to define clearly both the
tasks of the Secretariat and those of
Member States and a recomendation
that the latter should provide their
Unesco National Commissions wIth
adequate permanent secretariats wi11
be submitted to the Conference. Other
resolutions call on Member States to
etc-operate w'th one another in joint
action for Unesco aims, and suggest
that greater use be ma3e of inter-
national conventions involving the use
of education, science and culture for
progressive and peaceful ends.
" : :,
Creative Genius Of
Florentine Masters
GO-OPERATION will also be the keynoteof a series of special meetings
held in connection w'th the Con-
ference. One of these will group
representatives from National Com-
missions for Unesco and the second,
representatives from the 100 non-
governmental organizations. having
consultative status with the Organiz,-
ation.
Unesco's present membership-
55 nations-is likely to be increased
during the Conference, following its
consideration of memt>ership applic-
ations from Korea the United States
of Indonesia and the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
Meeting in surroundings which pro-
cla ; m the creative genius of the Flo-
rentine masters, delegates will study
Unesco's plan for the preparation of
a scientific and cultural history of
mankind. And, it is fitting that in
the city of men like Leonardo da
Vinci, Michelangelo, BoWcelli, Mas-
saecio and Donatello, they should be
called on to consider ways of
improving the material and moral
freedom of creative artists.
Among the other important ques-
tions on the Conference agenda are
whether final steps s2'foulð. be taken
for the preparation of a Universal
Convention on Copyright, on the pos-
sibility of founding an international
institute of the press, on the work
already done towards evolving a uni-
form Braille script for the bli, nd and
on Unesco's part in the United Nations
Technical Assistance Programme.
During the Conference, the Italian
Government will sponsor a large-scale
programme of cultural events in Flo-
rence, including exhibition and lec-
tures. The Florence Festival of Music
and Opera, which co-incides with
Unesco's Conference is to include a
Theatre Festival, from May 25th to
June 13th, at which Italian, British
and French companies will perform.
RETRIBUTION. TO
