FREEDOM had waited through the centuries forevents which took place in Philadelphia, in the
American colony of Pennsylvania, on the 4th of
July 1776. and in Paris, France, on the 14th of July 1'789.
These events did not concern only the. Americans and
the French, but all men, everywhere. They did not
concern only the men of the late 18th century, but all
who have lived since that time, and those who will live,
during the foreseeable future.
The American Declaration of Independence, drawing
its words and thoughts from the whole history of the
struggle for human rights, declared :
"We hold these truths to be self evident, that all men
are created equal, that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are Litre, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."
Thirteen years and ten days later, in the name of
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, the people of France
smashed the gates of the Bastille, and dealt a blow
to the concept of absolute monarchy which echoed
across the world.
PAUL BROCA
Twenty years before his sudden death on July 9th 1880.
this famous surgeon, carrying out research into the
nerve centres of the brain, identified the centre that
governs speech-the third frontal convolution,
generally referred to since then as"Broca's convo-
lotion". At the time he was a professor at the University
of Paris, and his discovery established him as a master
of comparative anatomy and a pioneer in the domain
of anthropology. Broca died before completing his
study on cerebral morphology.
FABRE D'EGLANTINE
During a period of twelve years, from 1793 to 1805,
Frenchmen dated their letters"ler Floréal"or"16 Fri-
maire", held celebrations in honour of Virtue, Labour or
Public Opinion, and dedicated the different days of the
year to the Grape, the Chestnut, the Vat and so forth.
instead of to the saints. The man responsible for this
was a middle-class citizen of Carcassone born on the
28th of July 1750 with the very ordinary name of Fabre.
He added the rest after winning the prize of a golden
eglantine for an ode he submitted to the Jeux Floraux
of Toulouse. Fabre d'Eglantine began his career as a
mediocre playwright, then became a revolutionary,
followed Danton faithfully through every phase of his
career-and went to the guillotine in the same tumbril
as his leader. But he will be remembered for his
calendar, with its charming headings, and by a few
Van Gogh, the painter, who died
on the 29th of July, 1890, was a
great artist even before he left his
native Holland and settled in Pro-
vence. But it was there that, to
use his own words, he"found
salvation", there that he found the
E : 1chantment he had sought for so
long. As his Dutch biographer,
Julius Meier-Graefe, says."he had
to penetrate more deeply than
anyone else had done before him.
His eyes bit into every object, into
trees and soU I1ke an axe... l1e kneaded the ephemeral
air into a solid mass... As everything was yel10w be
had painted yellow but so that you could taste, hear,
smell and touch it. He painted till he made stone
talk..."
THE MOST PRECOCIOUS POET OF INDIA...
... and very probably of the world, was Pillamarri
Pinavirabhadrich, born near Madras some time in July
1450, He died at the age of thirty, having, it is said,
undermined his constitution by every k'nd of excess.
But he had time to bestow upon his nation those
wonderful poems, the"Jaimini Bahratha"and the
"Sringara Sakunthala". At the age of ten he was
already famous. And one story reia'es how an old
writer, who had just published a book, came one day
to ask his opinion of it. He had to hunt tor the young
critic among his li'tle playmates, and after listening to
a judgment that was both severe and brief, went sadly
away while PiIlamarri returned to his game.
songs. Although a hundred and sixty years have gone
by, children still love to sing"11 pleut, il pleut. ber-
gere".
JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH
Johann Sebastian Bach died two hundred years ago
on the 28th 01 July 1750... It is interesting", writes
Albert Schweizer,"to compare his life and that 01 Kant.
Both 01 them lived a simple, middle-class life, but kept
in close touch with outside events. Neither had any
great doubt as to the path he should follow, nor any
great difficulty in winning appreciation from his contem-
poraries. Both wrote a great deal, but not too much.
Both were greater and happier than certain other men
01 genius, because the ideal towards which they strove
was in complete harmony with their daily occupations..."
VINCENT VAN GOGH
