A DAY TO
: BER EVERY DAY
On the first anniversary of the adoption by the United Nations
General Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, M. Jaime
Torres Bodet, Director-General of UNESCO, issued a call to action for
the bridging of the gap that exists between the promise of the Declaration and
its fulfilment.
In his message, whose text we publish below, M. Torres Bodet warned that
the Declaration would seem a far off goal"as long as men anywhere still have to
endure hunger and want, injustice and ignorance".

0n 10 December 1948, the GeneralAssembly of the L'nited Nations
proclaimed the Universal Declara-
tion of Human Rights. The observance
of this important anniversary would be
ovoid of meaning if we, who are cele-
brating it, failed to realize the challenge
that it brings : what have we done, what
are we doing, and what can we do in
the future to help ensure that the lofty
principles of that Declaration are car-
ried into effect ?
No man today, in these troubled time3,
can take refuge in the thought that, for
countess centuries, the human race has
rxisted without exercising the Universal
precepts as contained In the Declara-
tion. The infamy of our violent past
can account, perhaps, for our distrust
of the future ; it does not, however, jus-
lify present inaction.
The Declaration of 10 December is
/lot only a milestone in hLstory : it is
also a plan of campaign. Every para-
graph its a call to action ; every line a
condemnation of indolence ; every sen-
tence reproves some aspect-individual
or national-odour past ; every word
forces us to rye-examine our present
state. Can any of us say : "Not
Guilty ?"
No country Is guiltless of the oppres-
sion that still weighs upon mankind.
How many States can boast, even
within their own frontiers, a real and
complete code of freedoms ? And, even
if they could, would they, by that fact
alone, have fulfilled their duty towards
the rest of the world ?
Written in the Peoples'Blood
TRUTH recognizes no frontiers. The
destiny of man is a universal re-
sponsibility shared by everyone. So
long as any right of any man is violated,
the United Nations'Declaration will
hold us guilty of cowardice, negligence.
laziness and inhumanity. The document
signed in Paris a year ago will seem a
very far off goal so long as men
anywhere still have to endure hunger
and want, injustice and ignorance.
The Declaration of 10 December
moves us-it moves us because it was
writlen in the blood of millions of men

and women who died that we might be
able, one day, to proclaim these prin-
ciples. And what is written in the
peoples'blood can never be erased.
Documents such as the Gnicersal De-
claration of TIuman Rights are incen-
tives not to complacency but to heroism,
There is little value in writing them; ;
the important tMng is to lire them.
They are not just dreams or hopes.
They are calls to action, showing us the
tremendous gap that exists between the
promise and the fulfilment. It is we
who must close that gap, bringing all
our talent and strength to the task. To
sustain this ideal, built up at such heaey
cost, demands of us tenacity and cou-
rage.
A Great Symbol : Man's Dignity
T 1at is why Unesco is trying tomake known the Declaration of
10 December eveywhere, both to
the adult and the child in school. Our
conduct will never be imbued with its
principles if these are taught mechanic-
ally. These principles can only be
learnt through practice. Every right
has its corresponding duty : for ins-
tance, the right to education implies
our duty to give others the edu-
cation they need ; the right to work
implies that we must work to earn that
right ; the right to freedom of thought
implies that we must both think freely
and tolerate others'freedom of thought ;
the right to equality before the law
implies the need to respect the laws
that ensure that equality ; and, finally,
that fundamental right, rooted in the
hidden depths of our being-the right
to life-bids us respect in all cir-
cumstances the right of others to live.
To spread throughout the world a
knowledge of the Declaration of 10 De-
cember is to launch a worldwide
campaign for decent living condi-
tions for all, to be brought about by
governments in solemn and practical
recognition of their duties in regard to
the social development of mankind.
Unesco's great mission is to help States
to fulfil those duties in the fields of
education, of science and of culture.
And what more inspiring role could we
ascribe to culture, education and science
than to make all men the guardians, and
therefore the faithful executors, of the
Universal Declaration ?
On a day like this, millions ofchildren bow before a great sym-
bol : the dignity of man-of the
man that each child, between hope and
fear, is preparing to become. Let us
try to ensure that the world they will
inherit is happier than the one into
which we. ourselves, were born. The
nations are tired of fighting fruitless
wars; ; but they are no less tired of
hearing barren precepts. The peoples
want words that are borne out by deeds.
Every one of the rights of man was
fought for : and we must fight to keep
and extend them. It is not enough to
set aside a day in commemoration of
the principles that we are now celebrat-
ing. Celebrating them means prepar-
ing to carry them out. And carrying
them out means practising them every
day, every hour, in every action of ours
throughout our lives. Thus shall we
be men living in independence, courage
and faith in the condition of man.
REMEM
REMElV. I
