BENVENUTO CELUN !
un 1 November lUU an
artist was born in Flo-
rence who was almost
perfectly"typical"of the
vigorous and questing
spirit of the Renaissance.
His compatriot Baldinucci
described him as fol-
lows :"Benvenuto, ren-
owned for his Nute play-
ing and his great skill as
a goldsmith, an excellent
engraver of medallions, a
sculptor of more than or-
dinary distinction, an ar-
chitect and metal-/c-under.
an ardent admirer of Mi-
chelangelo, skilful. vigo-
rous, bold of speech and
with a natural eloquence, ready at all times with
the cutting phrase or repartee, and wont to ex-
press his opinions with the utmost frankness,
irrespective of his audience, even to people of
the highest rank..."
THE METRIC SYSTEM
In their decree of the 13th Brumaire in the
year IX (4 November 1800) the Consuls of the
French Republic laid down :"First the decimal says.
tern of weights and measures shall be used
throughout the Republic..."Man thus ceased to
be the measure of all things. Cubit, foot, inch,
acre, yard and fathom, gave place to more exact
and objectively definable quantities as did the
grain, pint, bushel, quart and pound.
Huygens and the mathematician Picard had al-
ready proposed that the unit of length should be
that of the pendulum whose oscillation measured
seconds, but it was not until the Revolution that
universally applicable measures were adopted :
the metre-a ten millionth part of a meridional
quadrant of the earth ; the kilogramme-the
weight of a litre of pure water at 4 centigrade.
'FOR THE PURPOSES OF MUTUAL
UNDERSTANDING...'
Five years ago, Unesco was established. On
16 November 1945, representatives of 40 govern-
ments and 7 international organizations, assembled
In London, signed the Final Act, which is now
the Constitution of Unesco. On behalf of their
peoples, the governments then declared that :
''The States parties to this Constitution, believ-
ing in full and equal opportunities for education
for all. in the unrestricted pursuit of objective
truth, and in the free exchange of ideas and
knowledge, are agreed and determined to develop
and to increase the means of communication bet-
ween their peoples and to employ these means
for the purposes of mutual understanding and a
truer and a more perfect knowledge of each
other's lives".
LEO TOLSTOI
Two months before his death, on November 20,
1910, Count Tolstoy, greatest wri'er of his time.
wrote a letter to Mahatma Gandhi, then a lawyer
practising in Johannesburg, on non-resistance,
another name for the"law of love which has
b2eh preached by all the sages... and expressed
most clearly by Christ...""The aspiration of the
soul for communion with our fellow men", he
wrote,"is the only ultimate law of life"."And
so", he told the young Hindu,"your work in the
Transvaal, which seems to us to lie at the utter-
most end of'he earth, is yet the thing on which
our interest is concentrated ; it is the most im-
portant work in the world today..."
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
On 13 November 1850,
Stevenson began the fe-
verish life which was to
take him from his native
Scotland through a suc-
cession of seaside resorts,
hotels and sana'oria to
the fabulous islands of
the Pacific. His tubercu-
losis gave him little
peace, yet the creation of
a new book marked al-
most every stopping-place
on his distressful journey.
The last phase of his life
began in 1890 when Ste-
venson, his wife and his
adopted son, cruising in
the Pacific, landed in
Samoa, where Stevenson started to build a house.
He was to remain there until his death, as the
protector of the people, the friend of the king,
and almost a king himself, exhausting himself
by his efforts to stir the world to indignation
against colonial exploitation.
