GENERAL CONFERENCE ADOPTS V1/ORLD AGREEMENT
FOR DUTY-FREE IMPORT OF EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS
IN some countries books comingfrom abroad are taxed as uch
as 300 per cent. Scientific equip-
ment needed in research laboratories,
! is taxed with equal severity. Education
exhibitions, destined for schools and
museums, remain in customs'ware-
houses while their sponsors try to raise
the heavy bond often required by the
authorities.
These tariff and trade regulations
make it costly, difficult and sometimes
impossible for people in many coun-
tries to obtain the works of art, and
the scientific and educational materials
they need.
To remedy that situation, Unesco's
Fifth General Conference adopted
unanimously a new international
Agreement allowing a wide range of
educational, scientific and cultural ma-
terials to move across frontiers free of
duty. Governments adhering to this
Agreement will abolish duties on books,
newspapers, magazines, musical scores,
maps and charts. They will grant
import licences and foreign currency
for publications needed by public
libraries.
The Agreement will also permit the
free importation of paintings, drawings
and sculpture. Approved institutions,
such as museums, laboratories and
schools, will enjoy sweeping privileges
for the free importation of everything
from documentary films to scientific
apparatus. One provision, for exam-
pie, eliminates barriers to the move-
ment of everything required for the
educational advancement of the blind.
"Free Trade"
in Culture
'\T'3W that the Agreement has beenunanimously adopted, it will be
opened shortly for signature at
Lake Success. The British Govern-
ment has announced that it will sign
the Agreement and submit it to Par-
liament for ratification. Many other
countries have also indicated that they
will seek quick legislative approval of
the pact. There is little doubt that it
will obtain, within a short delay, the
ten ratifications needed to bring it
into force.
This is the second international
Agreement to be sponsored by Unesco.
The first is designed to abolish duties,
quotas and other trade barriers to the
movement of films, recordings and
similar audio-visual aids to education.
It has been signed by 17 countries
and ratified by one, Norway.
When these Unesco Agreements
enter into force, bringing a"free
trade"in culture, people in each coun-
try will find it much easier to obtain
books, paintings, documentary films
and all types of educational materials
from other countries-a significant,
practical step towards international
understanding.
