FOOD AND PEOPLE EDUCATIONAL
CAMPAIGN LAUNCHED IN U. S.
Mr C. J. McLanahan. a member 01 the
U. S. National Commission for Unesco and
educational director 01 the Co-operative
League of the United States, describes
pamphlets designed tor discussion
programmes on the theme of"Food and
People". At his left is Barclay Acheson
01 the Readers Digest and (extreme
right) former Governor Ellis Arnall of
Georgia, President 01 the Society 01 Inde-
pendent Motion Picture Producers.
(Photo : U. S. State Dept.)
To enlist the active interest of the American people,whose food standards are high, in the task of
lifting the standards of the one-half of the world's
people who are badly fed, the United States Natio-
nal Commission for UNESCO has launched a nation-
wide educational campaign on the problems of Food and
People.
The practical purpose is to stimulate discussion in
communities and organizations in all parts of the United
States on the need for national and international action
to face the problem of a rapidly increasing world popu-
lation not yet matched by increased food production.
The campaign, officially begun at the semi-annual
meeting in Washington, D. C., of the National Commis-
sion, is being carried out with the co-operation of the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
U. S. State Department and Agriculture Department, the
FAO Inter-Agency Committee of the U. S. Government,
schools and universities throughout the country, and ma-
ny national, state and local private organizations repre-
senting farm, labour, consumer and other interests.
A Food and People"Fact Sheet", one of 18 separate
items distributed to interested organization points out
that :"Only one-third of the world's people get enough
of the right kind of food, and they consume three-fourths
of the world's food supply. One half of the human race
actllally goes hungry, and famine and starvation still
stalk the earth, as in ancient times."
Six Unesco booklets set forth various.. aspects of the
problems presented by the need to feed a constantly
rising population, an estimated increase of 68, 000 per-
sons daily.-
