MEN WHO FIGHT FOR WORLD'S RIGHT TO HEALTH
THE observance of a World Health Day on April 7 is not
for the specialists alone. Its main purpose is to bring
home to everybody, sane and sick, layman and profes-
sional, the direct bearing of health on other main pro-
blems of our time, and the inter-dependence of health condi-
tions in all parts of the world.
The World Health Organization exists to drive home this
lesson. UNESCO collaborates in this task through its Natural
Sciences, Mass Communications and Education Departments.
Some months ago UNESCO, for example, was responsible
for the world distribution of a series of IS articles on cancer
today, written for the New York Herald Tribune by Lester
Grant, who was later awarded the Peabody Prize for the best
science journalism in J 949. These articles were distributed
free to leading publications in all Member States.
THERE will be speeches-and stories in the papers-and there willbe public ceremonials, and the giving of medals and prizes ; there
will be lectures in the schoolrooms and dramatic programmes on
the radio-to help celebrate World Health Day, April 7. Some of the
best celebrations, however, will be on the sports fields of the world,
where young people play soccer, pelota, cricket, baseball, hockey, tennis,
basketball, throw javelins, run and jump.
They will celebrate in this way because they are alive. (Many of
them wouldn't be, save for the great international flow of medical
knowledge during the past few years-even during the past few weeks
or days). Fewer of them are disfigured ; fewer are blind, than would
have been the case even several years ago. A relatively small number
of them have had small-pox.
Only 200 years ago small-pox attacked more than 80 per cent of
mankind, and disfigured, crippled, blinded or killed one person in every
four in every nation. Today this disease is fully under control in the
more advanced countries. There are still, however, many unvaccinated
persons throughout the world.
In 1946-7 there was an epidemic of small-pox in Rangoon with a
death rate of 30 per cent, and in Hong Kong at the same time 530 people
died out of 820 who went sick. The main centres of infection are in the
less developed areas of the world.
It has been estimated that each year malaria cause* the d. aths of 3. 000.  peoples. To attack
this problem on a world scale, the World Health Orgcmiscrtion has organised joint campaigns
with the governments of many countries. In this photo Greek peasant women watch as a
team sprays their house with D. D. T. Experts from W. H. O. supervising this work during the
recent fighting in Greece had a significant experience in a lonely farmhouse one night. They
opened the door to find some partisans pointing rifles at them. The doctors feared the worst
until the partisans expiained that they wanted theiI"hide-outs"sprayed with D. D. T.
But while victory has been won over smallpox, there remain other
diseases which take their toll of mankind-as smallpox once did-in
terms of millions of lives. Tuberculosis, for example still kills between
3 and 5 million people each year.
In India alone, in 1944, nearly 2 million deaths were caused by
malaria.
Disease knows no frontiers, and we must therefore fight it wherever
it appears. The peoples of the world recognize this and that is why
the World Health Organization (WHO) came into being.
Nils Blaedel, science editor of the Copenhagen newspaper"Politiken"
recently went to WHO headquarters in Geneva. Here, in his own words,
is a glimpse of what he found :
"'Working in the Palais des Nations in Geneva is a group of practical
people who believe they can help bring peace to this troubled world.
They are working to liberate hundreds of millions from sickness and to---,--. L'I-----. 1...

maKe uiem acuve woria
citizens. Their task, on a
score of fronts, is to fight
disease-the mental and
physical enemy of man.
"These men and women
are members. of the World
Health Organization, whose
member states have united
in accepting the definition
of health as a state of com-
plete physical, mental and
social well-being. For
them, health is a positive
thing-not merely the
absence of disease and
infirmity.
"The WHO was born in
1948. Since then it has
fought for the attainment
by all peoples of the highest
possible level of health, in
the belief that their health
is decisive for world peace.
"Is this merely an empty
phrase, an international
cliché ?

Dr. BROCK CHISHOLM (Canada),
Director-Generttt of the World
Health Organization.
"MAN HIMSEI.. F
IS GREATEST
CHALLENGE
Or. G. Brock Chisholm,the canadian psy-
chiatrist responsible for the
health of the Canadian
army during the last war
and now Director General
of WHO, has an answer to
this question.
.,'if we utilize the know-
ledge we have today', he
says,'this ought not to be
merely a phrase, but the
facts at the root of the
problem are disagreeable
ones. Today, the greatest
challenge to humanity is
man himself. Throughout
human history men have
been fighting wars. Yet we
must not accept this as the
nature of things.
..'pother expressions of
human nature have under-
gone basic changes. Why
then cannot this ? We may
not be able to completely
change human nature, but
we can modify it in the
right direction. The res-
ponsibility for trying to
safe-guard the human race
against itself rests with
science. Together with
other. sciences, psychiatry
must try to shape another
'ftuI future humanity. The
WHO : will try to stimulate
this tremendously impor-
tant task.
"'But mental health is
only one half of the world
problem. We have experts
combatting avoidable dis-
eases which every year
claim hundreds of millions
of victims, whose sufferings
prevent them from co-
operating as active world
citizens. We co-operate
with our sister organization,
Unesco, in this international
peace work. Half the people
in the world are illiterate,
and in underdeveloped
areas where campaigns
against disease are carried
on Unesco and WHO are
fighting together for a new
and better civilization'".
