* FTER four weeks of frequently heated discussions, the Fifth General
/\ Conference has come to an end. If the debates of this Assembly
have presented a new aspect,'it is this : Unesco finds that it must
face up to one of those contradictions of which our age gives so many
examples. The tasks undertaken are in the interests of a more stable
peace, but they will on) v reach fruition during peace. It is a question
of long-therm projects : will there be sufficient time ? Will those threats
which weigh so heavily on the world today allow, the forces of peace
enough time to become established and to triumph ?
However difficult the solution, the problem confronting the General
Conference of Unesco, was neverthe-
less very clear : \Vas its duty to conti-
nue as if nothing was wrong, to confine
itself to technical projects, unquestion-
ably useful but producing results only
in the distant future ? Or, on the con-
trary, was its duty to accept the world
as it is, admit its division, its problems,
and to take immediate steps to fight
those dangers imposed by the constant
threat of war ? The final decisions of
the General Conference were inspired
by the need to reply to such questions ;
questions indeed which constantly ab-
sorbed the representatives of all the
59 member states of the Organisation.
For this reason, though still continu-
:  its long term projects, Unesco has
at the same''me launched itself on a
new path. The ConieÌ't0e has charged
the Executive Council and the lJ ! rectors
General to submit a certain number 0 :
special projects which will attempt
"more directly and in the framework
of the United Nations and its partieutar
department, to support and consolidate
peace".
Positive Action
For World Stability
IT was foreseen that the importanceand sc p  of these projects would
be so great that the ordinary budget.
of Unesco would not be sufficient to
finance them. The Conference there-
fore decided that they could be Jlnanced
"by voluntary contributions 01'Titoney
from private and public sources or'Í/ !
,'el'l'ices trom as many countries as pos-
sidle". By such projects Unesco will
take positive steps toward immediate
relief for the world's present intellec-
tual and moral instability, in propor-
tion to the means put at its disposal
and in the framework of its competence.
Two proposals (presented by the U. S.
delegation) relating to matters such as
these, have been approved by the Con-
ferenè". The first charges Unesco to or-
ganise and put) mC eet a major pro-
gramme"/Lith a view to aÙ' : : : cHlg 1/1-
ternational understanding in German ? i".
The other requests Unesco to set up re-
gional centres of scientific research the
first of which will be in Western Eu-
rope. These centres, established by
means of funds collected by Unesco
outside its normal budget, will help to
remove that monopoly of scientific re-
search which the present high cost of
modern apparatus gives to countries
rich enough to afford its construction.
The moral and intellectual instability
which Unesco is trying to remedy, par-
tially originates in the differences that
become more and more apparent bet-
ween industrial countries and less fa-
vouredregionsof tile globe. Thelatter
are becommg more impoverished every
d2y and their resources continually di-
minisll ; the power of the former grows
all the time and modern techniques en-
sure a way of life that, becomes in-
creasingly easier.
The United Nations'plan of tech-
nical assistance to countries that
are insufficiently developed has been
conceived to answer this problem.
In 1951, L'nesco will play an important
role in putting this plan into effect. In
addition, it will undertake specific
works of its own. in this field. Thus, an
international conference on"The COII-
quest of the desert"is going to meet in
Israel, in collaboration with the Inter-
national Institute of the Arid Zone,
which Unesco is at present setting up.
However, despite the great importance
of these matters, they do not represent
a full solution. many conflicts arise
from the inequality of'man. Others re-
sult ; ; ; : ! ! l different causes. There are,

Îuï ëmple, conflicts, whose origin
remain ulJscuì'"vhich occur even
within a nation, between dlC :'"'sth-
nic groups. Unesco, in pursuing en-
quirks into various states of social ten-
sion, is making a study of these obscure
causal factors. It is important to know
not only the obstacles which oppose
harmonious relations betvveen different
groups, but also the factors which have
brought about good relations in certain
regions.
Unesco has decided to u ! Hlc'. lake, ; Üs
year an enquiry into economic, politi-
cal, cultural and psychological factors
which"aid or hinder harmonious rela-
tions betu ; een races and ethnic groups",< ! / : f< t<t< ; <'e) t rac a ; t f/t) ti  roM ".
This enquiry win be launched in Bra-
zil, which country, to quote the Bra-
zilian delegate at the General Confer-
ence,"progresses in fraternity between
its ever-increasing black, white and
Indian population".
A Step Towards Universality
I XTEHXATIOXAL understanding, whichis one of the íixed aims of Unesco
as stated in its Constitution, can only
be facilitated by works such as these
which, moreover, are directly allied to
all the tasks undertaken by l'nesco-
studies related to states of social ten-
sion, dissemination of scientific data
with respect to racial problems, di1'lu-
sion and promotion of the rights of man.
Even within the organisation a new
step has been taken towards that uni-
versality which shouidbe the main
characteristic of Unesco : the Confer-
ence ! E, ! ! l ffect, charged the Direc-
tao-General to study the jJû' : L :  ! t ; cS
or à. 1 : itting as associate members a
certain number : T_'on-autonomous ter-
ritories.
It is impossible to review all aspects
of the programme decided upon for
1951 by the General Conference. It is
equally impossible to draw up a balance
sheet of endeavours which have already
borne fruit. Nevertheless, it must be
noted that the General Conference of
1950. marks an important date in the
struggle for the free circulation of
lùeas"by words and images". The
Conference has, in fact, unanimously
approved an International Convention
for the free circulation of educational
material. in lilt ; è ! ü  ! ! f gïêt ;-
ment, the signatory governments would
undertake to abolish customs duty on
hooks, publications and documents and
provide currency for the importation of
books to public libraries. Moreover, all
customs duties which have prevented
the importation of pictures, designs,
sculpture, music and material for mu-
seums, would also be lifted. Immediat-
ely after the approval of this project
agreed upon by the Conference, the
British delegation announced that its
government intended to sign and pre-
sent this document without delay for
the ratification of Parliament.
An Examination Of Conscience
W HETHEIl it was a question of exa-\\'mining its routine programme or
specially selected projects, the
General Conference was continually ab-
sorhed with the problem of peace. The
crises undergone and surmounted arose
from this"examination of conscience"
that the Conference had attempted, m
the words of M. Torres Bodet. Further-
more, one of the most significant fea-
tures of the Conference has been its
desire to place particular emphasis on
the role of the member states in the
execution of Unesco's programme.
L'nesco had at times been accused of
being a bureaucracy. This year even
the language of its programme indicates
an effort to nullify this objection. The
resolutions which have been voted are
not all drawn up according to the tra-
ditional formula :"The General Confer-
ence instructs the Director-GeneraL."
An increasing number begin with these
words :"The General Conference invites
member SMes..." One can perhaps land,
in this new trend, signs of a happy,
transformation. There is no cause for
astonishment that attention to such
matters is of such recent date. Unesco
is a young organism ; its means are
limited and its tasks immense. For live
years it has had to work as quic'kly
as possible ; to repair, with the means
at its disposal, the havoc of war ; to
draw up a programme and a field of
action.
Unesco, today, in taking stock of it-
self, is passing through a kind of crisis.
Its weakness, and at the same time its
strength is being noted."L'nesco", as
At. Torres Bodet has said,"consists o/
59 member states." : \leasured in terms
of this idea of an assembly of states,
the power of Unesco is immense. And
in order that this power can be fully
used, its programme and its efforts
must not be merely those of a team of
specialists ; they must become the com-
mon task of nations determined to safe-
guard peace.
