LIBRARIES-A NEGLECTED RESOURCE
Unesco Seminar proposes active
programme for adult education
"p l'BLIC lib1Ylries can,'be and indeed in some cases are among the
most effective agencies now existing for the continuing educa-
lion of great masses of people", according to a resolution of
the Unesco Seminar on libraries in adult education just held
in Malrno, Sweden.
The.'can be"is the justification Tor this four weeks'workshop for
professional librarians specially interested in adult education, arran-
ged by Unesco. The fact is that the potentialities of public libraries
are far from being realized or even recognized in many parts of the
world. It is also true that the public library movement is on the
move. This is clear from recent advanced made in many countries
and from the place public library development occupies in Unesco's
programme.
The progress is very uneven,
however ; indeed in some regions
it has not even sorted. The cen-
tral idea of this seminar was
to pool the best practices and
theories, to focus attention on the
role of libraries as educational
agencies and to reach agreement
on standards.
By the end of the seminar, the
48 participants from twenty
countries had produced a number
of clearly formulated recommend-
actions as to how libraries best
can aid popular education.
Some of these recommendations
are directly addressed to Unesco ;
others should ra. ther be regarded
as pointers to everyone engaged in
public library work and planning.
Library services in India, Ceyton. Egypt, the Argentine, France, Italy and Great
Britain are represented among these members of a study group at the Unesco
Seminar on Libraries in Adult Education, held at Malmo, Sweden. This group
was concerned with the ways in which libraries can help mass. education in
the large under-developed areas of the world.
library is a service organization
bringing educational and recrea-
tional aids to the people. These
aids are not only made out of
printed words. The spoken word
through radio, gramophone and
lecture, the image through film,
lantern-slide and poster and even
the combination of these two
modern techniques in tele\ vision

now belong within the domain of
the librarian in the service of the
community.
This study-group formulated a
minimum, median and maximum
programme for the audio-visual
services of libraries. The mini-
mum programme which the Seminar
commends to all libraries requires
at least the establishment of an
effective community film inform-
ation service.
Unesco was asked to publish an
international list of selected films
of universal interest in the field
of adult education.
The work and recommendations
of this group huve meant a real
step forward towards the recogn-
ition of the film's rightful place
in public library services... An effective library service
forms an indispensable and integral
feature of any fundamental eduction
Programme", the third study-group
stated. This group was concerned
with libraries in the aid of mass
education in the large under-
developed areas of the world and
many of its recommandations were
addressed fo Unesco, an organisation
which since its start has devoted
much of its programme to funda-
mental education.
LlBRAIRIES-AND ILLITERACY
THIS group had to consider thelibrarian's problem in a
community that is mainly
illiterate but tun the process of
learning how to read and write.
The school system in such an area
is still inadequate, no libraries
exist. The educational experiment
to introduce reading materials is on
a'". pre-book" basis. The librarian
has to be a pioneer clearing new
paths, often in the face of op-
position and despondency and with
very scantv material means.
The forty-page report produced
by this group, in the work of which
professionals from all the conti-
nents participated, is itself a
valuable handbook jn librarv
planning and practice in the under
developed regions.
The group chairman was the li-
brarian of the Musée de 1'Homme in
Paris,. Mile Yvonne Oddon, whose
experience in the field, includes
Unesco's fundamental education
pilot project in the Marbial vallev,
Haiti.
The whole Seminar benefited
from the fact that the modern
town library of Malmo had been
chosen as the site. This model li-
brary is a fine example of the pro-
gressive Swedish public library
system and many of the participants
could not but feel envious when
they saw what excellent library
facilities are at the free and easy
use of the people of Malmo and
the province of Scania..
The results of a seminar cannot
be judged only from the reports
and recommendations produced.
The real results will come when
the words are translated into action,
when the new techniques have
been put into practice, new build-
ings erected, services expanded
and improved. This will happen
when the participants are back in
their communities and after their
colleagues and public opinion have
been given the opportunity to
benefit from their widened outlook
and improved skills.
Both kinds constitute impulses to
action on the local, national and
international plane.
Director of the seminar, which
used the discussion group techni-
que, was Dr. Cyril 0. Houle, Dean,
University college, University of
Chicago, who also led the work of
the group studying the organization
and administration of library adult
education programmes.
BOOKS-ONLY THE BEGINNING
THE modern conception i ?
much broader than the one
once commonly held of public
libraries as places where indi-
viduals caÌ1 borrow books and scan
newspapers. The modern public
