HOW UNESCO CAN HELP
THE KOREAN PEOPLE
To support United Nationsaction in Korea, Unesco's Exe-
cutive Board has approved the
opening of a credit fund of $175, 000
of which $50, 000 is to finance a
programme of education directed
towards a better understanding of
the ideals of the United Nations
and the principle of collective secu-
rity. The remaining 8125. 000 is to
be used for emergency aid and the
restoration of educational facilities
in Korea.
Unesco can help the Koreans in
the following ways :
A SPECIAL MISSION
Unesco must first investigate the
nature and extent of the educa-
tional needs of the Koreans. If the
United Nations consider it ne-
cessary, a special mission of experts
will be sent to Korea. These ex-
perts, working with the Unified
Command and with the Specializ-
ed Agencies'of the United Nations
will find out the most urgent needs.
Longer-term plans, concerning the
future educational needs of Korea,
when peace has been restored, will
also be considered.
URGENT EDUCATIONAL NEEDS
Because of the widespread de-
struction in Korea, it is likely that
schools will be in need of even the
most elementary. equipment. Unes-
co's emergency aid must include
help in the reconstruction of
schools or at least in the provision
of temporary educational facilities
in areas where the need is greatest.
To equip schools, supplies of all
kinds : blackboards, exercise books,
pencils will be needed. Supplies
required for the higher grades of
education are likely to include labo-
ratory and technical equipment and
books and periodicals for the Uni-
versity of Seoul and the colleges at
Seoul, Taegu and Pusan.
MATERIAL AID
Unesco is already considering
how it can bring material help to
the people of Korea. Such help
could include clothing for school
children and students and grants
to refugee students and teachers.
The provision of food, particu-
larly milk, to Korean schoolchildren
is likely to fall within the sphere of
operations of the United Nations
International Children Emergency
Fund.
PEDAGOGIC ENTRE.
If requested by the Republic of
Korea, Unesco could set up a tem-
porary pedagogic centre. there.
It is understood that the Spe-
cialized Agencies of the United Na-
tions will work together as a team,
each being responsible for urgent
measures in its own particular field.
The Secretary-General has appoint-
ed a Director of Civilian Relief for
Korea, Brigadier Parminter, form-
erly of U. N. R. R. A., who has al-
ready taken up his duties at Lake
Success. A Chief of Mission in the
field has also been appointed and
the nucleus of a United Nations
relief organization is being created
in South Korea.
The tragic plight of hundreds of thousands of refugees who have fled to the South
of Korea calls for the immediate provision of relief services and supplies. Before the
end of August incomplete reports gave the refugee population of South Korea as over
1. 500. 000, most of them living under pitiable conditions.
w
