Trygve Lie (Norwegian), Secretary-Ge-
neral of United Nations, contributes an
analysis of the UN Charter-"The docu-
ment", he says,"that resulted from
the work of those who wrote the Charter
was not the lowest common denominator
ut the highest common denominator of
agreement attainable either then or
now.
Brock Chisholm (Canadian), WoIild
Health Organization, describes the new
kind of human society In which survival
will be based on co-operation Instead of
competition."It calls", he says,"for
people with real maturity, Two basic
qualities of a mature person are
adaptability and compromise, and'both
of these qualities are required of those
engaged in the building of peace".
Eleanor Roosevelt, the world leading
woman Internationalist says of the Decla-
ration of Human Rights :"I am even
more hopeful that If we begin to try and
live up to the Declaration we will remove
one of the great causes of war ".
Lord John Boyd Orr (English) gives
br : efly the objectives of the Food and
Agricultural Organization :"to provide
the machinery for the nations to
co-operate In putting an end to hunger
and malnutrition In the world, to raise
the standard of living of rural workers.
and to develop the resources of farms.
forests and seas-to enrich the world
with their products".
Jaime Torres Bodet (Mexican) - Direc-
tor-General of Unesco - Instances the
help Unesco denends on, when he says one
lesson Is already dear."We know that
succes will depend on the friendly co-
operation of a multitude of Institutions
and that there are no monopolies In the
field In which Unesco works. Our duty
does not lie In a lordly dispensing of
alms, but In organizing mutual help."
Other outstanding contributions des-
cribe the work and purpose of thethe work and purpose of th
Economic and Social Council, the Inter-
national Trusteeship System, the Inter-
national Children's Emergency Fund, and
the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
The introduction is written by Robert
E. Sherwood, who defines the book as
an"assertion of tremendous progress
and of faith that such progress can never
be lost".
UN, WHO. FAO, UNESCO, UNICEF- what can these tidy blocks of
letters contribute to the happiness of
ordinary men and women, who want
to spend their lives at peace with one
another, in useful, purposeful work ?
A book can only help to answer this,
for the real answer is being given by
action, humble or noble, ten or a
hundred thousand times a day. But
a book can inspire new efforts, by
recording present gains. Such a
book. is PEACE ON EARTH, a 251
page volume, published by Hermitage
House, New York.
The names of the writers form a
miniature world WHO'S WHO for
they are names of the men who lead
the international teams of workers
charged with responsibilities for
keeping the peace, helping distressed
children, and improving the health
and educational standards of the
whole world.
