The SLAVES who claimed
their RIGHTS as MEN
quakes in 1751 and 1770 and on several
occasions it has been ravaged by firs.
It has even changed its name, having
been known successively as Port-Henri
and Port-Republicain.
To-day, Port-au-Prince is celebrating
its second centenary : two hundred
years of life ; one hundred and forty
six of hard-won freedom.
But it is not the descendants of the
Indians who lived on Haiti when
Christopher Colombus discovered it on
December 6, 1492, who will take part
in these celebrations. They have long
since disappeared. In 150ô. the Span-
iards and Frenchmen who settled in
Haiti to grow sugarcane, began import-
ing large numbers of black slaves and
even at the start of the 19th century.
the wealthy land-owners of Haiti
considered the entire population as
their personal property. It is the des-
AT PORT-AU. PRINCE
IN the year 1749 a certain Mon-
sieur de la CUza drew up plans
and started building a town,
which was to be called 1'Hopital,
on the West coast of the island of
Haiti. Situated in a wide bay, pro-
tected by two long peninsulas arid
by the lie de la Gonave, this city later
became Port-au-Prince, capital of the
Republic of Haiti.
Port-au-Prince has had a troubled
history. It was destroyed by earth-
cendants of these slaves who are to-
day free men and citizens of the
Republic of Haiti.
During the last one and a half cen-
turies the people of Haiti have walked
a hard path from conditions of gene-
ral slavery to emancipation as a free
people. And their conception of
Human Rights has been more than a
legal or philosophical concept.
It was for the Rights of Man, of all
men, whatever their colour or creed

that Toussaint Louverture fought the
armies of Napoleon, and died in a
French prison, so that one day, a
nation of coloured people should live
in freedom and independence in the
Caribbean.
And it is symbolic that a century
and a half after these battles, it should
have been Monsieur de Saint Lo. Hai-
tian Minister in Paris, and head of his
country's delegation to the United
Nations General Assembly, in Paris,
who presented the report on the draft
Declaration of Human Rights, which
was adopted by the Assembly the
following day.
Unesco's exhibits on Human Rights which are being presented at the Port-au-Prince Inter-
national Exhibition, this year. stress the part played by the coloured deputies irom Saint
Domingo in the proclamation by the French National Convention, on February 5, 1794. of the
abolition of slavery in all French colonies (see above). One of the most famous of these
coloured deputies was lean-baptists Belley (1746-1804) whose portrait (reproduced ctbove)
was painted in 1797 and is now in the Versailles Museum. Another diorama at the exhibition
shows Monsieur de Saint Lo, the Haitian delegate to the United Nations Third General
Assembly, presenting the draft Declaration of Human Rights, on December 9. 1948.
It is therefore appropriate that the
theme of Human Rights should figure
in the celebration of Port-au-Prince's
second centenary this year and to this
end, Unesco is organizing an exhibition
for inclusion in the International Exhi-
bition to be held in the capital of
Haiti.
On January 2nd, crates weighing
over a ton left Unesco House in
Paris for Haiti. They contained
wooden and aluminium wall-panels,
facsimile reproductions and dioramas
illustrating the theme of Human
Rights from their origins to the pre-
sent day. The exhibition will first be
shown at Port-au-Prince and later in
other towns of the Republic.
Some of the exhibits will be of
special interest to Haitians. There is
a scale model of the"Ouragan" (Hur-
ricane), a slave-ship built at Nances
in 1830 ; it was originally a schooner
and later converted into a 150 ton brig.
Visitors to the exhibition will also
see a diorama portraying the session of
the French National Convention on
February 4th 1794.
Another diorama shows the scene in
the United Nations General Assembly
when the Haitian delegate, Monsieur de
Saint Lo, presented the draft Declara-
tion of Human Rights.
Speaking for all who have suffered
oppression and for those who still
suffer to-day, the Haitian delegate
opened a new chapter in the history of
Human Rights, a period which should
see these rights become established
facts throughout the world.
