"HUMANITY IS UNDER NO COMPULSION TO ABDICATE"
JAIME TORRES BODET,
TO THE 5TH SESSION
OF THE UNESCO GENERAL
CONFERENCE
THERE are not many places in the world where one realizes
so clearly as on the banks of the Arno that wisdom and
beauty are the twin ar hes of that invisibl  bridge which
leads from the individual conscience-ever rebellious
against its destiny-to man's collective conscience, ever in
search of general progress. This city's greatest citizen was
an exile. His DIVINE COMEDY confirms it for us : for free
men the longing for the lost fatherland is but the aspiration
to another fatherland that may always be won-humanity
itsell..
Every statue, every picture, that we stop and wonder at
here, every Florentine stone we look at, would give us the lie
were we so arrogant as to conceive our mission as a substitute
for the original creative mission of educators, artists, poets,
and scholars. Happily, we think no such thing. Our
Organization does not so mistake its role. We know that to
seek to impose uniformity on the infinitely diverse and
spontaneous life of culture would be illusory. If Unesco should
attempt to sap the originality and individuality of the different
national cultures, it would be unfaithful to its very origin, born
as our Organization was of a free covenant in which the
representatives of the Governments strove to speak on behalf
of the peoples. The reason for our existence is not to create
what none can create by order, by rules and laws. The clear
intent is rather to serve the creative minds among mankind
by putting them in more direct relation with the problems
of the masses, and at the same time to serve those masses, who,
in the longing 9f their unsatisfied needs, aspire towards
education, and through it towards freedom...
Thus, in clearly recognizing our limitations, we become the
better aware of our ambitions. There is no Unesco science,
no Unesco art, no Unesco philosophy. But there are many
dark places among men ; to light up these places requires a
joint effort on the part of all the different countries : a faith
which no individual State can furnish, a truth of which no
State is the sole repository, a wisdom and knowledge which no
one single State possesses.
OUR greatness will lie in serving. But how ? What can
fifty-sis assembled countries do to strengthen peace by
means of ducation, sc enc  and culture ? What more 
they do-some will ask than they were doing before they
joined Unesco ?
I could not accept such a sceptical attitude. Fifty-six
countries working together in the pursuit of so lofty an ideal
can together do infinitely more than each in isolation, within
its own boundaries and by its own unaided means.
First of all, countries working together in this manner can
regularly exchange information, and can agree simultaneously
to take the most effective measures to surmount or remove
obstacles to the free flow of culture.
Again, they can study and try out together the various
modern means of helping men to participate actively in the
progress of the international community. They can undertake
together to further all steps which may help educators to form
citizens conscious af their rights and yet equally conscious of
their duties towards their fellow-men of every nation, language,
race and religion.
Above all, they can infuse a spirit of justice and concord
in their domestic and foreign policies, so that there may prevail
between peoples and governments that atmosphere of mutual. confidence which is essential for peace. Such an atmosphere
is indispensable for the success of Unesco's mission also. Only
in a world free from the continual threat of war can culture,
science and education bear their finest fruits.
FEAR can corrupt the very aim and essence of education
and of research. It can distort them entirely to meet the
remand. ; of another war. It can tran form these factors
of peace into instruments of hate and destruction. It is
thus of the most fundamental importance that governments
should do everything that lies within their powers, to fight
against the obsession of war, to act as members of Unesco not
only when they speak at Une. sco, but also and still more when,
outside the Organization, they are taking decisions with regard
to all those questions which may affect our aims and ideals.
These are some of the things which fifty-six countries cannot
undertake separately but which, working together, they could
achieve.
This would be a great achievement. Yet it would not be
enough. If for instance education does not provide equality
of prospects to all men and women-the same men and women
who, on the political plane, guarantee collective security with
their lives-then collective security will rest upon bases
which are fundamentally unjust, and therefore unstable and
precarious. So that all countries may provide this equality,
there exists a sacred duty of reciprocal help, on some aspects
of which Unesco has already made a beginning.
According to our Charter, we are an Institution whose
guiding purpose it is to ensure peace by means of international
understanding, and to help to promote that international
understanding by means of education, science and culture.
These are our ultimate aims. Nothing that we undertake must
deflect us from them. None the less, if we would not
have Unesco founder in empty phrases, we must admit that
peace will not be won by us alone.
'., <..,--.-"-""h (Continued on Page 10) The Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, site of the Fifth Session of Unesco's General Conference.

"HUMANITY IS UNDER NO COMPULSION TO ABDICATE"
(Continued from Poge 1.)
Our authority is only of a moral
character. It cannot by itself produce
the political and economic decisions
which could limit armaments and halt
preparations for war. The path which
is set for us is assuredly long and
hard.
Far from discouraging us, the
difficulties of the present hour should
rather strengthen our resolve. Are
not freedom of the individual, and
respect for the dignity of man, the
very bases of the system set up by
the United Nations ? Without the
support of the common will of all the
peoples of the world, peace'... could be
no more than a truce, under constant
threat of new conflagrations.
I said : The peoples of the world,
and I want to make it clear that I
mean all the peoples of the world
without distinction of ideological
tendency or party. Yesterday you
heard from M. Laugier of the concern
of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations at the fact that, whether
from permanent abstention or what
I hope are temporary withdrawals,
not all the peoples are represented
at our meeting.
I share his concern, for an organiz-
ation dedicated to education, science
and culture cannot attain the kind
of universality essential to it merely
by increasing the number of its
member states. The universality of
the human spirit is not a matter of
arithmetic but consists essentially in
a unity with diversity of opinions,
systems and points of view. Without
that diversity UNESCO will not be
universal and unless in fact it does
séek to be universal I can see no
significance in it.
Our work, then, does not lie in the
domain where diplomats erect the
legal groundwork of peace. Our work
is less spectacular. We are dealing
with the very stuff of culture. Yet,
will culture ever be separable from
the political and social circumstances
which condition it ? For us peace
is not something taken for granted,
international understanding is not a
postulate. On the contrary, we
regard both one and the other as the
result of a series of efforts which must
be combined and harmonized, so as to
satisfy the longing for justice which
burns in man.
As every year, the fate of our
Organization is in your hands. You
have before you three main documents.
The first condenses, in the form of
specific resolutions, the programme
which the Executive Board proposes
to you for 1951. The second gives
you the budget estimates which the
Secretariat considers necessary for
carrying out the resolutions the Board
proposes. The third document, the
Basic Programme, justifies and ex-
plains the other two.
questions, added to the network of
non-governmental international orga-
nizations which collaborate with us,
place Unesco now and henceforward
in a position to undertake tasks on a
scale beyond that of the advice, the
suggestions, the token services to
which it has hitherto been confined.
A mere la"oratory 01 ftI, Odel tee,... aiqKes"
Laek 10'_tio__l resolutioll.
l'the 1951 programme gives us, in acertain measure, a pict re of
Unesco as it now is. The Basic
Programme, on the other hand, should
give us a picture of what Unesco may
become. The one limits and circum-
scribes our work. The other defines
our ambitions and, by defining them,
gives us encouragement.
I must not fail to point out to you
that these two documents are still
separated by an immense gulf. The
Secretariat will never be able to bridge
that gulf unaided. It is for Member
States and their peoples, by their
unselfish and resolute efforts, to do
sc.
I do not know what view you will
take of the programme submitted to
you by the Chairman of the Executive
Board. But I am bound to tell you
that, however concrete and consistent
it may appear to you when it leaves
your hands, it will remain a frail
thing until we frankly acknowledge
that the malaise from which Unesco
suffers is due not so much to a surfeit
of international"resolutions"as to a
lack of national resolution in each
country to put them into effect.
In my opinion it is important and
urgent to see that the programme
effectively combines the constructive
work that devolves upon Member
States with the function of liaison,
stimulation and co-ordination which
is the Secretariat's. Similarly, in
order to understand Unesco's real
situation, it would be desirable not
only to judge it by the Director-
General's Report, but to illuminate its
conclusions by an impartial study of
the reports sent in to the Organiz-
ation by Member States. In this
way the Member States and the secure-
tariat would be linked more closely
both by the programme and by the
various reports of activities.
Until these two conditions are
fulfilled, public opinion may look upon
our annual meetings as no more than
occasions for administrative exchanges
of views between the Governments
and the Secretariat. However indis-
pensable, however cogent, such ex-
changes may be for myself and my
collaborators, Unesco's mission cannot
be measured by the efforts of the
Secretariat alone. For that reason
it is of the first importance that these
general debates should also provide
the opportunity for another fruitful
encounter-the bringing face to face
before the Organization as a whole
the true instruments of our pro-
gramme, namely the States which
founded Unesco and which maintain
it. Only a confrontation of this
kind will enable every programme,
present or future, to be firmly rooted
in international fact. The concen-
tration of our work would be'of no
avail if it failed to satisfy the needs
of the peoples as they should find
expression in the Reports of Member
States. To be more practical, our
resolutions must be based upon a
study of those Reports. But for that
purpose, if you will allow me to say
so, the Reports must be at once fuller
and more precise than most of those
- and there are not very many of
them-that we have so far received.
A voicecrfling in tile wilderness"
AN examination of what each coun-try is doing for Unesco, of how it
is applying the recommendations
of the Conference, and of the response
evoked in the men for whom we work,
would provide a more solid basis to
our discussions. It would help us to
dispel the idea that our work is too
theoretical, and above all, it would
allow us more effectively to adapt
means and ends.
Doubtless many projects will be sub-
mitted to the present Session. All
those which promise to be valuable
to Unesco will assuredly be warmly
welcomed. Nevertheless, I hasten to
urge, even before I know them-for
later you might think that I was
taking exception to some specific pro-
ject-that, before presenting new
proposals, you should ask yourselves
in all sincerity :"Will the deleg-
ations who approve this or that pro-
posal be able to count upon their
governments for the full effort that
 will be needed if the proposal is not
to be rendered fruitless by niggard-
liness in its execution ?"
The effort I refer to must first of
all be financial. A programme
without a budget is a voice crying in
the wilderness. The day will come
- I hope so for the sake of my suc-
cessors-when critics will be
astonished that in May 1950 men who
believed in Unesco asked for only a
little more than eight million dollars
in order to carry out fof a year. in
fifty-six countries, a great inter-
national work of culture, science and
education.
The budget that you will be discus-
sing, however, was one that had to
accord with the resolutions proposed
by the Executive Board. It had to
take account of the spirit of the dis-
cussions of the General Conference
and, lastly, it could not disregard the
financial situation created by the fai-
lure of certain countries to pay their
contributions. If it was possible in
Paris, when considering an increase
of $220, 000 to accuse the administration
of Unesco of being"expansionist",
what, I wonder, would have been said
of an increase larger than that which
I am proposing to you ? Yet how
could I do other than strongly re-
commend this increase, believing as I
do that in the present circumstances
any curtailment of the Secretariat's
activities would delay for several
years the coming into being of that
living Unesco, of which the Secreta-
riat must in future be only the centre
of liaison ?
As I pointed out in my introduction
to the Budget Estimates, the small
increase of $150, 000 over the 1950
Budget is not quite enough to main-
tain the Secretariat's activities at
their present level. In fact it means
a reduction in the funds available for
those activities, because of the in-
crease in the unavoidable overheads of
a developing organization.
It is not only a matter of appro-
priations for the Secretariat. Many
of the National Commissions can have
only a paper existence until they too
are in possession of a budget allowing
them to undertake the surveys and
the work of information, consultation
and sometimes practical action, which
our Organization urgently requires of
them.
The time has come to redouble our
endeavours to embark resolutely upon
constructive work. The stage of
growth reached by the Organization,
the experience it has acquired in these
early years, the documentation it has
assembled and the surveys it has
carried out with regard to numerous
I MEAN tasks which, in a given fieldand for a particular area, would in-
volve a transformation of existing
conditions. Shall we for ever be
content to be a mere laboratory of
mod ? l techniques ? The peoples of
the earth do not respond to formulae,
but to achievements. And if inter-
national collaboration is to appear
ever more desirable to States, before
all it must show that it is effective.
It may be necessary to try out fresh
mthods committing Unesco's collec-
tive action to more immediate work
in connection with specific problems
of international importance. The
work of the Secretariat, as defined in
the programme, answers in the main
to a permanent need for intellectual
co-operation in the exchange of in-
formation, comparative research and
the dissemination of knowledge. As
such, and with the help of the Nation-
al Commissions and non-governmen-
tal international organizations, it
makes up a system of basic services
which an institution dedicated to the
promotion of the intellectual and
moral fellowship of man could not
rightly reduce.
But besides these permanent servi-
ces, there may be room for collective
undertakings by Member States-
along the lines worked out for tech-
nical assistance for economic deve-
lopment-for the solution of certain.
problems which may arise in a parti-
cularly acute form in one or another
part of the world and which present
an obstacle to the general progress
of mankind, if not a potential threat
to peace itself. As in the case of
technical assistance, we should have
to draw up a programme of specific
objectives to be realized in a given
number of years. Participation in
this scheme would be entirely volun-
tary and States could contribute to
it in the form of money, supplies or
services ; it would further be under-
stood that States directly benefiting
from the scheme would agree to fulfil
the conditions necessary for the suc-
cess of this international assistance.
Such schemes would benefit from
the services of the Secretariat as a
whole, and from any outside help that
might be forthcoming. All these
efforts would have to be co-ordinated
and combined for the purposes of a
concrete undertaking, and no longer
be scattered, as they so often are
to-day, over different specialized fields
of work. In this way Unesco would
give proof of unity in action, and at
the same time realize its true voca-
tion. In any case, for my part I
do not see any-other way in which
the Organization can advance from
the stage of investigation and
stimulation to the stage of practical
accomplishment, so long as its ordinary
Budget remains at the present figure
or until Member States play a very
much larger part in the carrying out
of the programme.
I have spoken of the financial effort
that devolves on Member States.
There is also the moral effort. Par-
ticipation in our work cannot consist
solely in paying a subscription into
the Secretariat's account. Without
the moral contribution of every people,
the financial contribution by their
Governments would be ineffectual.
Can we fail to see that the spiritual
conditions in which Unesco works,
have changed since 1945 ? The breath
of human fellowship that we felt
about us when we met in London has
steadily weakened. A dark cloud of
anxiety has veiled the high hopes
that inspired us when, while the
nations were joined in the last battles
for liberation, we laid the moral and
intellectual foundations of permanent
co-operation in the cause of peace.
Dave we all the tiMe we need ?
IN several respects the situation to-day is worse than at which faced
the world at the end of first'World
War. Never, in time of peace, has
travel been so necessary and physically
so easy, yet administratively so cum-
bersome and difficult. The fron-
tiers, closed with barbed wire in
the war, are still dotted with firmly-
entrenched customs posts and weari-
some controls of currency and pass-
ports. Before, it was the armaments
merchants who were suspect ; now
even scholars and poets are regarded
with mistrust. Everywhere we see
conflict, or provocation to conflict,
between ideologies which consider
themselves irreconcilable. We are
trying to remove from children's
history books a few tendentious pages,
a few prejudiced versions of events.
Yet we show no particular alarm
when we see grown-up people applaud-
ing in the newspapers and on the
screen, in books or on the stage,
everything that flatters nationalist
self-esteem, even though it must
wound the answering sensibilities of
other nations.
Because of the fields in which it
operates, and of the nature of its
methods, Unesco, in carrying out its
mission of peace, must mainly focus
upon the future. The deeper it
enters into its tasks the more time
will it take to show results ; for the
habits of thought and feeling, which
are the substance as well as the ins-
truments of its activity, call for patient
and difficult adaptation. But are we
sure that we have all the time we
need ? That is a question we cannot
escape from. And even if peace is
maintained, is it fitting that we should
not have helped in maintaining it ?
The future is child of the present.
If we stand aside to-day, we shall
forfeit the authority to win acceptance
for our ideal tomorrow.
As I said to you in Beirut when
accepting the position to which you
had elected me, it is our duty to make
of Unesco the conscience of the United
Nations, and conscience can never
stand aside from the main stream of
history. Therefore Unesco must
associate more closely in the work
of the United Nations. Admittedly,
its strictly technical sphere is different
from that of the political organization
of which it is a specialized agency.
But that should not prevent it from
taking its part to-day in the defense
of peace-remembering that never
before have education, science, culture
and mass communication been such
important factors in political action
and practice.
It is said that Leonardo da Vinci
onca uttered these despairing words :
"Hate sees more clearly than love".
Let us not be defeated by such
pessimism, against which Leonardo
himself so ardently fought. Were
not the smiles of the Gioconda and
of St. Anne painted after he had said
this ? We ask ourselves to-day what
suffering he had to endure in order
to give being to those two smiles,
which have in them such infinite
wisdom and forgiveness. No !-for
Leonardo, hate was not more clair-
voyant than goodness. Nor will it
be so for us. After all, if civilization
has continued it is because, like the
smiles of those unforgettable faces,
every culture contains the message of
a hope that has been tempered and
purified by grief.
!"I. lltiJlfllor ø lello..,."". llree _øa"
UNLESS it is accompanied by socialprogress, material progr ss carries
with it an immense danger. And
how can we imagine social progress
without a fair chance for all of an
education that liberates each one,
without the consolation of a culture
in which each one can flnd his
happiness ? Unesco's very name
indissolubly links the trinity of science,
culture and education. The realities
to which those words correspond
require towards all three of them an
equal loyalty. In a world from which
science were missing, culture would
again become subservient to magic,
and education would decline into an
automatic and tyrannical machine.
On the other hand, in a world where
progress depended solely upon science
- where education lacked the influence
of humanism, and culture was
without warmth or vitality, where
power would end by outgrowing the
capacity of the mind that controlled
it-the inventor would be merely
the victim of his inventions. Van-
quished by his own victories, conquered
by his conquests, Man, placed between
the tyranny of technical triumph and
the responsibility of freedom, would
no longer know how to choose.
Happily, humanity is under no
compulsion to abdicate in order to
continue its onward march. The
peace we aspire to would be a poor
pretense if we thought to build it
upon the repudiation of science, the
restriction of teaching, or the placing
of culture in leading strings. On the
contrary Unesco is fighting for a
fellowship of free men, a fellowship
of human beings capable of full self-
expression and genuine self-realization.
It is only with men thus worthy of
the name of mn that we shall be
able to assure a true peace.
May your debates, gentlemen, be
Inspired by the ideal of such a peace !
