THE end of the war in the Far East
provided the much needed opportu-nity to implant in Japanese child en
a truer appreciation of the indivi-
dual as a human being and to give them
a mere realistic picture of their own
country in relation to other nations.
'The first essential task was to reform
the teaching of history, for this subject
had been much distorted in the books in
use at that time. These books had been
issued in 1943 and were written from a
rnilitaristic viewpoint.
Japan's new textbcoks are no longer
illustrated with Samurais on horseback
and gods descending from the heavens.
Instead, they show works of art, popular
scenes, or scholars and scientists at
work.
In one, for instance, is the story of
Fenellosa, the foreign art critic, who,
towards the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury, fought against the destruction by
the Japanese themselves of relics of
Japan's artistic past.
The new texts stress the importance of
modern rather than ancient times. The
origin of the Japanese race is no longer
explained by legends of ancient mytho-
logy, but in the light of the scientific
findings of anthropologists and archae-
ologists.
Instead of learning the episodes of the
clan warfare of feudal times, children are
taught the history of their country's
c'vil administration, that of navigation
and of the development of popular insti-
tutions. Instead of speaking about the
aggressive policy of European nations, the
new history books explain the decline of
the Samurais, the democratic evolution
of the Meiji era, and the cultural evolu-
tion of modern Japan.
The old textbooks go no further than
the celebration of the 2, 600th anniver-
sary of the empire 0940 in the Christian
calendar) ; the new ones include the
attack upon Pearl Harbour and stress the
importance of the Emperor's radio speech
in which he announced Japan's uncondi-
tional surrender.
The history book ends with these
words :"The advent of the military
clique brought misery to Japan and
dragged the nation to Mar".
Written in a Spoken Language
IN this way, the interest of Japanesechildren is being turned from martial
matters to scientific and cultural
subjects. By studying ancient tombs and
fossils, they learn how their country
originated and developed.
Studying the history of their people
within the general pattern of world his-
tory widens the cultural horizon of these
children, so that they gradually become
aware of Japan's place in the world as
a whole.
They are beginning too to use their
powers of discrimination, to establish
parallels between the culture of ancient
Japan and that of Persia and Arabia.
They are taught to develop their indi-
viduality and critical sense by answering
sets of questions at the end of each
chapter of their history books.
Another important reform is that these
textbooks are now written in the
"spoken"language. This language,
simpler than the classical vocabulary
which includes Chinese and compound
Sine-Japanese words, js more easily
understood by children.
Historians With Fresh Vision
THE new textbooks, therefore, teach thechildren to see history in a n w light :
when speaking of the sixteenth cen-
tury, for example, they no longer refer
cnly to the subject of feudal unification ;
they also tell of the first ccntacts with
the outside world through Christianity
and cf trade with Holland and Portugal.
Finally the old chronology based upon
the reigns of the different emperors has
been abolished. Each emperor was given
a posthumous name and the dates were
established in relation to each reign.
Today, Japanese textbooks use the
Christian calendar so as to enable
parallels to be drawn with the history
of other nations.
In this way, historic and intellectual
isolation is being abolished.
Effcrts are being made to introduce for
school study the works of Japanese
scholars which would have a far greater
value than those hitherto employed. One
of the most suitable of these books is
"The Y amato Era", which was inspired
by H. G. Wells'"Outline o/World
History".
This work deals with the creation of the
world and with Japanese anthropology
and archaeology, starting with the story
cf the Ainus, a white race which origi-
nally occupied the country.
Japan's increasingly broad-minded and
socially conscious h'stcrians are daily
expanding their own vision of the world.
as they gain access t new sources for
research and study. The children of
Japan, and cf all lands, are deriving
benefit from this improved vision.
