JUST over a year ago, an eminent
Brazilian educator described the
stat  of primary education in most
Latin American countries in the
following terms :
"Over a large part of the continent,
primary schooling is not only in-
adequate, it cannot even fulfil its allot-
ed task of helping to raise the commu-
nity's standard of living This explains
the people's, indifference to it, the poor
school attendance and teachers' lack of
social prestige and their low salaries. "
The educator, Professor Lourenco
Filho, of Brazil, was making the closing
speech at the inlet-American Seminar
on Literacy Campaigns and Adult Edu-
cation, whose work he had directed,
near Rio de Janeiro. In it he summed

up the. findings of a seminar group
which dealt with problem of primary
education and which reported :"its
quantitative and qualitative deficiencies
are one of the principal causes of illite-
racy on the continent."
Last month, solutions to sone of the
tremendous difficultie facing primary
schools in t. he Am ericas, where
J 9, 000, 000 children of school age are
deprived of schools, were again being
suugtlt hy a group of educators, this
Time, at a Seminar entirely devoted to
primary education.
The Seminar, whicll was formally
opened in Monlevideo on October 2nd.
sponsored by ttie Covernment of Uru-
guay. the Organization of American
States and Unesco. was in reality a
continuation of work done by the 1949
Seminar in Rio.
Three Vital Questions
A LTHOL'GIl most discussions concern-ed Latin American problems, ex-
perts had come from other parts
of tile world to discuss those common
to their own areas and to contribute
their knowledge and experience to the
work of the various study groups.
Unesco contributed extensive inform-
ation on primary education in non-Ame-
rican countries and sent t. o the Seminar
four dislingnisllcd specialisls.- Mr. Ro-
her. Dottrens. Director of the Geneva
Institut universitaire des Sciences de
L'Education, Professor P. Rosselo, As-
sistant Director of the international Bu-
reau of Education. My. GiovanniVozzcr,
Secretary of the Halian Commission for for
Education'nail Reconstruction, and Mr. Fa-
ker Akel, Inspector of Schools and Pro-
fessor of Education.
Tile seminar study groups had before
Ihem live main themes for discussion :
the organization of elementary school
systems ; plans, curricula and methods :
universa), free and compulsory educa-
tion ; the education of teachers, and
textbooks and schools materials.
Some of the vital questions for which
these educators were seeking the most
effective answer were cited by Unes-
co's Director-General. M. Jaimc Torres
Bodel. in a message to the Seminar.
I. Torres Bodet said :"... The following
three problems of primary education
deserve, I feel, special consideration by
Latin American educationalists : How
may the liberacy campaign be speeded
up without relaxing effort to introduce
the necessary reforms in primary school
curricula? How should curricula be
varied to suit regional conditions, and to suit
more nationally adapted to the needs
of rural communities? How is the prin-
ciple of compulsory education to be
made a reality? ?
"In short, illiteracy must be resolute-
ly stamped out, and living standards
gradually raised, throuth a programme
in which eaually effective provision is
made for primary education and for
literacy campaigns..."
