"A CHtLDS EDUCATION BEMNS
TWENTY YEARS BEFORE HE IS BORN"
By proclaiming that"everyone has theright to education", and qualifying
It with the words,"without distinc-
tion of sex", the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights draws attention to one of
thefunaamentat probtems of our age :
equality of educational opportunities for
women.
The problem Is one of redressing an
injustice, an age-old injustice whioh,
though less flagrant than in the past. still
oonstltutes a glaring denial of the rights of
the majority of women In the world.
Unesco. which Is working jointly with
the United Nations to make the theoretical
equality of women's right to education a
praotical fact, last month called a meeting
of an alp-woman committee of experts to
examine the obstacles which prevent the
realization of this right and to suggest how
they can be overcome.
The following artlole which outlines
some aspects of the problem as It exists
to-day and suggests how Unesco might
attaok them, Is based on reports prepared
by Mite. Jeanne Chaton, a Unesco Consult-
ant on Women's Education and Secretary
General of the Women's Expert Committee.
A L'rHOl'GH the right of women to
education is proclaimed in the
Cniversal Declaration of Human
Rights, and although it was conflnued
bY most of the countries which rep'ied
hi the questionnaire sent out by the
COI/lI/li. ç"Îon on tile status of l\'omen
(UX Economic and Social Council), the
position in many countries is still unsat-
isfactory.
Even in the count des where the most
favorable conditions existed, only an
insignificant percentage of women had
completed the various stages of educa-
tion and won distinction for their
scientific research. The famous names,
so often quoted, are exceptions that
divert attention from abasic inequality.
Five ta8k8 tor Unesco
t-x those countries where local condi-
. lions our social and religious traditions
- *-have stowed down the evolution 01
women, there is marked evidence 01 a
lack of education among women and an
absence of their influence. In otter
cases, where education has sudrIfmly
been made available to women, as in
Turkey for example, the result has
been an outstanding cultural progress
for the whole population.
In its programme for 1949, Unesco.
while making every efforts to make
known the Universal Declaration of
Human Rigttts. has 1'een carrying out. in
Inquiry into the educational opportuni-
ties open to women. Could anything
be more logical ? By the very nature
of the mission entrusted to it at its
foundation. Cnesco, as the cultural
agency of the United Nations, was
"

Mile Jeanne Chaton, secretary-general of the Comiltee of Experts on Obstacles to the Equality
of Educational Opportunities for Women, addressing delegates to the meeting in Unesco
House. From left to right : Mme Shafik (Arab Musulman League and Egyptian Feminist Union) :
Miss W.-G. Gowan. C. B. E. (International Council of Women) : Mrs. Lakshmi N. Menon,
Secretary oaf the UN Commission on the Status oi Women ; MUe Chaton ; Dr. P. Volkov
(New Education Fellowship) : Dr. Eder (International Council of Women).
hound to consider how it could help to
bring about the realization of educa-
tional equality for the sexes.
WHAT means should Unesco use to
acllieve this purpose ? It should
maintain a close collaboration
with the CN Commission on the Stalus
or Women, especially when the Com-
mission's work and recommendations
bear on educational problems. It must
also follow closely the policy of Mem-
ber States with regard 10 general
education, schools and universities.
It should see that special attention its
given to the problem of equal
opportunities in the consideration of
educational facilities for women, and
should diagnose the reasons for pa1t
and present discrimination, in order to
find elective and practical remedies.
Finally, it should, by employtng every
possible information medium, try to
win public support throughout the
world for equal educational opport-
unities for both sexes.
Among other matters to be considered
are the total lack of proportion between
the numbers of educated men anu
women in certain areas of Africa or in
countries bordering on the Indian
Ocean and the seeking out of the
various religious or economic causes
which vary from country to country.
This will be a task for èthnographlcàl
and sociological experts co-operating
with specialists on fundamental educa-
tion.
At present, It appears that there are
very few cases where there is a higher
proportion of educated women than
men, two examples being Basutoland
and Bechuanaland.
\\') ule Unesco's Department of Edu-
cation will naturally be required to play
a leading part in this task, it will also
be up to the Department of Mass
Communication to use everv means to
spread the idea of the right to educa-
tion, wherever it is still disputed or
ignored, bearing in mind differing local
conditions.
Dlø. gøosiøg cøuses
01 discrimiøøtwø
TilE Division of Exchange of Personsmust also see that women benefit
from the increasing number of
international exchanges brought about
by its work ; it must also encourage
private and governmental assistance for
the cultural emancipation of women.
The work of the Social Sciences
Department must include consideration
of the underlying reasons for educational
discrimination still existing between the
sexes : the conflicting interests of men
and women and the conflicts between
family and professional obligations
Inherent in women's special role in
society.
Independently of the United Nations,
Unesco should assemble information on
the subject, keeping it constantly up-to-
date, and should'make known Its
recommendations through the National
Commissions and international non-
governmental organizations.
