A HUNDRED GROUPS
WITH
A COMMON AIM
This is the fourth in a series of special articles describing
the work of some of the 100 international non-governmen-
tal organizations whose co-operation with Unesco helps
the accomplishment of its programme.
LONG before modern psychologists
had stressed the importance of
pre-school education,"The
child is father to the man"Was an
old saying which renected the
importance of childhood experience.
The great seventeenth-century phi-
losopher Spinoza said that if he were
given a child to educate for its first
seven years, any education or lack
of it which followed would make
little difference.
In this formative period, children's
capacities for mutual understanding
grow by degrees-the first difficult
adjustments to the rights of others.
If directed toward the wrong ends,
as it was among the Nazis, it leads
to a corrupt view of mankind ; if
handled properly, it develops into
the tolerance and understanding
which the world requires of its
mature citizens to-day. ?
Many aspects of the fundamental
needs of young children including
education, health, school buildings
and children's gardens, were consid'-
ered at a conference called by the
World Organization for Early Child-
hood Education last month in
Vienna. This conference, held with
Unesco's aid, enabled psychologists,
pedagogues and anthropologists to
discuss children's needs and the
requirements of society. Delegates
from pre-schools in Mexico, Great
Britain, and Israel described what
each ; of their various systems
considers a well-spent day for a
small child.
The World Organization for Early
Childhood education is one of the
non-governmental groups ! working
under consultative arrangements
with Unesco, and its efforts are
extremely valuable since it is the
only international organization acting
in this field, with national commis-
sions in eleven countries.
The recognition of children's rights
is an essential foundation of any
civilized society. One of the orga-
nizations working to defend chil-
dren's rights and to help children in
distress is the International Union
for Child Welfare, which has already
helped over 4000 children, many of
them war victims. Recent conferen-
ces have been held by this group on
"Juvenile delinquency provoked by
war"and"Methods of protection of
children", and Unesco has contri-
buted to aid another conference of
experts on social aspects of the
educational problems of child war-
victims.
International
understanding
- the personal approach
THE picture which young peopleget of a 1'foreign country from
history and geography texts
becomes much more real once they
have been in direct contact with the
youth of these countries. To make
such contacts possible, the Inter-
national Federation for School Cor-
respondence and Exchange works
with other groups in twenty-five
countries, encouraging correspond-
ence among students which brings
opportunities for international under-
standing to a personal level. Work-
ing under consultative arrangements
with Unesco the Federation publishes
bulletins in which Unesco's activities,
especially the part its education
programme plays in better inter-
national understanding, are des-
cribed.
A typical international problem,
among the world's universities today
is the linequality of academic de-
grees. A student who graduates
from a universityjtn one country and
continues his studies in that-of
another may find that he receives
little or no academic credit for the
work he has already completed.
The International Association of
University Professors and Lecturers
contracted with Unesco to study this
problem. This group works to

In the formative period up to seven years of age, children's capacities for mutual under-
standing grow by degrees-the first difficult adjustments to the rights of others. Properly
handled this develops into the tolerance and understanding which the world requires 01 it*
mature citizens. Many international non-governmental organizations are today working with
Unesco to improve the techniques and to apply pre-school education towards this wend.
facilitate the exchange of professors
and students and to help students
from countries, whose educational
facilities are underdeveloped, to
study in other countries.
Students'problems are the concern
of the International Student Service,
which, with two other associations
has formed Ia European fund for
students in need. During and after
the war it distributed more than five
million dollars to universities and
students in Europe and Asia.
One special way in which the
Student Service helped Unesco was
by providing information which was
invaluable in setting up the Inter-
national Bureau of Universities.
This Bureau, created under Unesco
auspices at the conference at Utrecht
two years ago, assembles complete
documentation from universities, so
that professors and students the
world over can obtain information on
educational opportunities, scholar-
ships and conditions of admission in
other countries.
The right to education
- without distinction 01
sex
THE history of education shows usonly too clearly how women's
educational opportunities have
been much slighter than those of
men. Even today this situation still
exists in some countries. Unesco has
been greatly aided by, women's
organizations from many countries
in its effort to end this discrimination.
In a study of the situation at a
conference in Paris last winter,
reports showed that obstacles to the
educational equality of women were
sometimes legal or social, or based
simply on prejudice.
In a number of countries, the law
forbids the entry of women into
certain professions, and thus few or
none study in fields for which they
have great aptitude. Even in some
countries where women theoretically
hold equal rights, there are ten times
as many schools for boys as there
are for girls-a result of the ancient
custom of confining women jin
harems. In one country girls
are not permitted to attend secondary
schools ; in another, girls must go to
work at an early age ; in a third
women are legally allowed to
practice law but fear to do so
because of prejudice.
The International Federation of
University Women, with 130, 000
members in thirty-three countries,
has helped many university-educated
women who could not get the work
they : reserved because pf race,
religious or political beliefs. This is
one of the organizations represented
at the Paris conference, which passed
a number of resolutions aimed at
breaking down the barriers of
prejudice against women. Another
Conference resolution requested
Unesco to promote short-time resid-
ential courses for women, both on
their domestic problems and their
duties as citizens.
All of the women's organizations
which work under consultative
arrangements with Unesco have done
a great deal in making known to the
world the Universal Declaration of
the Rights of Man, as well as their
own campaigns for equality for
women in every field.
