THE selling up of Popular Science
Institutes where the " man in the
streel " could see how science can
and does change his way of life is one
of the suggestions made in the latest
report published by the Division for l'"hli"llI'tI hy Ihe/) h'ision fll"
Science and its Popularization, of
Unescos Natural Sciences Department.
The Report, "The Theory and
Practice of Popular Science " has been
written by Dr David S. Evans, a young
scientist of Welsh brith, now working
awl at the Radcliffe Observatory, Pretoria,
Union of South Africa.
Surveying the field of popularization
of science and assessing the problem as
a whole in relation to modern times,
Dr. Evans, who was formerly advisory
editor of the British science magazine
"Discovery ", emphasises the urgency
of making science understandable to
the layman. He discusses the strategy
and tactics of popularizing science in
the press, magazines and books, through
the spoken work and in scientific films.
Popular Science
Institutes I."rged
HE believes that "the newspapers andthe scientists need to co-operate
ever more closely so that the for-
mer can acquire a better appreciation
of the handling and presentation of
scientific subjects, and the latter should
so organize themselves, that this need
is met".
He advocates the selling-up of Insti-
tutes of Popular Science, which he sug-
gests could probably be made a finan-
cial success. Each of these should
include film projection rooms, a plane-
tarium, laboratories and a small te-
) escopc, demonstrations, lectures and a
library and museum. "The new em-
phasis", he says, "should, if possible,
be on direct manual experience rather
than on visual instruction. Il is clearly
a large programme, but its political
implications alone, in a country based
on technical advances, would make the
project worth while ".
He advocates also the introduction
into universities, where important
fundamental scientific advances are
made, of Public Relations Officers who
can ct as skilled interpreters of new
developments. These P. R. O. s would
help to "smooth out the irrigating
misconceptions of new advances which
are the bane of the scientists responsi-
ble for for them ".
Copies of this Report, and a list of
other Reports, may be obtained on
application to Unesco.

NATURE AND TECHNOLOGY.-Here is a striking model 01 the human ear. displayed
at an exhibition in Switzerland. The caption reads :"In Nature, the human voice is
received by the ear and reproduced by the mouth. In Technology, the human voice
is received and reproduced by a dietatiag and recording machine". The latter is an
example of modern precision engineering. The exhibit indicates the type of visual
approach that could be made in an Institute for the Popularization of Science.
