TO GIVE NEW LIFE
TO GEOGRAPHY LESSONS A WEST AFRICAN
VILLAGE COMES TO PARIS
TilE best way to learn a country's geography is to live there, but
not every schoolboy can afford to take a trip of thousands of
miles to supplement his textbooks.
The next best approach, a group of French teachers decided last
year, was to bring the country to the pupil. That was the motiw
behind a three-month expedition to French West Africa sponsored
last summer by the French Teaching League (Ligue Française de
1'Enseignement), and led by Pierre Fourre,-a teacher in a Paris Lycée,
The expedition bore results several weeks ago when the Leagin
opened an exhibit depicting life in a native village of French West
Africa. More than two thousand
school-children visited this corner
of Africa transplanted to a displa
room on the Left Bank of the Seine
in Paris.
For these children, and thousand
more in other French cities which
the exhibit will visit, this is a novel
and effective way of learning geo-
graphy. Even from the photo-
graphs brought back by the expedi-
tion-a few of which are shown
on this page-they can obtain a
comprehensive pictorial impression
of the way of life, customs and acti-
vities of the people. However, the
most effective lessons are learned
with peanuts. The following morn-
: ag, the seer loooks at the tracks
ipft by animals who ate the nuts
during'the night, and thus tells the
future.
From Dakar
To Timbuctu
ALL this material and data wascollected by the expedition,
partially financed by the
French Ministry of Education, on a
trip from Dakar to Timbuctu, the
door to the Sahara Desert. Its
members, who included photogra-
phers, film cameramen, a geography
specialist and a naturalist, first
travelled by train and then trans-
ferred to a truck. They made part
of their trip in a native canoe
constructed of two hollowed-out
logs lashed together. While aboard
their canoe, they were caught by
one of the 31 tornadoes they expe-
rienced during the rainy season and
forgot about education for a night
while they bailed to keep afloat.
The results of this new approach
to geography teaching so far have
been promising, and the Teaching
League now plans to send the same
group on another expedition this
summer. Their destination will
probably he French Equatorial
Africa, since this will enable them
to report on life in a forest civiliza-
tion instead of a river society, such
; as they visiled last year.
JUST LIKE THE REAL THING. French
schoolchildren, visiting the Paris exhibit on
life in French West Africa (above) examine
an exact model of Nere-Koro, a village on
the Niger River. Dr Francis Corde, medical
man of the expedition which brought back
the exhibit materials, explains that in
villages like Nere-Koro r Mopti (photo on
lett) homes are made of"banco"-heaten
earth mixed with straw. The fcunily livers
in one room, the second generally housing
sevsral sheep. In the courtyard there is
usually a loom. One end of the cloth being
woven is attachsd to a stun'). just outside
the courtyard entrance shoW"> in the photo.
through the three-dimensional
exhibits.
"Air View"of Nere-Koro
REACHING the exhibition, the sonof a Paris grocer or of a Bou-
logne factory worker might
well imagine himself arriving by
air in French West Africa. There
below him is the River Niger and,
on one of its banks, the village
of Nere-Koro. The village (a redu-
ced scale model in plaster) shows
him exactly how a native commu-
nitv lives on the banks of a river
we'rich supplies the livelihood for
nearly all of the village's working"
population.
The village itself is dominated by
a mosque and dotted by small rir
ental'silos where tile population
stores its precious millet harvest,
cultivated during the short rainy
season. Its dwellings consist at
thirty tiny huts, with minalure
rafters jutting out of their sides [0
support their earthen roofs. In thecentre ties the communa) pond
where the population of Nere-Koro
ohtains its drinking water.
From this bird's eye view of Nere-
Kcio, young visilors puss next to a
corner of the village itself. This
is a full-sized replica of the en-
trance to a native home, reconstruc-
ted in plaster. There are no miitet.
fields and the River Niger is mis-
sing, but the next best things to
liven up a geography lesson are
there.
As he picks up one of the agricul.
tural tools at the hut's entrance, a
boy begins to appreciate the amount
of hard work that goes into the
cultivation of a mil1et crop when
only primitive implements are
available. Visitors are particularly
impressed by the"daba"-a wood-
yen-handled instrument of hammer-
pd iron-which serves fits users for
everything from a pick to a plough.
And, as a girl examines the weaving
loom used by native women to make
cloth for blankets and cloths, she
marvels at the skill and patience
that goes into the Hnished product.
Another interesting sidelight on
the life of another peopie is the
exhibit's section on tribes still prac-
ticing fetishism, where photograph-
ittustrate the tribat method of for-
tune telling. This consists out
tracing symbols and placing twigs
in the sand, then sowing the sand
As in most native communities,
weaving has an important place
among village handcrcút industries
01 French West African. Using pri.
mitive looms, natives weave the
. cloth in bands, nine inches wide.
Sewn together, side by side these
are made into blankets or clothes,
FOOD FROM THE SEA. At Yon.
near Dakar, French West Africa,
the native fishing boats have just
returned from a trip. Fishermens'
wives carry their wicker baskets of
fish fro the boats and empty the
catch on the beach, which conve-
niently serves as fish market.
