SCIENCE AND THE CINEMA
- EACH HELPS THE OTHER
BEFORE the advent of lhe
brothers Lumière and of Tho-
mas Edison ; before, indeed,
the invention of the cinematograph,
scientists had already devised several
ingenious instruments able to register
and analyse movements which escape
the naked eye.
In 1874, Pierre Janssen, the astro-
nomer, was able to photograph the
successive phases of Venus. In about
1880, Marey invented a.'photo-gun"in
which the trigger moved plates into
position rapidly enough to make it
possible to photograph a bird in flight,
whilst Eadweard l\1uybridge was able
to record the movements of a galloping
horse by means of a series of photo-
graphs taken in quick succession.
Indeed, the cinema was invented pri-
marily for scientific purposes rather
than for those of art and enter-
tainment.
As a scientific instrument, the ine-
ma has two aspects which are comple-
ll1entarv to each other. On the one
hand, scientific research brought tech-
Two years ago, Gaston Diehl, a young
French art critic, working with Robert
Hessens and Alain Resnais, made a film
about Van Gogh, using such works as the
self-portrait of Van Gogh (above, left) to
interpret the artist's message.
Art films bring out the wealth of detail in works 01 art as. for example. in the above
close-up 01 the eyes in another Van Gogh self-portrait. The supersensitive ye of the
camera pinpoints attention on a limited area and brings out every perfection-or flaw.
by Francis BOLEN
nical improvements both to the camera
and the film, whilst, on the other,
films became a valuable means of
research into the different branches
of pure and applied science.
Curiosity of man
in the street
IN October 1947, an InternationalScientific Film Association (ISFA)
was set up through the joint ef-
forts of the Institut de Cinematogra-
phie Scientifique, created in Paris in
1930 by Jean Painleve, and the
Scientific Film Association of Scientific
Workers.
The third annual Congress of the
I. S. F. A. was held last year in Brussels
on the invitation of the Belgian Insti-
tute of Scientific Film Production.
Delegates and observers from more
than 20 countries and from Unesco
attended this meeting and also parti-
cipated in a Festival of Scientific Films
which was held in Brussels during
the same period.
Entries at'the Festival came from
Australia, Belgium, China, Czechoslo-
vakia, France, Germany, Holland,
India, Italy, Poland, the Soviet Union,
South Africa, the United States and
Uruguay.
On the opening day of the Festival,
the great ship-like hall of the Brussels
Palace of Fine Arts was filled to capa-
city. The opening ceremony was
attended by Queen Elizabeth of Bel-
gium and many prominent personali-
ties of the scientific and film worlds,
but the bulk of the audience number-
ing some 2, 000 was made up of ordi-
narv men and wpmen who had come
to the Festival out of interest and
sometimes out of sheer curiosity.
limitless fields"
or knowledge
IN less than a week, more than 150"shõrts"were shown which can be
broadly elassified as follows :
popular scientific films, films on scien-
tific research, educational films, films
dealing with medicine and surgery and
those depicting industrial processes.
The complexity of subjects already
dealt with and the limitless fields of
knowledge which remain to be explor-
ed by the camera are almost over-
whelming.
But the task is not only one of
producing scientific films : it is essen-
tia that these should have the largest
possible circulation. It should, there-
fore, be borne in mind that there are
many international barriers to be
overcome before their circulation can
become truly international-
It will be remembered that at its
third General Conference at Beirut
Unesco adopted an international agree-
ment relating to the circulation and
the spreading of educational, scienti-
fic and cultural aids bý audio-visual
means. The agreement has now been
submitted to the member states for
acceptance. It will come into effect as
soon as ten countries have accepted it.
In the meantime, I. S. F. A. at its third
annual congress, has drawn up the
draft of a bilateral agreement relating
to the exchange of films produced by
government departments. The char-
acter and scope of this scheme are
limited but it is a first step and one
which may well lead to a more general
type of agreement.
Co-operation for which
the world is richer
) 1" order that films may circulate, itis n cessary to cre te a demand.
This is one of the reasons why the
Brussels Congress decided to adopt an
international card-index system. In
future, all scientific films will be listed
and analysed in their countries of ori-
gin for reference, information and
eventual use in other countries. Not
only will this system promote the
exchange of films but it will prevent
work from being done twice.
The Third Annual Congress of the
I. S. F. A. has established three perma-
nent committees. These bodies will
concern themselves with films in the
respective fields of industrial techni-
ques, medicine and surgery and pure
science.
Among the schemes which are being
actively promoted are the production
of scientific films on an international
basis, the creation of an international
film library, and the publication of a
magazine and of a year-book.
The activities of the he S. F. A. in the
service of the cinema and of science
are good news indeed. Each helps the
other and the world is richer for it.
A cinematic treatment of Rubens'"L'Apothéose d'Henri IV". In the film on Rubens, while outliues are drawn round sections of the painting to focus
attention on detail and composition or to suggest analogies, and even actual movements within the frame of the picture.
