ITALY REBUILDS
HER ART Mar i 0 b 0 S S I
casualties or war
were magnificent
monuments of the
past. Some of these
were lost for ever-
the Abbey of Monte
Cassino, the Santa
Trinita bridge, the
mediaeval palaces
near the Ponte
Vecchio in Florence.
But others, less
badly damaged, are
being restored with
a competence that
does great credit to
Italian ingenuity.
Restoration work
was undertaken im-
mediately after the
war under the direc-
tion of Professor
Ranuccio Bianchi-
Bandinelli, Director
General of the Divi-
sion of Fine Arts in
the Ministry of Edu-
cation.
Everything p 0 s-
sible has been done
to save as much of
the original monu-
ments or painting as
possibly. Even small
fragments are re-
turned to the place
where they originally
belonged. Columns
too badly shattered
to hold the weight
of a roof are rein-
forced with concrete,
or with other devices
of modern architec-
ture, rather than
replaced. Paintings,
blown into torn frag-
ments, are being
restored to resemble
""mnh as nossible
THE traveller in Italy to-day often finds it difficult to believe that
five years ago a devastating war wrought desolation and ruin in
its slow progress from Sicily to the Alps.
Bridges have been rebuilt ; roads cleared of wreckage ; churches
repaired ; great works of art restored ; entire villages which were levelled
by German demolition or Allied bombing have sprung up again. In a
collective effort the Italians have laboured to rebuild their country and
its art treasures.
It has been a difficult job, complicated by the fact that many of the
The competence with which partially war damaged buildings
are being restored does great credit to Italian ingenuity. At
Bolzano, for example, where the cathedral roof (above) suffered
severe damage, the architects and experts charged with its
reconstruction were faeed with the problem of building material
shortages, especially wood, when they began their work. As
the photo (right) shows, they overcame this by replacing the
ancient wooden beams with reinforced concrete.
.
No"Counterfeiting"Allowed
No attempt is made to repaint orto hide the damage or the work
of restoration. Professor Bianchi-
Bandinelli has too great a love for
antiauities to allow what he considers
counterfeiting. When a small part
of an ancient edifice has to be recon-
structed, and the new is hardly dis-
tinguishable from the original, the
date of restoration is engraved on
every new stone.
Of all Italian CitiM, Naples has done
the most, in proportion to the damage
suffered, to reorganize its great col-
lections of antiquities and art. Re-
construction has already been largely
completed on the Church of San
Martino, the Floridiana, and the
National and Pompeian Museums.
Epecially arduous has been the task
of restoring such beautiful landmarks
as the cupola of the Gerolomini, the
chapel of Sant'Anna dei Lombardi
and the crumbled columns of the
House of the Faun and the House of
Edipo Rufo in Pompei.
But by far the most difficult task
has been the repairing of the terrible
destruction wrought upon Naples'
Royal Palace, one of the most sump-
tuous in Europe. To-day the palace
is once more almost in its pre-war
condition, and the enormous salons
have again been furnished as they
were during the 122 years of foreign
occupation. The taste and mood of
the Spanish and French queens has
been recaptured and reproduced with
exquisite sensitivity.
Florence is also making good progress
in the reconstruction of its destroyed
art monuments. The blueprints for a
new bridge of Santa Trinita await
only the approval of the Ministry of
Public Works. The quarters along the
Arno demolished by the Germans be-
fore their retreat are quickly rising,
and they faithfully reproduce the ori-
ginal. The Uffizi Gallery, where many
of the Renaissance's most revered mas-
terpieces are exhibited, has been
completely repaired.
A share of the credit for this quick
revival must go to the Allied Armies,
which co-operated with the Italians
in making póssible the immediate
repair and restoration of works of art.
A great part of the preliminary work
was done through the Monuments,
Fine Arts and Archives Branch of the
During the fighC-ng in and around Florence many oj the city's finest buildings, including
the Uffizi Palace. home oj a priceless collection ot artistic treasures, were badly damaged.
Today, experts are working in the celebrated restoration1 laboratory at the Uffizi on the
delicate task 01 repairing the damage done to paintings and statues.
Allied Control Commission. This
branch, in turn, was aided by a spe-
cial committee for the protection of
works of art in war zones, oreated
under the auspices of the American
Council of Learned Societies, which
for about two ydars had prepared
lits of monuments that ran the risk
of being damaged. They were marked
with red circles on special maps dis-
tributed to Allied Airmen.
The Allied Armies were particularly
helpful to the Italians in connection
with the recovery of art treasures sto-
len by the Germans and taken out of
Italy. The Germans at first exported
only works of art"bought"from
private owners or antiquarians. But,
after the armistice between Italy and
the Allies in September 1943, they
systematically removed works belong-
ing to public collections, under the
pretence of safeguarding them.
In Italy, art restoration has been brought to
its highest level 01 skill and has become a
task 01 the most modern kind of precise
science combined with the old intuitive arti-
3unship. Work being carried out today
(above) in the UUizi Palace, Florence, is in
the hand. of men who are probably the best
scientists 01 their kind in the world.
Exodus of Art Treasures
AT the start o. she war accordingto a booklet written by the pre-
sent Minister of Education,
Guido Gonella-the art works of
Naples'National Museum and of the
Gallery (Pinacoteca) were carried,
together with other treasures of great
value belonging to churches, to three
depots far from any likely military
objective : the Abbey of Cava dei
Tirreni, the Convent of Mercogliano
and the Abbey of Monte Cassino.
In order to convert the hill of Monte
Cassino into a fortress, the Germans
later emptied that enormous store
house and moved its contents north.
The task was done by the German
Service for the Protection of Works
of Art (Kunstschutz), which never
tolerated any interference by Italians.
Before reaching the North, these
art-objects were trucked from city to
city, loaded and unloaded. Many
suffered severe damage. A part of
them was seized by paratroopers of
the Goering Division and secretly sent
to Berlin, as a tribute to their Mar-
shall. The remainder was stored at
the Palazzo Venezia, Mussolini's for-
mer residence in Rome.
Immediately after the liberation of
Rome, a check with the Neapolitan
Museums revealed the tremendous
artistic and intrinsic value of the
stolen property. The Danae of Titian
was missing, as were such master-
pieces as the Parable of the Blind
Men by Pieter Breughel, the Courtesan
Antea by Parmigianino, the Apollo
Citaredo, one of the most beautiful
statues uncovered at Pompei, together
with the rich collection of Pompeian
jewellry. Meanwhile, in Berlin, exam-
bitions and celebrations had been
organized to welcome the arrival of
Titian's Danae.
Works of Art Come Home
WHEN the mass-bombing of Ber-lin began, the stolen Italian
art treasures were sent to one
of the AIt-Aussee salt mines near
Salzburg. The order was given in
March 1945, and the transfer was
made by truck, in two stages because
of the heavy snow. The statues were
badly crated, The paintings had no
protection whatsoever. It has now
been revealed that Italian intelli-
gence officers, acting under specific
orders, secretly followed the convoy
to its destination, and subsequently
turned in a full report to their govern-
ment. This information was later
relayed to the Allied authorities.
After the occupation of Western
Austria by the American Army, the
depot was taken over by officers of
the Army's Fine Arts Service and,
later on, the works of art were trans-
ferred to Munich and housed in the
former headquarters of the Nazi
Party.
Many art treasures stolen from Flo-
rence's galleries were similarly reco-
vered. The Germans had stolen
58 crates containing statues in marble
and bronze, among them masterpieces
by Donatello and Michelangelo, plus
26 crates of Greek sculpture. They
had also carried off 291 paintings,
some of which were by Titian, Botti-
celli, Raffaello, and Murillo, together
with about 25 crates of smaller paint-
ings. These were eventually found,
reasonably intact, by Allied Forces in
north Italy and returned to their
rightful owners.
In spite of past achievements, much
remains still to be done.
Plans drawn up by the Division of
Fine Arts of Italy's Education Mi-
nistry reflect Italy's determination to
restore or repair all destructions
wrought by the war.
the originals ; whenever a part is
missing its outline is indicated by
dotted lines.