Opening night at the Divadlo Hudby. In the concert hall of Prague's Music Theatre. two
young actresses who replace the'programme notes", explain the origin of the music as
members of the National Ballet prepare to execute folk dances.
*

Sometimes the Prague
Music Theatre uses
films to illustrate the
motif behind the music
that is played. To
accompany music by
Bach slides may be
employed to illustrate
the instruments in use
during his lifetime or
films shown (above)
for an evening of jazz
music composed by
laroslav Jezek.

THE first theatre in the world tobe devoted exclusively to the
presentation of recorded music
and drama has been created in Cze-
choslovakia.
It is the Divadlo Hudby (Music
Theatre) opened last autumn as an
experiment in bridging the gap be-
tween the formality of the ordinary
concert hall or playhouse and the
informality of home listening to
radio or gramophone. It is also an
MANY contemporary musical worksand thousands of folklore docu-
ments have not yet been record-
ed. The Council will try to fill this
gap by choosing works, having them
recorded and getting the records put
on the market. Composers write, but
often lack the means to make known
their compositions. Seeking out com-
positions worthy of note, the Council
will have them copied, and, when
possible, arrange for the works to be
performed. Where musicologists are
unable to cbtain the books and docu-
ments needed for research the Council
will again give assistance. Finally, it
will try to improve travel facilities for
musicians attending international
meetings.
These are the main tasks. But there
are others as well, and they all have
the same objectives : mutual knowledge
and joint effort. At the beginning of
the last war, Romain Rolland wrote :
.. Let us save all the light that can be
saved. There is no brighter light than
music". The new International Music
Council Is uniting its efforts to save
that light.


experiment in combining various
cultural forms. Although Divadlo
Hudby means Music Theatre, many
varieties of music with drama,
dance and film have been tried.
To parallel these combinations, the
choice of material has been broadly in-
ternational. The variety of music in-
cludes Beethoven, Bach, Rimsky Korsa-
kov and the classics of many nations as
well as New Orleans and Dixieland jazz,
swing and be-bop, European folk songs
and African tribal compositions.
Programmes of Vprdi sung by Caruso
and Gigli and of Moussourgsky by Cha-
liapin have alternated with madrigal
singers and spirituals from the best re-
cordings of Marian Anderson, Kenneth
Spencer and Paul Robeson.
Drama has ranged from Shakespeare's
Hamlet as done by Olivier, Gielgud, Clu-
ner, Kacyalov and others to Chekhov
and Gorky as presented by the Moscow
Art Theatre. A regular English-lan-
guage programme has initiated a multi-
lingual project. The poems of Pablo
Neruda and Mayakowsky in English
translation were presented alollg with
music and photographic slides. Memo-
rials were held for the Czech poets Ju-
lius Fucik and Frantisek Halas.
The experiment has been so success-
ful that each of the Music Theatre's one
hundred seats has been filled since the
opening day at each of the four or five
daily performances.
Morning performances, at which pla-
ces are free, are for children and stu-
dents. Afternoon sessions are often for
the devotees of Duke Ellington, Cab
Calloway and Louis Armstrong. Every
week, the evening performances offer
at least one classical symphony, an
opera, a session of chamber music, a
concert of rare recordings, and a Mevro
- a variant of the audience particip-
ation radio programmes in the United
States.
Dr. Seda, the Programme Director, Is
working out new combinations of cul-
tural forms but in all cases, he says,
the other forms will be subordinate 10
music. This point of view is shared by
the three co-directors of Divadlo Hudbv
because its over-all purpose Is to help
people love, understand and know
music as a universal language.

Beethoven and ( {Be-Bop", are both welcome in-,-,"-
MODERN PRAGUE THEATRE
FOR REWORDED MUSIC
