A SCIENCE MUSEUM GOES ON TOUR
December appearance in Havana
next month, during a conference of
representatives of Unesco National
Commissions in the Western
Hemisphere.
Trip To The Stars
so far, the astronomy section of the
museum has proved to be one
of the biggest attractions.
There, a portable planetarium, which
can be viewed by as many as sixty
persons at a time, takes visitors on
a trip to the stars. (At the end of
its run, the planetarium folds up into
units no larger than a table.)
This astronomy section also inclu-
des photographs of such phenomena
as comets, sunspots and meteorites
as well as illustrated explanations of
the workings of the solar system and
of the giant telescopes used to study
it. Part of this section is devoted
to a telescope built by an amateur
astronomer to demonstrate that this
science can be appreciated and
enjoyed with simple equipment-the
kind that a schoolboy might cons-
truct.
The physics exhibit is the first to
greet the visitor, since it begins with
the beam of light broken on entering
the museum, setting the photo-
electric cell in operation and auto-
matically recording the visitor's
entrance. It displays operations in
mechanics, heat, sound, electricity
and electronics, optics and nuclear
physics.
Among the equipment which the
During its visit to Lima, Peru, the Unesco Travelling Science Museum was seen by up to
5. 000 people each day. One or its biggest attractions was the astronomy section (above)
whose exhibits included a portable planetarium.
THE National Library of Peru,
in the heart of Lima, created
a traffic jam early last month,
which was repeated every day for
more than two weeks. Outside the
library, the sidewalk was crowded
with adults and children. As they
filed past the entrance, they were
counted by a photo-electric cell,
clicking monotonously at a rate
which went as high as 5, 000 visitors
a day.
The attraction was a travelling
museum, intended to explain simply
the newest developments in science.
The story of crowds in front of the
National Library in Lima goes back
to Paris-to Unesco's Department
of Natural Sciences. There the idea
was first conceived of a prefabricated
museum, which could be crated, pla-
ced in a train or the hold of a ship
and then set up on short notice.
The purpose of the museum was to
take science out of the bewildering
terminology of the laboratory and
bring it to the public in Latin
America-both to adults and chil-
dren. Unesco's funds, however,
were limited, and the museum
became a reality only with the offer
of help from universities and science
organizations in the United States.
When, last August, the museum
had been stowed in Boston aboard a
ship bound for Callao, Peru, it repre-
sented the combined efforts of
Unesco, the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, the Harvard College
Observatory and the Science Clubs
of America. Its construction was
carried out under the eyes of
Mrs. Christine Buechner, an official
of the National Research Council of
the United States.
The portable museum's first stop
was Lima, where it was shown under
the auspices of the Peruvian Minis-
try of Education. After the coun-
try's senate registered a vote of
thanks to Dr. Jaimes Torres Bodet.
U n e s e o's Director-General, the
museum moved on to Quito, capital
of Ecuador. It is scheduled for a
museum displays is a triple-axis
motordriven gyroscope which visitors
are invited to attempt to push off
balance. Then there is a Van de
Graaf generator, an electrostatic
machine that builds up high voltages
by charges carried on a moving belt.
This machine, which steps up the
speed of slow-moving ions (posi-
tively-charged particles) or electrons
(negatively-charged particles) is
often used by scientists to investigate
nuclear atomic structure or to pro-
duce high-power X-rays.
As a whole, the museum is desi-
gned to be understandable to children
and yet valuable to adults who have
some background in science.
Although there are simple models to
explain each principle, the texts
accompanying the display develop
the theories and the applications of
these principles.
This travelling science museum is
much more than an educational road
show. Its main objective is to give
youth in Latin America a good look
into the wonders of modern science
in the confidence that this will
encourage some of these boys and
girls to make science their life work
and thus to become the technicians
and the engineers their countries
need so urgently.
