NEW INTERNATIONAL COUNCil
Will BRING TOGETHER>
THE WORLD'S MUSICIANS
Page II-UNESCO COURIER
"M music", wrote John Wilson, a 19th century Scottish writer,"is theuniversal language". Like all arts music should not be res-
tricted by frontiers and like the sciences it requires the co-
operation of all peoples. Yet for many years it has lacked the best
medium of assuring these two needs-an international organization
covering the whole field of musical activities.
It is true that about fifty years ago, musicians founded an inter-
national society, but this was broken up by the outbreak of the First
World War, and musicians again found themselves as isolated as before.
From that time it seemed impossible, in spite of a general desire,
to re-establish a similar organization covering the whole field of music
from composition to execution, from the history of music to modern
musical education and from the classics to the popular forms.,
It was in November 1947 that Unesco undertook to found this much
needed organization. Before it was finally set up, however, two years
of investigation, negotiation and consultation were required, for if it

CONCENTRATION ON
URGENT TASKS
THE International Music Councilhas also elected an Exec tive
Board whose chairman is M. Ro-
land Manuel, professor at the Paris
Conservatoire, and whose Secretary-
General is M. Marcel Cuvelier, founder
of the Belgian Musical Youth.
What are the aims of this new
international institution ? Firstly
its members wish to improve co-
operation between leading musical
organizations and to encourage the
foundation of new ones in fields of
music where none exist. They will
also work to promote and co-ordinate
the organization of musical congresses,
festivals, competitions and meetings
of experts.
But, above all, the Council wants
to help the dissemination of musical
works, the distribution of musical
instruments and the exchange of
musicians, individually and in groups ;
to improve the moral and material
situation of musicians generally and
to work for musical culture in all its
forms.
Such a programme is obviously a
long-term one and requires far more
resources than the Music Council at
present possesses. The greater part
of its budget is provided by Unesco,
whose own budget is very limited, and
for the rest, the Council relies on an
ever-growing number of member orga-
nizations. To manage on its present
slender resources, the Council must
therefore concentrate on the most
urgent tasks, and these are listed
among its first year's objectives.
NO BRIGHTER LIGHT
THAN MUSIC
EIGHT music students. 1cill be ableto attend the National Conser-
vatory of Music of Paris for a
yc. ar as a ]'esult of a gift of 4000
dollal's from the International Mu-
sic Fund. The Fund has been set
up by the American Section of the
Intemational Society of Contempo-
rary Music to aid composers and
composers'societies in Europe.
The sum will cover the educatio-
nal expenses, food arul lodging of
the students, four of whom come
from the French provinces and
four from other countries.
When pl'esenting the cheque to
the Conervatory last January,
Unesco's Director-General M. Torres
Bodet said :"In these difficult times,
creative w01'/iers and aI'fists in par-
ticular arc encountering many
obstacles which Unesco is ended-
vouring to determine in the II ope
of whelping to reduce fhe7n :"


is to achieve practical results, work
on an international level requires
long and careful preparation. Finally,
last month, the International Music
Council, as the organization is called,
held its first General Assembly at
Unesco House in Paris.
The membership of the Council can
be divided into three categories.
There are the associations-compos-
ers, musicologists, folklorists-
grouping musicians in different coun-
tries according to their specialities.
Then, there are experts, such as
Arthur Honegger or Andrzelj Panuf-
nik, chosen in a personal capacity,
and lastly, there are national com-
mittees.
These committees, which already
exist in the United States and
Holland, are now being organized in
many other countries. In several,
the delegates who will organize the
groups representing the entire musical
life of the country have already been
chosen.


MillIe FOND GIFT
FOR STUDENT
COMPOSERS
IN PARIS
