Thanks to
some unusual
Child
Guidance
.
BAD CH ILDREN
IN LONDON
F) ND ! T S
MORE FUN
TO BE GOOD
Every year, millions of dollars are spent on the treatment of juveniledelinquents-the young people who break t  laws of their country,
city or community, again and again. Many people are aware of such
causes of delinquency as poverty, broken homes, unstable parents, war
conditions and other social evils. Yet, few know exactly what can be
done to present the crimes committed daily by boys and girls under twenty-
one. The article below tells the story of one unusual experiment which
is going on in Great Britain to help wayward youth.
If you were walking along a quietstreet in the West End of London,
you might be startled to hear the
husky shouts of youth at play, the
splinter of glass and the thud of a
football. You might be even more sur-
prised to learn that the sounds of
rough and tumble were coming from
a one-time convent, a building with
austere stone walls and a conservative
design. But, if you took one more step
and went inside the door, you would
understand at once why those youthful
sounds were coming from the building.
It is the Institute for the Scientific
Treatment of Juvenile Delinquency.
The methods which this Institute uses
to treat wayward youth make it out-
standing in the British Isles, and per-
haps unique in the world.
Hundreds of children are selected
from the court rooms of London each
year to attend the Institute. There is
nothing frightening about their wel-
come, when they come to spend one or
two afternoons a week there. Though
they are not aware of it when they
enter, a team of experts begins work-
ing in their behalf. Health reports,
intelligence, school and home reports
are thoroughly prepared.
When these check-ups are completed,
the children come to play-in the two
basement playrooms of the Institute,
under the watchful eye of a man and
woman. These are highly trained
play teachers, who recreate, in a sense,
the symbols of a father and mother in
the family circle. They give the
children complete care and coopera-
tion, but they never tell them directly
what to do.
What goes on in these playrooms
may seem strange at first. But, when
one stops to consider that about
seventy per cent of these difficult and
unhappy children are treated success-
fully at the Institute, it seems worth-

while to examine the methods care-
fully.
From* Destruction
to Creation
first, the children, especially thosewho are aggressive, forceful, and
somewhat backward in school, are
put in what is known to the staff as
the"`Dirty Room,"Here, every child
begins by being allowed to do exactly
as he likes-except that he may not
hurt anyone else. He is encouraged to
make a mess, to produce those fami-
liar noises which often echo in the
streets. Pots of paint are placed on
the floor, just waiting to be daubed on
the walls and flung at the ceiling.
Earth, sand and water lie ready to be
made into pies and plastered anywhere.
Newspapers are there to be lighted and
allowed to name.
The children, unlike normal boys
and girls, become very aggressive in
isolation, and usually run wild in this
Dirty Room. All the pent-up violence
and tension is flung out at the walls
and ceiling. When they have worked
off the hidden anger which has dis-
turbed their behaviour and made them
unhappy, they become less tense, grow
more creative than destructive, and
feel more confident with their teach-
ers.
Then, as most patients finally do,
they move from the Dirty Room to the
Clean and Quiet Room. Here, there
are constructive games, paints and
clay, tables and chairs, cards, and
even boxing gloves for organized
fights.
« Drawing out >&gt;
Nightmares and fears
The pictures painted by the childrenare very important. When the
youngsters are encouraged, they
draw their nightmares and the things
that frighten them. And after they
have drawn and discussed them, they
gradually lose their fears. At first,
the pictures are vague, impersonal and
confused. But after more effort and a
chat with the play teacher, they begin
to draw with real design and purpose.
Later, when these children can play
games, accept rules and defeat, and
take their turn in an organized
fashion, they have made considerable
progress.
When they have reached such a
stage, they are nearly ready to be
released from treatment at the Insti-
tute. Elizabeth Draper, General SR-
cretary of the Institute, says that they
are now prepared to make a realistic
adjustment to their homes and back-
grounds. For the Institute always
treats the children while they are still
l1ving at home-so that they may
make a healthy arrangement for living
within their immediate situation.
Today, this Institute for the Scienti-
fic Treatment of Juvenile Delinquency
is more than seventeen years old. Its
clinic for the cure of young people who
have got into trouble with the law has
been taken over by the British Minis-
try of Health, while its research work
has had the support of the United
Nations Appeal for Children. Its me-
thods may seem unusual at first, but
they have had results, which may in-
fluence the treatment of what has been
called wayward youth all over the
world.
