NEARLY 2 500 YEARS AGO
CONFUCIUS AS
SEEN BY THE
EUROPEANS
This picture of Con-
fucius is taken from
"Confucius Sinarum
Philosophus".
CONFUCIUS'the most sagely ancient teacher'
PLANNED A WORLD COMMONWEALTH
The following article on Confucius has been condensed fromone ritten by Dr. Cheng Chi-Pao, of Unesco's Education
Deportment.
IN the course of history few men
t have continued down the centu-
ries to exercise a profound
influence on the thoughts and
actions of many millions of people.
One man who has done so for more
than 20 centuries is Confucius, the
great Chinese sage, the 2500 th
"Seek the truth and dfJ not
."
compromise.
anniversary of whose birth is being
celebrated this year.
Confucius, whose teaching has
dominated the intellectual, political
and social life of China for more
than 2000 years, was born in 5511
B. C. in the ancient State of Lu-
now a part of Shantung province
- and died in 4i8 B. C. Historians
differ in their calculation as to the
exact date of his birth, but oft-
cially, the Chinese Government
fixed August 27 for its comme-
moration.
There was nothing spectacular
about the career of this political
thinker, social theorist and teacher.
He did not attempt to originate a
new philosophy, much less a new
religion, but merely tried to trans-
mit to future generations the
virtues and wisdom inherited from
the past.
\\'hile much of the external in Confu-
cianism has been swept away there
still remain in the thought and action'
of China's people many of its hidden
influences. In fact, so striking is the
identification between Confucius and
his people that it is difficult to mention
any special tenet of his without at once
recognizing it as one of the character-
istics of the people.
The basis of Confucianism rests
mainly on three great books all of
which were written or edited by his
disciples. To these, The Great Learning,
The Doctrine of the Golden Mean and
the Confucian Analect, must be added
a fourth book, the work of Mancius,
who lived one hundred years after Con-
fucius and was one of the chief ex-
pounders of Confucian philosophy.
The first of these books, The Great
Yearning, which embodies psychology,
education, science and political philo-
sophy, was the work of Tsang Sin, one
of the most profound of Confucius'
disciples.
It begins with the development of
CONFUCIUS AS A CHINESE
ARTIST SAW HIM
Portrait 01 the Chinese Sage by Wu Tao-Tze.
a famous artist of the Tang Dynasty (A. D.
618-907). This portrait is typical of those
representing Confucius, as a kindhearted
old gentleman.
able to ponder with care that one will
be able to reach the goal."
The Doctrine or the Golden Mean, a
great book on the exposition of the"na-
tural way'"was written by Confucius'
grandson, Tze-sze, and can be summed
up in one phrase :"In everything, he
Golden Mean is the best."-
Confucius himself said :"that
heaven ordains is called Nature. What
conforms to Nature is called the Na-
tural Way. What regulates Nature is
called Instruction."Man's duty he held
was to discover the way of nature and
thus avoid being swayed by doctrines
and dogmas. In this way would he
accord with the natural motion of the
universe and be able to live in serenity.
"The noble man is moderate in his words
but ardent in his action"
personal mind and virtues, through the
cultivation of man's social relations
and ends with training for government
leading to the final achievement of the
idea of a world commonwealth.
Holding that the moral development
of one's own person is the root of all
achievements, The Great Learning
states :"It is only when the goal to be
attained is known that the aim is fixed...
only when the aim is fixed that a calm
and steady state of mind can be achiev-
end... only when a calm and steady state
of mind. has been achieved that the
mind can be at ease... only : when the
mind is at ease that one is able to
ponder with care... only when one is
Confucianism is not a religion. Con-
fucius believed that man's attitude
towards the Supreme Being should be
one of deep reverence, but he was not
interested in such problems as the soul
or the nature of God. Speculation
about such matters was to him a
waste of time."H'e do not know li/e,
why should bother ourselves about
leath ? We have not leamd to serve
men ; how can we serve God ?" Never-
theless, he was undoubtedly a religious
man. To establish the Kingdom of God,
he considered that the right relationship
should first be established among men.
Confucius emphasized particularly
the 'development of personal virtues.
(Confucius, the Philo-
sopher of the Chin-
ese), published in Pa-
ris (1687). Some of the
earliest translations
of the Confucian
writings were pu-
blished in this book.
He believed that the nature of man is
esentially good, but that contact with
the everyday world often brings about
its degeneration. The well-being of so-
ciety depends on the right relations of
men.
He said :"Only he who has the spirit
of goodness within him is really able
either to love or to hate.""The wise
man regards the moral worth of a man,
a a fool only his position ; a wise man
expects justice, a fool, favour."
"I shall not be grieved that other men
do not know me, but I shall be grieved
that I do not know other men."when
the right relation among men is esta-
blished, it is easy to achieve a harmo-
nious family, a peaceful state, and even-
tually a world commonwealth.
This is the picture Confucius had in
mind :"When the Great Principle (an
ideal social order) prevails, the world
is like one home common to all ; men
of virtue and merit are to bel elected fo
be rulers ; sincerity and amity pervade
all dealings between man ana man ;
people. shall love not only their own
parents ana on children but also those
in politics. Not satisfied with exiting
conditions, he held up as a pattern for
his and succeeding generations the
model of a Golden Age. Looking into
the past he idealized the ancient states.
"Devote yoursel patiently to the theory
and conscientiously to the practice or
government", he said. "Without the
confidence of the people, no governement
can stand very long. Government is
good when it makes happy those who
live under it and attracts those who
live far way
Confucius was a great teacher--a
educator in the modern sense of the
word. He gave us principles of educa-
tion which are as sound today as they
were in his time. Students, he main-
tained, should be both diffusers of
knowledge and discoverers of new
truth."Learning without thinking is
useless and thinking without learning is
dangerous", he said."Know what you
know and know that you do'not know
what you do not know for that is the
characteristiG of one who knows" De-
manding earnestness and sincerity. from
his pupils, he said,"I explain nothing to
him who is not earnest, nor heap anyone
"What you do not wish to be done to yourself,
do not do to others."
o others ; the aged, the young, the
helpless widows and widawers, the or-
phans, the destitute, the incapacitated
and the sick shall be well provided ana
looked a/ter, while the well bodied shall
exert themselves in their aid.... thus
not anxious to express himself. when 1
have demonstrated one angle and he
cannot bring me the other three, 1 do
not repeat my lesson."
Confucian philosophy is essentially
the study of how men can best be help-
ed to live together in harmony. Confu-
cius sought to"create a completely ho-
mogeneous community by the unifica-
tion of men's minds, a community in
which there would be general and
spontaneous agreement as regards the
objects considered worthy of desire and
in which the careless, the selfish and
the anti-social would be subdued by the
transforming influences of example and
exhortation". This is what the world
needs today and about which it can
learn much from Confucius.
Voltaire told of a philosopher friend
who kept in his study a single por-
trait-that of Confucius under which
was inscribed the following lines :
.. Without Assumption he explored the
mind."
Unveiled the light of reason to mankind
spoke as a Sage and never as a Seer,
Yet, strange, to say, his Country held
[him dear."
The Temple of Confucius at his birthplace,
K'iuh fow, in Shantung Province. Confucius
is buried outside the city and before his
tomb, a large and lofty mound, is a marble
stable bearing the inscription of the title
given him under the Sung dynasty :"The
most sagely ancient Teacher ; the all-accom-
plished, all-informed King."
there will be no cause for, conspiracy,
robber, the/t, or rebellion, and no need
to bolt one's outside door. This is a
true commonwealth."
But it is on the practical side of life
that Confucius has made the real con-
tribution not only to China. but also to
the entire world, both in the past and
for the future.
Living in a time of great political
confusion, he was primarily interested