For many generations, and on every continent, the yellow sand and the grey dust
of desert areas spread like an ugly flood across the green grass upon which human
life fundamentally subsists. Here and there, and now and then, the desert's
advance was stopped, and sometimes pushed back, but, today, the arid and semi-
arid zones of the earth cover about one-third of the land surface of the globe.
Today, too, there are more men, women and children than have ever existed before.
Now, more than ever, it is true that man cannot live on only two-thirds of the word.
He needs it all. He does not accept and he need not accept the thought that his
greater numbers mean greater misery. Man demands and has the means to get a
better life.
For these reasons, the story of"The Desert Against Man"is being rewritten. Now
it must be"Man Against the Desert". Most of the desert areas of the world were
once fertile. Why do they no longer support life ? What is needed, in the way of
water, fertilizers, farming methods, to reclaim them for human use 1
Ritchie Calder, Science Editor of the British News Chronic ! e, working in collabo-
ration with the Natural Sciences Department of UNESCO, has gone to the classic desert
of all deserts, the Sahara, and is going on to other arid regions in the Middle East, for
answers to these and other questions.
Mr. Calder is not only undertaking a great and vital task of exploration, but a big
and unique reportorial and educational job. It is not enough for a few experts to know
What can be done to make the deserts useful, for the men and women of many countries
must also know-so that they will agree to support and help carry out the necessary
measures. It is not enough for the older generation to know-for they cannot com-
plete the task, and the"older generations"have had a mixed record anyway in the
wise use of the land. The children must also know, for the biggest part of the job is
for them.
Accordingly, Mr. Calder is writing a series of articles for his paper, which will be
distributed to newspapers throughout the world by UNESCO.'"collaboration with
the News Chronicle, the British illustrated weekly Picture Post is preparing text
books and film strips for schools. Other publications in several countries will deal
with various aspects of the trip. Results of Mr. Calder's studies will be widely used
in schooi courses in England dealing with history, scripture, economics, geography
and current affairs.
On these pages, the UNESCO Courier reprints the first three stories by Mr. Calder
in his series,"Men Against the Desert".
opposite side of the canyon, is the Saharan fortress of Beni Abbes, on a ridge
against mountainous sand dunes.
"Look !" cried Cvijanovich (hereinafter called"George") pointing to what might have
been an infant fortress on an adjoining ridge,"that is the laboratory of the Centre
of Saharan Research".
This was what he had been promising me all the way-from the Paris café on the
Champs-EIysees, through the snows on the Atlas Mountains, through the hailstorm
on the High Plateau and across the cold (yes, very cold) desolation of the Sahara
which separates Beni Abbes from Colomb Bechar, the capital of Algerian Sahara.
George is a scientist infatuated with the desert, and this was his homecoming. And
in that first glimpse of white battlements tinted with the hues of a desert sunset J
understood.
Before leaving Paris
for North African. Rit-
chie Calder had an in-
terview with M. Jaime
Torres Bodet, Director-
General of Unesco
who told him :"Your
article*, by awaken-
ing public imagina-
tion to the challengo
and possibility of the
desert, will render a
valuable international
service."This photo
shows Ritchie Calder
(right) discussing this
Unesco project with
M. Torres Bodet. (cen-
tre) and Raymond Kle-
boe, the Picture Post
photographer, accomp-
anying Ritchie Calder.
It was worth the tribulations of that
journey of a thousand miles (or in
nomad measurements 40 camel-days)
from Algiers. It was worth the bone-
jarring jolting over that trail which some
humorist has signposted as"The Boule-
vard of the Foreign Legion"-a road
across black misery of sun-enamelled
rocks, through ravines where men died in
ambush, across sand crusted like a merin-
gue, with a thin layer of sun-fused glass.
This was a trail first beaten out by the
pads of camels, then by the weary boots
of marching men, and now by the enorm-
ous wheels of the trans-Saharan trucks
and of military cars like the one in which
we travelled.
ILLUSION ENDS
And then to drop into the precipitousvalley of Oued Souara, with its fortres
and its"Scorpion Oases", at the sun-
set when the muezzin was calling the
Faithful to prayer-"Allah ila la Allah"
- and when a camel caravan out of the
Great Western Sand Desert was settling
down for the night, with brushwood fires,
in the square of the cases-that was
our recompense.
The young commander of Beni Abbes,
Capt. Clarisse, and his beautiful wife
were waiting for us at the gate of the
fortress which once housed a regiment
of men. The Goum sentries passed us
through. And there the illusion of mili-
tary might ended.
The citadel of Beni Abbes houses barely
a platoon. In these days, when the slave-
raiders from the mountains of Morocco no
longer harry the desert oases, Beni Abbes
is the civil affairs administration of an
area as big as Yugo-Slavia with a popu-
lation of 20, 000 living in near-starvation.
The young captain, who embodies in
his person the entire government, glows
with Gallic excitement when he talks of
his plans. Always it is water, water, wa-
ter, and the new crops and animals which
could be produced if only there was
enough water.
In this modern military task he does
not need the rifles of the Foreign Legion
or the death-or-glory exploits of the
White Squadron, the camel corps. He
needs his new"garrison", the desert scien-
tists, with their laboratory as their for-
tress.
They might be called the new"legion-naires". George, for instance, is a state-
less Yugo-Slav, with a refugee passport a
yard long and the Research Centre was
the inspiration of another refugee-
Mr Menchikoff, a Russian.
As we came through a grim defile we
passed a memorial on the spot where the
Research Centre of the Sahara might
have perished. There is a memorial to
General Clavery and his Foreign Legion
escort who were massacred in a Moroccan
"rezzou"or raid on their way from Beni
Abbes to Colomb Bechar. Menchikoff
should have been in that party.
Today he is a professor in Paris and
creator and director of the Saharan
Centre, which has its resident staff
but is also the headquarters for visiting
scientists from Algiers and Paris.
There is a biologist, Franklin Pierre,
who is assisted by his young wife, a civil
servant from Paris, who came to Beni
Abbes to be married by"Le Capitaine"
and to receive the church benediction
from a desert priest who travelled 350 mi-
les for the ceremony.
With Pierre I went off into the sea of
sand as vast as the North Sea to inspect
his instruments and dig for beetles and
insects.
This is not just entomological curiosity.
These beetles are insect-camels, which can
store water for three months. How they
find water and how they live has human
significance. ,
UNDERMINED BY TERMITES
With Philip Guinet, the botanist. 1explored the experimental nurseries
where desert plants are studied and
where the food plants from other parts of
the world, which might replace them, are :
tested.
And I saw the miracle which water can !
work in desert sand-mandarin oranges as
big as grape-fruit ; potatoes, cauliflower. ;
asparagus, etc. And I saw the ravages off !
the inevitable sparrow, which with thel
jerboah, or desert rat, is the plague of the !
desert gardener.'
r saw, too, the tearless despair of the
desert scientist. All the way from Paris,
George, the geophysicist, had hugged like
a bridal bouquet a delicate magnetometer
for the magnetic laboratory which for
eighteen months he had mined out of the
sand and rock, 60 ft. beneath the ridge.
With pride he opened the door to
enthrone the instrument which he haa
been all the way to Paris to fetch.
Tragedy ! The termite, the white ant.
had done its own mining and undone
his work.
by RITCHIE CALDER Science Editor of the London News Chronicle.
A NEW SAHARA GARRISON
- THE DESERT SCIENTIST
1 FORT BEN-'ABBES- (Last. 300 N.,
Long. 002"W.) THE "Boulevard of the Foreign Le-t gion piunges suddenly over the
Edge of Beyond. And there, on the
