A New Chapter Opens In The Life
Of Rural Ceylon
by Dr. D. Spencer Hatch
or. Spencer Hatch who is directing the work of Unesco's Minneriyai J Centre, is a veteran of thirty years in rural educati n work and
an outstanding leader in this field.
Dr. Hatch, an American, first began to work in under-developed
regions in 1922 when the International Committee of the Young Men's
Christian Association sent him to Martandam, in the Indian state of
Travancore. There he developed the concept of a rural centre to
demonstrate simple new methods of raising living standards.
Dr. Hatch returned to the United States in 1940, but left immediately
for Mexico to establish more rural centres. Later he joined the Inter-
American Institute of Agricultural Sciences to head its rural extension
work in Costa Rica.
Prior to directing the Ceylon centre, Dr. Hatch was a Unesco adviser
In rural education to the Indian Government.
CENTURIES ago, the area ofCey Ceylon k own today as the
North Central Province, was
a flourishing land, whose abundant
harvests, made possible by a large-
scale irrigation system, gave it the
name of"granary of the East".
Long years of neglect, a low
rainfall and the prevalence of
malaria, however, gradually turned
this"dry zone"into a wasteland,
forcing the bulk of Ceylon's popu-
lation into what is now called the
"wet zone".
Today, a new chapter is opening
in the life of the people of rural
Ceylon, not only for those in the
malarial jungles of the North
Central Province-acknowledged
to be the poorest of all-but for
those crowded to excess into the
"wet zone"areas.
The change is being brought about
through a large-scale government
programme of settling new regions
to ease population pressure on
overcrowded land, and the latest
contribution to this plan is the
creation of a Unesco-Governmenf of
Ceylon Rural Fundamental Education
Centre recently opened by M. Jaime
Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-
General, at Minneriya.
Village"Laboratories"
MrNNERIYA is the centre of acolonization experiment begun
by the Ceylon Government as
part of its resettlement programme,
in which special emphasis has been
laid on improved agricultural me-
thods. The opening of the funda-
mental Education demonstration
centre there means the beginning of
a new march forward-education-
al, cultural and scientific-which
will not only help the people of that
area, but will also be an example to
other parts of Ceylon as well as to
other countries with similar pro-
blems.
But the men, women and children
who will most immediately benefit
from the work of the Minneriya
Centre are those who live within a
twenty mile radius and whose vil-
lages constitute a.'laboratory"for
the Centre's extension programme.
Just how badly they need help was
shown by a report of the Lanka
Mahila Samiti, a women's rural
improvement organization, working
in the North Central Province and
other parts of Ceylon.
This report stated, in part :
"The North Central Province was
once the seat of Lanka's Kings and
the granary of the East. Then
ensued long centuries of neglect.
Today, her average villages present
a sad picture... Centuries of ma-
laria-ridden life have made the
North Central Province peasant
apathetic to outside interests. A
resigned inertia is the result. It is
not to be wondered at, for it is the
logical outcome of a life utterly at
the mercy of nature.
"Only the land means life to them.
Paddy and chena crops are their sole
source of income, and the terribly
wasteful barter system still reigns
dominant in this province where
subsidiary incomes are absolutely
essential, but do not exist...
"A good number of peasants are
debt-ridden, leaving them neither
progressively independent, self-res-
pecting nor self-supporting. Most
villages have no roads and are
therefore cut off from the available
amenities provided by the Govern-
ment. Patients die on the way to
the nearest medical institution or die
because of their superstitious dislike
Jf medical aid. Except the younger
generation, the majority of North
Central Province folk, especially the
women, can neither read nor write."
There are many villages like those
described above. Some have a mixed
population, others are inhabited by
Singhalese or mainly by Tamils,
Mohammedans or aboriginal Ved-
dahs. The Veddahs were formerly
nomads who wandered from place to
place in the jungle. Now, however,
WET ZONE OF CEYLON. Rubber was introduced uring the closing years of the 19th century
and today covers. a largeriarea than tea. Note strange shape which the roots have taken.
sections of them are settling down
in villages and are beginning regular
cultivation. It is they, above all,
who need all types of fundamental
education with special emphasis on
basic agriculture and animal hus-
bandry.
The Jungle Is Cleared
THE Minneriya Colony, where thenew Fundamental Education
Centre has been set up, is a
symbol of new hope for such people,
for it has shown in recent years how
practicial ideas and strenuous efforts
can work a"miracle"in the jungle.
In this once dangerous malaria-
infested area, the jungle has been
cleared by the Government, the
ancient irrigation system based on
copious"tanks"which are the size
of small lakes has been restored, and
colonists, formerly displaced persons,
have been settled on the land.
Thanks to the irrigation, good
crops are now being produced, small
and attractive houses have been built
on the plots of land assigned to the
different families, and, in general,
the economic status of the people
has been raised.
But a better economic status does
not always mean a better life. The
colonists still need education and
the Centre's extension staff will
therefore organize a special teaching
programme for them, while continu-
ing their work among villages as
yet"unreclaimed".
While showing people of all castes,
creeds and circumstances how they
can improve their living conditions,
the Centre at Minneriya will also be
working out and demonstrating prac-
tical ways of self-help that can be
usefully followed by the peoples of
other countries.
The Ceylon project is also provid-
ing a significant demonstration of
co-operation and co-ordination, the
Centre being staffed by experts In
literacy training, agricultural educa-
tion, sanitation, rural industries and
home economics in co-operation with
Unesco and three other UN Spe-
cialized Agencies-the World
Health Organization, the Interna-
tional Labour Organization and the
Food and Agricultural Organization.
Representatives of different related
departments of the Ceylon Govern-
ment will also join the staff. All
the bodies as well as voluntary non-
official agencies will work together
in a common programme.
The Ceylon Centre will also be
co-ordinated with the new Unesco
Pilot-Project in Delhi State, India,
and with any other Unesco Funda-
mental Education Projects which are
being or are to be established in the
countries of South and South East
Asia.
In this once malaria-infested area of the Minneriya Colony, Ceylon. the jungle has been cleared to
permit cultivation of rice-the staple diet of the inhabitants. Above. harvesting one of the fields.
Veddah family house in Ginidamana villages, part of Unesco
education project at Minneriya. Formerly nomads, the Veddahs
of Ceylon now live in villages and are beginning regularcultivation,
