UNITING FOB PEACE : The Bole Of The
United Nations General
Assembly In Preserving
Peae And Security
O N November 3, 1950, the General Assembly of the United Nations adoptedby 52-5, with two abstentions, an important resolution. Its purpose
was to reinforce the Charter's measures for collective security and to
accelerate the social and economic progress of the world. On such founda-
tions alone could an enduring peace be built. The resolution reaffirmed that
only by a constant application of the Charter's Principles, could the high aims
of the United Nations, as stated in the First Article of the Charter, be ful-
filled.
To this end, faced with a threat to peace or a breach of peace by an act
of aggression, and in cases where the Security Council fails to discharge its
responsibilities, the General Assembly, in which all the United Nations have
equal representation, may meet in emergency special session within twenty-
four hours and make recommendations to Member States on necessary collec-
tive measures, including the authorisation of armed force.
With the object of facilitating the task of the Assembly and the Security
Council, two new agencies were established and put at their disposal : (1) a
Peace Observation Commission consisting of 14 members, including the five
permanent members of the Security Council. The appointment of this Com-
mission was approved by 57 votes to nil, two abstaining. (2) A Collective
Measures Committee to investigate methods which might be used to main-
tain and strengthen international peace or security in accordance with the.
Purposes and Principles of the Charter.
The resolution also recommended that each Member State should inves-
tigate the full extent of its country's resources to determine the nature and
scope of the assistance it might be in a position to render in support of any
recommendations of the Security Council or of the General Assembly for
the restoration of international peace or security.
Fully conscious of the futility of adopting further measures of collective
security without reinforcing the fundamental condition to peace, the General
Assembly, in a 54 vote to nil, with one abstention, urged Member States.'to
develop and stimulate universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and to intensify individual and collective efforts
to achieve conditions of economic stability and social progress, particularly
through the development of under-developed countries and areas."
--. areas :'
