UNESCO JOINS IN UNITED NATIONS'
EFFORTS TO MAKE HUMAN RIGHT.
DECLARATION A LIVING REALITY
by M. Jaime Torres Bodet
Director-General of Unesco
mental education campaign, of which it regards the universal
extension of primary education as an indispensable prolong-
ation. and it has provided for the support of this campaign a
whole series of economic, civic, and trade union measures.
Thus the battle against ignorance is to be waged on all front.
with ever-increasing forces.
In the field of science and culture, Unesco's many activities
are directed towards the double aim of increasing the world's
inheritance of creations of the mind and sharing it out between
all human beings. Research becomes a service to humanity
when we so facilitate and guide if that it is brought to bear
upon problems of world interest, like the development of the the
Arid Zone, or the tensions created by the rapid introduction
of modern technical processes into countries of ancient culture.
It is important to safeguard the eeqom and rights of
creative artists, and we hope that our patient work in this
direction will soon be croWned by potion of a Universal
Copyright Convention. But We should be failing in our duty
if we did not try to open the horizon of a liberating culture to
the ever increasing multitudes. To spread among the public
at large a knowledge of the scientific discoveries that are
changing the face of the world, to equip libraries and
museums so that they shall become centres of intellectual and
artistic initiation, to disseminate reproductions of masterpieces
pi painting throughout the world, to help musicians and spread
a knowledge of their work - such tasks as these, upon which
we are now engaged, illustrate what is the keynote of our
programme.
THIS is the place to mention planning of the futureCovenant of Human Rights. It would be of outstanding
significance if this legal instrument were to cover, not
only civic and political freedom. but the rights to education
and a share in cultural liie and the benefits of scientific
advancement. States ratifying the Covenant would be under-
taking clear obligations, and the difficult process oi applying
these rights, which Unesco has already begun but with
inadequate resources, would thereby be immensely facilitate.
It is our hope that the provisions dealing with these rights,
which in accordance with our suggestions were accepted by
the Human Rights Commission at its recent meeting, will figure
in the draft Covenant when this appears upon the final agenda
of the United Nations General Assembly.
The implementation of Human Rights is inseparable from
access to information, which has become so essential in modem
life in connexion with the spreading of knowledge and with
effective freedom of expression. But information can only be
spread freely and universally if all sections of humanity have
the necessary material resources at their command. This
emphasizes the whole gravity of the newsprint shortage
which is today hampering the production of newspapers and
books, and imparts urgency to the appeal launched by Unesco
for immediate international action to increase the production
of newsprint and distribute what exists more equitably between
the various countries.
This is a threat of reaction which must be dispelled before
it is possible to envisage fresh progress. In a distracted
world which is apt to let its energies be diverted from work in
the service of peace and humanity. circumstances all too often
compel us, in many field. to mark time. But our faith is not
shaken. History will, in the end, vindicate men of goodwill,
provided they persevere in their efforts and never lose that
thirst for justice and magnanimity, which is another way of
saying that they never lose their power to believe, dare and
achieve.
THE extension of free and compulsory primary educationto all children of the world still encounters too many
obstacles arising from the unequal distribution of wealth
between the peoples. Here, too, international co-operation
must intervene decisively. The XIVth Conference on Public
Education, which met this year at Geneva under the joint
consonant with the immense needs it has to meet. The estab
has invited governments to draw up national plans for a
steady increase in school attendance, and it goes without
saying that such plans will receive our full support.
For its part, the Inter-American Cultural Council has already
decided, at its inaugural meeting recently held in Mexico, in
which Unesco took part to undertake a literacy and funda-
THREE years ago. on 10 December 1948. the General
assembly of the United Nations adopted the first
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the history
of the world. The anniversary of this historic event will cer-
tainly be celebrated with even more mark than in previous
years. Not only on this day. however. but on an days.
Unesco's campaign makes itself felt through books, the press.
the radio, the film, exhibitions, and teaching in schools, for the
purpose of disseminating the Declaration as widely as possible
and making its scope and meaning knOwn throughout the
world. This year, one of the major themes has been the
denunciation of racial prejudice, based on a thorough and
critical study of the facts.
By seeking thus to mobilize the opinion of the world, Unesco
shows that it is faithfully carrying out its obligations. With
all its resources, and an increased effectiveness due to the
dynamic concentration of its activities, our Organization is
joining in the work of the United Nations to establish Human
Rights in men's minds. as in their everyday lives.
The objectives aimed at by the Declaration are at the very
centre of the mission which our Constitution has assigned to
us. The world which we are trying to build through educa-
tion, science and culture perceives its features in this bold
outline of a community of free men. men enabled to perform
in full their services to humanity. But I would like to
rapid survey of the rights with which Unesco is more esp -
cially concerned and. in so doing, to underline the increasingly
universal nature of our work. In making it universal we are,
surely, practising enlightened realism, for it is by giving all
human beings a worthier and fairer share in life that we shall
bring about that true peace lor which the world yearns -
peace based on solidarity between the peoples.
In that vast column of humanity which is on the march in
search of knowledge, can we reconcile ourselves to seeing the
advance guard taking giant strides while half the world lags
behind in a cloud of ignorance and is thus condemned to a
miserable existence ? This initial inequality, with all the
dangers it implies, points to our most urgent duty, which is to
give these masses of the people minimum of technical and
civic knowledge wherewith to secure their emancipation.
This as I have said more than once, is the purpose of the
international enterprise in fundamental education which
Unesco has launched this year, on largest scale that its
limited resources permit, bearing in mind that it may later
receive help which will enable it to make the project more
consonant with the immense needs it has to meet. The estab-
lishment of a centre for Latin America has opened the way
to the creation, without further delay, of a world network of
schools where, within the space of a few years, training will
be imparted to thousands of teachers who will then be called
upon, in their turn, to train future leaders in their own countries.
