Drug research in one of India's new national chemical laboratories
recently set up in different parts of the sub-continent. Above, Indian
scientists at work on penicillin production at the Haffkine Institute in
Bombay. Unesco is helping to extend such scientific research work.
India's Chain of National
Research Laboratories
THE chain of national laboratoriesnow being set up in India has
been described by Prince Min-
ister Pandit Nehru as'"the founda-
tions of progress". His words are a
recognition of the fact that no mod-
ern State can hope to raise the
standard of living of its people and
strengthen its position in world
economy, without a wise and full
employment of science.
Dr. S. S. Bhatnagar, F. R. S., Direc-
tor Indian Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, has made it
clear that these laboratories will
undertake work that is not ordina-
rily within the scope of industry.
Their approach to industrial pro-
blems will be from a national point
of view rather than just from the
outlook of particular industries.
Without being restricted by ideas
of immediate financial gain, the
laboratories will be in a better posi-
tion to employ suitable talent and
try new approaches to problems.
Matters with wide social and
economic aspects will be carried out
by State scientific research. The
laboratories will aim at improving
industrial processes, so as to increase
efficiency of production and develop
new industries in India.
There are to be 11 national labora-
tories, each dealing with a specific
industrial activity. They have been
planned not only for today, but also
for the future. The buildings
have been de-
signed to allow
for expansion,
and the equip-
ment is the most
up-to-date.
A completely new feature is the
provision of pilot plants, which bring
research to a point where its possi-
bilities for commercial exploitation
can 00 demonstrated.
The largest of the national labora-
tories is the National Physical Labo-
ratory in New Delhi where research
will be directed at the fullest use of
India's raw materials. It will have
the country's first electron micros-
cope, as well as facilities for research
in radar, meteorology, cosmic rays
and the planetary system.
The laboratory is making preci-
sion instruments-for example, a
beta ray spectrograph for studying
beta-radiation from radioactive ma-
terials. Other investigations deal
with the determination of nuclear
magnetic moments by resonance of
microwaves and dispersion and
absorption of ultrasonics in liquids
and the study of luminescence of
rare earths for use in luminous
paints.
The National Chemical Laboratory
at Poona, with its seven specialized
divisions is the link between scienti-
fic institutions and industry. Inves-
tigations include experiments on
pure gelatine as a substitute for
blood plasma in surgery, and the
preparation of a drug called hepa-
rine, derived from cattle liver.
By
Maurice Goldsmith
Processes for the manufacture of
citric acid, calcium glucenate and
vitamin C have also been devel-
oped.
In the inorganic division, new and
quicker methods of estimating rare
metals and minerals are being devel-
oped. Experiments are also being
conducted on the
technical uses of
non-edible oils.
The Fuel Re-
search Institute
at Digwadih (in
the Jharia coalfields of Bihar) has
undertaken a survey of the country's
coal to assess quality and quantity,
and its most effective use. Work is
also being done on Indian oils and
fuels derived from coal, wood and
alcohol. The Institute will be assist-
ed by six field stations in the coal-
field.
The other institutes are those of
Glass and Ceramics, Metallurgy,
Food Technology, Drug Research,
Leather Research, Building Rese-
arch, Road Research, and Electro-
Chemical Research.
To help, the Government during
1950 agreed to forego customs duty
on scientific apparatus and equip-
ment. This concession follows an
earlier one allowing an industry to
deduct research work expenditure
from income tax returns. From the
Rs. 2, 500, 000 thus collected, the
industry was able to set up the Silk
and Art Silk Mills Research Asso-
ciation.
Of great importance was the pu-
blication last year of the second
volume of Wealth of India, which
gives detailed information about the
country's raw materials and indus-
tries. Two volumes of the National
Register of Scientific and Technical
Personnel have also been published.
India recognizes that it is not
·//
///
AUnesco technical assistance teamarrives in Pakistan this month to
co-operate with the Government in
harnessing the natural resources in that
country, both above and below ground.
The leader of the mission, which is
part of Unesco's S 2, 300, 000 programme
of technical aid in 1951, is Dr. Gunnar
Norgaard, forty-seven year old Danish
geodesy expert who reached Karachi in
April. He is the advance guard of a
four-man team requested by the Pakis-
tani Government for its scientific research
programme aimed at stepping up agri-
cultural, mining and industrial produc-
tion.
Before his departure for Pakistan,
Dr. Norgaard explained that his main
task will be to assist Pakistani scientists
in mapping their country and thus lay
the foundation of future prospecting for
petroleum and other mineral resources.
The other three members of the team
are Michael Fournier d'Albe, a British
physicist now conducting research in
France, Henry 1. S. Thirlaway, a British
scientist teaching in Australia and Karl
Wienert, a German geophysicist.
They will aid in attempting to raise the
amount of rainfall on marginal land now
unsuited for agriculture, and in deter-
mining what regions are most vulnerable
to earthquakes and what can be done to
adapt building construction to these
conditions.
The budget of the mission includes
$ 35, 000 for scientific equipment to be
used in Pakistan. Five fellowships for
Pakistani scientists also will be offered.
In addition to this mission, Pakistan is
scheduled to receive technical assistance
this year from Unesco in the field of
educational broadcasting.
enough to have fine buildings and
good apparatus. As Professor J. D.
Bernal said at the, opening of the
National Physical Laboratory,
"Science is not for appearance and
prestige, but for work-and that
work depends ultimately on men.
Recognizing the importance of scien-
tific workers and giving them the)
opportunity of doing their best for
the country, should be the first
considerations.
"A country like India cannot
afford to lose even one trained
scientific worker, nor can it, in the
long run, do without the services of
the many thousands more of poten-
tial scientists which better education
could provide."
Unesco, through its programme of
technical assistance for economic
development, is lending India a
helping hand in getting the chain of
national laboratories under way.
Last November, an agreement was
signed by the Indian Government
and Unesco, under which India will
receive the services of an interna-
tional team of ten research workers
for her national laboratories.
These scientists include specialists
in plastics, low temperature physics,
electrical engineering, mechanical
engineering, hydraulics, and photo-
elastic studies. Their mission fits
into Unesco's belief that economic
development, to be sound, must have
a firm foundation in science and
education.
The setting-up of these national
laboratories will benefit all aspects
of Indian life-industry, the uni-
versities, the villages. It is a conti-
nuation of the great tradition of
Indian science, which in the past
has made outstanding contributions
to world knowledge and progress.
The National Physical Laboratory at Delhi is one of tne ! argest. most moaern scientific institu-
tions in all Asia. Opened in January, 1950, the laboratory s directed at making the fullest use
of India's raw materials. It has fach. u. s, o. research in many fields including radar.. ;. eogy
and cosmic rays. This laboratory is also mking various kinds of precision instruments.
42, 000. 000
More Indians
tndia's census which has just been
taken shows that the population is
361. 820, 000 while that of Pakistani is
75, 697, 000-a combined total 01437, 500, 000
people now living in the sub-continent.
This is an increase in 10 years, when the
last census was taken, 01 42, 000, 000
mouths all clamouring to be fed. These
statistics point to the urgent need for
measures to increase agricultural produc-
tivity and working out a population policy
if millions of men and women are to be
saved from starvation.
