Opening the Door
Of Hope
For the Blind
'by Sir Clutha Mackenzie
s'Sir Clutha Mackenzie, one of the world's lead-ing blind welfare workers, was totally blinded
himself in 1915 during the Gallipoli campaign
of World War I while serving with the New Zealand
Expeditionary Force. He became one of the
first students at St. Dunstan's Hostel for Blinded
Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen, founded in Lon-
don in 1915. Returning to duty, he edited the
New Zealanders'Army newspaper in Europe,
sometimes acting as his own front-line reporter.
When war ended, the field of blind welfare became
his life's work. In 1935, he was knighted for his
work in New Zealand.
In 1942, at the request of the British War Office,
he re-entered the army to take charge of rehabili-
tating and resettling the war blind of South-eastern Asia.
Sir Clutha, a well-built man of 56, has travelled alone throughout most
of the world in 30 years of working in his field. Now Unesco's Consul-
tant on Braille, he has concerned himself during the past two years
with the problem of setting up a single international system of Braille
symbols for the blind of all nations. In February, Sir Clutha attended
an international conference on Braille, held in Beirut under Unesco's
auspices, which agreed to a uniform Braille alphabet for 5 million blind
persons in India, South-East Asia, the Middle East and Africa. The
new alphabet will replace over 20 local Braille scripts now in use in these
areas.
IN a number of western coun-tries today all normal, healthy
blind children, as well as
adults who lose their sight, have
the opportunity to be trained and
educated for a useful job in life.
Not only can they have wage-
earning occupations but homes and
families, sports and hobbies, com-
munity interests and responsibili-
ties. To reach this goal has been
a long uphill job.
Alas, the countries in which this
ideal has been achieved are all too
few. About three-quarters of the
world's blind live in Asia and
Africa where"liberation"has been
granted to no more than one per
cent. The vast majority still lives
by begging in streets, bazaars and
outside temples. Many only
manage to exist by a traditional
family system which makes
stronger members of the family
responsible for sick, maimed or
aged members. But it is a negative
existence. Minds and muscles are
left to atrophy.
One of the interesting jobs
which fell to my lot during World
War II was at a rehabilitation
centre for war-blinded men of
India and south-eastern Asia.
There was, for instance, Corporal
Bishan Das whom I came across
in a hospital ward in Karar ; hi,
Pakistan, soon after he was
brought back from North Africa.
Utterly crumpled, he answered my
questions only with sobs. He
declared that life was ended for
him and that he must accept
God's will with submission. Never-
theless, he finally agreed to come
to our centre for training. He was
the first to complete the eighteen
months course. He learned type-
writing, Braille reading and writ-
ing, rope-making and the weaving
of newar (a webbing used instead
of springs on Indian beds). When
finished, he left for his distant
home in a high Himalayan valley.
The Blind Scribe
A year later, Bishan Das was backto see us to discuss a business
proposition. Prosperous and
happy, he had become an im-
portant man is. his village. His
two trades of rope-making and
weaving kept him very busy. In
addition, he had become the village
scribe, writing letters in Roman
Hindi on his typewriter. Men sat
in groups before his house, smoking
and telling yarns, while their
business was transacted. His
opinions were treated with respect.
Now he wanted to harness a
vigorous mountain stream which
roared past his house and build
THE BLIND ARE OF ALL AGES. Here a small boy of four-sightless since birth-learns to
"read the time by means of a specially modelled Braille clock with raised numbers. Often, a
Braille watch is the first crack in the opening door of hope for the newly blind.
a flour mill. Would we finance
him ? We did, and Bishan Das
continued to prosper.
There is a bond between fellows
like Bishan Das and myself. I had
been through it all after being
blinded by a shell in Turkey in
1915... When I arrived in an
English hospital a few weeks later,
Sir Arthur Pearson, the able, blind
leader of St. Dunstan's took me
in charge. Still in bed, I learned
to type. Still in bed, I wrote a
press article at his suggestion. A
few days later the post brought
me an envelope. It contained a
copy of a leading London paper
which carried my article and-a
five-guinea cheque. With such a
journalistic beginning, my fears
and depression began to vanish.
Within a year I was back with the
Army, running a newspaper for the
New Zealand Expeditionary Force.
So I knew how Bishan Das felt
when he was wounded. I knew
the joy he experienced as he
mastered his dark new world by
regaining a full place in life.
Devotion Of Father Jackson
FOUR of the other men at ourIndian training centr , a Sikh,
a Bengali, a Punjabi Mussul-
man, an English captain, were not
only totally blinded but had lost
both hands as well. Their lot was
a hard one until the British
Ministry of Pensions had sent the
special fittings they needed for
substitute hands. How depressed
we were when the first package of
the plaster casts of their stumps
went astray on its air journey to
London !
One of the soldiers, Gulam Qadir,
was only 18 and full of ambition.
We taught him English and type-
writing and prepared him as a
public speaker and demonstrator
who would arouse the public to a
practical interest in the blind. HLs
typewriter, incidentally, wa. s a
specially designed machine oper-
ated by a key attached to his
stump.
In the eastern countries, mis-
sionaries often were the pioneers
in helping the blind to lead fuller
lives. There was Father Jackson,
for example, a young blind priest
of the Church of England. He
went to Burma about 35 years ago
and, by a tremendous effort and
devotion, he built one of the best
organizations in Asia for the educ-
ation of blind boys and girls and
for the practical employment of
men and women.
In grilling heat and drenching
monsoon-clad in cassock and san-
dals-he walked the highways and
byways of that vast country
preaching the gospel and at the
same time opening a new and
wonderful world for the blind. He
died young, working to the last,
but not before his zeal left a per-
manent mark in the field of blind
welfare.
Pioneer Asian Schools
MISSIONARIES having shownthe way, ruling prince  and
volunteer philanthropic
groups-and even a few govern-
ments-set up a number of schools.
Such early efforts, however, affect-
ed only a small proportion of the
afflicted although they vividly
illustrated that the blind Chinese,
Indian, Persian and Arab are
potentially just as active in mind
and body as the European blind
person.
But schooling alone is not
enough. Practical workshops and
vocational training for future
employment are necessary too. A
modern school for the blind, for
example, must have special ap-
paratus in addition to more
ordinary equipment. Today, I
know of at least fifty small pioneer
schools in Asia, where the gift of
such equipment for teaching the
blind would be an untold blessing.
Each blind student needs a Braille-
writing machine, the rather ex-
pensive thick paper on which to
write, and a round-pointed stylus.
To write, one pierces the sheet
from behind-looking-glass fashion
- making the combinations of dots
for each Braille letter. This is
cheap and simple. But it is slow,
and the pupil cannot read his work
while writing.
Therefore there are typewriter-
like machines. With the latest
model, the student's written work
appears on the upper side of the
paper so that he can read and
check his script as he works.
There are many other ingenious
aids including special measures
and liquid measuring units and a
variety of trade tools. Invaluable
is a Braille watch. Not infrequently
it is the first crack in the opening
door of hope for the newly blind.
I remember, for example, the
tragic figure of Rifleman Saw
Jacky, a young Burman Karen
blinded by a spray of machine-gun
fire during the war. For a fort-
night after he arrived at the
Indian training centre, he would
only lie miserably on his bed. He
refused food and all attempts to
rouse his interest. If I can't have
my eyes back, I only want to die",
he repeated. Then, an English
officer-armless and blind-gave
Jacky a Braille watch. He made
him feel his handless arms, and
explained that he was luckier.
Jacky at least could feel the watch
even though he couldn't see it !
The gift of a Braille watch was
the first step for Saw Jacky and
succeeded in giving him fresh hope
and a feeling that all purpose had
not departed from his life.
