
RANCE and Italy have offered financialhelp to permit Unesco to make a prelimi-
nary study this year into the possibility of
setting up a West European Physics Laboratory
for High Energy Particles. An offer of 2, 000, 000
lire from the National Research Council of Italy
was accepted by Unesco's Executive Board at
its meeting last month, and it was indicated
that the French Government was considering
making a donation of 2, 000, 000 francs.
The study is to be made under the direction
of Unesco's Natural Science Department, which
is headed by Professor Pierre Auger. The
possibility of helping to establish a West Euro-
pean Physics Laboratory has been examined by
Professor Auger since Unesco's General Confe-
rence approved the setting up of such regional
centres last June.
Home For A Cosmotroa
p ROFESSOR AUGER considers that the WestEuropean physics laboratory should house
a cosmotron-a giant machine which would
be able to reproduce in the laboratory, high
energy particles at present being extensively
studied outside laboratories, through research
into the mysterious cosmic rays which reach
the earth from outer space. The cosmotron,
therefore, would enable great advances to be
made in nuclear Physics in Western Europe.
When a preliminary report on the possi-
bility of establishing the West European
centre is completed, it will be presented to a
meeting of experts to be convened by Unesco.
A number of Western European nations are
interested in the project, and additional
financial help is expected. By the
terms of the Conference resolution, Unesco is
undertaking to discover the needs and possi-
bilities for the regional centres, to make initial
surveys of cost estimates and locations, and to
help in the formulation of programmes, but not
to contribute to the cost of construction or main-
tenance out of its regular budget.
Unesco will not, moreover, be the governing
body of the West European centre. It is con-
cerned at this stage with carrying out the
studies needed to assure its establishment.
Conference Preparations
OTHER questions dealt with by the UnescoExecutive Board at its meeting included
the Organization's 1952 programme. The Board
recommended its adoption by the next General
Conference which will take place in Paris from
June 18 to July 10.
In approving the Conference agenda, the
Board agreed 10 send invitations to non-Member
states of the United Nations and Unesco to send
observers to these meetings. These States
include, among others, Spain, Cambodia, Laos
and Vietnam. The three last, like Japan and
the German Federal Republic, have asked to be
admitted to Unesco. Their candidatures will
first be submitted to the Economic and Social
Council of the United Nations, which will mee'
during February at Santiago.
After approval by the Board, Unesco will
make a grant of $266, 750 to eleven non-govern-
mental international organizations which co-
operate with Unesco in an advisory capacity.
The Board has also approved the use of
donations amounting to nearly $2, 500 for urgent
relief work being carried out by Unesco in diffe-
rent parts of the world.
Unesco's activities in Germany and Japan
were also studied by the Board. Unesco's work
in Germany will be centralised in a single
bureau to be set up at Wiesbaden, which will
replace the three now operating in the English,
French and American zones. This modified
plan for Unesco centres in Germany was made
with the approval of the three representatives
of the Allied High Commission, and it is felt
will facilitate the execution of the Organiza-
tion's programme.
It is planned to create three other centres
in Germany for the study of social questions,
teaching and all problems affecting German
youth. New offers of financial aid for this pro-
ject have recently been received from Lebanon,
the Philippines, France and the United States.
