M. PAUL VAN ZEELAND
Belgian Minister
for Foreign Affairs
THE very idea of giving Technical assistance
to under-developed countries is a noble and
stirring one, and I can easily understand
how it has appealed to the imagination of
men of goodwill.
Unesco can be proud of carrying out the educational and cultural aspects
of this programme.
As a universal organization it has responded to the undefined, yet
pressing, appeal which has come to us from past generations, for every
age has witnessed the inexorable struggle between rich nations and less
fortunate ones. The human and material resources of Unesco's member
countries are enormous, and its action can at the right moments tilt the
scales in the right direction.
It is necessary, however, that in each of the assisted countries a balance
be kept between technical progress and traditional customs, for material
progress cannot be made at the cost of destroying inestimable moral or
spiritual values acquired over centuries. If this should happen, mankind's
cultural patrimony would suffer a great loss.
The struggle against ignorance and inertia is one of the most reassuring
aspects of the vast spiritual movement under way in the world today. It
makes a vital contribution to the establishment of a genuine peace
between peoples. The task Unesco will undertake may be long and hard,
but let us not forget that the most lasting victories are those won in the
face of difficulty over injustice, misery and ignorance.
Professor H. R. KRUYT,
Chairman of the Netherlands
Commission for International
Co-operation
IN this world we want more happiness and to
t attain this we must fulfil certain preliminary
conditions. In the first place, if we re t
enjoy good health, we must be amply fed
and this means we must work for favourable
social and economic conditions, i. e. a certain
level of prosperity. Above all, we must adopt the right mental attitudes
and see to it that education equips people to achieve these aims.
In developed countries these important values were recognized gradually,
and it took us centuries to reach the present conditions. Younger nations
are striving for similar ones and we are bound to help them wherever we
can.
Speaking for the Netherlands, I am happy to say that the Government
as well as all institutions in the fields of education science and culture
are willing to contribute in helping less developed countries. We can
offer such help not only in fields in which we have always specialized
(hydraulics, soil science, shipbuilding, agriculture), but in others in which
we have a large experience-in tropical prob1ems. tropical hygiene,
fundamental education, tropical agriculture etc. We have already wel-
comed to our country, to our mutual satisfaction, many people from less
developed countries. Moreover, an international academy to supply the
needs of other peoples coming to the Netherlands, is planned. I hope
that Unesco may succeed in the important task of assisting the less
developed countries in education and culture.
COUNT SFORZA, Minister of Foreign Affairs, italy
THE programme undertaken by Unesco within its constitutional fields of educ-ation, science and culture, as part of the Technical Assistance Plan for under-
developed countries deserves to be widely known and encouraged.
The technical assistance offered by Unesco is a new application of an inter-
national solidarity which, in spite of many adverse currents, is becoming more evi-
dent each day. It assures to less favoured peoples the conditions of prosperity andu  ---
independence indispensable to the dignity of men and women who want to live in freedom.
In giving its most effective co-operation to the Technical Assistance Plan, Italy is following the
highest and most vital traditions of its national spirit.
MRS. GERONIMA T. PECSON, Senator of the Philippines
WE of the Philippines are near enough to
the Korean conflagration to feel the heat
of its war flames. Conscious of the dan-
ger, we instinctively seek protection. In so
doing we find that protection, like peace, is indi-
visible. We cannot protect ourselves merely by
ensuring safety within our own borders. We
realize that we must have peace among our
neighbours-nay, peace in the whole world-
to ensure safety for ourselves.
But as long as there is hunger and want on any part of the earth,
as long as decent living is denied to great groups of people, as long as
misery and abuse drive man to unrest, peace will not prevail. For man
the only road to salvation is co-operation for abundant living. Herein
lies the present and the future of technical assistance. A helping hand
to the weak from the strong, a liberal flow of knowledge from a well-
developed country to an under-developed area, a free trade of under-
standing among people of varying cultures-these are the elements of
the global strategy of technical assistance. The objective is not victory
through destruction ; the goal is shared well-being achieved through the
magic touch of friendly collaboration. Technical assistance is nothing
more than friendly collaboration for co-existence.
Imperialism is the one-way street to prosperity for the colonizer and
the downward road to slavery of the colonized. This old-time imperialism
is a vanishing phenomenon in the free world. Technical assistance has
replaced it. Exploitation powered by greed of gain is now replaced by
exploitation of the possibilities of exporting expert knowledge and
sympathetic understanding. Technical assistance is the antithesis of
imperialism in objectives and procedures. It wins support by a convin-
cing demonstration of modern know-how applied in improving standards
of living. In all fields where it operates, whether it be in health or
industry, in education or government, the assisted nation co-operates
with the assisting country not because it has to, but because it so desires
such co-operation.
Korea stands as a challenge to the speed with which technical assist-
ance can work out a machinery for co-operation in attaining a common
well-being on earth. Technical assistance must accelerate its temipo. It
must catch up with the forces of destruction unleashed by war. Pilot
programmes must soon be replaced by widespread applications. Isolated
trials must soon give way to bolder schemes of nation-wide implement-
ation.
Unesco is well prepared to make its programme of technical assist-
ance come to the aid of a world half-famished and more than one half
illiterate. May it succeed in its role as a dispenser of technical ingenuity.
i
of the most alarming aspects of our contemporary society is the gap which separates the most developed countries
from the least developed ones. It is true that this gap has existed throughout recorded history for as long as there
have been cleavages of wealth and poverty between nations. But today, in an era in which the great majority of the
word's nations have joined together to seek permanent peace through international co-operation, a new way had to be found to
spread the benefits of scientific and industrial progress to those areas which lack not only capital but technicians, scientists
and trained workers. The plan of technical assistance elaborated for this purpose by the United Nations and its agencies
is conditioned byanumberofcompiex probtems. For it is not enough to furnish those"unfavoured by history and geography"
merely with the means of progress. They must be made capable and desirous of using them. More than this, technical
assistance can only be a direct result of the desire, willingness and active efforts on the part of these countries for their own
development and the shaping of their own destiny. Unesco has been guided in its programme by the principle that education
and scientific research must accompany and follow any economic development worthy of the name. tt has therefore
approached the problem from the human rather than the materiaf angie. instead of helping an underdeveloped nation by
constructing dams and bridges-although they may be badly needed-it is equally urgent, if not more so, to train teachers,
engineers, supervisors and workmen who will be able to build these bridges and dams themselves.) In other words, the final
aim of Unesco's technical assistance programme is not to provide teams of foreign workers, but national ones recruited and
given instruction vocally. As part of its Technical Assistance programme for 1951-52 alone Unesco has earmarked S2, 300, 000.
tn recent weeks Unesco has signed aid programmes with Brazil and the Philippines and sent scientific and educational teams
to Liberia and Thaiiand. Atready, a total of 23 nations are benefitting from this aid programme in Asia, Africa, Europe and
America. Thirty Unesco specialists are already at work in different countries and this number is soon expected to teach
156 with additional countries participating in the scheme. The technical assistance programme has been widely hailed by
eminent international figures, all oaf whom have recognized its far-reaching importance. On this page we are proud to publish
four statements prepared specially for the Unesco Courier by Count Carlo Sforza, Paul Van Zeeland, Geronima Pecson,
and H. R. Kruyt.
