CH) LDREN'S F) LMS...
HOWEVER much adults may re-gret the role that the cinema
plays in the lives of their chil-
dren, it is no good harking back to
the days"When I was a child...".
Good or bad, dangerous or healthy,
the cinema is here, and it has taken
a part in our life which cannot be
excluded.
Also we can do nothing about the
fact that children form a large part
of the cinema-going public. The
Honourable Mrs. Henrietta Bower,
member of Britain's Departmental
Committee on Children and the Ci-
nema, has given the following signi-
ficant figures (1).
Out of a total of 7, 000, 000 British
children aged between five and fif-
(1) Mentioned by Henri Storck in"Le Film
Récréati (1/0111' S} lec/a/eurs l1wéniles",} lublish-
cd VII U lIesco
teen, 1, 250, 000 go to the pictures at
least twice a week, and 550, 000 at least
three times. Three shows a week
mean that the fifteen-year-old has
already seen 1, 560 films-and this does
not include educational film shows
given in the schools.
Financial Difficulties
OBVIOUSLY, therefore, the cinemaplays a big role in the formation
of the child. If it helps to give adults
certain ideas about this world, how
much more so when it comes to the
more receptive and emotional young-
ster, who is particularly vulnerable to
psychological shocks, with their im-
measurable after-effects.
But it would be wrong to say that
only in the cinema does he get
these shocks. Apart from what life
itself teaches him, he has other means
of learning about the world-books
and newspapers, for instance. The ci-
nema is of course, different from
these, but its effects can be judged
by a comparison with them.
Children's literature has existed for
centuries. It has its good points, as
well as its bad, but at least it is
written to suit its readers. It has
had its famous authors : Andersen,
Lewis Carroll, Jules Verne. And
generally speaking, children read the
books and magazines written for
them, rather than those meant for
adults.
But it is just the opposite at the
cinema. It is adult films which chil-
dren see most frequently. Westerns,
gangster films, adventure or love,
news, documentaries and cartoons
pass before their eye. s with that
hypnotic force which forbids one's
attention to wander from that screen
in the middle of the darkness.
Producing special films for children
means all sorts of problems-finan-
cial ones, for instance. What producer
will undertake to make a picture
which he knows will not be accepted
by the usual circuits ? It would not
show a profit perhaps in 15 or
20 years.
Mrs. Bower's solution for this pro-
blem is assistance from governments,
who would create an international
pool of children's films. Interesting
in itself, it is only a suggestion, and
we must content ourselves with things
as they are.
The scarcity of special films means
that people who organize children's
film shows have first of all to choose,
among films made for adults, those
which are most suitable for young
spectators. This poses a question
which remains to be answered satis-
factorily : the criteria for making this
selection.
It is the fashion in certain circles to
blame the cinema for everything.
Children's misdeeds. and crimes are its
fault. It always leads them, if not
to delinquency, at least to immorality,
and shows them how to behave like
gangsters. Its eroticism-even if
nothing more than a kiss-seriously
trouble the young cinemagoers.
Must all this be guarded against ?
The answer is : No, it does not matter
very much.
Indifferent
WE have a tendency to judge theinfluence of the cinema on
children by what it does to us. But it
is quite different with youngsters. Dr.
Le Moal, who has made an important
study of this matter, declares that ;
from five years of age to puberty, love
complications are matters of indiffer-
ence, even boredom, to children.
Only girls over 16 prefer love stories ;
the boys continue to opt for adven-
ture or historical films.
Accusing the cinema of fostering
The photos on this page we !"e
Mars. Henrietta Bower, a mem
Office and Ministry of Education
on children for two years."The
the great need for real entert
shown that even children who
suffer afterwards from nightma
produced primarily for adults
ears and feelings of the child.
bildren's films that really amus
brternational pool of Children's
... FC

child delinquency is to ignore the
social and psychological conditions
which are at the root of anti-social
attitudes-lack of adaptability, bad
family conditions, misery, promiscuity.
It is quite wrong to imagine that a
gangster film will lead a boy to crime
if, after the cinema, he can return
home to a happy, prosperous and unit-
ed family. As for the lad who lives
in a slum and in the street, and sees
his drunken parents quarrel each
night, does he really need the cinema
to teach him lawlessness ?
Grave Problems
NEVERTHELESS, it would be wrongto say that the cinema does not
pose grave problems with regard to
children. Very often it gives shocks,
with traces that remain. You have
only to look at some of Mrs. Bower's
infra-red photos taken in darkened
cinemas and shown in these pages.
Such emotions can have dangerous
effects on such young human beings.
But the large number of studies of
this problem have produced very dis-
similar opinions on its effects.
Richard Ford, in his book"Children
in the Cinema", gives the results of
an enquiry made by cinema club
directors into the subjects which
frightened children most. They were :
shots of the mysterious, of the
unknown, of terror ; scenes taken in
the dark showing ghosts, skeletons
and witches ; war crimes ; brawls
which included close-ups of criminal
faces.
Can we accept fully the results of
this enquiry ? Apparently not. Ans-
wering a question put by Mrs. Bower,
a child gave what she regards as a
typical answer :"I like ghost films,
because I know it could not happen
to me."Note that this child did not
say that these scenes made him
frightened-in fact, he enjoyed this
type of fear.
Let us take three films meant espe-
cially for children : Pinocchio, Snow-
White and the Thief of Bagdad. M.
Armand Lanous finds in all of them
a result. Some films leave memo-
ries which are not effaced for months.
That children undergo violent emo-
tional disturbances as a result of
seeing films meant for adults-as
well as those made for children-
cannot be denied. Only the extent
of these shocks is disputed. Some
say they can last a long time. Others,
like Dr. Elliott Jach, contradict this.
Dr. Elliott Jach declares that horrible
. scenes are perhaps a good thing in
that they give the child an outlet for
his anxieties and instincts. For the
cinema is an art-or a distraction-
which only calls for its spectator to
respond spontaneously, temporarily,
and with no long-term call on his
emotions.
The cinema is thus a cultural ele-
ment that is new and, one can even
say, strange. Perhaps it is too soon
to weigh up its effects.
But one fact cannot be ignored : the
cinema demands above all high
finance. To be profitable it must
please the greatest possible number of
people. That is to say, it must follow
at the same time as it creates. And
Clearly it is not only in the British
and American film that one can
gather such stupidities.. They are
pretty general.
Evil and Poverty
T* AKE the last"cliché"in this list :the cinema's representation of
the foreigner. This may be the
only viewpoint many children get for
years.. It can well be the basis of
misunderstandings, with serious con-
sequences for the future of their
country.
There are, of course, exceptions.
All-whether children or adults-
who saw"The Last Chance"got an
opportunity of understanding better
the problems which passions had put
in a wrong light. In this film, no
matter whrLt language is spoken,
everybody is just-a human being.
The conventions which, by force of
circumstances, the cinema must res-
pect affects its best work. Thus, the
conclusions reached by the British
report on children's entertainment
films show that, in order to please
children, the actors who play the less-
attractive roles must bear the conven-
tional signs of their badness-dirty
clothes and rags. and ugly faces
(which, however, must not be repul-
sive.)
M. Henri Storck comments on this
peculiar modern tendency to link evil
with poverty. In the days of melo-
drama, he recalls, the bad person was
the cruel and powerful nobleman.
Dangerous Ideas
IT is easy to see the danger whichcan arise from this linking of the
evil and the poor. After having given
children a view of life which they are
most unlikely to find in reality, is the
cinema going to add some dangerous
ideas about the superiority of some,
while others get no less dangerous
notions about their inferiority ? This
happens often, and the cinema, by its
conventions, makes it occur still more
frequently-thus tending to make the
divisions of society even more rigid.
To want to transform the cinema
would be ridiculous. But its possibi-
lities are immense. There is no hu-
man progress that cannot better
humanity and bring it clooer together
- unless it is allowed to worsen man's
lot and teach him to hate.
It is not fruitless to draw the atten-
tion of those responsible for the evo-
lution of the cinema to the most
subtle, the most far-reaching and the
most serious consequences of their
activities.
Whether the makers of films like it
or not, whether they do something
about it or ignore it, the cinema is a
new aspect of culture. The cinema
must not forget as it forges ahead
that culture forms part of it.
we !'e uken with a special infra-rend camera by the Horn.
ember of the DepartmenUI Committee of the HQme
tion in England which studied the effects of the cinema
"there photograph", Mars. Bower states,"are proof of
ntertainment films for Children". Her enquiries have
who do not show fright at an incident in a film often
htrnares, because"most of the films seen by children are
ults and hence do not uke into account the emotions,
Mild. Mars. Bower has issued a call for the productíOfl of
amuse and entertain the child and the creation of an
en's films sponsored by governments.
OR GROWN-UPS ONLY ?
by Jean BLOCH-MICHEL
sequences which give violent shocks.
When Pinocchio was swallowed by
the whale, the children were fright-
ened to see him inside the monster
(the young spectator identifies
himself very much more with the hero
than adults do>. In Snow-White, it
was the fairy being changed into a
witch which affected them most,
while in the Thief of Bagdad they
were scared by the nightmare fight
with Faraignee.
What about adult films which keep
on showing scenes of violence as their
principal theme ? Mr. P. Mayer de-
clares in the"Sociology of the film"
that often children have been so
impressed by a picture that they
have nightmares and insomnia as
that, perhaps, is its greatest danger
to culture.
The cinema nowadays is at the root
of many prejudices--or at least it
does nothing to combat them. On
the other hand it often presents to
children a view of the world and of
life which has little connection with
reality.
Here, for instance, is a list of"cli-
chés"of the British and American
cinema which Mr. Roger Manvell has
gathered together in his book
"Film" :
Luxury, especially associated
with women, is normal.
The full-time pursuit of women
by unoccupied businessmen and
rich young rulers is normal.
Men are a source of money for
women.
Sex is probably the most impor-
tant sensation in life.
Things of the spirit are either
funny, eccentric, charlatan or
ever so wonderful. (Art is
usually debunked as artiness,
religion as mania, mysticism as
a yearn in soft focus.)
To be foreign is to be under
suspicion. To be Eastern is to
be horrific.
