SCIENCE AND NEWSPRINT
THE world today faces a desperate shortage of newsprint, the material on which our newspapersare printed. Inadequate production, rising prices, uneven distribution-all contribute to the prob-
lem whose effects are being felt in all pa. rts of the world. Concerned by the danger to the spread
of information and knowledge due to this shortage, the Unesco General Conference gave prominence
to this subject and voted a resolution calling on Unesco Member States to take urgent steps to solve
the serious problem of greater production and a fairer distribution of newsprint. The following
article describes how scientists are exploring. new ways of helping to solve the problem, thereby
ensuring individuals in all countries of one of their fundamental rights-freedom of information.
on the Ivory Coast which is to begin work
almost immediately, using tropical woods to
make paper. A new factory is being built in
Morocco which will use. eucalyptus wood.
There is a factory using bamboo in Indo-
China ; another in Algeria is using alfa, a kind
of grass. Belgium is experimenting with
papyrus in the Congo-using the reeds on
which the Egyptians wrote thousands of years
ago. India is making paper from bamboo. All
over the world this shortage is felt and all over
the world men are trying to find the answer.
Already, for example, daily newspapers in
the United States of America have been printed
entirelv on sugar cane. Australia is now using
eucalyptus for its newspapers. A pilot plant is
experimenting with still other materials in
Georgia, U. S. A., for the benefit of manufacturers
from America, Africa, India, New Zealand,
Finland and Mexico.
No one, however, has thought of trying to
duplicate one of the strangest of all the
attempted solutions for paper shorfage-that
of August Stanwood in the United States.
Stanwood was pressed for raw material to keep
his paper mill in operation during the Ame-
rican Civil war, and arrived at a novel solution.
He imported shiploads of mummies from Egypt
and used their cloth wrappings and papyrus to
manufacture a paper which eventually found
its way into the shops of grocers, butchers and
other merchants to wrap their parcels.
Obviously, this out-of-the-ordinary approac 11
has no wide application. But there may be
others which offer better prospects. That i-
why governments as well as individuals and
international gatherings are pressing their
efforts to find an answer. Unesco is directly
concerned, since the very great shortages of
paper are likely, to impede the work and
development of information and education.
All present indications are that there will not
be a single solution. Many answers will have
to be found in response to varying local situa-
tions, and the scientists' rôle must be sup-
plemented by efforts on many other levels.
