Young Yugoslavs greet M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-general, during his visit to an orphans'home at
Zagreb, in the People's Republic of Croatia.
In Belgrade, Ljubljana and Zagreb, M. Torres Bodet sees success of
CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT ON
A REG ! ONAL BAStS
Drawing on the wealth of their individual cultures and traditions, the peoples of Yugoslavia are today makinga determined effort to develop the educational, scientific and cultural resources of their country.
Each of Yugoslavia's six federated republics, for example, organizes its primary, technical and higher
schools, its academy of arts and sciences, and its research laboratories, which, while fostering the culture of
the people they serve, are designed to meet the social and economic needs of modern life.
This cultural decentralization, which is co-ordinated by the Council for Science and Culture of the Federal
People's Republic of Yugoslavia, has been accompanied by a series of measures to make education generally
available for the bulk of the people, and to provide generous financial allowances for the development of cultural
institutions.
When M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Director-General of Unesco, visited the cities of Belgrade, Ljubljana and
Zagreb recently as the guest of the Yugoslav Government, he was able to measure the extent of these efforts
and appreciate the practical results of the constructive collaboration between Yugoslavia and Unesco.
M TonnES BODET'S visit began in Belgrade, seat of theFedel'al Govel'nment, \vhere the Yugoslav National
Commission for Unesco was set up early this yea ;.
Severely damaged during the war, and in particular by
bombing attacks m 1941, the capital of the new Yugoslavia
is in the process of being rebuilt. On the ramparts of. the
ancient citadel, which down the centuries has occupied a
strategic site between the rivers Danube and Sava, an exhibi-
tion commemorating Yugoslavia's resistance and liberation
from 1941 to 1945 has been organized. It tells. simply and
effectively, the story of a courageous four years'struggle
waged by people who showed themselves capable of the
greatest sacrifices for the sake of their freedom.
Belgrade's university, which has always filled an important
r6) e in the political and intellectual ife of the country.
continues to maintain this tradition through the Intensive
studies and research carried out within Its walls. It was
here on September 28 that the Yugoslav National Commis-
sion for Unesco held its first meeting under its President,
Professor Sinisa Stankovic.
welcoming M. Torres Bodet, Professor Stankovlc declared :
"Our country has joined Unesco because It Is inspired by
a sincere wish to help the development of Intellectual co-
operation between peoples and states.
"Yugoslavia's Independence and freedom to develop
according to her own ideas have only been won at the cost
of great sacrifices. The maintenance of this Independence
and freedom is-today more than ever-Yugoslavia's su-
preme task.
"This country has been transformed into an enormous
workshop to build up a new future ; but we are flr ! !} l)' con-
vinced that this task will be accomplished above all by
fighting actively to safeguard and maintain peace.
"Fighting for peace means righting for the truth ; fighting.
by education and science, agamst war psychoses and hate
among peoples ; fighting, in fact, for mutual understanding
and respect as well as for international collaboration which
allows the different peoples of the world, great or small, to
develop freely their own national cultures."
At the same meeting, 1\1. Torres Bodet outlined the basic
principles which guide Unesco and the goals towards which
It works.
"Unesco takes care not to be guided in its actions by a
philosophy of uniformity"he satd."It is not the expres-
sion of anv one faith, or mode of thought, or way of civil-
ization. It is rather an ensemble of means of action for
realizing certain practical aims. These aims-peace and
general prosperity-and these means-the development of
education, science and culture through international collabora-
ton-correspond to some of the deepest aspirations of the
peoples.
INCREASING LIFE'S VALUE
/I F OR \'ho, indeed, would not desire to dwell in security.
improving by means of intellectual and moral co-
operation the conditions in which the v live' ! It is
then. onlv with these aims in view. and hy means
such as these, which are common to all mankind, setting
aside particular ideologies that Cnesco carries on its work.
On the other hand, the universatist character of its missions
is cleal'lv not to be denied.
"If t were to sum up the programme of L'nesco in a few
words. I should say that it aims at increasing the vatue of
human. life through educattun, science and culture.
"Secondly, as man cannot live In isolation, it seeks to
assist every country's progress towards a better way of life
through the augmented capacities of fuUy-educated citizens... And lastly, taking into account the dependence of one
country upon another, which makes collective isolation as
impossible and suffocating as individual solitude, L'nesco
tries to create or develop the intellectual and moral con-
dilions of international collaboration in peace, mutual assist-
ance, the iibertv of the peoples, and equality of rights."
During his tM'0 days'stay in the capita). 1\1. Torres Bodet
was receives, by Marshal Tito ; Mr. Edvard Kardelj, Foreign
Minister : Mr. Rodoljub Kolakovic, President of the Federal
Council for Science and Culture, and other leading figures
in the political and cultural life of the nation, including
M. Vladislav Ribnikar, a member of Unesco's Executive
Board.
M. Torres Bodet then travelled to Ljubljana, capital of the
People's Republic or Slovenia and a citv which is proud both
of its rich cultural heritage and of the advanced stage of
industrialization it has reached. This modern progress has
been aided by the work of the city's institute of technology
- visited by five Director-General-whose laboratories have
contributed to the economic and social progress of the whole
country.
Yugoslavia's reconstruction and {) \'ogressive industriaii-
zation has created a need for a growling army of specialized
workers. This is a problem IWluch the institutes or techno-,
logy, whose numbers have greatly increased since the war,
are helping to solve.
Unesco has already turned its attention to this acute
problem, a partial solution for which may be found by the
setting up under the Technical Assistance Programme or a
modern documentation centre and a scientific iibrary in
Yugoslavia.
During his visit to Ljubljana. Unesco's Director-General
was welcomed by Mr. Boris Ziherl. President of the Council
for Science and Culture in the Slovene People's Republic.
He also visited an exhibition commemorating the 400th anni-
versary of the printing of the first Slovene Book.
INTERNATIONAL CONTACTS
I x the City or Zagreb the Director-General visited the Aca-demy of Arts and Science, set up by the Croat people in
the middle of the 19th century. From Its founda-
tion this institution ptayed. in the field of cultures and
literature, a leading part in the liberation and political uni-
fication of the Yugoslav peoples, and today it continues to
hold a vital place in the intellectual life of Croatia.
l'nder its aegis, a series of institutes and laboratories to
carry out specialized \work of direct importance to the
indusll'ial and economic development of the country has
been set up since 1945.
Visits to the Institute which carries out research into
problems of workers'heaith, as well as 10 the Physics
Institute of the University, showed the Director-Genera) the
important part. which Croatia can p) ay in the service of the
Yugoslav peoples. Similarly, in the Zagreb Academy, the
Croat people. have a modern centre of artistic and cultural
rife. One of the best examples of the vitality of this present
day culture is the work of the great sculptor Mestrovic.
many of his sculptures are to be found n Zagreb's Museum.
Allied to the effort which Yugoslavia is making to build
its new social order is a firm wish to co-operate inter-
nationally. Yugoslav intellectual circles attach the greatest
importance to the contacts and intellectual exchanger which
Lnesco can help to establish in all its fie : ds of activity.
Already they are participating in the work of several
organizations set up under Unesco's auspices such as the
International Theatre Institute and the International Council
of Museums. Yugoslavia is turning. more and more to
Unesco for help and technical advice. In this connection a
mission of experts may be sent to assist in the resioraion
of one of the most ancient and noble monuments of medIeval
Yugoslavia-the church of St. Sophia in Macedonia.
Yugoslavia's scientists, scholars and men of letters are
clearly showing their \viliingness to associate themselves
with all Unesco's efforts which can contribute directiy to
the maintenance of peace and the development of inter-
national understanding.

YUGOSLAVIA'S UNIVERSITIES ARE GUARDING
TRADmONS WH ! LE SERVtNG MODERN NEEDS
Dhl'OUghout centuries of in-
yasion and oppressive outside
tJ) influences, the peoples of
Yugoslavia have retained a deep
attachment for their own tra-
ditions, languages and cultures.
The history of their universities
is a reflection of this struggle
between culture and war, which
might easily be symbolized in the
story of the first Yugoslav
printing works. Shortly after
this was set up at Cettinje in 1493,
the town was attacked by the
Turks-and the people of Cettinje
had to melt down the type to make
ammunition.
If, even in recent times, Yugo-
slavia had an unduly high illiteracy
rate, this was probably because its
inhabitants were more often called
upon to take up arms to defend
their country than to study and
work for its development. But,
even after the worst devastation,
they have always found strength
and courage to rebuild on the
ruins.
Nowadays, the Yugoslav univer-
sities can at last fulfil the aims of
those who founded them and then
often fought hard to keep them
in existence. They link respect
for the rich cultural traditions of
each republic with the task of
instructing men and women in the
modern techniques of which the
nation has need.
Success has meant valiant effort
and heavy sacrifices. After the
second world war, it was not only
the universities of Yugoslavia that
had to be reconstructed, but its
entire schooling system : for
eighty per cent of the schools had
been destroyed. Now, not only
the universities have been rebuilt,
but many new institutes of higher
studies have been set up.
Before the war, there were three
universities in Yugoslavia, with 21
faculties and eight centres for
higher education. Now there are
five universities, with 42 faculties
and 25 attached centres. The
number of students has risen
from 17, 734 in 1938 to 60, 000 in
1950.
Shut by an empire
study of the history of
Yugoslav universities shows
that they have some common
characteristics. The oldest, which
were founded by the religious
orders, had to fight for centuries to
maintain their right to teach in
their own languages. Those most
recently established are constantly
trying to link traditional studies
- philosophy, theology, law-with
technical instruction.
The University of Ljubljana,
founded by the Jesuits in 1595, is
the country's oldest. Originally
confined to faculties of theology
and philosophy, it was not until
the setting up of the Illyrian Pro-
vinces (1809-13) that it began to
extend. It was in this period that
the"central schools"first came
into being. A period of general
instruction was substituted for
philosophy, and this was followed
by four or five years of higher
studies. Later, when the"se-
condary school"was separated
from the"academy", a university
in the real sense of the word was
formed, with five faculties : philo-
sophy, natural sciences, medicine,
law and theology.
But, after the fall of Napoleon,
Slovenia once again was incor-
porated into the Austro-Hunga-
rian Empire, and the higher
studies of the University of Ljub-
ljana were cut down to what they
had been before the French re-
gime. In 1848, despite Slovene
pleas for a university in their
capital, the imperial government
closed Ljubljana's schools of
higher studies, and education was
concentrated in the German-
language areas. The fight for the
setting up of a Slovene university,
however, continued right up to the
end of imperial domination. In
1919, after the collapse of the Cen-
tral Powers, the Slovene univer-
sity got back its prerogatives, with
four faculties (philosoDhy, law,
technical instruction and the-
ology), and a school of medicine.
Reconstructed and re-organized
after the second world war, the
university of Ljubljana now has
four faculties : philosophy, natu-
ral sciences and mathematics, law
and economics. The technical fa-
culty has become an institute of
technical studies with six facul-
ties : architecture, civil engineer-
ing, electrical engineering, ma-
chine construction, chemistry,
mines and metallurgy. The faculty
of medicine is divided into two fa-
culties : medicine and stomatology.
Autonomous institutes, outside the
university, have taken over instruc-
tion formerly given by the faculties
of theology, agriculture and forest-
ry. Its scope therefore is very va-
ried, but its modern techniques
have not meant any lessening of
respect for Slovene traditions and
culture.
State aids 60 her cent
If tel'Ljubljana, Zagreb is the
i oldest of Yugoslavia's uni-
versities. It was in 1632
that the Jesuits started to
widen the scope of their Zagreb
school by adding theology and
philosophy to the curriculum.
On September 23, 1669, the
Emperor Leopold I accorded the
rights and privileges of an inde-
pendent university to the Academy
of Zagreb-privileges already en-
joyed by those of Cologne and
Prague. This meant the rector
had the right to confer the degrees
of doctor, licentiate and bachelor,
and that these degrees would be
recognized elsewhere. But, in
practice, the university could only
partly avail itself of these rights.
In 1773, at the suppression of
the Jesuits, the Academy of Za-
greb was placed under the autho-
rity of a bishop. Three years la-
ter, the Academy of Sciences was
set up by order of the Empress
Maria Theresa. In 1848, however,
this Academy of Sciences was sup-
pressed, and the Faculty of Phi-
losophy dissolved. Only the Facul-
ty of Law continued to function,
as an independent juridical acade-
my, and from 1853 to 1860 lec-
tures were given in German. It was
not until 1874 that a university
was established again in Zagreb,
with three faculties : philosophy,
theology and medicine.
Today, the University of Zagreb
has ten faculties, compared with
seven before the war. The number
of students has risen from 6, 436
in 1939 to 16, 000 in 1950. Sixty
per cent are assisted by State
grants, and the annual influx of
new students is such that the
building of a vast university city
has been undertaken.
Respect for diversity
melgrade University was, at its
. origin, a secondary school in
Kragujevac. Founded in
1838, it was transferred to Bel-
grade in 1841. In 1863 it became
a centre for higher education with
three faculties (philosophy, law
and technical instruction) and in
1905 it was designated as Belgrade
University. Of all the Yugoslav
universities Belgrade suffered most
in the second world war. Out
of 174 institutes, seminaries and
laboratories, 72 were completely
destroyed, while another 58 lost
half their installations and col-
lections.
It was largely thanks to the ef-
forts of the students themselves
that the University of Belgrade
has since, not only been recon-
structed, but also enlarged. Once
again, the need to expand and to
facilitate studies and technical re-
search has led to wide changes in
its structure. In 1948, the tech-
nical faculty was separated from
the University and made into a
higher education centre which
ranks as a university. It is com-
posed of the faculties of architec-
ture, civil engineering, electrical
engineering, machinery construc-
tion, mines and technology, geolo-
gy. Today the faculties of medi-
cine, pharmacology and stomato-
logy are being reorganized, and
will soon be formed into a School
of Medical Studies. Over 25, 000
students now attend the Univer-
sity.
The reform of the old Yugoslav
universities, which was under-
taken at the same time as their
postwar reconstruction, answered
the need for extending and improv-
ing the technical instruction that
they could give. It is this same
need that has led to the foundation
of new universities, and the estab-
lishment in each of the Yugo-
slav republics of an independent
cultural centre. Thus, in the same
way as Ljubljana is the Slovene
University, Zagreb the Croat Uni-
versity, and Belgrade the Serbian
one, so Skoplje is the University
Centre of Macedonia, and Sarajevo
that of Bosnia-each of them
deeply steeped in the traditions and
cultural lives of the people they
serve. Respect for this diversity
has also led the Yugoslav Govern-
ment to set up schools for many
linguistic minorities. Thus, Ru-
manian, Czech and Slovak children
living in Yugoslavia receive in-
struction in their own languages.
Entry will be difficult
The progressive elimination of
illiteracy and the economic
progress made by the country
have caused a number of students
to increase three-fold since the
war, thus raising serious problems.
Entry to the universities, there-
fore, will shortly become. more dif-
ficult, and examinations will aim
more and more at restricting en-
try to those who show themselves
most likely to benefit from the
instruction.
These then are Yugoslavia's uni-
versities. Built and maintained
over the centuries with courage
and perseverance, rebuilt or newly
established despite every diffi-
culty, they show the attachment
of their founders to their own
cultures. Since the last war, the
enthusiam which has led teach-
ers and students to join their
efforts in constructing-sometimes
with their own hands-laborator-
ies and libraries, university cities
and faculty buildings, is further
proof of the courage and faith
with which the Yugoslavs are
making their ancient country into
a modern one.
Medical students listen as Professor Andrija Stampar, President of the Faculty of Medicine at Zagreb and President of the
Yugoslav Academy of Science and Art in Zagreb, gives a lecture in the University of Zagreb.
