PRINCE JAI SINGH
and his XVlllth century observatories
THE SAMRAT YANTRA.-Emperor of Instruments"-is oriented in a North-South direction so as
to point at the Pole Star. The observer's post at the uppermost point is 65 feet above the grouna.
EARLY in the 18th century, an Indian
Prince, Jai Singh-descendant of the
"Sons of the Sun"-conceived and
carried out a piau to erect a series of
observatories unparalleled in his time. Even
today, the purity of line and abstract form
of the structures he built, offer one of the
most remarkable examples of astronomical
architecture.
The Prince-Maharajah of Amber-was
a member of one of the ancient and legend-
ary dynasties that made Rajputana great.
Mathematics, astronomy and architecture
were his greatest interests, and in these fields
he was regarded as one of the most talented
men of his day.
Prince Jai Singh studied deeply the
treatises of the Hindu astronomer Varaha
Mihira, read occidental works on trigono-
metry and on the drawing up and use of
logarithmic tables, and translated Greek and
Arabic works into Sanscrit. His inquiring
mind and his enthusiasm for science enabled
him to contribute to his country's greatness
in this field.
His urge to learn more of the scientific
discoveries in the Western world caused him
to send one of his principal astronomers and
mathematicians to the court of the King of
Portugal. In return the King sent Xavier
da Silva to the Prince, and presented him
with tables drawn up by the French astro-
nomer, de la Hire.
Open-Air Observatories
PRINCE JAI SINGH considered the availableastronomical data of his time inade-
quate. Even the famous tables of the
Sultan Mirza Ulugh Beg of Samarkand, he
felt, were out of date. So, he decided to
draw up new and more accurate ones.
Between 1710 and 1730, therefore, he
ordered the construction of five observatories
- at Jaipur, Delhi, Mathura, Benares and
at Ujjain, a town situated on the main
meridian of India, on the Tropic of Cancer
- so that the observations and calculations
made by his astronomers and mathe-
maticians could be verified and cor-
roborated.
Today is, Jaipur City, which Prince Jai
Singh founded in 1728, the remarkable
structures which made up one of these five
open-air observatories, provide a record in
stone of the scientific progress for which
this mathematician and astronomer is
famous.
Jaipur City itself, with its wide and
regular streets,. which divide it into six
blocks, its painted houses and its crenellated
walls overhung by rugged hills, is a monu-
ment to the energy and progressive efforts of
the Prince.
When he ordered the building of the ob-
servatories, Prince Jai Singh planned to use
types of apparatus made of metal, but find-
ing these unsatisfactory, he had huge new
instruments construted in stone. The size
of these was intended to facilitate more
accurate studies and readings of stellar space
and time.
"Emperor of Instruments"
SOME of the structures, such as theSamrat Yantra,"the emperor ofinstrument", are as much as 65 feet
high, run 130 feet in length from North to
South and are proportionately wide from
East to West.
Other instruments are in the form of twin,
complementary constructions. Open spaces
in one are reproduced in the masonry of the
other, to permit easy reading at any point,
so that in fact, these double instruments
form one.
One instrument, the Rama Yantra, consists
of two partitioned cylindrical structures,
which make possible the observations
required at that time for the revision of
Ulugh Beg's tables of altitude and azimuth
of heavenly bodies. Another, the Jai Prakash
Yantra. is composed of two complementary
The Rama Yantra instrument, used to revise the
astronomical tables of Sultan Mirza Ulugh Beg
hemispherical parts.
Besides these, and pointing into space are
a series of other complicated instruments
- evidence of the spirit of research which
since ancient times, has urged man to extend
the field of his knowledge and to explore
and understand the great universe that sur-
rounds him. Faced by the mystery, beauty
and the grandiose scale of time and space in
the starry universe, man has patiently tried
to understand his role and his destiny by
creating and perfecting the means of obser-
vation, study and measurement.
Prince Jai Singh, King of Amber and of
Jaipur, was one such man fired by the urge
to explore the infinite realms of space. As
such, he belongs to that company of great
men who have affirmed the primacy of the
universal, and who, despite all obstacles,
have achieved by scientific co-operation a
living brotherhood of the mind.
The Jai Prakash Yantra, a detail of which is
shown here, enabled Indian astronomers to
determine the position of the sun at various times.
One of the sun dials at the Jaipur observatory
with, in the background, the giant"Sam rat Yantra"I
constructed in the early years of the 18th century.
Some instruments in the open-air observatory at Jaipur. They were designed by Prince Jai Singh and
his mathematicians and astronomers to allow more accurate observations of the stars in their courses
than had hitherto been possible.
