TELEVISION EXPLAINS SCIENCE
TO 15, 000, 000 AMERICANS
THREE years ago a group of us at
the Johns Hopkins University
put the finishing touches on a
plan originally conceived in 1946.
We were about to televise a science
programme which would carry scienti-
fic demonstrations to the few Balti-
moreans who owned television sets in
March, 1948.
That first programme, carried by the
newly-erected station WMAR-TV was
the beginning of The Johns Hopkins
Science Review, a weekly half-hour
showing of current developments in
many fields of science. It was one
of the first programmes televised by
an American university on a regular
weekly schedule. It is the only one
today which can be viewed by more
than 15, 000, 000 people in many cities
on a network.
On that day in 1948, Professor
Franco Rassetti, once the colleague of
atomic physicist Enrico Fermi in Italy,
stepped before the television cameras,
set up on the Hopkins campus, to
demonstrate a few fundamental facts
about nuclear physics.
That first experiment with television
as an educational medium went almost
unnoticed. But we had faith in our
belief that the public should be infor-
med about developments in science,
that the public is eager for such infor-
mation. We were confident then that
our programme would one day serve
the entire United States. Today, we
hope that it will prove to be another
link in the chain between the family
of nations welded together in Unesco.
Since March, 1948, the Science Re-
view has grown in quality, and has
won national recognition. Each Tues-
day night from September to June, the
programme originates in the studios of
WAAM, Baltimore, and is carried over
the DuMont Network as far west as
Chicago.
First Need-Simplicity
LOOKING back today on the wintert debut of the Science Revie , we
realize how little we knew about
the technical and production problems
of the infant medium. There were no
books or treatises on the techniques
of telecasting scientific demonstrations.
This was fortunate, perhaps, in that
it meant meeting the challenge and
learning for ourselves, doing the basic
research on television programming of
this type.
All through the initial stages of The
Johns Hopkins Science Review, we
struggled with important problems of
presentation : How to impart scienti-
fic information in such a manner that
it would be understandable to the lay-
audience. This audience knew little
about science, therefore the pro-
grammes had to be simple. Yet we
could not insult our viewers by talking
down to them, treating them as unedu-
cated children.
We have delved into many realms of
science, each one presenting its own
special television problem. How, for
instance, to show viewers seated com-
fortably at home the spectacle of mi-
cro-organisms darting about in pollut-
ed water ? This we had to do in
order to present a programme on sani-
tary engineering.
At another time, hours were spent
working out the mechanics of stimu-
lating the path of air waves as they
struck the wings 01
planes in night at
supersonic speeds.
Otherwise, the average
viewer could not fa-
thom the latest de-
velopments in aero-
nautics, developments heralding the
passenger flights of tomorrow.
Televising A Heart
WE learned early at Hopkins thatwe must simplify the language
of the scientists who are the
principal performers on the Science
Review. Wherever possible, we substi-
tute a simple synonym for a technical
word unfamiliar to viewers.
By relating the facts to the viewer's
daily life, one can select intricate,
even nebulous, scientific experiments
and explain them in a manner in-
tensely interesting to the layman.
Gradually, a format has evolved
wherein verbal explanations comprise
a mere background accompaniment for
visual demonstrations. OUr cardinal
rule :"If you can't show it, don't talk
about it for more than a minute."
This rule is responsible in large part
for the Science Review's rapid pace,
for holding its viewers from week to
week, and for consistently enlarging
its audience.
A Science Review programme on X-
Rays can be cited as an example. The
theme was the introduction of a revo-
lutionary new X-ray machine deve-
loped by Dr. Russell H. Morgan, of the
Johns Hopkins Hospital. The machine
enables the diagnostician to peer into
the interior of a patient and watch his
organs in action, without having to
adapt his eyes to the conventional
Quoroscope.
The moderator introduced the
theme. The"old-fashioned"fluoro-
by Lynn Poole
scope was demonstrated on a white-
robed patient. An ordinary X-ray
machine taking a negative was shown,with viewers watching
the negative on a view-
box and hearing a
discussion of its ad-
vantages and draw-
backs. Then the new
X-ray machine was... u ;-..... <tho 011 ; ðT'l"'. o. f,..introduced, allowing the audience to
see a patient's heart beating. The
climax was reached when the cameras
showed an injured factory worker
who had been brought to the hospital
with steel splinters in his chest.
Telephone lines brought in the voices
of a doctor in Chicago, another in
New York. As they consulted with
physicians in Baltimore, the men in
Chicago and New York were sitting
before television screens viewing the
patient's chest cavity.
Aeronautics To Zoology
THE programme has given viewersan opportunity to look over the
shoulders of many men of science
and to see and understand current
investigations in every realm of
science, from aeronautics to zoology.
Two questions are often asked of
Johns Hopkins personnel : Why are
you expending nearly 200 man hours
each week on this programme ? How
are you able to present this pro-
gramme on a television network ?
To the first question, we answer :
We believe we have a duty to our
public to utilize this new medium to
disseminate knowledge beyond the con-
fines of classroom and campus. The
swift development of science in the
past 25 years has been confusing to
many people. By presenting science
programmes, explaining current deve-
lopments, and showing how these
developments affect us individually, we
believe we can eliminate some of the
confusion, allay many of the fears.
It is a pleasure to answer the second
question. We are able to present the
Science Review on a network because
of the magnificent co-operation by the
University, television station WAAM,
and the DuMont Network. A staff
of two at Hopkins prepares and writes
each programme, and secures the
demonstration equipment as well as
the scientists who perform the de-
monstration.
Station WAAM furnishes studio
space, a producer free of charge to
work with the University staff, and all
studio facilities. DuMont provides the
network transmission without cost to
Johns Hopkins. Both WAAM and
DuMont provide these facilities as part
of their public service commitment
to the people of the United States.
In addition, the University offers the
only U. S. award for the best original
half-hour television drama each year,
in the hope that Hopkins might play
its part in encouraging original think-
ing and writing in the television field.
This writer envisages the day when
filmed recordings of educational pro-
grammes can be exchanged between
Unesco member nations. These
recordings, known as kinescopes or
teletranscriptions in the United States,
can be televised for the edification of
peoples throughout the world.
It is further hoped that those inte-
rested in, and responsible for, educa-
tional television in Unesco member
countries will meet to exchange ideas
and problems-to aim at eventual co-
ordination for the use of television as
an instrument of understanding among
the free nations of the world.
EDITOR'S NOTE : Mr. Lynn Poole ori-
ginatcd and still produces the Johns
Hopkins Science Review which is regard-
ell as the outslanding educational televi-
sion programme ill the United States.
He has asked the editor to annonce that she
Irill be IWPPII to send free copies o {
sCl'ipls 10 those interesleeL-Please write
10 Mr. Poodle, Johns HOjlkills University,
lJl/ltimul'e, Mary/unci, U. S. A.
OThiS was a demonstration of what fear is, and what happens inside the body of a frightened person. Dr. Robert A. McCleary, of JohnsHopkins, has placed a laboratory animal in water to frighten him. Later the animal was remov d, a d a sampl  of its blood was placed
under the microscope so that the audience could see the changes which had taken place in it.  Dr. Donald H. Andrews, director of low
temperature research at Johns Hopkins, demonstrates the balometer, which he invented, In this programme the audience was shown that
when atoms are slowed down, cold is produced. When they are speeded up, heat results. The alometer enables the operator to see in the
dark. It will pick up the heat radiated by the body of a man a mile away and show his outline.
A NEW X-FRAY MACHINA, developed by Dar, Russell H. Morgan (while
coast, earphones) of Johns Hopkins Hospital, shows the chest cavity of a
patient injured while at work in a factor. Doctors in Chicago and New
York examined chest images of the patient which were televised from
Baltimore, and held a three-way consultation by radio.
A FAMILY LOOKS ON. Chest cavity of Injured wor man as t 00 e
to doctors in three cities and to the audience watching the programme.
On the television screen they can see the ribs of the patient, and the pieces
of steel fragments that struck him in the back when a grinding wheel
flew apart in the Baltimore factory where he works.
