Syria Decrees General Mobilization
Of All Civil Servants As Part-Time Teachers
new kind of revolution
is taking place in Syria.
1 A. Though it affects all
levels of national life,
the greatest'changes are
taking place in the cultural
field.
It is a bloodless revolution !
While other countries,
caught up in a worla arma-
ments race, are passing laws
for military conscription,
Syria has ordered a different
kind of mobilization-in
the service of education.
---
In its Constitution, adopted last October, Syria
declared its intention of sweeping away all illiteracy
within its borders during the next ten years. Ton-
day, from the banks of the Euphrates to the
mountains of Lebanon, from the deserts of Central
Arabia to the rivers Tigris and Taurus, an energetic
campaign is being waged to give men, women
and children-city-dwellers, peasants and nomad
bedouins-the right of free access to education
and culture.
Sufficient funds are being made available to the
Ministry of National Education to ensure the suc-
cess of the campaign, and the introduction of
compulsory social service has solved a primary
prob : em, by providing an army of teachers. Every
Syrian, man or woman, possessing a school certify-
cate or a diploma for more advanced studies is
required, by law, to become a teacher, thus ensuring
a pp. rmanent teaching staff in each"School for
the People".
These"Schools for the People"now being opened
throughout the country are cultural centres located
in the primary schools. Their purpose is to spread
practical, useful knowledge among the people and
in particular to wage a campaign against illiteracy.
Schools for nomads
EVERY person holding a school diploma issuedduring the last te  year  must assist in this
teachmg campaign. Anyone wishmg to en er
the Civil Service is also obliged to provide his
services for three months, and later receives a
certificate signed by the headmaster of the school
and attested by the provincial Director of Education.
In this way, postmasters, court clerks and customs
officers, will later have the satisfaction of recalling
by Camille Aboussouan
the time when they took part in this community
service.
Educators were faced with difficult problems even
with the general mobilization of everyone capable
of assisting in the work. How could Syria's nomad
tribes, numbering several hundred thousand people,
be provided with sufficient schools ? How could
equipment such as blackboards and maps be con-
tinually moved on the backs of camels, as the pupils
wandered from pasture-lands to winter quarters ?
Despite such difficulties, fundamental education
has achieved some. remarkable results. The present
aim IS to illcrease tne num-
ber of schools with a teach-
ing programme adapted to
desert conditions. Instruc-
tion on rearing of stock-a
daily factor in the life of
these tribes-is given spe-
cial prominence ; land cul-
tivation is also taught, for
it is hoped to induce the
nomads to abandon their
wandering life and settle
permanently on small farms,
gaining their livelihood from
agriculture.
Reviving"A Glorious Age"
THER schools are being established for smalltowns and isolated rural populations where
pupils receive primary education and are
taught trades. Local inhabitants are asked to
contribute to the building of schools, and in this
connection, a fund-raising experiment has been
introduced in the regions around Damascus, the
Euphrates and Aleppo.
In these places municipal authorities are imposing
a one piastre tax on every kilo of cereals sold at
the Corr. Office, on sale of drinks and on radio sets.
The proceeds from this indirect taxation are used
to benefit the very inhabitants who have paid these
taxes. Thus, a café habitue, watching a school
being built in solid stone or good timber, has the
satisfaction of knowing that he has played his part
in this work, because he was a good taxpayer... or
a good Brinker...
An equal drive is being made in the cities :
teaching at primary school level and instruction in
the trades is preparing youthful citirens for their
future callings, thus ensuring an adequate supply
of skilled labour.
A real wave of enthusiasm has swept the people
of Syria, who see in the opening of the doors to
education a chance of reviving once again the
glorious age when classical Moslem culture was
producing the most significant works in philosophy.
the sciences and the arts.
Proud of the Arab heritage
ONE of the impressive results of this culturalrevolution is the fact that already, elementary
schools have increased in number from 1, 070
to 2, 000 and secondary schools from 64 to 110. Ten
trade training schools and six teachers'colleges
have also been opened. But perhaps the most
striking transformation is the opening of educa-
tional facilities to women. To-day, girls represent
one third of the school-going children of Syria
and one fifth of the students at Damascus Uni-
versity. In ten years, it is expected, their numbers
will equal those of the boys.
One of the best measures of Syria's effort is the
share Education receives of the country's budget.
This is 20 % for 1951 ; it will be increased to 2a %
in future years.
The paramount role of education was laid down
in Syria's Constitution in these words :"It should
aim at the training of a generation with strength
of mind and body, believing in God, virtuous, proud
of the Arab heritage, possessing an adequate intel-
lectual background, conscious of its duties and its
rights, zealous for the public welfare, imbued with
It"nirit. of solidarity and brotherhood."
These words are to-day
becoming a living reality.
Damascus, capital of the
Ommeaydes ; Damascus,
whose three hundred mos-
ques with their blue mina-
rets dominate the most an-
cient city in the world, is
the heart of a powerful curl-
tural revival which is
preparing a country rich in
tradition to fulfil its role in
the present and future life
of the world community.
Arab States
Preserving
Crusaders'
Strongholds
ning has also been made on a [20, 000 rebuilding scheme for Beaufort,
whose imposing 12th century mass dominates the pass from Damascus
to Sidon. At Sidon, the Chateau de Mer, now lies with seven or eight
arches of its bridge at the mercy of the sea. An effort is being made
to salvage and rebuild at a cost of {8. 000. Four months work will be
put in this year. Further up the blue coast, at Gebail-ancient Byb) os-
restoration work was carried ou'fast year on the Port Tower. Atten-
tion is now to be given to the cathedral. Elsewhere along the old
Phoenician coast and iniand, where Crusaders'fortresses and outposts
have weathered six centuries, lesser restoration projects are in hand.
The work of preservation is unforlunately limited by economic condi-
tions in these two Middle East countries where the field of antiquities
is extremely vast,"nd Ihe"Uempts that are being made to preserve
these monuments of Christian zeal are therefore well in keeping with
the legends of Saracen chivalry towards the Crusaders who built
these stronahoids.
The chroniclers of the Middle Ages might well have scoffed had
they been told that one day, the governments of the Arab States would
be allocating part of their budgets for the restoration and us ; keep of
the castles of the Crusaders. Yet this is exactly what is taking place
today in the Middle East, where the Departments 01 Antiquities in
Beirut and Damascus are preparing their summer schedules of res-
toration and repair. Despite the passing of centuries, these castles
still appear to the traveller of today to look down with undiminished
majesty. The Syrian and Lebanese Governrrents do not intend that
they should fall completely into decay and they therefore devote a part
of the funds they make available annually for work in the rich archaeolo-
gical field they have inherited, to this work 01 restoration. An out-
standing example of the architecture 01 the Crusades is the famed
Krak des Chevatiers, near the high road from Tripoli to Homs which
is in an excellent state of preservation. This year, it will continue to
receive its annual allocalion from Syrian antiquity funds. A begin-
