San Marcos de Lima :"Dean of American
Universities " Four Centuries of Uninterrupted Teaching
by José de Benito
IN 1551, the Pe-
ruvian City of
the Kings
(which to-day
we call Lima)
was a newly-built
town on the banks
of the Rimac where.
some 15 years before.
it had been founded
by Francisco Pizarro.
Its shape gave it the
"chessboard"appear-
ance of a Roman garrison town, with nine
streets running lengthwise crossed at right angles
by thirteen others. From a distance-a certain
Fray Reginaldo de Lizarrago noted-its spring-
ing vines and many groves of fruit-trees made
it look more like a forest than a town.
Another old writer, Cieza de Leon, described
its broad plaza and narrow streets, its substantial
- sometimes elegant-houses with towers and
walled gardens standing four to the block. In
reality, however, many of the 458 homes pro-
jected still remained to be built and of those
completed the majority had only mud walls and
roofs of matting. The only exceptions were
the churches and convents constructed by the
religious orders ; their architecture reflected
both the wealth of the new-found countries and
the faith of the missionaries.
Such, then, was the city which had petitioned
Emperor Charles V for a university where the
local"Creoles"could prepare themselves for the
liberal professions. The decree issued in Valla-
dolid on 12 May 1551 conferred on the new insti-
tution certain of the privileges of the ancient
and famous university of Salamanca, founded in
1220, with its 6, 000 students and 60 professorial
Chairs.
A long tradition already marked the university
life of Spain. By the thirteenth century no less
than eleven laws-the Partidas of Alfonso the
Wise-covered almost every aspect of university
life : courses of study, student associations,
competitions for nomination of professors and
even the location of bookshops near the
universities.
Within a few years after its foundation, the
new University in America had established
Chairs not only of Law, Medicine, Arts, Astro-
nomy, Theology and Canon Law, but also of the
Quechua language.
The general atmosphere of the colony in those
days, however, was not an easy one for a
university. The early history of the University
of San Marcos reflects not only the quarrels
between Pizarro and Almagro and the suspicions
of the newly converted or as yet unconquered
natives, but the ambitions of the different
religious orders to increase their own influence.
The Dominicans, in whose convent the university
had been set up, tried to monopolize the
teaching posts and to exclude lay teachers and
members of other religious orders.
Seeking A Home
A number of stinging incidents, however,quickly convinced the Viceroy of Toledo
of the need for making the university
independent of the religious orders. And on
30 December 1571 a decree obtained from King
Philip II, formally ordered the removal of the
university from the Dominican House in Lima.
It made two moves, first, to a building near
the church of San Marcelo and then to a
permanent home in the"House of Refuge for
the Mestizo Daughters of the Conquistadors"
LIMA'S HANDSOME PLAZA : Four hundred years ago, Cieza de Leon, a Spanish writer, described the"substantial, sometimes
elegant houses with towers and walled gardens"of the newly-founded city of Lima.
dedicated to St. John of Penitence. The new
site, chosen by the Viceroy himself, with the
advice of the Rector, doctors and other persons
"zealous for the public welfare"closely followed
one of the ancient Laws of Castille calling for
buildings"with access to the country and the
public squares to enable students to meet
together, discuss their studies and refresh their
minds."
"Out of the Hat"
THE Patron Saint of the university, strangely,. was determined by chance. As an absolute
majority of university officials could not
be secured for any proposal, the names of a
number of saints and evangelists were literally
"put into the hat". The name drawn out was
that of St. Mark the Evangelist. To-day, after
four centuries of uninterrupted teaching, the
university is still known by his name throuehout
the world.
As early as 1577
there were sixteen
professorial Chairs and
in the same year the
first native-born gra-
duate, Dr. Jean Val-
voa, began lecturing
on"The Language of
the Indians".
By 1588, the uni-
versity had gained
such prestige, that the
King issued a decree
granting all graduates
- bachelors, licencia-
dos and doctors-"the
same liberties and
franchises throughout the West Indies as are
enjoyed in this realm (Spain) by graduates of
the University of Salamanca, including immu-
nity from taxation".
Zealous in maintaining its independence, the
University of San Marcos has always defended
its freedom and safeguarded the high intellectual
standards of its teaching staff. Senior profes-
sorial posts are still filled by public competition
and the President of the University is chosen
independently by free elections.
Like every other ancient institution it has
known days of glory and of difficulty, days of
bitterness as when fire ravaged its splendid
library, and hours of solemn thankfulness like
those through which it will live as it comme-
morates this year its birth four hundred years
ago. Because of its antiquity and its continuous
service to learning, it has now the title of"Dean
of the Universities of the Americas".
