FOLKLORE IS AN EVERYDAY
EVENT) N YUGOSLAV ! A
YUGOSLAVIA is one of the few European countries
where folklore is not something to be revived
on special occasions, but a prominent feature
of everyday life.
The Yugoslav villager consider it quite normal
to sing or dance over his daily joys and sorrows.
He can express his joie de vivre in humorous
dances, work dances, miming dances, his unhappi-
ness in combined song-dances. He can display his
vigour in the so-called"deaf"or"mute"dances,
which have no musical accompaniment.
But all these vary wlaely U'on
one region to another. Yugo-
slavia's cultural heritage has
come under Greek, Turkish, even
Russian influences ; yet, the na-
tional obstacles which her moun-
tains present have, to a large
extent, resulted in each area
retaining its own original and
different folklore.
Musical traditions in the towns
for instance, are quite different
from those in the country. Urban
folklore is mainly homophonic,
while that of the rural areas is
polyphonic. These local va-
riations are also found in dance
steps. In the mountains, where
the shepherds are usually alert,
their dancing is nimble. In the
plains, it is more"heavy"-
nearer to the soil, so to speak.
by Georges Fradier
shuttle. Then there is the sostarska, which imi-
tates the shoe repairer as he sews, drills and drives
in the nails. In Macedonia, the metalworker is
represented in a dance which shows the cleaning
of copperware with the feet before it is tinplated.
The work of the farm has also inspired the
poetry of the dance. Six singing youngsters drag-
ging a plough which bears a couple of festooned
pine trees will pretend to dig three furrows in

is stripped from a birch tree in a ceremony honour-
ing the spirit of Spring.
The origin of the ritual dances goes back into
the distant past, and in certain cases-such as
the rusalia-they are a reminder of pagan
cults. Some still bear traces of ancient customs
which called for sacrifices.
No people and no era is without its romantic
dances. The Yugoslavs have their wedding dances,
which imitate the ceremony and the preparations
for it, and the young bride going to her new home.
tion and elopement.
War, too, is an inevitable
theme. A favourite dance recalls
the exploits of a princely hero.
Another, probably dating from
the 16th century, tells of Turkish
raids into Croatia, and is a form
of defiance against the con-
queror.
The koala, which originated in
the centre of Serbia-so rich in
folklore-is the most widely
known dance, although its steps
vary greatly in the different pro-
vinces and villages. But the koala,
like another Yugoslav dance, the
lessee, always remains a collective
dance.
In each of these, the leader
plays an important role-and, in
Macedonia, an indispensable one.
It is he who starts and finishes
the dance, and orders the change-
over from one movement to an-
other, like the leader of a quad-
rille. He may separate himself
from the others to perform spe-
cial steps ; for he is not only the
best dancer, but also a person of
note, worthy of this honour and
the reponsibility it brings.
The extraordinary vitality of
the Yugoslav dance-the most
expressive and richest form of
a centuries-old culture-surprised
foreign visitors at the recent
Opatija festival. Every Yugo-
slav republic chose. from the
remotest villages the groups
which were considered most
worthy to represent their art.
More than 700 men, women and
front of a house, and wish the owner of the house
good luck and an abundant harvest. Evil spirits
of winter, darkness and illness flee before the
youthful strength of the"ploughmen,"who repre-
sent the good spirits of spring, light and health.
In Serbia, masked dancers perform magic rites
called koleda, as they dance around platters contain-
ing the products of the soil to frighten off evil.
'Hagic* is dying out
BUT Yugoslavia's magic and ritual dances, which
are reserved for special feasts, appear to be
dying out, although they have lost nothing of
their liveliness and freshness. In Slovenia, for
instance, during the ritual dance of St. George, bark
children took part in the festival, which was
acclaimed by the critics as something of un-
forgettable beauty and passionate interest.
To preserve their artistic traditions in all their
true anthenticity, every village has its own folk-
lore group, while the youth societies and the trade
unions have brought together over 50, 000 dancers
in the towns. There are also professional groups.
In Yugoslavia, folk dancing therefore is not just
something reserved for special occasions. It has
kept its vitality, fostered by the creative imagina-
tion of the people. It is something that is spon-
taneous and improvised. There can be few
countries where folklore has such enthusiastic
support.,
AFTER 500 YEARS,
MOSLEM WOMEN IN
YUGOSLAVIA NOW
SHED THEIR VEILS
Since the end of the war, social legislation in
Yugoslavia has been progressively aimed at
removing inequalities in status between men and
women. This year, the promulgation of a law
abolishing the wearing of the veil by Moslem
women was an important step in efforts to
help these women to take a more active part in
the social and economic life of the country.
Whole districts of Bosnia-Hercegovina and of
Macedonia are completely Moslem in culture
and population. These peoples, however, are
not a Turkish minority left behind after 500
years of Ottoman rule, but the descendants of
Southern Slavs who embraced Islamism during
this period. The effect of this law prohibiting
the wearing of veils-a custom which has set
Yugoslav Moslem women apart for some 500
years-is illustrated above in the photographs
of one woman member of the country's 1, 600, 000
Moslem people. Until this year, Miss Hanka
Zeko, village school teacher at Katcharevo, in
the province of Kosmet, had to wear the
faredjia or veil whenever she went out (1).
After the passing of the Government decree,
Miss Zeko, without her veil for the first time,
gives a geography lesson in the classroom (2),
and leads playtime games in the school
courtyard beside the minaretted mosque (3).
o [f) J ø
