MOTURIKI. AN ISLAND"LABORATORY"FOR COMMUNITY. DEVELOPMENT I  THE S UTH PACIFIC
MARCH 1951
A decision taken around a conference table at Noumea,New Caledonia, in May 1949 has wrought a peaceful
revolution in the lives of the 500 or so inhabitants of
Moturiki, a speck of an island in the Fijian archipelago.
At that time, the Research Council of the South Pacific
Commission approved a plan, later approved by the Com-
mission itself, to single out communities in each territory
within the Commission's area of action for intensive expe-
rimentation in methods of raising living standards with
the human and natural resources at hand.
The South Pacific Commission set up in 1947 by the
governments of Australia, France, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States, is a
regional organization whose aim is to promote the econo-
mic and social welfare and advancement of the peoples
of non-self-governing territories in the South Pacific
Region.
To launch its community development plan, the Com-
mission approached the Government of Fiji and asked it
to select a community where a pilot project could be
carried out. As a result, the Director of Education for
Fiji visited the island of Moturiki to explore the possibi-
lities of centering the scheme there.
THE PEOPLE : Typical islanders of the Fijian Archipelago, these two men are crossing in a punt
from Moturiki to the larger island of Ovalau, the nearest market and centre of communications.
The man holding the tiller is the boat's captain.
After the purpose of the project had
been explained to them, the people of
the island expressed their apprecia-
tion of the opportunity thus offered,
and promised full co-operation.
ALL-FIJIAN TEAM
njr OTURIKI, which thus becamethe first area to be selected
under the regional programme,
proved to be an ideal site. Only five
and one-half miles long and never
more than two miles wide, it lies off
the Fiji island of Ovalau. There were
only 527 persons in its ten villages,
and its small area and population
enabled it to come under the
educator's"microscope"without any
great difficulty.
This"pilot project in community
development", as it was termed by the
Commission, began slowly. Its prin-
cipal objective was not to"develop"
Moturiki, but to test methods of
improving facilities for education,
health, sanitation, house-building,
agriculture, land-utilization and
general self-help, so that they could
be put to work more. efficiently and
on a larger scale elsewhere in the
South Pacific region.
Although an advisory group was set
up, consisting of the Directors of
Education, Medical Services and Agri-
culture for Fiji, the Southern District
Commissioner and a representative of
the Fijian Affairs Board, the actual
work on the island was done by a
team made up entirely of Fijians.
In February, 1950, the team arrived
on Moturiki. Headed by Eliki Seru,
a 32-year-old supervising teacher, it
consisted of a nurse, a forest guard,
two instructors to teach handicrafts
and house building, and a health
inspector.
ISLAND LIFE RECORDED
ITS first task was to survey allaspects of life on the island.
With painstaking care, the team
examined in great detail the health,
housing, agriculture, education, forest-
ry, women's occupations and social
conditions on Moturiki.
The housing survey, for example,
included the dimensions of each house,
the number of occupants, the condition
of foundations, flooring, walls, ceiling,
drainage and ventilation, and the
nature of the water supply. In all,
27 aspects of life on the island were
analysed and recorded.
Communications between Moturiki
and the outside world-formerly, the
island's only link to the mainland
was an oar-powered ferry which took
one hour-and-a-half to make the trip
- were facilitated by the installation
of radio telephone apparatus. Within
ten hours, islanders had cut two
40-foot masts from the bush, raised an
aerial, and the radio was installed in
working condition.
By June, the survey was completed
and the team returned to the main-
land to report to the commission's
advisory group. For two months, a
programme of village development
was hammered out and then, in
August, the actual work began.
These are the main points of the
programme designed to make Moturiki
a better place to. live in :
1. A village development fund,
financed by an interest-free loan of
E500 from the South Pacific Commis-
sion, has been set up after the
islanders voted its acceptance.
2. To increase Moturiki's efficiency
as a food producer, cocoanut groves
are being rehabilitated, a crop of yams
has been planted and three young
men from the island have been sent
to the mainland to learn livestock
management. In addition, a plough, a
harrow and a pair of bulIocks have
been sent to Moturiki for experiments
in rice-growing.
3. The team's forest guard has
begun a campaign to stop islanders
from burning their land to clear it,
and, at the same time, a cutting and
thinning system has been begun to
turn the forests into a profitable
source of firewood.
4. The Fiji government's medical
department has agreed to provide
material needed to build a combined
maternity home and clinic at the
village of Nasauvuki. Moturiki's
population was also examined for
tuberculosis and 19 of the islanders
were sent to a mainland hospital for
further observation.
5. Experiments are now under way
to test reed insulation as a means of
protecting dwellers of iron-roofed'
houses from the sun. At the same
time, work has started on the digging
'Of bore-hole latrines to improve
sanitation.
ACTION BY THE PEOPLE
THROUGHOUT its work, the de-i velopment team has taken care
to observe local customs and not
to force any changes which the people
themselves did not want. The team's
work is discussed by a Moturiki De-
velopment Committee headed by the
island's chief.
While progress is being made in
Moturiki, the South Pacific Commis-
sion has other projects geared towards
raising the standard of living, health
and education of the inhabitants of
other Pacific islands under way.
Some are purely for research pur-
poses ; others are pilot projects. In
general, they are co-operative ende-
avours between the Commission, the
various governments concerned and
the people themselves-with the
accent on action by the people.
These projects range from the con-
trol of tropical weeds and insect pests
to the development of new educational
techniques and facilities, and from the
development of island fisheries to the
control of tropical disease and tuber-
culosis.
Such work is opening up a new
phase in regional co-operation to raise
living standards in an area where
differences between cultures, relative
economic and social development and
economic potential although often
wide, are few enough to permit a
regional approach to many of the
problems of development.
