All over the world women are taking an increasingly active part in fundamental educa-
tion campaigns. Here, an entire Indian village turns out to greet the women members
of a mobile educational mission. In India, where once few women enjoyed political
rights, the present Constitution gives all women the right to vote and hold public office.
THROUGHOUT the ages those women
who led the fight for the emancip-
ation of their sex understood
clearly that the first right to be won
was the right to knowledge.
One of these was Christine de Pisan,
daughter of the physician-astrologer to
Charles V of France.
This woman, a widow at 25, defying ridi-
cule and scandal, accomplished in 1390.
the extraordinary feat of living on her
own by her pen."Ladies'Treasure"and
"A City for Ladies"were the first works
showing that Woman was really the equal
of Man. She wrote :"If it were the cus-
tom to send girls to school and teach
them as boys are taught, women would
understand the subtleties of art and
science, as well as men do. Jþ
Her successors-the Englishwoman,
Mary Astell, in the 17th century and the
followers of the French thinkers in the
18th-revolted in like manner against the
unjust prejudice which made them out to
be infcrio : r to men.
There was another conntry where
women gave no thought to the question
of"rights", absorbed as they were in
carrying out what they regarded as their
duty. That country was America. The
wife of the New England settler was ac-
customed to stand by her husband's side
and fire a musket when it came to de-
fending their farm and their children
against bands of marauders. She helped
to clear the land, to build, to organize.
Right through the War of Independence
she remained the tireless helpmate, feed-
ing, tending and supporting.
When, with the Declaration of Indepen-
dence proclaiming that"all men are
created equal", the Federal Constitution
was drawn up in 1787, the American
women, not unnaturally, might have ex-
pected to be given the vote. But, instead,
their menfolk refused to give constitu-
tional recognition to their rights as
"citizens".
After the first French Revolution,
Olympe de Gouges laid before the Con-
vention her"Declaration of the Rights of
Woman". This urged that women, who
"must take part in the making of laws',
should be granted the same"public pri-
vileges, appointments and offices as those
open to citizens"."Women", she argued,
"have the right to mount the scaffold ;
they should also have the right to mount
the rostrum". When, on 3 November 1793,
Olympe de Gouges bravely ascended the
steps of the guillotine, neither she, nor
any other woman, had yet climbed those
of the tribune.
Nevertheless, other women, in other
countries, continued to hope for emancipa-
tion, thanks to the great liberating
movement started in France.
In England, Mary Wollstonecraft pub-
lished in 1792 her"Vindication of the
CHRISTINE
DE PISAN
Her books, written
in Paris in 1390,
urged recognition
of equality between
the sexes. !
"Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance", states
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. During the last hundred
years, social legislation has helped to improve the living conditions of the less favour-
ed classes, but much more will have to be done if mothers and their children are
to be spared such conditions as those shown above.
Rights of Woman". Women, she said,
must be rescued from the depths of ignor-
ance to which they have been consigned ;
they must be educated. In this way, the
mind of Woman having reached an equal-
ity with the mind of Man, she will be
able to become his equal in married, pro-
fessional and political life.
The"Vindication of the Rights of
Woman"produced an outcry in England.
Women were frightened by the audacity
of this dangerous"hyena in petticoats",
so immoral and shameless as to advocate
co-education !
In America women gradually obtained
equality of civil rights.
Frenchwomen, on the other hand, had
been placed under tutelage by the Napo-
leonic Civil Code. They were now to wit-
ness the Revolution of 1848. Their hopes
stimulated again by this new revolution,
they formed associations, opened clubs,
started newspapers, organized lectures in
order to obtain educational equality, revi-
sion of the Civil Code, protection of
working women, and civic rights. Public
opinion was either scornful or indignant.
In 1849, the French were called upon to
elect a National Assembly. Jeanne De-
roin, in defiance of the Constitution, put
forward her name, and sought the backing
of the Social Democrats, saying :"You
stand. for the abolition of the exploitation
of men and women by men ; for the com-
plete and radical abolition of all privi-
leges of sex, race, birth, rank and for-
tune". And for the first time, a political
party admitted a woman among its can-
didates.
In England, in the middle of the XIXth
century, the boldest fighters were among
women in easy circumstances, and their
best propagandist was a man : John
stuart Mill, author of"Women's Ser-
vitude".
In 1867, when a bill for Electoral Re-
form was under discussion, J. S. Mill de-
manded that women should participate in
the right to vote. He submitted to Par-
liament a petition with 1499 signatures
attached (he had asked for 100), obtain-
ed by Mrs. Fawcett, who had recently'
founded in London the Society for
Women's Suffrage.
Mill's proposal was rejected, but the
drafters of the Reform bill, forgetting the
term"male persons", returned to the use
of the word"men". In that case, cried 
the women,"men"being a general term,'
the bill applies to us ! Eight thousand of
them demanded to have their names plac-
ed upon the electoral registers. Some suc-
ceeded in their demand ; but Parliament
had no intention of accepting such an
interpretation.
The Faculty of Medicine tenaciously re-
sisted all assaults. Elizabeth Garrett,
fired with enthusiasm by the lectures of
her compatriot, Elizabeth Blackwell, who,
having gained her degree in America, was
now the first woman doctor, had decided
in 1862 to become a doctor also. Debarred
from following the regular medical course,
she entered Saint Bartholomew's Hospital
as a nurse ; spent her nights studying, and,
followed the doctors on their rounds. In
1865, her brilIiant work earned for her the
first English medical degree conferred
upon a woman.
Having obtained municipal suffrage for
unmarried women, the National Union for
Women's Suffrage went on with its cam-
paign for the parliamentary vote. But'
Parliament, in spite of petitions and pro-
jects, turned a deaf ear. In 1897, cham-
pions of the female vote became more
numerous in Parliament and seemed on
the point of obtaining this right. Anti-
feminist speakers, however, engaged in an
interminable discussion of two bills ; one
for the combatting of parasites, the other
for the building of sewers. It was then
time for the House to rise. Thus,"for a
flea and a sewer", Englishwomen failed to
get the vote.
In Germany, it was in the midst of the
JUANA INEZ
DE LA CRUZ
In lath century Mex-
ico she strove to
help the poor and
died while nursing
plague victims.
nationalist and liberal movement of 1848
that the first Feminist, Louise Otto, made
her appearance,"What part should
women play in affairs of State ?", asked a
Liberal newspaper. Louise Otto, then 25,
replied :"Their participation is not a'
right, but a duty. Women, like men, have
a mission to perform ; to wield the sword
of Justice and Truth in the halls of the
Assembly."Moved by the poverty-striken
condition of working women, she also
forwarded to the Minister a plan for the
organization of female labour.
Work !-that was to be, a few years
later, the primary demand put forward by
the German Feminist Movement, parti-
cularly in the east of the country, striken
by a serious agricultural crisis and badly
hit by the development of the heavy in-
dustries of the west.
Led by Louise Otto, who founded the

WOMAN'S STRUGGLE TO
ATTAIN HER RIGHTS
by M ichèle Massane
ARTICLE 16 : 1. Men and women
of full age, without any limitation due
to race, nationality or religion, have
the right to marry and to found a family.
They are entitled to equal rights as to
marriage, during marriage and at its
dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into
only with the free and full consent of
the intending spouses.
3. The family is the natural and
fundamental group unit of society and
is entitled to protection by society and
the State.
ARTICLE 23 : 1. Everyone has the
right to work, to free choice of em-
ployment, to just and favourable condi-
tions of work and to protection against
unemployment.
2, Everyone, without any discrimi-
nation, has the right to equal pay for
equal work.
3, Everyone who works has the right
to just and favourable remuneration
ensuring for himself and his family an
existence worthy of human dignity,
and supplemented, if necessary, by
other means of social protection.
4. Everyone has the right to form
and to join trade unions for the protec-
tion of his interests.
ARTICLE 25 : 1. Everyone has the
right to a standard of living adequate
for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food,
clothing, housing and medical care
and necessary social services, and the
right to security in the event of unem-
ployment, sickness, disability, widow-
hood, old age or other lack of livelihood
in circumstances beyond his control.
2. Motherhood and childhood are
entitled to special care and assistance.
All children, whether born in or out
of wedlock, shall enjoy the same social
protection.
first"General Association of German
Women"in 1865, and Augusta Schmidt
and H. Lange, who formed them in 1890
into the"General Association of Gover-
nesses", they were to fight to obtain the
same education, the same degrees and the
same posts as men. As for the right to
vote, they won it in 1919, under the Wei-
mar Constitution.
In Sweden the leader was Frederika
Bremer, who came across the Feminist
Movement while on a visit to America.
Returning to Sweden, she published
"Herta"in 1856, This novel was to be
the starting point of the whole Feminist
Movement in Sweden.
Frederika Bremer got 25 recognized as
the age at which women attained their
majority. Her discipleost of whom
were married women of the leisured class
- rapidly obtained equality in education.
From 1870 onwards, all the universities
were thrown open to women, who flocked
to them enthusiastically.
With obstinate determination the Swe-
dish women's"League for the right to
vote"campaigned until it met with suc-
cess in 1903.
The Norwegian woman was able to take
advantage of the ideas of equality current
in her democratic country. From the be-
ginning of the XIXth century, she began
to obtain equality in regard to education,
conditions of work and civil rights.
Women no longer had anything to agi-
tate for save political rights, when, in
1885, Gina Krog founded, in Christiania
(today, Oslo), the first association for
women's suffrage. In 1899, 12, 000 women
signed a petition demanding the vote.
Every member of the Storthing found a
copy of it on his desk and they gave the
matter their careful attention. First suc-
cess was registered in 1901, in the muni-
cipal field, when Norwegian women secur-
ed the election of 90 of their sex. In
1907 the doors of Parliament were opened
to them.
In Finland, under Russian domination,
the hour of national awakening had
struck, and the poet Z. Topelius wrote :
"Without women's help it will be impos-
sible to inspire our future generations
with noble ideas".
But the women of Finland were pro-
foundly ignorant, and the whole system
of education needed revising. Sarah
Wacklin, the Finnish woman writer,
founded girls'boarding-schools in Helsin-
ki and elsewhere. Frederika Runeberg
voiced Feminist demands : improvement
in education, in the position of married
women, in conditions of work. F. Bre-
mer's book, by rousing public opinion and
the Press, brought about the first public
debate on Feminism.
At the end of the century the women
took their stand by the men to organize
resistance and, in 1905, they stood by
them to compel Russia to re-open the
Diet, in which they were to take their
seats in 1907,
Bursting like a bombshell in the midst
of peaceful Danish families, the'Letters
of Clara Raphael"written by a girl of
19, split Denmark into two hostile camps.
Although published in 1849, her"Letters"
do not appear to bear the marks of any
foreign influence. Time passed ; the con-
flagration died down, and nothing more
happened until around 1870, Then, sud-
denly, under the instigation of Frederick
Bajer, the Feminist Movement came into
being, organized itself with astonishing
rapidity and straightway demanded the
right to vote. Its adherents immediately
undertook the social and political educa-
tion of women of the working class. In
less than 40 years, Danish women had
obtained the vote (1908) and the right to
stand (1909) in municipal elections. Six
years later, they became eligible for all
political assemblies.
Dutchwomen allowed the middle of the
XIXth century to pass without demons-
tration of any kind. In 1880, a Liberal
minister opened to them the University of
Groningen and, as a natural consequence,
all the other universities. They could
FLORENCE
NIGHTINGALE
She organized med-
ical care of Crimean
War wounded, and
brought about
mititaryhospita)
reforms.
enter any of the professions. But they
still came under the famous Napoleonic
Code, their first Feminists pressed for
civil rights. Aletta Jacobs, the first
Dutch woman student, launched a peti-
tion for the legislative vote in 1883, The
first big campaign organized by the"As-
sociation for Women's Suffrage", on the
occasion of a bill for constitutional
reform, took place in 1905, Dutchwomen
became eligible for election in 1917, and
voters in 1919,
The year 1848-the date of the Con-
vention of Seneca Falls-was a landmark
in the history of Feminism in America.
This Convention was the direct result of
the Anti-slavery Congress held in London.
In the early'thirties, Lucretia Nott had
launched her antislavery campaign, and
neither insults nor threats of death pre-
vented her from speaking.
When, in 1840, an International Con-
gress for the Abolition of Slavery met in
London, L. Nott went there with Elizabeth
Cady Stanton and Elizabeth Pease. But
they were stopped from entering the hall,
and only tolerated as listeners in the gal-
lery,"Very well !" exclaimed Elizabeth
Cady Stanton,"as soon as we get back to
America we will call a meeting to discuss
Woman's slavery". And, indeed, immed-
iately after their return, henceforth
convinced that the abolition of political
incapacity was the key to the abolition of
all other disabilities, they set to work.
The movement now relied on the sup-
port of societies founded in the different
States. In 1848, the delegates assembled
at Seneca Falls voted in favour of a
Convention : since the Government only
exists to safeguard the inalienable rights
of men and women,"if it fails in this
essential duty, the governed may legi-
timately withdraw their allegiance". The
following year, the"National Convention
for Electoral Suffrage"was founded.
After the Civil War, Negrc slavery was
abolished. But women were not include
in the text of the 14th amendment to the
Constitution, giving negroes the right to
After a long struggle, women in many parts of the world have won equality with men.
They have equality before the law in whose application they now participate as judges
and lawyers.
vote. Although certain States, of which
Wyoming was the first in 1869, gave wo-
men the vote, Susan B. Anthony, now the
leader of the Movement, considered the
right should be claimed in the federal
sphere.
In 1872, she took part with fourteen
other women in the federal elections at
Rochester. She was arrested and brought
before the magistrate. Her offence was
to have voted without having the lcol
right to do so. She was sentenced to pay
a fine of 100 dollars, but refused to pay.
Some years later, the"National Asso-
ciation for Women's Suffrage"had be-
come the heart of a solid and powerful
organization. Each year, a Congress
brought together delegates from all over
the Union. At the Congress held in
Washington in 1888, the idea of an Inter-
national Women's Association was put
forward. Five years later, at Chicago, the
"International Women's Council"was
formed, to which all countries gradually
became affiliated.
America, England and France, the
EMMELINE
PANKHURST
She led English-
women In their de-
termined and vic-
torious fight for the
right to vote.
triple cradle of Feminism, were the
countries in which the struggle for the
vote was to be the longest and the most
arduous.
In Manchester, England, in 1905, Sir
Edward Grey, who was presiding over an
important electoral meeting, had just
finished his speech."When do you
intend giving the vote to Englishwomen ?"
shouted a woman. For the first time, the
"Women's Political and Social Union"
had made its voice heard. At the head
of it was Mrs. Emmeline Pankhurst who,
tired of false promises by the Govern-
ment, had decided to go into action with
her adherents. Thenceforward,"suffra-
gettes"were to use direct methods of
agitation ; causing uproar at political
meetings, demonstrating outside Parlia-
ment, badgering ministers even at the
theatre and in drawing-rooms, organizing
mass parades.
From 1912 onwards, exasperated by
persistent obstruction in Parliament, their
action became more violent. But when
war came, their one thought was to work
for victory, following which they were
given the right to vote.
In 1917, in order to obtain the vote, the
little group of American"Militants"went
Into ö"Lion On 10 January, 12 women,
carrying banners H--ibed with their
claims, took up their stand, and
motionless, in front of the White House.
The following day other women took their
places. So, day after day, the silent but
symbolic sentinels mounted guard. On
22 June. accused of"obstructing the traf-
fic", they were arrested as a warning, and
then released. They immediately return-
ed to take up their watch. This time
they were sent to prison, for they refused
to pay the fine.
Courageous as these women were, it
was, nevertheless, not their spectacular
efforts but persistent and often obscure
work on the part of the mass of American
Feminists-of which the"Militants"
formed only a small fraction-which
finally gave American women their rights
of citizenship.
Ever since 1780, the public monuments
of France have been inscribed with the
words : Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. But
though the Chamber of Deputies was pre-
pared, from 1925 onwards, to give real
liberty to women and to place them on an
equality, the Senate fiercely opposed any
change. The year 1944 however, saw the
liberation of France and the granting of
the vote to Frenchwomen.
What a long way we have come espe-
cially, since the beginning of the century !
Women have proved their worth in every
field.
Yet, in spite of an equality accepted in
principle, custom, prejudices and material
conditions still prevail which tend to re-
establish a measure of inequality. This
must be fought against."We now have
to proclaim", as M. Jaime Torres Bodet
has urged,"that mankind needs-and
needs urgently-the active intervention of
women, who have at last attained their
majority. It is the recognition of a right,
of a hard-won dignity, to give women the
means of complete self-development and
self-determination ; it is also the response
to a vital need of to-day".
Mielll'le Massone, the all/11m'o {/Ms artie/.'
has sp"eializ"d, dnl'illg h"r ell1'''"r as a JOIlI"
nalist, in women's affairs, particularly in
regard to national legislation affecting,
