EDUCATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
IT is only a little while, againstthe scale of recorded history,
since any who claimed the
right to education for everybody
would have been thought mad.
He would probably have been
thought dangerous also. Yet on
December 10th, three years ago,
the Governments of the Member
States of the United Nations
solemnly declared that every one
did have the right to education.
This solemn assurance did not,
it is true, have the force of law,
for it was not made in a Treaty
or Covenant. But this Article 26
of the Universal Declaration does
set a standard, so that if any one
anywhere in the world claims that
his right to education is not being
given in practice he knows that
he is asking for something that
the governments of the world have
said should be his.
There are many who could make
such a protest at the present time.
More than half of the adult men
and women in the world cannot
even read or write. We do not
know exactly how many of the
children of the world between the
ages of six and twelve are not in
regular attendance at school, but
it can hardly be a much smaller
proportion.
We know that access to educ-
ation is not always given without
discrimination of"race, colour, sex,
language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other
status", as the Declaration says it
should be.
Prejudice and poverty
THIS is not due only to preju-1 dice, though there is a great
deal of prejudice in the world still.
It is due also to the difficulties in
which nations find themselves,
though they accept the principle,
in turning it into practice, that is
b say in building the new schools
requ m ending and p"ying tho
teachers to man them, and in
raising their general standard of
life so that they can support such
financial burdens. For very many
countries there is little chance of
doing these things without inter-
national aid.
That is where Unesco comes in,
both through its own activities
and through its partnership in the
United Nations programme of
Technical Assistance to raise the
economic level of life in under-
developed countries.
by üonel Elvin
(Director. Department of Education, Unesco)
Unesco plays its part in three
ways. It is concerned, in an advi-
sory capacity, with the attempt
now being made to supplement the
Declaration by a Covenant. It is
concerned with international edu-
cational assistance to those coun-
tries that request it for turning
this principle into fact. And it is
concerned with getting the idea of
Human Rights understood in the
schools so that our boys and girls
will be fitted to become responsible
citizens of the world of to-morrow.
The Commission on Human
Rights, at its Seventh Session in
April and May of this year,
discussed the right to education, in
common with other rights, when it
was drawing up a draft Covenant
to submit to the Economic and
Social Council. Unesco, through
the Director-General and members
of the Secretariat, took part in
If this were done the advance in
the life of the peoples of the world
would be incalculable.
Now the Economic and Social
Council, when it received this draft
Covenant from the Commission,
raised the question whether social
rights of this kind ought to be in
one Covenant with political and
civic rights ; and it has referred
that question to the General
Assembly which is now meeting in
Paris. The Executive Board of
Unesco believes there should be a
single Covenant so as to link eco-
nomic, social and cultural rights
with civil and political liberties,
and it has asked the Director-
General to emphasise this at the
General Assembly. It has also in-
vited him to continue discussions
with the Member States of Unesco
to ascertain their views as to the
substance of the draft clauses on
ARTICLE 26 : 1. Everyone has the right to education. Education
shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Ele-
mentary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional
education shall be made generally available and higher education shall
be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
2. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human
personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance and
friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further
the activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace.
3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that
shall be given to their children. <.
these meetings. Two Articles in
the draft Covenant dealt with
education.
The first of these has several
clauses. It re-asserts the right
of everybody to education, says
that primary education shall
compulsory and avi1a. l>le free
to all, tH./ihat secondary education
shall be generally available and
made progressively free, and that
fundamental education (for those
who have not received proper
primary education) shall be encou-
raged : and there are other impor-
tant clauses.
The second of these articles is
particularly interesting, for it binds
every Member State that signs the
Covenant, and that does not yet
have free and compulsory primary
education, to draw up (within two
years) a plan for achieving It
within a reasonable period of time.
education rights.
Many countries are in fact
pressing on with schooling, and
Unesco has been putting into effect
its first measures for assisting
them
An international conference on
the subject was held last summer
in Geneva, under the joint auspi-
ces of Unesco and the Interna-
tional Bureau of Education ; and
this will be followed by regional
conferences to work things out in
more local detail (the first being
for the countries of southern Asia
and the South Pacinc, in 1952).
For this purpose studies will be
made (six have already been) on
the problem as it affects particular
countries, until a study has been
made for every country in the
world. Expert advisers will be sent
by Unesco on the request of Mem-
ber States, to help them by bring-
ing international experience to
their aid.
The third way in which Unesco
links education and Human Rights
is broader : it concerns the under-
standing in our schools and uni-
versities of the concept of Human
Rights as a whole.
"human Rights"is of course not
a subject that can be taught, like
history or geography or mathema-
tics ; though much teaching, espe-
cially in history, will involve study
of them and of the struggle to win
them. In the same way the
consciousness of what their own
country stands for is in part taught
to boys and girls and young people
through their school subjects.
Lesson in living
BUT it goes further than that :it is conveyed through school
activities and school ceremonies
and through the way the school
conducts itself and feels itself
as part of the community. In the
same way an international society
in which human rights are really
respected can be felt through the
schools as a growing reality, over
and above what is formally taught
in class.
To think out how to do these
things is not easy. Unesco is
calling a seminar of teachers in the
summer of 1952 to discuss the best
methods in the school. In con-
nexion with this it is preparing a
handbook of hints for teachers,
and a book of basic documents,
with scholarly commentaries,
illustrating the struggle for human
rights in the past and the present.
It is asking Member States, this
year and every year, to observe
Human Rights Day in their schools.
These things can all help to make
a better world, for the schoolchil-
dren of today when they are grown
men and women.
But to do this, they must be
taken up with vigour and with
imagination everywhere. How
many of our schools are satisfied
that they do now treat their own
children without discrimination of
sex, or colour, or politics or religion,
or give a view of other people that
recognises their equal rights too ?
If every teacher, schoolboy or
schoolgirl who reads this article
could think of one thing in his own
school where this was not yet done,
and would set out to make practice
there accord with the principles of
the Declaration before December
10th, 1952, this would be a truly
significant year in the history of
human rights.
Although many nations accept the principle of free access to education for
all, they lack the means to provide schools and train teaching staffs for
them. Where teachers are available, however, improvised classrooms can
be organized, like the'one shown above, held in an Indonesian village.
