FOR several years past, a message of international unity has beenfinding its way into the albums of many stamp collectors who have
avidly been seeking postage stamps, envelopes and cancellation
marks related to the activities of the United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies. Since the celebration of United Nations Day on October 24,
this"international'''stamp collection has been enriched'by several new
items, some of which are reproduced on this page. One of these,"People
of the World", is a one-cent maroon-coloured stamp which symbolizes
the principal races of mankind being released from bondage and looking
with hope towards the United N'ations. Another stamp,"World Unity",
is for 20 cents, and shows the United Nations emblem between the hemi-
spheres of the world, with the words"United Nations"in French and
Spanish. The first group of stamps issued on October 24 consisted of
one-cent, one-and-a-half-cent, three-cent, five-cent, 25-cent and one-
dollar denominations. Five denominations-two, ten, 15. 20 and 50
cents-will be released on November 16, and four air mail values-six,
ten, 15 and 25 cents-on November 30. The United Nations stamps will
be used on official communications despatched by mail from United
Nations headquarters in New York, and on private correspondence sent
through the headquarters post office. A special philatelic sales office
will also be opened at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, where the United
Nations General Assembly meets this month. Postage stamps have
already shown their value as a means of spreading ideas and informa-
tion, and these latest issues will undoubtedly help to make better known
the ideals and work of the United Nations. Although Unesco has not
itself issued any stamps its work has been recorded on those issued by
several countries which include Belgium, France, Italy, the Lebanon and
Mexico. In Belgium, for example, a new series of three special stamps
with surtax has helped the work of Unesco's Rehabilitation Service. In
France, a cancellation mark which reads :"Through Education, Science
and Culture, Unesco is serving the cause of Peace"is stamped on
envelopes by post offices in Paris, Bordeaux, Lyons and Lille.
A NEW MESSAGE
OF WORLD UNITY
