MODERN ARCHAEOLOGISTS'DIG'
FROM AEROPLANES
OCTOBER I 9 51
BRITISH farmers near Andoverwere sceptical when they
heard that there were clear
and unmistakeable traces of
an important native settlement
buried in their fields. They
knew every inch of their land,
and there were definitely no signs
that they could see of it. Their
district had long been of interest
to archaeologists, but these
experts had never found any
"clues"in the ground to such a
settlement.
The way in which it was
discovered seemed strange too. It
was not by excavations, but by
air photographs. And the pic-
tures were taken, not before
cultivation started, when it was
easiest to see the land, but just
prior to harvest time, when the
thick crop made the soil virtually
invisible.
But after they saw the photo-
graphs, there was no doubt about
it : there, among the growing
'crops, was a remarkably clear
outline of what the settlement
looked like in plan. Even long-
buried ditches and pits were
revealed.
For the archaeologists, it was
another example of how air
photography can yield results that
observers on the ground can never
hope for.
Variations in vegetation reflect
features buried below the surface
and long lost to sight. Photo-
by Richard O'FARRELL
graphs taken from the air can
give extraordinarily detailed cla-
rification of these features, thus
enabling archaeologists to recon-
struct the history, form and
growth of towns, villages, garri-
sons and buildings.
Nature's Sketch Book
E YEN when such markingscan be seen from the
ground, they are often so
distorted by perspective that no
recognizable pattern can be dis-
cerned. The aircraft, on the
other hand, provides an overall
survey.
Air photography has, of course,
been used extensively in Britain
and other countries for town and
country planning and in the
revision of maps. But archaeo-
logists cannot obtain all the in-
formation they want from these
high altitude photographs, which
are taken at any time of the year.
Their investigations call for a
more detailed reconnaissance
carried out at between 1, 000 and
3, 000 feet under the right
conditions of lighting, weather
and vegetation.
Only for a short period each
summer, a few weeks before
harvest time, does arable land
become nature's historical sketch
book, when the infinite patterns
of crop-markings disclose to
archaeologists the presence, the
character and even the epoch of
buried features.
But in these few weeks of
each year, Britain's air-minded
archaeologists have already made
a large number of important
discoveries. For instance, three
Roman forts which they located
in Watling Street offer a big
opportunity of obtaining new
information about the history of
the Roman conquest.
The usefulness of these photo-
graphs also depends on the soil
and type of crop. In general,
long-rooted cereals, viewed in the
late spring or early summer, give
the most sensitive renderings.
Photographs taken at Carriden,
Linlithgowshire in 1945, clearly
revealed the three ditches of a
fort under a crop of wheat ; the
following year, a grass crop
showed nothing.
Rotation of Clues
OFTEN the most satisfactoryresults are not to be obtain-
ed unless observations are
made over a number of years.
Only a proportion of agricultural
land will give results at any one
time ; rotation of crops will reveal
different"clues".
Year after year the archaeolo-
gists returned to photograph the
Roman camps at Dunblane,
Scotland, and each time they got
a more complete idea of just what
it looked like over a couple of
thousand years ago.
The extreme drought of 1949
caused the plan of one corner of
the 50-acre legionary fortress at
Inchtuthill, Perthshire, to appear
in exceptional detail as parch-
marks in rough grass. It reveal-
ed that there would have been
rows of timber barracks arranged
in facing pairs. Not only the
main walls, but also the internal
partitions of the barracks became
clear, forming a remarkable
record of the plan of a timber
fortress such as cannot at present
be seen anywhere else throughout
the territories that formed the
Roman Empire.
Under the searching gaze of
the air camera, even Stonehenge
- one of the best known and
most studied monuments in the
world-had to reveal some of the
secrets it had kept from archaeo-
logists for centuries.
The possibilities of aerial
archaeology are immense, and
already its discoveries cover all
periods between the New Stone
Age and the present day. It is an
instrument of research of the
utmost value in the study of man's
social development.
i
(f'h% s copyright by lJr. J. 1\. S/JOBeplt,
f"/lil'P/"-'i/y of (' (/m/J/irl ! JI'.) 
A FORTRESS IS REVEALED.-Only an aerial photograph could show the
shape of this ancient fort at Bonchester Hill (Roxburghshire), which was pro-
bably occupied from prehistoric times until the Roman era.
CEMETERY JUNCTION.-As day draws to a close, a striking picture is
taken of these prehistoric tumuli near Lambourn (Berkshire). The junction
in the road is known as Seven Barrows (i. e. burial mounds).
THE ROMANS CAMPED HERE.-These remarkable foundations at Chew
Green (Northumberland) are located beside the main Roman road to Scotland.
In this wild piece of country Caesar's armies rested.

STONEHENGE, the most famous megalithic monument in Great Britain, has been studied by archaeologists from all over the world. This aerial photo-
graph shows the complexity of the memorial, whose construction extended over a long period. The view was taken from the east along the line of the ave-
., nue, which can be seen extending to the bottom right-hand corner of the picture.,....
ROMAN'RUNWAY'.-The archaeologist who went up to photograph a
relic of 2, 000 years ago-a Roman road intersection which had been revealed
by parch marks in the grass at Badbury Rings (Dorset)-was amazed
at its similarity to plane runways.
HADRIAN'S DEFENCE POST.-This view of the fort of Housesteads,
with the wall and military road threading their way along the crags, is probably
the first single photograph to give the elements of the frontier scheme which
was based on Hadrian's Wall.

AERIAL ARCHAEOLOGY
(continues)
CLUES TAO THE
HIDDEN PAST
The existence of this big henge"
monument at Coupland (North-
umberland) was unknown until
two years ago when aerial pho-
tography revealed a striking dif-
ference in the colour of the
vegetation. Yet this"clue"to a
memorial that would have been
about 280 ft in diameter could
not be distinguished by an observ-
er on the ground. In the same
way, details of an oval-shaped
building at Hutton Moor, York-
shire, were revealed by the lines
in a cereal harvest. It would
have been surrounded by a large
embankment and two moats-
one inside it and the other out-
side-which were cut by the
two entrances. These are stri king
examples of the part aviation can
play in both archaeology and
physical geography. In the I 920's.
aircraft revealed lost towns and
civilizations in Syria and Mesopo-
tamia. A number of universities,
especially in France, use air pho-
tographs in their studies of vol-
canic areas, soil erosion and
geology. Recently, under the
auspices of the United Nations.
an international centre was set
up at Delft (Holland) to train
specialists in the aerial exploration
of regions whose resources were
insufficiently well known. Here,
therefore, aerial photography is
simu) taneous) yhetpinggeo ! ogists,
map-makers and agricukurists.
(Photos copyright by J. K. St. Joseph)
OCTOBER 1951
