THE RIGHT TO FREE AND
COMPULSORY EDUCATION
by Jean Debiesse, Assistant Director
of Primary Education in France
THE right of every human being to education is, of all the rights affirmed by the United Nations
Declaration of 1948, one of the ! east contested. Yet there are still places which have not yet
applied Article 26, which states that elementary education should be free and compulsory. Today,
the question is more alive than ever following campaigns for fundamental education and for equal
access to secondary education.
A long-term programme for free and compulsory education in the spirit of the Human Rights Decla-
ration planned by Unesco has now been approved by the Organization's General Conference. The
urgency of the problem is also shown by its choice as the main subject for discussion at the fourteenth
International Conference on Public Education, which opened in Geneva on July 12, under the auspices
of Unesco and the International Bureau of Education.
A N'CIE1'.'T holy writings, according to thehistorian Zosimus, report that certain
angels fell in love with women and went
down to the Earth, where they taught about
the workings of nature. For this, they were
banished.
According to this version, it was only after
that period that women were able to teach
their children to drink, eat, walk, k, run-to
adapt themselves progressively to the life of
adults.
Now, this basic culture may have been suffi-
cient in the caveman period, but it leaves much
to be desired in our modern world. The man
of today swims in a sea of letters and figures,
from taxes to train timetables, from farming
and machine manuals to voting. The whole
problem of living and of improving one's life
is bound up in the acquiring of these skills.
The modern State has more and more to take
up the task of completin the culture that
children receive from their family. It is a
logical outgrowth of civilization.
Society cannot permit a baby to remain
naked and without food. Society cannot permit
a baby to fall prey to disease. No more can
society permit a baby to grow up lacking
fundamental knowledge of his surroundings.
Out of this concept grew, toward the 19th
century, the idea of establishing compulsory
education. But, among impoverished peoples,
it is not possible to yield completely the
dependence on child labour : everyone, children
and adults, must spend his time in seeking
sufficient daily bread to maintain life.
It is because economic conditions were
favourable in western civilization-thanks to
the development of machines, and to general
improvement in standards of living-that
certain countries were able to pioneer the
development of compulsory education.
There were no insurmountable difficulties.
As a matter of fact, in most of these countries,
more than three-fifths of the children already
were going to school. Thus, the reform was
accepted without too much trouble and has
since helped to lay the foundation for the great
democracies of today.
But all this is no reason why an abyss should
open between the nations which instruct their
children and the ones that have not yet arrived
at that point. Both groups must work together,
for it IS intolerable in our times that nearby
half the people in this world cannot read or
write. General ignorance creates fanaticism
and superstition, and leads often to hate and
war.
It is just and it is necessary that all the
children of the world should have the right to
equal opportunity. Each child should have the
chance to reach any position through merit, no
matter what his race, reliPion or social origin.
. this ideal is the motivating force which has
led Unesco to undertake a campaign for
compulsory education. The educators of the
world, with the help uf Unesco, are consulting
together and poohng their experiences and
results in primary education.
Even the most convinced Doubting Thomas
must learn that riioney spent on education is
the most fruitful of all investments. All must
learn that the mutual aid of all the nations is
necessary to realize the instruction of all the
children on this earth, despite the very real
difficulties that lie in the way.
This is one of the ways in which Unesco can
fulfil its aim of solidarity and co-operation in
working for the general good and for peace.
