: 0 BOOK FUND PROGRAMME :
ING KNOWLEDGE UP TO DATE
Six years after the entire University of Caen was destroyed during me Allied advance through
Normandy, University Rector, P ! erre Daure (extreme left) watches the construction of the first new
building. The University's temporary library, housed in a former school, recently received a
consignment of CARE-UNESCO books donated through the help of the War Dads Auxiliary of
Kansas City, Missouri.
At Goethe Um-
versity, Frankfurt.
Germany, gifts of
some of the new-
est American sci-
entific and tech-
nical books don-
ated through the
CARE-UNESCO
Book Fund Pro-
gramme, are exa-
mined by (left to
right) : Professor
of Medicine Ar-
nold Lauche ; Dr.
Boris Rajewsky,
Rector of the Uni-
versity, and Pro-
fessor Herbert
0'Daniel, of the
Department of
Physical Science.
IN a small Greek town towards the
end of 1949, a six-year-old girl was
brought into a doctor's surgery,
feverish, vomiting and complaining
of a severe headache. The doctor dia-
gnosed the case as meningitis and sent
her to the nearest hospital.
Here, the case was confirmed as one
of tuberculous meningitis, and the
child was rushed to Athens where, the
hospital doctor had read, similar cases
had been successfully treated with
streptomycin.
The use of this drug saved the child,
but for this one fortunate case where
the doctor knew of recent advances
in medicine, there are many others
where children do not get the same
chance.
Knowledge is slow to spread particu-
larly in under developed countries and
in others that were cut off by the
war from information on advances in
medical skill and treatment. It was
to resume and increase the diffusion of
knowledge in this and other fields that
the CARE-UNESCO Book Fund Pro-
gramme was begun just over 18 months
ago.
Paul Comly French, executive direc-
tor of the Co-operative of American
Remittances to Europe (CARE), open-
ed the programme. Shortly after, on
July 15, 1949, 18 new technical books
were presented to the University of
Louvain in Belgium.
But as the programme got under
way, the University of Louvain-twice
destroyed in the two Great Wars-re-
ceived a second gift of $1, 000 worth
of books. And other shipments went
to other institutions around the world.
One Year-50, 000 Books
IN the first year of operation, theFund made 530 shipments, t talling
nearly 50, 000 books and periodicals
to 24 countries. Greece alone-which
had 91 per cent of its schools de-
stroyed or rendered unusable during
the war-received 31 shipments of new
technical books.
Contributions for books and medical
equipment tallied up to nearly one
million dollars.
During the year, the programme has
been expanded to take in not only
war-torn countries, but also nations
with development problems. The coun-
tries which have participated in the
programme include : Austria, Belgium,
Burma, Ceylon, Czechoslovakia, Fin-
land, France, the Western zone of
Germany and Berlin, Great Britain,
Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Jordan
Korea, Malta, Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Thai-
land and Yugoslavia. All except
Czechoslovakia and Poland are stillparticipating.
At this moment new contracts are
being negotiated in the South Ame-
rican countries which have expressed
an interest in the Book Fund.
The categories available have been
enlarged too. Now, they include medi-
cine, health and welfare, dentistry,
nursing, pharmacy, agricultural science,
veterinary science, biology, mathema-
tics, physics, chemistry, engineering,
English language instruction, teaching
and education, geology, library admi-
nistration, psychology, sociology and
statistics.
This expanding programme under-
lines both CARE's and UNESCO's de-
sire to do something in the service of
peace that is both concrete and lasting.
Tools Of Progress
CARE is the welfare agency thathas del i v ere d approximately
$100 ; 000, 000 in food and textile
packages to Europe and Asia since
1945. Its primary aim was, and is, to
provide an efficient, reputable channel
by which individual Americans could
sent gifts to their friends and relatives
abroad. But, simultaneously, the or-
ganization decided :"Relief sustains,
but we must also progress."
Books and scientific equipment are
obvious tools of progress. CARE has
delivered medical equipment, bought
by the U. S. State Department, to
11 West German universities. The
schools each received an iron lung
(costing about $1, 500, to be used
for treatment as well as training pur-
poses), oxygen tents, radium (for can-
cer treatment), anaesthesia apparatus
and medical literature.
Carefully designed hand ploughs are
now being sent to India and Pakistan
so that these people can"grow their
own packages".
In the book field, CARE looked to
UNESCO for help and direction.
The first step in developing the Book
Fund was UNESCO's survey of need.
It was discovered that 1016 of the
world's important libraries were, in-
deed, in desperate need.
Priority listings were made of insti-
tutions. Then UNESCO and CARE
queried the libraries and universities
as to which books they needed most.
At that point, CARE took over. It
approached the American people.
"Here is the need", CARE said."Here
are the means to fill ; the need. But,
between the need and the fulfillment
stand dollars we do not have."
A $ 1, 000, 000 Answer
THE one-million dollars that camei. to CABE's New York office and
its local offices-in the United
States, Oanada and South America-
were the answer. Contributions la-
belled,"For the Book Fund, have
come from every state in the Union,
Hawaii. Alaska, the Canal Zone, Co-
lumbia, Mexico, Venezuela, Canada,
Turkey, Germany, England and France.
To-day, the need continues. CARE
recently announced that the Depart-
ment of Geology at Seoul National
University in Korea has received a top
priority rating. The reason : although
mining is one of Korea's major in-
dustries, the geology library had only
a few old Japanese books on this vast
subject even before the recent bombing
and fighting in Seoul. In fact, not
until four years ago did Korea even
have a department of geology as it
had been under Japanese occupation.
As soon as it is practicable, CARE
plans to send at least the nucleus of
an up-to-date library on geology to
Seoul, providing the funds are avail-
able. Thus CARE-UNESCO aim to
help in the reconstruction of another
wounded country.
