MEXICO'S"SCHOOLS
WITHOUT WALLS"
TEACH THE LESSON
OF SELF-HELP
Hundreds of thousands of Mexican
t-) who live in rural areas, not only
far from the big towns but also
lacking most of the material ele-
ments of ordinary modern well-being,
are being slowly but surely heaped
toward the achievement of better per-
sonal and communal standards of living
and working.
The improvement Is being brought
about through the work of 48 rural mis-
sions which the Mexican Government
sent out ton 146 remote zones, with a
combined population of 540, 000, under
its remarkable Cultural Mission Pro-
gramme. First launched In 1923, then
re-established on a broader and firmer
basis in 1942, and further developed
during the last few years, this pro-
gramme works on the fundamental
principle of adult education that the
people should be helped to help them-
selves to solve their problems.
Some of the major achievements of
the rural missions are described in
"The i1lexican Culluml Mission P,'o-
gramme,"an 80-page booklet, written
by Lloyd H. Hughes, and recently pu-
blished bY Unesco as the third in its
series of monographs on Fundamental
Education. 1r. Hughes, who was sent
to Mexico by Unesco in the summer of
1949. sets forth in detail the story of
the evolution of fundamental education
in Mexico during the thirty years since
the battle cry"tierra y escuelas" (land
and schools) resounded throughout the
land until it reached the ears of the
remotest Indians.
His conclusion on the basis of a care-
ful studv of the rural missions'work
in 1948 and 1949 is"that slightly sunder
45 % of the people living in zones where
missions hare worked haL'e benefited
from the cultural mission projects and
activities."
Ending Rural Isolation
"T lie cultural missions,"J1fr, Hug liesdeclare ,.. have contributed
greatly to tlre overcuming oj the
physical and mental isolation in which
tile'campesino'and tile Indian live ;
they ?//iafe also given rural communi'ies
a sense of inlerdependence and relation-
ship with the rest of tile population. in
this ! I ; ay they hrwe contributed to the
triumph of nationalism over regionalism
and localism,
.. Frequently, as in Los Reyes de Jail-
re=. a village near Tepeaca in the S'r ; te
of Puebla, they ha'e checked'L'illage
and inter-villaue l'ivalries and promoted
co-operation to solve joint problems.
They have also made the'campesi-
nos'better producers and consumers
through the introduction of new crops
and bet'per domestic anim2ls, techniques
of production and diet.
"The set'ere tasks of rural 7, L'omen
have been lightened through the intro-
duction of communal"molinos de nix-
tamal" (corn mills) and ! sewing mac/t-
ines, and through a distribution of chore, 
among all able members of the family.
'Campesinos,'especially Indians, have
been encouraged to consult doctors and
to use modern medicines. The intro-
duction off recreation programmes and
music has given a new orientation to na-
tional and local festivals and helped to
overcame the problem of alcoholism in
many areas."
Eighteen of the missions work in
Federal eapital. Tile programme also
includes the use of a number of moto-
rized and cinematographic missions.
Leaders Of Change
During 1948-1949 the rural missionsconcentrated on improvement of
economy and health ; improvement
of the home and domestic life ; develop-
ment of sound recreational and cultural
activities ; material improvement of ru-
ral communities. Most of the teams in-
cluded a home economics leader, a nurse
and midwife, an agriculture teacher, a
construction teacher, a trades teacher, a
mechanics teacher and a leader of re-
creational activities.
In general, stress was put on agri-
cultural improvement, such as the in-
troduction of new crops and new meth-
ods of farming. A grafting campaign
was sponsored during which thousands
of shoots, mostly of fruit trees, contra--
buted by growers in Sierra Norte de
Puebla and Amanalco de Becerra, were
employed.
In the vicinity of Hueyapan and Yao-
nahuac, Puebla, extremely good results
were obtained in convincing farmers to
use chemical fertilizers to increase
yields. Tiie missions'teachers of agri-
culture taught large numbers of far-
mers in many regions how to vaccinate
their poultry ; they imported blooded
fowl from the United States to improve
creole varieties ; and they demonstrated
building of brooder houses.. Improved
methods of livestock raising and breed-
ing, and the development of local small
industries were also taught. In Nati-
vitas, Tlaxcala and Hueyapan, Morelos,
classes in small industries were orga-
nised as well as producers'co-oper-
atives to market their products. The
building of dams, rain-water reservoirs
and small irrigation canals was pro-
moted and farmers were shown how
to prevent soil erosion.
A Better Home Life
one of the major activities, Mr. Hu-ghes points out, was"to help raise
the moral standards o (the poople
by teaching affection and consideration
for mother, the protection of woman
and children, and a more equitable dis-
tribution o (chores among all members
o (the (amily. Classes in child care, no-
trition, cooking and sewing were orga-
nized (or young women and mothers."
ART HELPS EDUCATION. Mission teachers in plastic arts try to assls'me growth
of the social campaign through stimulating pictures. This painting, for example, has for
subject the literacy campaign.
The missions all co-operated with the
Government's literacy campaign, main-
taining 125 schools and encouraging
town and village authorities and par-
ents'societies to raise the very low sal-
aries of teachers. In many towns
reading rooms and small libraries were
established for the use of newly literate
readers and one, at Santiago Ixcuintla,
now has 5, 000 books.
The greatest lack, : \11'. Hughes found,
was of personnel trained to serve suc-
cessfullv as members of missions.
This situation, not limited to Mexico, is
one of the reasons which has led
Unesco to set up a centre for the train-
ing of fundamental education teachers,
for Latin America. (See Pages 8 and 9
of this tissue.) This centre is being
established in Mexico where students
from many countries of Latin America
will stud' methods of Fundamental
Education'under an international sta1l
including Mexican experts. Their field
studY will take them into Mexican
communities, where they will be able to
study at first hand the work of the
Mexican Cultural Missions.