A NEW nation will be born on Jan-uary 1, 1952, when the three pro
vinces of a former Italian colony
will be united as the independent State
of Libya-the first country in history
to be created by a world organization.
Since World War II, Cyrenaica and
Tripolitania have temporarily been
administered by the United Kingdom
and the Fezzan by France. The future
status of the three regions was finally
settled in November 1949, when thé
United Nations General Assembly, without
a dissenting vote, recommended that
Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan
"shall be constituted an independent,
sovereign State."
PoliticaIIy, Libya is weIl on the road to
shouldering the responsibilities of State-
hood. A provisional government was
established by the Libyan National
Assembly in March, 1951. This Assembly
also recommended that Sayed Mohamed
Idriss El Sennusi, the Amir of Cyrenaica,
should become the constitutional monarch
of the new country, the United Kingdom
of Libya.
But national viability requires more
than a political constitution. Mr. Adrian
Pelt, who has been United Nations
Commissioner in Libya since January
1950, has continually emphasized that
the United Nations has an equally great
responsibility in providing Libya with
the technical assistance it needs to
develop a sound economy and set up
efficient governmental machinery.
The immensity of this task is express-
ed in his reports. The three regions of
Libya total 1, 150, 000 inhabitants living on
1, 750, 000 square kilomètres, but much of
this land is desert. The country's
average per capita income is a mètre
$35 a year.
Mr. Pelt summed up Libya as"an
THE UNITED NATIONS HELPS A NEW STATE
. Ta PREPARE FOR INDEPENDENCE
LI BYA
underdevelcped area with a marginal
agricultural economy, basically handi-
capped by inadequate rainfall and poor
soil :' Irrigation, dry farming, and
animal husbandry in the coastal regions,
however, can support Libya once she
possesses the knowledge and skills needed
to work land in these regions efficiently.
This need raises serious educational
problems. From 1942 to 1946, no schools
were open in Libya. Even today, the
elementary school population of the
entire region is only 39, 000 (and no more
than a few hundred children attend
secondary schools). Mr. Pelt reported that
Libya's minimum requirement is school-
ing for 100, 000.
This deficiency, couplet with antiquat-
ed agricultural methods and heavy war
damage, Jed him to write :"Unless means
are found to improve the agricultural
techniques of the country and to bring
in new capital investment, there is a
grave danger that the Libyan economy
will sink back toward a pastoral economy
of nomadism, with inevitable social and
political consequences which may jeo-
pardise the very existence of the State."
In July 1950, at Mr. Pelt's request, a
United Nations mission surveyed Libya
to ascertain in what ways the United
Nations Expanded Programme of Tech-
nical Assistance for Economic Develop-
ment could help the creation of the new
State. On the recommendations of this
mission, a programme was drawn up
showing the means by which the United
Nations and its Specialized Agencies
could begin furnishing aid.
This called for international experts to
begin work in Libya in such fields as
pilblic finance, education, agriculture,
viticulture, irrigation, wool production,
electric power and social welfare.
A study of public finance in Libya has
already been published, and the United
Nations experts are now advising on
specifie problems. In the field of vital
statistics, a sample census of three
selected tribes has been conducted, thus
giving the region reliable demographic
statistics-a prerequisite for any sound
economic development plan.
In the field of education, Unesco was
given a specialized rôle. Working in
co-operation with the British administra-
tion of Tripolitania, it has set up a
technical training centre to prepare
young Libyans for posts in the new
government.
This centre, in which 230 students
were enrolled during its first year of
operation, does not aim much higher
than supplying the foundations-the
clerks, the typists and the secretaries-
needed for an efficient civil service.
Unesco is alsQ awarding fellowships to
enable Libyans to study abroad and
prepare themselves for higher adminis-
trative posts in their country's new
government.
In addition, Unesco has begun to
establish another centre in Libya design-
ed to train primary school teachers and
to produce the teaching materials they
require. This centre is also intended to
furnish specialized personnel tue attack
the problem of illiteracy, of which Libya
has a high percentage.
In ail, more than sixty experts have
been sent te Libya by the United Nations
and its Agencies and nearly 50 fellowships
and scholarships have been awarded.
This aid has been described by
Mr. Pelt as"one of the most constructive
and most useful examples"of how the
United Nation's technical assistance
programme for underdeveloped regions
can operate.
FEZZAN
Greatest area, fewest people
THE Fezzan is bounded on the west bv southernJL Algeria, southern Tunisia and Tunisia, n the
south by Trench zest Africa and French Equa-
torial Africa, on the East by Cyrenaica and on the north
hy Tripolitania. It is a vast depression, with an area
of some 800, 000 square kilometres, enclosed within pla-
teaux which isolate it from the sea-some 500 to 600 kilo-
metres distant-and from the neighbouring lands.
Within the depression lie three oases-Sebha, Brak and
Murzak-around which is grouped the non-migratory
population. Widely scattered and thinly planted
palm groves are also to be found in the Zelal.
The population of the Fezzan is estimated at 50, 000,
of which one-fifth are nomads or semi-nomads. The
non-migratory population is found within the depres-
sion ; on its fringe and beyond live thé nomadic or semi-
uomadic peoples. In the north these are tribes of fair-
skinned stock with a strong Berber influence. In the
south, in the foothills of the Tibesti and in ail thé area
as far as Fort Lamy, Tebbous of Hamitic origin are to
be found. ln the Tassili, in the west, there are sections
of the Berber Confederation of the Tuareg-Adjer, who
are scattered between Timbuctoo and Nigeria.
Ethnically, the non-migratory population of the
interior is mixed, containing Elements of both fair and
black races. They ! ive among palm trees, cultivating
wheat, dates, barley, millet and sorghum. This popu-
lation can be divided into two groups ; three-quarters
are very poor, deriving their livelihood from the harsh
and unremitting labour with which they irrigate small
lots of land ; the remaining quarter might be described
as the middle class of the country, living in relative ease.
These are the landowners, traders and officiais.
The subsistence economy of thé Fezzan, based upon
an oasis pals-gardien culture, is handicapped hy the
difficulty of obtaining water and by primitive methods
of irrigation and cultivation. The depressed economic
situation is reflected in the under-nourishment of the
population and the al1llUal emigration, which further
aggravates the problem of manpower.
The chief resource of the Fezzan is the date patm.
Estimâtes of their number vary considerably, but most
of them are wild and uncultivated, and it is probable
that not more than 1, 000, 000 date palms are product-
ive. The date crop, of about 15, 000 tons annuaUy,
is in excess of local needs, and the surplus is bartered
for oil and barley with the nomads or exported by cara-
van or lorry. The poor quality of the crop, together
with the transport cost to markets, limits its export
value. Local production of grain is insufficient to
meet the requirements of the population 3nd must be
supplemented by imports. The meagre grazing sup-
ports few animais.
In the three principal valleys of the Fezzan, a water
table of varying depth makes it possible to increase the
area of irrigated land, either by open wells in the areas
where the phreatic folds are near the surface or by
flowing wells from the artesian lever. open weus, in
the present stage of technical development, can only
be exploited by traditional methods, efforts to introduce
Free elections were a novel experience for the people of Libya, some of whom are
shown here in animated discussion during polling at Tobruk (Cyrenaica). About
80 per cent of Cyrenica's townsmen and 66 per cent of tribesmen voted.
A citizen of the new United Kingdom of Liya.
This Tuareg from Fezzan wears the litham or
shawl muffler, which is wound round the mouth
to keep out the blown sand of the desert.
A meeting of the National Assembly of Libya, taking place under the chairmanship of the Mufti of Tripoli, Mohammed Abdul
Asa'd AI Alem. The three territories are represented equally, each by 20 delegates : the Cyrenaicans at left, theTripolitanians
at right and the Fezzanese in the foreground.

pctroieumpumps havingprovedafaiiure. Artesian
wells, which do not require the labour of men and beast,
not only relieve the pressure on the utilization of man-
power, but also provide for a greater area of irrigable
land in proportion to expenditure.
The condition of the serf-like jebbad or drawer of
water, bound by a system of contracts to the proprietor
and receiving only a share of the harvest, has been pro-
gressively improved during the French administration.
The lot of the jebbad and the entire population can be
improved by the further distribution of newly irrigated
lands, continued supervision of the harvesting and stor-
age of crops and maintenance of the security of the
non-migratory population against raids by nomads.
The only known minerai resource of commercial value
is natron (sodium carbonate), the annual export of
which is less than 100 tons. There is no industry ;
rudimentary handicrafts have only limited local import-
ance.
TRtPOUTAN) A
Main asset-farming
THE existing administrative division between Tripo-± Utania and the Fezzan was agreed t  F ance
and the United Kingdom for the duration of the
occupation of Libya. Tripolitania, by this definition,
extends over some 250, 000 square kilometres between
Tnnisia and Cyrenaica. The greater part of its area is
desert. The widely settled parts of Tripolitania consist,
first of the narrow coastal belt of oases between ; \visu-
rata and Zuara, which contains 60 per cent of the popu-
lation of the territory, and, secondly, of the northern
edge of the Jebel, a broken plateau running north-east
from the Tunisian frontier to Homs, where it intersects
the coastal belt. The Jebel is separated from the coast-
al area by a wedge of steppe, and south and west of
the Jebel this merges into semi-desert and desert country
suitable only for pastoralism and the shifting cultivation
of barley. The total area of productive land varies
with the annuairainfai), but only about 1. 6 per cent of
the total area is devoted to static farming. This area
is, however, generally well-watered and ofIers a fertility
in striking contrast to the greater part of Libya.
The population of Tripolitania is estimated at 800, 000.
The indigenous population, numbering about 730, 000,
is Arab with a considerable admixture of Berbers, of
whom some groups in the. western part of the country
have retained their distinction of community and their
langage, and continue to folio,,'the schismatic lbadite
rite. Arabs and Berbers live amicably together in spite
of past différences. AIl are ; \Ioslems ; the religious
followers of the Senussi Order have been estimated at 30
per cent of ail ; \Ioslems.
The urban population is about 165, 000. Some 105, 000
Moslems live in the towns, mainly engaged in handi-
crafts and small trade. ylost of the rural population
are settled farmers living in the coastal oases and in the
Djebel. Semi-nomads are numerous, both in the Jebel
and in the steppe areas bordering the oases. lnasmuch
as many of the non-migrating population combine
pastoralism and shifting cereal cultivation with statìc
farming during parts of the year, it is impossible rigirlly
tociassify thé population bynumbersaccordingto thé
ways of lifte. The wholly nomadie population is much
less important than in Cyrenaica and is found principally
in the Sirtica and Ghibla areas. Only among the nomads
and a few of the hi) i tribes exists the closely knit tribal
structure which characterizes Cyrenaica. ln the more
prosperous and populous coastal ares thé tribe is grad-
ually giving way to a village and town society.
The minorities comprise about 45, 000 Italian, 13, 000
Jews, 2, 000 Maltese and 400 Greeks. The level of the
Italian community has, as far as possible, been main-
tained numerically by the British Administration at the
point ta which it had fallen at the end of the war. The
Italians, about haIf of whom are town dwellers, have
large commercial and agricultural interests which had
been developed during Italian rule.
The Jewish minority, now almost exclusively urban,
has been rapidly diminishing in the last 18 months
because of emigration, largely to Israel.'fhis sxodus
has reduced the Jewish community from about 29, 000
in 1948 to 13, 000. The rate of Emigration has recently
s) ackened.
The economy of Tripolitania is based principally on
agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries, with esparto
grass and rough handicrafts as auxiliary resources.
Olives, barley, citrus fruits and grapes, which cover a
considerable area of the coastal beat, are the principal
crops. The Moslem population of the coastal belt lives
chiefly by gardens and palm groves, cultivating market
crops and fruit tress irrigated from wells operated
1I10stly by animal power. Some Arabs have, however,
undertakenfarmingona) argersca) e. Inthenorthern
part of the Jebel olives and other fruits are grown in
important quantities and tobacco, which is a monopoly
of the British Administration as it was of the Italian,
is grown with some success, although it is mostly of
inferior quality. ln the steppe and semi-desert sheep
and goats are pastured and bar) ey cultivated by scratch
pioughing.
The ltalian cOll1munity outside the town is chiefly
engaged in the cultivation of olives, citrus fruits, vines,
almonds, and, on a lesser scale, wheat. Thé Italian
farms, both private concessions and para-statal settle-
ments, represent a remarkab) e feat of pioneering and
land recJamation, which, chiefly owing to the comparat-
ively long period of immaturity of the olive tree, has
only recently begl\n to demonstrate its full productive
value. Indeed, many of the plantations wili not bear
fully for some years ta come. They are, however, the
greatest economic asset of the territory, an asset which
can easily be lost if constant care to prevent erosion and
other deterioration is not maintained. Both the con-
cessions and the ettlements were assisted by the con-
siderable tax exemptions, subsidies and credit facilities
accorded to agriculture by the Italian Government. A
certain unbalance is becoming apparent in their nnan-
cial position as a resu) t of the graduai expiration of these
facilities, and it is likely that some measures wiII be
needed in order to maintain them, since production and
markets are not yet proportionate ta the capital and
maintenance outlays.
After two years of serious droughts in 1947 and 1948,
the territory has enjoyed good harvests, and export-
able surpluses of agricultural products have increased.
CYRENAICA
Problem No. 1 is water
CYRENAICA extends over 700, 000 square kilometres.It lies betwe  the Western Desert of Egypt on
theeastandTripolitaniaonthewest. On the
south, it reaches to the Anglo-Egyptian Sndan and the
mountain wilderness of the Tibesti, in French Equatorial
Africa. Its area is almost enÜrely désert, which is
rainless throughout the year. In the north, however,
a low plateau of limestone hills benefits from rainfall
adequate for the profitable cultivation of cereals and
fruit. A number of fresh-water springs are also to be
found in the hills, which support a considerable vegeta-
tion. This plateau is fringed by a narrow coastal belt,
where the rainfaIl again declines. The plateau grad-
ually falls away to plains in the south and east, which
provide pasture over a considerable area and where
barley is grown, as the rainfaIl permits, year by year.
In the few oases of the southern desert, date palms and
some vegetables are grown.
The population of Cyrenaica is estimated at 300, 000,
the overwhelming majority of which are Arabs. There
is a Jewish minority of some 200, reduced from 4, 500
in 1948, and smalt Maltese and Greek communities.
Except for a few priests and nuns, the Italian pre-war
population left the country before its final occupation
by the AIlied Forces.
The town-dwellers number some 85, 000. The rural
population consists mainly of semi-nomadic tent-
dwetlers, mostly inhabiting the coastal plateau where
they cultivate their barley and herd their animais. On
the plateau tribal boundaries are weIl defined and nomad-
ism consequently severely restricted. In the de sert
fringes to the south of the plateau the vagaries of the
rainfall necessitate a greater latitude of movement, but
it is only a minority which leave their habitat on the
plateau to find grazing and cultivate in the désert. thé
rural population is organized in tribes, among whom the
land is divided. The main tribes (Sa'adi) hold their
land by right of conquest dating from the Arab invasion
inthellthcentury. In addition, there are dependent
groups (Marabitin) who have attached themselves to
the powerful Sa'adi tribes. AU the Bedouin daim pure
Arabian extraction, but there is undoubtedly an admix-
ture of Berber stock, especially in the oases to the south
of the plateau.
The economy of Cyrenaica is handicapped by the
lack of natural resources and the underdevelopment of
its land and water. lt is based on the raising of live-
stock which is carried on, together with the shifting culti-
vation of barley, by the majority of the rural population.
On the northern plateau, however, and in some parts
of the coastal belt, wheat is grown by modern mothods,
and olives, vines, apricots, and other fruits thrive to-
gether with market vegetables. The development of this
area is actively encouraged by the ministre of Agricul-
ture.
11ljornlatÎol1 yiuen ÌIl these payes reyardiny the yeoyraphy,
populalion and economy of Ihe Ihree regions of Libya, is laken
tram Ihe report of Ihe United Nations Commissioner i/1 Libya la
1/.. l'nited l\"alions Secretary-General.
