BECAUSE of his masterly translations of the Bible
in the 4th century, St. Jerome is regarded as
"The Patron Saint of Translators". Were he
alive today, St. Jerome would certainly be
interested in another kind of"bible"-one used
by the publishers, writers and translators of the 20th
century.
Bearing the latin title"Index Translationum", this
publication is an International Bibliography of Trans-
lations prepared by Unesco. It was actually first
published as a quarterly bulletin by the Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation from 1932 to 1940, and, after
an interruption of ten years, it was revived by Unesco's
Department of Cultural Activities.
The first issue in the new series published last year,
covered translations made during 1948 in thirty
countries, as compared with 14 countries covered by the
last pre-war issue of the Index. The second volume
which is now available, is even more comprehensive
than the first, and shows clearly a general rise in
translations as compared with 1948..-.--.
Examination of the Index
brings out the striking fact
that neither the most popu-
lated countries nor those
with the most highly deve-
loped publishing industries
produce the greatest number
of translations.
It shows that in 1949 Ger-
m ; mv took thp lead with.
1. 290 translations followed by Poland and Italy (937) ;
France and Bulgaria (784) and the Netherlands (756),
Since the languages of four of these countries are not
widely used or spoken outside their borders, these
countries would obviously appear to have greater needs
for translations of scientific and literary works.
When three or four countries have a common
language, however, it would be wasteful of them
to undertake separate adaptations of foreign works.
How much more efficient it is to share the labour
and thereby avoid unnecessary duplication. Unfortu-
nately, this is not always as easy as it may
appear. In fact, one work is sometimes translated
several times during the same year in the same country !
For example, a certain writer translated a work by
Bergson, unaware that two other writers in his own
country were doing the same thing at the same time. In
Italy two Milan publishers simultaneously translated
"Three Men in a Boat", and three German versions of
a novel by Alphonse Daudet appeared in 1949.
A Linguistic Approach
To look at the problem from another angle, statistics
for natIOns ; lJeakmg the same language show
ot ! ; êi' mequalities. Compared with 1, 730 German
translations (Germany, Austria and Switzerland) there
were only 980 French translations (France, Switzerland ;
Canada and Belgium). Then ; >'6 ; ;' ; ;-" : r : ngìish transla-
tions (Gl' : :  riiain, the United States, South Africa and
canada) numbered 854, while in Spanish (Spain,
Mexico, Cuba, Argentine, etc.) there were 597.
A grouping of the Scandinavian countries-Denmark,
Sweden, Norway, as well as Finland, which publishes
a percentage of books in Swedish-shows the number
of translations during one year as 1, 082.
Of the thousands of translations made each year, by
far the most are from American, English and French
books. People living in Eastern Europe, however, are
offered a larger selection of Russian translations than
those in other parts of the world.
After these writers came
a group which included such
names as Pearl Buck, Feni-
more Cooper, A. J. Cronin,
Dostoievsky, Ehrenburg, Kip-
ling, Jack London, Mark
Twain, Stendhal, Alexandre
Dumas, and Plato whose
works were translated in
eleven languages in 1949.
Almost equally sought after were the works of Alphonse
Daudet, Tolstoi, Upton Sinclair, Maupassant, Karel
Capek, George Amado, and ex aequo, those of Winston
Churchill and St. Thomas Aquinas.
Xovcls Talic First Placc
OF all translations published, the novel takes firstplace. The Index shows the choice of literature,
in its broadest sense-ranging from philosophy
to verse-varies from country to country.
Italy, the United States and France appear to prefer
books on history and geography. Hungary and
Bulgaria demand works on the social sciences and
pedagogy. This is true too for Poland, which shows
great interest in philosophical and religious work as
well. Russians and Spaniards prefer works on the
natural and applied sciences, while books on meta-
physics and theology are in the greatest demand in
Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Great
Britain.
But perhaps the most important help that the Index
Translationum can give to publishers and translators is
to show-by omission-the large number of important
works which still remain to be translated. Editors
sometimes ignore a particular work because they feel
sure that it has already been translated. Often this is
not the case at all and here, the Index stands as a handy
guide and indispensable reference book.
The uses that can be made of the Index are unending.
It can, for example, provide the basis for research
the translation of book titles, since the are all-
important from a sales viewpoi, There is, for
example, the  case of "Clochemerle ", Gabriel Chevalier's
semi-classic of Gallic humour, which caricatures life in
a French village. In its Italian translation, the title
became-"Sins in a Provincial Town".
-' 1'108t Tl'ul1s1alt. d Authors
"WHICH authors are the most translated ?" Thisquestion, which has been asked by most people
at one time or another, can be answered by
examining the Index. The first impression one gets is
that few translations enjoy more success than those of
Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, until one remembers
that there are some ten Slavonic languages, and that
many different dialects are spoken between the Cau-
casus and Manchuria. On the whole, publishers favour
other great writers : Goethe and Balzac led the'field in
1949-the year of their centenaries. In the same
year, works by Victor Hugo, Dickens and Tchekov were
translated in thirteen languages.
