by Maurice GOLDSMITH
UNESCO Science Editor
DURING the last ten years, great
progress has been made in the
scope of calculating machines.
The great British diarist, Sa-
muel Pepys, would have been happy
if such inventions had been at his
service, for, although in charge of
the contracts branch of the Admi-
ralty, his arithmetic was so weak
that he had to rise at four o'clock
each morning to learn his multipli-
cation tables.
But that was 300 years ago. Only
the recent development of the
science of electronics has made it
possible to build new and elaborate
calculating machines which enable
us to tackle many mathematical
problems shunned up to now because
the calculations involved would take
the normal human computor far too
long. In science, industry and admi-
nistration the modern world is so
complex that it would break down if
rapid mathematical calculation were
not possible.
One of the newest machines, de-
monstrated in Britain a few months
ago, is so fast that it can provide
the answer in one minute to a pro-
blem that would occupy a mathema-
tic : an for a month. In a quarter-of-
an-hour it can make a calculation
which, if written out, would fill half-
a-million sheets of foolscap paper.
MACHINE WITH A"MEMORY"
THIS particular machine, known asthe ACE (automatic computing
engine) uses pulses of electricity,
generated at a rate of a million a
second, to solve all calculations
which resolve themselves into addi-
tion, subtraction, multiplication and
division ; so that for practical pur-
poses there is no limit to what the
ACE can do.
On the machine the pulses are
used to indicate the figure 1, and
gaps represent the figure 0. All cal-
culations are done with only these
two digits in what is known as the
binary scale. The number 2, for
example, in binary notation is"10".
To put a sum into the machine, the
numbers are first translated into
then binary scale. Instructions for
the calculation are given to the
machine by coding them as holes in
cards.
To carry out long sequences of
operations, the machine must have
a"memory". It may have to com-
bine the results of a dozen or more
separate calculations, and, as it can
do only one computation at a time,
the machine must remember each
one. This highly complicated me-
mory section depends on the slower
time of travel of supersonic waves,
into which the electric pulses are
converted, through a column of
mercury. One thousand pulses-
representing digits-can be stored
and extracted at the moment needed.
The complete calculation appears in
code as a holed card, representing
the answer in the binary scale, which
is translated back into ordinary
numbers.
FROM PASCAL TO AIKEN
THESE giant calculating machines,however imposing their bilities,
cannot function without being
told what to do. They are not
capable of asking questions, but only
of providing speedy answers to pro-
blems put by human beings. They
may-one expert has pointed out- perform everything that can be
called"second class brainwork".
The history of the development of
calculating machines covers many
countries. It was the Frenchman,
Blaise Pascal, who in 1642 produced
the first adding machine ; the Ger-
man, Leibnitz, who in 1671 conceived
the first multiplying machine, and
the Frenchman, Thomas, who in
1820 built it. It was the Englishman,
Babbage, who in 1832 had the idea
of a universal calculating machine-
that is, a machine handling any pro-
blem ; and the American, Aiken, who
110 years later constructed one that
worked.
TO HELP MANKIND
THE setting up of an InternationalComputation Ce tre has been
studied and discussed at length
by the United Nations. It is part of
the wider project for international
A MODERN TELEPHONE SWITCHBOARD ? No, one of the latest types
of electronic calculating machines, built in France. Science and industry
are becoming more and more dependent on the work of such machines
which in one minute can often produce answers to problems that would
take a man one month to solve.
research laboratories, on several of
which-the Arid Zone Research
Council, the Laboratory for the Phy-
sics of High Energy Particles, and
the International Computation Cen-
tre itself-Unesco has already
begun preliminary work.
The Sixth Session of Unesco's Ge-
neral Conference has agreed to a
series of recommendations for the
organizing and establishment of this
International Computation Centre.
The Centre's main functions in the
fields of research, education and ser-
vice would be :
To organize and make better
known study and scientific research
on use and development of mecha-
nical computation devices ;
To promote collaboration and co-
ordination between computing insti-
tutes throughout the world ;
To organize the training and im-
provement of research workers ;
To establish and maintain an advi-
sory service dealing with queries
from scientific institutions and scien-
tists, and ;
To set up laboratories equipped
with various types of calculating ma-
chines and requested to carry out
numerical computations.
Three countries-Italy, the
Netherlands, and Switzerland-
have offered to act as host for the
proposed Centre, but no decision is
to be made until a special meeting
is held in November.
This Centre will be the first of the
United Nations'research laborato-
ries, which are designed to help
improve the living conditions of
mankind.
THE MODERN CALCULATING MACHINE :
AN AID TO MAN IN HIS FIGHT FOR PROGRESS
