I
HUMAN civilization cannot be class : fied under a number of mutually exclusive
t-j heads. Like the colours in the solar prism, they gradually shade off one into
another, and in totality present a colour harmony where nevertheless some
distinct colour types are noticeable. These are different, no doubt, but not anta-
gonistic. We thus can easily note a number of types in present-day civilization, as
they can be noted for the earlier periods of history. Under each of these general
types there are a number of sub-types, or attached types which present among
themselves diversities of variations, but show likenesses due to genetic reasons or to
affiliation. Taking note of those types which have an international implication or
significance, embracing peoples different in their original race and language, we may
say that Four Distinct Types of Civilization now prevail in the world. These arse- (1 J
the Eur-American,- (2) the Islamic, (3) The Chinese, and. (4) the Indian. At least this
is how it strikes us in India. And there is also a good deal of over-lapping, giving
rise to complexities which sometimes lead to conflict and are sometimes harmonized.
The culture of India is a great complex,
perhaps in its roots and its implications
the greatest complex of its kind in the
world. And in its complexity it is like
life itself. It is vast as Nature herself,
Nature as she has been manifested in the
minor continent of India. In its all-
inclusiveness, it may be compared to a
tropical forest.
The geographical boundaries of India
(I use India to mean the geographical and
cultural entity that has always been so
known since ancient Greek times, includ-
ing both the States of India and Pakistan)
make the country rather like a pocket,
where whatever ethnic stocks arrive, stay
on to attain a complete development,
participating in the life already existing
in the country and enriching it with new
elements and contributions.
According to the most recent pronoun-
cement of authorities in the matter, six
distinct racial groups with their separate
speeches belonging to four speech-families
have co-mingled in blood and culture to
give rise to the people of India and to
the characterized culture or civilization of
India. The process began at least five
thousand years ago, and was accomplished
some two thousand years ago, but it
continued for some centuries more to
function and to spread and consolidate
the completed culture over the whole of
India and over what have been called the
lands of Greater Indian, in South-eastern
Asia and in Central Asia.
After 700 A. D., and particularly after
1200 A. D., it came in contact with Islam
- first the Islam of the Arab in Sindh,
and afterwards the Islam of the Turk
and the Persian in the Punjab. These
brought about a profound change in the
fortunes of this culture. In the l6th-
17th centuries, Modern European and
Christian influences touched the fringe of
Indian culture in some coastal areas when
the Portuguese established themselves in
Goa and in a few other seaport towns,
in Western India as well as in Bengal.
But Portuguese influences were not deep
enough, and the real contact with
European culture started after the English
became the masters of Bengal in 1757
and subsequently established their empire
over the whole of India.
Indian culture in its broadest conno-
tation would include all that has been
achieved in the domain of thought and
the good life by the people of India, as
a whole or in groups, ever since the
foundations of a common life, common
traditions, common way of thinking and
a common attitude were laid by the most
important component elements of the
--- by
Suniti Kumar Chatterji,
Processor,
Calcutta U niversÍfy
Indian people (the Austric, the Dravidian
and the Aryan speaking groups), beginn-
ing to form in the Upper Gangetic
Plains a single people with a single Aryan
speech. The culture that took shape in
this way round the beginning of the first
millennium B. C. took another five hun-
dred years to be fully characterized, and
a further five hundred years to expand
from the Ganges Valley to the whole
of India.
At the beginning of the Christian era,
and it may be even a few centuries ear-
lier, we have a Pan-Indian culture fully
established. This culture has been, for
want of a better term, described as
Ancient Indian, or Ancient Hindu, with
its three important philosophical and
religious expressions, viz., Brahmanical,
Buddhist and Jaina. It was not the
creation of a single section only of the
Indian people. It was not an Aryan
culture, to start with, which was imposed
by a superior civilized, white Aryan or
Indo-European speaking people upon
backward or savage, darkskinned, non-
Aryan aboriginals, as it was at one time
fondly believed. It was in fact the joint
creation of the Aryan and non-Aryan
- elements were contributed by all,
which were combined into one single type.
The Significant Contribution
0 ! Indian Civilization
IDEAS like SMmsdrat, or transmigrationand Karmâ, or a man's actions de-
termining his fate, the mysticism of Yôga
with its special discipline and practices,
the doctrine of Bhakti or devotion to God
- all these developed in an atmosphere of
co-operation between Aryan and non-
Aryan. And those who built up the struc-
ture of Hindu philosophy in its various
schools, the Brahmans and others of North
India (of mixed origin themselves)
profited by the diversity of point of view
presented by the different racial elements.
The theory of caste, stressed division of
mankind according to their qualities or
character (guna) and their avocations
(parma), and not according to race (a
Brahman so born was no Brahman unless
he went through certain ceremonies, and
certain other ceremonies also exalted
people to a higher position).
Apart from certain material and intel-
lectual contributions made by India
to the sum total of Human culture (these
contributions have been accepted and now
form permanent parts of the human
heritage the significant contribution of
Indian civilization by which India can E
still serve humanity lies in her philosophy I
and her attitude to life, in seeking to I
model human relations on certain spirit-
tual bases
"He who sees all creatures in himself,
And himself in all creatures, then he does
not dislike or hate (anybody)."
(Isa-Upanisad.)
Being after all a human production or 
creation, Indian civilization cannot claim 
to be the sole repository of any particular
idea or set of ideas, or behaviour or sets,
of behaviours, which are not found else-t
where among other civilizations. Then
greatest things thought or said or done,.
by people in India have also their echoes'
or counterparts in other lands among,
other people.
Unity In Divel'sitv 
nal'mony Of Contl'at,
1 T is on the emphasis that India has gi- !- ven to certain ideas and behaviours, on']
the manner in which certain lessons have ;
been sought to be imparted for the realiz- :
ation of the good life, that the special :
character of Indian cultures lies. sanskrit
literature and its ancillary literatures in various
the ancient and modern provincial lan- :
guages of India give an expression to,
these ideas and the lessons, in part or in ;
totality. The cultural unity of India with 1
all its diverse elements is the result of I
the implicit acceptance of the ideology of 1
Sanskrit literature at its highest and most j
universal. The cultural history of the I
various peoples in India in ancient and]
mediaeval times is the progressive
Sanskritization of these, and this.
Sanskritization is still proceeding. Suns
ideas (the higher spiritual thought and
mystic experience of Islam, based on J
elements of love and beauty and certain 1
deeper philospical speculations from Greek]
Neo-platonic philosophy and the Indian1
Vedanta) have supplied a common plat-Satya-j
form for Indianism and Islam ; and the' ;
inherent Hellenism or Europeanism of
Christianity has made an understanding
between Indian thought and culture and
Christian culture feasible. f {
The character of Indian culture may be
expressed by one phrase : Acceptance oft
'. 1 do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows to be stuffed. I want cultures of all
lands to be blown about my house as freely as possible. But refuse to be blown off my feet by any.- MAHATMA GANDHI.
Unity in Diversity, or a Harmony off
Contrasts.
This sense of Unity and Harmony
which represents the most specifier
humanistic and human value of Indiana
culture, has as its basis the following : c
1) A sense of Unity of all life and being
as the expression of an Unseen Reality
This Unseen Reality is both immanentx' !
and transcendent. It embraces life and
the universe (which are unending through"
aeons and is the Divine Spirit (Paramât. 
man), or Energy (SaktiJ or Order (Rta) o
working through them. S
GOLDEN TEMPLE at Amritsar is situated on an Island in the middle of a sacred lake surrounded by marble
terraces. The temple has a copper dome covered with gold foil. It is the chief place of worship of the4,
Sikhswhoburntheirdead ! iketheHindus. f

JDIA
2'A Desire for Synthesis, to combine
lpparently disconnected or discordant
'ragments in life as well as experience
n their proper place as an Essential
Unity.
3) An Urge to realize this Ultimate
Reality in its essential Unity in life
; hrough the path of knowledge, or work,
Jr grace.
4) A rigid adherence to Intellect or
[ntelligence is sought to be harmonized
in the higher plane with the Emotions.
5) A Recognition of the Sufferings and
Sorrows of life with an attempt to go to
; he Root Causes to remove these sufferings
a. nd sorrows, by creating an Under-
standing through knowledge or faith or
both.
6)-A Feeling'for the Sacredness of All
Life which finds its outlet in the negative
doctrine of Ahimsa or Non-injury and the
positive one of Karunâ or Sense of Pity
and Mâitrî of Active Charity.
7) A great Tolerance for all other
beliefs, experiences and points of view.
Indian Culture in its broad and universal
aspect, as distinguished from the narrow
sectarian points of view, recognizes that
Ithe Ultimate Reality manifests itself in
'various forms, and that Truth is
approachable by diverse paths, and as
such does not insist upon or inculcate a
particular creed which must be accepted
by all. It believes that man can attain
to the summun bonum in life through the
best that is available in his environment
followed in a spirit of sincerity and
charity. The Ultimate Truth does not
pin itself down to the experiences or
opinions of any single individual, but it is
expressed in the experiences of the sum
total of humanity.
Looked at from the point of view of
man in his striving to know the truth and
to do, the good, the three basic ideas of
Indian Culture can be summarized in
the words-Samanvaya or Synthesis,
Satya-jijnâsâ or Desire to know the
Truth, and Ahimsâ or Non-injury.
The Great Weakness
Indian Culture
p ARADOxicALLY enough, the great weak-ness of Indian culture lies in what
is its greatest strength-its all-inclusive-
ness frequently conduces to absence of
zeal or conviction, and tends to'make
people prone to compromise and to yield.
Those who follow a narrower and a more
circumscribed path are found to be
stronger and better disciplined in struggle,
frequently aggressive struggle. The In-
dian may be taught to tread the path of
the Gods in cultivating a frame of mind
au-dessus de la mêlée ; but unless he has
braced himself with the manly doctrine
of the Bhagavad-Gita to fight for the
good, it takes a good deal of suffering and
"aerifice for him before he can stiffen
himself into resistance. As a philosophy
It is certainly on a higher plane, but as
'I practical doctrine it has its dis-
advantages. Yet the compromise bet-
wees the highest thought and practical
Ipplication was arrived at and consciously
nculcated in Indian life. But thought
'rather than élan in action marks the
: haracteristic Indian effort.
With this wide sweep seeking to
embrace all, this sense of under-
stranding and sympathy, this acceptance
if the position that"diversity of thought
s a part of the scheme of things and is
) uite in keeping with the scheme of
Mature in other directions", it is no
wonder that Indian Culture should be able
o leaven the thoughts and views of other
'copies who come to know it and did not
lismiss it with impatience but sought to
mderstand what it had to say and to
; ive. For the greater part of a
nillennium, Indian culture and thought
ormed the guiding spirit in the intellec-
ual and spiritual aspirations of the
xeater part of Asia-in what have been
yell called the lands of Greater India-
JAGANNATH TEMPLE. Puri in Orissa, Northeast India, contains the world-
famous shrine of Jagannath or Lord of the World", name under which the
Hindu god Vishnu is worshipped. It is perhaps the most frequented of all
Hindu places of worship.
Ceylon, which culturally is but a projec-
tion of India ; Burma ; the lands of Indo-
China-particularly Siam, Cambodia and
Champa or Old Cochin China ; and the
islands of Indonesia ; besides ancient East-
ern Iran, Central Asia, and Thibet.
The sister-civilization of China (supply-
ing, with Indianism and Islam, one of
the three mainsprings of civilization in
Asia), also received its full share of the
Indian spirit through Buddhism, and pass-
ed it on to Korea and Japan and to Giao-
Chi or Viet-Nam. Tibet developed the
elements it received of Indian culture in
her own way, and passed it on to Mon-
golia.
The question of the influence of
Indianism on the Hellenic World is
problematical, as Indianism was develop-
ing contemporaneously with Hellenism.
From the days of Alexander the Great,
the Indian gymnosophists or recluses
impressed the Greek mind, and there is
evidence of contact between Greek
thought and Indian thought from at least
the 5th century B. C., and particularly in
the 3rd century B. C.-earlier contacts are
not proved (e. g. the indebtedness of
Pythagoras and the earlier Greek philo-
sophers to Indianism). India was indebted
to Greece for an advance in astronomical
knowledge, although the helio-centric
theory of planetary world was her own
discovery.
When the intellectual centre of Islam
at Baghdad became a great clearing house
of science and thought and material or
technical advancement through the Arabic
language, India made substantial contri-
butions in mathematics and astronomy,
in medicine, in certain arts and crafts,
and in the spheres of mental and
spiritual culture also-in literature (the
beast fable with a moral and the mar-
vellous and romantic tale, which found a
place in world literature through the
popularity in the European world of
versions based on Arabic), and in mysti-
clam.
Indianism
III The Modern World
I NDIANlSM has now entered a new phasea force in"the development of
universal civilization and of man's hyma-
nistic conceptions". Contact with the
European mind at the beginning of the
last century quickened the Indian
intellect and brought about a renaissance
of the Indian spirit. The scientific
curiosity of the West established Orient-
alism Studies as intellectual disciplines
beside the study of the Classical Human-
ities, and the attempt at a just estimate
of the Indian contribution to human
culture on the part of European savants
filled Indian scholars with a spirit of
emulation in understanding and ap-
praising the bases of their own civiliz-
ation. Sir William Jones, the illustrious
founder of the Asiatic Society of Bengal
in 1784, was thus a great benefactor not
only for Indians but for the whole of
Humamty.
Raja Ram Mohan Roy was the first to
take his stand as a modern and
cosmopolitan Indian who offered to the
world the Upanishads as India's great
contribution. Ramakrishna Parama-
hamsa, Hindu saint and devotee, under-
lined the universality of Hindu religious
thought and ideals, and his disciple
Swami Vivekananda by this first public
proclamation before the West at the
Congress of Religions in Chicago in the
year 1893 inaugurated a movement for
the understanding and wider application
in practical life of the Indian Vedanta
philosophy.
Other great personalities came up before
the international lorum as harmonizers
between the spirit of man and its
expression through Indianism-Rabindra-
nath Tagore, Mohandas Karamchand
G a n d h i. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
among others. Rabindranath's interna-
tionalism, which he considered as the best.
expression of Indianism and his sense of
perception of the Ultimate Reality
through Nature and Life, so beautifully
expressed in his poetry, have been accept-
ed and appreciated by the cultural
elite all over the world. Radhakrishnan's
insistence on the idealistic aspect of life
as set forth by Indian thought has also
been received with growing conviction by
men of thought everywhere. And Gan-
dhi's doctrine of Non-violence (Ahimsa)
and Holding Fast to Truth (Satyâgraha)
is looked upon with increasing interest by
thinkers of the present day.
In England, in America, on the Conti-
nent (in Germany, in Scandinavia, in
Holland, and in France, as well as else-
where), the leaven of Indianism appears
to be at work, slowly and imperceptibly,
through translations of capital works of
Indian thought and culture and through
ancillary literature of various kinds. The
internationalism or cosmopolitanism of
India is something which suggests her
entire personality. And at the present
day, the message of India as expressed in
the philosophy of the Vedanta and in the
imaginative and emotional rationalism of
Hinduism with regard to the fundamental
basis of existence, is bringing something
which-judging from current trends in
thought and culture in Europe and Ame-
rica-both the heart and the intellect of
Modern Man everywhere is craving for.
