DESPITE THREATS TO PEACE, MEN STRIVE
TO PROTECT THEIR SPIRITUAL HERITAGE
AS DID
A HUMAN RIGHTS VICTORY : In France, the rights of authors were written into law during the Revolution. This was largely due to Le Chapelier
brilliant lawyer and legislator, here pictured presiding over the National Assembly on August 4, 1789, when privileges were abolished.
IF Rabelais, Shakespeare or Dante
came back to earth today, they
would be astound d to s e the pro-
minent place given to.. copyright"
in a Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. For today, it is universally
conceded that writers, composers and
all creative artists are the spiritual
masters of their works and are entitled
to claim a just share of the revenue
resulting from them.
But this right, which we now take
for granted, is actually of comparati-
vely recent origin. For centuries, the
marvellous invention of printing en-
riched the publisher, or as he was
then called, the bookseller. In France,
under a special privilege from the
King, he had practically a monopoly.
The author had no such guarantee
and once his work passed out of his
hands, it was lost to him. All that re-
mained was the hollow satisfaction of
renown, eked out by the capricious
bounty of a patron of the arts-most-
ly, of little account.
An Engaging Personality
IT was not until the French Revo-lution that a new right, whose
conception was, from the first,
very clear, was written into law.
"The most sacred, the most un-
assailable and, if I may say so, the
most personal of all rights of owner-
ship is creative work, the fruit of a
writer's thoughts. It is therefore most
right and just that the men who cul-
tivate the domain of thought should
reap some harvest from their labours.
During their life and for some years
after their death, no one should be
able, without their consent, to dispose
of the product of their genius."
This clear and forceful statement
was made by Isaac-Guy Le Chapelier,
in the Constituent Assembly, during
the memorable session of July 21, 1791.
Unquestionably an engaging perso-
nality, this Breton lawyer was some-
what maliciously described in a con-
temporary newspaper as"fond of gam-
ing and women, elegantly dressed,
always well curled and powdered."
Yet, his face was coarse : yellow
complexion, cynical mouth and an
air of cunning. The true worth
of the man was perhaps only revealed
in his high, noble brow. Obstinate,
energetic, clever, a marvellous extem-
pore speaker, he quickly achieved po-
litical fame. It was he who presided
over the National Assembly debates
on the famous night of August 4, 1789.
It was he who was responsible for theç....--.. :--..... 1.'-....10rmatlOn 01 Lne
National Guard,
sounded the death-
knell of the"cor-
porations"and cau-
sed the abolition of
the laws governingthe unequal division of legacies. But,
this untiring legislator and persuasive
rapporteur was also a man of
culture. In the salon of Condorcet,
"the last of the philosophers"-that
famous European salon where con-
temporary thought fermented and
took form-Le Chapelier was a
brilliant figure. He expounded his
ideas in a periodical of that time, the
Bibliothèque de l'somme public.
Writer and orator, friend of the arts,
he quickly became an ardent supporter
of the petition presented by Parisian
playwrights.
Authors of tragedies and comedies
complained that a royal privilege"had
established s. single theatre in the
Capital where everyone was forced to
present their works". Henceforth they
would no longer tolerate that actors
"should be the sole possessors of mas-
terpieces for which the French stage
was illustrious".
His Finest Hour
E CHAPELIER took up theirclause. On the Parliamentary tri-
bune at this time, defending au-
thors'rights, he knew his finest hour
To help win his case, he first refuted
Rousseau's diatribe against the im-
morality of theatrical performances.
Down with privilege, relic of princely
favours, and barrier to the advance of
liberty ! All this must be replaced by
a right recognizing the author as sole
owner of his works.
The law was passed unanimously
and received the commendation of Mi-
rabeau. Playwrights were granted the
rights of literary ownership for the
first time The law set forth that en-
graved or printed dramatic works
should not be repro-
duced without the
"formal and writ-
ten"consent of the
author, or without
that of his heirs for
a period of five yearsalter nIS aeacn. lJreOltOrs or meatre
producers should not be allowed to
seize the remuneration that justly
belonged to the author.
Set down in the faded yellow leaves
of the Moniteur Universel this small
text defies oblivion and remains to
the lasting honour of its originator.
It prepared the way for a legislation
which has in the last 150 years spread
through Europe and the world.
The question of copyright had cer-
tainly aroused much interest at that
time. Since the beginning of the
18th century a certain measure of pro-
tection had been accorded to English
authors by the Statute of Anne,
entitled"An act for the encourage-
ment of learning by vesting the copies
of printed books in the authors or pur-
chases of such copies during times
therein mentioned". In America,
between the years 1783 and 1786, ten
of the thirteen original states had pro-
claimed in their legislation their desire
to encourage learning for the public
benefit, coupled with provisions
stressing the author's interest, several
States declaring that there was"no
property more peculiarly a man's own
than that which is produced by the
labour of his mind". But these pro-
THREATS FRO\1 WITHOUT-UNREST WiTHiN : In July 1791, Austria and Prussia threatened to invade France. Unrest swept Paris and fight-
ing broke out at the Champ de Mars (above). Despite such conditions, the Constituent Assembly continued its work, and only four days after the riotsit passed a law granting literary ownership to playwrights.
visions did not have such a wide-
spread influence on other countries as
the French law.
In France, the date July 21, 1791,
was an important one. Tempe-
stuous days followed the flight to
Varennes. Louis XVI was brought
back to Paris,"a humiliated cap-
tive", to the consternation of some
and the anger of others. After a
thousand years of monarchy the
throne was tottering. Excitement and
unrest swept Paris and the provinces.
At the Champ de Mars, the National
Guard fired on the people ; the dead
littered the steps of the national altar.
Despite these conditions, the pro-
mulgation of laws continued without
respite. The members of the Consti-
tuent Assembly faced up to all threats.
They recognized the Navy and Trea-
sury, debated the fate of the King
and, not least of all, took steps to pro-
tect Racine's successors.
The Foundation
TWO years later-in July 1793-theConv ntion suffered the full forc
of the tempest. Insurrection broke
out in sixty departments. The Ven-
déens marched on Tours. The Coali-
tion armies invaded the North and the
East. Conde, Valenciennes, and Belle-
garde fell to the enemy. In Paris,
Marat was assassinated. The royalists
schemed and plotted. To cope with
the desperate food shortage, the Com-
mittee of Public Safety imposed the
death penalty on anyone caught
hoarding and speculating. At the
height of the crisis, the members of
the Convention were to forget every-
thing-civil war, defeat, and the gust
of anguish and rage sweeping Paris-
in order to resume their debate on
copyright. Extending to all literary
and artistic productions the law of
1791, they decided on July 19 and 24
to recognize"the exclusive right of
authors of writings of all kinds, com-
posers of music, painters and de-
signers, to sell, cause to be sold, distri-
bute or cede the ownership of their
works". The right of heirs was ex-
tended to cover a period of ten years
following the author's death. Here,
stated in clear, precise terms, was the
foundation of subsequent laws.
A Symbolic Coincidence
THE leaders of France were con-stantly in danger at that mo
ment. Le Chapelier, like many
others, perished on the scaffold."At
a time when the history of several
centuries was being re-made, they felt
their days were numbered"said Mi-
chelet."All these men, at such an
hour, were vibrantly alive. Self-
interest, ambition, all the human pas-
sions were in play. Most powerful of
them all was love in all its many mani-
festations : love of ideas, love of
country, love of the human race.
What gigantic labours, burning de-
bates, events crowding on events, what
swift reforms, what cataclysmic chan-
ges ! What tremendous enthusiasm !"
And after all, is our present era so
different ? In this year of 1951, copy-
right is again being discussed-a sym-
bolic coincidence. A universal con-
vention is being formulated in the in-
ternational councils to give copyright
its full effect. Unesco is contributing
in this effort.
l (CA (lI (
Father Of
Copyright
