MAY 95t
PAKISTAN
Spiritual Home and
National Reality
Page 5-UNESCO COURIER
OF all the countries which makeup our inhabited globe, Pakis-
tan is perhaps the one which
presents the most unusual characte-
ristics. The laws defining its exis-
tence declare that it was founded as
a State where all Moslems could live
accordir. g to the principles of Islam.
As such, it provides a spiritual home
for all members of a single religious
community regardless of their na-
tional origin. Nevertheless, Pakis-
tan remains in the deepest sense of
the word a nation. It groups under
one unified authority lands that for
thousands of years have been inha-
bited by the same people, most of
whom have shared for centuries the
same moral, political and religious
principles forming the basis of the
new State.
This dual aspect-the spiritual
home and the national reality-
characterizes the Pakistan of today.
It explains too, certain paradoxes.
For although Pakistan's hope is to
bring together Moslems from all
over pre-partition India, in reality
40 million Moslems-or roughly 30
per cent of the total number-are
still scattered in other parts of the
sub-continent.
As a nation, Pakistan has defined
frontiers and distinctive geographic
and sociological features. As a spi-
ritual home, it somewhat anticipates
its national individuality. For it
must mould itself-with undimi-
nished creative zeal-in the image
of the great promise it wishes to be,
not only for its own people but also
for all those who some day may
come seeking a means of life in
keeping with their faith.
The Golden Fibre
o NE has only to glance at a map tounderstand the complexity of
the problems confronting this nation
which has set itself such lofty requi-
rements. Not only do a thousand
miles of Indian territory split East
and West Pakistan but differences
in climate, physiography and even
language separate the two regions.
Eastern Pakistan, though by far the
smaller area, has the larger popula-
tion ; yet it is West Pakistan, which is
less fertile, that compensates for the
food shortages of the eastern zone.
This zone (East Bengal) is almost
entirely devoted to the cultivation of
jute-the crop which enables the
government to balance its national
budget.
Pakistan happens to hold practi-
cally a world monopoly of raw jute
but not only is the country unable
to convert the fibre for lack of any
jute-goods industry but inadequate
port facilities even impede its expor-
tation. (1).
To remedy this situation, the Go-
vernment has embarked on a series
of vast industrialization projects for
the construction of the first jute
mills at Narayanganj, a hydro-elec-
tric dam and a paper mill on the
Karnafully-River, additional port
facilities at Chittagong, a new port
at the Ganges Delta, power stations
at Malakand, and sugar refineries at
Mardan.
But the immense problems of fi-
nancing these projects and of trans-
forming a large portion of illiterate
peasants into technically and socially
educated workmen present formi-
dable obstacles. Here United Na-
tions and Unesco Technical Assis-
tance and U. S. Point IV programmes
may help in meeting some of the
difficulties.
8, 000, 000 Refugees
PARTITION and with it the indepen-dence of Pakistan brought in its
wake immense misery and suffering.
Since 1947, eight million refugees
have trekked into West Pakistan
(Sind and Punjab) from all parts of
India, leaving behind them every-
thing they cherished-their person-
al belongings, their fortunes, their
land and the tombs of their ancestors
- in order to join the spiritual com-
munity of their own choosing :
Despite the efforts of the Central
Government, hundreds of thousands
of these refugees still live in condi-
tions that defy description. Undoub-
tedly material aid must first be given
to the adults ; but surely the problem
of re-adapting and rehabilitating
the children is no less important
than that of other children during
and after the last world war when
psychologists, sociologists, psychia-
trists and educators from all over
SILVER FIBRE. Just as jute is regarded as the"golden fibre"of East Pakistan, cotton is the
sliver fibre"of West Pakistan. About 90% of the cotton crop is grown under irrigation mostly
from canals fed by the river Indus and the three Punjab rivers.
GOLDEN FIBRE. A cartlod of jute-Pakistan's'go) den fibre-on its way to the market.
Although most of the world's raw jute is produced in East Bengal, only 8-10% of the total cultivated
area is devoted to jute growing.
(I) 1\Iost of the world's jute is g-rown in
East Bent-ail Known as the"Golden
Fibre of Pakistan", it is used chiefly for
makIng-burlap, sacking-, twine, rope,
wrapping-paper, and coarse fabric.
(Editor's Ante.)
the world joined to find a solution.
Similar problems-and others
even more specialised-also face
East Bengal. To solve them will re-
quire no small degree of imagina-
tion and international collaboration.
For even the most intensive jute cul-
tivation cannot be expected to absorb
the manpower or assure the liveli-
hood of a population which exceeds
in density 2, 500 inhabitants per
square mile. In fact, for centuries
the people have sought a secondary
means of income in cottage indus-
tries such as the manufacture of
muslin cloth which has made Dacca
famous. But even these rural crafts
are conditioned by unique circums-
tances. They depend on interna-
tional markets not only as a source
for raw materials but as a sales
outlet for the finished products
To take a specific case, in East
Bengal I recently visited a number
of villages of incredible poverty
in the region of Langalbund not far
from Dacca. There, over 50, 000
people live only by the manufacture
of mother-of-pearl buttons. These
buttons, of the kind used for cheap
shirts and underwear, are produced
in huge quantities by hand tools
which might well have belonged to
the early Middle Ages.
The raw materials needed for their
production such as chemicals, card-
board and the foil spangles used to
mount the buttons on the cardboard,
have ceased coming in from abroad
since Pakistan became independent.
Following a world slump in demand,
pearl button production in the vil-
lages has declined from 60, 000 gross
pe week to less than 50, 000 per
month, while the price paid to the
village craftsman has fallen 75 per
cent.
This is only one example of the
distressing problems facing Pakistan
today. It would be a mistake, how-
ver, to view them merely as econo-
mic problems. No doubt the key to
the dilemma lies first with the tech-
nicians.
Synthesis 01 Humanity
poR example, the material condi-tions of the Bengali peasant
could be almost unbelievably im-
proved by the introduction of small,
specially manufactured, hand ope-
rated machines. These would sim-
plify the different stages of work
in the button industry. But
who, better than Unesco can draw
the attention of scientists and techni-
cians to the fact (which they so often
tend to overlook) that the purposes
of science are not only to solve
scientific problems but to find an-
swers to social problems as well. The
efforts of science should not only
enable mankind to surpass itself ;
they must also help those who lag
behind to catch up.
A young nation founded on an an-
cient civilization, Pakistan like other
nations of Asia or America, synthe-
sizes in its problems the whole of
human development. At one and the
same time, it suffers and lives in our
Middle Ages which its villages per-
petuate ; in our 18th and 19th centu-
ries which its first attempts at indus-
trialization reproduce ; in our 20th
century whose advantages it is deter-
mined to secure. Perhaps the more
developed nations, by providing Pa-
kistan with some of the means to
bridge these gaps and overcome such
contradictions, may learn in return
how man can succeed in attaining
his full individual stature without
denying any part of his heritage and
of his past.
SHEPHERD STUDENT ARTIST POTTER VILLAGER
