Latin America's Regional Fundamental Education Training and Production Centre is to be cpened near
Patzcuaro, (above) one of Mexico's loveliest lakes, which is located nearly 7, 000 feet above sea level. The
lake and the ancient own of Patzcuaro are in the old Tarascan Indian stronghold of Michoacan.
The Regional Conference of Une, sco National Commissions held recently i  Havana gavespecial attention to the subject of fundamental education, for problems involved in
launching this type of educational programme are among the most urgent of those
facing Latin American educators today.
Addressing a conference group which studied questions of fundamental education in
Latin America, M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General traced the history of Unesco's
Fundamental Education Programme and described the work done by the Organization through
its missions, seminars and pilot projects.
The Director-General also announced the opening in Patzcuaro, Mexico, of the first
regional fundamental education training and production centre, set up by the Organi-
zation of American States and Unesco with the help of the Mexican Government.
The Wtai rote thh new centre can play in helping to meet the need for trained fundamental
education teachers and effective teaching materiab, not only in Latin America, but in other
parts of the world, is described in the following article.
SEVENTY million persons impri-, JOned behind a wall of igno-
rance constitute a burden that
is today handicapping the economic
and social progress of an entire Con-
tinent-Latin America.
This figure-70, 000, 000-is a
recent estimate of the number of illi-
terates in Latin America'where indi-
vidual countries are facing up square-
ly, though often with limited means,
to the problems posed by populations
with an average literacy rate believed
to be about 55 per cent.
Liberal provisions for education
were written into the constitutions of
nearly all these nations when they
shook off outside domination and,
today, some are spending as much as
one-fourth of their national budgets
on schooling.
Latin American educators have also
long realized that illiteracy is vir-
tually a synonym for hunger, disease,
poverty and wastage of human re-
sources. For decades, they have
worked on the principle that illiteracy
is only part of a way of life that must
be changed. Literacy for its own sake
is not enough.
The key to this change is the teach-
er. Mass produced drugs can be
used to attack such diseases as yaws
and malaria but there is no such
thing as a mass-produced teacher
and teachers are what are needed to
attack illiteracy and ignorance and
the other"diseases"that spring from
them to afflict the people.
Educators can point to many
examples where campaigns against
ignorance and low living standards.
even though they have started off in
a spectacular way, have slowed down
and failed to produce lasting results
in the face of a shortage of teachers
and educational materials.
Today, the problem of making good
these two deficiencies has been singled
out for attack by Unesco under a plan
to establish an international faculty
for training teachers of fundamental
PATZCUARO ?
A School For TacticiansJ
In The Fight Against
"", ; ;, Iënorance' ; ! :' :
education-a term coined by Unesco
to describe ways of teaching people
to live fuller and better lives in their
own surroundings. The plan also
provides for the development and
production of adequate educational
materials by this teachers'college.
Although illiteracy is a world pro-
blem, methods of literacy teaching
have usually to be devised to meet
the needs of individual regions.
Unesco therefore decided to organize
its faculty on a local basis and thus
the idea of regional training and pro-
duction centres came into being. In
October, 1949, the Mexican govern-
ment offered to. help Unesco establish
such a centre in Mexico to serve Latin
America. In the same month the
Organization of American States
joined the plan.
Latin America will therefore be the
first of five regions-the others are
the Far East, India, the Middle East
and Equatorial Africa-to benefit
from the work of what Unesco calls
a"fundamental education training
and production centre". With the
other regions, it comes under a
$20, 000, 000 plan to create a world
network of six such centres, training
some 4, 000 fundamental education
teachers of teachers over twelve years.
Teaching farmers how to fight plant diseases and
insect pests is an important part of rura ! fundamen-
tal education. Here, Mexican farmers learn about
potato diseases from experts working under the
joint agricultural programme ofthe Mexican Govern-ment and the Rockefeller Foundation.
Teachers of Teachers
THe plan was adopted by Unesco'-sExecutive Board last November
and has still to be approved by
the next Unesco General'Conference
TWO APPROACHES TO LITERACY TEACHING. Using Mexican communities as"laborato-
ries", students at the Patzcuaro Fundamental Education Centre will test the relative effectiveness of
two teaching methods-direct instruction in Spanish and the use of the local language with a later
transition to Spanish. The Illustrations above demonstrate different approaches to this problem in
two Latin American countries. They show (1) a page from"Cartilla Tarasco-Espanol", a literacy
primer in Tarascan and Spanish, which offers a bridge from a vernacular to a regional language and (2)
a Brazilian prinier which goes straight into the regional anguage, Portuguese, and makes learning
as streamlined as possible.
This Mexican wall newspaper ina rural community meets both a social and an educational need. It keeps
people up-to-date with local and national news and provides auseful form of follow-up reading material for
newly literate men and women.
in June before it can go into full
operation. However, it is already
becoming a reality for Latin America
whose Mexican Centre plans to train
more than 1, 000 fundamental educa-
tion specialists in twelve years. Com-
pared to 70, 000, 000 illiterates, the
number 18 infinitesimal, but the
centre will train teachers of teachers.
Graduates will go out to staff similar
centres organized by individual na-
tions, so that teachers will be formed
by a kind of"chain reaction"process.
The programme of the'centre will
be familiar to most Latin American
countries where educators believe, if
the people cannot go to schools, in
bringing schools to them. One coun-
try uses"cultural missions", another
"cultural brigades", and still another
"travelling schools", but the idea of
a mobile team of education specialists
runs throughout these programmes.
Such teams usually are made up of
experts on literacy, hygiene, home
economics, practical farming me-
thods, or perhaps handicraft indus-
tries and organized recreation. They
visit rural regions by motor truck, on
muleback or even by river boat.
Often teaching becomes a secondary
task : the first job is to convince
0 o

people that education has something
to oner them.
The worth of these teams has
1>een shown in Mexico, only one of a
number of countries using them.
There, cultural missions have been
given much of the credit for an in-
crease in rural school attendance
from 50, 000 to 683, 000. Other pro-
gress, in terms of healthier diets,
better housing, wiser use of land and
a growth of co-operation, is more dif-
Ücult to translate into statistics.
Unesco has incorporated this
"team"technique into its plan to
train teachers to accomplish on a
larger scale what individual nations
have shown can be done. Students
at the Latin American regional cen-
tre, and other centres that may follow
it, will begin their training as a team,
work as a team and return to their
own country as a highly-trained unit
of specialists.
When the centre opens this year at
Patzcuaro in the Mexican state of
Michoacan, it will have an interna-
tional student body drawn from such
professions as adult educators, sani-
tary engineers, rural schoolteachers,
nurses and agricultural experts. At
first, there will be fifty students ; ten
from Mexico and forty from other
Latin American countries, all studying
under Unesco grants. There will be
accommodation for up to 100 students,
the fifty others to be sent under
fellowships provided by their own
governments.
Community
"Laboratories"
P atzcuaro, which lies in a moun-tain region dotted with lakes
and which is often called the"Swit-
zerland"of Mexico, was chosen as the
centre's site because of the variety of
communities available for study in its
immediate neighbourhood. Its Indian
population, the Tarascans, have
shown, in the past, a healthy desire
for education.
The early start of operations at the
Mexican centre is being made possible
The Tarascan people, of whom those at Patzcuaro are the proud descendants,
were an advanced, artistic and poetic race with a melodious language and a
tradition of many handicrafts. Today, as in the past, they fish in dugouts
on the jade-green waters of Lake Patzcuaro, using graceful butterfly nets to
catch the swarming silver"charales". Traditions and customs preserved
frompre-Spanish times still play an important role in the lives of the Tarascans.
by preliminary research undertaken
by the centre's staff, under the direc-
tion of Lucas Ortiz, former head of
Mexico's rural education department,
and by Mexican educators and go-
vernment officials.
They have already selected the
areas and communities which will
serve as"laboratories"for the centre.
One is typical of Mexico's tropical
lowlands, another of her mountain
regions and the third has a problem
faced by nearly all Latin American
educators-that of a population
speaking a local language without
fixed spelling or grammar. There,
the centre's students will test the
effectiveness of two teaching me-
thods ; the one being direct teaching
of literacy in Spanish and the other
the development of literacy in the
local language with a later transition
to Spanish.
This research into local conditions
will be expanded gradually by the
centre until it covers the needs of all
Latin America. For this task, the
centre is equipped with a research li-
brary and also with a documentation
exchange service designed to keep
both the centre's staff and Latin
American educators abreast of tech-
niques in their area. Students
themselves will contribute to this
research, even before beginning their
eight-month training course, by
writing an entrance"thesis"on fun-
damental education in their own
countries.
Research facilities will also be pro-
vided by a"bureau of production"in
Washington operated by the Organiz-
ation of American States, an example
of the close co-operation among in-
ternational organizations, which ha. s
made the foundation of the centre
possible. The centre's staff, for
example, will include specialists from
three other United Nations agencies
- the World Health Organization, the
International Labour Organization
and the Food and Agricultural Orga-
nization.
Equal importance will be given to
the production side of the centre's
programme. The need to develop the
right materials for both teachers and
pupils was illustrated recently by a
member of an international adult
education seminar who told his col-
leagues wryly :"In my country, we
taught 30, 000 people how two read in
POSTERS FOR PROGRESS. These striking, coloured posters used
by Brazil in its nation-wide adult education campaign have proved their
worth as a means of arousing public interest in the literacy drive and of
providing useful health hints. The texts of those shown above read :
(right)"With these weapons we shall win."and (left)"Sleep protected
from the malaria mosquito-use mosquito nets."
six weeks-but six weeks. later, they
were illiterate again because they had
nothing they could read.".
Follow... up
To Literacy
When a newly-literate adult dis-covers the only available ma-
terial at his reading level to have
been written for children, he can
hardly be blamed for concluding that
illiteracy was not after all such a
disadvantage. One purpose of the
centre's production division is to pro-
vide him With reading material which
fills an immediate need in his daily
life. If being literate can help to
teach a farmer how to keep insects
from ruining his harvest, it has a
practical value which is immediately
obvious to him.
The language and illustrations used
in fundamental education teaching
materials must be as local as the
conditions they are designed to
change. The production experts at
Patzcuaro will work to develop texts,
films and filmstrips which can be
easily assimilated by audiences often
brought up on long traditions of
hostility to"strangers"and the new
ideas they may bring.
One film strip production method
open to the centre i. s that employed
by members of Unesco's Audio-Visual
Fundamental Education Project in
China. There, a new technique-the
use of paint and ink directly on films
- was applied by local artists. Such
artists, when they have been shown
the lesson to be taught, can express
themselves in a language and in sym-
bols which are real and familiar to
the local people and thus more likely
to produce effective results.
The centre will develop materials,
test them in Mexican communities
and then offer them as samples and
models to other Latin American
countries, but with an annual budget
of little more than $100, 000 to cover
both staff and fellowship costs, it will
not be able to publish texts or print
films on a large scale itself.
According to present plans the cen-
tre is to develop a complete range of
fundamental education materials
over five years. It will aim at a
maximum quality of production
whose cost, however, must be kept
within the financial possibilities of
economically under-developed re-
gions.
The entire programme to go into
effect at Patzcuaro, in March, is
conceived not only to meet local
needs in Latin America but also to
act as a"trail blazer"for funda-
mental education campaigns in other
parts of the world.
When these other campaigns get
under way, the educators in charge
of them will have some trustworthy.
signposts-the lessons learned at
Patzcuaro by both teachers and pu-
pils-to guide them down the best
roads.
