A NEW DEAL FOR THE WORD'S ARID LANDS
by Maurice GOLDSMITH
mad a wilderness when we knew
uttie of nature's laws. We plunderedthis planet, robbing the good earth of its
fertility, destroying the forests, decimating wild-
life-creating wilderness. Now-because there
are about 50, 000 new mouths to feed each day
and because the pressure on good agricultural
land is so great-we must restore the wilderness
to fertility.
The task is great, because the arid and semi-
arid regions of the world cover more than a
quarter of the land surface. They range from
deserts, homes of a few nomads, to populated
areas where economic life is maintained only by
the careful husbanding of resources like water.
The development of these different areas gives
rise to problems which, scientifically and techni-
cally, are similar in many respects. International
action is needed, and this is now forthcoming
with the setting-up of Unesco's Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research. The story
of this great venture began in 1948 with a pro-
posal from the Government of India to Unesco.
The United Nations has since expressed full
approval and its Specialized Agencies are
working in close collaboration with Unesco.
At the recent first session of the Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research in Algiers,
scientists and engineers from seven countries
outlined the beginnings of an international
research programme. One project already in
progress is the preparation of reviews of research
on water flow, in rivers and underground, which
has been carried out in the arid region. This isI ! 1'1----. :----..---- ---------------------------
of key importance, for
without water there is no
life.
The Sahara is a typical
desert of the arid zone. It
is a place of intense sun-
light, with strong wind, and
little water. There are few
clouds, and radiations from
the sun and sky are intense.
The great heat is absorbed
by the rocks and sand, re-
radiated and conducted into
the air. The rise in tem-
perature during the day
increases the currents of
air, causing sand and dust
to be picked up and trans-
ported.
Man cannot live for long
in the desert without water.
Two-thirds of the human
body is water, and to live we must maintain that
level. Desert conditions promote rapid evapora-
tion of sweat (which is water taken from the
body.)
As the American physiologist, Dr. E. F. Adolph,
points out :"Sweat evaporates in the desert
before it becomes visible : still invisible, It may
be disappearing at the rate of two or three
pounds an hour. Not only for comfort, but also
from gripping need, must this water be replaced
as rapidly as it is lost. To continue without
water in the desert is as impossible as to be
without oxygen in the atmosphere." (One minute
without oxygen is equivalent to about four hours
in the heat and sun without water.)
BARRENNESS : A desert where nothing grows Is uncommon : mostly It
is sparse grassland or scattered shrub, Many people imagine that
a desert cannot be made fertile. Waster, however, will make it by.. : >om.
*
FERTILITY : This was once a deserts. Modern technology brought
water with startling result. Arid areas can become productive If
moisture can be conserved or sources other the. m local rainfall trapped.
Unesco is making plans for a conference on
the"Hydrology of the Arid Zone with special
reference to Underground Water." (Hydrology
is explained in the article below).
Another project being undertaken is the pre-
paration of homoclimatic maps to show which
regions of the world have similar climates.
When new agricultural methods are developed
in one part of the world, these maps indicate
other regions where they may be applied.
Arid regions may differ climatically and eco-
logically, because annual rainfall may be more
or less heavy and may be associated with widely
varying heat conditions, resulting in a series of
type of climates, each with its own special
features. The arid regions of North Africa, for
example, are really comparable only to some
parts of California and Australia.
There are a number of research institutes
working on the problems of arid regions, and a
directory of these is to be compiled : In addition,
Unesco is to form panels of world experts on
the hydrology, biology and climatology of arid
and semi-arid regions.
This programme of research gives grounds for
hope. As Mr. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-
General, has said :"'with new scientific
discoveries, we shall soon be able to turn these
wastes into a smiling home for the steadily
increasing population of the world."
