UNESCO NATIONAL COMMISSION AND FOUAD 1 DESERT INSTITUTE INAUGURATED IN EGYPT
T liE EgpliüIl. \', tliOIlül Comlllbsionfour Unesco was inaugurated in
Cairo on December 28, by Cnes-
co's Director-General,, M. Jaime Tor-
res Bodet, in the presence of mem-
bers of the Egyptian Government, in-
cluding the Ministers for Education,
Social Affairs aid Economics.
In his address Unesco's Director-
General appealed for support of Unes-
co's work for peace, for, he said,
"There is M man nor people in the
leorld so rich lIS to have nothing tao
gain from the help of others, nor any
man our people so poor as to have
not/dng to lose in a world-Wide con-
flayration. H'hatever its result, the
final balance sheet of any war would
reveal appalling loss. Not only would
lires and wealth be thrown away, but
mankinll itself would emergelt'Ì ! h
shrunken stature."
M. Torres Bodet recalled the growth
of Arab culture, and the efforts of the
Egyptian monarchy to increase the
number of institutes of learning and
education, to found universities and
show *By such initiative that"the
Egypt of today is determined again to
enter that path, wltieh, in the Golden
Age of Islam, brought her her brigh-
test fame."
A warm tribute was paid by the
Director-General to Egypt's Minister
of Education, Dr. Taha Hussein Pasha,
whom, he said"has accomplished in
an extraordinarily brief space of time
results which display a keen awa-
reness of our age's tasks,""These
in themselves are titles eMugh",
he went on,"but Dr. Taha Hussein
Pasha has yet others. André Gide has
said of him :'What may pe>rhaps as-
tonish MS... is fundamentally the exam-
ple that his life affords of a success,
a triumps of the will, a palient victo-
ry of mental vision over the sha-
dol () S."
Task For The"New Man"
THE inauguration of the EgyptianNational Commission was follow-
ed on December 30 by the open-
ing of the Fouad I Desert Institute
at Hel. iopotis near Cairo.
Work un this Institute began in
1930 during the reign of King Fouad I,
who gave orders for its construction.
The war, however, delayed completion
of the building.
The structure, designed in Arab
style, is surrounded by a garden, part
of which is devoted to the cultivation
of plants from the Egyptian deserts,
and to experiments in their acclima-
tisation to different conditions.
The role of the Desert Institute is
to make studies and carry out practi-
cal research on Egypt's deserts. It
will study too various climates, geo-
logy, mineral, agricultural and zoo-
logical resources, as well as perfecting
ways of preventing the invasion of
arable land by the sands of the de-
sert. The Institute also includes a
museum of considerable scientific in-
terest.
Such an initiative on the part of the
Egyptian Government links up with
the programme of Unesco. which en-
visages the seating up of an Interna-
tional Institute of the Arid Zones.
Such areas comprise almost a quarter
of the world's surface.
Recalling this fact in his speech at
the Institute's inauguration, M. Torres
Bodet added :
"These empty tracts are an untold
loss at a time when the productive
land can barely feed half the world's
population. The improvement of this
situation is one of the primary tasks
of the new man that Unesco hopes
ldll emerge-a man who not only
thinks in terms of the world as a
whole but also acts on a basis of soli-
darity towards his feUow men. Man
has suffered many a setback in this
battle against the desert ; he has had
to retreat beJore the hostile land that
will have none of him. These reverses
were suffered when men were fight-
ing sfnglelwnded. But once the peo-
ple as a whole make a concerted e/-
{art to overcome their adversary, that
(Photo"The Times")
The Nile from the air. This photograph shows how narrow is the belt
of cultivation on each side of the river. The role of the recently inaugu-
rated Fouad Desert Institute is to carry out research into ways of increas-
ing the area of this fertile region.
udt'efa/'y Idll in its turn lie {o/'ced to
retreat, leaving men to enjoy the ex-
panse they have brought back to live."
Triumph Over Nature
D. Taha Hussein Pasha in hisaddress paid homage to King
Farouk and his dynasty for seek-
ing to aid the spread of science, and
the development of scientific organiza-
tions within the country, and to use
these means for establishing a close
scientific liaison with other countries.
"/t is vitally important that the East
should finally be ßndowed'wUh a
modern Desert (Mute", declared the
Minister."Egypt will not be the only
country to ogain by it. Its effect will
be felt throughout the world. Scien-
tific establishments belong to all hu-
manity. The founder of a university
not only renders a service to his come-
try, but to all other countries.
"Only the great", continued Dr. Ta-
ha Hussein Pasha, are capable of such
undertakings as this, which aims at
reducing desert expanses and elimi-
nating the causes of fear bll fertilizing
the desert, and transformmg it into
an oasis'of science, knowledge and
tranquillity.
"We, more than any other people",
he said,"are influenced by the desert.
Shut in on two sides, our Great Nile
flows in reality lire a trickle between
two immense deserts.
"If we think constantly of the desert
it is because it affects us deeply. Our
ancient Arab literature has depicted it
as both marvellous and terrible-as
the source of fear and consternation.
"In conceiving the project of this
Institute, King Fouad wished that it
should become a centre for scientists
devoted to research on soil, climate,
desert flora and fauna-a field of
experiment and study available to
scholars of other countries-a centre
where science would demonstrate its
triumph over the forces of nature.
"The eminent men meeting here
to-day", the Minister conc ! uded,"are
proof of the success'of King Fouad's
belief that the Institute must be a
centre of co-operation betwen men".
