THE ITALIAN FILM :
A Mirror of Mankind's
Social Responsibility
by Luigi CHIARINI
Editor, Bianco e Nero, Italian review of film studies
THREE fundamental factors, in my opi-
nion, explain the importance of
films as a medium for international
understanding : their immense popular-
ity and wide circulation ; their direct visual
character which makes them a magnificent in-
strument for concrete, first-hand knowledge ;
and their artistic qualities born of a concentra-
tion on significant detail which permit them to
translate the universal through the particular.
This implies a two-fold conception of the
cinema : first, as a means of achieving cul-
tural, educational and scientific ends, and se-
condly as an artistic medium, for entertainment
purposes. But it implies neither vulgar enter-
tainment pandering to man's lowest instincts,
nor some monstrous machine"bombarding"
the brain with ideological or political dogmas,
thus insulting the human dignity of the spec-
tator because it makes no demands on his
critical faculties.
It is in the light of these ideas that an as-
sessment must be made of the Italian cinema's
contribution in this stormy, conflict-ridden
post-war period towards the promotion of in-
ternational understanding and the active de-
fence of fundamental human values, without
which there can be no hope of real progress.
For reasons of space, and also because of
the attention attracted by our neo-realist films
abroad, we shall confine our remarks to"fea-
ture"films. In the field of the cultural,
scientific and educational documentary film,
the Italian cinema has produced little ; com-
mercial obstacles, combined with problems of
distribution-soon, it is hoped, to be over-
come-have unfortunately prevented these
important aids to knowledge from being as
widely circulated, internationally, as Italian
feature films.
Wolf among Wolves
JUST as there is no such thing as"moral or
immoral"art, so there is no such thing as
"educative"art. This does not mean
that art is a mere empty form. On the con-
trary, it contains the essence of all human
values. Art is, in fact, the full and free affir-
mation of human personality in its essentials ;
the true and complete expression, through the
medium of significant detail, of the human
spirit.
Thus art is always, by definition, moral, edu-
cative and optimistic, in that it lifts man above
human passions and, while faithfully reflecting
the national soul, speaks a language which is
universal.
The stir made in the world by recent Italian
films is due to the very fact that they have been
inspired exclusively by artistic considerations
- the need to express the seething passions
roused by the harrowing experiences of the
war ; to reassert, in art, those human values
which had been trampled and crushed under
foot ; and to combat violence, injustice and
poverty by claiming respect for the human
being.
That is why all the films of which we are
speaking, whatever the politics of their authors,
are permeated by a genuine Christian spirit.
It might seem, at first sight, that art is not the
prime consideration in these films, and that
the producers are mainly concerned to discover
a direct and vivid form of expression, free of
all technical refinements and complications-
to concentrate, in fact, rather on what they
want to say than on how to say it. But it is
the essence of art to eschew all formalism in
expressing human truths.
. Thus, Roma, città aperta (Rome, Open
City), though it depicts the Italian capital
under German occupation and though its cha-
racters are highly individualized, even to the
point of speaking dialect, is universally under-
standable ; in the Italians, the citizens of
Rome, the spectator everywhere, whatever his
nationality, sees man, his passions, his feelings
and his sufferings ; he sees men who, though
victims of the blind brutality of war, are
neither conquered nor resigned, but are capa-
ble of fighting to the bitter end for the attain-
ment of a better world where man will no
longer live like a wolf among wolves.
Similarly, Pots, another film by Rossellini,
shows the various types of Italians, from
Sicily to the marshes of Comacchio, with
their weaknesses, their miseries, their hero-
ism and their religious faith, during the war
upheaval caused by the Allied advance north-
wards. It depicts, through the sufferings of
the Italian people, the sufferings of peoples
the world over who have experienced the
horrors of war.
Crude Reality
OTHER films, especially those of Visconti(La Terra Trema-Earthquake), De
Sanctis (Riso Amaro-Bitter Rice) and
Germi (Il Cammino della Speranza-The Road
to Hope), give a picture of the crude and
moving reality of certain aspects of Italian life,
and evoke, naturally and without rhetoric, a
plea for greater social justice. This is a pro-
blem that is particularly topical in present-day
Italy, where social inequalities are particularly
glaring ; yet it is a problem that is not peculiar
to Italy alone.
In the films of De Sica and Zavattini
(ScmcM ; Ladri di Bicicletti-Bicycle Thieves ;
Miracolo a Milano-The Miracle) the
social argument is centred no longer on the
crowd, but on the individual ; the social theme
is spun around the hero and the other cha-
racters of the story, and the call for the
rights of the individual is then once more
generalized so as to apply to the masses.
In the work of these two producers, neo-
realism assumes a less ideological, a more
warmly human, and one might almost say a
more concrete form ; the centre of gravity
shifts from the people and the various social
categories to their individual representative
- man himself, in all his humanity, man as
a worker, a son, a father, a husband, a com-
rade, a citizen and a member of a religious
community ; man who has feelings, who be-
lieves, thinks and works ; in fact, our fellow
man.
These films, devoid of all the artifices, em-
bellishments and studied effects characteristic
of a"spectacle", and sometimes positively
stark in their simplicity, have helped
to give the world a picture of Italy as it is
today. Avoiding political propaganda, they
have raised, on the artistic and therefore
human level, a question of universal concern
- the need for social justice, harmonized with
the rights of the individual. These films are
the expression of a new humanism ; they issue
a call for, and preach, real human under-
standing.
No.. Escapism..
SUCH is the chief contribution made byrecent Italian films to international under-
standing. Using the screen as a mirror in
which men's actions are vividly reflected, they
indicate, in the strongest possible way, the
need for a sense of social responsibility. Films
of this type are clearly the very antithesis of
"escapist"entertainment.
It is possible that the historical and musical
films made during this period have also helped
to spread abroad a knowledge of our art and
our traditions ; but most important today are
those works which emphasize the affinities,
rather than the differences, between peoples.
The Italian cinema can, if it continues on
these lines, make a valuable contribution to
the development of a mutual understanding
that may, in turn, sow the seeds of that com-
mon conscience which is essential to the estab-
lishment, across political and religious bar-
riers, of understanding between the peoples.
The lesson of art is always a lesson in human-
ity.
Side by side with feature films, it is to be
hoped that in future more progress will be
made in the artistic, scientific and cultural
documentary, which is a potentially important
medium for spreading abroad a knowledge of
our traditions, our genius and our national
characteristics-in a word, the soul of our
country.
OPEN CITY, produced by Roberto Rossellini
SCIUSCIA, produced by Vittorio de Sica
PAISA, produced by Ro. berto Rossellini
THE DIFFICULT YEARS, produced. by Luigi Zampa
THE SUN RISES ALLAYS, produced by
Aida Vergano
