ENTERTAINMENT FILMS FOR CHILDREN
by Lady Allen of Hurtwood
In our september issue, devoted to the cinema as a means of international understanding,we publish d an article entitled "Children's Films-For Adults O ly ?" by a French
writer, writer, Jean Bloch-Michel. As the title suggested, this article maillly dealt with the
effects of adult films on  children. M. Bloch-Michel did not attempt a study of the special
production of films for children. The publication of this article has aroused considerable
interest and comment from our readers in different countries. Lady Allen of Hurtwood,
Chairman of the Advisory Council on Children's Films in Great Britain from 1945 to 1950.
has sent us an article dealing with some of the efforts made in recent years to provide
better entertainment films specially made for children in Britain and other countries of
Europe. We are pleased to publish this artilce below.
In the September issue of the Courier, Mr. RossMcLean (Head of Films and Visual Information
Division, Unesco) wrote that makers of films
"all have a common duty to the world's child-
ren, and an opportunity greater than ever before
10 dischar'ge it, because of the vast challenge it.
presents." The impact of films on children for
good or for-evil Is becoming widely recognized, hut
the challenge has only been accepted in a few
countries. Jean Bloch-Michel writes on children's
films in the same Issue as though no attempt had
been made to produce entertainment films for
children. He Ignores the pioneer work done by the
U. S. S. R., Czechoslovakia. Denmark and the Cnited
Kingdom. He even makes the error of deseribing
the Disney fiims as"fiims meant especially for
children."These films are made for the ordinary
cinema audiencps and their unsuitability for
children is clearly shown in the article. Further-
more, these films are not available for children's
matinées until they have exhausted their commer-
cial run. lie asks "What producer will undertake
to make a picture which he knows will not be
aeeepted by the usual circuits ?"
Early in the near, the J. Arthur Rank Organza-
tion, aware of the harm ilone 10 the sensibility of
child'yen hy seeing old adult films, subsidized a
department charged with the quite new problem
of making children's entertainment films. During
five years, this group, led by Miss Mary Field, was
responsible for producing over 220 films-shorts,
features. a monthly world magazine, fantasy.
adventure, musical. historical and what Sir Michael
Balcon describes as"feature documentary" or John
nrier"on as"making drama frum our da'il'events.
and poetry of our problems."
II was not long hefore the, advisory Council on
Children's Entertainment Films (a group appointed
10 watch and guide this important adventure, and
representing all the principal organizations and
government departments interested in children)
realized that, apart from entertaining children, them
had a unique opportunity of showing how children
lived in other lands. Some of the most popular
British films were stories made in. Australia.
Germany. Norway, Basutoland and Austria. Child-
ren of these countries were the actors and In many
cases spoke their native languages. These and the
English-speaking films have been shown in coun-
tries where the language was unfamillar. and the
children had no difficulty in following the stories
because the spoken word is only incidental to the
action. Here then Is a tremendous opportunity to
show children that "foreigners" are in essence
like themselves, adventurous, clever, warmhearted
and normal human heings with whom they would
rejoice to be friends.
Unesco Is the body to which we all hopefully
turn for assistance to develop this fundamentally
important work. It Is not enough to devote one
article in one issue of the Courier. Why, for in-
stance, should not children's entertainment films
be included with the newsreels, scientific and
cultural films In the Unesco-sponsored interna-
tional conventions soon to be ratitled and so assisl
the free flow of films already made and stimulate
further production ? Is there any reason whv a
viewing library should not be established at Unesco
House, as has already been done for educational
and welfare films" ? Would Unesco convene a
small conference of expert and experienced per-
sons to discus the whole problem and to rccom-
mand the best ways Cor Unesco to Cosier and
guide the making and distribution of children's
entertainment films In relation to the needs and
possibilities in each continent? The implications
are immense and the interest vivid-so much
that there is a danger that other bodies outside the
United Nations may assume international leader-
ship.
EDITOR'S NOTE
Children's films, if certified by the Government of
the producing country to be of an educational,
scientific or cultural character, come under the
duty free provisions of the Unesco Agreement for
Facilitating the International Circulation of Visual
and Auditory Material of an Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Character. In addition, the second
Unesco Free Flow Agreement would allow
educational, scientific or cultural institutions
approved by the Government of the importing
country to import such films duty free. The
subject of children's films wos the theme of a
series of film group meetings held in Venice from
. August 16 to 19 at which Unesco was represented,
and at which Unesco's publication Recreational
Film for Juvenile Audiences serred as a basis of
discussion. Unesco is at prensent collaboratin with
an international committee formed in Venice
during these meetings to prepare the first world
congress on children's films, scheduled to be held
next year in Europe.
