FREEDOM OF INFORMATION-A COLLECTIVE RIGHT
by Fernand Terrou
Legal Adviser
to the French Cabinet
FREEDOM of expression is among the foremost 0"human rights. It is the continuation and practical
application of per. sonal freedom of thought. The
manner in which it is envisaged is therefore a funda-
mental element of any system of social organization.
Hence, the principle of such freedom must necessarily
be set forth more or less explicitly in any social covenant,
whatever its form-whether it be derived from custom or
determined by a written constitution.
It is thus that, at the present time, these various written
constitutions, irrespective of the system of administration
that they establish, all make mention-either in their texts
or in the legal preambles which precede them-of freedom
of expression, though the terminology employed is variable.
And when the administration is founded on common law,
freedom of expression is among those essential principles
of government which general practice, the attitude of the
authorities and the vigilance of the courts apply with as
much exactitude as, and in an even more concrete form
than if they had been enshrined in a written constitution.
The principle of freedom of expression, thus stated or
emerging, and the concept therein set forth, must as a
matter of course determine the legal system to be applied
to the various vehicles of expression, the mass media of
information. While freedom of thought is a personal
freedom, freedom of expression is a collective freedom,
whose character in this respect becomes more and more
pronouncea as tne great tecnnlcal
methods of diffusion multiply and
improve.
In the case of individual liberties,
such as freedom of thought or security
of the person, the legal system need
do no more than guard against any
attempt to interfere with the behaviour
of the individual, other than those
controls necessary to social order.
Collective freedoms involve a more
extensive and complex treatment, in
so far as they require the use of
considerable material resources. The
legal system must then determine the
use to be made of these resources, the
collective instruments and organiza-
tions required by such use, the
guarantees which must be furnished
for the protection of individual rights
within the framework of such
organizations and, if need be, the
policy to be pursued by these latter in
the public interest.
"Everyone has the right... to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of fron-
tiers,"While with the press, the film and the radio (above) there has been an increase in the means of propagating
ideas, the means of controlling and checking this propagation have today also become much more refined.
nor under the same conditions in the
field of radio or even, sometimes, in
that of the cinema, as it is in the
field of the press. The constitutional
expression of the principle of freedom
of expression is the first evidence of
this.
Certain constitutional provisions,
and especially the most recent, are,
however, wider in their scope ; such,
for instance, is that contained in the
Constitution of the Saar, which
guarantees freedom of expression
whether oral, written, pictorial, or of
any other nature... Yet another
formula has recently arisen and
gained a footing, at any rate on
the international plane ; it is that
enshrined in them, they generally men-
tion only those elements which affect
the actual extent of the right of public
utterance, leaving out all those which
concern the material resources required
for that purpose. Now, freedom of the
press or freedom of information, is a
collective freedom, a group freedom.
Its exercise involves, in the ordinary
way, recourse to collective organiza-
tions and Instruments.
It is true that the magnitude of
the material resources needed for the
exercise of freedom of expression
through the press, and the consequent
scale of the collective organizations
and instruments, did not become fully
evident until the end of the nine-
Three Terms-One Idea
THE concept of freedom of expres-sion regarded as a principle is
merged with the concept of the
use that may be made of the resources
and technical methods essential to the
practical expression of this freedom.
This appears from the very termino-
logy employed. While certain consti-
tutional provisions guarantee freedom
of expression, others in the same
context, mention only the freedom of
the press, which strictly speaking, is
the oldest-established of the great
media of diffusion.
The advent of new technical methods
of information (radio and cinema)
has not, however, affected these for-
mulae, because-and this simple
examination of constitutional ter-
minology brings us straight to the
dominant fact of our whole theme-
generally speaking, freedom of ex-
pression is not guaranteed so fully,
ARTICLE 19. Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expres-
sion ; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference
and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers.
of freedom of information, which
primarily applies to freedom of expres-
sion in every form, and more especially
in those forms which correspond to
the three great technical media of
diffusion. In any case the terms
freedom of expression, freedom of the
press and freedom of information all
express one and the same primary
idea.
A Group Freedom
EXAMINING these constitutionalprovisions on the tech ical pla e,
however, we discover, that even
when they specify the constituent
elements of the notion of freedom
The invention of printing in the fifteenth century placed a formidable weapon in the hands of innovators and
reformers, whose resources increased with the spread of pamphlets and later, periodical, Today, great
newspapers are more vulnerable than were the slim pamphlets of the past, and the policing of frontiers has
everywhere become more effective. True democracy, however, can only exist where free availability of informationand the freedom of the press are assured.
teenth century. Whence it might be
deduced that constitutional instru-
ments, which in many cases date from
an earlier period, could not apply to
them. But since then, at least under
certain systems, nothing has been
done to complete them in this respect.
Yet the press has developed con-
siderably ; it has become both a trade
and an industry, requiring costly
materials-all the more costly
since progress and improvements are
constant. Alongside the strictly
political factor involved in the defini-
tion and regulation of collective
freedom of expression, and which
results simply in laying down the
boundaries of the field left open to
Iree inmauve, leaving
individuals and groups
free to select the ideas
or news-items that
they may wish to cir-
culate, there now ap-
pears the economic
factor, which affects
the very organization
of the material resour-
ces now required for
the use of that right,
for the exercise of the
functions and activi-
ties it involves.
A first glance leads
one to the conclusion
that the manner in
which these resources
are, or may be, made
use of is an element
almost as important
as regards the extent
of freedom of expres-
sion as is the political
factor. The distinc-
tion between these two
elements dominates
the whole of the legis-
lation regarding the
press and information
services.
Free Enterprise
THROUGH, precis) yin those constitu-
tional provisions
the economic factor is
not mentioned save as
an exception, this is
not due to an oversight.
It is because, as vie
have seen, the systems
set up by those provi-
sions do not admit the
existence of an econo-
mic factor peculiar to
the press, of such nature as to call for
the separate treatment of newspaper
enterprises, and thus to add special
provisions concerning the rights of
expression.
These constitutional systems are
founded on the principle of freedom
of trade and industry. It is true that
they provide for the regulation of that
liberty-regulation which, in certain
sectors, goes so far as to annul it.
But they always provide a fairly
broad sector of economic activity
where the regulations are as few and
as elastic as possible, to avoid hamper-
ing initiative and the spirit of private
enterprise.
To
Uneasy Speculation
HE sector of free enterprise is thevery exp ession, one might say 
embodiment, of the economic po-
licy which characterizes the systems
mentioned. And the very essence of
that concept of freedom of the press
and of information, upon which these
systems are based, is the assumption
that press undertakings belong to the
sector of free enterprise.
There was therefore no need to
include any special provision for this
in those passages of the constitutions
which define freedom of expression ;
the general principle was sufficient,
since it applies to the newspaper
industry as to all others.
Nevertheless this principle is relaxed
or even dropped in respect of radio
and cinema, where constitutional
provisions carry little weight. As
regards newspaper undertakings them-
selves, uneasy speculation has been
aroused, even in those countries most
attached to the principle of free enter-
prise, concerning the possible reper-
cussions of this economic factor upon
freedom of expression. And, in any
case, every system has some special
provisions relating to newspaper
enterprises.
These systems are based on the
principle of free expression that we
have already described, on the in-
dependence of the press from the
political authorities and, in principle,
on free enterprise. The special
provisions applicable to newspaper
undertakings which they include, or
which may arise out of the concepts
embodied in them, in no way tend, at
any rate in the reasons or explana-
tions given for them, to ensure or
promote the subordination of the press
to the political authority to entrust
the supervision or guidance of public
opinion to that authority, or to place
the enterprise under its control. Their
main effect is or would be to ensure
either the economic independence
of newspaper undertakings, or the
practical application of those res-
ponsibilities which go hand in hand
with true freedom. And those which
are found to be the most usually
accepted or recommended are or would
be aimed at giving full effect to
freedom of expression and information.
Freedom of information has a
double aspect. In the first place, it
implies the liberty to issue and to
disseminate ideas and news, without
unjustified restriction. In the second
place, it implies the right of every
individual to be fully informed. The
liberty to be informed is the necessary
corollary of the liberty to supply
information.
