WHEN seven-year-old Esam Attia was brought to the
\A/Quobba Model School in Cairo for the first time, he. was very unhappy. Clinging to his father's arm, he
sobbed that he didn't want to start school, and he
finally had to be forced into a classroom.
It was not long, however, before Esam overcame his fear and
anger and settled down happily at the Quobba School. Why
he was able to do so is part of the story of an experiment in
the use of art as a means of full educational development which
I began several years ago for first grade children aged seven
to eight.
Taking art, which I regard as an instinctive form of expression
with most children, as a centre of interest, I used it as an
approach to, and as a nucleus for, many other subjects.
Art traditions, nature and the fresh ideas children absorbed
from their environment were moulded into the experiment
during its first years in 1945-1946. We arranged trips to mus-
eums and places of interest related to the problems under
study, and also made the project the subject of a play and of
articles in the school magazine.
While many kinds of art media were used to give form to
the children's expression, the most successful was clay modelling.
Examples of the work done by these seven-and eight-year-
olds which appear on this page show what can be done, even
with the simplest materials and equipment, to develop the
natural artistic abilities of children, provided they are taught
and encouraged with sympathetic insight and understanding.
When we put this experiment into operation, we faced two
main problems : how to seek out each child's inherent and
unique pattern of expression and which subject of interest to
choose to enable the integration of all learning ?
To solve the first we chose an emotional theme and asked
each child to express his ideas on it in simple patterns composed
of one object such as an animal or a man.
Some astonishing results were obtained, as in figure 4 on
this page"The expression of an angry lion", which was done
by Esam Attia, the same little boy who had to be forced into
school. Now E`sam's outward feelings of fear and anger have
left him, for they have been released and given a chance of
expression in t) his form of the angry animal. The lion has
been hit by arrows and is roaring with pain and anger. All
the subjective and dramatic feeling of the child has thus found
an outlet in his expression of the suffering lion.
A similar example is found in figure 2 where the young
artist's subject was"A man feeling the pain of hunger". Note
how the child has stiffened the man's arms and fingers and
made the form unmovable. Here the expression is shown in
a very subtle way.
After using these dramatic modes of expression, we shifted
the emphasis to another subject which could be studied within
the proximity of the school-the life of the Egyptian peasant ;
his house, work and animals. Examples of the modelling done
by the children on this subject are also shown here.
"Two farmers at work" (figure 1) has a quality of dramatic
expression that can be found in certain paintings of Geor-
ges Rouault, while"The shepherd" (figure 3) is a poetic work
characterized by the rhythmical repetitions of forms. Note the
manner of depicting the grass.
Oar aim was not to teach"art for art's sake", but to seek
the total aesthetic development of each child. At the same time
the children studied the life of the Egyptian peasant, later
comparing it with life in other lands. They also planned to
build an actual model of a peasant's house, and this involved
doing mathematical problems and writing letters and reports
on their experiences. Then they wrote a play for which they
made dresses and peasant tools, prepared stage scenery and
studied songs and music.
In this way, working from art to life and vice versa, I think
we have succeeded in giving our pupils the creative experience
which children need, and in teaching a valuable lesson in the
development of direct, honest and unspoiled artistic expression.
II
Ð
&commat;)
STORIES IN CLAY
BY CHILDREN
UNDER TEN
by Dr. Mahmoud EI-BASSIOUNY
Art Teacher, Quobba Model School, Cairo
