DO IT YOUR OWN WAY
by Georges Fradier

"YaU do not notice the beauty of the world.You do not notice the wonderful things
that make you grow strong and healthy.
If you would notice all these things, then you
would know the world and enjoy life better."
The author of these words is about twelve
years old. He took pains to form the letters,
but the words came spontaneously. He wrote
down freely and joyfully the ideas in his mind.
But, when the school year began, he had never
even given so much as a thought to the
"beauty of the world."For, living in the poor
districts of Los Angeles, this lyrical young
writer and his school friends know much more
about unemployment, alcoholism and end-of-
the-month quarre1s than the film producers in
nearby Hollywood who attempt to portray
"real life"on the screen.
These youngsters are also well acquainted
with what are called social and racial tensions,
although they have learned how to overcome
these forces of contempt and hate. Their
class at school is formed mainly of Chinese
and Mexicans ; there are also some Japanese,
and white and Negro Americans. But their
teacher did not give them any lectures on
racial and social relations ; instead, she made
them work, dance and sing together. She
taught them how to write and to paint
together. Above all, she showed them the
meaning of confidence and friendship-
without favouritism, without exceptions,
Mrs. Natalie Robinson Cole, the teacher in
question, has now told the story of her work
with these children in a simply written book
entitled :"The Arts in the Classroom."It
is a moving work because it shows the arts and
especially painting being discovered rather
than taught.
"A teacher can't force fine painting down
children's throats", she writes."She must be
content to open them up by getting and hold-
ing their liking and respect. Good children's
painting comes as a result of a rapport estab-
lished and the feeling that the teacher has
faith that they can do it."
All the time, she is reminding the young
artists that they must do things their own
way. Soon-whether it be modelling, dancing
or English composition-they begin to
understand their capabilities and freedom.
They start saying :"It's just like painting,
huh ? You got to do it your own way. You
mustn't be afraid ; just feel it inside and do it."
Supplied with colours, brushes and paper,
they produce big water-colours ; and adults
cannot help admiring the strength, the sin-
cerity and the rhythm. The subjects are
inexhaustible ; happy or sad experiences,
memories and reveries, shared or secret joys-
all the deep-seated emotions of childhood take

"I CLOSED MY EYES, AND SEEN AN ANGEL
AND MADE ONE LIKE I SEEN) T"
shape in the painting when the anxiety to
imitate has given place to a sole desire to
perfect a"beautiful picture". The best are,
of course, exhibited in the classroom, and each
pupil looks forward to his turn to have his
own picture well framed and in full view, to be
admired as it deserves.
In her book which is as studious as it is
human, Mrs. Cole gives many practical sug-
gestions, including some psychological tech-
niques. The"problem"child, she declares,
the child who is most handicapped and dif-
fident, can achieve equilibrium and self-
respect if you know how to encourage his
slightest artistic effort, if you frankly admire
his work. Don't spare admiration and praise ;
such a child is not used to it. He used to
think he could not get anything but
reproaches, rebuffs and punishments.
But each time, whatever may be the talents
or character of a pupil, the teacher should
remember that the growing process is more
important than the finished product-that
the child is more important than the picture.
Here is how one child has confided his
feelings :.'1 like to paint because it is fun.
And if you want a good picture yov have to
work on it and feel it inside and keep working
with it and take pains with it and make it
strong and don't be looking around or talking
to anyone and mind your own business and
don't be running around. Then you can make
a good picture and the teacher will hang it out
in the hall and you will have something to be
proud of."Another has not reached such
hasty conclusions. He contents himself by
saying reverently :"I like painting. 1 would
like to paint all the time, everyday. 1 am
never tired of painting."
Even if they do tire of painting, they find
fresh ardour in clay which soon takes the
shape of, say, a cow (the anatomy may be
strange, but it is unmistakeably a cow) or
an angel, whose authenticity is guaranteed
("I closed my eyes, and seen an angel, and
made one like I seen it"). They can make
and decorate plates, which will be baked in the
oven and can be used at meals. They can
engrave on linoleum those big figures with
arms upraised, those portraits. of a comrade, of
the teacher or of the cook who quite uninten-
tionally are depicted in the style of the
handsomest of African masks. They can print
on materials, dance or write, There still
remain so many means of explaining the world
that they are learning to observe, to touch, to
feel ; so many means of expressing the beauty
of the world revealed to those who are no
longer afraid of contributing to this beauty
because they know it is within them.
For they know what satisfies them ; they
know it so well that they want to hand on to
the grown-ups something of the confidence
they have gained in their school, where the
joy of making has conquered fear or the
boredom of living. Someone may say,.'You
do not know the world". So, as if she were pic-
turing an unseen world to the blind, a little
girl bravely tries to explain :"Now I will tell
you something about the earth-what's beau-
tiful on the earth. Well, here I go. The
earth is. simply marvellous  the trees, for
instance. Just think about them. Now the
pepper tree. The leaf is different than any
other leaf. Have you ever picked a pepper
leaf ? And their smell is so different, and the
little red pepper that comes on it. Everybody
should be thankful for our beautiful earth."
(l'iì% s by C. I' :. Ell/Oil. CO} JY" ; yll/ by Nai<llie Co/e.)
