EVERY district of Paris seems to be celebrating
the 2000th anniversary of the French capital
these days. The whol  city is d corated,
the flags are out and the shop windows and
public squares have the air of a big family birth-
day.
In the programme of festivities, something has
been thought of for everybody-including the chil-
dren. Working under the guidance of two French
art teachers, Madame Vige Langevin and M. Jean
Lombard, boys and girls have produced a remark-
able series of paintings and drawings with Paris
as their theme.
The iriteresting thing about these paintings-a
number of which we reproduce on this page-is
that they have been done according to a rather
unusual technique, developed by Madame Langevin
and M. Lombard. All of the works shown on this
page are collective paintings executed by as many
as 80 boys and girls between the ages of 9 and 14.
Madame Langevin defines collective painting and
drawing as an artistic work of quite large propor-
tions, conceived and carried out by a group of chil-
dren. The number and age of the children working
on a single painting, she points out, often varies
considerably. The same is true of the size, the
technical methods used and the length of time
needed to complete a given project.
One of the advantages of this method, according
to the two French art teachers, is that it enriches
the child's aesthetic appreciation and at the same
time gives him a lesson in social education.
Working in this way, the child learns quickly to
be selective in his own expression, to discipline
his ideas and to respect the efforts of others.
"The child acquires a collective sense", says Ma-
dame Langevin,"for he learns to understand that
a painting conceived and executed by himself and
by other members of his group must take into
account the requirements of everyone and give
aesthetic satisfaction to the whole team. Such a
painting therefore assumes greater importance and
beauty for the child since it represents the total of
everyone's efforts."
Like many other modern art teachers, Madame
Langevin and M. Lombard are interested above all
in stimulating the creative personality of children,
and tao, do this the teacher must make an effort to
understand their feelings and ideas."A teacher"
they say,"must be as much a psychologist as an
artist, and must respect the artistic efforts of the
child, however faltering or even absurd they may
at first glance appear."
Pliotos Copyright by Edition.'dlt Scarabée, paris.
NOTRE DAME-Collective painting, executed by 24 children between 11 and 12 years of age (3314 ft. x 3ft.)
PLACE DENFERT-ROCHEREAU-Collective painting made
by 20 boys aged 13 to 14 (4 1/4 ft x 41/4ft.)
PLACE D') TAUE-CoHective painting of one of the more
populous sections of Paris, made by 25 girls aged 12 to 13,
THE SEINE-Collective painting executed by a group of children between 10 and 14 years of age.
HOW 80 CHILDREN
AGED 9-14 SEE
THE CAPITAL OF FRANCE
EIFFEL TOWER-This is how 4 boys of 11 and 12 saw and
painted the famous landmark of Paris.
