UNESCO COURIER-Page 10 FEBRUARY 1951
HAVANA CONFERENCE RESOLUTIONS REFLECT
REGIONAL SUPPORT FOR UNESCO'S PROGRAMME
REPORTING on the work of the First Regional Conference of National
Commissions of the Western Hemisphere, to Unesco's Executive
Board, last m th, M. Jaim  Torres B det, the Director-General,
stated :
"The Conference might have been no more than a meeting for
information and study purposes ; even as such it was indispensable, as was
shown by the discussions. But, whether it was a question of fundamental educ-
ation... of teaching about the United Nations and the Declaration of Human
Tights, of the role of the university on the American continent, or of the develop-
ment of exchanges of persons, the Conference, both in its advice to the Secretariat
and in its recommendations to the governments concerned, showed its keen
desire for more regional co-operation within the Organization".
M. Torres Bodet added :.. The fact that, in the case of at least half
the delegations, those who voted for these resolutions were the persons directly
responsible for action, gives me considerable hope that these intentions will
be translated into fact in the near future".
The desire of National Commissions in the Western Hemisphere to
contribute actively to Unesco's programme is reflected in the texts of
conference resolutions relating to four important aspects of Unesco's
work, which are published on this page.
Assembly of the United Nations on
10 December 1948.
(b) That, to this end, the National
Commissions of every Member
State, in agreement with the
Secretariat of Unesco in Paris,
promote the establishment of
educational curricula on this
subject on the following basis :
(i) The systematic development
of theoretical and practical
teaching about human rights,
from elementary classes in
primary schools up to the
advanced (university and
technological) level, including
an examination of the meas-
ures designed to ensure those
rights and guarantees, and an
estimate of their effectiveness
in everyday life ;
(ii) The attaching of greater im-
portance to a knowledge of the
bases of each human right
studied than to the actual
means whereby the right is
given legal effect.
(iii) The carrying out of a national
and international campaign of
civic education, in which
teaching in the schools, among
the public as a whole, and
in non-scholastic institutions
shall be included, with a view
to preparing all people for the
exercise of the rights and the
fulfilment of the obligations
laid down in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
of 10 December 1948.
(iv) The special emphasizing of
the fact that the rights of the
individual imply and define
,'obligations on his part as
regards co-operation, living inSociety, responsibility and
maximum respect, for the
dignity of other men...
(c) That, in those countries which
have not yet inaugurated official
curricula for teaching about hu-
man rights, the curricula referred
to in paragraph (b) be placed at
the disposal of the governments
concerned by 1 April 1951 at the
latest.
NATIONAL COIUMISSIONS TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE IN LATIN AMERICA
The COllferellce
(a) RECOMMENDS the governments
of the Western Hemisphere :
(i) To include in their annual
budgets allocations sufficient
to enable National Commis-
sions to make an effective
contribution to the execution
of Unesco's programme.
(ii) To consider the desirability of
setting up a permanent and
adequately remunerated Se-
cretariat for the National
Commissions called upon to
play an essential part in pro-
moting the aims and objects
of Unesco.
(iii) To arrange for frequent meet-
ings and for continuity in the
work of the National Com-
missions of the Western
Hemisphere, through the
establishment of special com-
mittees corresponding to the
chief fields of action included
in Unesco's programme and
also, where necessary, of an
Executive Committee to be
responsible for co-ordinating
the work and taking any
decisions that may be requir-
ed between plenary meetings
of the National Commission.
(iv) To invite Member States to
review the composition of
their respective National Com-
missions, with a view to
enabling them to carry out
their work more effectively,
ensuring that they represent
governmental bodies interest-
ed in Unesco's aims, public or
private institutions, women's
organizations, labour and
youth associations of an
educational, scientific or cul-
tural nature, and international
cultural organizations, so. that
the general public may be
more closely associated with
the implementation of Unes-
co's programme.
(v) To establish, whenever neces-
sary, centres affiliated to the
National Commissions, grant-
ing them adequate premises
and assuring them of the
support of the administrative
and university authorities and
of cultural organizations.
(b) ALSO RECOMMENDS the Nation-
al Commissions of the Western.
Hemisphere :
(i) To contribute by all appropri-
ate means to the implement-
ation of Unesco's annual pro-
gramme and special projects,
the maintenance of contact
between the latter and the
national organizations, and
the dissemination of inform-
ation concerning the objects
and activities of Unesco.
(ii> For that purpose, to make a
careful study at the beginning
of 1951, of Unesco document/
XR/14 concerning the partici-
pation of National Commis-
sions in the execution of the
programme for 1951, and to
draw up on the basis of that
document a detailed plan of
action for the year.
(iii) To prepare a complete list of
the educational, scientific and
cultural bodies in their res-
pective countries, both for
their own convenience, and for
the information of Unesco and
particularly of the Regional
Office at Havana, to which
reports should be sent.
(iv To establish, whenever possible,
particularly in educational
centres, associations of friends
of Unesco.
TEACHING ABOUT HUMAN RIGHTS
The Conference'J
RECOMMENDS to the Governments
of the American countries :
(a) That they promote throughout
their territories, as soon as possi-
ble, public and private teaching
not only about the human rights
and fundamental freedoms
enshrined in their countries'
Constitutions, but also, and as
intensively as possible, about the
rights set forth in the Universal
Declaration which was approved
and proclaimed by the General
The Co.. lereøe
RECOMMENDS
(a) That Unesco and the Mexican
Government be congratulated on
the setting up of the Mexican
Scientific Bibliographical Centre,
the Conference being fully cons-
dent that the work of the said
Centre will benefit the whole of
Latin America and that branches
will be set up as soon as possible
in the Latin American countries.
(b) That, in co-operation with the
other Agencies of the United
Nations, Unesco carry out a survey
on the native problem in Latin
America, especially on native
education.
(c) That a seminar be organized on
the techniques to. be used in de-
termining the needs for specializ-
ed personnel in Latin America.
(d) That a seminar be organized to
study the results of Unesco's
enquiry and activities in the
matter of Technical Needs in Mass
Communication (Film, Press and
Radio) in Latin America, and to
draw up a programme for dealing
with those needs.
(e) That study groups or seminars on
scientific questions connected
with the economic development of
the Latin American countries be
organized within the general plan
of Technical Assistance, with the
special purpose of studying various
scientific aspects of the conserva-tion and use of the Continent's
natural resources.
(f) That the Director-General of
Unesco be requested to send the
five foregoing recommendations to
the Latin American Governments
for ratification, approval of those
recommendations being regarded
as constituting official requests for
technical assistance to Latin
America.
(g) That the National Commissions of
the Western Hemisphere be re-
quested to collaborate in the
implementation of the Technical
Assistance Plan...
FUNDAMENTAL EDUCATION
The First Regional Conference of
National Commissions of the Western
Hemisphere considers that the train-
ing of teachers and the production of
teaching materials are of the greatest
importance in fundamental education,
and it therefore submits the following
recommendations concerning the
better and more effective co-operation
of the National Commissions, and
concerning the Regional Centre to be
established at Patzcuaro under the
auspices of Unesco :
(a) The greatest possible number of
fellowships should be obtained for
each country.
(b) The number of fellowships should
be established in accordance with
the cultural needs and the geogra-
phical situation of each country...
THE CONFERENCE
HAVING carefully considered the
"project for the establishment of a
world network of regional fundamental
education centres"submitted by
Unesco's Director-General ;
CONSCIOUS of the need of trained
staff and suitable teaching materials
for ensuring the success of the world-
wide fundamental education campaign
sponsored by Unesco ;
NOTES with satisfaction that the
first Regional Centre has been estab-
[lShed by OAS and Unesco, with the
help of the Mexican Government, in
order to meet the needs of Latin
America in trained staff and suitable
teaching materials for fundamental
education ; and,
DESIROUS of seeing the work of
the Regional Fundamental Education
Centre in Latin America serve as an
example for similar centres in other
parts of the world,
RECOMMENDS the National Com-
missions of the Western Hemisphere
and the Third Meeting of Represent-
atives of National Commissions to
give their full support to Unesco's
project and to facilitate its execution
by all appropriate means.
THE OPENING OF THE UNESCO REGIONAL CONFERENCE. This photo, taken in Cuba's
National Capitol on December 8, shows, (front row, from left to right) : Dr. Cosme de la Torriente,
Chairman of the Regional Conference ; Dr. Lincoln Rodo, President of the Cuban Chamber of
Deputies ; M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General, Dr. Ernesto Dihigo, Cuban Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Manuel A. de Varona, President of the Cuban Senate, Dr. Alberto Lleras,
former President of Colombia and Secretary-General of the Organization of American States ;
and Dr. Octavio Mendez Pereira, Director of Unesco's Regional Centre,
DURING THE HAVANA CONFERENCE OF NATIONAL COMMISSIONS, three Unesco
exhibitions-colour reproductions of modern art, Human Rights and Unesco'S Travelling Science
Exhibition-were held, and within 12 days had been visited by 40, 000 people. Their inauguration
in the National Capitol at Havana coincided with the commemoration of Human Rights Day, on
December 10, This photograph, taken at the inauguration, shows, from left to right : Sr. Manuel
Gua) Vital, Mexican Minister of Education, Dr. Ernesto Dihigo and Sra. Dihigo, M. Jaime
Torres Bodet, and Dr. Octavio Mendez Pereira.
