impressions that one becomes acquainted with two States,
newcomers to political independance and eager for the
modernization on which their existence depends. Their tradi-
tional environment is millinary, but their problems are modern.
Liberation has been achieved, but adaptation to the social and
economic conditions of the 20th century is proving to be more
difficult. All the questions which are stirring the India of today
spring from these two contradictory sets of conditions,
The first of these questions, facing both Pakistan and India,
is how best to create a modern state together with the
institutions and methods needed to ensure its efficient working
in a society as yet archaic.
This sub-continent, clearly bounded by the Himalayas, the
Arakan and the Ocean has continually come under the rule of
foreign conquerors : the forts of Agra and of Delhi are impressive
monuments to the Mogul power and, only yesterday. British
Viceroys governed 400, 000. 000 Indians.
In this environment dominated by a concern ; : nor
metaphysics, the notion of the State was long an alien
concept, and responsability for order rested on the authority
and competence of a handful of British civil servants. Now
that these men have left, will their Indian or Pakistan successors
be capable of administering, by western techniques, the deve-
loped State structures which they have inherited with a society
as yet largely medieval ?
Karachi and New Delhi certainly have able leaders trained
in the British school, but they lack that framework of experienced
officials on which execution primarily depends. We who live
in-an old social structure where the difference between the
highest and the lowest in a hierarchy is, in fact, trifling, cannot
easily appraise the obstacle created by a lack of officials able
to interpret an order. First-rate ministers-and India has
them-are not enough ; heads of offices are also needed.
How, one wonders, will this education of civil servants be
carried out, and will the Indian administration be able to
maintain the high level achieved by the previous regime.
Intelligence is certainly not lacking, but rather a certain
orderliness of method, a certain collective discipline in conduct.
How can an administration of the Western type operate in Asia
with a national staff ? This is certainly one of the first questions
raised in the mind of an observer.
A gigantic programme faces the new leaders of India, first
fn the modernization which is closely linked with the problem of
illiteracy and the magnificient efforts now being made to
develop the country's teaching and educational resources.
The technical and administrative work carried out by the
British was considerable-in some respects outstanding-but
the need for adequate mechanical equipment remains urgent.
Agriculture is still in the era of the camel and the medieval
cart, while the existing system of land ownership and tilling
demands (the word is not too strong) a revolution. Moreover,
the industrialization of the new country-still too exclusively
agricultural-seems indispensable, if a too numerous popu-
lation is to be given the chance of existence. This population
grows by three to four millions every year, producing surplus
mouths that no one knows how to feet, and creating an ever-
present threat of famine. Charity or assistance cannot solve
this problem without a complete reform of the economy.
Such a transformation is less urgent for Pakistan, but for
India it cannot long be delayed. Although India is now a
great industrial country, and has been for half a century, its
industrial potential is far from fully developed. The time when
its former rulers, by treating its economy as a colonial one,
arbitrarily gave it the role of exporter of raw materials and
importer of manufactured articles, has now passed.
The problem now arises which undoubtedly more than any
other troubles the India of Gandhi-when the country has ior
the first time become master of its own destiny. Is the vitally
needed technical revolution compatible, either with the peasant
and handicraft tradition, or with the requirements of the Hindu
religion (or, in the case of Pakistan, with those of the Koran) ?
The tractor will bring into India's 700. 000 villages methods of
work which may profoundly disrupt rural life. And what of the
handicraft worker on whom Gandhi, with his symbolic spinning
wheel, had founded his entire patriotic and mystic resistance to
the mechanical inroads of the West ? Can we, moreover,
disregard the fact that many reforms in hygiene and technology
only too obviously contradict a ritual tradition to which the
people are, for the most part, deeply attached ?
Sooner or later an answer must be given to these questions
which, each day, become more and more pressing. It is not
hard to foresee the attitudes likely to be taken in this respect
by the various sections of the population.
The official. and with them the intelligentsia of the
universities, give first place to the need for this modernization.
going so far at times as to treat as superstitious the religious
beliefs likely to raise opposition. The West alone is able for
the time being to give them technical advice and adequate
financial aid. But can we not sense that they would be
prepared, eventually, to turn elsewhere for such assistance ?
Officials, intellectuals and technicians are not all of India.
however. And even amongst them, it is worth noting that there
are many who may revert to the conservatism of their elders
once the enthusiasm of their youth has passed. Is it not
possible, therefore, that the religious tradition, which is so
closely linked with the ritual tradition, may once again become
the guiding influence in the country following a return to the
deep-seated feelings of the masses ? In the next popular
election which candidate will be listened to and followed tnost
closely-the one who advocates a policy of tractors, dams,
anti-famine measures, progress in hygiene, or the one who
appeals to the ancestral beliefs expressed in respected rites ?
Thus, while the real question is to learn to what extent an
Asiatic country can absorb and use the administrative and
technical methods of the West, it is also essential to know how
much the country really wants these methods and the kind of
life they imply. The values of the East are'not the same as
ours. It is not, however, a question of superiority, since there
is no proof whatsoever that the West is superior, but rather one
of efficacy. One might wish to be twenty years older so as to
see how India will act in solving these great problems which
touch the depths of a people's soul.
Studying India is like leaning
over the brink of an abyss from
which a timeless past seems to a
rise, envelop and penetrate one's
very being ; it means experiencing a
terrible climate in which life and
death intermingle, where human
density its almost pathological and
where an intense religious atmo-
sphere eloquently expresses the
primacy of the spiritual.
It is through the impact of such
, I ! 
' ; ! 1
ì
1
off 0
I
. 1
bv André SIEGFRIED, of the Académie FrançaiseJ
