IN the following article, Mr. WE. WiOiams, director ofthe Bureau of Current! Affairs, London, describes the special wall charts being produced for
Unesco by the Bureau of Current Affairs. The charts will provide a visual
presentation with a brief text, of (1) The United Nations, (2) the Security
Council and (3) Unesco. They are designed to provide a basis for a"United
Nations Corner"in schools and thus stimulate continuing activities and pro-
jects by both teachers and pupils :
MANY vital phrases in the vocab-ulary of the United Nations
make a rather vague impact on
the popular mind. One of these is
the phrase"Collective Security".
Unesco has recently undertaken an
educational campaign to bring home
to the Man-in-the-Street the signific-
ance of collective security ; One means
whereby this is to be attempted is
through a pair of wall charts designed
and produced by the Bureau of Current
Affairs in the United Kingdom. They
will be produced in four colours and
three languages, English, French and
Spanish, and will form a compact and
colourful unit suitable for display in
school classrooms, community centres,
youth clubs and factories.
This is not the first time, by any
means, that wall posters have been
designed for such purposes. But the
Bureau of Current Affairs claims some
valuable innovations in the posters
now in production. For one thing,
they will not merely rely on their first
impact upon those who look at them,
but because they will require periodic
alteration and revision, they should
prove of constant interest to groups of
children and adults wherever they are
displayed.
It is particularly hoped, during the
anxious period in which we now live,
to keep alive a vital interest in collect-
ive security and to help people to
understand its interpretation in the
deliberations of U. N.
The two charts should be displayed
side by side. The first is a visual
interpretation of U. N. : the countries
which belong, their interdependence,
able victories over ignorance, disease
and malnutrition.
On the reverse of the second chart.
therefore, will appear, in the first
issue, a depiction of the specific tasks
of Unesco. Subsequent issues will deal
similarly with the achievements of
such organizations as the Food and
Agriculture Organization, the World
Health Organization and the Inter-
national Labour Organization.
The material on Chart I will be of
a comparatively permanent character.
But Chart II, and the reverse of
Chart II, afford obvious opportunities
for revised versions of the material
BY W. E. WilLIAMS
Mr. Williams is Director of the Bureau of Current Affairs, London, Chief Editor of
Penguin Books and a Trustee of the National Gallery. A former member of the
Unesco Secretariat, he helped to bring into existence such enterprises as
the radio unit and the Special Features Press Service. He has written and talked
abundantly about Unesco, and lately went on mission to Lake Success to inform
the United Nations what Unesco was doing about collective security and to display
the roughs of the Unesco Wall Charts.
and the consequences, in human and
industrial terms, of warfare. The
second chart is devoted entirely to the
Security Council, its compostion, terms
of reference, achievements to date and
future problems.
TO CONSOLIDATE PEACE
PEACE is not simply the avoidanceof war, and it has b en thought
well to embody on these charts
some reminder of what is being done
by the various specialist agencies of
U. N. to consolidate peace by compar-
they contain in their initial present-
ation.
These charts are not intended
merely for display on a wall where, in
due course, their message will be
taken as read or totally ignored.
They are expressly planned to stimul-
ate a regular and consistent interest
in international affairs. Each of them
is 40"X 30"in size, and they are design-
ed to appear beside each other. In the
leaflet of instructions which will go out
with the charts, teachers are urged to
locate this unit in a strategic position
in the school-in the main hall, for
example, or in a corridor where the
children often gather.
TAPING THE : VIEWS
A MONO numerous suggestions formaking the chart  a focus f
interest, there is room here to
mention only one. This is the device
called"Taping the News". To carry
this out, a long table should be placed
against the wall underneath the
charts, and children should be en-
couraged to collect newspaper cuttings
and photographs about the U. N. and
Security Council and pin them on the
table. These cuttings should then be
joined to the appropriate places on.
the maps and diagrams by coloured
tapes, a practice which not only tends
to give a bright and dramatic aspect
to the unit, but also teaches children
to put two and two together in their
observation of what is taking place in
the world.
The Bureau of Current Affairs has
a long experience in creating pictorial
conceptions of this kind, but all who
have seen these charts and drafts are
impressed not only by their attractive-
ness to the eye but by the skill with
which they convey their message.
Roughs of the material were recently
shown to meetings of TJ. N., and also
at Unesco, so a great deal of represen-
tative opinion and experience has been
embodied in the final results.
The plates have been made, and by
the time these words are read, the
copy of the English edition of the
charts should be coming off the
presses. The French and Spanish
editions will follow very shortly.
UNESCO WALL CHARTS TO AID IN
STRUGGLE FOR COLLECTIVE SECURITY
