THE decision that Unesco should select collective security as amajor theme in its educational work. in the light of the action
taken by the United Nations with respect to Korea, was made
by the Executive Board of Unesco in September, last year.
As part of a general resolution adopted by the Board on Unesco's
contribution to the action of the United Nations and Specialized
Agencies in the Korean crisis, the Director-General was authorized
to undertake a special programme of education on the principles of
collective security and their application in such specific circums-
tances as the conflict in Korea.
Accordingly, plans were made for the production of written and
visual materials for use at various levels of education.
Publications already written or in the course of preparation under
these plans include pamphlets explaining collective security, address-
ed to teachers, senior pupils, and adult groups ; pamphlets of sug-
gestions for teachers ; studies on collective security intended pri-
marily for use in universities ; and wall charts for use in classrooms.
On this page and on pages 5 and 6, the Courier presents a"pre-
view"of these publications, in the form of extracts from one of the
pamphlets intended for the use of teachers, senior pupils in secon-
dary schools and adult education classes, an article written by one
of the authors of the three studies directed to"university level"
audiences, and an article explaining the purposes to be served by
the wall charts now being prepared by the Bureau of Current Affairs
in London.
As an aid to teaching about collective security in secondary schools andadult education classes, three pamphlets for teachers are being produ-
ced by Unesco. In brief form (approximately 40 pages), they sketch the prin-
ciples, problems and historical developments of international collective security.
To write these pamphlets in English, French and Spanish respectively, Unesco
has called upon Dr. A. Appadorai, Secretary-General of the Indian Council of World
Affairs ; M. Jean Dupuy, an authority on international law ; and Professor Guillermo
Francovich, Rector of the University of San Francisco Xavier, Sucre, Bolivia.
These three authors have written independently, each in a different language,
on common lines agreed upon in a series of consultations. The three pamphlets,
to be published in Unesco's"Towards World Understanding"series, will be
available for free distribution.
Below we publish extracts from the pamphlet prepared by Dr. Appadorai,
who was formerly professor of politics at the University of Madras. Dr.
Appadorai is the author of Substance of Politics (Oxford University Press,
1949) and of several pamphlets on international affairs.
THE MEANING OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY
Security and Freedom
HISTORY is in large measure a
record of man's efforts to
achieve greater security and
freedom. The gradual evolution of
the modern state from tribal
beginnings obscured by time is a
pattern of attempts to achieve
these things. At the outset, men
grouped themselves together main-
ly for mutual protection ; in due
course, nations came into being
and political institutions advanced
towards the ideal of government
by consent. The search for secu-
rity led to nationalism ; for
freedom, to democracy.
Since the Industrial Revolution,
the different nations have become
economically more interdependent ;
teehnology has increased their
capacity for production and des-
truction as well ; iand war, with
the aid, of science, has come to
mean total annihilation. It has
become clear that there must be
a rule of law among nations as
there is a rule of law among
individuals within each state. The
attempts to establish such a rule
of law represent a continuance and
extension of man's efforts to
achieve security and freedom.
The implications of a rule of law
among nations can be fully grasp-
end only by contrast with the
rule of might which still prevails.
At present, when'a nation's
interests are supposed to conflict
with those of another, the nation
concerned may resort to war as an
instrument of policy. Each state
has therefore had to try indivi-
duaYy or through alliances to be
stronger than its adversaries. But
the world wars of 1914-18 and 1939-
45 have taught a painful lesson :
security based solely on might is
impossible for all at the same time,
or even for a few at all times.
This indeed is inherent in the
logic of facts. Every state or
group of states cannot be always
stronger than every other state or
group of states.
What then is the alternative ? The
answer 4s collective security
through the rule. of law. This
means three things :
1. Nations must agree to the
principle that in matters affect-
ing other nations besides their own
they will accept the rule of conduct
iaiddown by C6 common inter-
national authority as binding on
themselves.
2. They must agree to renounce
the right to settle disputes by
making tear.
3. They must bind themselves to
regard any act of war by any State
in breach of this primary obligation
as an'act of war against them-
selves and come to the assistance
of the victim of the agression.
One means of establishing in-
ternational collective security
through the rule of law is the
voluntary acceptance of the prin-
ciple as symbolized in a league of
sovereign nations. This is not a
new idea ; indeed, it can be traced
back at least as far as the four-
teenth century. However, the
most significant attempts to orga-
nize such a league on the world
scale have occurred within our
own times.
Dr. Appadorai goes on to discuss
the development of the idea of
collective security in the life-time
of the League of Nations, before
writing on the subject of the
LESSONS ON THE UNITED NATIONS are being introduced in schools all over the world
with the help of teaching methods worked out by Unesco. Here a class 01 ten-year-aids listens
and looks as their teacher shows a film-strip produced by the United Nations.
United Nations and Collective Se-
curity. In.'this, the third and
longest chapter, he deals with the
purposes and principles of the
United Nations, the organization
of collective security, the record of
the U. N.'s work, the Korean crisis
and finally outlines some of the
efforts that have been made to
reduce poverty, disease, and econo-
mic inequality-which in the ulti-
mate analysis are responsible for
frustration, insecurity, discontent,
dispute and war.
In the last chapter of the
pamphlet, extracts from which are
reprinted here, Dr. Appadorai
suggests ways by which the found-
ations of collective security could be
strengthened.
STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS
DiHiculties and Weaknesses
history of the last five
t years, and more especially theKorean crisis, has brought
into relief some difficulties and
weaknesses in the present organi-
zation of collective security. The
fear of war, instead of receding,
has increased. Nations are spend-
ing on armaments the money
and the energy which they should
spend on economic development
and the provision of social services.
Confidence in the ability of the
United Nations to provide security,
it is clean, has not yet been
created.
The consequence of such a poli-
tical climate on the system of
collective security provided in the
Charter has been disastrous. Ar-
ticles 43, 45, 46 and 47 of the
Charter are fundamental to that
system. According to these, the
Security Council was, with the
assistance of the Military Staff
Committee, to negociate with
Member Nations agreements for
making available to it at its call,
armed forces, assistance and faci-
lities necessary for the purpose of
maintaining international peace
and security. But on account of
the political differences referred
to earlier, and mutual suspicion,
the Military Staff Committee could
not function, and no agreements
with Member Nations could be
worked out.
Article 27, paragraph 3, which
contained the famous principle of
unanimity-that decisions of the
Security Council on matters other
than procedural"shall be made by
an affirmative vote of seven mem-
bers, including the concurring
votes of the permanent members"
(with certain exceptions in respect
of the pacific settlement of dis-
SUGGESTIONS FOR TEACHERS
putes)-has been found to be a
limiting factor. In defence of the
veto, it must be said that it was
included in the Charter because
continuing unanimity of purpose
among the Big Five was the very
foundation of the Organization.
Any other course was too acad-
emic : if the Big Five split, the Or-
ganization would be divided in
any case and the members would
act as they liked. What was
necessary then was to maintain
the unity of the United Nations,
and to depend on that unity to
lay the foundations of a lasting
peace.
But as it was, the existence of
the veto not only prevented the
proper building up of a system of
collective security ; it also prevent-
ed the Organization from becom-
ing las universal as it could be.
The admission of such nations as
Ceylon and Finland, for instance,
has been blocked by the veto, with
the result that as many as 14
nations are still outside the Orga-
nization.
It is not our purpose, here, to
examine the differences between
the factions or to judge who is
right and who is wrong. In the
context of collective security what
is significant is the inability of the
Security Council to act effectively ;
each party accuses the other of
expansionist ambitions, and there
is mutual suspicion. But as against
this, the people of the world are
anxious to avoid war and, if we
read public opinion aright, they
would like to see the United
Nations established more effective-
ly as an instrument for collective
security.
Improvement
of the Machinery
T. HREE pamphlets of practical suggestions on teaching about
collective securitiy to pupils in the 11-16 age range dre to be
published by Unesco. They will be complementary to the
pamphlets described above and, like them, will be'f !"epm>ed
independently but on similar lines by three authorittes from
different couJl, tries, each writing in his own language. The authors
of the pamphlets of suggestions and the languages in which they
will write are : Mr. John Spencer, of Harrogate Training College,
England (english) ; M. Plful Fraud, Primary School Inspector,
Paris (French) ; and Sr. Dlego Gonzalez, SuperintC11dent of Schools,
Havana, Cuba (Spanish).
HOW then can this be done ?ri We must at this stage
go back to first principles.
Power held in reserve has always
played an important part in inter-
national politics ; the United Na-
tions can be an effective instru-
ment of collective security only if
the statesmen of the powerful
nations are prepared to use the
power of their States on its behalf.
Granted this, how can the ma-
chinery be improved ?
(Contiftfled on pare 6.,
---.. ;
UNESCO CARRIES OUT EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMME
ON THE PRINCIPLES OF COLLECTIVE S CURITY

STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATIONS
. OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY
(continued from p. 4)
The United Nations should have
reliable means of information on
preparations for aggression and on
aggression itself when it takes
place ; it must be capable of tak-
ing quick and effective action ; and
the action must be backed up by
power. The Assembly, according
to the Charter, can only make
recommendations ; it cannot take
binding action. Article II clearly
states that any such question (re-
lating to the maintenance of inter-
national peace and security) on
which action is necessary shall be
referred to the Security Council by
the General Assembly, either
before or after discussion. Much
has been made of this restriction
and it has been suggested that only
a general conference summoned
under Article 109 to review the
Charter could legally vest in the
Assembly such functions as were
proposed to be transferred to it,
under'a united action for peace'
resolution which was introduced in
the Political Committee by seven
nations on 9 October, 1950.
Here, Dr. Appadorai outlines the
points covered by the"united
action for peace"resolution, the
text of which is published on page 3
of this issue. He then goes on :
Is this a usurpation by the As-
sembly of a power conferred by the
Charter on the Security Council ?
We think not. First, the Assembly
has been given some responsibility
for the maintenance of internatio-
nal peace. Secondly, this is only
a recommendation and, clearly, the
Assembly can recommend. A re-
commendation has, of course, no
binding force as, for instance, a
decision by the Security Council
would have ; that means that the
effectiveness of the resolution
depends upon how far Member
States are prepared to co-operate
with the Assembly in checking
aggression.
Perhaps another point may be
made clear. It is difficult under
the Charter to think of a United
Nations sponsored war against a
permanent member of the Security
Council if any one of them is an
aggressor, since each has a veto in
the Security Council in respect of
preventive or enforcement action ;
and an Assembly resolution cannot
substantially alter the fundamen-
tal position of the Big Five under
the Charter.
From the point of improved
machinery for collective security,
it is worthwhile also to explore the
possibility of regional arrange-
ments (contemplated under Arti-
cles 52-54 of the Charter) for co-
operation between countries and
with the United Nations ; they
may be useful for localising con-
flicts and ensuring peace, if pro-
perly set up and organized. A
small expert committee, it is
suggested, may be established to
study the problem in all its aspects.
Aid to Under-
developed Countries
MENTION has been made earlierof the importance of the
economic development of
under-developed countries ; the
"United Action for peace resolu-
tion"passed by the Assembly on
3 November 1950 specifically urged
Member States to intensify indi-
vidual and collective efforts to
achieve conditions of economic
stability and social progress parti-
cularly through the development
of under-developed countries and
- THE UNESCO STORY"
PUBLISHED IN U. S.
A graphic record of the great andwide-spread interest in h  United
States in the activities of Unesco
is provided in an illustrated 112-page
booklet, titled"The Unesco Story",
which has just been published by
the United States National Commis-
sion for Unesco. The booklet des-
cribes the into, national programmes
01 Unesco and the work of national
organizations and community groups
in the United States in furthering
understanding of the Organization's
aims and activities.
areas. There is no space here to
discuss the ways and means for
such development ; it is sufficient
to draw attention to the Report of
the Fourth Session of the Sub-
Commissinn on Economic Develop-
ment. Under-developed areas need
for their economic development
capital equipment and financing as
well as technical assistance ; and
in both these respects, the methods
which have been tried and found
suitable in the industrialized coun-
tries of the West must be conside-
rably modified to meet the needs
of the under-developed countries.
The Sub-Commission referred to
above recommended (regarding
financing) that international lend-
ing institutions follow flexible
policies in making external loans
for local currency costs of economic
development, with due regard to
the circumstances in each case
and with a view always to the basic
objectives to be achieved ; the
Chairman of the Commission
suggested a bold new organization
under the aegis of the United
Nations to promote the economic
development of the under-develop-
ed countries..'The new organ",
he said,"would work. in co-
operation with the International
Bank and other'Prgans of the
United Nations, but it would be
charged with responsibility for
economic development. It should
not be merely a planning or advi-
sory organ but should have finance
at its disposal"..
Regarding technical assistance,
and assistance to economic deve-
lopment in general, the United
Nations has now recognised the
wholesome principle that"it must
be organically related to the eco-
nomy"of the country which asks
for the assistance. Besides,"the
services rendered by the United
Nations must be of the kind desired
by the government of the request-
ing cou' (l, try. They must be dests'n-
ed to meet its needs, must be
in the form that it desires and
must be designed to strengthen its
national economy and promote its
political and economic indepen-
dence. Such principles preclude
the arbitrary imposition of schemes
devised by foreigners to achieve
the political or economic subju-
gatiowor exploitation of peoples of
less highly developed countries.".
The more help rendered to
under-developed countries on the
principles stated above, the better
the chances for providing the con-
ditions under which collective secu-
rity can be maintained.
The Creation
of Goodwill
FINALLY, to promote collectiveSecurity, the development of
certain national and indivi-
dual attitudes will be helpful.
At the national level, what is
important to realize is, that diffe-
rent ideologies, together with the
institutions they imply, must learn
to exist side by side in the world ;
for the one ideology to try to wipe
out the other is undesirable and
impracticable. In concrete terms
this means that the governments of
the countries concerned should
cease abusing social systems and
ideologies with which they are not
in sympathy. It also means the
removal of suspicioy by promot-
ing freer intercourse between the
countries.
At the individual level, the rele-
vant attitude to be cultivated
consists of two elements : (1) the
attitude of'live and let live', a
sense of tolerance and charity, a
recogfnition that a diversity of
cultures, by their very diversity,
contributes to the increase of
human happiness ; and (2) non-
violence, that is, the recognition
that the warlike attitude is not
something inherent in man, but,
instead, that man is by nature so-
cial and can live in neighbourly
friendliness and love. These
attitudes in the individual which
education can do much to culti-
vate, indeed go to the root of the
problem of collective security.
f*) Dr. L. Keonleyside i United Na-
tions Bulletin, Vol. ix, no 8.
