Scientists Urge International Co-operation
,
PROPOSALS for a world-wide survey of
scientific research and other proposals
dealing with scientific research and the
improvement of living conditions for
mankind are to be presented to the Sixth Ses-
sion of Unesco's General Conference in Paris
next June. Forming part of the Unesco
Natural Sciences Department's programme,
they are a recognition of the fact that
adequate scientific knowledge alone can prov-
ide a sure basis for human welfare.
Background to these projects is the uneven
distribution of the world's scientific resources
and the knowledge that to meet some of
science's requirements, research must be
conducted on an international scale.
M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General,
stressed this recently at the International
Conference of Universities when he said :
"The high cost of equipment, the nøed for
highly specialized, and hence very scarce,
staff, the very naturc of research and the
necessity for comparing observations recorded
at widely separated points in the world, all
alike make four the desirability of establishing
centres or laboratories operating on a world
basis indispensable for the advencement of
such disciplines as astronomy, meteorotogy,
cartography, oceanography or geophysics".
Certain aspects of the problem have already
been studied, following the decision of the
Economic and Social Council in 1946 to invite
the Secretary-General of the UN to submit a
general report on the problem of establishing
United Nations Research Laboratories. An
extensive investigation was made by the
Secretary-General of United Nations in 1947,
This inquiry dealt with (a) the current feeling
in scientific circles throuhout the world,
regarding international action to achieve the
most effective organization of research ; (b)
those fields where international work would
be most productive and immediately desirable.
RESEARCH CENTRE PRIORITIES
In August, 1949, a committee of experts fromUnesco and United Nations examined the
results of this inquiry and recommended the
following priorities in the Natural Sciences.
First priority : International Computation Cen-
tre ; lnternational Brain Institute.
Sceund priority : International Astronomical
Laboratory ; International Institute of Bio-
chemistry, ; International Meteorological Insti-
tute ; International Research Laboratory on
Arid Zone.
The committee also studied other proposals
concerning problems in the Technical Assis-
tance programme, and drew the attention of
the United Nations and specialised agencies to
further projects worthy of consideration.
In August 1950, an ECOSOC resolution
invited Unesco to prepare a detailed plan
for the setting up of an International Comput-
ation Centre.
The next session of Unesco's General Confe-
rence is to be asked to agree that a world-
wide survey of scientific research be carried
out, concentrating on those fields outlined by
the Expert Committees ; that steps be taken
to organise and establish an International
Computation Centre ; and that consideration
be given to the establishment of a European
Regional Physics Laboratory for High Energy
Particles and an International Brain Institute.
