A close-up from the Belgian film RUBENS by Paul Haesaerts and Henri Storck, showing Rubens'eye from his famous
self-portrait at Windsor Castle.
WHAT HAPPENS TO ART FILMS ?
WHEN a producer makes a short-reel film devoted
to a work of art or several works of art he
may be congratulated for his achievement or
he may receive a shower of brickbats. But whatever
the reaction, it almost always comes from a small
number of specialized film critics who, more often
than not, are his own colleagues. The art film pro-
ducer may even win some kind of award or other
official forms of recognition to encourage him to
continue his work. But what actually happens to the
film ? It is true that the film on art is a relative new-
comer to the cinema. The first successful ventures
of the Belgian Henri Storck date from 1936, while the
Inspirational Themes of Dekeukeleire, the Michel-
angelo of Curt Certel, and the Mystic Lamb of André
Cauvin appeared only before the war. But the fact
is that the number of real masterpieces produced thus
far in this field is quite high. That many failures
have also been turned out cannot, of course, be denied.
The art film producers themselves have recognized
this and are constantly on guard to avoid the pitfalls
of stereotyped presentation or mere imitation. That
is why they keep hunting for new techniques, new
ideas and fresh approaches more keenly than the
"commercial"cinema does. But what do they gain
in the end ? Once again, what happens to their
films ? Unesco has drawn up a list of 476 titles-of
quite unequal worth it must be admitted-produced
in 21 different countries (1). But ask the cinema-
going public about them, those people who go to the
"pictures"with almost clock-like regularity. How
many have seen any of these films ? How many have
even heard of them let alone been able to enjoy them ?
(On this page we give a list of some of the better art
films. But how many of them have our readers heard
of-or seen ?) In first-run and local cinemas the
documentary stands a chance-of being shown both
in the big cities and in provincial towns ; so does the
short scientific film. But films on art are apparently
considered taboo because it has been"decided"that
the general public is not interested in art. The rare
occasions when the art film has been shown to the
general public has proved that this is simply not true.
In spite of this, Storck, Emmer, Haesaerts ans Resnais
remain relegated to the"cinema clubs"and"art-film
houses". Yet their films could, if given a chance, open
a small window into the magic world of the painter,
the sculptor and the architect for those who know
even nothing of the arts. It would be a revolution.
But it is perhaps too much to expect.
Georges FRADIER.
(t) Published In 1950 and 1951 as an appendix to the two
volumes on « Films on Art » (4/$0.65 or 200 fr. frs.).
Maillol at work. A scene from the French film. MAILLOL by Jean Lods.