THE FIRST elNEMATle
ENeveLOPAEDIA
FRENCH THOUGHT IN PICTURES
by Yves HACQUARD
AFTER the passage of two hundred yearsthe"Encyclopédie Filmée"is carrying on
the tradition of. Diderot and the great
Encyclopaedists.
"Cow is the feminine of bull ; bull is the
masculine of cow", we learn from the French
dictionary Larousse. Unless you are suffering
from mushroom-poisoning, it will not occur to
you to ask the Dictionary for a definition of
Amanites, especially if you think they are
animal fossils or members of the French Union.
Have you ever thought about the word"artery",
which applies to cities as well as to the blood-
stream ? Or of that word"bureau", which
has come to denote a solemn Council after it
once clothed a mediaeval peasant ? What
have you learnt about arithmetic since you
first stammered through the multiplication
table ?
The month of April 1951 marked a mile-
stone in the history of the cinema, when
authoritative representatives of French letters,
arts and sciences joined with scenario-writers
to revive the tradition of the eighteenth-
century Encyclopaedists. Duly defined, com-
mented upon and expressed in the form of
pictures, words will follow one another upon the
screen in a series of films which will make up
a cinematic encyclopaedia available to the
general public.
It is a big task with many difficulties, not
the least of which is the fact that, despite the
cinema's ideals and successes in many new
fields, it still continues to be regarded chiefly
as a means of recreation. The scholar may
give credit to the producer of educational films
and make the necessary intellectual effort to
retain knowledge presented in a more or less
didactic form ; but the average cinema-goer,
who seeks an escape from time and space, a
journey to what-mig, ht-have-been, will not
willingly exchange it for an analysis of the
meanings of words, however humorous or
interesting they may be.
Diderot discovered the educational influence
of faithful reproduction two centuries ago.
His Encyclopaedia owed a great part of its
initial success to an illustration which pleased
the Royal favourite, Madame de Pompadour.
It was a detailed diagram showing how her
stockings could be woven. She was also in-
terested in finding a good description of how
cosmetics were made. The admirably engraved
plates for the different crafts determined their
vocation for generations of Europeans. Dis-
pensing with unnecessary comment, the pic-
ture became an organic link in the story and
made it possible to secure greater objectivity
or a subtle distortion of reality.
In the course of its growth, the cinema has
developed steadily towards an ideal marriage
between language and sensation. The talking
film has produced science or art documentaries
as well as sound and spoken newsreels : the
picture needs, at the same time that it fears,
the'language which confirms or annuls it,
while words find in pictures virgin soil for the
development of their harmonies, that void and
silence which are the essence of poetry.
Above all, the creators of the cinema ency-
clopaedia are striving to avoid vulgarity, the
circulation of cheap knowledge. Like La Fon-
taine, they want to instruct and to amuse at
the same time and have endeavoured to as-
semble at the outset all the material necessary
to success.
The Editorial Committee for the Film Ency-
clopaedia includes such well-known writers
and novelists, essayists, philosophers and dra-
matists as Marcel Achard, Alexandre Arnoux,
Jean Cocteau, Pierre Descaves, Roger Ferdi-
nand, Professeur Monder, Léon Moussinac,
Marcel Pagnol and Raymond Queneau ; jurists,
high officials and political personalities such
as Madame Georges Bidault, Julien Cain,
Maurice Garçon ; humorists like Jean Rigaux
and Jean Effel ; the Director of French radio
and television, Wladimir Porché ; and a galaxy
of scenario-writers-Jean Benoit-Levy, Marcel
Carne, André Cayatte, René Clair and Jean
Gremillon. Jean Marin is Secretary-General.
These modern encyclopaedists will be at li-
berty to deal with each subject just as they
think fit, without any definite style being laid
down. The encyclopaedia will rely on inspira-
tion, on the results that diverse tempera-
ments can produce with the cinema's means of
expression. It plans to give young people a
chance to show what they can do and to incor-
porate as many new ideas as possible.
Filmgoers will be able to see Pierre Kast
explaining the mystery of numbers, the key to
the universe. Madame Georges Bidault will
try to show-in colours-that red-and-white
mushrooms cultivated by her husband are
better than any grown in the ground.
Seated at his worktable, Raymond Queneau
will humorously meditate before us on the most
abstruse questions of arithmetic. He will ask
how he can be sure that he really has five
angers, will recall that no cotton reels are equal
mathematically to no corkscrews and that
there is only one chance in a billion that a
saucepan which is put over a fire will freeze
up.
The idea is to draw the spectator's attention
insensibly towards wider philosophic or moral
perspectives. Blue, Jean Grémillon tells us, is
the colour of the sky, of the policeman's
breeches and of the Virgin's cloak. The Cote
d'Azur ceases to be azure in Italy, where blue
symbolizes force and skill. But it is the aim-
maker Marcel Pagliero who reproduces the
delicacy and purity of blue by a very lovely
bare-shouldered woman wearing a necklace of
blue stones.
Work on a dozen words beginning with the
letter"A"is to be completed by the end of
this year. Pierre Laroche will gather together
all the meanings of Age. Madame Simon will
sing of Actors. Colette Audry will attack
Absence. Alexandre Arnoux will visit the
Amazon and its Amazons, while Jean Marin
climbs Atlas to look at the Atlantic.
The encyclopaedists not only hope for dis-
tribution of their work through the normal
circuits, but also to enter into agreements with
educational organizations and with television
networks. A dubbed commentary in different
languages will bring their lively and imagin-
ative survey of the French language to many
countries.
In this way a cinematic achievement with
rich possibilities will carry to the four corners
of the earth a message of culture, intelligence
and liberty. With regard to the last item, it
is true, André Gillois observes, at the end of his
piece on Automaton, that it will be some time
before the encyclopaedists reach the letter"L",
adding, however, a trifle cynically, that people
are used to this long wait for Liberty.
