ASPECTS OF SCIENCE
THE WATERS BENEATH
NOT apparent to the eye, butnone the less pres nt and vi-
tally important to the welfare
of man, are the vast seas of under-
ground water found in almost all
areas of the world, including deserts.
The volume of water below the
ground often is, in fact, many times
the maximum capacity of all avail-
able surface reservoirs, both natural
and artificial.
What geologists call. ground water
is the water collecting in and
between the porous and permeable
rocks of the earth's surface. These
great pools are the sources on
which we draw when tapping wells
and springs for the large quantities
of water needed by industry-chem-
ical plants, steel mills, power
plants-as well as for irrigation and
for domestic supply. It is under-
standable, then, that the state of our
reserves of underground water is a
matter of great importance, not only
in the arid regions but in many other
parts of the world where enormous
increases in the rate of use in recent
years have seriously threatened to
deplete the supply.
The branch of science dealing
with water, its properties and its
distribution over the surface of the
earth is formally called Hydrology.
The beginnings of this study go back
some two thousand years in history,
when It became known that springs
and rivers derive their water from
rain and snow percolating through
soil and rock and eventually coming
out again at the surface of the land.
This idea was not generally accep-
ted by scientists until nearly the
end of the seventeenth century,
when quantitative studies were made
by English and French observers.
They measured and compared rain-
fall, the evaporation of water from
lakes and seas, and the rate of dis-
charge of rivers. Gradually there
came to be recognized the existence
of the hydrologic cycle, by which
water is transported from the sea to
the land and back to the sea.
Some details of what goes on be-
neath our feet may be seen schema-
tically from the sketch below. The
water table is the upper surface
of completely water-soaked ground.
Notice that it is not level, as water in
an open pond would necessarily be, but
is higher beneath the hills than in
the valley. This is because there is
a continual, but slow, sideward and
downward flow of water as it filters
through the rock, and the continuing
replenishment of water seeping into
the ground does not permit the water
surface to attain its usual condition
of balance along a level. Above the
water table, the spaces between the
rock and soil particles are not
completely water-soaked.
If an ordinary well is to yield
water, it must be dug to a point
below the water table, and the water
must be pumped to the surface.
But sometimes drilling into the satu-
rated zone between two impermeable
layers of rock will produce a well
from which the water may gush
spontaneously and continuously.
This is an artesian will, named for
the province of Artois, in France,
where the first wells of this kind
were used early in the twelfth cen-
tury. In places where the water
table happens to meet the surface of
the ground, the water may issue as
a spring, and in some instances a
marsh or a lake may form.
AN IDEALIZED CROSS-SECTION FTHE LAND, showing the water table in relation to the
surface of the ground. The wells, which must be sunk to a point beneath the water table,
lower its lever in their immediate neighborhood. The position of the water table at a given
place varies from time to time, depending upon supply and demand. It is usually lowest in
the Autumn.
by Ira M. Freeman
Despite the claims of"water di-
viners"who represent themselves
as having a mysterious ability to
locate water with no other equip-
ment than a forked stick, prospect-
ing for the hidden treasure of
underground water is a complex,
time-consuming and costly scientific
occupation. The amounts of water
entering the rock in a given region
must be computed and other fac-
tors must be estimated. The phy-
sical nature of the rock must be
studied, and its porosity, state of
division and other properties must be
examined. In recent years, geo-
logists and hydrologists have had at
their disposal certain indirect
methods of getting the required
Information, such as electrical and
radio-active means of locating, fol-
lowing and measuring the quantity
of ground water.
Recognition of the fact that
ground water is one of the more
important of our natural resources
has been slow in developing. This
has become a matter of deep concern,
not only in arid countries but in
those more richly endowed with
water reserves. Fortunately, a num-
ber of governments have already
taken steps to set up commissions
and planning boards charged with
studying ground water resources and
undertaking additional research pro-
grammes in this field.
If you are interested in further read-
ing material on underground water,
writJe to the Division for the Populari-
zation of Science, Unesco, 19, avenue
Kleber, Paris (16'), France, requesting a
free bibliography.
