CAIRO CEREMONIES HIGHLIGHT TRADITIONAL
CULTURE AND MODERN TECHNIQUES OF EGYPT
The ceremony (Left) marking
the Silver Jubilee of the Fouad
I University in Cairo was atten-
ded by King Farouk, shown
here wearing his robe of
Doctor"Honoris Causa"of
the University, and surroun-
by members of the royal
family and of his suite.
M. Jaime Torres Bodet, Direc-
tor-General of Unesco speak-
ing at the inaugural ceremony
ofthe Fouad I Institute of the
Desert, at Heliopolis, near
Cairo. (Right)
FOR a week, from December 27
to January 3, Cairo was the
scene of impressive c lebration as
King Farouk, government leaders,
diplomats and scholars from many
countries joined in ceremonies marking
the 25th anniversary of the building
of the Fouad 1st University, the 75th
anniversary of the Royal Geographical
Society and the inauguration of the
Fouad 1st Desert Institute.
Visitors went from one memorable
experience to another as they visited
and marvelled at the work of creative
artists belonging to a civilization
several thousand years old ; and then
went on to inspect the universities
and scientific laboratories of Modern
Egypt.
Tradition And Techniques
THIS demonstration of Cairo's cul-
tural wealth was more than a
mere pr of of national creative
genius. The ceremonies truly cons-
tituted a demonstration of the spirit
and purpose of Unesco-even a
contribution to the work of the
Organization. Both the presence of
Count Jacini, Chairman of Unesco's
Executive Board, and the Director-
General of Unesco, and the speeches
they made, symbolized the spirit of
friendly co-operation that exists bet-
ween Unesco and this Member State.
Visitors to the Fouad 1st University,
a well-equipped block of buildings
designed on simple architectural lines,
also inspected the time-hallowed
mosque of EI Azhar. Here, for more
than a 1, 000 years, Koranic teachings
have been passed down from genera-
tion to generation ; and the visitor
begins to understand the force of a
spiritual tradition among a people
with so many of its fine scientific
foundations. It was ! designed to
furnish scientists with research equip-
ment to assist the discovery and full
development of agricultural, animal
and mineral resources in the vast
desert regions surrounding the Nile
Valley. The construction of these
buildings and the drawing up of plans
and programmes covered a period of
by Jean THOMAS
who also welcome the most recent'
branches of learning and technique.
During their visit, Count Jacini and
M. Torres Bodet met members of the
Egyptian National Commission, to
explain Unesco's programme and the
results that have already been
obtained, and to point out projects
where Egypt's collaboration can be
most useful. From Unesco's point of
view, much useful information was
obtained and it is likely that the
Egyptian National Commission drew
equal benefit from this visit.
The Desert Institute
THE Desert Institute, inaugurated
on December 30, was part of an
immense programme conceived by
King Fouad 1st, who provided Egypt
more than 20 years. King Fouad did
not live to see the realization of the
project to which he had devoted so
much time and thought and it was
his son, King Farouk, who attended
the inauguration ceremony of the
Desert Institute.
M. Torres Bodet and His Excellency
Taha Hussein Pasha, Minister ot
Public Information for Egypt, both
hailed the excellent example set by
the new Institute and the opportunities
it offers-not only to the Egyptian
people, but to all peoples fwhose
existence depends on the development
of arid zones. Emphasis was placed
on the need for international collabo-
ration, in this continual struggle.
Implicit in the ceremony, was a
mutual desire that Unesco assist the
Cairo Institute in its work and that
the latter contribute to similar enter-
prises undertaken by Unesco.
A Model Museum
IN Cairo, there is a recently built
museum. It is perhaps the most
modest mus um in th  city, yet it
could constitute a model for the rest of
the world. Temporarily housed in an
iron and cement tower, this Museum
of Egyptian Civilization offers a series
of diorama, mural paintings, photo-
graphs and reproductions of particular
interest to students of Egyptology.
Of more general interest, is a résumé
of Egyptian history told in a display
of authentic objects and original
works, dating from the time of the
Pharaohs to the present day, each
epoch shown by picturesque scenes,
and samples of its art, science, agri-
culture and industry.
Thousands of children and young
people, under the guidance of teachers,
come every month to learn, by means
of these concrete examples that can
be so easily understood, how much
their ancestors accomplished, for the
civilization of their country.
The recent Egyptian visit gave an
insight into the beautiful and the
picturesque. But its effect was less to
charm than to instruct the visitor and
cause him to reflect.
