A MAM. A PANTHER, A WOMAN, AN
ELEPHANT. No thought of precedence entered
the mind of the man who carved this pole. He
was guided solely by considerations of aestheti-
cism and nature.
- TWO BAMtLEKE GtRt-S whose skulls have been deformed by the use of
passage, as is the local custom, until the bones finally hardened.
FRICAN cultural problems have a $pecial interest for Unesco in con-
nection with its efforts to help all countries develop their cultures
according to their traditions and characteristics. To this end.
Unesco has worked in close collaboration with the International African Ins-
titute since 1949 and through grants made to this Institute, has enabled ethno-
logists to carry out important research in this field.
Thanks to Unesco's help, the Institute has published an African analytical
bulletin and several sociological works and is today organizing an interna-
tional mission of ethnologists.
Unesco has itself made available two fellowships to young African scholars
and has organized a committee of experts to discuss the preservation of
popular arts.
Many of this committee's recommendations related to Africa and stressed,
above ail, the need for a spirit of understanding for peoples and a respect for
local cultures. Such recommendations, which are in accord with the general
principles guiding Unesco, find a confirmation in the story of Abossolo Simion,
an African craftsman, which is told in the reportage on this page.
D tiRING the past thirty years, arts InAfrica have ceased to be regarded
with a certain disdain rather as if
they were barbaric curiosities. Such arts
have inspired European painters ; they
have helped Matisse and later Picasso to
"reduce nature to its geometrical ele-
ments."
But while artists (rather than the gene-
ral public) appreciate the aesthetic value
of the statuettes, masks and ritual objects
donated by travellers to museums or
sold to art dealers, even these artists
are unable to explain the meaning or
significance of such objects. Their ap-
preciation is related solely to the imme-
diate visual or emo-
tional impression ; as
to the intrinsic va-
lue and symbolism of
these art forms to
the African crafts-
men. explanations are
usually left to ethnologists.
Yet this is a vitally important aspect of
such art. The marvellous sculpture of the
entrance to Chartres Cathedral, for exam-
ple, evokes admiration. But at the same
time, such work conveys the religious fer-
vour that inspired the artist to fashion
these virgins, angels and kings. The 12th
century artist actually carved or painted
a virgin and not just a statue or a stained
glass window.
The same is true of African artists, say
the ethnologists, who thus give a timely
reminder that there can be no true un-
derstanding of the art of these peoples
without a knowledge of their social, tech-
nical and religious background. The signi-
ficant fact that emerges from such a study
By Georges F RADIER
is that this art, when it is really authen-
tic, is always a sacred one. Before these
ancestral effigies, funeral masks and sac-
rificial instruments which other peoples
examine with mere curiosity, the black
peoples show a reverence which, while it
may sometimes be aesthetic, is always re-
ligious.
A Threat To Negro Art
rn ODAY, the beliefs, customs and socialstructures which, during many cen-
turies have given rise to these crea-
tive forms, are greatly altered or are even
Demg destroyed. l"ljeW
religions (Shamanism,
Islam, Christianity),
and new institutions
- those of colonial or
protectorate powers-
are rapidly spreading
right to the heart of the African contment.
whether these changes should be extolled
or deplored, the fact remains that they
appear to have had a most disastrous in-
tluence on traditional arts. To quote Mar-
cel Griaule, the French ethnologist :
"everywhere that the institutions of the
Negro peoples come in contact with new
cults or'administralive measures, art either
is transformed or disappears."
This conclusion, however, sufficient
though it may be for the ethnologist, far
from satisfies the Africans or the artists
who have wholeheartedly accepted, in their
definition of art, the works of the Sudan
and the Congo. When the myths which
bind together his universe lose their power,
will the Negro become incapable of aesthe-
tic creative work' ? Is it not possible for
him to evolve, since"evolutIOn"seems
inescapable, without abandoning the art
forms inherited through tradition, but
which at the same time, are the expression
of his oneness with his society, his world,
or, in a word, his culture' ?
Perhaps the most adequate reply to this
question is provided by the experience of
a young French teacher, M. Raymond Le-
coq, who, arriving in Africa five years ago,
was obliged to solve, on a small scale, a
practical problem which today confronts
all people who, thirty years ago were still
regarded as"primitive."
No Right To Teach Drawing
BLUE BATIK ROBES, a panther skin encircled by feathers, a pearl decorated hood, a cone-shaped
head-dress covered with small figures, a whip, a horse's tail and a monkey-stun sleeve-these are some
features of the native dance used as art motifs by Abossolo Simion.
IN 1945 ; when 1\1. Lecoq was sent tothe Cameroons, instructional centres
existed at Douala and Ebelowa for
training masons, carpenters, joiners, bas-
ket-makers and railway men, as well as for
a group of youths whose role was appa-
rently to perpetuate the"popular arts."
At Ebelowa, a craftsmen's co-operative
served more than a hundred workers, ap-
prentices and pupils, and M. Lecoq was
appointed by this co-operative to take
charge of one of its school. At the same
time. he was asked to work on a plan for
the organization of craftsmen's centres for
all the Cameroons.
He found himself in the midst of an en-
THE CHIEF'S SEAT : a panther, coloured In red ochre, uttr :
and white pearls on the norse,
THE CHIEF'S THRONE is also decorated with
pearls. One figure supports the seat, the other
forms the back.
thusiastlc crowd of young men who,
throughout the day in the sculpture class,
devoted their efforts to making poor imi-
tations of European, Moroccan and Chinese
curios and trinkets. Having visited the Co-
lonial Museum and the Museum of Man in
Paris and having studied speciaJised re-
views on African art, M. Lecoq felt he un-
derstood the subject. He had, therefore,
hoped for something different from what
he found at Ebeiowa.
His mission, it seemed to him, would be
unproductive if the craftsmen entrusted to
his care, had lost their inherent capacity
of perception and feeling and their crea-
tive ability and if thev were to be hence-
forth in the tow of bazaar vendors and
manufacturers of decorative articles. Then
he had the idea of asking his native pupils
for a design on a free subject and this test,
he relates, revealed"two things : ftMMy,
out of the hundred designs submitted, there
were about twenty which, uninfluenced
by pictures in books, showed a rich depth
of feeling and inspiration and the vision of
the"primitive"artist, who, ignoring ordi-
nary laws of perspective, depicts by the
simplest means, superimposing thou, qhts
and pictures and accentuating the most
characteristic details.
"Secondly, 1 had no right to teach them
to draw ; my Western knowledge, 1 felt,
must not impose itself on their sincerity
and their native power of observation."
THE LESSOR OFABOSSOLO
. African Craftsman and Artist
"""=
_-

e, ultramarine and black and white, with large blue
nose and forehead.
th A HARLEQUIN which would not seem out of
place at at a Picasso exhibition. Only the panther
recalls its African origin.
t Stay Away From School !";
ENCOURAGED by the results of his ex-periment, Lecoq then asked his pu-
pils to make either a clay model or
a piece of sculpture based on a scene in
their everyday life. This test gave final
poof : about half-a-dozen statuettes reveal-
ec the touch of true artists. One crafts-
mn was especially gifted and this man
WlS to be of the greatest assistance to the
Fench instructor in his work. He was
nt only a talented sculptor, but a creative
arist who followed the traditions and aes-
ttttic ideais of his people.
rhis craftsman and artist, Abossolo Si-
mon, ran the risk, despite his talent, of
stlfering the fate of his comrades and of
sinking, consciously or not. into unfruit-
fll imitation. Seein the influence the
school had on his pupils, the teacher advis-
eC him not to come any more, to work at
home and just to show the work he had
dl1e at the end of each month. The result
was successful. Abosso : o set
a studio with six apprentices and his
work sometimes drawing inspiration from
local life, sometimes from mythology, was
abounding.
fwo years later, the work produced by
top co-operative at Ebe : owa was almost en-
tirely patterned on models provided by
who changed his designs as often
aspossible to discourage standardized pro-
RESPECT DUE TO STATUES OF ANCESTORS was shown by the artist who carved these figures :
(from left to right), the present chief, his father and his grandfather. These figures, placed against a wall
at the entrance to the chief's hut, retain an air of dignity and serenity despite exposure to the elements.
duction and keep constantly alive the ar-
tistic value of the craftsmen's work.
Furniture, statues, portraits, stylised ani-
mals-his sculptures perhaps are no longer
endowed with the spiritual power of a re-
ligion which impregnated the whole life of
the ancestors of Abossolo. But the forms
are at least derived from elaborate designs
which date back many centuries to the
borders of the forest and the banks of the
Niger ; there is the same simplicity, the
same vision, often the same techniques and,
in the words of the French teacher"the
same impression of power and things eter-
nal."
No Need To Pass The Torch
THIS is the lesson to be learned fromthe story of Abossolo Simion. His
art is no longer a social function.
It no longer embodies a tradition, a cus-
tom, a faith ; his talent was, in a sense,
available, and he could have debased it by
working for commercial interests. Or
again, under the influence of a European
teacher, he could have become just ano-
ther sculptor, without roots, orthodox and
mediocre. But he was fortunate enough to
meet an instructor with sufficient judg-
ment and experience to encourage him, to
free him from any sense of inferiority and
allow him, in fact, to become a fine native
sculptor, not only for his own develop-
ment but for the cultural enrichment of
his compatriots.
The story seems simple enough, but its
full portent cannot be overstressed at a
time when the economic development of
Africa is going to require great perception
by educators, if they are to safeguard the
creative tal nt of those peoples whom theyare trying to help.
Culture lives through exchange and not
by forced loans. Recently, a"colonial"
magazine made the following statement :
"Since the evolution of the native races
includes the teaching of history, geogra-
phy, Latin the sciences etc... : why shoulrl
not the slandard measures for depicting
the human form be instilled at the same
time, thus passing on the torch which our
artists went as far back as Greece and
Ancient Rome to rekindle ?"
If such pretensions were to carry the
day, both the native races and civilization
would be the losers. The words of the
young French teacher have a truer ring :
"I'm convinced,"he says,"that an artist
with the courage to forget his Western
culture, and prepared to study the art
forms of the country where he is called
upon to guide and direct native craftsmen,
can and should safeguard he natural ar-
tistic perceptions of the Africans, for such
peoples are too apt sometimes to imitate
us in a superficial fashion, even while We
are seeking among them our lost youth."
DANCE TOM-TOM. Caryatids support the body of
the drum which is decorated with serpents, chame-
leons and small reclining figures.
