REGIONAL CONFERENCE FOR
WESTERN HEMISPHERE SETS
NEW STANDARDS FOR WORK
OF NATIONAL COMMISSIONS
Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
we first Regional Conference ofnational Commissions of the
\Vestern Hemisphere, held, at
Havana in December, was conceived by
Unesco as an experiment which, if
successful, could provide it with a new,
precise and effective instrument for
action.
Last month M. Jaime Torres Bodet,
Unesco's Director-General, reporting to
the Organization's Executive Board on
the work of the Conference, was able
to state :.. Without prejudicing the
ultimate results of the Conference, it
may be said at once that it'lEas a very
great success. The final resolution
adopted by the Conference, whwh em-
phasises the value of the information
exchange and the impetus given to the
National Commissions of the ll ; estern
hemisphere, recommends that 1 draw
the attention of the General Conference
to these results, lvith a view to the
periodical convening of Regional Con-
ferences."
In all, 17 countries sent delegates to
the Conference. These were :
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, France, Guatemala. Haiti,
Honduras, Mexico, Panama. United
States nf America Hrusruav and Vene-
zueta. In addition, CMU,
Paraguay and Nicaragua,
which are not yet members
of Unesco, sent observers.
The First Lesson
tion and work of the National Commis-
sions ; dissemination of and teaching
about Human Rights ; Technical Assis-
tance programme in Latin America ;
Fundamental Education in Latin Ame-
rica and a special Unesco project ;
teaching about the United Nations ;
translation of great Latin American
books ; libraries and book coupons ; the
role of universities in the present day
world.
The conclusions the Conference drew
from its work and the practical solu-
tions it found for each point on its
agenda are reflected in the recommen-
dations which it made to Governments
and National Commissions.
(Some of the most important of these
appear on page ten of this issue.)
Education-Technical Aid
Q pEciAL attention was given to the ur-gent educational probl ms of La-
tin America to-day. Delegates, for
example, closely examined Unesco's
programme on Fundamental Education,
after M. Torres Bodet had described its
development, and outlined the work ac-
complished through missions seminars,
pilot projects and training and produc-
tion centres.
CUBA'S NATIONAL CAPITOL (above) where the naugural Conference meeting was held,
is one of Havana's finest building, A second meeting, devoted to the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, was held there on December 10. This building also housed the three Unesco
Exhibitions which were opened during the Conference.
IT was the compositionof the del gati ns, how-
ever, as well as their
number, that ensured the
success of the Conference.
These delegates included
Five Ministers of Educa-
tion, two Under-Secre-
taries of State, a former
President, and several
former Ministers, eigkt
Directors of Education,
and many officials from
ministries of Education
and Culture. The Orga-
nisation of American Sta-
tes was represented by its
Secretary-General and by
the Director of its Educa-
Lion Department. Mr. How-
land Sergeant, United
States Deputy Assistant
Secretarv of State for
PubJic Affairs was also
present, and gave a lecture
on a particularly important
Conference subject, Tech-
nical Assistance.
THE HAVANA CONFERENCE hears a talk on Technical Assistance
given by Mr Howland Sergeant, United States Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Public Affairs. This photo shows : (from left to right) Dr. Mendez
Pereira, Head of Unesco's Regional Office in Havana ; M. Michel Dard,
Head of Unesco's Division of Relations with Governments and National
Commissions ; M. Torres Bodet, Unesco's Director-General ; Dr. Cosme
de la Torriente, Chairman of the Conference ; Mr. Howland Sergeant and
Dr. Vincente Ardaya, Bolivian Minister of Education.
The presence of such a high propor-
tion of responsible persons, who direct
the executive bodies of member states
in Unesco fields, was described by
M. Torres Bodet as perhaps the most
salient feature of the Conference.
Emphasizing this point in a report to
the Executive Board, he stated :"It
cannot be denied that, in many coun-
trie, รง, the relationship between the Exec-
utive and the delegations to the
General Conference still leaves much to
be desired. In cases where the execu-
tion of our annual programme falls to
authorities which have rwt themselves
taken part in the Conference discus-
sions, those authorities frequently have
little understanding for, or even no
kno/cledge at all, of that programme.
It is scarcely possible to remedy this
situation. It would be very difficuU to
persuade the responsible members of
the Executive to undertake journeys of
101 !-g duration to distant capitals. The
first lesson of the Havana regional
Conference therefore is that, if Unesco-
wishes to reach them, it must do so
on the spot."
Work Of Delegations
A T Havana, Unesco did effectivelyreach the Mi isters and Directors,
who took part in the four daily
work meetings throughout the Confe-
rence, and who were able to make a
personal study of Unesco's problems
and methods of work.
wishing to tackle problems together,
and to be kept informed on as wide a
regional basis as possible, of all mat-
ters under discussion, delegates reject-
ed the idea of adopting"division of
labour,"and of appointing a certain
number of delegates to each committee.
In eleven working days, delegates
were able to deal with questions whose
scope might normally have seemed ex-
cessive for the time available.
These questions included. organiza-
The Director-General also an-
nounced the opening in Patzcuaro,
Mexico of the first Regional Fund-
amental Education Centre for Latin
American countries. (See pages 8
and 9.)
This project for the training of per-
sonnel and the preparation of teaching
material for Fundamental Education
campaigns was strongly approved by
the delegates, who submitted a series of
suggestions for its development.
The Conference made a close study of
Technical Assistance methods and sug-
gested a number of ways for National
Commissions to collaborate in the im-
plementation of the United Nations
Technical Assistance p) an. These in-
cluded their participation in study
groups, the nomination of experts who
could work in other countries, and as-
sistance in the reception and placing of
Unesco fellowship holders.
After adopting the report on Unes-
co's role in the United Nations Technical
Assistance programme, the Conference
declared that, 7M programme of econo-
m ; c development, as opposed to econo-
mic expansion, can be carried out with-
out a simultaneous increase in educa-
fMKa ! programmes aimed at securing
the intelli, qent participation of the peo-
ples concerned."
Inter-Cultural Exchanges
DELEGATES made a realistic approachto an undertaking to which the
countries of Latin America attach
great importance-the translation of
Latin American classics. Governments
and National Commissions were asked
to give the utmost support to the Unes-
co project for the translation into En-
glish and French of these classics and of
contemporary works, which would help
to increase the knowledge of Latin Ame-
rican culture throughout the world.
They also emphasized the need to dis-
seminate these works in their original
language throughout the
countries of Latin Ameri-
ca, so as to make the cul-
ture of each country
known in the others.
To assist these efforts
towards the development
of mutual knowledge, Na-
tional Commissions were
asked to set up committees
to carrv out the trans-
lations and to ensure the
distribution of the works,
while governments were
asked to take action for
the abolition of obstacles
to the circulation of books,
reviews and newspapers.
A certain number of
Conference resolutions
were addressed to Unesco,
which was asked, for
example, to assist in the
organization of a Seminar
on the subject of Human
Rights to be held towards
the end of 1951. Unesco
was also asked to help In
the publication of a Span-
ish basic vocabulary pre-
pared by the University of
Porto-Rico, and to sponsor
a Congress of all the
American Universities.
A New impetus
THE greatest number of Conferencerecomm ndations, h wever, wer
directed towards the Governments
and National Commissions of the
Western Hemisphere. The most signi-
ficant of these, because it provides the
means of giving a new impetus to the
collaboration of Latin American coun-
tries in the carrying out of Unesco's
programme, concerned the re-organiza-
tion and the provision of budgets for
National Commissions as well as the
creation of permanent national secreta-
riats.
(The text of this resolution appears
on page 10.)
Action called for by this recommen-
dation includes the review by Member
States of the composition of their Na-
tional Commissions. To enable these
Commissions to work more effectively,
the resolution urged that they should
include representatives of governmental
bodies interested in Unesco's aims, pub-
lic or private institutions, women's or-
ganizations, labour and youth associa-
tions of an educational, scientific or
cultural nature, and international cul-
tural organizations, so that the general
public may be more closely associated
with Unesco's work.
The full implication of this recom-
mendation lies in the fact that its au-
thors are in many cases members of
the National Commissions and Govern-
ments who are called on to carrv out
its terms. Together with other recom-
mendations, it defines, in effect, an in-
ternational cultural policy affecting 17
countries, whose representatives have
themselves formulated their national
responsibilities.
Although those who attended the Ha-
vana Conference never lost sight of the
world-wide character of Unesco's mis-
sion, several of their resolutions implied
- on the basis of decentralization-that
Unesco's Regional Office in the Western
Hemisphere situated in Havana should
be further developed. After studying
such recommendations, Unesco will
submit appropriate proposals to the
next session of the Executive Board.
One of the most important results of
the Havana meeting was summed up
by M. Torres Bodet, when fie stated :
"The Havana experiment has proved to
me that the formula to be sought is
indeed that of'Regional Conferences of
Ministers of Education and of National
Commissions'."
Unesco is now organizing the second
of these regional conferences which
will group Ministers of Education and
members of 15 National Commissions in
the Far East, South East Asia and the
South Pacific at Bangkok, next Novem-
ber.
DELEGATES are shown here inside the National Capitol at Havana, during the inaugural
meeting of the Regional Conference.
