
NOT AN AGE OF ATOMS BUT OF WELFARE
FOR ALL
by
Arnold J. Toynbee
Today we consider with pride the
progress made by Man in his march
from prehistoric times to the present
age, and teach our children to respect
the achievements of science and
technology which have gradually
transformed the traditional ways of
human life. This is how we regard
the past, but how 300 years hence
will our own age be judged ? What
will our descendants consider the
outstanding development of this cen-
tury ?
Arnold Toynbee, the noted British
historian, has made some significant
predictions on these questions in
an article he wrote recently, and from
which we reprint extracts by permis-
sion of the New York Times Maga-
zine, in which the article appeared.
IN the contemporary world-inwhatever age or century one
happens to be living-religious
and political differences between
various sections of the living
generation are apt to seem absolute
and ultimate. For instance, our
seventeenth century ancestors in
Western Christendom could not
conceive of any greater gulf than
that which seemed in their day to
be fixed between the Catholic and
Protestant varieties of Western
Christianity. By contrast, we their
descendants, looking back on them
and their conflicts III the perspec-
tive of three centuries of history,
are far more conscious of the gulf
between our own age and the world
of the seventeenth century than we
are of the domestic divisions
within that seventeenth century
world. To our eyes, those Pro-
testants and Catholics are all alike,
seventeenth-century-minded people
first and foremost ; and it needs
some effort of discrimination on
our part to appreciate the nice
distinction between the warring
religious camps.
In the light of this historical
precedent-and there are countless
others that would have served
equally well to illustrate our point- We may be sure that, 300 years
from today, our own descendants
will be much more alive to the
common features of the twentieth
century world-and especially
those common features that seem
to them distinctive-than they
will he to the current differences
DECEMBER 1951
''Today we have tapped a wholly new kind of material resource in discovering how to harness mechanical power to
technology, thus bringing the benefits of civilization within the horizon of every man's hopes". No longer, for example,
need farmers fear the ravages of insect pests on their harvests when aircraft can be called on to protectively spray
vast areas.
that mean so much at the moment
to all members of the living genera-
tion, in whatever continent or camp
we may happen to have been born.
Can we guess what the out-
standing feature of our twentieth
century will appear to be ir. the
perspective of 300 years ? No doubt
we shall not all guess alike. Some
of us will guess that the present
age will be looked back upon as the
age of scientific discovery. Others
will expect to see it branded as the
age in which Fascist and Commun-
ist apostates from a Christian
will-so I should guess-come
to look both less important and
less interesting than will be easily
credible to anyone alive today. In
the easy wisdom that comes after
the event, our successors will,
perhaps, be able to pronounce that
this or that policy for achieving a
common twentieth century ideal
was more suitable than the rival
policy was to the social conditions
of this or that region in that
antique and still unstandardized
twentieth century world.
They may even judge one
ARTICLE 25. Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate
for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food,
clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and
the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability,
widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyondhis controt.
civilization harnessed science to
the service of a neo-barbarism. My
own guess is that our age will be
remembered chiefly neither for its
horrifying crimes nor for its
astonishing inventions, but for its
having been the first age since the
dawn of civilization, some five or
six thousand years back, in which
people dared to think it practicable
to make the benefits of civilization
available for the whole human race.
By comparison with the signifi-
cance of this common twentieth
century new ideal, the differences
between the conflicting ideologies
''The new ideal and objective of extending the benefits of civilization to the
common man will in future times tower above other features of our century."
One practical application of this ideal is the Expanded Technical Assistance
Programme of the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies under which
experts are advising the peoples of under-developed countries how to make
the best use of their natural resources.
twentieth century ideology was
better or worse than another in
some absolute moral sense. But
the common features of our
century will, I fancy, be the
features standing out the most
prominently in perspective ; and,
among these, the new ideal and
objective of extending the benefits
of civilization to the common man
will in future centuries tower
above the rest.
Perhaps there are two points
here that are worth underlining :
This vision of a good life for all IS
a new one, and-whatever our
success or our failure may be in
the attempt to translate this vision
into reality-this new social
objective has probably come to
stay. That the ideal of welfare for
all is new is surely true ; for, as
far as I can see, it is no older than
the seventeenth century West
European settlements on the east
coast of North America that have
grown into the United States. And
it has surely come to stay with us
as long, at any rate, as our new
invention of applying mechanical
power to technology ; for this
sudden vast enhancement of man's
ahilitv to make non-human nature
produce what man requires from
her has, for the first time in
history, made the ideal of welfare
for all a practical objective instead
of a mere utopian dream.
So long as this aim continues to
he practical politics, mankind is
certain, however many times we
may fail, to go on making one
attempt after another to reach the
oal. When once the odious in-
equality that has hitherto been a
distinguishing mark of civilization
has ceased to be taken for granted
as something inevitable, it becomes
inhuman to go on putting up with
it-and still more inhuman to
try to perpetuate this inequality
deliberately.
If the new material resources
required in order to make practical
politics of the new ideal of welfare
for all had been confined forever
to new agricultural resources, the
dream would soon have faded away
again. After the conquest of North
America by the plough, the only
remaining'virgin soil in the
Temperate Zone was Manchuria ;
and after the plough's conquest of
Manchuria in the early twentieth
century, the future of mankind, as
a whole, so far from being anything
like.'welfare for all", would have
been something like the present as
it can be seen in China or India.
The reason why.''\velfare for all"
is still practical politics in the
world at large today is because we
have tapped a wholly new kind of
material resource in discovering
how to harness mechanical power
to technology. Mankind's hope of
better things lies in a permanent
industrial revolution.
The outlook of the twentieth
century world at large is governed,
as I see it, by two facts. The first
fact is that three-quarters of
mankind are to-day still living the
traditional life of an agricultural
civilization in which there is no
reserve of virgin soil and therefore
no possibility of providing more
than a tiny minority of the popula-
tion with anything better than bare
subsistence out of agricultural
production.
But, in this wold-fashioned starve-
ling agrarian world, the Industrial
Revolution has brought with it a
hope for all mankind, from the
prosperous American technician
and farmer to the most miserable
Chinese or Indian coolie, of break-
ing right through the iron limits to
which the extension of the benefits
of civilization has normally been
subject in an agricultural society.
This hope is now rapidly dawning
in the hearts of the depressed and
ignorant peasantry that to-day still
constitutes three-quarters of the
living generation of mankind. They
have begun to ask themselves how
they are to attain those benefits of
civilization which a mechanized
technology has at last brought
within the horizon of every man's
hones.
How is this depressed three-
quarters of mankind going to set
about the stupendously difficult
task of gaining the benefits of
civilization ? Now that the hun-
dreds of millions of peasants are
aware of the relative well-being of
the Western peoples, nothing : is
goin to stop them from setting out
to reach a goal which the West
seems to them to have attained
already. And no doubt only trial
and error are goin to make them
aware of the difficulties in their
path which are glaringly manifest
to Western eyes..
For us westerners it is easy to
see that the mass of mankind to-day
does not command those assets and
advantages which have enabled a
Western minority within the last
two centuries to make some
progress toward a wider distribu-
tion of the benefits of civilization
inside the narrow circle of our
Western society.
.., The sunreme need of the hour
is, I would suggest, an immense
patience and mutual toleration.
A revolutionary improvement in
means of communication has
suddenly brought peoples with
sharplv diverse traditions or civi-
lizations into close physical contact
with one another. If, in spite of our
diversity, we find ourselves all
alike, pursuing what is ultimately
a common ideal, this IS something
to be thankful for.
