HONOURABLE
MISS DOLL
IS MORE THAN JUST A TOY
FOR JAPANESE CHILDREN
APANESE children make no fuss
and blowout no candles when
their birthdays come around
every year. In far, the children
of Japan do not celebrate their real
birthdays at all ; New Year's day is
everybody's birthday. Children are
considered to be one year old when
they are born and on New Year's day
everyone just adds a year. The real
celebrations for girls and boys are
held on special festival days in March
and May.
On March 3, the colourful Hina-
macuria (Doll's Festival, sometimes
also called Peach Blossom Festival)
reminds girls that they must be gentle
and peaceful. A series of shelves,
placed one above the other, is set up
in a corner of the best room and
covered with a red cloth or some
precious coloured faerie to represent
a little house. Ceremonial dolls,
handed down from generation to
generation, are then arranged on the
shelves by the girls. On the top shelf
of honour are the Emperor and
Empress, while at either side or below
them are the ladies-in-waiting, musi-
cians, guards and footmen, all dressed
in the rich court costumes of ancient
times. A staircase leads down from
the top shelf to toy orange and cherry
trees, one at each side, while paper
peach blossoms and lanterns brighten
the shelves.
The girls of the family and their
friends who visit from house to house
all come to look at the dolls and to
offer red and white rice cakes and
sweets shaped like fruit and f3sh.
Then all the children share in eating
the delicacies. When the ceremony
of O-Hina-sana (Honourable Miss
Doll) is over, the dolls are put care-
fully away in another room along
with other family treasures and there
they are left until the following year.
May 5 is Tango-no-sekku day, the
Boys'Festival. Every family which
has sons proudly plants a bamboo
pole in the garden or on the roof and
floats from it a coloured paper fish (a
carp) for each boy. A hole is made in
the paper so that it swells with the
wind and twists and turns in the air.
The largest fish represents the oldest
son, the tiniest fish the baby boy of
the family. For the Japanese, the
carp symbolizes perseverance, courage
and strength.
A Danish traveller who recently
returned from a trip around the world
expressed his surprise at the impor-
tance given to dolls by Japanese
children."Never have I seen so many
dolls or doll-shops as in Japan", he
said.
Last year, the students of Komat-
sugwan Girls'High School in Tokyo
told their teachers that they wanted
to present Unesco with a gift as a
token of their interest in the world
organization. It is not surprising,
therefore, that when encouraged to do
so by the principal of the school,
they decided to present a collection of
hand-made dolls dressed in costume.
Some of the photos of these dolls,
received at Unesco Headquarters in
Paris, are published on this page. The
collection includes models dressed in
various costumes worn by modern
Japanese-a young bride in white
robes decorated with gold brocade, a
dancing girl in a brilliant red dress
with brightly coloured designs, a
puppet man (the equivalent of a Euro-
pean Guignol player)-as well as
figures from Japanese history.
What is interesting to note is that
although these small dolls represent
traditional figures of Japanese life and
history, the child artists who
executed them, managed to instill in
each form a poetic richness and ex-
pression all its own. There is a
prevailing belief among Oriental peo-
ples that everything in nature has life
and spirit. Thus the Japanese
children-and indeed the Japanese
people as a whole-are thrilled with
This small Japanese doll and the seven others shown below are part of a collection presented to
Unesco by students of a Girls'High School in Tokyo. The dolls represent traditional figures of
Japanese life and history ; but the children have succeeded ingiving each of them a spiritual quality
and graceful beauty worthy of real artists.
joy when they come in contact with
or can create life and spirit even in an
object which may appear trivial at
first glance.
By emphasizing the movement,
character and decorative beauty of
their dolls, the Japanese high school
children have sought to express such
joy and feeling. They have attempted,
essentially, to reveal the life and soul
of each personage rather than the
more physical form. And although
the Japanese passion for neatness, for
fastidious and cleanly order character-
istic of their art in general, is re-
flected in these children's dolls, their
work is imbued with a spiritual qual-
ity, a delicacy and grace inspired by
their common love for the beautiful
and exquisite detail.
As early as the sixth century, an
eminent art critic, Hsieh Ho, had
already emphasized the importance of
"spiritual rhythm and IUe movement".
placing these at the head of six canons
embodying the fundamental principles
of the arts. This was not only his
own view as a Chinese, but an ideal
of the Far East held from ancient
times and transmitted down to our
present day. Japanese children, sur-
rounded by the old customs and tradi-
tions that still pervade family life in
their country, have apparently learned
to appreciate these ideals at an early
age.
1-Kagano-Chiyo was a child prodigy who became one of the most famous Japanese poetesses
of the eighteenth century. She ended her days as a nun, assuming the religious name of Seen.
2-A maiden of Oshimawho is carrying a bundle. of sticks on her head ; Kamuro, a dancing girl
and Komori, a nurse-maid, who has the baby tied on her back. In winter, the baby Is protected
by an overcoat, called a"nenneko", which is shown on this doll. In the doll's hand is the"den
den daiko", a kind of drum used for amusing the baby. 3-Three other doi) s, Maiko. Teneraiand
Sendai-Hagi, In traditional costumes and head-dresses.