HISTORIANS IN DIVING SUITS--
EXPLORE THE SEA'S DEPTHS
by-Yann Loranz
OWearing the self-contained diving suit which has madeunderwater archaeology possible, an historian goes down to
the sea-bed. A At the site which is to be explored, he
clears away V weeds and sand covering Roman jars which
have lain there for hundreds of years. Before the disco-
veries are lifted to the surface, photo  graphs are taken
so as to ensure a record in case of breahage or other damage.
THROUGHOUT the ages, man has
tried to wrest from the sea its
treasures. As I writ , in front
of me is a map of the world on
which hundreds of little crosses mark
in the cemetery of the sea the resting
places of legendary ships with their
cargoes of jewels and gold. Here are
the ships of the Invincible Armada,
there the Elizabethville with her
13, 000 carats of pure diamonds, further
on the frigate Lutine with her gold
lingots, or the Orient with the wealth
of the Knights of Malta. Elsewhere
are the galleons of Philip II or the
galleys of Caligula. This map re-
minds me of the day in 1934 when,
aboard the little Italian cargo boat
Artiglio. I saw the first dredger
bucket opened, revealing the gold
sovereigns which had just been taken
from the shattered hull of the steam-
ship Egypt.
Until a few years ago, it was the
hope of making money that led
sailors to carry out salvage operations.
Such treasure hunters needed only a
little more audacity and physical
endurance than those prospecting for
gold in Alaska.
Now a band of newcomers have
joined the wreck-hunters on the sea-
bed-a handful of men who are not
motivated by thought of personal
gain. In fact, I think their research
costs more than they get in return.
These men, who are inspired solely
by their concern for history and
science, are the underwater archaeo-
logists.
Underwater archaeology, a new
science which still needs definition as
well as organization, owes its exist-
ence to a new diving technique, made
possible by a self-contained diving
suit. Following the pioneer work of
Commandant Le Prieur, this suit was
perfected by Commandant Cousteau
of the French Navy, and a French
engineer named Gagnan.
Clues To History
TOURING the past 15 years, his-torians have left their libraries,
and biologists their laborat-
ories, to don diving suits and carry
out methodical investigations off the
shores of the Mediterranean. Some-
times, because of technical difficulties,
governments have called in profes-
sional divers-and their reward
comes when some remarkable object
is brought to the surface. There
was, for instance, the famous bronze
statue of Zeus of Artemision which,
thanks to the Greek Government,
was brought up on the shores of
Greece, where it had lain since the
fifth century before Christ.
The uniniated wrongly imagine that
the underwater archaeologists have
only one aim-to recover artistic
treasures hidden in the Mediterranean.
The great Middle Sea, which was the
scene of an intense maritime trade
in ancient times, hides mainly relics
- wrecks and various objects-
whose shape and location provide
clues to important historical facts, as
well as enabling techniques of a new
science to be evolved. True archaeo-
logy-whether terrestial or under-
water-does not aim at pillaging the
past, but at studying and reconstruct-
ing it. Certain oustanding findings
have recently been totally destroyed
by the depradation of amateurs, and
there is, therefore, an urgent need
for underwater relics to be protected
by law in the same way as historic
sites and monuments on the ground.
M. Philippe Diole, one of the pro-
moters of underwater archaeology
and certainly its greatest authority,.
has urged that these discoveries should
be treated with respect in their proper
surroundings. Underwater archaeo-
logy should not entail the breaking
up of articles with the sole aim of
raising them to the surface, re-
constituting them, and making them
museum pieces. First of all it is
necessary to study them closely
where they are found, to clear the
sites and to photograph the objects,
preferably before handling them.
An Emp : re's"Junk"
'-r'HE"materials"awaiting searchersare of two kinds. Wrecks are
the most usual, but there is also
a multitude of objects which people,
in all eras, have got rid of by throwing
away into harbours. These are objects
which, after the mud protecting them
has been cleaned off, constitute the
most interesting materials for study,
and which provide experts with real
"archaeological layers".
Among the wrecks, two have for
long attracted the interest of divers :
the Anthéor and the Albenga, dis-
covered by members of the Club
Alpin Sous-Marin off the Italian
coast. Both contain large numbers
of jars, not of marble, as has been,
said, but pottery made of common
clay, which in Roman times preceded
the cask-a Gallic invention. This
shows that the Anthéor and the
Albenga were not therefore galleys,
as has been claimed, but cargo boats
bringing food to the Roman capital.
When one thinks of the many
African ports which were used by the
Roman feet, and the number and
variety of objects thrown into the
water by seamen or port-dwellers, one
gets an idea of the task still to be
undertaken.
In any case, underwater archaeology
has already proved its efficacy with
the French excavations at Fos-sur-
Mer where divers had to work with
pickaxes to get to the newly-discover-
ed relics. Ceramics found under the
sea-bed enabled them to fix-as
archaeologists and historians had
never been able to do-the date of
the foundation of the city by Marius :
the end of the second or the beginning
of the first century before Christ.
Similarly, the team of divers led by
Father Poidebard, after exploring the
waters of Tyre and Sidon, were able
to trace accurately the plan of these
ancient ports.
There are many legends which tell
of cities under the sea. The old fisher-
man of Douarnenez, for example,
claim that at certain tides one can
see the ruined walls of the proud city
of Ys which, the story goes, sank
below the waves off the Brittany
coast.
Though such stories may belong to
the realms of fancy, traces of other
cities have actually been found. Near
Hyeres, for example, the divers of the
Cannes Club discovered the under-
water relics of a former Greco-Roman
colony, similar to those of Vercura-
num, near the town of St. Honorat.
At Olbia, a. town which digging
operations had already partly revealed,
other divers brought to light part of
a stone jetty and other constructional
remains.
The new science of underwater ar-
chaeology is still in the early pioneer
stage. It lacks followers-not scientists,
as such, but scientist-divers. This is
a vocation which will not take long
to capture the imagination of youth,
and it is to be hoped that soon new
teams will go to the bottom of the sea
to help the development of this new
field of scientific investigation.
