THE BONDS UNITING INDIA AND UNESCO
'V NDIA is a young nation, but
it has inherited prodi-
gious, economic and edu-
cational problems which affect
nearly 350 millions. Our illite-
racy figure is as high as 85 %.
Though 70 % of our people
work on agriculture, we are
short of foodgrains. Our
standard of living is low.
These are a few illustrations.
Our leaders are aiming at
building up a welfare state, at
improving agriculture, at in-
by Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Indian Ambassador in Moscow
dustrializing the country. We
have undertaken schemes for
large-scale irrigation, scientific
research, and are building up
technical institutions to train
scientific and technical per-
sonnel. And so we look to
Unesco for all the assistance
it may render in our trans-
forming ourselves.
India has been a foundation-
member of Unesco, whose ob-
jectives have always appeated
to the Indian mind and
conscience. The delegations
to Unesco included some of
our foremost scientists and
scholars. We have set up a
National Commission to co-
operate with Unesco and carry
out its principles in our coun-
try. Above all, India believes
in the healing power of the
principles of Unesco.
We live in an age which is
torn by conflict, fear and
hatred. If we look below the
surface of political events we
become aware of the massive,
emotional currents which are
working to produce a new life
in society. At the heart of the
nature of things, there is
always a dream. The greatest
gift of life is the dream of a
higher living. At the heart
of the universe there is this
dream of justice for all men.
When the framework of
scciety becomes a cramping
prison, it explodes by the
explosive power latent in
society. This is revolution.
And every revolution causes
suffering to innocent people,
who have to pay for the atro-
cities and arrogance, laziness
and selfishness of the fore-
runners or leaders. This does
not, however, justify our em-
bracing social systems which
cramp the free spirit of the
individual. Democracy is a
balance between the organiz-
ing power of the state and the
enterprise of the individual.
Enterprise, adventure is
what saves civilization from
staleness, from boredom. A
civilization which is adven-
turous is free, vigorous, and
creative. Where adventure is
lacking, we have life without
depth ; literature without spi-
rit, science concerned with the
elaboration of details, art busy
with trivialities.
The spirit of man craves for
freedom, for co-operation.
We must elect for wisdom or
folly, for co-operation or ex-
tinction. No nation has a
monopoly of either wisdom or
folly. Unesco attemps to work
for a just and enduring peace,
for constructive adjustment of
conflicting interests. Humani-
ty's inability, nay refusal, to
use the Unesco method and
deal with the world problems
in a civilized way is the most
distressing feature of our time.
India believes in Unesco ; in
the paths of peace and co-ope-
ration.
We are using all the instru-
ments, the visual arts, theatre,
daqce, music, cinema, wireless,
etc., for this once. supreme
purpose of fostering the intel-
lectual and moral solidarity of
mankind.
Rabindranath.
Tagore 4
may 1861-August 1941)
A T every period in its longhistory India has had hu -
dreds of poets. None of
them, however, ever had as many
admirers in the West as Rabin-
dranath Tagore, who was born
just 90 years ago on May 6, 1861, in Calcutta. In
1913 the Nobel Prize for Literature confirmed his
fame. It was then discovered that the poet had
founded a school called Abode of Peace-Santim-
ketan-which he himself directed entirely, and that
it was rapidly becoming a true international university.
It was to this school that Tagore immediatly devoted
the 1 : 8000 of the Nobel Prize. Poems, novels and
plays, translated into English by the author, and into
other languages, often by í1lustrious writers, presented
"the mind of India"to a whole generation of
Occidentals. By his own countrymen, too, he was
considered a profound sage, whose words were received
with the closest attention, and his doctrine on the
relation between Indian thought and western civiliza-
tion exercised undeniable influence. The East, he said,
must accept industrialization and technical progress ;
but he considered that it was the role of'the Orient
to show that certain pernicious influences could be
avoided, and that. above all, the basic spirituality of
Eastern thought could be kept intact. H believed,
therefore, that education had a primary role to play
in this evolution, and that its fundamental object was
"not merely to give us information, but make our life
In harmony with all existence". Then came 1914.
Tagore raised his voice on behalf of frustrated and
oppressed justice :"There is a moral law in this
world", he reminded the warring peoples,"which has
its applications both two individuals and organized
bodies of men. You cannot go on violating these
laws in the name of your nation, yet enjoy their
advantages as individuals. We may forget truth for
our convenience, but truth does not forget us... Until
man can feet the unity of mankind, the kind of
barbarism which you call civilization will exist.'"Until
his death Tagore showed no mercy towards natio-
nalism, which he termed"that dominant intellectual
abstraction". But he offered a glimpse of hope of a
world transfigured,"when the diverse races and the
nations have evolved their perfected distinct cha-
racteristics but all attached to the stem of humanity
by the bond of lore".
Muhammad
Iqbal
it., f). la : : -April 193-81
nt PHAMMAB Iqbal is reveredby the people of Pakistan
as one of the founders of
their country. His poetry often
predicted the independent State
and in a celebrated speech deli-
vered at Allahabad in 1930 he openly demanded it.
But the appeal of his poetry, as yet little known
outside of Pakistan, rises above all frontiers. For
Iqbal is not only a great Pakistani poet and a great
Muslim poet ; he wrote for all mankind. His verse
composed either in Urdu or ancient Persian, remained
faithful to traditional forms, but it added a new
conception of the lyric with profoundly moving mes-
sages : a passionate desire for a world-wide culture,
a great faith in the destiny of man, a belief in
man's ability to develop and climb to ever higher
peaks of perfection. For Iqbal the true aim of art
was to make human life rich and beautiful. He had
no patience with people who talked of art for art's
sake-"There should be no opium eating in Art".
he once said. Art is not a pastime of intellectual,
but must"serve life"since the poet is endowed with
a mission. He himself may have hesitated before
defining his own mission. But his journey to Europe
from 1905 to 1908 revealed it to him as the search for
a great spiritual faith-which he felt was alone capable
of combatting the injustices of the modern world. He
became the lyric and philosophic poet of Beauty and
Love and their struggle against human wickedness
- oppression and cupidity. The East. he said, must
find itself and at the same time find its lost heritage.
By the East, he meant especially Islam, which he
denied as a total abandonment to God, and an active
co-operation with divine forces. He quoted the
Prophet :"The Earth does not belong tò kings or
ruters, but to God. Indignation or anger may have
at times appeared in the dialogues between East and
West which he used in his poetry, but never sterile
hostility. On the contrary, he saw in the union of
apparently opposing cultures the foundation of true
progress. Unite the spirit of logic with mystic love.
said one of his phase'-
In the West Intellect is the source of life,
In the East Love is the basis of life.
Arise and lay the foundation of a New World.
By welding Intellect to Lope.
The Central Ministry of Education is now embarked on a large-scale
programme for rural and adult education to reduce India's high
percentage of illiteracy.
Great village audiences enjoy open-air filmstrip showings and
other programmes at the Unesco Delhi State Pilot Project in Rural
Adult Education.
