TEACHING OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY
AIDED BY UNESCO PAMPHLETS
PEACE and collective security among annations ultimately depend upon the
thoughts and feelings of individual men
and women ever. ywhere on earth-and educa-
tion remains an indispensable means for
developing such individual attitudes of aware-
ness and co-operation.
The authority for this view is Professor A.
Appadorai, formerly of Madras University in
India, one of the world's most distinguished
experts and educators in the field of inter-
national relations, and author of a pamphlet
entitled Collective Security, one of three on
the subject prepared for Unesco and just
published by the Organization as part of its
vigorously continuing efforts to explain and
make widely known the principles and activ-
ities of the United Nations.
"The relevant attitude to be cultivated,"the
Indian educator explains,"consists of two ele-
ments : nrst. the attitude of'live and let live',
a sense of tolerance and cha-
rity, a recognition that the very
existence of a diversity of cul-
tures contributes to the increase
of human happiness ; and, se-
cond, the attitude of non-vio-
lence, that is, the recognition
that a bellicose attitude is not
something inherent in man, but
that man is by nature a social
unit capable of living in neigh-
bourly friendliness and love."
Parallel with Professor Appa-
dorai's pamphlet, written in
English, Unesco has published
two companion works, one in
French prepared by Dr. Jean
Dupuy, Secretary-General of
the French Association for the
United Nations, and one in
Spanish by Professor Guillermo
Francovich, Rector of the San
Francisco Xavier University of
Sucre, Bolivia. Their titles are
L'Etablissement de lea Security
Collective and La Seguridad Co-
lectiva lnternacional.
of Unesco's General Conference in Paris
in July 1951 declared moreover"that, if
there is to be widespread understanding of-and
popular support for United Nations action,
there must be adequate education regarding
specific acts of aggression and breaches of the
peace, as well as the actions taken by the
United Nations to maintain and restore the
peace". (The full text of this resolution is
published on this page.) The Executive Board
and the Director-General were authorized to
provide"widespread understanding"of United
Nations action to maintain or restore peace
whenever the Security Council or the General
Assembly took such action.
"History", says Professor Appadori in
analyzing the meaning of collective security,
"is in large measure a record of man's efforts
to achieve greater security together with per-
sonal freedom. War, with the aid of science,
has come to mean total annihilation. Clearly,
Foundations of peace
T HEI preparation and pub-
j lication by Unesco stems
directly from the Con-
stitution of the Organiza-
tion, for the view of Professor
Appadorai, shared by Dr. Dupuy
and Professor Francovich, that
collective security depends upon
the attitudes of individual men
and women, links directly with
the statements in Unesco's basic
Charter that :
"Since wars begin in the
minds of men, it is in the minds
of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed... the
education of humanity for jus-
tice and liberty and peace are
indispensable to the dignity of
man and constitute a sacred
duty which all nations must
fulfll in a spirit of mutual
assistance and concern... peace
must therefore be founded, if it
is not to fail, upon the intellect-
ual and moral solidarity of
mankind."
All three pamphlets are de-
signed to provide teaching aids
for use in primary and adult
education, as part of the sup-
port which Unesco gives in the
various fields within its compet-
mint t. n t. np. < : t. ru ! ! ! ! le of the'-'. 1.'-''''' \IV \1. 1."'" VU"'''''''bÞ'''''''.............-
United Nations on behalf of the collective
security on which a just and durable peace
depends. From the very start of its existence,
Unesco has carried out educational activities
in the light of the judgment that the subject
of collective security is of such vital import-
ance to mankind that it demands well-
informed and objective study.
The decision that the Organization should
select collective security as a major theme in
its educational work was made by the Execut-
ive Board in September 1950, in the light of
the action taken by the United Nations with
respect to Korea, and at the request of the
Economic and Social Council of the United
Nations.
The Board instructed Director-General
Jaime Torres Bodet to develop"the execution
of the programme resolutions concerning
teaching about the United Nations and its
Specialized Agencies, putting particular em-
phasis on the necessity for collective security,
based on respect for law, with the aid of con-
crete examples."It also authorized him"to
prepare, in close and constant collaboration
with the United Nations, both written and
audio-visual materials for use in schools, adult
classes and universities".
A Resolution adopted by the Sixth Session

international affairs. In preparing his work for
Unesco, he consulted with the Royal Institute
of International Affairs in London and the
Institute of Pacific Relations in the United
States.
Dr. Dupuy was President of the International
University Federation for the League of Na-
tions and of the Executive Committee of the
World Federation of United Nations Associa-
tions ; a member of the French Delegations to
the San Francisco Conference and five Gen-
eral Assemblies of the United Nations. He is
the author of many works on international
affairs including San Francisco et la Charte
des Nations Unites.
Professor Francovich has filled high political
and diplomatic posts in addition to his work
as an educator. He is the author of El Mundo,
el Hombre y los Valores and of other books
in the fields of history and philosophy.
The three writers agreed, in consultation
there must be a rule of law among individuals
within each State. The attempts to establish
such a rule of law among nations represent a
continuance and extension of man's efforts to
achieve personal freedom."
The authors of all three of the Unesco
booklets point out how, as the culmination of
a slow and difficult historical process, man's
will for peace found its instrument in the
United Nations. Moreover, the United Nations,
through its adoption of the Universal Declara-
tion of Human Rights, became also the
vehicle for the spread and development of the
principles of enlightenment and progress.
Three militant writers
THE three men chosen to prepare the pam-phlets were not only educational experts,
but also militants in the cause of collect-
ive security with long and brilliant records of
achievement.
Professor Appadorai is Secretary-General of
the Indian Council of World Affairs, joint
General Secretary of the Asian Relations
Organization, and the author of The Sub-
stance of Politics, Revision of Democracy, De-
mocracy in India and of many pamphlets on
to seize power".
But the essence of the idea of collective
security which has emerged from the tragic
experiences of recent years, he stresses, is that
"freedoms must defend themselves."Such a
security"can exist only in the collective effort
of all States within an international organiza-
tion. We must really want peace and above
all be ready to accept on its behalf, each
according to his means, a share of the burdens
imposed by its establishment and mainten-
ance."
And Professor Francovich, in the Spanish
language pamphlet, comes to the conclusion
that"Force must be the effective and tangible
contribution of the peoples to the defence of
collective security ; for force will represent the
irresistible power of the human will put at
the service of all peoples'aspirations to a har-
monious and pacific community."
It is as a continuation of Unesco's vigorous
efforts to teach and spread awareness that in
the long run Human Rights can be enjoyed
only in a world at peace and free from the
threat of aggression, that the pamphlets were
conceived, prepared and published. Some
editorial suggestions were made by the Unesco
and United Nations secretariats, but the
authors were free to accept or reject them.
with officials of the United Na-
tions and Unesco, on the main
outlines of the form and content
of the pamphlets they would
prepare. Within the general
framework thus established,
each author was given freedom
to develop the subject as he
judged best, in the light of his
knowledge of the needs of the
educators and students who
were to form his particular
audience.
'Germs of confHct'
PROFESSOR Appadorai divideshis 34-page pamphlet into
four sections : the Meaning
of Collective Security ; the De-
velopment of the Idea ; the
United Nations and Collective
Security ; Strengthening the
Foundations. After tracing the
history of United Nations steps
to help solve problems in Iran,
Indonesia, Greece, Palestine and
Kashmir, he analyzes the les-
sons of the Korean experience.
"Power held in reserve,"he
says,"has always played an im-
portant part in international
politics ; the United Nations can
be an effective instrument of
collective security only if the
statesmen of the powerful na-
tions are prepared to use the
power of their States on its be-
half.
"Without a system of collect-
ive security, there can be no
stable peace ; yet, unless all
nations accept the system in
practice, it must be enforced or
it will fail. But if we can deal
with international problems by
reasonable rather than violent
methods, that will greatly help
to produce a political climate in
which the sense of collective
security can grow".
Dr. Dupuy points out in the
French language pamphlet that
the concept of collective secur-
ity has evolved to include social
security and economic organiza-
tion."An international struggle
should be carried out", he
writes,"against unemployment,
hunger, poverty, illness, ignor-
ance, misunderstanding ; against
all these defects, all these germs
of conflict which dictators and
dema ! !"O ! ! : Ues can exnloit in order
