CHILD WAR VItTIMS TEll THEM OWN STORY
BRITISH, FRENCH,
ITALIAN NETWORKS JOIN
UNESCO'S RADIO CARA-
VAN ; MILLIONS HEAR
"EVERYBODY'S CHILD"
Here is a p1'Oblem in cornmunicati011, :The ordinary range of a child's voice is small
--and in these days it is often too small to reach
the din-filled ears, the crowded minds and the troubled
hearts of grown-ups. This is particularly true of the
orphans. Yet, the needs of the child are limitless-and
their claim is just-for love, warmth, food, education
and training in the tools and techniques of the world
which is to be theirs. As expressed by the Chilean poet,
Gabriela Mistral,"The outstretched hand of the child
is not'begging,. it is collecting."Yet, the voice of those
whose need is greatest is too often he ; weakest voice
of all. He1'e is a p1'oblem in communication.
Here, in fact, was a problem for the Radio Division
of Unesco's Department of Mass Communication. An
answer was found in the Unesco Radio Caravan, made
possible by the combined skill, knowledge, money and
conscience of three of the world's great radio networks :
the British Broadcasting Corporation ; the Radio-
diil'usion franchise and Radio-Italiana.
As the first result of the Radio Caravan, several mil-
lions of British listeners, at home and overseas, and
several millions of French listeners have already heard
the children-those whose voices are normallv the
weakest. This month more millions of Italian listeners
will have the living reality of these children brought
into their homes, and in the months ahead countless
more people in Europe, Canada, the United States, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, Latin-American and other coun-
tries will be stirred to action by radio's forceful remin-
der that"No body's child is everybody's child."
The Caravan broadcasts are good"public service"
programmes, but they are also what broadcasters call
"good 1'audio", and the best evening listening hours have
been chosen for them. In this issue, the COURIER
prints pictures of these children, members of the gene-
ration that suffered most from World War II, in the
belief that their publication is timely.
The Uuesco Radio Caravan was planned by radio
experts from eighteen nations meeting at Unesco
House. Early in October 1930, two automobiles loaded
with recording equipment and baggage left Paris.
Their passengers included Marjorie Banks of the
(Continued on page 12)
VOLUME 111-No 12

CHilD WAR VICTIMS TELL THEIR OWN
STORY ; MILLIONS HEAR
"EVERYBODY'S CHILD"
(Continued from page 1)
British Broadcasting Corporation, Mille Clara Candiani
of Radiodiffusion francaise, and Aldo Salvo of Radio-
Italiana. The party was completed by Edward Ward, who
served as guide, and Jacques Oguse, Unesco sound tech-
nician.
Their first important stop was the Children's Republic
at Mouiin-Vieux, perched high in the French Alps near.....--...... -_......
Grenoble, where 300 child war
victims live, study and work in a
community of their own, directed
by five teachers. Mouiin-Vieux was
a fortunate choice, for its members
presented an hour-long pageant in
song, depicting the history of
France, with skill and beauty
which will be long remembered by
radio listeners of many countries.
Seeking the widest possible var-
iety in methods of caring for
children, the radio reporters went
next to'''Rayon de Soteit" (ray of
sunshine), an institution near Ta-
rascon. There, they found twenty
boys and girls living together in a
big rambling house with foster
parents, all of them working
A BEAUTIFUL HOME-BUT ONLY FOR 35 CHILDREN
together to make the building look
as much like a home and as little
like an institution as possible.
BREATHING SPELL
FROM HARDSHIP
THE last stop in France was at"Narvik", a children's com-
munity near the Riviera
which is supported partly by Nor-
wegian funds."Narvik"is home
for four months to groups of
Spanish refugee children who are
sent there fifty at a time. There,
they take a breathing spell from the
years of hardshi p their fnmilies
ONE OF THEIR JOBS-TO KEEP MUSIC ALIVE...
, ONE OF OUR JOBS-TO REPLACE FEAR WITCH CONFIDENCE
CHILDREN NEED LOVE-ESPE-
CIALLY CHILDREN LIKE THESE
have passed, and try to learn what
it is like to be children-without
the cares of adults.
"Narvik"has nearly everything
to meet the children's needs, except
for a means of transport. This lack
makes it impossible for the children
10 bathe in the Mediterranean.
Another effect is to increase the cost
of running the camp, because of the
cost of haulage.
The caravan rolled into Italy and,
at Milan, its members visited the
"Casa Don Onone dei PiccoU Muti-
latti"-a rehabilitation centre for
war-maimed Italian children. There
they watched disabled youngsters of
all ages, religions and nationalities
living together and learning how to
use the prosthetic appliances they
need to overcome their disabilities.
Milan also offered the caravan a
glimpse of its"Villagio di Madri di
Fanciulli"-"The Village of Mothers
of Children"-where mothers unable
to make ends meet in the outside
world are given a home for them-
selves and their children. The
village's energetic director finds
jobs for mothers and she herself has
become known throughout Milan for
her energetic fund-raising drives.
MESSAGE FROM
"NOBODY'S CHILD"
F
ONE CHILD STEAKS TO THE WORLD-FOR ALL CHILDREN
 OLLOWIXG visits to Italian insti-tutions where the latest
methods in the rehabilitation
of juvenile delinquents were pract-
iced, the caravan moved on to
Switzerland, to record reports of the
work done by the Swiss Red Cross
in child care.
The institutions visited were of
various kinds and the children, too,
were amazingly different, one from
another, as children always are. Yet
in important respects, they were all
tire same. All of the selfless and
devoted grown-ups who have sup-
ported and operated the institutions
need continuing help in their task.
: 111 the children too have continuing
needs for material things, for
training and retraining, guidance,
reassurance and hope for the future.
This message, that"Nobody's
child is everybody's child"is now
being told. Thus, part of the pro-
blem of communication has been
solved, sand it is the grown-ups turn
to speak.
In addition to the programmes
already broadcast or scheduled, the
Badio Division of Unesco's Depart-
ment of Mass Communication has a
wealth of recorded documents ob-
tained by the Radio Caravan. This
material in several languages is
available to broadcasting organiz-
ations throughout the world.
Encouraged by the success of this
new venture in international co-
operation and in the use of radio
for the benefit of mankind, a second
Radio Caravan is now being planned
for 1951.
KEY TO IllUSTRATIONS
The photographs published in this issue
of some of the children's centres visited
by Unesco's Radio Caravan, were taken
by Edward Ward, who served as guide.
Those on page I show : (top) Boys at
the Arese re-education centre in Italy,
where the latest methods of rehabilitation
of juvenile delinquents are practised, and
(bottom, left) Marjorie Banks, of the B. B. C.,
(facing camera) interviewing a boy through
an interpreter at the"Casa Don Orione
dei Piccoli Mutilatti", Milan-a rehabili-
tation centre for war maimed children.
Photographs on this page show : (top)
The valley in the French Alps where the
members of the"Moulin Vieux Children's
Reþublic"recorded a history of France
in song.
(Centre) : A priest and two of the boys
at the"Piccolo Mutilatti"home for war
disabled children, Milan,
(Left, top) : The school at Trubscha-
chen, Switzerland, where unusual methods
are used to encourage the musical and
artistic talents of children.
(Left, centre) : Members of the choir
at the Scuola Citta Pestalozzi, Florence
recording songs for the Radio Caravan.
(Left, bottom) : Children at the"Rayon de
Solei/"home at Pomeyrol, France, take over
the microphone and interview each other.