BRIEFING FOR A MISSION : Members of Unesco's Educational Mission to Burma assembled
at Unesco headquarters in Paris for a briefing shortly before they left for Burma. This photo
shows : (from left to right) Mr. M. Jimsai, Head of the Missions Section of Unesco's Department
of Education ; Mr. Francis T. Fairey, of Canada ; Mr. Richard M. Tisinger, of the United States and
Mr. Luciano Hernandez, of Mexico. On the extreme right is M. Edmond Sidet, of France, who
left for Afghanistan last month as technical adviser to the government and to follow up the work
done by the government and the Unesco mission which visited the country in 1949.
THERE are 2, 750, 000 children ofschool-going age in Burma,
but only 54, 000 receive even
the rudiments of school training.
At least 50 % of the schools have
been totally destroyed by war and
30 % have been badly damaged.
The shortage of trained teachers
is desperate, and facilities for
training them are inadequate, in a
country where technical develop-
ment has been retarded so long.
Along with providing children with
adequate instruction, it is equally
important that teaching be provi-
ded for millions of illiterate adults.
Such a vast programme require. s
heroic efforts by the government
of Rangoon and it can be enorm-
ously speeded by experienced assis-
tance. Accordingly, Unesco has
sent three experts to Burma to
study problems relating to funda-
mental and adult education, de-
velopment of primary and secon-
dary instruction, technical training
and vocational guidance, training
of teachers and allied administra-
tive problems. At the conclus. ion
of their investigation and subse-
quent report, these experts will
help the Burmese government to
carry out the measures which they
have recommended and which the
government has approved.
The three specialists chcsen by
Unesco are men experienced in this
work. Mr. Luciano Hernandez was
Director of Education for the state
of Chiuahua in Mexico. Mr. Ric-
hard M. Tisinger and Mr. Francis
T. Fairey have both worked on
educational problems among In-
dian tribes, one in the United
States, the other in British Colum-
bia. Mr. Tisinger, in charge of the
mission, will devote himself to pro-
blems in primary school instruc-
tion and teaching administration,
Mr. Fairey to secondary school
teaching and technique, Mr. Her-
nandez to fundamental education.
This is not the first time that
Unesco has assisted in such work.
Similar missions have been sent to
the Philippines, to Afghanistan
and to Thailand. One has been
working in Bolivia for several
months. Each of them, within
the programme of general educa-
tional improvement, has been given
a special task directed to the local
needs of the country concerned.
Basic Needs-Special Problems
THE Philippine mission, like the
one in Burma, had to take war
losses into account, as well as
problems in primary and secondary
instruction, adult education, train-
ing of teachers and administra-
tive difficulties related to teaching.
In the Philippines, 8, 300 schools
were totally and 3. 887 partially
destroyed, 95 % of school equip-
ment was lost, scarcely 5 % of the
collections in the National Museum
were preserved intact, and 694, 000
out of a total of 730, 000 volumes
are missing from the National
Library.
In Afghanistan, among other
major problems, school attendance
and children's access to primary
schools, were given special study :
less than 10 % of the boys, and
less than 0. 33 % of the girls
receive primary school instruction
in Afghanistan.
In Bolivia, the most urgent need
is adult education and the mission
of experts is giving primary im-
portance to a campaign against
illiteracy. At present, out of a
population of 3, 700, 000 people, it is
estimated that 2, 000. 000 are totally
illiterate.
In addition to such basic needs,
each country presents its educators
with special difficulties. In Afgha-
nistan, for instance, there is the
problem of a nomadic population ;
in Bolivia, one of the principal
obstacles is the inaccessible moun-
tainous terrain which bars normal
communication between the diffe-
rent small mountain settlements
and with the nearest centres.
The experts sent by Unesco do
not work separately. All their
work is done, ot only in co-ope-
ration with the authorities of the
country concerned, but with the
support, and in consultation with,
local educationists. Unesco also
makes available to the members of
each mission, the findings of simi-
lar organisations, received at its
headquarters in Paris from all over
the world.
Unesco is attempting, through
these missions, to provide a
common pool of experiences-
experiences which would otherwise
never be known-and whose va-
lue is immeasurably increased
through this method of collation.

IN THE WAKE OF KOREAN WARFARE : This open air class (above, left) was set up amid the ruins of a primary school In the
village of Eum Pyung, north of Seoul. Before it was demolished by artitiery fire during the fighting for the Korean capital, the school
had 1, 300 students and 23 teachers. When this photo was taken, 12 teachers remained and students were slowly coming back as their
parents returned after taking refuge in the nearby hills. U. N. DAY IN KOREA : (above, right) Korean refugees, carrying whatthey have
been able to salvage from their home, read one of the posters commemorating United Nations Day (October 24) which had been prepared
by a U. N. group organized by Koreans in Seoul immediately after its liberation by United Nations forces.
