COURIER
THE ROAD
NOVEMBER 1952. Pe3
TO UNIVERSAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
By Alexandre Leventis
o many people, the four years since December 10,
1948, when the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights'was adopted and proclaimed by the General
Assembly of the United Nations, seem too short a
period to judge its full significance. Yet, even the
opening words of the Declaration, recognizing
"the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable
rights of at), members of the human family"leave
no doubt as to its capital importance.
Those who today enjoy the fundamental rights
of equality and freedom tend to regard this prin-11_-__1_____1 11."'-mL__-----_. t. L-. J ! _--_. L 1...-.. 1. 1-. 1. 1...-
ciple as a perfectly natural thing. They are apt to forget both the
recent lessons of history and the examples of past centuries, during
which men fought to win recognition of this principle, and resisted
the tyranny and oppression responsible for individual and collective
crimes against humanity.
The modern conception of Human Rights is the fruit of a long
evolution in human customs, outlook and la\v which finally broke
down outmoded doctrines of absolutism and feudalism. Yet the idea
itself is by no means new. If we look back over the centuries, we find
it set forth in the texts of constitutions, expouaded in the speeches of
politicians, expressed in the'wisdom of Hindu and Chinese philosophy,
and recorded in the writings of religious leaders.
One of the greatest of ancient historians, Thucydides, has re-
corded for posterity the famous oration of Pericles, in which the atter
expounded the conception of Human Rights in the Athenian demo-
cracy :"Its administration favours the many, instead of the few ; that
is why it is called a democracy. The laws afford equal justice to all
in their private differences. Advancement falls to reputation for capa-
city, class considerations not being allowed to interfere with merit.
Poverty does not bar the way ; if a man is able to serve the tate, he
is not hindered by the obscurity of his condition."
In particular, Thucydides quotes an admirable maxim :"Freedom
is identical witch happiness, courage identical'with freedom :'
Such Human Rights principles'are expressed in Roman philo-
sophy which, despite the acceptance of slavery, can record Seneca's
Homo res sacra homini (Man is sacred to man). They are also to be
found in the spiritual'theories of Buddhism, the political wisdom of
the disciples of Confucius, the Islamic precept pf human brotherhood,
the ethics of Judaism, the equalitarianism of Christianity, quotations
from the writer of the Reformation and the 17th century, and in the
clarion call of the 18th century, with its humanitarian philosophy and
optimism which engendered a po'werful upsurge of international
progress and freedom.
Human Rights have been included in the charters and consti-
tutions which, in the various countries where they were promulgated,
won for men some of the rights that are now proclaimed in the Uni-
versal Declaration of 1948. Among the oldest of these documents is
the Magna Carta of 1215, but the ones which exerted the most wide-
spread influence were the French Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizen, promulgated in 1789, and America's Declaration of Inde-
pendance and Bills of Rights, which preceded it by several years.
Yet, none of these declarations was expressing new ideas. As
the historian Georges Jellinek has remarked,"The number of new
political ideas is very small ; most of them can be trac'ed back, at least
in essence, to the most ancient formulae of public law. This, however,
is not true of political institutions,'which are perpetually changing."
But both the French and American Revolution elaborated new
conceptions of public law, and left a profound mark on all political
changes which came in their train.'
In the American declarations, however, the rights defined were
not traditional and historical. Instead, they were abstract and rooted
in human psychology. Their wording was drawn from the voca-
bulary of the humanitarian philosophy of the age :"inalienable rights",
"pursuit of happiness","resistance to oppression."
Inspired by the doctrines of the Church, the theories of Locke, the
works of Rousseau, natural law and the Cohtrat Social, the American
Bills of Rights,'were, like the French Declaration, the product of the
intellectual climate of the 18th century, which was essentially inter-
national in character.
It is interesting to recall that the authors of the French Declaration
of the Rights of Man readily admitted that their text'was based on
the American models. The Archbishop of Bordeaux, Comte Jerome-
Marie Champion de Cice, declared in 1789 :
"It was fitting that it should be to our soil that this noble idea.
conceived in another hemisphere, should first be transplanted. We
contributed towards the events whereby North America'won her
freedom. America in her turn shows us the principles whereon to
base the preservation of our own."
Nevertheless, the French declaration of the Rights of Man and of
the Citizen cannot be regarded as a free translation of the American
ones, but an interpretation of them ; and it was this declaration drafted
in French-a universal language of the i8th century-that let loose
the humanitarian wave which swept across Europe, then to Latin-
America and finally around the world. Everywhere the French text
was imitated, consulted, adopted.
The Declaration of 1789 is not, however, a unique example of the
irresistible spread of humanitarian ideas. There was, for instance,
the Constitution of Cadiz, which, until 1830, was the prototype of
liberal constitutions in southern Europe. From then until the end of
the 19th century, the Belgian constitution of 1831 served as a model
and an example in Greece, Spain, Portugal, Naples, Rome, Piedmont,
Rumania, Serbia, Bulgaria and Egypt.
If, after the efforts of ancient days and the achievements of more
modern times, the struggles of the 19th and 20th centuries did not
bring new rights, they did at least usher in new hopes : protection of
the family and of children, equality of the sexes, the assurance of rest
and leisure, and a standard of living adequate to health and well-
being. Alongside the traditional freedoms has appeared the concep-
tion of economic and social rights, some of which have already become
realities.
But despite the humanitarian character of the many declarations,
charters and constitutions, and their broad framework which has made
possible their adoption without major modification in many countries,
they retain an undeniably national quality. In this they differ from
the Universal Declaration of 1948, which, for the first time, brought the
fight for Human Rights on an international basis.
The Universal Declaration applies to all human beings"without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property or other
status."It is not designed to protect any one individual or group, any
one nation or group of nations, but fixes a common standard of
achievement for all peoples.
The Universal Declaration, which is the result of two years of
laborious study and discussion, could hardly be described as a spon-
taneous event. It is expressive of our time, for it voices the revolt of
mankind's conscience against bal'bnl'ous acts committed during a world
war which brought suffering and oppression to many peoples.
Recognition of the difficulties encountered in reaching agreement
on the terms of the Declaration can only help to enhance its value. For
this was no document blithely adopted in a surge of blind enthusiasm,
but a charter, each of whose words was carefully weighed. To reach
agreement on matters involving material interests alone is often difficult
enough, yet how much more so when it is a question of principles !
A witty reference to such difficulties is made by Jacques Maritain
in his introduction to a Unesco collection of essays on Human Rights.
"It is related", he writes,"that at one of the meetings of a Unesco
National Commission,'where Human Rights were being discussed,
someone expressed astonishment that certain champions of violently
opposed ideologies had agreed on a list of those rights.'Yes,'they said,
'we agree about the rights, but on condition that no one asks us'why'.
That'why'is where the argument begins.'"
But, as Richard McKeon has pointed out in the same collection :
"The fundamental problem is not found in compiling a list of Human
Rights ; the declarations of Human Rights that have been prepared by
committees and groups who have undertaken a study of the problem
and the declarations that have been submitted to the Commission on
Human Rights are surprisingly similar.
"The differences are found rather in what is meant by these rights,
and these differences of meanings depend on divergent basic assump-
tions, which in turn lend plausibility to, and are justified by, contradic-
tory interpretations of the economic and social situation."
Those who, on the basis of some of the things happening in the
world today, attack the Universal Declaration, by declaring that it is
no more than a pious hope, commit a grave injustice and mistake. The
Declaration was never conceived as a code which would abrogate,
modify or replace the laws of each country. In its preamble, without
any ambiguity, It lays down standards which will be
applied once new measures have been adopted on a
national or international basis.
tonhnucd
on next page.
There was nothing surprising about this, for, as Joseph Barnave,
a member of the Constituent Assembly, had said :"The Declaration of
Rights must be simple and comprehensible to all ; it must become our
national catechism."
Just before the final text ways adopted,"a remarkable, almost
inconceivable, situation arose,"the historian Alphonse Aulard tells us.
"The'1, 200 deputies, who had been unable, while working indi-
vidualfy or in small groups, to arrive at any brief or clear formulae,
succeeded in the tumult of public discussion in elaborating a concise
and inspiring text.
"The Declaration of Rights was completed'within a single week
by dint of improvized oral amendments. It was as though the entire
nation, spontaneously imposing its will, was dictating to its repre-
sentatives the words of the Declaration."
It is not straying from the subject of Human Rights to recall that
a year later this Constituent Assembly promulgated the famous decree
which represents the first constitutional renunciation of aggressive
war."The French nation undertakes never to embark on any war
for conquest, and never to employ force against the freedom of any
people."
Underlying this was the conception of the"just war,"which was
taken up by the United Nations as the basis of collective security.

Page 4. NOVEMBER 19 S 2
THE ROAD
TO UNIVE RSA L
1
(Continued from pre, ious page)
In other words, it cannot make its full impact
until its principles have been embodied in a
covenant under which nations will undertake
formally to apply Human Rights, and after
arrangements have been made for the United
Nations to supervise and, if necessary, to
impose, the application of these rights.
This was emphasized by Professor Boris
Mirkine-Guetzevitch", when he wrote :"'It is
important not to underestimate the opposition,
caution and hostility which new principles of
freedom and Human Rights almost always
encounter. Human Rights cannot be imposed
all at once-years, sometimes several decades,
must elapse before the principles proclaimed
can be embodied in constitutional texts. Nor
does the mere fact that Human Rights have
been proclaimed and inscribed in constitutions
mean that they will automatically be observed."
In the four years which have passed since
the adoption of the 1948 Declaration, men have
still fought one another, and all mankind has
lived in the shadow of war, and the fear of
very real threats to freedom. Yet, while
admitting a decline of Human Rights, there is
certainly no reason for despair and apathy.
On the contrary, the moment to proclaim
fundamental freedoms with renewed vigour is
when they are most gravely threatened. It is
because these freedoms are denied to millions
of human beings that they must be defended
and extended.
The greatest enemy of Human Rights is
man himself. Those who live under a tyranny
can do no more than give vent to their despair,
while those who enjoy these rights are perhaps
over-inclined to take them for granted-like
someone who recently declared :"Human
Rights are so much a part and parcel of our
lives that we find it difficult to imagine that
they could not exist !"
Yet it is not because all men are not yet
ready to offer each other the hand of
friendship that no hands should be out-
stretched.
"In the midst of all our miseries and all
the injustices committed or suffered, we must
have faith in human nature,"Jean Jaures
wrote in his Address to Youth."He who has
lost the sense of grandeur and infinite poten-
tialities of mankind is self-condemned never
to understand his fellow men.
"Such faith is neither stupid nor super-
ficial. It is fully a'ware of all the vices,
crimes, errors, prejudices and egoisms-the
egoism of individuals, the egoism of castes,
the egoism of parties and the egoism of
classes, which hamper progress and frequently
turn the river of life into a muddy, troubled
torrent. And it is aware that the forces of
good, of wisdom and light and justice need the
help of time, and that the night of slavery and
ignorance cannot be dispersed by a sudden
flash of light, but only by a long series of
flickering dawns."
Unesco is working to end this"night of
slavery and ignorance."Its programme con-
stitutes in itself a roll-call of the fundamental
rights of man, and its work is aimed at their
realization.
Unesco's programme of fundamental
education aims to help the people of under-
developed countries to raise their standards
of living and to solve their economic and
social problems. It is also \working to bring
about the universal application of free and
compulsory primary education. It is fostering
the access of women to education, the freedom
of artists, the free flow of cultural material.
In fact, every aspect of Unesco's programme
is linked'with one or other of the rights pro-
claimed in the Universal Declaration.
It is Unesco's effort in favour of Human
Rights, in close co-operation with the other
Specialized Agencies of the United Nations,
that forms the theme of this issue of the
Courier.
THE RIGHT TO EDUCATION
I
The flags of many countries
flank the main entrance to
Unesco's Patzcuaro centre.
