' : OUR ; ER DECEMBER 1952. Page I 5
FOR THOSE WHO LIVE BY THE PEN
THROUGHOUT the centuries the history of writ-
ers as a class has been one of continuous
material difficulties. This may well have
been due to the tradition that the written word
was sacred and therefore not for sale ; to the
mass of the people the writer was a kind of priest
and as such was forbidden to exploit his priest-
hood for his own gain.
The normal work of the.'scribe"-the man
who could write-was to copy the sacred scrip-
tures and it was through such copyists that the
Persian Zendavesta, the Hindu Ramayana and
Mahabharata, the Torah and Talmud, the Bible
and Gospels and the Mohammedan Koran were
handed down to us. Moreover, as well as being
sacred, writing was thought to have definite
magical powers. To make a curse more effective
and surer to break the thread of the victim's
destiny, it was scratched with a pointed im-
plement-a stylus-on the waxed tablets on
which Romans wrote before parchment or papy-
rus came in. For the written word remains.
Even today when we speak of things we had felt
were bound to happen all along, we say they
were"written".
Writing was the privilege and responsibility of
a small caste and from the times of classical
Greece these men regarded themselves as the spi-
ritual guides of their people. Again, because the
written word is"imperishable", the law has been
"written"ever since the tablets of stone of the
10 Commandments on Sinai and the Twelve
Tables of early Roman law were produced and
promulgated to leave no excuse for ignorance of
the law. This promulgation was done by
formal public reading of the text. From the
time the spread of printing made newspapers
possible, new laws have been
published in the daily press or
official gazettes.
With the crushing weight of
such traditions pressing down on
it, the writers'trade has ever
been thankless, hard and with
more than its share of perils and
even disaster : it is worth
remembering that both calamity
and the calamus (1), or reed
pen, which for centuries was the
typical tool of the writer, are
connected in philology and also
in mythology. Fame-if he
won it-was the greatest reward
a writer could hope for : what he
got rather more commonly was
prison or exile and the gallows or
the stake if he fell into hetero-
doxy or heresy. But in the story
of man's fight for freedom, it is
the writers, nevertheless, who
hold the place of honour as the
awakeners, in every age, of the
spirit of resistance to tyranny.
The Frenah Revolution, for
example, was the work of the
Encyclopaedists.
Books themselves have always
been eagerly sought and, both
before and after the invention of
printing, works by certain philo-
sophers, mathematicians, astro-
nomers and historians, in print
or manuscript, have sometimes
fetched fabulous sums. However,
until the 19th century, the maker
of the books-the writer-was
not muc. h better placed than a
mediaeval serf bound to the land
who farmed his lord's acres.
dwelt there at his lord's pleasure
to keep other nobles out, and
who had to drop everything to
follow his master to the wars, at
the peril of his life, but, in the
serf's case, on foot and un-
armoured.
Save in the East and in the
Islamic sphere, Eastern and
Western, where there was gene-
rous patronage of writers, such
patronage as existed was confin-
ed to the artists who adorned the
palaces of the rich and there
was. not a copper to spare for the long and toil-
some work of the writers whose loving care
created the intellectual heritage of mankind
and built the steps for civilization to climb
higher.
Don Quixote achieved worldwide fame so
quickly that in its author's lifetime it had been
translated into the tongues of all the civilized
peoples of his day. Yet Cervantes lived and died
in poverty and had to serve at various times as
a soldier and a tax-collector to keep body and soul
together. Another professional soldier, and an
exile from Lisbon, was Camoens, the greatest Por-
tuguese poet of all time, who sang his country's
glories in the Lusiads : he too died in the
blackest poverty. Shakespeare did make some
money during his life but it was as a producer and
actor and not as the author of the immortal
plays.
For five and twenty centuries authorship was
so exclusively a labour of love that it could only
be indulged in by those who by nature were not
afraid of sacrifices or by the privileged who wrote
byjfoMde BEN/TO
in their leisure time, like Sir Francis Bacon.
For one Erasmus or Voltaire, favoured by a sover-
eign and with some sort of pension from him,
there is an unnumbered multitude of writers of
works of science, literature and philosophy who
paid for the boldness of their thought with their
hides or lives. Let us not forget Galileo, Servet or
Pico de la Mirandola.
There was yet another hardship under which
the professional writer laboured. Strictly speaking
he did not"make"actual books ; he only wrote
them and the printer did the manufacturing.
The finished article was sold, not by the author,
but by a bookseller and as he was risking his
money in his business he could get exclusive sales
or printing rights in the merchandise he handled.
However while the actual book was"merchand-
ise"to the seller and even the buyer, what was
in the book was never counted as the merchandise
or saleable property of the author. So freedom
was actually easier for the villein to win than
independence for the author, since the earth and
its fruits are tangible things and as such can be
acquired as property, which every villein aimed
to have and some actually achieved, so as to
become a free peasant.
Before they could accept the notion that ideas
could be property, lawyers had to break free of
the rigid definitions of the Roman law which held
that only material things like land or cattle or
goods could be owned ; even though writing them
down did in one sense give them a physical shape,
ideas were not material things in the Roman
sense. So the process was a long one and for
(1) The calamus was a thin reed used by the people of
old for writing on papYl'Us or parchment. It was cut and
shaped in till'same l1 : ay as the quill} len later on and wasused with vary thic/ ; ink. In the pictorial symbolism of
mythology, Calamity is shown as a mourning wotan veiledin blacl, and leaning on a calamus, symbol of the insecurity
of human fortune.
thousands of years authors took'it for granted
that writing-setting forth their ideas-might
bring them fame or honours or shame, but never
a livelihood. The result was to deprive mankind
of the contributions of many who could not face
the sacrifices which authorship demanded-
though undoubtedly the loss in quantity was offset
by the quality of those who obeyed the imperious
need to give their vision of the truth without
balking at the complications which might follow.
The fact was that writers had to count on some
other profession for a living-sometimes teach-
ing, like the numerous writers from the univer-
sities, and at other times a trade. For instance
Spinoza earned his bread as a spectacle-maker, so
as to be able to produce the great philosophical
work which is the origin of many of the human
rights now recognized by law. It was not until
the daily press came into being, and with it the
serial as a bait for readers, that there was any
possibility of getting a living by the pen. The
first man to dare to describe himself simply as
an author and to make it his sole profession was
Balzac. His output was prodigious and he earned
a good living ; indeed though he tried several
times to change to another profession, each time
he was driven back to writing by the failure of
his latest industrial or financial scheme. It was
he who first had the idea of convening a meeting
of the other serial writers and men of letters of
Paris to found the first Authors'Society to protect
the interests of those who had to live by their
pens. However, as often happens, the awakening
of the corporate spirit of authors was a cumula-
tive process and not the result of explicit recog-
nition of their right to enjoy the fruit of their
work.
In 1709, under Queen Anne, an Act was promul-
gated in England"for the encouragement of
learning, by vesting copies of printed books in
the authors or purchasers of such copies, during
times therein mentioned". Ten of the 13 American
States which issued laws on copyright between
1783 and 1786 took the view that it was a natural
right and one of them went so far as to speak
of there being"no property more peculiarly a
man's own than that which is produced by the
Jabour of his mind". However in all these laws-
as later in the Federal Constitution of the United
States-the concessions were treated merely as
a means of assisting the progress of science and
the useful arts and the unfortunate authors had
to continue the fight, with the profit from their
works in most cases going to the publishers and
booksellers. In France, Beaumarchais concerned
himself with the protection of the rights of play-
wrights and as a result of his efforts the first laws
on performance and publication rights were pro-
mulgated in 1791 and 1793 respectively.
As far as copyright and its accompanying finan-
cial benefits were concerned, the second half of
the 19th century was a real spring-time. In every
country there was a spate of domestic legislation
on copyright, while international dealings in
books and the question of their translation into
other languages raised new problems. The first
attempt to tackle the latter was
in the Berne International Con-
vention of 1886, later amended
at Berlin in 1920, at Rome in 1928,
and at Brussels in 1948. In the
Americas a second international
system took shape under the
terms of the Montevideo Treaty
of 1889 subsequently revised at
the Pan American Conferences in
Mexico, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos
Aires and Havana and now re-
classed as the Washington Inter-
American Convention on the
rights of the author in literary,
scientific and artistic works.
This dates from June 1946.
However, the Berne Convention
does not cover all the non-Ame-
rican, nor the Washington Con-
vention all the American, States,
while the need to protect dif-
ferent interests in the two areas
has led to clashes of principle
between the two conventions on
certain points. When principles
are in convict, the victory of one
implies the utter defeat of the
other and hence the whole ques-
tion of securing effective world-
wide protection of the rights of
authors of works of the mind had
reached an impasse from which
it was hard to see the way out.
In 1947 at the Second General
Conference of Unesco in Mexico,
it was decided that the drafting
of a Universal Convention to
proffer a solution to the main
difficulties arising over interna-
tional copyright was desirable.
After five years'work, collection
of materials, meetings of experts
and struggles with the obstacles
which inevitably arose, the re-
presentatives of 36 nations from
every continent last September
formally signed the first Univer-
sal Copyright Convention. The
governing principle of the new
Convention is that the same pro-
tection shall be given by each
signatory country to foreign works
as to those by its own nationals ;
it also enormously simplifies the
formalities required for the en-
forcement of copyright and includes wise and
equitable provisions on translation.
This new world-wide Convention embodies
clauses specifying that it shall not in any way
affect the provisions of the Berne Convention or
abrogate multi-lateral and bilateral conventions
which may be in force between two or more Ame-
rican Republics, or two or more contracting
States ; that no reservations shall be permitted
- a most important point, since more than one
convention has foundered on accepting reser-
vations about its implementation-and that
Unesco itself, which prepared the way for the
Convention, shall be the body acting as Secre-
tariat of the Intergovernmental Commission for
the supervision of its proper application and for
the reception of instruments of ratification and
denunciation.
Annexed to the text of the Universal Conven-
tion are three additional protocols : the first on
the application of the Convention to the works
of stateless persons and refugees ; the second on
its application tithe publications of certain
international organizations ; and the third on the
means of determining the effective date of instru-
ments of ratification, acceptance or accession.
When the text was signed, in English, Spanish
and French in Geneva, one of the delegates said :"'Justice has won a fresh victory".
----
C. 0./. Photo
