GROWING ISOLATION IN SCIENCE
tS CALLED ALARM) NG
by Dr Bart J. Bok,
Harvard University
AMERICAN scientists and engineers who parti-cipated in the Third National Un sco Conference
at Hunter College see in such meetings a tre-
mendous potential in bridging the gulfs and prejudices
between scientific disciplines which have seriously
retarded the advance of knowledge.
Working on all levels of the conference, scientists
received new insight of the work of fellow Americans
in the field of international affairs and set their own
sights on specific ways in which pure and applied
science can contribute to the construction of a stable
peace. Because the results of scientific study are of
immediate, potential value to all nations, it was
stressed that the objectives of Unesco cannot be
achieved without encouraging and promoting both
basic and applied science.
Calling attention to the fact that the world's
reserves of essential metals would be exhausted
within 25 years, if the per capita use of metals in
the rest of the world equalled that in the U. S., the
working group called for the formation of a research
group to consider the minerai resources problem on
a world basis as n essential element in the United
Nations programme of raising world living standards.
Interwoven into the discussions was the recognition
that free exchange of information and facilitation of
travel are both essential to scientific progress and
human welfare and that nationalism in science leads
to international misunderstanding and impedes the
promotion of world peace. The delegates were very
outspoken against unnecessary and undesirable
restrictions on exchange of information and travel of
scientists which now exist in certain countries, includ-
ing our own. They viewed with alarm the increasing
scientific isolation of the U. S.
The U. S. National Commission was urged to give
added impetus to the scientific and technological
programme of Unesco and it was urged that there be
no reduction in funds now allotted to technical
assistance and the field science co-operation offices,
grants in aid, international research laboratories and
documentation and scientific abstracting.
Recognizing that a better balance should be
achieved by Unesco in its support of basic and applied
sciences, the delegates recommended that assistance
to medical and engineering sciences be brought up to
the level of support for the more basic sciences and
that attention be given to the promotion of inter-
national co-operation in the agricultural sciences, if
possible in co-operation with FAO. The conviction
was expressed that the services of the engineering
profession have not adequately been utilized by Unesco
and a survey of proposals regarding closer co-operation
between Unesco and the world-wide engineering
profession, prepared by the work group of the
Engineers'Joint Council, was transmitted to the
National Commission. Included were suggestions
regarding the development of engineering education
in foreign countries and the s2lection of qualified
students for education in the engineering sciences in
the U. S.
