Page 4. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER) 952
25OOO MILES
THROUGH
SOUTH-VAST
ASIA
(4)
A report by
Ritchie CALDER
U. N. Photographs
by Eric Schwab
UNESCO COUF
In Burma, an ever-increasing number
of women and young girls are volun-
teering to train as doctors, nurses,
social workers and midwives thanks
to the energetic efforts of Daw Khin
Kyi, widow of one of the country's
national heroes, who directs Burma's
Mother and Child Welfare Depart-
ment. Trained women are badly
needed in the hospitals and dispen-
saries of which there are still too few
(upper photos). Their skill and devo-
tion are just as urgently required by
families crowded into single rooms
(photo below). In this room live six
people-including a T. B. sufferer.
WOMEN HAVE
"NO'NO !"protested Da'w Khin Kyi,
when a fulsome compatriot des-
cribed her as the Little Mother of
the Country. And she added :
"Just call me Little Sister".
Little Sister of her Country is the widow of
Aung San, the statesman who negotiated the
treaty with Britain which gave Burma its inde-
pendence. He was later assassinated by polit-
ical rivals in the government buildings where
Daw Khin Kyi now'works.
As the widow of a national hero, she would
have been honoured in Burma-but she has
won a place of her own as well. She does not
call herself Mrs. Aung San, but, in this country
of emancipated women, retains her maiden
name (pronounced Dawkinchee), and works for
her living as the Director of the Mother and
Child Welfare Department.
I had been warned of the charm of Daw
Khin Kyi-"warned"because her flashing
smile and disarming chuckle is calculated to
win any argument.
That is why I found myself being eaten alive
by nocturnal insects as I sat in a tropical garden
and watched a revue of which I did not under-
stand one word. It was no use pleading that
we had been out since before dawn, labouring
in the sweltering heat, without respite or a
meal. Even the fact that it had been all in the
interests of Daw Khin Kyi's mothers and chil-
dren was no excuse. She just smiled...
It was graduation day for her student nurses.
They had qualified for their arduous assign-
ment of going out into the country, to the vil-
lages of the Irrawaddy delta and up into the
hill states. And she was going to see that they
enjoyed themselves. She had been a nurse
herself once. (It was while nursing Aung San,
then leader of the Burmese resistance army,
that their romance started.) So she was stag-
ing a party for them. And they were staging
a party for her.

COURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 5
ALWAYS BEEN MEN'S EQUALS IN BURMA
These 12 girls were Daw Khin Kyi's pride
and joy. They were girls whom she had
selected from the countryside and had brought
to Rangoon to train (because city-bred girls
would not take very well to the country life for
which the nurses were needed). And they had
qualified with honours.
Their idea of a celebration was to put on a
play or a series of sketches with songs and
dancing, illustrating a student nurse's life and
why they were going to be nurses (with a lot of
slapstick to liven the argument).
The stout figure under the banyan tree was
U Bat Sein, Permanent Secretary of the Minis-
tries of Health and Education, laughing
uproariously and applauding vigorously.
"This,"he said,"is part of the answer to our
problem of recruiting nurses. Let's send this
show round the countryside, and the people
will love it, and the girls will rush to join..."
Daw Khin Kyi has other methods as well.
She gets the wives of cabinet ministers to
appear at women's meetings. Most of them
have been nurses, doctors, or professional
women. And the idea is that if a girl takes up
nursing, she may get a good match.
"But,"I warned her,"if you bring girls into
the nursing profession just as a prelude to get-
ting married, isn't your training going to be
wasted ?"
She smiled pityingly at this male logic.
"No training of women is ever wasted in our
country,"she said. ("wen a woman sets up a
home she does not cast away her experience.
Even if she makes a modest match, the girl-
nurse is always the'good neighbour'. Her
skill is a permanent part of the community.
And when a woman marries she does not give
up her career. There are more women than
men doctors in Burma. Our leading lawyer is
a woman..."
And she quoted a whole list, pointing out,
too, that \women were responsible for organiz-
ing and running most of the social institutions
in the country.
That is what makes Burma exceptional in
South-East Asia. Women from time imme-
morial have had equality with men. At one
time there was probably polyandry (the form
of polygamy in which the woman has several
husbands). Marriage is an equal contract, civil
and not religious. Divorce is by consent. All
property is shared equally between husbands
and wives. Most of the trading is done by
women and, in the case of market-traders, the
housekeeping is often done by the husband.
Burma also claims to be exceptional in its
high proportion of literacy. Boys and girls, in
the Buddhist tradition, have attended the temple
schools. Now these schools are run by lay
teachers (another secular function which the
priests have lost), but visiting educationists and
quite a number of Burmese expresses some
misgivings about what"literacy"amounts to.
The content of education leaves a lot to be
desired.
One of the most significant developments in
independent Burma is the Burmese Translation
Society, which is setting out to put worthwhile
literature from every language into Burmese.
The government supports the Society and has
helped it to send missions to other parts of the
world to get help for this enlightened enter-
prise.
Another new development is mass education.
Aung Min, Secretary of the Mass Education
Council, told me how, in spite of insurrection
in the countryside, Government trained mass
education organizers spread through the vil-
lages.
"Our activities", he said,"are entirely confin-
ed to rural areas. We choose a village as the
centre of a district-even in the Hill States---
and there are now 105 of these village centres.
"We select men who can provide leadership,
and give them six months'training. Main
emphasis is on health, then agriculture, home
crafts and rural industries, co-operatives, tech-
niques and adult education. They come from
the villages and go back to the villages.
"The organizer's house becomes the model
home in the village, an example to others to
improve their cleanliness and sanitation. He
lives the lives of the villagers, takes a part in
their work problems, their education problems
and their health problems. lIe leads the chil-
dren in games, and adults into the anti-illiteracy
campaign.
"Priests play a big part in this movement.
They urge the people in their areas to start the
community centres and to get a mass education
urganizer, and many of the centres are in the
monasteries, just as the schools are."
Unesco sent Dr. Tisinger and Prof. Her-
nandez, at the request of the Government, to
help with the educational problems of Burma.
One of the biggest problems is training. There
are 13, 000 teachers available in the country, but
45, 000 are needed-a deficiency of 32, 000.
Apart from filling that gap, the output of
existing teachers'training colleges are putting
out only a fifth of the replacements required.
Plans for new training schools and new edu-
cational improvements in line with the
Unesco recommendations are now in process
for both normal and Fundamental Education.
The task of equipping a new country with
staff for Government administration, education,
health services, new industries, improved agri-
culture, financial and economic services. is
enormous. The Burmese Government has
recognized that in its very extensive and extra-
ordinarily varied requests for technical assis-
tance from U. N.
One of the advantages which Burma has is
the full participation of the women. When
women are on the side of change, everything
is possible.
