UNESIER MAYt952. Page) !
MEN
AGAINST
WANT
THE'GNOMES'ARE MOVtNG
A MOUNTAIN WITH BARE HANDS
JOGJAKARTA, CENTRAL JAVA.
LIKE gnomes in some weird fairy tale,copper-red bodies dug and delved
in the squelching mud at the bot-
tom of the pit or scurried like ants up
the swaying bamboo ladder, as long as
a fire-escape. The peasants of the hills
above the Progo River were constructing
a canal.
It was an incredible sight which I watch-
ed under the blistering sun until my
eyes glazed and my muscles ached in
sympathy with the back-breaking efforts
of the toilers. It was like stepping out
of the 20th century back into the remote
ages when the pyramids of Egypt were
built. In this way, with such primitive
tools, the Babylonian slaves must have
cut the Hillah Canal which diverted the
Euphrates. With such freaks of muscular
effort, the fabulous Hindu temple of Bo-
robadour must have been built.
That is no exaggeration. The Javanese
peasants are cutting a fifty mile long
canal with nothing but their own muscles,
pickaxes, mattocks and chisels. The only
contribution of the machine-age is a
couple of oil-pumps, no bigger than motor-
car engines, to check the seepage through
the dirt dam holding back the swirling
waters of the Progo, which will presently
flow through the canal. For the rest it
is just flesh and blood and primitive iron.
When they encounter rocks they do not
use dynamite because they have not got
it and because manpower is still cheaper
than explosives. So they use hammers
and chisels and wedges and chip the rock
into pieces small enough for the bearers
to carry away in their baskets. I saw a
rock two cubic yards in size being put
up to contract. The foreman put a price
of 75 roepias ($10) on its removal.
The bidder then started immediately
on a chiselling job which would take him
a week. Work which a mechanical shovel,
or a bulldozer and a few sticks of dyna-
mite could accomplish in a few days takes
hundreds of peasants months of strenuous
effort. In a year, they advanced two
miles.
But these were not Babylonian slaves.
They were free farmers working for a
greater freedom on an enterprise they
themselves had started. They wanted rice
and this is the hard way to get it. Up
here in the mountains, about 30 miles
from Jogjakarta, which was the first capi-
tal of the Indonesian Republic, life is
even harder than in the plains. Down
below there is water-rice in those impres-
sive Javanese terraces, contoured like the
seats of an arena. Up here there are
coconuts and cassava.
Rice needs water, and the Progo River
by-passes their hill-lands. Further down
the river, a Dutch plantation owner had
dammed the river and drawn off water for
his hill-station. And tantalizingly across
the river are the kind of wet. rice fields
the peasants on this side would like to
copy.
So the hill dwellers got together and
decided to cut this canal just to meet
their own local needs by bringing water
into the hills. Then the Government
took a hand. It could not give the pea-
sants equipment but it could give them
advice and a master plan, by which the
hill villagers were persuaded to make
their local irrigation scheme part of a
bigger scheme which will make the Progo
water 25, 000 acres over a wide area. Arid
so it will be. The villagers in each area,
working co-operatively, provide volun-
teers for the work, each village sending
its complement, as the work progresses
into its area. The Government has pro-
vided some permanent labour but only a
fraction. It is still primarily the peasants'
own efforts which matter.
UN Technical Assistance experts in
Indonesia had urged us to see this remark-
able undertaking, not because the United
Nations has any direct connexion with it,
but because of its significance.
The United Nations, even if asked,
which it has not been, could not mate-
rially help a project of this kind. Tech-
nical Assistance is confined to advice and
such limited material as is needed to
demonstrate that advice ; it does not
supply capital equipment. Nor can the
Government, in this case, afford to do so.
Even if it could supply the dynamite it
would have to provide the trained civil
engineers as well. So all it can do is to
give such help as it can spare and its
blessing to the peasants'efforts.
But the significance is what happens
when a community is relieved of the
disabling and discouraging burden of
mass disease, such as yaws, and with the
incentive of new-found freedom is urged
on to produce the better food it needs,
to make use of experience in new methods
of cultivation, and, at the same time, to
create the instruments of its improved
well-being, like education and the anti-
illiteracy campaigns.
The Government is giving every assis-
tance and encouragement to new move-
ments for co-operatives-credit co-ope-
ratives to find the means and producer
and marketing co-operatives to procure
supplies and sell the produce.
Just what that can mean can be mea-
sured by the age-old abuse of peasant
labour. To get seed, the peasant had to
borrow from the Chinese money-lenders.
If he borrowed a hundred roepias, he
would repay at the usurous rate of
15 roepias a month-and still be owing
the original borrowing at the end of the
year. But it did not stop there. When
the seeds had sprouted in the nursery
patch he and all his family would labour
from dawn till dark, laboriously trans-
planting it seedling by seedling. Then
when the crop was approaching ripening
in the wet fields, he would drain them.
At this point, the money-lender who
would also be the agent for the rice
merchants would come along again. He
would make an offer for the green rice,
which would be half what the harvested
rice would fetch. And since the farmer,
to meet his interest rate and feed his
family, would be in desperate need of
money, he would have to accept the offer.
Then he would have to husband and
harvest the crop for the benefit of the
money-lender.
Credit co-operatives will help him
there. The Government can help him
with improved seeds, from special breed.
ing stations and with experts on proper
management and on the way co-operatives
should be run. It has started rural
extension courses and schemes for sup-
plying cattle as a way of encouraging
farmers to improve and extend their
stocks.
All this marches alongside the other
activities-the trai'iing of social workers,
of health officers for the villages, cam-
paigns to improve nutrition and remove
disease, schools (two and sometimes three
relays of pupils a day) and adult edu-
cation.
This is new life in an old country. The
Javanese are amongst the most careful
farmers in the world. They understood
contour farming long before the words got
into textbooks. They built up these
earthworks of mud, plastered by hand.
In their flooded fields they developed
inland fisheries, the simultaneous growing
of fish and rice. Because of the value
of this in supplying badly needed protein
for peasants in other parts of the world,
the Food and Agriculture Organization
has enabled students from as far away
as the Caribbean to go to Java. And the
"professors"have been the illiterate
peasants, rendering Technical Assistance
to other countries out of age-old expe-
rience of their own.
So the"gnomes"of the Progo canal
are symbolic. They are cutting their way
into the twentieth century and, to do it,
are moving mountains with their bare
hands..
The Javanese peasants are building a 50-mile long canal
with nothing but their own muscles, pickaxes, mattocks
and chisels. When they encounter rocks they use no
dynamite, because manpower is cheaper than explosives.
Copper-red bodies scurried like ants up the swaying
bamboo ladder as long as a fire-escape. It was like
stepping back into the era when Egypt's Pyramids were
built. Only modern contribution was two oil pumps.
No load is too heavy for this Javanese peasant woman atBorobodour, Central Java. An Indonesian bird-cage vendor is on his way to the market on the island of Java.
