UNESCO COURIER-Page 12 MARCH 1952
THE INTERDEPENDENCE
OR CIVILIZATION
by Professor hands KOHN
INDIVIDUALS grow and develop, spiritually and morally,by contact. The same holds true of nations and
civilizations. In the primitive stage peoples live as
strictly separated entities. They jealously guard their
"own"civilization, their"original"traditions, protecting
them from"alien"influences. But with the progress of
history barriers give way to a growing cross-fertilization
of civilizations ; meeting the challenge of other cultures
they diversify their own and liberate it from limiting
shackles by assimilating and adapting outside influences,
often in a complex give-and-take process. The more in
the open society grows, the further it advances towards
unity of mankind.
Buddhism in its vitality spread its message to China
and Tibet, to Japan and Thailand, to Ceylon and Bali,
everywhere vivifying and transforming the native civiliza-
tions and permeating them with the same attitudes.
Even more penetrating was the spread of Greek
civilization after Alexander the Great, who in his brief
career was inspired by the hope of uniting the peoples
of the earth in a new peaceful order based upon the
community of civilization. He bade Greeks and barba-
rians, as Plutarch wrote,"to consider as their fatherland
the whole inhabited earth, and as akin to them all good
men."The Stoics developed this attitude into a
philosophy, and the Romans made the spread of a
uniform civilization throughout the then-known world
possible. This civilization was no longer Greek ; it had
absorbed Oriental and Roman elements, with a new
emphasis upon humanitas, the human quality in every
man and the essential oneness of mankind. This cross-
fertilization of civilizations made the spread of
Christianity, and later of Islam, possible. The latter,
originally the creed of desert Arabs, became a World
factor by assimilating Greek and Persian civilizations.
THE flowering of Christianity in the High MiddleAges, with its universities, poetry and chivalry, was
an outgrowth of its closer contacts with the world
of Islam. Arab philosophy transmitted to the West the
wisdom of Greece ; the court of Frederick II in Sicily,
who admired Mohammedan civilization for the greater
freedom of its intellectual atmosphere, showed the first
symptoms of modern government ; the Crusaders brought
home from the Levant sometimes a deep respect for the
wealth and form of the alien civilization which they found
there. It was this very recognition of the interdependence
of civilization and the willingness to become open to the
influence of alien cultures which made the great advance
of the West possible. It was the increasing withdrawal
from open contact and intercourse which weakened Islam
and Eastern Christianity. Around the year 1000 the
leadership had been theirs, by 1500 it had definitely
shifted to the West.
In the following five hundred years this leadership
became more pronounced by the growing eagerness to
explore other civilizations, to become enriched by this
contact, and to visualize the world more and more as an
open society in which the intercourse of ideas and the
flow of goods should be untrammelled and continuous.
It began with the fifteenth century, when Western
scholars eagerly learned from the Greeks who had left
Constantinople after its fall to the Turks ; it found a
climax in the eighteenth century, when Far Eastern
wisdom and art was joyfully and respectfully received in
the West, and its intellectuals turned to the newly
discovered"primitive"civilizations for inspiration. Nor
did Western civilization tend to dissociate into closed
entities proud of their.'originality."Educated men
found their cultural fulfilment in Latin or French, and
scholars and diplomats could meet in understanding
without the help of translators. The great achievement
of the West, the recognition of individual liberty and
free inquiry, was due to the interplay and inter-
dependence of the Low Countries-where Grotius,
Descartes and Locke wrote, and where Pierre Bayle
launched in 1684 his Nouvelles de fa République des
Lettres-and England, with its Puritan and Glorious
revolutions, of the Anglo-Americans in the virgin lands
across the Atlantic, and of France, where the English
concepts of the rights of the individual and the
limitations of government were transformed into a
universal message for every man and citizen.
Germany's greatest writer, Goethe, stressed always this
interdependence of civilization. He acknowledged his
deep indebtedness to"alien"cultures which to him were
part of the one great patrimony ; he had hardly any
sympathy for, or interest in, the German struggle of his
time for"liberation"from the French"invader."In
his old age he expressed his admiration for French
culture, and he created the term Weltliteratur, world
literature, as a meeting ground for the good in all civili-
zations and the nursery for the writers in all tongues.
He did not confine himself to the West, though in
many ways he was one of the representative men of
Western civilization ; his most mature poems were
influenced by his reading of translations from Persian
and Arabic authors and especially the West-Eastern
Divan, where these celebrated lines can be found :
Gottes ist der Orient ! God's own is the Orient !
Gottes ist der Okzident ! God's own) is the Occident !
Nord-und südl/ches Gefande, Northern and southern lands,
Ruht im Frieden selner Rest peacefully in His hands.
[Hande.
The other great Germans of his time, Kant and
Beethoven, Lessing and Schiller, were equally devoid of
any national exclusiveness. But only a few years later
a new emphasis was placed on the"originality"and
uniqueness of national civilizations, on the differences of
cultures ; the more distinct culture became faithful to its
.'own"origins and past and unaffected by"alien"
influences, the more it was thought to be creative. This
cultural self-sufficiency was also applied to the political
field in the stress of undiminished national sovereignty,
and to economic relations, in which national frontiers
became ever mounting barriers. In his Der geschlossene
Handelsstaat, the German philosopher J. G. Fichte
suggested the creation of an ideal society in complete
isolation from the rest of the world so that, by as little
contact as possible with foreigners, it might develop its
national character to the highest degree. While it would
close its frontiers to all commercial exchange with
foreign lands-thus establishing its own state as a
great common work house guaranteeing work to every
citizen-he at least exempted scholarship from this
extreme isolationism. Whatever belongs to the citizen,
The Concept of Man and the Philosophy of Educationin East and West. This was the theme of an inter-
national symposium attended by philosophers, human-
ists. and educators in New Delhi recently. The sympo-
sium, held by Unesco and the Indian Government, studied
this question for one week. Divergencies, of course, arose
but mainly it was found that they did not stem from funda-
mental differences in attitude between the East and West.
The symposium reached general agreement on a number
of basic ideas. Among these we note the following : 1) The
difference between East and West has been over-emphasized
in popular thought. 2) The East is by no means synonymous
with India. 3) Certain differences due to geography, climate
and similar factors must always remain and cannot be chang-
ed. 4) Even so, the typical attitudes of Eastern and Western
man are products of evolution and could be modified, with
time, by cultural contacts. 5) Such contacts are now possible
on a scale unknown before and must be promoted by every
means available. 6) Wars and world conflicts have not
arisen from differences of civilization such as are repres-
ented by East and West, but between the uncivilized and
fanatical minoritieswithinasingle civilization. It is to elimin-
ate such uncivilized minorities by means of education
that East and West might co-operate. 7) The teaching of
science should be more closely related with philosophy
teaching so that scientific work can go hand in hand with
'., Qgnition of its impact on man and society. The inter-
:'_.. Jence of all civilizations-a fact strongly borne out
i the symposium-is discussed by Dr. Hans Kohn, Pro-
fessor of History at the College of the City of New York,
in the stimulating article published on this page.
he wrote, is under the control of the state, but
scholarship belongs to man and not to a citizen. In
the twentieth century this distinction was given up in
some cases of proclaimed self-sufnciency.
The nineteenth century, however, took on the whole
a different course. Society became more and more an
open market place of ideas and goods. Cobden and
Bright spread fervently the gospel of free trade, not
only as an economic doctrine but as a means to build the
interdependence of mankind in peaceful dependence :
"In place of the old local and national institution and
self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction,
universal interdependence of all nations. And as in
material, so also in intellectual production. The intellec-
tual creations of individual nations become common
property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness
become more and more impossible, and from the
numerous national and local literatures there arises a
world literature."
This fertilization by interdependence enriched the
civilizations which tore down the walls separating them.
Peter the Great broke a first window in the wall which
Orthodox Russia had erected in an attempt to isolate
herself from Europe. A century later, a more open
intercourse between the two civilizations slowly began
to emerge, though it continued to be hampered by
prohibitive passport regulations and the fear of contact
predominant in the reign of Nicholas I. But even this
incipient recognition of interdependence bestowed upon
both civilizations a new spiritual energy and broadened
their hozirons to mutual benefit ; the Russian educated
classes began, under European influence, to strive for
liberty under law after the Western model and to fight
the traditional police state autocracy. Europe, on the
other hand, drew a new inspiration from the human
warmth and the deep searchings of the Russian literature,
from Gogol to Dostoevski, from Tolstoi to Chekhov.
CULTURAL inlercourse was hampered in precedingcenturies by distances and the scarcity of means of
communication. All this has changed rapidly
during the last hundred years. Ever new geographic
discoveries and technical inventions have made the globe
one world, thus realizing in space what has long been
recognized by religion and science, the existence of one
mankind. This geographic and biological unity of a
common earth and a common blood finds its spiritual
fulfilment, however, in a plurality and diversity of
civilizations. Each of them has its specific contribution
to make, and complements the others. None of them
exhausts the spiritual potentialities of man. In the inter-
course and interdependence they find the stimulating
challenges preserving them from ossification and
arousing them to the search for new responses to ever-
renewed questions and conquests. Western civilization,
with its emphasis on individual liberty and free inquiry,
would have been much poorer without the recent meeting
with the ascetic morality of Gandhi and the humanistic
wisdom of Rabindranath Tagore, both the fruit of
ancient India's contact with the West. The Mediterranean,
once the centre from which Western civilization radiated,
has witnessed recently at its Western and Eastern
extremities efforts at re-invigoration of the civilizations
of Spain and of Islam, which in the past have played
their great role. All signs portend that an African
civilization arising out of a strong virgin soil under the
fertilization of older civilizations will soon take its place
among these which in clearly recognized and desired
interdependence make their contributions to an open
society based upon freedom and diversity. Such a
society pre-supposes cooperation in the spirit of tolerance.
No civilization must think itself in exclusive possession
of the true way and endowed with an infallible insight
into the course of human history.
Russia's contact with Europe produced suddenly and
almost without precedent a literature of the first
magnitude : its influence radiated back to Europe, and in
its turn fertilized the older literatures.
However, the fact that the interdependence of
civilization releases unprecedented creative energies was
not easily conceded. Many denied it, and Peter the
Great's work formed in the nineteenth century the
subject of much bitter controversy in Russia. An
influential group of Russian patriots, often called the
Slavophiles, regarded his opening-up of intercourse with
Europe as a misfortune for Russia ; it was believed to
have hindered or destroyed a pure indigenous cultural
and spiritual development with exclusive roots in the
peculiar traditions of Russian character and history. The
Slavophiles were convinced that the flowering of Russian
culture demanded an isolation from contact with alien
elements-Russian culture in itself, and only in itself,
contained the seeds for world leadership and world sal-
vation. This exclusive nationalism turned against
Europe and against Slavdom's Western neighbours, the
Germans. Yet even this Slavophilism with all its claims
to self-sufficiency was not an indigenous Russian growth ;
it had developed under the influence of Geiman romantic
thought by simply transferring the anti-cosmopolitanism
and anti-intellectualism of German folk theories to the
Slavs as the bearers of the true spirit. Thus even the
most"independent"movements bear witness to the
interdependence of civilization.
It has not always been clearly seen that the very
insistence upon indigenous development and its unique
and exclusive originality has been the product of cultural
contact and of an erroneous interpretation of the past.
Oriental nationalists have often rejected Western
civilization as an expression of crude materialism
contrasting it with their pure indigenous spiritualism ; in
this attitude they were influenced by Ruskin and other
European critics of certain aspects of Western civilization.
The degree to which cultural isolationism weakens and
destroys a civilization that refuses to recognize cultural
interdependence in a community of nations, can be seen
from the attitude of the Chinese at the beginning of the
nineteenth century. They were then convinced that they
alone had the correct doctrine and knew the true way,
that all others had to learn from them, while they could
gain nothing from alien guidance or influence. From
the towering height of their uncritical self-confidence,
which placed them in the very centre of all civilized
life, they built a wall of isolation around themselves and
refused intercourse with other civilizations on a footing
of equality. As a result Chinese civilization, in spite of
its venerable antiquity and its unsurpassed records of
beauty of form and serenity of wisdom, became
proverbial abroad as the model of fossil pedantry. Only
more recently the intercourse with other civilizations
eagerly sought by the educated youth, re-invigorated the
Chinese civilization. A similar process in other Oriental
countries, from Turkey to the Philippine Islands, inaugur-
ated an entirely new period in the history of Asia.
