Page 22. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952
A GARLAND
BOMBAY is called"the gateway to India".Its harbour on the western coast is one of
the finest natural shelters in the world and
is only rivalled by those of Rio de Janeiro, Naples
and perhaps San Francisco. The city itself is
built on an island (in ancient times there were
seven islands) but it is connected to the mainland
by a series of causeways and breakwaters so that
it is practically a peninsula. Owing to its position
on the Far Eastern trade route to Europe, it is
today the second largest city in India (Calcutta
in the north-east is the first).
Bombay boasts many of the finest buildings in
India, both public and private, and its university
is one of the oldest in the country. But it also
has some of the worst industrial slums in the
world and 75 per cent of its inhabitants are
illiterate.
The population of Bombay is in the region of
1, 250, 000, but this figure is probably an under-
estimation since thousands of immigrant labour-
ers from all over India are attracted to the textile
mills, factories and workshops of the city every
year. In addition, the population of Bombay has
been swollen by thousands of refugees who
migrated from Pakistan following Partition.
New arrivals to the city usually settle in what
is known as a chawl (a tenement block) or in
one of the groups of slums surrounding Bombay.
For the past 13 years, an unusual organization
has been at work to clean up as many of these
slums as possible, to raise sanitary conditions,
and reduce the high percentage of illiteracy.
The organization is called the Bombay Social
Education Committee. Since it began this huge
task in 1939, over 300, 000 men and women have
taken four-month courses and two-thirds have
passed the basic tests which certify them as being
able to read and write. Wherever the committee
is active, improvements are to be found in the
slum conditions of the chawls. The committee,
whose educational and cultural influence has
spread throughout India, offers instruction in
literacy, health, citizenship, handicrafts and
many other aspects of social education.
Recently, a Unesco official visited classes of the
Bombay Social Education Committee and re-
ported as follows :
"I visited both men's and women's classes of
various sorts, during the evening as well as by
day.
"A large percentage of Bombay's industrial
workers are housed in chawls, of which there are
many hundreds. From the outside, these four-
storey reinforced concrete blocks have the
misleading appearance of fairly modern housing
units. Inside, however, they are like rabbit
warrens or, as someone said,'human filing
systems'.
"The average chawl contains about 30 room
of medium size. Each accommodates a dozen or
more people of all ages and both sexes. Often
Radio sets bought with Unesco Gift Coupons enable groups living in chawls (tenement buildings) of Bombay to profit from education pro-
grammes. A set from America is handed over (bellow) to a representative of the bahya (municipal milkmen) for the building where his
group lives. A worker (above) garlands the new radio set with almost religious fervour. Following one of the broadcasts, mothers form
discussion group (bottom photo). First radio programme was amplified for public through loudspeakers attached to palm tree (below, right).

AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 23
WAS PLACED ON THE NEW RADIO SET
two whole families are crowded into a single room
on the rough concrete floor.
"The only light comes from smoky candles or
dim kerosene lamps. It is not difficult to
imagine the problems of health, sanitation and
welfare in the chawls. In every chawl the
Social Education Committee organizes a centre.
"In and around those chawls where literacy
classes had barely started, conditions were
appalling. In others where the programme has
been operating for some time, cleanliness and
order prevail in spite of the crowding. Here I
could see clearly that'literacy', as taught by the
Social Education Committee, means far more
than the alphabet. People displayed evidence of
good civic sense, cared better for their children,
and seemed altogether more alert and capable."
It is the aim of the Social Education Committee
to transform the 75 per cent illiteracy in Bombay
into 75 per cent literacy.
The education of women, however, presents
special problems. Although women have made
enormous strides in recent years towards
achieving equality with men, millions of Indian
wives still live in purdah-the word means
veil or curtain-set apart and veiled from others
around them. It was only in 1939, the same year
that the Bombay Committee was formed, that
the Indian Government passed a law called the
"Child Marriage Restraint Act"forbidding child
marriages under the age of 16. All over India, a
great movement is growing to educate girls and
young women after they have married. The
opposition to such educational activity remains
strong, however, in many groups. Since even
today many women will not or cannot drop the
curtain of purdah, teachers must seek them out
behind their veil.
This the Bombay Committee is succeeding in
doing. More and more husbands of wives in
purdah are being brought into literacy and
fundamental education classes. And as a result
of this, veiled women too are now coming to the
education centres, and in many cases they are
taking an active part in the different activities.
The Bombay Social Education Committee is
supported in its work by local government grants
and voluntary local donations, but its resources
are still insufficient.
Last year, the Bombay Committee became one
of Unesco's Gift Coupon projects. Unesco
notified voluntary groups and organizations in
donor countries of the equipment the Committee
urgently needed-equipment ranging in price
from $10 to $5, 000. It explained how Unesco Gift
Stamps could buy Gift Coupons which the Bom-
bay committee could use to buy radio sets
specially adapted for use under tropical
conditions, or film strip projectors as well as
16mm. documentary films. It explained that All
India Radio (known as"AIR") has a regular
educational broadcasting programme for indus-
trial workers, villagers, schoolchildren and college
students ; that local Bombay stations broadcast
special programmes for workers every evening
and how the Committee would use the receiving
sets in its educational programmes. In a similar
way, Unesco explained the particular need for
film projectors and the filmstrips which"not only
speed up the rate of learning among large groups
of people but also serve to arouse the interest of
the people who have so far been untouched by
adult education activity."It showed how print-
ing equipment was urgently needed by the Bom-
bay Committee for the literacy primers it
produces and the special newspapers it publishes
for the newly literates ; and that the vocational
courses undertaken by the Committee at its
different centres in Bombay were seriously
hampered by the lack of necessary lathes, drill-
presses, wood-working machines, bookbinding
equipment as well as sewing machines.
Since then, a large number of groups and
organizations of young people in the United
States have adopted different parts of the Bom-
bay Social Education Gift Project. Several
months ago, for example, the first three film
projectors along with a whole series of filmstrips,
and 16 radio listening sets reached the pioneer
education group in Bombay. All this equipment
had been purchased by the Social Education
Committee with the aid of Gift Coupons supplied
by club women in the United States.
The arrival of the radio sets, for example, was
greeted by the inhabitants of the Bombay chawls
with almost religious fervour. Crowds gathered
to watch the crates being opened. A representa-
tive of the bahya (the municipal milkmen of Bom-
bay) proudly stood to attention to receive the gift
for his crawl. The sets were carefully decorated
with garlands of flowers, after which they were
switched on and special loudspeakers attached
to the high poles in the courtyards so that
the men, women and children could hear their
first programme broadcast by All India Radio.
For some inhabitants of the chawls, the arrival
of this equipment from the other side of the
world seemed almost unbelievable. But the
feeling quickly grew of a new bond of friendshipwith the women of a country which until then
had seemed so strange and far distant to them.
For the world-minded women from Okla-
homa, Texas, Illinois, Kentucky, Alabama, Florida,
Montana, and other states in the United States,
the Gift Project was an answer to their question
"What can we do to help the purposes of Unesco
and the United Nations ?"In it they have found
a new way of sharing with, a new way of speaking
to people in other lands, and a new way of foster-
ing international goodwill by joining to help
worthwhile causes most in need.
"What curious money is this ?", asks a Bombay worker, seeing Unesco Gift Coupons for the first time. Mrs
K. Sayani (right) Vice-President of the Bombay Social Education Committee, explains that they can be used
to buy radio sets, filmstrips and similar materials for the centres it has opened in the slum areas of the city.
Rapt attention on faces of Bombay women (left) seeing their first'filmstrip show. Subjects include health ana
hygiene, home economics and general knowledge. Veiled women (right) watch show at education centre.
Curiosity overcomes traditional reserve (below) as purdah spectator examinesa filmstrip she has seen projected.
, ? TRIER
