Page 12. DECEMBER 1952 UNESCO.
Photo Z.Mihanoff.
by Dr. Gerald WENDT
IT is light that makes plants grow but itits darkness that makes them blossom. By
day the leaves absorb the energy of the
sun and build the body of the plant from mater-
ials that are taken from the soil and the air.
Water and carbon dioxide gas are chemically
combined to make the materials that comprise
the stem, the leaves and the roots. Without
sunlight there would be no plants, therefore no
food for animals-and no animals. There
would be no life on earth.
But plant life cannot go on unless there are
seeds, which usually come from flowers or
blossoms. And the development of flowers is
dependent on periods of darkness, according
to recent botanical'research. Without the
right amount of darkness even healthy plants
do not bloom and without seeds most food plants
would soon die out. So the alternation of light
and darkness is needed for the continuance of
life on earth.
The role of darkness is so important that it
controls the geographical distribution of many
types of plants over the earth. Some need a
short night, some a long one. In the tropics the
night does not vary much in length at various
times of the year ; in summer, as in the winter
months, both day and night are about twelve
hours long. But in the higher latitudes, towards
the poles, both north and south, the summer
nights are short and the day long. Only those
plants can survive there which need only a
short night for their flower production.
Sugar cane, for instance, needs a twelve-
hour night and will never come to flower away
from the tropics because in the temperate zones
the summer nights are too short. The cockle-
burr, on the other hand, needs only a nine-hour
night and will throve as far north as 50"off lati-
tude, where the nine-hour night comes in August
so that blooms may come and seeds may form
before the coming of frost. Still farther north
(or south) of the equator the nine-hour night
comes too late in the season so that seeds do not
ripen in time and the plant dies out. Plants
that grow wild in the far north or south need
only a short night to stimulate their flowerings.
The discovery of the important role of dark-
ness in plant reproduction is a story of modern
botanical research, told by Professor A. W. Nay-
lor of Yale University in a recent issue of the
Scientific A merican. The most surprising dis-
Fovery was the simple fact that it is the length
of the dark period that counts in flower forma-
tion. A chrysanthemum flowers only when the
days are short and the nights long. Darkening
it by day does not affect its blooming but if It
is put into artificial light for even a short time
during the night it does not bloom. The dark-
ness is then too short. Florists are learning to
bring their plants to flower whenever they want
them by controlling the length of the dark
period. But flower-lovers who bring blossom-
ing plants home from holiday trips to the north
or south often find that they grow well but
never bloom. A change in latitude of only 150
miles (250 kilometers) makes a small difference
in the length of the night but it is sometimes
enough to make flowering impossible.
But this was only the beginning of the
research. There was still the question of how
the length of darkness can have so profound an
effect on the life of the plant. Darkness itself
is only the absence of light. What goes on in
the dark that makes the flowers bud and grow ?
Growth is a chemical process. Does darkness'
then produce a special chemical in the plant
which in turn produces flowers ? This bizarre
guess proved to be correct. What this chemical
is is not yet known, but that it exists is now
quite sure.
The proof of its existence came from many
laboratories, in the Netherlands, in the U. S. A.
and in the U. S. S. R. Nearly twenty years ago,
Professor Knott of Cornell University (U. S. A.),
got a clue when he experimented with spinach
plants, \which bloom in the summer on a
long day and a short night. For part of the day
he covered the little stem where the flowers
would sprout, thus putting them in'darkness
and changed, in effect, the length of day and
night. But the flowers budded and grew as
usual. Then he gave the leaves a shorter period
of darkness. In this case the plants refused to
flower. The action of darkness is therefore on
the leaves and not on the flower bud.
This was proved by other research workers
who found that when all the leaves were taken
from the plant, no flowers formed but if even
one leaf remained and had the proper alterna-
tion of day and night the flowers came. Pro-
fessors Hamner and Bonner of the Universitv of
Chicago (U. S. A.) worked with the cockle-burr.
They found that even one-eighth of a leaf kept
for the necessary nine hours in darkness stimu-
lated flower formation, no matter how much
light or dark fell on the rest of the plant. This
was taken as proof that the proper period of
darkness on one leaf or less produces a chemi-
cal that travels through the plant and starts
flower formation.
Other investigators went even further and
grafted a number of plants together. Even
six plants grafted together in a row all flower-
ed together when a single leaf was given the
nine hours of darkness.
Even more surprising is that the flower-pro-
ducing chemical seems to be the same in all
plants because a leaf from an entirely different
plant can be grafted to another plant and will
still produce the same effect of stimulating the
formation of blossoms.
There is much interest among botanists to
discover what this chemical is. If it could be pre-
pared in pure form and plants could be treated
with it then any plant could be brought to
flowering at any time. This would make it
possible to grow flowering plants far from their
natural home. It would make it possible for
florists to offer blossoms of any climate or area
by the simple device of providing the chemical
that nature can make only by the proper alter-
nation of light and darkness. Even more
important from the point of view of agriculture
is the fact that this would permit the plant
breeder to get blossoms at the same time on
two different varieties which usually bloom at
different times. He would thus be able to cross
or hybridize them, and obtain new and valuable.
varieties which are at present impossible.
Although the fact that periods of darkness
produce such a stimulating chemical is new, it
is well known that many chemicals have a
direct effect in stimulating or inhibiting root
growth, leaf growth, even flower growth. They
are sometimes known as plant hormones, but
are more correctly called auxins. Already, some
plants can be sprayed to prevent them from
'lowering and others can be sprayed with differ-
ent chemicals to increase the number and size
of the flowers produced. In a few commercial
operations these methods have proved profit-
able. In the pineapple fields of Hawaii, for
instance, the flowers naturally develop through-
out the summer so that only part of the field is
ripe for picking at any one time. But if a field
of pineapples is sprayed with a chemical called
naphthalene-acetic acid, then in six to eight
weeks the entire field blossoms at once. Conse-
quently, the entire field of pineapples ripens at
once and can be harvested by machinery. This
has enormously reduced the cost of harvesting
and therefore the cost of pineapples.
In Hawaii also. experiments are now under
way to increase the flowering of the litchi-nut
trees. This delicious fruit has not become com-
mercial because in Hawaii only about four per-
cent of the trees come to bloom. But when
the orchards are sprayed with naphthalene-
acetic acid nearly 00 percent of the trees blos-
som and bear fruit. This discovery may create
a new industry for Hawaii and for other areas
of the earth.
In other plants it is desirable to prevent
flowering. In the case of lettuce and celery, for
instance, the leaves are edible and important
and the growers wish to prevent the formation
of blossoms and seed. In this case, chemicals
can be used to delay the formation of flowers.
On the other hand, growers of celery-seed can
spray with a different chemical and thereby
promote seed formation.
Interference with the natural growth of plants
for the benefit of man is thus not uncommon in
special cases, but the largest and most import-
ant development will come when botanists
learn the chemical nature of the substance that
is produced by all plants and which is neces-
sary to begin the formation of buds, followed
by blossoms and seeds. At present, plants
depend on the night to form this unknown che-
mical, but once it is identified, and manufac-
tured darkness may no longer be needed
because that chemical could then be injected
into the stem of the plant. It is as if animals
and men were freed of the necessity of sleeping.
The major prospect perhaps is that in that case
the far northern and southern regions of the
world might become productive because the
long days and even the midnight sun would not
interfere with the production of valuable food
crops.
DARKNESS,
NOT L I G H T. I
MAKES
FLOWERS
BLOOM
