COURIER DECEMBER 1952. Page 7
ON the quayside of Reykjavik, capital ofmodern Iceland, stands a Viking carved in
granite, stern-featured beneath his winged
helmet. With his back to the sea, he leans on
the shaft of his steering-oar, his stony gaze
fixed upon the rugged circle of black and purple
volcanoes dominating the bay. It is Leifur
Eriksson (Leif the Fortunate), who discovered
America 500 years before Columbus and
established a settlement in the snowy wastes
of Labrador. Leif the Fortunate ranks not only
as the first of history's great explorers but also
as an early humorist, for, to attract colon-
ists, he gave the pleasant name of"Vinne-
land"-the country of wine-to Labrador. (It
was a tradition begun by his father, Eric
the Red, who discovered and christened
"Greenland".)
Everything about Iceland, incidentally, has a
similar stamp of fantasy-gay or tragic-
and if there is any part of the world where
Puck, fleeing from conformity with its levelling
effect on scenery and customs which is a sign
of our times, may have found refuge, it must
surely be here in Ultima Thule,'''the most
distant land", where stood, according to the
Ancients, the gate of Hell.
Iceland is a country of paradoxes, of sharp
geographical and human contrast. Though it
still bears the misnomer it was given by a near-
sighted ninth-century Norwegian, it is really
much more the island of flames than the island
of ice. Lying just below the Arctic circle, its
climate is almost as temperate as that of Brit-
tany, thanks to the Gulf Stream-a kindly
sea-serpent, whose warm coils envelop it.
Neither trees nor wheat will grow there, but
constant warm springs and geysers enable
tropical fruits to be cultivated extensively under
glass. Isolation in the cold, northern mists for
a thousand years drove Iceland to offer gene-
rous concessions in exchange for visits from
foreign ships ; today it is a vital link in the air
communications of the whole northern hemi-
sphere.
For most Europeans, there is still a spice of
adventure in the very name of Iceland, but this
is due more to the survival of legend than to
actual facts. Reykjavik can now be reached as
easily'and quickly as many of the Western
capitals-eight hours by air from London or
Amsterdam, or four or five days by sea from
Copenhagen. The last port of call before the
polar wastes, Reykjavik is a city of 50, 000 peo-
ple, a somewhat ill-assorted union between a
small Jutland community-neat little wooden
houses brightly painted in salmon pink, canary
yellow and green-and a typical American
"mushroom"town)-square, reinforced concrete
warehouses, a university and national theatre
on strong, simple lines, and a crop of apartment-
houses and bungalows with large windows,
lining miles of streets which have no pavements.
What attracted me to the shores of Thule,
however, was not this spectacle of a modern
metropolis within a stone's throw of the Pole,
nor even the marvels of northern nature with
its wild, awesome contrasts-the unending
glaciers and volcanoes in eruption, the lava fields
like storm-tossed seas, the intermingling of the
sun's blood-red and ochre colours by day, or the
twinkling lights of the Aurora Borealis by night.
I was primarily fascinated, after a long stay in
Scandinavia, by the idea of retracing, as it were,
the source of Nordic civilization in a land where
the Viking world, with scarcely any alien inter-
mixture, came to newer.
The population, incidentally, includes some
Celts (Irish and Scots) but, to the detriment of
the picturesque, not a single Eskimo.
The Vikings were not only bold seamen and
fierce pirates ; they also gave the Western
world the first example of a democratic par-
liament, the Althing, which was established in
930 AD by the oligarchy of the godords, their
clan chieftains.
Although it is relatively close to us in terms
of history, the civilization of the wild Norsemen
is so bound up with legend that its origins seem
to be lost in the mists of time. But this is not
true of Iceland, where the past is still regarded
as a living continuity and never ceases to play
its full part in daily life.
One day, with a chance acquaintance, I went
for a drive in the"countryside"-a barren chaos
of lava with, here and there, a small field of
poor grass, a flock of sheep, a few wild ponies,
and every ten miles or so a farm. I looked in
vain for the many hamlets whose names were
on my map. My friend soon explained the
reason. The names were not those of villages
or farms ; they preserved the memory of a
church which had disappeared 500 years before,
of a Viking village which had crumbled into
dust, of an historical (or legendary) event. Of
these buildings and events my companion
spoke, pointing out some invisible spot on the
inhospitable horizon with as much interest and
knowledge as though he were describing some
recent episode. Iceland is not a"museum"of
ancient Scandinavian life. The Viking heritage
is here a very part of the people's daily exist-
ence.
(Continued on age 10.)
Mn
1 1
1.  r  :

WHALEMEAT IS A FAVOURITE DISH Icelad's only whling station is situated inthe Fiord of Hvalfjodur, o the north of Rey-
kjavik, where during the season at least one whale is processed each day. Whale steaks, a
popular item on the family menu, are eaten with potatoes cooked in sugar and a sweetened tapioca
sauce. Fish, too, is an important item of diet, as well as being the country's main export.
THE STONE IGLOO HOME OF AN ARTIST Near o Reykjavik is found this curious stnedwellmg-home of the sculptor SogurJon
Olafsson, who finds his models among the local people and works in the open air. Iceland can
boast a galaxy of artistic talent out of all proportion to its population of 120, 000 and area of
some 40, 000 square miles. In few other lands is there a more widespread love of good literature.
The statue of a Viking-one of many in Iceland-dominating this"Swan I
with present-day life in the island. Nameplaces on maps still mark the sit
today there is simply bare ground. Despite their everyday struggle to gail
fish (below), from a more bountiful sea, the people of Iceland cherish tI
GRASS THE BACKBON"E OF FARMING Icelanders have made grass, which grows
well is the thin soil, the backbone of their
farming. They raise cattle and small, hardy sheep and horses. In Spring the sheep are marked
and put to graze on the hillsides where they are left until the farmers go out to collect them in the
Autumn. This photo shows the"Rettir"or rounding up of the small and long-wooled flocks.

THE ISLAND OF ICE AND OF FIRE Most of central Iceland is a wind-sweptdesert of sand and lava, ridged by mountains
and strewn with glaciers and snowfields that never melt. The valleys of the fiords and the narrow
coastal plains in the west and south are almost the only places where man can live. An eighth of
all Iceland is buried under snow and ice and more than half is mountainous. But winters are mild.
this"Swan Lake" (above) is a reminder that the past remains bound up
I mark the site of former villages or the scene of long-past deeds where
ruggle to gain a livelihood from a poor soil or, like these women salting
nd cherish the Viking heritage in language, story-telling and customs.
EVERY ROOM HAS ITS OWN ROOF The traditional Icelandic farm is built partlybelow ground lev l with a separate roof for
each room. The row of roofs seen on the left of this photo all belong to one farmhouse and
represent a link with old Viking architecture. Typical also is the form of the Lutheran church
often found in Iceland's countryside. Newer houses are made of imcorted timber or concrete.
"STORI GEYSIR", THE GREAT GEYSER More than a hundred volcanoes, some stillactive, make Iceland one of the most volcanic
regions of the world. The volcanic rocks heat countless hot springs and geysers, the largest of
which is the famous Geysir (from geysa, Icelandic word meaning"to rush forth furiously"), from
which the world's geysers take their name. The warm spring waters are piped to heat houses.

Page 10. DECEMBER. 1952
A BOOK-LOVtNG PEOPLE) N A BLEAK LAND
(Continued from page 7.)
When, one bright summer morning
in 1944, Iceland re-established th6
Republic in the very spot where it
had first been born-the majestic
amphitheatre of Thingvellir hol-
lowed out in the rock and lava beside
a mighty lake-the members of par-
liament quite naturally and unself-
consciously donned the leather cape
and breeches of the godords. The
language they used, Izlenska, the
root-language of the Scandinavian
peoples-with its archaic system of
writing and its tonal resemblances
(o the Romance languages-was very
nearly the same as that spoken by
their ancestors.
The Icelandic vocabulary is still
extraordinarily rich. It comprises
no fewer than 200, 000 words and is
far purer than any other European
language, as it has preserved 57 per
cent of the original Indo-European
roots. It has fewer than 3, 000 bor-
rowed words. Icelandic has also
preserved the old declensions and
conjugations, with all their cases
and tenses. One hundred and
twenty-five out of its 130 suffixes
date from the Aryan period. This
extraordinary, complicated"Man-
darin"is spoken by 140, 000 people.
The laws of the new State were
to include, almost unchanged, con-
siderable portions of the Jonsbok, the
; >ld customary law which was codified
in 1281. The past is everywhere alive,
even in the most common daily
practices, in the survival of customs
which, today, sometimes strike us
with surprise. The Icelanders, for
instance, have no patronymics, no
surnames handed on from father to
son. They still observe the Viking
custom, which was common in me-
diaeval Europe, of using only the
Christian name. Children add the
suffix son in the case of boys and
dottir in the case of girls. Married
women do not take their husband's
name-a custom which reflects the
respect shown to women in primitive
Germanic society.
Whatever the disadvantages of
this system, not one Icelander would
agree to give it up. This attitude is
something more than a childish,
parochial chauvinism. It is the
proud self-assertion of a small but
determined nation which has, for
ten centuries, withstood the combin-
ed assaults of malignant nature and
men-volcanic eruptions (about 100
to date), earthquakes, periods of
deadly cold, epidemics, famines, the
ravages of English or Barbary pi-
rates and the despotism of ambitious
kings already thinking of Iceland's
strategic position. Despite so many
heavy blows, whose effects are shown
in the fluctuations of the country's
still knows little of our sagas, one of
the truest treasures of the human
mind."The man who said this to
me was expressing, with some
bitterness, the unanimous opinion of
the Icelandic people. Possessing a
strong desire to escape from their
age-long isolation and having an
active interest in the culture of the
world, the people of Iceland find it
hard to understand what they regard
as a neglect of their intellectual
heritage by other peoples.
Despite the work of Xavier Mar-
mier, Craigie, Poestion and others,
OVER A THOUSAND YEARS OF HISTORY
8th century.-Discovery of Iceland by Irish monks.
870.-Ingolfur Arnason, a Norwegian emigrant, lands on the site of the future city
of Reykjavik.
870-930.-Colonization by Viking feudal lords in voluntary exile owing to their
dissatisfaction with the policy of King Harald Haarfager, who built up the crown
lands in Norway.
930.-Foundation of the Althing, the first Parliament in the world, and of a highly
decentralized oligarchical Republic.
982.-Discovery of Greenland by the Icelandic Viking. Eric the Red (Erikur Raudi).
1000.-Eric's son, Leifur Eriksson, discovers America nearly five centuries before
Columbus.
I 000.-Iceland converted to Christianity.
1262.-send of the Viking Republic. Internal strife among the godords, or local
chieftains, leads to the island's submission to Norway.
) 3th century.-Gotden age of the : agas, the hallmarks of Icelandic literature.
) 382.-A change of dynasty brings Iceland under the Danish crown.
1402.-Plague kills two out of every three people on the island.
1550.-The Reformation in Iceland ; the population joins the Lutheran Church.
1602.-denmark imposes a very severe"commercial monopoly"on Iceland.
1783-1790.-Volcanic eruptions and famines, resulting in the death of 10, 000
peoples.
1904.-Home Rule for Iceland.
1918.-Ireland recognized as an independent monarchy within the Danish Union.
1944.-Proclamation of the Second Icelandic Republic.
population (estimated at 80, 000 in
the eleventh century, and declining
to a mere 50, 000 at the time of the
1801 census), the people of Iceland
have never lost faith in their future ;
and this justifies their proud, non-
aggressive patriotism.
"In the past few decades, holiday-
makers have been discovering the
beauty of our scenery, sportsmen
have made acquaintance with our
trout streams, and military leaders
have begun to appreciate our stra-
tegic importance, but the world
very little is known abroad about the
ancient Icelandic literature-the
drama of the Eddas and the poetry
of the Skalds, with their complicated
and mannered metres, strange col-
lected works like the Landnamabok
(Book of Settlements), and the
lslandingabok (Book of Icelanders),
the versatile works of the church-
man Thorgilsson (1067-1148), which
are a mixture of epic, genealogy and
cadastral survey, and above all the
half-historical, half-legendary cycles
of the sagas.
I have had the opportunity to read
some English translations of these
sagas, and I am inclined to share
the opinion of the Icelanders, who
hold them worthy of comparison
with the epic masterpieces of the
West, the poems of Homer, the
Nibelungenlied or the Kalevala.
Composed between the lith and the
13th century, and mostly anonymous,
they embody with restrained and
sober lyricism the Weltanschau-
ung, the"outlook on the world"
of the Vikings, a kind of lay philo-
sophy based on the strict and stern
observation of human nature in the
light of ideas held prior to the in-
troduction of Christianity into the
country. One cannot help being
struck by the realistic intensity of
these tales, imbued with the pan-
theistic mythology of Asatru, the
cult of Othin and the belief in
Valholl (the Germanic Odin and
Walhalla). Dissension, bloody strife
and vengeance are the principal
themes, while a fate as implacable
as Sophocles'hangs over the gods
and men and inanimate things. The
thirteenth century, the golden age
of the sagas, saw the composition of
great numbers of masterpieces-the
Tale of Egill Skallagrimsson, the
Laxdaelasaga, the Hrafnhelsaga
and above all the harsh Njallsaga,
the only Icelandic work which is
comparatively well-known outside
Scandinavia, since it has been
translated into many foreign lan-
guages.
The sagas, which the school-
children of Reykjavik can read
easily in the original because the
language has changed so little, are
not only the cultural wealth of
Iceland, but are also the nation's
"public records,"its genealogical
tree. The influence of the sagas
- which are found, richly bound. in
every home, even in the isolated
farms of the hinterland-can only
be compared to that of the Bible
amongst the Puritans of colonial
America. Public discussions and
newspaper editorials are full of
references to them. I can remember
a stormy argument between half-a-
dozen rough fishermen in the fore-
castle of the trawler which I took
THE WORLD'S
MOST NORTHERN
CAPITAL CITY
More than one-third of Ice-
land's people live in Reyk-
javik (from reykur,"smoke"
hence"smoking harbour"),
the chief port and capital,
which looks like a small
Jutland community in an
American"mushroom"
city. Amid one-storey homes
are buildings which, illus-
trate the importance of cul-
ture in the lives of the
people : the National
Library and the National
Theatre (photo on left),
the University and other
educational institutions.
Iceland reads more books
than any other nation in
proportion to population.
ICELAND HAS
A NAME THAT
IS MISLEADING.
Natural hot springs tapped
near Reykjavik provide water
almost at boiling point for
3, 000 homes and warm
538, 000 square feet of glass-
houses, the rate of flow
being about 88 gallons a
second. In these glass-
houses are grown bananas,
pineapples and other tropi-
cal fruit. ! n some places
water is piped through the
soil to warm it for growing
green crops, and is also
used in open-air swimming
pools. In fact, the name
Iceland is rather mislead-
ing, for this country is
much more the land of
flames than the land of ice.
UNEI

DECEMBER 1952. Page
on my return journey. It was not
about women or liquor smuggling,
but was in fact a literary discussion
on some obscure point in a no less
obscure saga, in which my seamen-
commentators appeared to display
remarkable erudition.
Icelandic culture has by no means
become petrified in fruitless con-
templation of the past. This is
shown by the tremendous amount of
educational work being done, in
which the most up-to-date teaching
methods are prominent. As he
goes about the country, the traveller
is struck by the large number of
large modern buildings standing by
themselves far away from the town.
With their petrol pumps, their
swimming pools fed by warm mineral
springs, their pleasant guest-rooms,
and sometimes even their own
small aerodromes. they are comfort-
able stopping-places for travellers.
Except during the two summer
months, however, they are not hotels
but simply country schools. The
pupils come by jeep, or riding ponies,
over miles and miles of mountains
or lava. The total enrolment in the
schools and universities of Iceland
is 28, 000, or 20 per cent of the popu-
lation ; last year, the State allotted
28, 300, 000 kromer (over f560, 000) to
education, out of a total budget of
256, 000, 000 kromer. There are 20, 000
children in the elementary schools
alone.
Iceland is a nation where illiteracy
has been banished, and whose
people are in fact among the best
educated in the world (one is soon
convinced of this after talking to
the"man in the street", who often
speaks several languages). The
people have also a remarkable res-
pect for the printed word, as is
shown by the enormous number of
bookshops in the country, all, so I
was told, doing a very thriving
business. I was always surprised,
when passing through a small town
with a few thousand inhabitants,
such as Akureyri or Vestmannaeyjar,
to see bookshops whose luxury
offered a sharp contrast with the
primitive austerity of other shops.
During the six long months of
Arctic night, when their work is
considerably slowed down, the Ice-
landers devour hundreds of books,
mainly translations of world classics
and popular scientific works. Pub-
lication for so small a market is not
a very good commercial proposition,
and as a result copyright laws have
sometimes been stretched. But we
can hardly criticize the Icelanders
for this, nor discourage their eager
curiosity, especially as an acute
shortage of foreign currency has
caused large restrictions in foreign
book imports. Friends of mine in
Iceland told me, in this connexion,
how sorry they were that Iceland
was not yet a member of Unesco, as
the Book Coupon Scheme would
make it possible to remedy a short-
age whose effects are particulary
felt in university circles. On a more
general basis, the inclusion of the
country in a great international
organization would meet one of the
deepest wishes of the Icelanders,
who still feel the hereditary dread
of cultural isolation.
Without dealing exhaustively with
intellectual developments in Iceland
- with its wide variety of news-
papers, its national theatre where
works by Shakespeare, Pirandello
and Bernard Shaw are presented in
the language of the Vikings, its
symphony orchestra and so forth-
I should like to mention the most
surprising feature of this small
country's intellectual life, namely its
great wealth of contemporary artists
and writers worthy of international
fame. If the word had not lost
much of its force, this might well be
described as a miracle ; but it is a
miracle brought about by intelligent
action, by wise State patronage,
which enables men who cannot
count on a large enough audience
within the boundaries of their own
country to maintain a decent
standard of living while practising
their art. Among these men are
Halldor Jiljan Laxness, the powerful
novelist, considered by Scandinavian
as comparable with the world's
great writers ; Gunnar Gunnarsson,
the novelist and essayist, some of
whose works written in Danish have
earned him an honoured place ;
the painter Johannes Kjarval, a
Van Gogh of the Arctic ; the por-
trait-painter Jon Stefansson, a
brilliant pupil of Matisse ; the
sculptor Sogurjon Olafsson, and
others. This galaxy of talent gives
the smallest and least favoured of
the Nordic nations a prestige out of
all proportion to its poverty and its
tiny population.
The picture Iceland affords us is
not merely that of a progressive
people clinging doggedly to life in
the most inhospitable of geo-
graphical surroundings. It is that of
the triumph of the Spirit where
Matter is most difficult to master,
that of Arctic solitude overcome by
a bond of union which links the
dweller in Farthest Thule to all
mankind, in the love of the truest
treasures of humanity. It is an
outstanding example of spiritual
vitality.
Photos : H. Malmberg. R Jonsson, T. Josepsson and Icefandic Tourist Off<ce.
? UER
