Page 10. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER) 1952
RACE RELATIONS
IN BRAZIL
.
RIO D JANEIRO
MELTING-POT OF PEOPLES
By Professor L. A. COSTA PINTO
University of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro
THE racial situation in Rio de Janeiro
offers some striking analogies with
what has been written about that in
Sao Paulo. In Rio, just as in Sao
Paulo, the harmonious integration which is
regarded as characteristic of inter-racial rela-
tionships in Brazil fails to correspond to facts
revea ! ed by sociological investigations.
It has been said to often and for so long that
racial prejudices do not exist in Brazil, that thisaffinnation which has
been passed around the
world has finally become
a source of Brazilian na-
tional pride. Yet, behind
this piece of dogma lie
feelings of bitterness and
an obvious uneasiness. To
describe this phenomenon,
we might well use the
expression"nyptomelan-
ism", which was applied
by the soeiologist Renzo
Sereno to Puerto Rico.
The word denotes the fear
to admit or the desire to
hide the importance which
is, in fact, attached to the
question of race and of
colour. Such a refusal to
face up to reality spring
from various causes. The
first must be sought in
the extreme forms taken
by racialism in other
countries by comparison
with which Brazil's situa-
tion takes on the air of a
model of tolerance and
harmony. Yet if the situa-
tions of the United States
and Brazil are placed side
by side, it can be seen that
the differences are of
degree rather than of
nature. They are differ-
ences of degrees easy to
identify in one country or
the other according to the
areas examined.
There is no question of
persecutions or even of
brutal discrimination, but
of a series of small facts
of greater or less import-
ance, more or less gene-
ralized and more or less
frequent which by their
sum total develop among
the members of a racial
group the feeling that they
may, at any moment, be
exposed to injustice or
even to discourtesy simply
because of their racial
origin. It is this insecur-
ity which produces in many Negroes a serious
state of anxiety, of fear and instability. Even
though someone may never have suffered from
another person's lack of respect for him or may
never have been snubbed because of his colour,
the threat of this is sufficient to put him on
the defensive and to give him a feeling of
victimization.
What seems typical of the Brazilian situation
is not the complete lack of prejudice, but the
absence of violence in the forms of discrimina-
tion shown to the Negro.
First of all it should be made clear that the
appearance of a new racial situation which can
be observed in Rio de Janeiro is directly related
to the influx from the countryside into the
Brazilian capital of people attracted by the
possibilities opened up to them by a rapidly
developing industry.
As a very large proportion of these emigrants
from the interior of the country is made up
of coloured people, it follows that the urban
proletariat is also made up to a great extent of
Negroes or mulattos. Statistics bring the
picture even more clearly into perspective.
They show that the number of Negroes who can
be classed as employers is insignificant in
comparison with the mass of coloured
employees, and that posts of authority in
industry, trade and agriculture are, with very
few exceptions, occupied by white people.
The men of colour who have succeeded in
rising above the general mass of the people and
in establishing themselves in the higher ranks
of the social scale represent"honourable
exceptions"'\vhich can give rise to no illusions
about the true state of the racial situation.
These men, who appear to have successfully
overcome barriers raised against them because
of the colour of their skin, underwent a
process of"whitening"and in proportion to
their rise in the social scale were treated as
if they had been white.
Alongside this long-standing elite which the
upper classes of the community accept and
regard as the symbol of their own liberal
outlook, is rising a new Negro elite which,
while wishing to progress, in no way desires to
renounce its"Negro consciousness". In its
march forward, this group runs into prejudices
expressed as racial stereotypes. Before this
barrier its reaction to the problem confronting
it takes the form of an awareness of race.
The ideology which Negro intellectuals have
built around the idea of"Negro consciousness"
is the form taken by this race consciousness
forced on the coloured elite. Its development
has been made possible because the whites
themselves sowed the seeds of the idea in the
very midst of the Negro"intelligenzia."-For,
just as one can say that the Negro problem is,
above all, that of the white man who has
mistaken ideas about Negroes and who acts on
the basis of these false ideas, so one can also
affirm that the idea of"Negro consciousness"
is not of Negro origin but merely a Negro
reflection of the ideas'which white men have
about him and also the result of his race
consciousness which has been developed by the
obstacles he has met throughout life.
It is these obstacles which are at the root of
racial ideology and which make of race a
mystic entity, mystic in the sense that it
transposes a daily experience into something
on the imaginative leve). It is of Htt) e import-
ance that these conceptions are naive ones.
The fact is they do exist and the socio-
logist is obliged to recognize their power
and analyze their origin.
It must be understood thai this exaltation of
"Negro consciousness"and the contradictions
which are so apparent in the ideological systems
are, in fact, the expressions, in racial terms, of
the aspirations and disillusions of a middle
class grnup which is try,
ing to rise, not as a race,
hut as a social class.
Their overriding aim is to
obtain for themselves and
their likes the acquisition
of the sort of life led by
the upper and middle
classed which are the
traditionally white classes
of Brazilian society.
While this rise of a
Negro eHte in Brazilian
society is slow, it is
nevertheless cedaintv tak-
ing place in existing
social frameworks and in
accordance with the values
and attitudes which belong
to them.
Progress. in the case of
a Negro who is a member
of the proletariat is limited
by the houndaries of the
particular social group in
which he lives. As one of
this mass of people the
Negro does not suffer
from the same feeling of
oppression and suffocation
of which the"élite"
complain. Me does not
feel, as do the latter, that
he is"two people in one."
He is ; he feels, simply a
Negro of the proletariat.
When he is attacked by
racial prejudice he reacts
simply and directly as an
injured party without in
any'way seeking the
transcendent causes for
the affront he has suffered.
Because racial prejudice
does not appear to him as
a coherent system, but
rather as a series of
incidents, he fights it as
a member of a social
class and not as a member
of a race. Furthermore,
he views his progress
not as something which
has a racial element but
which affects a mass
whose members include
men of other colours.
Brazil has no racialist philosophy to support
or give moral sanction to racial discrimination.
Only the"cryptomelanism", of which I spoke
earlier, had an effect of this kind. There
exists, however, no absolute or hard and fast
values capable of preventing the development
of racial tensions or of ensuring that they do
not lead to catastrophes.
The racial question in Brazil is not a problem
which is independent from others facing the
country. It has not been resolved in some
miraculous fashion, not is it, as some declare,
an unchangeable state of affairs. We would
not say that Brazil has a racial problem, if, by
that, we mean the particular form this question
has taken in other social structures which differ
from our own. nor would we say, in view of
the facts brought to light by our investigation,
that no problem exists. We would simply say
that there does exist a racial question which is
undergoing a process of change and which
displays particular characteristics within any
given social structure. This cannot be sepa-
rated from other present-day tensions.
This interdependence, then, can result in a
crisis or a solution according to the nature of
Brazil's social evolution in the coming years.
(Photo Pierre Verger)
This article i.  a teS/lmé or tile {' (J/lC[W110/l" of l't () fl'. s, or
('. vsta Pinto in iii". stllrfy The :'\el'o in Rio de Janeiro-
Race Relation,. ; in  Changing ociety, tv be/Jllú/islml by
Cnescu early ne, !'t year.
UNESCO
