MARCH 1952 Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
THE BLIND ARE ACHIEVING A FULLER
ROLE IN EVERYDAY LIFE
A BLIND man is not merely a person deprivedof sight. with all that this implies in the
limitatiòn of his possibilities for action and
inquiry. Socially speaking, he is a creature
subject to serious constraint. The attitude of
people towards blindness in the past was always
surrounded by an aura of fear or mystery. This
is revealed in their treatment of the blind.
In primitive societies, the blind were held to
be possessed ; and if their lives were sometimes
spared, it was because people feared the spirits
dwelling in them. The Laws of Manu authorized
the killing of infants born blind and relegated to
the ranks of the outcasts those smitten with
blindness later in life. In Ancient Rome, the cur-
rent of opinion which tempered the dread
prerogatives of the paterfamilias never went so
far as to condemn the practice of abandoning
children born with an infirmity. In the old Bibli-
cal days, blindness was considered an uncleanness :
"Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen,
or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these
unto the Lord..." (Leviticus, XXII, 22) ;"... a blind
man, or a lame,... shall not come nigh to offer
the offerings of the Lord" (id., XXI, 18). The
practice of blinding princes to prevent them from
acceding to the throne, which still prevailed at
the Persian Court as late as the 17th century,
was conceived less as a punishment than as a
means of branding them with a mark of infirmity.
T'if blind ceased to be outcasts when the Gospelmade them (and ai'so deaf-mutes and the
dead) the subject of miracles and proof of
Divine healing power. Mediæval Christianity
and Islam accorded them the status of privileged
by Pierre HE. NRI
Professor at the Institute for the
Young Blind, Paris.
beggars ; and on occasions they served as inter-
cessors with the Divinity and read the Lord's
prayers or. recited the verses of the Koran. Never-
theless, their position in society remained pre-
carious and degrading.
A certain degree of progress has been achieved
in modern society. For the past 250 years men
have made an effort to understand the psychology
of the sightless, beginning with William Moly-
neux, the English physicist, who early in the 18th
century first put the famous question to John
Locke : would a man who was born blind and
who later gained his sight be able to distinguish a
cube from a sphere ? And for the past 170 years,
attention has been given to the systematic educa-
tion of the blind. In spite of this, the attitude
of sighted people towards blindness remained
coloured by many fictions derived not from
external experience-that is, from direct observa-
tion of the blind-but from subjective and
largely emotional sentiments. To a seeing man,
any understanding of or influence upon the outer
world seems impossible without sight. When a
person closes his eyes in an attempt to realize
what a blind man may think and feel, his mind,
emptied of all visual impressions, is invaded by
the terrors which beset primitive man in the
dark. Those who can see are too afraid of blind-
ness to be able to understand it. Here, indeed,
is the chief obstacle to the natural assimilation
of the abnormality which the blind man repre-
sents in the social organism.
From this it is clear that the emancipation of
the blind has depended and will always depend
on progress in understanding by those who can
see. So long a's sighted people fail to free their
minds of the subjective and emotional factors
which so strongly colour their ideas of blindness,
so long will the efforts of the sightless to shake
on'their burden of infirmity be doomed to failure.
NEVERTHELESS, whatever may he said by thosewho have suffered from what they some-
what bitterly call social prejudices, these do
not represent the only chain which the blind must
break. Blindness is a fact. It narrows down space
very considerably and limits a man's mastery of
the material objects in space. The biological
function of sight is to anticipate and avoid pain
and danger. Nature is hostile to any creature
incapable of reaction at a distance. Had all men
been blind, mankind could not possibly have
survived the dangers which threatened it. The
world, with all the things which men have
developed for their use, such as houses,
communications, tools and books, has been
organized by those who can see, and for them.
The blind man thus meets life with a grave
handicap. How can he possibly overcome it
except by cultivating and making the fullest
possible use of the faculties he retains ?
The first idea that comes to mind is that the
blind person should develop those of his senses
he can still use, particularly hearing and touch.
(Continued on next page)

Towards an equal footing
with the sighted
(Continued from previous page)
One hundred and fifty years of associationist psy-
chology held to the theory of sensory transfer.
We know now that education of the senses is in
fact education through the senses, and that all
transfer is essentially of a mental kind. For
example, it is the mind which organizes fragment-
ary data acquired analytically by the sense of
touch, and gradually builds up a series of spatial
images. These, though lacking the richness,
spontaneity and potential emotional content of
visual images, are enough to meet the practical
needs nf the h) ind. That such images do exist
even in the brain of the congenitally
blind can no langer be doubted. Dio-
genes demonstrated movement by
walking ; people born blind come
and go about their business and
solve geometrical problems which
proves that their minds are capable of
conceiving space and shape. But it
is equally true that the number, the
quality and the practical value of
these mental images depend on ade-
quate training. Without such train-
ing, a blind child cannot overcome his
imtial handicap. This is a point to
bear in mind in any discussion con-
cerning the emancipation of the blind
through education and culture. We
shat return to the point in a moment.
FIRST consider another aspect ofthe problem. While the blind
man is handicapped by the loss
of one of his'senses and must find
ways to compensate for this, he can at
all times express his ideas through the
spoken language.
1, 000 blind students were enrolled at a t l\elogical
seminary in Egypt preparing to teach and comment
on the Koran. Taha Hussein Pasha, formerly
Minister of Education in Egypt and rector of the
Farouk I University, began his successful career in
this way. Though blind, he has risen to be one of
the leading educational reformers of his country.
Endowed with a great memory, he has people to
read to him and dictates his own writings, so that he
has never found it necessary to learn Braille.
He has already published a formidable body of
works : 20 volumes of criticism and essays, half-
a-dozen novels, translations of Sophocles and
Racine into Arabic, and a fa'scinating autobiography,
In fact, long before there was any
thought of creating special schools for the sight-
less,. blind persons often astounded their seeing
contemporaries with the scope and quality of their
learning. Many are the blind who have achieved
fame. We need not dwell on those whose blind-
ness is considered legendary or otherwise disputed
(such as Oedipus, Democritus, Homer, Ossian), or
those who lost their sight late in life and therefore
offer less conclusive evidence. It is noteworthy
that as early as the 14th century, an Arab scholar
named Safadi published the biography of 307 dis-
tinguished blind Moslems. In Japan, blind scholars
had their own academic institutions for many years,
in which they transmitted the traditions and
history of their country. Blind persons in Japan
also held a practical monopoly of massage and
other healing practices.
In civilizations where a formalized culture is
handed down by memory, and where teaching is
almost entirely by word of mouth, a blind person
with a good memory is almost on an equal footing
with those who can see. Not so long ago, over
Book of Drays. which is not only a somewhat
satirical account of the training given at El-Azhar
50 years ago, but also an invaluable document on
the psychology of the blind.
No instances of formal education for the blind are
to be found either in Greek or Roman times, or in
mediaeval Christendom. On rare occasions, the
greatly gifted found their way to fame : Didymus of
Alexandria became the teacher of Saint Jerome in
the fourth century ; Palladius, one of the pupils of
Didymus, later became bishop of a see in Asia
Minor ; Joannes Ferdinand, born in Bruges in the
15th century, acquired fame as a philosopher, poet
and orator ; Pierre Pontanus, known as the"blind
man of Bruges"early in the 16th century, left
treatises on the art of writing poetry, and spoke out
fearlessly on the social problems of his day. Other
blind scholars, philosophers, theologians and
writers appeared in Italy, England, and other coun-
tries, leaving a permanent mark in their specialities.
By the 18th century, the number of sightless
whose achievements astounded the whole world
rose sharpl. History has recorded many of their
names : Elizabeth of Wa) dkireh in Switzerland,
Mélanie de Salignac in France, Maria von Paradi.-
in Austria, and Nicotas Saunderson in England.'
It was Diderot, in his famous Letter on the Blind
who first drew the world's attention to the work
of this extraordinary. man. Blinded at the age
of one following an attack of smallpox, Saunderson
had a painstaking mentor in his father. When
he attended school his lightning mental calculations
astonished hi, s teachers. He was a brilliant student
of Latin, Greek and mathematics. Before Saunder-
son was 30, he was appointed to the Lucasian Chair
of mathematics at Cambridge University, and he
was one of the rare persons In l ! ; nglana
who cou ! d exp) ain Newton's Principin.
His students were filled with admira-
tion at his lectures on optic's and his
explanations on the rainbow, the na-
ture of colours, reflection, refraction
: mud vision. Lord Chesterfield later
ralled him the miracle of a man who
lost the use of his own sight and
taught others to use theirs. To aid
his remarkable memory and compli-
cated mathematical demonstrations, he'
invented the arithmetical board which
is the basi's of today's mathematical
equipment for the blind.
This is a significant point. Most
blind people during this period found
it necessary to use or to devise for
themselves many kinds of mechanical,
aids to learning. Cut-out letters,
writing guides, relief surface maps,
musical notations on a projecting
slave, were all used. One blind per-
son, living in Hesse, Germany, even
built up for himself a huge series of
ideographs consisting of little pieces,
of wood of different shapes and sizes.
It was, in fact, the advance made in
educational techniques that laid the
foundation for the efforts to teach
them to read late in the 18th and early in the 19th
centuries. Had teaching continued to be mainly
by word of mouth, and the development of printing
not made the book rather than the teacher the
chief source of reference, Valentin Hauy might
never have thought of giving his pupils his enor-
mous quarto volumes with their pages covered with
ordinary letters embossed in large type. And,
40 years later, Louis Braille might have devoted
less care and thought to converting the meagre
system of sound symbols which his predecessor,
Charles Barbier, had suggested for the use of the
blind, into an alphabet capable of adaptation to
every language and every form of human know-.
ledge.
In the history of the rehabilitation of the blind
and of their gradual attainment of fundamental
human rights, the invention of the alphabet in rais-
ed dots marks the beginning of the era of their
intellectual emancipation. Since then, blind chil-
dren have been able to'study the same school
subjects as the sighted. Their programmes of
Britain's famous training centre for the blind, founded after World War I, follows a careful plan for rehabilitation.
Newcomer first gets Braille watch-a small but vital step to independence. Then he learns to be blind." (1) He
ista'jghttoread Braiiieandtotype. instructor is himself blind. (2) After learning to walk, wash, dress, St. Duns-
taners learn to enjoy their recreation (here a game of darts). (3) Next comes specialized instruction. This blind
man has been trained as a physiotherapist. (4) High skill of blind workers makes unemployment unlikely for
St. Dunstan"graduates."These men are checking machine parts to very fine limits. (5) Many are trained as
telephone operators. A number of firms have for many years asked St. Dunstan's to fill every suitable vacancy.
THE ST. DUNSTAN'S
TRAINING CENTRE
Instead of almost invariably being a burden on their relatives, as the sightless were
at one time, blind people now are often well-equipped to lead useful and happy lives.

expressions, dress, the setting of his existence and
which, while he may retain his own share of
individuality, develops in him a resemblance to his
fellows. The potential for developing the.'economic
man"is found in the opportunities for productive
and creative work or at least in the training for
it which sight makes possible.
The blind person, however, is restricted to the
boundaries of his own world which he must
patiently explore and chart. First he must learn
how to appear like other people ; he must pain-
fully acquire all the substitute skills that may help
him to bridge the tremendous initial gap between
his natural abilities and those of a sighted person,
and, in addition, he must overcome emotional
disturbances which so often spring from his
disability. From this we can see what"education"
and"culture"signify to the blind and to what
extent the ground to be covered goes beyond what
are generally called the mental faculties.
A hundred years ago it was a great achievement
to be able to teach a sightless person how to read,
write, count and to provide him with a minimum
of general knowledge. Today it means very little.
This is something which should never be forgotten
by those who work to free the blind from ignorance
in the unhappily numerous areas of the world
where educational opportunities are still extremely
limited.
It should be recognized, however, that while
culture, of a strictly intellectual order, may not
suffice alone, it is an indispensable condition, for
the substitution of one faculty for another is
primarily a mental process. Moreover, where a
sighted person understands and acts quickly and
without effort, because he can take in all the factors
invoved in deciding his action, the blind man must
go through slower processes of inference and
calculation.
The skill with which a blind man finds his way
about a city, the capabilities of the sightless"odd
job"man or worker, the blind woman who not
only copes. with all her domestic duties, but, quite
unaided, makes herself a becoming dress-here are
examples of how acquired knowledge may be put to
use. When competing with those who can see, the
blind can only hope for success through excelling
in some respect. Even to obtain a modest position
he must possess qualifications not generally requir-
ed for the post. It is therefore not unusual to find
blind university graduates working as telephoni'sts,
shorthand-typists and in other jobs which by no
means call fur the full use of their capabitities.
IN this article, we have had in mind chiefly theblind since childhood, although not because
there are more of them-two-thirds of the
blind are over 50 years old-but because their
situation sets them more sharply apart. We have
said nothing of Milton, Euler, Augustin Thierry,
Henry Fawcett, Handel or countless other poets,
scientists, scholars and artists who have contmued
their careers despite loss of sight. Their brains
continued their work ; others became their eyes.
Probably the most striking instance is that of Fran-
çois Hubert, the Swiss naturalist who impressed
his contemporaries in the late 18th century with
his observations on bees-observations made
through. the eyes of his servant.
Today many blinded people continue successful
careers in journalism, documentation services,
teaching and scientific research, with the help of
someone else's eyes.
There is no doubt that blind people have found
in the intellectual or aesthetic sphere, a means of
sublimating instinctive energies whose natural
outlet has been barred, and that they have sought
compensation in their pursuit of culture in all the,
forms and at all the levels they can reach. We
have shown that the world of the intellect remains
open to them, and it is natural that they should take
refuge there, even if, for some of them, it means a
certain overstraining of their natural aptitude
(he. Pierre llenri, ! I'ho is himself blind, has published In
French the life 01'the Blind and Tile Life and work of
Louis Braille.)
C IVILTZATION ran no longer be cmtent merely
with homo sapiens ; it needs man with a social
conscience, and homo economics, as Léon
Jouhaux has called him. Formal education may
lead to a development of the first of these, but it
plays only a small part in the formttion of the
other two. In a sighted person, social consciousness
derives from a spontaneous imitation cf everything
he sees around him, which determines his gestures,
study are the same though the method : of teaching
are different, and they receive the stme degrees.
Special libraries have slowly been buit up, mostly
by voluntary efforts, in which the adult blind can
find entertaining and instructive literatures, while
scores in Braille notation are published to enable
blind musicians to study and practise their art as
well as teach it.
In the less developed countries, wel'are work to
improve the lot of the blind sometimes results,
paradoxically, in educating people wto, had they
been able to see, would have remained illiterate,
Education then is regarded as he primary
condition for the emancipation of the blind. But
is education enough by itself ? Can ; ve say that,
where the blind have attained a certain standard
of education, they are automatically fr'ed from the
psychological and social constraints imposed by
their blindness ?
It would be wrong to believe this or to allow the
blind to do so. They need more than lnowledge or
university degrees if they are to have equal
chances in the world of those who car see. There
are plenty of examples where education, which
should have opened a door to freedom :'or the blind,
has merely stimulated the"malady of thought."
Having more to think of, they suIered more.
Spurred on by a strong desire to be compensated
for their disability or ill-advised by those around
them, the people we have in mind took up studies
which never helped them to make their way in
the world.
