Page I 2. MAY I 9 52 UNESCO) OUR
shelter of the valleys and fjords of Norway right
until the beginning of our present century.
From earliest time, the inhabitants of Norway
have shown a strong urge to express their
thoughts and ideas in terms of decorative art.
Undisputed master of his land for many
centuries, the Norwegian peasant was also a
skilled carpenter and woodworker. He turned
oak, birch, beech and fir into log dwellings and
farm buildings and furnished them with hand-
made objects ranging from carved furniture
to decorated beer bowls.
Peasant art was mostly a winter art, flourishing
during the cold, dark months when the home
became the centre of all family life.
The artistic development of painting, carving
and architecture, all of which are closely linked,
really began with the introduction of chimneys
into peasant houses. Until the Middle Ages, and
in some places even much later, the fire was
made in an open hearth. Before the smoke
escaped through a ljore or smokehole in the
roof, it obscured and blackened everything.
(Continued on þøge 14.)
THERE seems to be such an enormous differencein quality between the everyday household
objects we see displayed in museums and
those we actually use ourselves today. If we stop
for a moment to reflect that, before finding their
place in museum showcases, many of these
treasures were once considered little more than
ordinary objects, made and sold for common use,
we may well ask ourselves why so much beauty
and quality have gone out of the familiar objects
that surround us today.
Museum collectors comb the world in search of
the works of craftsmanship and art of old, and
painstakingly assemble them in truly magni-
ficent treasure houses for their own and future
generations to see and admire. But have we made
anything like a similar effort to bring more
beauty into our own everyday lives, into our
homes, into our cities, into our streets ? How
many of us, for example, accept with complacency
or with an apathetic shrug of the shoulder the
ghastly ugliness of our industrial suburbs ?
It is in this light of marrying art more closely
to our daily living and surroundings that I see
the peasant culture which flourished in the

MAY 952. Page 13
; pUR) ER

Page 4. WAYt951
The Norwegian home is like an ever-open book to which the tired peasant can
turn his mind when the daily toil is ended. The decoration of his furniture and
walls-and often of ceilings-can be compared to the illuminated manuscripts
which, in the Middle Ages, combined beauty, spiritual instruction and humour.
A BLENDING OF USEFULNESS AND ART IN EVERY OBJECT
(Continued from page/2.)'.,'-,,
Decorations therefore were limited to symbols
designed to ward off evil spirits : magic signs
or dragons'heads carved on wooden beams. On
feast days, tapestries woven by the womenfolk
were hung on the walls, relieving the drabness
of the bare wood with their variety of colours.
These tapestries, with their biblical figures or
geometrical designs, followed a traditional
technique still in use nowadays. Old Norwegian
peasant women can still be seen spinning and
dyeing the new wool and then weaving it on
antique wooden looms.
After the introduction of the chimney into the
home, the whole atmosphere of the living-room
changed. With the disappearance of smoke and
soot inside the house, the furniture and walls
began to be covered with permanent decorations.
First, symbolic geometrical designs were carved
on coffers, sideboards and beds ; then the carved
wood was covered by a simple coat of paint and
finally, as its possibilities were applied to the
reproduction of biblical or family themes, painting
became the basic element in decoration.
This is, of course, an over-simplincation since
the development did not occur simultaneously in
all parts of Norway. At Voss in western Norway,
for example, carved geometrical decorations
remained in vogue at a time when decorative
painting was being outstandingly developed in
the provinces of Telemark and Hallingdal. In
these two areas, graced with especially pictu-
resque landscapes, painting acquired a special
name, rosemaleri (rose-painting) from the use
of flower foliages as the basic motif.
The rose-painters soon became skilled crafts-
men both as housepainters and artists.
They went from farm to farm offering the
peasants their services. At times they travelled
into other provinces, where their work
influenced and enriched the existing local styles.
One of the most famous Norwegian rose-painters
was Olav Hanson of Telemark, whose works show
evidence of a sure hand, true powers of
observation and a developed sense of humour,
despite his reputation as a great drinker of
aquavit (alcohol distilled from potatoes).
Inscriptions got place of honour
AFTER the flower foliages, the subjects on doorpanels and wardrobes took the f rm f
remarkable little paintings. Borrowing from
illustrated bibles and religious pictures, the
artists painted reproductions of Old Testament
images alongside domestic scenes of feasts and
marriages. Heraldic animals also lent inspira-
tion, but the most common subject was that of a
peasant astride his horse.
The technique employed by these artists was
always very simple. Outlines were first skilfully
made with the brush and then vivid tones were
applied flat. Neither perspective nor relief was
very highly studied, and the treatment of the
subject was in general as simple as possible.
In these decorations, a place of honour was
given to inscriptions, with the lettering pro-
minently placed among flowers and arabesques.
This was especially true of the linen chest which
a bride even today traditionally receives from her
parents in rural Norway. The chest, usually an
ancient one, is repainted in bright colours, with
the bride's name and the date of her marriage
carefully inscribed inside. For many families,
dates on these bridal chests constituted a sort of
civil register.
Typical Norwegian peasant beer bowl.
It is difficult to follow the evolution of these
popular peasant styles because they intermingled
and no chronological records were kept. Never-
theless, one can distinguish two main currents.
The first is a sense of continuity in both
conception and technique springing from the
effect of the recurrent seasons on farm life. This
explains why we find prehistoric magic symbols
and Roman motifs side by side on 19th century
furniture. The second current is the slow and
late introduction of different European styles
which gradually became integrated with
Norwegian peasant art but did not destroy its
national character.
It was natural that folk art in a seafaring
country like Norway should be inspired by
souvenirs brought back from abroad by sailors.
The peasants'practice of decorating a horse's
harness with cowrie shells, which serve as money
in some parts of Africa, is one example. (See
back page cover.)
The popular rose-painter, Gunnar Anfinsen
Arekel, drew inspiration from material brought
from abroad by seamen in the early 19th century.
Arekel, who lived in the fjord of Hardanger in
South-west Norway, became a painter because he
was lame and could not work on the land. The
local pastor taught him the rudiments of drawing
and the young man eventually became nati01'''llly
known for his exquisite decorations of wedding
chests.
'--.",--.. : >-Fiance carved his proposal
THE Norwegian peasant's love for decorationexpressed itself in practically every piece
of furniture and wooden object at home.
The ancient wooden board used for ironing-
called the mangletre-was profusely decorated
and came to acquire a special symbolism as the
traditional love token of the peasant.
The mangletre-a forerunner of the modern
flat-iron-is still used as a love token in rural
Norway even today, in the same way as the Dutch
sabots, the Alpine casket and the African Bam-
bara clogs are in their own countries.
A narrow wooden board, about two feet long
with a handle in the shape of a horse, the
mangletre was (and still is), the peasant's
traditional"proposal of marriage."Before
proposing, the young nance spent long hours
patiently carving on it figured motifs, decorative
forms and lettering. Later, when in use, the flat
wooden board was rubbed against the laundry
until it was pressed. Today, hanging in the
home, the mangletre is a reminder of the
wedding day.
The Norwegian house is like an ever-open book
on whose pages the peasant can rest his eyes
and his thoughts. The decorations that brighten
the furniture, walls and often the ceilings, have
something in common with the illuminated
manuscripts of the Middle Ages which combined
beauty, spiritual teaching and the joy of colours.
Norwegian peasant art teaches a lesson of life,
going far beyond the mere study of style or
aesthetics. It is with this art, intimately linked
to everyday objects of the home and farm and
rich in symbolism, that the peasants, in spite of
their isolation, or perhaps because of it,
maintained a flourishing regional culture until it
began to lose its vigour with the growth of
industry at the start of our century.
Nowadays, art and usefulness are too often
divorced from each other. I do not of course
suggest that to bring them together we should
copy the decorative forms of Norwegian popular
art. They have spoken their language ; we should
speak our own. For there is nothing so sterile
in art as to seek to evade the present, and to
take refuge only in the past. But today our
streets are emptied of beauty to make room for
advertisements. Our homes are frequently
furnished with a thought only to material
comfort. Even our skies are used to proclaim
the virtues of this or that brand of soap,
spaghetti or tinned food. Surely, it is important
that the spiritual beauty of decorative art be
given greater meaning in our everyday lives.

MAY 952. Page) S
Children admire old Norwegian farmhouse at Bygdoy Open-Air Folk Museum. This painting in blue on a cupboard was influenced by Chinese porcelains.
Typical peasant bedroom for newly-weds and guests. Decorated about 1828. 18th century carvings on cupboard at Drammen, once centre of clay pipe making.
Detail of hand-woven biblical tapestry dating from 1625. It depicts the Adoration. Ancient chair from Telemark carved from single log, reserved for head of family.
=t. IER
