COURIER OCTOBER.) 951. Page
T echnical \\ briefing"brings Yugoslavia up-to-date
SHORT-TERM AID FOR A LONG-TERM POLICY
EQUESTS for technical assistance can rangefrom those which are so comprehensive that
they involve the entire economy of a coun-
try, to those, which only involve calling in a
specialist in making piston rings. The first
case may require the training of local experts
capable of transforming their country. The second
usually means that the local technicians and
engineers already exist and aIl they need is a
"briefing"to bring them up to date on the latest
developments in production techniques.
On the whole, Yugoslavia is in the second cate-
gory. It is relatively more developed than most
economically under-developed countries, and al-
ready has a substantial core of expert technicians.
During the war, however, most of them lost touch
with their colleagues and with technical develop-
ments in other countries.
Technical assistance to Yugoslavia therefore fol-
lows a somewhat different pattern from that esta-
blished in lesser developed countries. Instead of
sending teams on one-year or even two-year mis-
sions, the Technical Assistance Administration of
the U. N. has begun an experiment whereby highly
qualifted experts are being sent to Yugoslavia on
assignments lasting only a few weeks.
For a country like Yugoslavia, which has been
carrying on a nationwide development plan of
industrialization since 1947, the short-term assign-ment offers a number of distinct advantages. It
means that for a given sum of technical assistance
funds, many experts, in widely different fields can
be provided ; international specialists whose ser-
vices are needed in many countries will often
accept a brief job but not one where they are.'tied
up"for long periods ; and on the short assignment,
: ietailed advice can be given on difficulties which
may be blocking bigger developments that local
technicians can then cope with unaided.
Yugoslavia's Five-Year Plan of development has
touched almost every phase of the country's eco-
nomic life. The aim of the plan is to turn Yugo-
slavia into a modern industrialized nation with
an up-to-date agriculture. Its primary tasks, in
the past years, have been to raise the level of
industry and create new ones, expand electric
power production and speed the exploitation and
development of the con-
try's rich mineraI resour-. :
ces.
In the first three year,
the plan called mainly for
laying the foundations for 
Yugoslavia's industrializa-
tion-that is, erecting the
buildings, developing the
grids raising the dams,
and digging the tunnels
for power plants and frac-
tories. The programme
was delayed because vital
heavy machinery, such as
tturbines, blast furnaces,
generators and similar
equipment, which hua d
already been paid for,
were not delivered to Yu-
goslavia by certain for-
eign countries. .
The Yugoslavs have 
tried to meet this diffi-
culty by husbanding their resources, ingenuity
and improvization ; by making a good portion of
the machinery themselves ; and by buying it
either in exchange for their own exports or with
credits received from certain western countries.
The progress of the plan and the increase of
production in aIl fields, agricultural as weIl as
industrial, has been remarkable.
In the past four years, for example, new smelt-
ing ovens have been built in Croatia, a factory
for the manufacture of water turbines has been
completed in Slovenia, the cement factory in Split
(cement is one of Yugoslavia's most important
export products) has been rebuilt and enlarged,
and new electric power plants have sprung up aIl
over the country.,
For these and many other industries, Yugoslavia
has availed itself, and is continuing to do so, of
the short-term"briefing services"of the U. N.
Thus, the services of two cement experts from
Switzerland and France were provided for periods
of a month and three weeks to advise on various
problems affecting the cement industry. A U. S.
(yu, ofolo.)
. (Yufofoto.)
expert in the construction of locomotive industry
and bridges advised for one month on such highly
technical matters as locomotive dimensions, the
production of curved sheets for boilers, forging in
casting moulds, welding, and the machine finishing
of locomotive frames.
In response to requests for help in mlning and
electrification, short-term assignments have been
provided on the use of new drilling methods in
large mines, the mechanization of ore-loading and
transportation, and the roasting of mercury ore.
Technicians have been provided 00 advise in the
re-organization of the Turbine Industry Research
Institute at Ljubljana which is seeking to improve
research and development of hydrauIic turbines,
pumps, ventilators and screw propellors ; in the
mass production of electric motors and transform-
ers ; and in the construction of large units of
electrical machinery.
AU of these appointments have been for a
month or less. In certain cases, however, the
technicians have been sent in for longer periods.
Thus a Dutch sanitary and heating engineer
stayed in Yugoslavia for three months, and an
expert on weather forecasting for four months.
The longest appointment so far-12 months-
has been for the services of an expert on rural
electrification, one of the major targets of Yugo-
slavia's industrialization programme.
Alongside these'''weeks-and-months''experts
who are being provided by the United Nations,
another new method of technical assistance is
being tried in Yugoslavia for the first time by the
International Labour Office.
It has often been found that experts. come up
against a hast of practical problème in giving the
full benefit of their experience and training ta
the country they are sent to. Perhaps the most
difficult problem-especially if it relates 00 in-
dustrial training-. arises out of the inability of
the expert to reach the actual worker in the fac-
tory or workshop.
For this reason, the ILO has undertaken 00 help
workers from Yugoslav factories ta get practical
on-the-job training in industrial establishments
abroad. In addition 00 sending 44 foremen-
instructors to Yugoslavia, ILO is arranglng 00
place as many as 377 workers in factories abroad
for periods ranging from 6 ta 12 months. Of these,
263 are already skilled workers who will recelve
advance practical training abroad ; 114 are compa-
ratively young workers having completed their
apprenticeship who will acquire further skills. The
trades in which they will receive training range
from electronics. to foundry practice, from paper
manufacture 00 ship construction, from aeronau-
tics 00 railway engineering, and from precision
instrument making to lorry construction. The
first Yugoslav workers 00 be trained under this
scheme began work this summer.
Unesco, too, is providing technical aid 00 Yugo-
slavia. At the request of the government, a Unesco
exploratory mission was sent 00 the country in
November 1951 and agreed with the Government
that the most urgent need was for a national,
scientific and technical documentation centre ta
service scientific and technical research workers
and students with up-to-date information.
A Unesco three-man mission has now arrived
in Belgrade. The Centre, which is now being
set up, will co-ordinate aIl the scientific and tech-
nical documentation produced by Yugoslav insti-
tutions, will put micro-films within the reach of
research workers, and will enable Yugoslavs 00
benefit from technical abstracts and bibliogra-
phies produced in other countries.
This is only part of the whole story of technical
assistance in Yugoslavia. Other U. N. agencies such
as FAO, WHO, UNICEF and the Monetary Fund
are aU participating 00 help Yugoslavia in the tre-
mendous effort which is transforming the life and
countryside of this nation.
