THE profile of El Salvador is rugged and so is lifefor its people.
Smailest of the Central American republics
(160 miles long and 60 miles wide), it has one of
the highest population densities in the Western
Hemisphere. Both its birth-rate and death-rates are
high. The average expectation of life is only 26 years.
While 40 per cent of its inhabitants are under 15 years
of age, only 4 per cent are over 60.
The average income of the majority of the families
is less than M50 a year-less than 60 cents a day.
TIliteracy in El Salvador is extremely high. By
law, education is universal and compulsory, but every-
where there is poor enrolment and poor attendance.
Children are family wage-earners and there is an
acute shortage of schools and teachers, which the
government is trying to remedy. Last year, the Mi-
nistry of Education's budget was double that of 1950.
This mountainous country, straddled by 11 major
volcanoes, is primarily agricaltural. About 80 per cent
of the arable land is cultivated, but methods are pri-
mitive. For example, El Salvador is third among the
world's coffee exporting countries-about 136 million
pounds a year-but 25 per cent of the coffee trees
produce 75 per cent of the crop. Destruction of forests
has been responsible for a serious water-shortage in
the country, although the average rainfall is 75 inches
a year.
The minera ! weaith of El Salvador is mainly in gold
and silver, which rank second only to agriculture in
value. Industry, which suffers from lack of electric
power, is restricted largely to the processing of agri-
cultural products. Transportation is limited by the
highways (less than 1, 600 miles improved roads) and
by only 375 miles of railway track.
Thus, El Salvador is, with ail thèse problems, an
under-developed country whose government is anxious
rapidly to advance the coantry's standards and pro-
duction. It turned to the U. N. for aid, even before the
officiaI Expanded Programme began. In 1947, ILO
sent a mission for consultations on a proposed social
insurance scheme. In 1948, the International Bank
sent a mission to study the possibilities of the Lempa
River Hydro-Electric Scheme and authorized a loan
of tl2, 545, 000. UNICEF since 1948 has covered sup-
plementary feeding for children, maternai and child
health and a BCG vaccination programme.
In 1950, FAO and the Economic Commission for
Latin America made El Salvador the first of the Cen-
tral American countries to be studied in the survey on
agricultural credit. Extensive bilateral help has been
made available by the USA. Since July 1951, the
United Nations and its specialized agencies have had
a comprehensive mission in El Salvador.
A United Nations experiment of world-wide import-
ance as weil as of local benefit is the Cuscatlan
Valley Demonstration Project. After El Salvador
offered to provide the site and facilities for a health
demonstration project, an agreement was signed in
March 1951 by WHO on behalf of itself, FAO, ILO.
the United Nations, Unesco and ICAO. WHO
contributed $150, 000 to cover the cost of technical
personnel, equipment and supplies, and assigned
25 specialists to the project.
The Demonstration Area is located in the central
part of the country, immediately north of San Sal-
vador. It was selected because it was fairly typical,
not only of the country, but of many other areas in
Latin America.
It embraces mountains, valleys and fertile plains.
waste lands and rivers. It contains a number of
fairly large towns and many villages and hamlets.
large plantations and small individually owned farms.
There are no substantial factories, but there are active
cottage industries and small workshops, particularly
hand-weaving. The schools in the area are in-
adequate both in number and in accommodation.
Only one of the five municipalities in the area had a
resident doctor and there was only one nutrition
centre.
In September 1951 a combined operation by the
Government, WHO and UNICEF tackled malarial
conditions there. In three months the Insect Control
Programme had been applied to the entire area and
to neighbouring localities. Some 17, 500 houses, affect-
ing 105, 000 people, were DDT sprayed. Training
courses were conducted for graduate nurses, sanitary
inspectors and auxiliary nursing personnel.
By the end of 1951, the government had spent
$46, 000 on the preparations for this experiment of
international import, which is to provide a practical
example of what can be done in providing environ-
mental sanitation, maternai and child health nutrition,
control of malaria, tuberculosis, venereal and other
communicable diseases, dental hygiene, laboratory ser-
vices, health education and public health training.
But health problems cannot be separated from
hunger, ignorance and debased conditions of life.
Other participating agencies are also taking their part
in this area-experiment. Many physical problems of
agricultural production require attention, such as
drainage, irrigation, conservation and proper utiliza-
tion of the soil. FAO is making a detailed economic
and scientific analysis of the demonstration area to
determine the approach to certain land use problems
and thus assist in its agricultural development.
Unesco has assigned two experts to thé team, one
in gênera ! fundamental éducation and one in literacy
techniques. They are making plans to conduct.
fundamental education in the valley and to train rural
health workers in fundamental education techniques
for their work in the villages, first in the valley and
later on throughout the country.
It is not the function of technical assistance to
create a Valley of Privilege in an under-privileged
country. The objects of Cuscatlan are to enable the
government to extend the experience gained to the
whole country, and, beyond that, to set an example
for other countries in like circumstances. Cuscatlan
is, therefore, an international laboratory for the study
of social, economic and technical problems. The initial
benefits which will accrue to the 100, 000 people co-
operating in these experiments, may be multiplied a
thousandfold if the experience gained here is made
available and adopted in similar areas throughout the
worid.
UNESCO
