UNESCO COURIER-Page 10 MARCH t952
LOUIS BRAILLE
unlocked the doors of darkness for millions
of blind men and women throughout the world
LOUIS BRAILLE, one of the truly great men
t of alt time, died a hundred years ago,
unknown to the world. But his simple
"touch"alphabet of raised dots for read-
ing and writing by the blind-developed
when he was only 16-has since spread his
name to every corner of the earth and unlocked
the once hopeless doors of darkness for mil-
lions of the world's sightless.
"Braille died a complete human being,
though blind,"Helen Keller has written."He
was great because he had greatly used his loss
of sight to liberate his afflicted fellow creatures.
He had both lived and died in the
glorious light of a victorious spirit
and a brilliant, inventive intellect."
This summer, to honour this
victorious spirit and inventive in-
tellect, the French Government is
transferring the remains of Louis
Braille from his humble tomb in
the village of Coupvray, 23 miles
from the capital, to the Panthéon
in Paris, where he will be buried
among his country's illustrious dead.
In many other nations, too, the
100th anniversary of his death is
being observed this year.
The son of a saddler, Braille was
born at Coupvray on January 4.
1809, At the age of three he lost
his sight when a sharp instrument
he was playing with in his father's
shop accidentally entered his eye.
An infection developed in both eyes
and he became totally blind. When
Louis was 10, he was taken to Paris
and was enrolled in the Institute
for the Young Blind. It was at this
school-the first educational insti-
tution for the blind, opened 35 years
earlier by Valentin Hairy-that
Braille distinguished himself as it
brilliant student and then became a
teacher of geometry and algebra
(his favourite subjects) as well as of
music. It was here that he learned
of t. he various raised characters used
to help the blind to read, and here
he finally evolved his own ingenious
system of dots.
Braille was not, however, by any
means the first to develop the system
of raised characters. The desire of
the blind for literacy and the efforts
of their sighted friends to open the
way for them, had led to innumer-
able experiments in embossed letters
and other schemes for many hun-
dreds of years before Braille's time.
Letters cut out of paper, pins stuck
into cushions or cards, geometrical
shapes enclosing raised dots, even
cleverly knotted strings were all
used in early attempts.
The first records of the actual use
of raised type for the blind date
from iûth century Spain and Italy.
Francisco Lucas of Saragossa, in
1571, devised a set of letters carved
on thin tablets of wood. In 157 ;),
Rampazetto of Rome improved this
somewhat.
Both methods, however, seem to
have been inspired by the earlier
teachings and writings of JeronlP
Cardan, of Italy, who had advocated
a system of reading by touch about
the year 1550.
A century later, a Jesuit priest.
FAtnpT'Ii'T'An/"p< :/,, () T. AnA T'p/" {) Q'ni7pn-----.-----------------,---- ('------
a new idea that Braille and his immediate
predecessor, Captain Barbier, were to develop
later : the potential usefulness of a cipher code
based on a number of dots enclosed in rect-
angles. In his book Prodrome. he even
proposed a'writing stylus and a wooden
writing frame with strings to indicate the lines.
Then followed a great number of inventors
who proposed various devices, including the use
of wooden movable letters, cast metal letters,
printing on copper. Of these attempts at em-
bossed type, undoubtedly the best known is that
of Valentin Hazy, who has been called the
"Father and Apostle of the Blind."
In 1771, Valentin Haüy saw a group of blind
men being hooted and laughed at by a crowd at
a Paris fair on the place Louis-) e-Grand-to-
day the place Yendòme. Horrified, he deter-
mined to devote his life to improving the lot of
the sightless.
One day, some time afterwards, he found a
blind boy begging in front of the Church of St-
Germain-des-Pres in Paris and decided to take
him home with him to try and educate him.
Haüy taught the boy, whose name was Lesueur,
to read with letters carved on wooden tablets-
similar to the method introduced by Lucas and
Rampazetto, It was slow, cumbersome and
difficult.
Then by accident to the story goes), when
Haüy was busy writing one afternoon, Lesueur
'ONE OF THE TRULY GREAT MEN OF ALL TIME'
In the village square at Coupvray, birthplace of Louis Braille, stands the
monument erected in his memory in 1887, thirty-five years after he had died
unknown. On one side of the seven-foot pedestal a bronze relief shows
Braille teaching a blind child how to read ; on the other is the Braille alphabet.
began sorting some papers on his desh. Sud-
denly the boy came across an invitation card
printed in heavily embossed relief letters and
found he could recognize some of the letters.
This gave Haüy the idea that teaching the
blind to read by raised letters on printed card-
board (embossed letters) was better than using
raised type or tablets directly.
Pierre Henri, an authority on Louis Braille
and his predecessors, doubts this story."I am
inclined to wonder,"he has written."whether
he did not get the idea from an addendum to
the 1783 edition of the LeUf'/'011 the Blind, in
which Diderot told how a Paris printer named
Pral1lt had produced a book printed in relief for
the use of a distinguished blind girl, Mile de
:- ; alignac."
In any event, whatever really inspired Hazy,
effort to meet these difficulties.
None of these embossed type
methods survives today except Moon
type. Invented by a blind English-
man, Dr. William Moon, this way
still fills the special needs of older
people whose touch is not good
enough to read Braille's raised dots.
The revolutionary idea of re-
presenting letters by raised dots did
not come from Louis Braille, how-
ever, but from Charles Barbier de la
Serre, a French Army officer in the
Signal Corps. Barbier devised a
system of"night writing"for
soldiers to communicate with one
another in the field after dark.
He then thought of applying it to
the blind and presented his system
to the Institute for the Young Blind
in Paris. Barbier's night writing
had 12 dots arranged in various posi-
tions and could be punched on to
paper. The Institute tried it out
and adopted it as a supplementary
teaching method.
But Barbier's system was compli-
cated. It occupied too much space
and was cumbersome for fingers ;
also it had to be deciphered, since
it was a code and not an alphabet.
Braille, a master in the Institute
at the time, became interested in the
idea. As a teacher, he saw its draw-
backs for spending and punctuation.
But the system could at least be
written since Barbier had also devis-
ed the metal frame for punching
the dots on paper. He set to work
to try to simplify it and make it
more easily usable by the fingers of
a blind man.
He reduced the 12-dot squares to
six. The six dots could be felt by
the finger tip at one go. Dropping
the idea of ciphers, Braille decided
to work out various combinations of
the dots to form the alphabet. He
arranged the six dots in three pairs,
one above the other, as in a domino.
"It has been said,"Pierre Henri
wrote,"that the reason why Louis
Braille's system has proved superior
to all other forms of writing for the
blind is that it bore the stamp of
genius. To put it more simply, it
results from a combination of skill
with patient and methodical labour.
Only a blind man could have ar-
ranged dots in groups which exactly
correspond to the requirements of
the sense of touch. Reduce the
number of dots, and the available
signs become obviously insufficient ;
add to their number, and the sign
can no longer be covered by the
finger tip, nor so easily read.
"Braille did not rest content with
giving an alphabet to the blind. From the
outset, by allotting double or triple values to
each sign, he presented a system of musical
notation, a set of elementary mathematical
symbols, and a system of shorthand so that the
blind could satisfy not only their desire for
culture, but also their professional needs."
Braille died on January W, 1852 with no idea
that his system would be universally adopted
by blind people in every part of the world.
Even in his own school he had great difficulty
in getting his method recognized and used.
Only after his death was it officially adopted in
French schools for the blind.
Today, without the Braille system, the world's
7, 000, 000 sightless would be deprived of the
most powerful key to human freedom and
scholarship ever devised for the blind.
it was with this new method that he decided to
try to teach other blind children. In it8/1, he
opened the world's first school for blind chil-
dren-the Institute for Young Blind, which
Louis Braille was to enter : 3 ;) years afterwards
- and by the end of its first year it put the first
embossed books at the finger tips of the blind.
His Institute is still in existence today in
Paris.
Hauy's system, however, remained difficult
to read by touch, and practically impossible to
write. Changes and improvements were con-
stantly being made in different countries in an
