Monsieur Pascal, the teacher in"Ecole Buissonnière", give
AFTER being a cinema critic inMontevideo for nearly 15
years, and before that a
cinema fan for almost as long, I
went to London in the middle of
the last war. Soon my interest in
moving pictures dropped to an
unforeseen extent.
The events of everyday life in a
struggling city became to me
actually far more absorbing than
the screen exploits I used to
admire in the provincial peace of
my childhood and early. youth.
Even the magic of some well-
remembered lyrical film'would
appear quite thin when compared
to the poetic stature people around
me seemed to acquire under the
ever-present impact of death.
Mine was not an individual
experience. It happened to millions
of people during the last ten or 15
years. Eventually its consequences
were to provoke a crisis in the
cinema industry, faced nowadays
with dwindling box-Office receipts
all over the world. The factory of
wonders seems to have lost its old
appeal, or at least to have let life
supersede it.
For, along with all its horrors,
wonders never ceased to crop up
during the last war, and have never
ceased since. The greatest feats of
the war are still too preposterous
to be re-created before the Klieg
lights. In the imagination of
millions of people, the miracles of
antibiotics, rocket weapons, jet
planes and of atomic developments
have become a challenge to the
tired wonders of life in Technicolor.
New elements are added to this
challenge every day. The future is
charged with suspense. On the
purely mechanical side, science
fiction on the screen has not dealt
even adequately with the exciting
prospect that space ships and
interplanetary trips offer to pro-
ducers.
What kind of super-wonder could
the cinema invent now to compete
with contemporary events and
exert once again the hypnotic
attraction it once had for the
masses ? The answer to this ques-
tion was clear enough in 1940, when
John Ford made The Grapes of
Wrath and presented man as a
fully-sledged creature that we could
recognize and feel identified with,
and not just a figment of the
screenwriter's imagination.
More than ever man, amidst the
magnificent nightmare of his
present life, now needs to know
himself, to look into himself. The
screen can help him to do this with
a strength and urgency no other
art could equal.
It is now some 30 years since the
documentary cinema, under the
banner of Flaherty, began to pave
the way for the introduction of
man in films-absurd as this word
"'introduction"may sound to some
people. But Flaherty looked for
real and vivid media quite exotic
to most of us ; the snows of the
frozen North, the stony fields of
Aran, the Indian jungle, the
swamps of Louisiana.
Another school of documentary
films flourished in England during
the war, depicting Britain under
the stress of battle-still a fa-
bulous adventure from the stand-
point of ordinary life, for all the
exacting organization, social as
well as technical, that went into it.
In many post-war feature films a
superficial preoccupation with the
documentary had led directors to
give us real locations-although
very rarely real characters or reac-
tions.
Thus, apart from a few out-
standing exceptions, the docu-
mentary at its best has beeh
a lesson-vital, perceptive and
poetic, as well as informative-on
the unusual and extraordinary,
either in background or way of life.
What we apparently needed,
though, was to go back to the
ordinary and extract from it new
sources of enjoyment and of confid-
ence in mankind. The.'neo-
realistic"film, as critics called it
from the start, sprang from this
necessity. It concerned itself with
an interpretation of the individual
called, in a revolting cliché,"the
common man"-the Western com-
mon man and his circumstance,
spiritual as well as geographical
and social.
As in a few memorable aims of
the"silent"era, man became in
this type of film no longer a pretext
to serve the mechanics of fiction,
but the central element, the very
soul of the work. The difference
between the present and the past
is that in silent films, with their
star system, man invariably turned
into an archetype. Chaplin gave
us his romantic tramp ; Fairbanks
his Quixote in plus-fours.
Only a score of films in post-war
years have really succeeded in
making heroes of each one of us-
with all our defects, hopes and
anxieties. Most of these films have
met with universal success. In
depicting man and his present, as
well as his eternal, plight with
nobility they have invariably struck
the note of Human Rights, as
defined in the United Nations
Universal Declaration.
This is a curious and generally
unnoticed fact, and a most en-
couraging one. Yet facts must
needs be illustrated with examples.
Here are some, chosen at random.
The Italian, De Sica, one of the
creators of the'''neo-realistic''
school, dealt with the rights to
work and to an adequate standard
of living in Bicycle Thieves, and
with the child's right to education
and welfare in the unforgettable
Sciuscia-a theme Bunuel was
going to enlarge upon in Los
olvidados.
The racial side of Human Rights
was the particular province of a
host of brilliant Hollywood direct-
ors-Elia Kazan, de Rochemont,
Clarence Brown-in a series of
films on the Negro which went
from the slightly conventional to
the absolute genuine in spirit. A
poignant British work, Cry, the
Beloved Country, adapted from
the novel of the same name, has
recently been added to the list.
The right to protection of the
moral and material interests re-
sulting from a scientific production
was at the core of that brilliant
satire, The Man in the White Suit,
although this film does not entire-
ly belong in the new movement.
A minor, sincere work of Bernard
Miles, Chance of a Lifetime, treated
the collective rights of workers and
the right to own property"in
association with others". In Jus-
tice est fate, another film which
enters into a more conventional
category, Cayatte dealt with the
right to the law's protection.
Now the main preoccupation of
the producers and directors of
these films was not to illustrate
certain aspects of the Human
Rights enumerated in the Universal
Declaration. But it is symptomatic
of the vital importance these rights
have on the lives of us all that,
implicitly or explicitly, they are
present in such significant works
of the contemporary cinema.
Nor is this likely to be a mere
coincidence during a passing trend.
Television will eventually devise a
new type of factual film with a
direct appeal to its living-room
audiences. This low-budgeted,
quickly-made film will have to
depend on some special intimate
quality communicable to the half-
dozen people who form the average
TV audience.
It is quite probable that modern
man, with his problems, his rights,
and all that forms the complicated
texture of our lives, will be the
main theme of that special form
of drama.
The sooner studio executives
realize there is a new glamour on
the way-a glamour that is cheaper
but, except for men of great
artistic integrity, far more elusive
than the one they imposed on the
public for so long-the better for
the education of the masses, to
say nothing of the film makers'
threatened finances.
As it changes its mood and
content, the cinema cannot but
help the implementation of Human
Rights. The prospect before us is,
in this respect, quite stimulating.
Albert, the school dunce, is a bitter and unhappy boy v
whole outlook changes when he gets understanding treat
A scene in"Broken Barrier''-Maoris cook food by
hot water vapour in a"hangi", or trench, during a tribal cere
In addition to offering a lesson in racial harmony,"Broken

The'dunce'knew his lesson
tiers", gives popular lessons. When possible, the practical replaces the theoretical.
appy boy whose
mding treatment.
Schooling takes on new interest when everyone can share in
building a hydro-electric motor with improvised equipment.
k food by using
tribal ceremony.
Tom Sullivan, the European journalist and Rowi, the Maori
nurse,. meet for the first time. Love overcomes race prejudice.
y,"Broken Barrier"presents a magnificent documentary record of New Zealand life.
M f PASCAL was a young man who,after passing out of a French*"*'* Teacher 'Training College in
July 1914, was immediately mobilized into
the Army.
The day he should have been taking
his first class, he was fighting in the
Battle of the Marne, and during the next
four years his only pupils were the men
he commanded.
He was wounded, spent a long time in
hospital and finally came back into
civilian life with a desire"finally to do my
job as a school teacher, to work for a
better way of things and to start every-
thing afresh with children, for they
are a beginning in themselves."
The film Ecole Buissonnière tells what
happens to M. Pascal after he is sent to
a village named Salezes, in the moun-
tainous part of Provence. The villagers
are friendly but rather suspicious of the
"new methods"which the teacher be-
lieves will help to make him liked and
understood by the children, and which
also will help to develop their qualities
and youthful intelligence.
Pascal's ideas are very different from
those of the former village teacher
whose guiding principles might well be
summed up as : order, punishments,
discipline, texts learned by heart and
arms folded in class.
The new master soon wins over the
children to his ways, but a section of the
village remains hostile, as does one of the
boys, Albert, the dunce who has already
failed three times to obtain his general
certificate of education.
But there are certain extenuating
circumstances in Albert's case. People in
the village say of him :"Oh ! he's the
son of a man who never came to much,
and who was killed in the war."
To such people Pascal retorts :"He's
the son of a hero."Finally, with much
difficulty, the teacher wins Albert over
to his side.
But resistance to the'''now methods"
increases and the threat that he will be
sent elsewhere if he persists, drives the
teacher to make a risky wager. Offering
to let all his eligible pupils, including
Albert, sit for the general education cer-
tificate examination, Pascal says that if
one of them fails he will ask for his own
transfer to another school.
Albert is, of course, the shakiest of the
candidates. Though he has made some
progress since his previous examination
failures, he is still weak on history and
he can remember neither the date of the
Battle of Agincourt nor when Louis XIV
died.
In geography he is even wider of the
mark. When the examiner asks him the
specious question :"What is the name of
the mountain which separates France
from England ?" he replies"Waterloo."
But he does know, however, that
"every Frenchman has the right to speak,
write and print freely."As the examiner
shows surprise that he is so well versed
in this particular subject, Albert tells
him :"That is in the Declaration of the
Rights of Man."
On this question, Albert's knowledge
seems inexhaustible."The Rights of
Man", he says,"also means women's
rights, and those of children too. Of
course, I've only just found out about
this. Before, all I heard about were my
duties. Nobody ever mentioned rights."
Unfortunately, Albert is stumped when
the examiner asks him the date of the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and is
Bnce more thrown on the defensive.
"I'm trying to talk to you with my
heart more than with memory", he says.
"I've remembered everything I've un-
derstood. I didn't know the date of
the Battle of Agincourt, but I do know
what Human Rights are :'All human
beings are born free and equal in dignity
and rights... everyone is free to hold
opinions without interference.'"
Finally, Albert's eloquence on the-
subject of Human Rights wins the day.
He and all the other boys from the
village school pass the examination, thus.
winning a victory for Pascal's ideas.
Jean-Paul Le Chanois, who wrote the
scenario and dialogue for the film, tells
a moving little story about the shooting
of this particular scene in the studios at
Nice. The boy who was playing the role
of Albert found the texts from the De-
claration of the Rights of Man difficult
to enunciate, and it was only when the
examination scene was being shot for
the third time that the boy said his lines
perfectly.
While this was going on a remarkable
atmosphere reigned through'out the
studio. The studio technicians, carpent-
ers, electricians and others who normally
go about their business without paying
too much attention to what is happening
on the set, stopped to listen and watch.
As the shout of"cut"brought the
shooting to a close, the chief electrician
turned to Le Chanois and said :"I was
sure he wouldn't make a mistake that
time... I was saying the words along with
him."
When the film was completed, all those
who had shared in its production
- workers, technicians and actors-
attended the traditional dinner to
celebrate the occasion. But this time
those present did not sing the songs
which usually conclude the dinner.
Instead, recalling the scene in the film,
they got up, one after the other, to
expound the rights proclaimed in 1789 in
France's Declaration of the Rights of
Man..
Breaking down race barriers
B ROKEN BARRIER", a dramatic fea-ture film made by Roger Mirams,
a New Zealand film producer,
deals with the subject of racial relations
between Maoris and Europeans, and pre-
sents a striking example of how Article 2
of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (Everyone is entitled to all the
rights and freedoms... without distinction
of any kind... such as race, colour...) is
applied in New Zealand.
Full legal and political equality for the
Maoris has existed in New Zealand for
many years, and is taken for granted.
They elect their own members of par-
liament, every profession is open to
them and they have achieved distinction
in'all fields.
Yet though the film indicates clearly
enough the very harmonious race rela-
tions between Maoris and Europeans, a
certain amount of prejudice and colour
consciousness does exist at the level of
personal and social relationships, such
as those brought about by intermarriage
between Maoris and Europeans.
Broken Barrier tells a simple, ro-
mantic story of a young Maori girl, the
daughter of a well-to-do farming family,
who meets a European, a journalist
whose parents are conservative middle
class people. When the young couple
decide to marry, they meet opposition
from their parents.
The success of the film, which is
showing in crowded cinemas in New
Zealand, demonstrates that this parti-
cular problem, though some people
discuss it less openly than others, does
still exist.
Some of the actors are professional or
semi-professional players, but most of
those who appear were recruited on the
spot. The film story is told against a
wide background of contemporary New
Zealand life.
From scenes filmed on the coast and
on a large Maori sheep and cattle farm.
the story moves to Wellington, the ca-
pital city and then to Rotorua, a regior
much visited by tourists. The camera
goes into Maori and European homes,
hospitals and country schools, so that
while telling a story of conflict caused by
colour, it also presents a fine docu-
mentary record of New Zealand.
The idea for making Broken Barrier
came from a former member of the Film
Division of Unesco, Mr. Gordon Mirams,
who was in Paris in 1948 when the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
was adopted there by the United Na-
tions General Assembly.
On his return to New Zealand, where
he. is now Chief Government Censor and
Registrar of Films, Mr. Mirams suggested
to his brother, Roger, that he should
make a film illustrating Article 2 of the
Universal Declaration.
Roger Mirams, working with another
young New Zealander, John O'Shea, who
became co-producer, director and script-
writer, carried out the venture. The
musical score by Sydney John Kay, an
Australian composer, is largely based on-
traditional Maori folk melodies.
Those who see this film when it is
shown in other countries will agree with
the mother of the young Maori girl when
she says..."There will be difficulties... but
we have all come a long way."She is
speaking not only for the young couple
who have decided to go ahead and marry,
but also for the people of New Zealand
as a whole and for all the peoples of the
world to whom the Universal Declaration
is addressed.
