Page JULY952. UNESCO
WHAT PEOPLE IN DELHI LIKE TO READ
CONTRASTING TASTES OF EAST AND WEST
by Frank M. GARDNER
Unesco Consultant, Delhi Public Library ; Borough Librarian, Luton, England
WHO are the potential library readers, and what do they want toread ? What subjects are they interested in ? What are their
demands for information as <lfainst recreation ? Most import-
tant of all, do they want books at all ?
The Delhi Public Library, opened by the Prime Minister of India
last October, and sponsored jointly by the Indian Ministry of Education
and Unesco, is able to give a partial reply to some of these questions.
of interest not only to librarians but also to publishers, booksellers and
authors. It can, in the process, also ask a few more. The last
(Illeslion. at any rate. will be easily answered. In rust over four
months, over 28, 000 books have been
lent for home reading, and over
130, 000 people have visited the various
departments. The total would have
been greater if the premises had been
larger and bookstocks bigger. Seldom
can an experimental institution have
met with such an overwhelming res-
ponse.
Answers to other questions are
naturally affected by the available
stock of books, which is still small,
but already there are some interesting
contrasts with the public library user
in England, and they raise some im-
portant problems for the future.
Although the library stock is in
three languages, demand for books in
Hindi predominates, to the extent
of two-thirds of the total. And
almost two-thirds of these, in turn,
are fiction, which is almost the same
proportion as in English libraries. Is
that a good thing or bad ? Without
expressing an opinion on the quality
of the novel in Hindi, I should say it
is good. Imaginative expression is a
sure sign of cultural virility, and
having had my greatest pleasures in
life through reading for entertain-
ment, I should be the last to deny
others the same opportunities.
Turning to fact instead of fiction,
the Indian library reader has very
different tastes from the English one.
In Hindi, the most wanted subject is
literature, then sociology, biography,
and philosophy, in that order. Few
books are borrowed on history, fine
arts, languages and science, and the
demand for technical books is only
moderate.
The Delhi Library, only a few
months after its inception, is lending
as many books on philosophy as my
own library in England, and over
half as many on sociology, but only
a tenth as many on technical subjects,
and less than a fortieth on fine arts.
The interest in philosophy is a
tribute to India's pre-eminence in the
field, but the interest in sociology is
not so good if it is at the expense of
other subjects. One reason for the
unbalance is, of course, the lack of
books. One notices in lists of books
from Indian publishers and book-
sellers a preponderance of works on
theoretical subjects-politics, econo-
mics, accountancy, statistics and law.
There seems to be more interest in
politics than people, more in manage-
ment than making, more in social
conditions than social life. There
seen to be few books, indigenous
either by language or by subject, on
the subjects that in England form the
bulk of library reading : home-mak-
ing, sports, gardening, hobbies, nature
study, popular science, travel.
Why is this so ? With very inadequate facts to go on, it seems
to me that the educated library reader is at the university level, and
mainly interested in pursuing a set course of study. Below that level,
the wants of the reader have either not yet been expressed or realized
by publishers, except to some extent in fiction. The cultural oppor-
tunities ofl'ered by the public library will become of greater importance.
It is necessary that the nature of the problems is realized early in library
development.
MODEL FOR AN ENTIRE CONTINENT
PEOPLE in many countries are seeking the information, education and enter-
P tainment which public libraries offer. This has been demonstrated by the
Delhi Public Library, a pilot project begun by the Government of India and
Unesco last October. Since then thousands of readers have used its
services. If it had not been created, most of these people would have been
unable to obtain the books they need and obviously want. Flocking into the
library every day are all sorts of people : rich and poor, educated and those
who have never been to school, adults and children. All of them are served,
but the library staff gives special attention to people with little formal
education-those who have recently learned to read. They will get even more
help in the months to come as the library begins a mobile service and expands
its programme of sub-branches in literacy centres. The Delhi Public Library
is doing a job of serving many people in one city, but there are thousands of
other cities, towns and rural districts which need this kind of service. Unesco
lacks the funds to help start public libraries in all of these places, but it
points to the pilot project in Delhi as a model which could be followed
elsewhere, especially throughout India and other parts of Asia. In view of
the success of the Delhi Library, Unesco has decided to set up a similar project
in Latin America., in co-operation with the Government of Colombia.
Photo below shows Pondit Nehru, India's Prime Minister, inspecfinq the De1hi Library
after its inauguration last year. Above,"story hour"in the children's department.
English women read more than men
TT ow does the Indian reader use a library ? He uses it very well,probably better than his British counterpart. He certainly returns
his books more promptly, and handles them as carefully. I have
personally been most impressed by the quietness of readers and their
general behaviour, and have even had the experience of being asked
by a reader to talk more quietly to a member of the staff-something
that never happened to me in England.
Do they steal more books ? There is no evidence of that as yet,
but even in England, after a hundred years of libraries, some people
Another striking contrast is in the
age of readers. In England, the pro-
portion of the child population using
the public library is very high, run-
ning up to 75 per cent in my own
town. Then it declines sharply as
children leave school, and the age
groups 15 to 25 are least strongly
represented.
Efforts are made to attract ado-
lescents to library use through the
youth organizations, but without much
success. In Delhi, no such problem
exists. It is obvious to the most
casual reader that young people
around 18 are the public library's most
devoted users. What they read, and
what they would like to read, will be
an interesting topic for closer study
in the future.
Helping the writers
BUT a library needs books as wellas readers, and children's books
are woefully inadequate, both in
quantity and quality. Quantity is
a problem that will solve itself as
demand increases, but quality in
children's books is a recent develop-
ment even in the U. S. A. and England.
If children's libraries can estab-
lish a firm market for well-printed
and well-illustrated books, they wn !
do a great service to education in India
generally, and. co-operation here is
most important.
In fact, the problem is a more
general one. The potential library
readers in India already exist, and
will increase enormously in the next
decade. I have already mentioned
the new class of readers that will
arise. Where will the books come
from ? In the English language, the
number of titles in print must be
more than 250, 000, and the annual
output must be 30, 000 or 40, 000,
Although one can make no more than
a guess at the availability of Hindi
titles of books suitable for a public
library, there are probably not more
than 7, 000 to 10, 000, and the annual
output cannot be over 2, 000, including
pamphlets. Of these many are badly
printed in unsuitable editions. In the
west, the growth of public libraries
followed the production of books in
quantity. In India, the two things
must grow together. Libraries can
have a direct influence on supply by
creating a firm market for suitable
books.
Here is a new problem for a lib-
rary ; net merely to buy the books
for its readers, but to assist in creat-
ing the books themseives by encou-
raging authors, publishers and book-
sellers to place on the market more
and better works.
If public libraries in India are to
play their full part in democratic
development, they must meet this challenge and turn it into an oppor-
tunity. It is an opportunity far greater than that facing the public
libraries of England a hundred years ago, because the need is more
urgent.
Libraries will naturally assist in the spread of literacy, but literacy
is a means not an end. In the use of libraries lie the prizes that are
beyond literacy.
To gain these prizes, certain necessities must be faced, The library
must be free and open to all. Its purposes must be to inform and
entertain, as well as to educate, and readers must be encouraged to use
books for leisure as well as vocation. And it must be realized that a
library is a continuing institution. If not allowed to expand it dies,
as a plant dies without water. Too many libraries have been estab-
lished in India with the best of intentions but with no provision for
sustenance, and inevitably they have withered.
To see the readers at the Delhi Public Library, young and old, is a
soul-satisfying sight to everyone who believes that books are the prin-
cipal agents of true civilization. Behind every one using the library
there are thousands without such facilities, and preparations must be
made to help them.
still steal what is in fact their own. what misplaced ingenuity I have
seen so far has been mainly devoted to what is in a sense the laudable
objective of acquiring an extra ticket. One method of achieving this,
which it would be unwise to disclose, had never occurred to me in
25 years of administration, and filled me with unwilling admiration.
One contrast, however, is regrettable. In England, the fairer sex
predominates in the library, even among the staff, and vives get the
library books for their husbands. In Delhi, the women are shy, or
maybe they have less time for reading. At any rate, they are compa-
ratively rare visitors to the lines of bookshelves.
