Pate 6. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952
AN INQUIRY INTO RACE
RELATIONS IN BRAZIL
by Dr. Alfred (/Jf
HY has Unesco undertaken a sociological inquiry into
race relations in Brazil ? This question has often been
asked, for it comes as a surprise to some people that
an international organization should choose for its study
of inter-racial relations a country which is considered
to have no urgent problems of this kind, People are
so accustomed to seeing efforts being made to relieve
t-n4 : ll+ thou I"'Q'nnnt nnÑø : rC ! t. t. : 20nñ Tlr'hu ð........ nT"ð nor løcC ! n ! : lJ--critical situations that they cannot understand why a more or less har-
monious state of affairs has need of attention.
Even the purpose of this inquiry has caused a certain amount of alarm
among people who fear it might. have repercussions on the very situation
Unesco is trying to analyze and describe."Beware,"they say,.'of making
the Brazilians conscious of racial differences to which at present they
apparently attach little importance. Take care not to arouse by indiscreet
questioning the sort of antagonisms which are always ready to flare up."
Such remarks, even if made seriously, have no careful thought behind
them, for the social sciences are not able, at present at least, to exercise
a direct and immediate influence on ideas which have taken root since
centuries. It is quite natural, however, for people to express surprise
that the study of race relations in Brazil should be part of Unesco's
campaign against racial prejudices and discrimination.-------o ; t  -.....-------. a...
It is particularly important to explain
the reason for this choice since the
gravity of racial conflicts in other parts
of the world would seem to call for an
entirely different approach.
But it was not in a spirit of escap-
ism or with the desire to undertake
an easy task that Unesco embarked on
this analysis of Brazilian behaviour in
matters of race. Innumerable studies
have already been made of racial dis-
crimination in all its forms. Whole
libraries could be filled with books and
articles devoted to descriptions and
analyses of racial prejudice and its
effects.
In the United States alone, hundreds
of organizations and public and private
institutions concern themselves with
problems arising from racial discrimi-
nation in the hope of solving them
through scientific methods. Again, the
fierce tensions which racial antagonism
provokes in South Africa form the sub-
ject of an abundant and ever-increas-
ing literature.
It would have been extremely diffi-
cult, therefore, for Unesco to find new
facts to add to those already assembled,
and it is doubtful whether supplement-
ary inquiries could have thrown new
light on these problems that have been
studied and discussed so often.
The rare examples of harmonious
race relations have not, however,
received the same attention either from
scientists or the public in general. Yet
the existence of countries in which
different races live in harmony is itself
an important fact capable of exercising
a strong influence on racial questions
in general.
One of the basic dogmas of racialism
is that men of different races cannot
mix without condemning themselves to
moral and physical decadence.
Those who believe this declare that
complete segregation is the only
solution for countries inhabited by two different races, for, they say, there
must be a congenital incompatibility between human beings whose skins
are of a different colour or whose noses have a different shape.
If we can show, by one or more concrete examples, that this argument,
or more precisely this belief, is false, the injustices and sufferings which
segregation policies inflict on members of the so-called"inferior"races
can no longer be justified.
Is the harmony real or apparent ?
THE case of Brazil offers the strongest argument against this racialistcreed. It is not therefore a waste of time to learn more about a social
environment which so strongly refutes everything that theorists of
racialism and politicians who support them continue to affirm.
The generally favourable impression produced by Brazil's race relations
has for many years been remarked on by travellers and sociologists who
have been greatly surprised to find there such different attitudes from
those observed in other parts of the world. Brazil has, in fact, been hailed
as one of the rare countries which. have achieved"racial democracy".
But science demands more than general observations. It wants to know
if this harmony is real or only apparent and if it appears in the same form
on all social levels and in every part of Brazil.
Earlier inquiries, particularly the historic works of Gilberto Freyre and
the sociological research done by Donald Pierson in Bahia had already
confirmed the favourable opinions that had been widely formed on Brazil's
racial situation, but not all doubts had been removed. Several incidents,
and some angry statements made by Negro organizations, suggested that
Last year, Unesco undertook a full, on-the-spot inquiry into thevarious social, economic, cultural and psychological factors-
both favourable and unfavourable-which condition race
relations in Brazil today. The reasons why a country like Brazil,
which has been regarded by sociologists and students of race rela-
tions as a remarkable example of racial harmony, was chosen for
Unesco's"pilot survey"rather than some other country in which
racial tensions are more bitter, are explained on this page by
Dr. Alfred Métraux, of the Race Relations Division of Unesco. In
order to avoid giving this survey too local a character, the most repre-
sentative regions throughout Brazil were included, and the task
entrusted to a number of different scientific groups and individuals
from Brazil itself and from abroad. The survey included direct
contact and case studies of the attitudes towards racial problems
- particularly towards the Negro and his position in the social scale-
of the population of four large metropolitan areas of Brazil : Sao
Paulo, the fastest growing city not only of Brazil but of all Latin
America ; Rio de Janeiro, the federal capital and a large industrial
centre ; Bahia (also called Salvador, or Salvador da Bahia), the great
Negro metropolis of Brazil ; and Recife, capital of the arid State of
Pernambuco, in the north-eastern hump of the country. The ques-
tion of race relations in rural Brazil-a subject that up to now has
been largely neglected-was also undertaken by a Unesco team in
a series of first-hand case studies in representative communities of
mountainous Central Brazil, the Amazon region, the arid backlands
(sertao) of the north-east, and the plantation area of the Bahian area.
The articles published on the following pages present a picture of
what the scientists conducting the Unesco survey found to be the
state of racial attitudes in Brazil today. Except for the article on the
place of the Negro in Brazilian history, by Gilberto Freyre-author of
"The Masters and the Slaves", a monumental study of the develop-
ment and evolution of the patriarchal society in Brazil-the articles
presented in this issue were written by the scientists who have played
a leading role in Unesco's survey. The work of the Unesco team
on race relations in rural Brazil is being published by Unesco in book
form this year under the title"Class and Caste in Rural Brazil",
edited by Dr. Charles Wagley, of Columbia University, New York.
The studies and findings of the other teams will be published by
Unesco within the next two years. This complete up-to-date study of
the Negro and race relations in Brazil will total at least six volumes.
racial relations were not as harmonious as many Brazilians and foreigners
liked to believe.
Yet if even no discordant note had been sounded, the existing harmony
would still have needed clarification and explanation by concrete examples.
It is the scientist's duty to discover which factors have so far preserved
Brazil from the bitter fruits of racial discrimination.
Thus it was in order to draw a lesson from the case of Brazil that Unesco
entrusted to different teams of sociologists, anthropologists and psycholo-
gists the task of completing existing knowledge by making studies of other
areas and different social groups.
These investigations extended from the Amazon region to the industrial
area of Sao Paulo and covered varying sections of the community ranging
from populations living in sertao (backlands) villages to members of uni-
versIty circles.
Brazilian authorities and scientific centres gave Unesco their whole-
hearted support, knowing that their country's reputation had nothing to
fear from such research. The few shadows on the picture only help to
intensify the light which suffuses it.
Unesco's inquiry has been of a purely sociological and psychological cha-
racter, that is, it has dealt with present-
day social realities, while historical
questions have been given only a minor
place. Nevertheless we should not for-
get that the racial attitudes found in
Brazil spring from a long historic tra-
dition. They show us that the attitude
of the Iberian peoples towards the slave
differed greatly from that of other
colonial powers.
Thus, clauses favourable to slaves
have always existed in Spanish and
Portuguese laws and the laws them-
selves have aimed at helping slaves
win their freedom. Such clauses reflect
the will of the church which, as early
as the 16th century, defended the In-
dians and the Negro slaves as human
beings. However miserable was the lot
of the slave in Brazil, he was never at
any time reduced to the level of an ani-
mal, and once freed he could aspire to
joining the community of free men,
and thus begin to rise in the social
scale..",
Debt to former slaves
THOSE who deplore the presence inj a country like Brazil of a large
minority of coloured people too
easily tend to forget the role which the
Indians and Negroes have played in the
growth of Brazilian civilization. As
many historians have already pointed
out, the Brazilian nation would have
had an entirely different character
were it not for the African contribu-
tions which it owes to its former slaves.
Can there be any doubt that this
contribution by the Negro has singu-
larly enriched the social, religious and
artistic traditions of a country now in
the course of demonstrating its power-
ful originality and of setting up a new
type of civilization ? To be astonished
that a Negro or a mulatto can be
talented and rise to a position of
importance is to express an unconscious. -.. 1......... :--..... +..................... \..' ; 1' ; +........,.. of : +1-....... hlnn1rracialism, as well as to cast doubt on the innate capabilities of the black
race.
When we speak of the debt owed by Brazil to its coloured citizens, we
are not thinking of those of its distinguished men who are wholly or
partly Negro. More significant is the wider contribution of the Negro
civilizations superimposed on that of the Portuguese by millions of slaves
imported from Africa.
The colonization of Brazil has been an adventure shared in by whites
and Negroes who even against their inclination have worked closely
together to set up a new social environment. The charm of Brazilian
life derives to a certain extent from those African traditions which have
moulded the national character.
Another lesson which can be drawn from Brazil's example is the large
part whieh economic factors play in the formation of racial prejudices.
Rapid urbanization in Brazil has upset the relations between whites
and Negroes in certain large towns, and has provoked conflicts which
threaten to become serious.
The rise of a rural working class, accompanied by growing competition
between immigrants and the large numbers of coloured people who are
moving into the industrial centres, could destroy this"racial democracy"
if the racialist feelings they bring to the surface. wee not countered by a
strong resistance based on liberal and open-hearted traditions.
In Brazil,"racial"laws were passed to combat racial prejudice and not
to give it official existence.
That is why-as Unesco's inquiry has clearly shown-Brazil remains an
exemplary nation, destined because of this to play an important role in the
building of a world in which mutual respect between races will become an
established and universal fact.
UNESCO
