Onthemorningof November 9, 1951. the Directors-General of four of the 12 United Nations Specialized
Agencies addressed the full Plenary Session of the General Assembly, meeting at the Palais de
Chaillot in Paris. Dr. Brock Chisholm of the World Health Organization ; Mr. David A. Morse of
the International Labour Organization ; Mr. Norris E. Dodd of the Food and Agriculture Organza-
tion ; and M. Jaime Torres Bodet of Unesco explained how each of these agencies is helping to
contribute to the United Nations'efforts for world peace. In this supplement we present abridged
texts of these addresses. Illustration (above) shows delegates at the General Assembly in Paris
a few minutes before a Plenary Session begins. (Photo Almost. 1.
WORLD POLITICAL EVENTS AND UNESCO
by Jaime TORRES BODET
A S ! rise 10 speak, and to greet you on behalf of Unesco. I cannot helpthinking of the day in September 1947 when, as leader of the Mexican
-- delegation. I had the honour of addressing the General Assembly for the
first time. The world had iust emerged from the war. Out of the ruins,
amid splendid dreams, peace was striving to establish itself. The various
agencies of the United Nations were in their infancy. I thought it appropriate
then to emphasize that the mission of the United Nations and that of the Special-
ized Agencies in the common task of securing peace was basically the same.
In that belief I accepted, in the following year. the office of Director-General of
Unesco. Passing thus from the service of my own country to the service of an
international organization, from politics to administration, I felt that I was remain.
ing true to the same cause-the cause of peace founded on economic and social
justice and on the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind-of peace, in
short, which would depend not merely upon Governments but upon the peoples
of the word.
to combat certain evils : hunger, disease, ignorance and want.
faced with which every man, to whatever country or party he
may belong, feels the same need for help or the same brotherly
urge to help others.
Two peculiarities distinguish Unesco from the other Specialized
Agencies. More than any of the others, it is directly affected by
Certainly I cannot forget the disappointment and the anxieties of the last four
years. But precisely because these difficulties are piling up in the political
sphere, it is imperative to reaffirm that peace is not a purely political pheno-
menon. It is also conditioned by economic, social, intellectual and moral factors.
less spectacular than the political ones, perhaps, but not less important. The
more obstacles the United Nations system encounters on the political plane, the
more desirable it is that its efficiency should be manifested in other domains.
where the concrete needs and the real aspirations of men in the last resort reside.
That is exactly what the SpeciaUzed Agencies are trying to do. They set out

UNESCO COURIER SUPPLEMENT Page 4
political events, and more than the
others too. it is deeply committed to
long-term policies. On the one hand,
its standing with the public depends
largely on the authority of the inter-
national order for which you are res-
ponsible, and on the other hand it is
responsible to you for stimulating
that international morality without
which your efforts could have no
lasting result.
In 1933. writers, scientists and philo-
sophers from a number of countries
were brought together by the Interna-
tional Institute of Intellectual Co-
operation to discuss the future of
civilization. They agreed on a
seven-point declaration, of which the
first two read as follows :
"1. The immediate future of civiliza-
tion. in all its forms, is closely depend-
ent upon the maintenance of peace.
and all other circumstances of a more
particular and technical nature turn
upon this issue.
"2. The future of culture, even within
individual countries, is essentially
bound up with certain universal factors
which, in their turn, are dependent
upon the organization of the human
race as one moral and legal entity."
It would be difficult to find better
words to define the way in which the
day-to-day administrative work of
Unesco is dependent upon the political
action of the United Nations.
We are constantly receiving proof
of this. Every worsening of inter-
national political relations immediately
reacts upon those who are carrying
out our programme, accentuates their
ideological differences, and threatens
to destroy their aspirations towards
world harmony.
Rampart of hope
AGAINST the rising tide of passionand fear. Unesco is erecting a
rampart of security and hope by
demonstrating the benefits of interna-
tional intellectual co-operation. By
helping scientists throughout the world
to get in touch with one another, it
reveals the existence of a way of
thought controlled by standards of uni-
versal truth. Still better, it tries to mo-
bilize experts in certain fields for a spe-
cific task of an international character.
either by organizing national research
according to an international plan. as
in the case of the problems of the arid
zone, or bv creating international in-
stitutions like the Computation Centre,
whose services are placed at the dis-
posal of Member States. Similarly, by
facilitating cultural exchanges, Unesco
provides proof that every culture pos-
sesses treasures which could and
should enrich humanity as a whole.
and vice versa that every culture can
be revivified by contact with other
civilizations. In all these domains, the
work carried out by Unesco has the
effect of liberating and strengthening
the reality of an international com-
munity of minds, which foreshadows
and prepares the way for the world
community of peoples.
It is not within Unesco's power to
determine whether the transition from
one to the other shall take place rapid-
ly or not. That issue depends on the
political rather than the technical
opportunity. National frontiers must be
opened to the free now of ideas, of the
persons who generate them, and of
the material which arises from these
ideas and helps to carry them into
effect. Freedom of expression must be
guaranteed, the rights of scientists,
authors and artists must be assured.
Then only shall we be able to measure
the full extent of the power of the in-
telIect as the organizing and unifying
principle of human society.
If we want intellectual and moral
factors to play their effective part in
the friendship and mutual understand-
ing of peoples, there must be a re-
adjustment in the political sphere.
First and foremost we must adequately
secure the present, so that the mind,
freed from preoccupation with the
immediate future, can have enough
perspective of time before it to recover
its utmost capacities.
End to inequality
ON this subject I can only agreewholeheartedly with the Secreta-
ry-General. whose twenty-year
plan for peace, among its other merits,
has the advantage of trying to extricate
the policies of the United Nations from
an atmosphere of crisis and give them
back their proper dimensions in time.
Unesco's work for peace must be
A striking picture of the temporary buildings at the Palais de Chaillot, which house the present General Assembly
of the United Nations in Paris. The speeches reported in these pages were delivered in the magnificent theatre of the
Palais de Chaillot. (U. N. Photo.)
regarded in this broad perspective. For
the task to which it summons its Mem-
ber States is vast and arduous.
More than half the population of the
world can neither read nor write, and
is plunged in almost total ignorance.
What a waste of energy ! What an
opening to exploitation ! What a breed-
ing-ground for revolt ! How can a
regime of peace, that is
to say, of reciprocal
respect for rights, or
how can peaceful pro-
gress for all, result from
such inequalifies ot
knowledge ?
It is to the lessening
of this inequality that
Unesco is bending all
its efforts, by carrying
out its policy in two
parallel directions : pri-
mary education and
fundamental education.
The Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights
proclaims in Article 26
the principle of free
and compulsory primary
education. Unesco is
steadily endeavouring
to promote the effective applica-
tion of that principle. Last July, in
association with the International Bu-
reau of Education, we considered the
problem as a whole at the Fourteenth
Conference on Public Education. This
conference, which was attended by the
delegates 01 fifty Governments, recom-
mended that every State in which pri-
mary education does not yet extend to
the entire population 01 school age,
should draw up as soon as possible a
priority plan which, while taking into
account the needs and resources 01 the
country concerned, would provide prac-
tical measures over a period 01 years
to ensure the steady expansion 01 free
and compulsory schooling.
Basing itself upon the conclusions 01
the Geneva conference, Unesco is now
proposing to organize regional cone-
rences, to be held every other year.
at which we shall lace and discuss
the relevant economic, social and
intellectual facts in every part 01 the
world. The purpose 01 these regional
conferences will be to help States in
working out and putting into practice
their respective national plans by pool-
ing their experience and knowledge.
However, so lonq as the majority of
Jaime Torres Bodet
the children of the world are denied
access to primary education, we
cannot ignore the mass of illiterates of
all ages who have never had the ad-
vantage of such education. It is for
the benefit of these outcasts. who have
been reckoned for decades in hundreds
of millions, that Unesco has formulated
the concept of fundamental education.
By fundamental educa-
tion we mean that mi-
: 1Ìmum of technical. mo-
ral and civic instruction
without which there
could be no education.
science, culture or in-
formation in the most
elementary sense in
which modern commu-
nities understand those
terms. Admittedly, in
comparison to primary
education, fundamental
education is no more
than an expedient. But
it its an urgent expedient,
if we do not want whole
generations, in a large
number of countries, to
run to waste.
After several years of
research, the General Conference of
Unesco at its last session adopted a
project which involves the setting up
of a network of international centres
where we shall work out, with due re-
gard to the special needs of the va-
rious regions of the world, methods of
training staff and producing the neces-
sary material for fundamental educa-
tion. The first centre was opened this
year in Latin America. We estimate
that to carry out this project in its
entirely will take twelve years and
will result in the training of about five
thousand fundamental education spe-
cialists who in their turn will train
teams of specially qualified teachers
in their own countries.
Thus, on the two fronts of the pre-
sent and the iuture. Unesco has taken
up arms against ignorance. But the
problem of education is not purely one
of quantity : it is one of guality. too.
The number of schools, teachers and
pupils is not the only thing to be con-
sidered : the kind of education given in
these schools, by these teachers, to
these pupils, is still more important.
For if it is possible to educate people
for liberty, it is also possible to train
them for servitude.
Unesco does not attempt to impose
any particular ideology. On the con-
trary, Unesco is founded on respect for
all creeds and it wants to see them all
represented in its orbit. Yet in the
debate between peace and war. liberty
and injustice, which sets men in oppo-
sition not merely to ideas, but to men,
Unesco can never be neutral. It will
always be found in the service of
human rights and of international
law, the establishment of which is more
necessary than ever if these rights are
to be guaranteed.
Value of the mind
CLEARLY, those who foundedUnesco in 1945 did not fores e
we should have tao grow up
in a world like that of today.
They did not think that six years
later the military budgets of the
nations would reach a total of one hun-
dred billions of dollars, as the Secre-
tary-General has stated in his Report,
nor that Governments would feel
themselves obliged to pay more fatten-
tion to the production of weapons of
death and destruction than to the
peaceful requirements of education,
science and culture.
Nevertheless, even in this world
poisoned by distrust and paralyzed by
fear, Unesco works to maintain and
establish peace. It works to maintain
peace by demonstrating to the masses,
as well as to the elite. the value that
the mind can add to earthly existence.
It strives to establish peace by giving
to all men intellectual and moral ac-
cess to the rights and responsibilities
of heedom, and by promoting the
triumph of the international civic
spirit over individual and collective
selfishness.
Mr. President and delegates, I have
shown how Unesco is affected by your
difficulties, shares the anxieties which
at present beset you, and yet feels that
it is the bearer of your highest and
most exalted hopes. You will under-
stand therefore, how very important this
Session of your General Assembly is
for us, and how ardently I wish you
success in your deliberations. On this
same site on which, three years ago.
by the adoption of the Universal Decla-
ration of Human Rights, you held out
a qreat promise to mankind, may your
labours lead the peoples of the world
towards the highways of justice, of
truth, and of peace.
. ;
s"-
I. ?
Z
<-'
\5
... ; :
..
. 
'E