
UNESCO COURIER-Page 6 FEBRUARY 1952
THE EVER RESTLESS AIOM
by Ira M. Freeman
THE notion that gross matter is not the uniform,continuous substance that it appears to be goes
back to ancient times and man's first specula-
tions about the world. The Greek philosophers
Leucippus, Epicurus and Democritus supported the
doctrine that matter consists of minute, hard par-
ticles, invisible and eternal, and in a state of contin-
ual motion. Such a particle was called an atom,
from the Greek word meaning"indivisible."
The thoughts of these early atomists survived only
in the famous poem of Lucretius, De Rerum Natura,
written several centuries later. Theorizing about
the nature of matter lay practically dormant during
the Middle Ages, and the atomic idea was not ser-
iously revived until the seventeenth century, when
Pierre Gassendi, in France, began to examine some
of the physical consequences of this hypothesis. By
assuming the atoms of a given substance to be all
alike and to rush about randomly, colliding fre-
quently in their frenzied, restless movement, he was
able to offer a plausible picture of the observed
behaviour of matter.
All known substances are either solid, liquid or
gaseous. We are familiar with water, not only in
its liquid state, but also as a solid (ice) and as a gas
(steam or vapour). A true solid has a characteristic
crystal form, as manifested by the variety of beautiful
geometric shapes shown by natural crystals such as
gems and minerals. These forms are but reflections
of the regularity of arrangement of the atoms
within the crystals, held as though arrayed on some
invisible framework, yet capable of vibrating about
their appointed positions.
If heat is sapplied to a crystal, the excursions of
the atoms are increased until they succeed in break-
ing away from the powerful forces that make them
cohere to their neighbours, and the solid melts. It
is now a liquid, in which the atoms'are no longer
constrained to the orderly arrangement of the crystal.
IN ORDINARY AIR, each particle
* has a diameter of about 0. 00000004 of a centimetre,
* weighs about 0. 00000000000000000000005 of a gram..
* moves with an average speed of 50, 000 cms. a second,
* collides with its neighbours 5, 000, 000, 000 times a second.
There are 27, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000 particles in each
cubic centimetre of air.
Even under ordinary conditions, but especially at
higher temperatures, there are some favoured atoms
or groups of atoms (called molecules), pos-
sessing excess energy which enables them to
wrench themselves loose from the attractions of the
ethers and soar away as individuals in the space
above the liquid mass. The aggregate of these in-
dependent molecules is the vapour-a. gas. It is a
collection of jostling flying particles, filling the
container by their motion. Raising the temperature
results in swifter motion and the gas presses more
strongly against the walls of its confining vessel ;
lowering the temperature has the opposite effect.
Only at the absolute zero of temperature would the
motion cease altogether (see the Courier for
October, 1951).
Because in a gas the molecules are free of mutual
infiuences except at the instant of collision, a gas
is the simplest state of matter, and so is the best
understood. The English scientist Callendar aptly
described a gas as"a homogeneous chaos, with that
uniformity in the midst of diversity which is charac-
teristic of probability."The branch of mathematics
appropriate for treating the behaviour of a swarm of
particles is statistics, whose application to gases and
more recently to liqüids and solids as well have not
only led to a rather complete understanding of the
structure of matter in the large in terms of matter
in the small, but have also succeeded in revealing the
magnitudes and characteiiSHCs of molecules.
The Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli was the first
to ascribe the pressure of a gas to the impacts of its
molecules-individually feeble and erratic, but pro-
ducing a steady and considerable effect in the
aggregate. Over a century later, Waterston and
Joule improved his calculations and established the
first mathematical relationship involving molecular
magnitudes. In rapid succession the mathematical
attack was continued by Kronig and Clausius in
Germany and by Maxwell in Britain, so that by the
middle of the nineteenth century the so-called
kinetic theory of gases was well founded.
When the theory was compared with experimental
observations on gross matter, the results were aston-
ishing. Molecules were revealed as entities a hundred-
millionth of a centimetre in size and weighing but
a few biIIionths of a billionth of a gram ; they were
shown to be moving with speeds of the order of a
kilometre per second. This knowledge and much
more has been obtained in spite of the impossibility
of seeing or handling individual atoms or molecules.
As early as 1827 an English botanist, Robert Brown,
observed that grains of pollen suspended in water
executed a ceaseless trembling motion, and this was
correctly interpreted later as resulting from the
irregular impacts of the surrounding water particles
on the pollen grains. This interpretation was borne
out by the experiments of Jean Perrin in France
early this century. Meanwhile, Einstein had supplied
the mathematical theory of this phenomenon.
Since that time, the kinetic theory has been round-
ed out to give science a much more comprehensive
picture of the nature of matter. The reality of
atoms is no longer questioned-indeed, the tide
of research has swept on in the last half-century to
explore the constituents of the atom itself and to
study their behaviour (see"Fundamental Par-
ticles-What Are They ?"In July-August Courier).
A scientific hypothesis is valuable only to the
extent that it relates the unknown to simplier
experiences, and to the extent that it suggests new
lines of investigation. Jildged in this light, the
kinetic theory of matter is one of the. most success-
ful scientific theories ever proposed.
If you are interested in reading more about the
Kinetic Theory of Matter, write to thp Division for
the Popularization of Science, Unesco, 19 Avenue
Kléber, Paris, XVI"for a brief bibliography sent free
of charge.