: OURIER APRIL 1952. Page 15
THE CHILDREN HELD THEIR OWN CONFERENCES
While the Third National Conference of the United States National Commission for Unesco
was being held in New York, high school students also got down to studying the programme
and aims of Unesco at two junior conferences organized by the New York Board of Education.
As a Unesco activity, the work of the National Conference itself came under discussion at
these junior meetings. Photos above show students in New York and other U. S. schools
debating such questions as the use of mass communications in Unesco's work and how the
reduction of racial as well as religious tensions can help to promote peace throughoutthe world.
THE boys and girls of a junior high school in Washington D. C. couldn't
understand it at a ! !. Everywhere they found the same six letters
staring them in the face. They were written on mirrors, chalked
on gym lockers, stuck on the library walls and in the corridors. Large
lettered posters proclaimed them from classroom notice boards. Red
arrows pointed to them in the washrooms.
Groups of the students stood before the letters asking each other"What's
it all about ?""What does U-N-E-S-C-O mean ?" Even when they asked
the teachers for an explanation, they drew a blank, for the latter just shook
their heads and pretended to be equally puzzled.
But not all the boys and girls of the Alice Deal Junior High School
were mystified. Some 40 or so students out of the total of well over a
thousand in the school went around trying bard not to look smug when
they heard the others asking"What's U-N-E-S-C-O ?" For these students
had been hard at work before the others arrived, putting up the letters,
signs and arrows where everyone would see them.
What may at first have seemed like a joke to the majority of the boys
and girls was in fact the first action in an educational scheme which this
single group had been secretly preparing for weeks past-a project
which originated in a suggestion by the United States National Commission
for Unesco that students might like to help them solve two problems.
For some time past, the Commission had been receiving the same two
queries from teachers and school officials :"What can we do to help
Unesco ?" ;"How can we bring Unesco into classroom activities ?"
Convinced that the best answers were to be found in the schools them-
selves, the Commission asked the principal of the Alice Deal Junior High
School and a member of her teaching staff to try to find out first if, nnd
then how Unesco could become a"living reality"to boys and girls in the
seventh, eighth and ninth grades.
From this idea that the boys and girls themselves might be best fitted
to work out a solution there grew a project which, conceived and carried
out by a class of 37 boys and girls, brought Unesco and its objectives into
clear focus in the minds of everyone in the school, and produced a blue-
print for an educational campaign suitable for other schools to adapt 10
their particular needs and resources.
This is how these boys and girls set about it. First of all, it was assumed
that the students as a whole knew nothing about Unesco. Miss Bertie
Backus, the school's principal and Mr. Leo M. Allman, a teacher of
English and Social Studies, therefore decided that the best approach was
through a small class of 11-to 14-year-old students.
The pupils began with a working committee of five youngsters who
gave up part of their holidays to attend meetings of the United States
National Commission for Unesco in Washington. This group returned
with a fund of information for the rest of the class when school began.
For more than a week during their English period the pupils discussed
Unesco and its aims, and supplemented these studies by"homework"
from materials gathered by another team. The teacher explained that
they were not being asked to solve problems concerning Unesco which
had stumped the experts, but that what the National Commission wanted
was a young people's angle. What were young people thinking about
Unesco ? What did they know of its programme ? In this way the class
became a workshop, with Unesco and the informational project forming a
regular part of the curriculum.
Then came the question"How are we to go about it ?""Write a
poem,"suggested one girl..'Paint a picture,"said the artist of the
section."Write a pamphlet,"said another. From then on the class
split into groups, each having a special job to do. One committee
worked out the draft of a pamphlet ; a second, composed for the most
part of students with art talent, prepared three different sets of posters
and a novel scheme for using them ; an Assembly Committee had a play
to introduce Unesco to the school ; a second assembly to conclude the
project was also planned ; a Committee on Music wrote a song with ori-
ginal words and melody.
Already at this point the interest and stimulation which the class had
obtained from the project had proved its worth in the opinion of the
teacher. Now, however, the class was ready to put its plan into action.
First it began to arouse the curiosity of the rest of the school. Without
any"xplanation the letters"U. ;'I/. E-S-C. O" appeared in every conceivable
place, in the building and in every size, shape and colour.
Then, these signs disappeared and a second series of posters asked the
question"What is Unesco ?" followed by placards asking in he frankly
facetious humour of the teenager.'Is it a heavenly constellation... ?""A
brand of cigarettes... ?""A new dance step... ?"
The next move was an assembly where, in a class-written script, the boys
and girls enacted the experiences of their own quest-how they them-
selves.'discovered"Unesco, how they decided to"pass the word along."
In the final scene the class talked directly to the audience :
"What is Unesco ?
"We did'nt find out until we started to write our pamphlet. Now we
can see that everyone has to know about it to make it succeed.
"At the end of our play we will announce an essay contest. The title
will be'What can I do to help Unesco ?'
"Our class will send speakers to your room to tell you about Unesco
and answer your questions."
For those who entered the essay contest, the class which organized the
information campaign offered the following services : It persuaded the
English teachers to make the essay a class project for each English class ;
it set up a library of materials on Unesco which it obtained from the
United States National Commission ; it compiled a pamphlet which gave
the background and the general goals of Unesco ; and finally, it set up
a Lecture Bureau and announced to the school that speakers would he
available to talk on Unesco and to answer questions in any of the classes.
An assembly at which the winners of the contest were announced and
prizes awarded brought the project to an end.
The students believe their plan can be used by other schools and that
it can be adapted to many other situations..'It is the best thing we did,"
they said,"because any school which carried out this plan or another
like it will accomplish what we set out to do."
Their teacher had this to say :"For the children we feel that this was
a wonderful educational experience. If we have anything to offer it is
the activity itself rather than any of its products. There is now not a
child at Alice Deal who does not know what Unesco stands for. And
their understanding of the necessity for greater tolerance and the easing
of racial and religious tensions as shown in the essays and pamphlets
they wrote is very gratifying."
Just how well such ideas went home to these children is perhaps best
illustrated by the words of a young girl, one of the contest prize winners.
In her essay, she wrote :"Stop before you say anything which might hurt
someone of a different race, colour or creed. Learn to be tolerant of
people. Did you ever stop think how queer your ways may seem to
someone else ?"
LOCKER
THE SIX LETTERS
ON THE GYM
