OCTOBER 1952. Page t3
THE LILLIPUTIAN HARBOURS OF POONA
by Daniel BEHRMAN
This jumble of pipes, planks and water (above) ! S actuaHy a detailed model reproduction of the port of Cochin in
Southern India. Lilliputian models of dams, rivers and port lay-outs (photos below) enable experts to study irrigation
projects and to work out answers to problems affecting India s ports, her main life-lines to the outside would.
AT land-Ioc. ked Poona. 120 miles from Bombayand the sea, engineers are working out answers
to problems confronting India's ports, her main
lifelines to the outside world. There, 2, 000 feet high
and dry in the Western Chats mountains, sandbars
choke up the Hooghly Estuary, nightmare of cap-
tains taking ships into Calcutta, and cyclones blow
into Madras Harbour, tossing ships at their moorings.
But this is aIl happening in miniature. For 30
years, Poona bas been thé site of a vast outdoor labo-
ratory where engineers have been able to scale down
waterpower and irrigation problems to mode size.
In) 1947, the Central Water and Power Research
Station there was given the added asstgnment of inves-
tigating port problems in its 120-acre laboratory, one
of the largest in the world (elsewhere, weather condi-
tions force engineers to conduct their tests under roofs,
but rain is a rarity at Poona).
There are now 40 engineers and 300 construction
workers at the Poona station, in addition to two men
sent in by Unesco, Alfred Frants Mogensen. a
Danish navigation research engineer, and Dr R. V.
Baud, a Swis engineer whose s-pecialty is testing
structures and materials for safety.
The station's activities are a symbol of India's
scientific révolution and a ! so iliustrate how technical
assistance by a United Nations agency can be dove-
tailed into a well-planned national economy.
Model tests of harbour problems are easily the
most spectacular aspect of the station's work. By
reducing these harbours to small scale, huge sums
which otherwise would have been spent on full-sized
experiments can be saved. Poona's engineers are caU-
ed in regularly to seek solutions to the many pro-
blems of India's ports and harbours.
A typical case is that of Mangalore, a city of
125, 000 on the west coast of India, 500 miles south
of Bombay, and a heavy exporter of coffee, cashew
nuits, pepper and roof tiles. We leamed about Man-
galo ; e's dilernma from V. S. Kudva, one its leading
business men, who had been delegated to visit Poona
and inspect a model of his city's port under con-
struction there.
The main stumbling block is the'port's lack of a deep
channel through the shaHow water stretching three miles
off-shore from the city and which forces ocean-going
ships to be unloaded by shaUow-draft dhows. During
the four-month monsoon season, not even the dhows
can get over the shallaws and Mangalore must do its
exportpng and importing by rai !, and this of course is
an expensive substitute.
Dredging a deep channe) into Manga) ore wtH cost
an estimated 4, 000, 000 rupees, an investment which
the city can amortize in four years if the channel can
be economically maintained. It is this"if"which is
now being studied in a 32, 000 square-foot model at
Poona and, working closely with D. V. Joglekar,
director of the station, Mr. Mogensen visited Manga-
lore to help gather data for the LiUiputian port.
Ot. Baud and Dr. Gurdas Ram of the station's
physics section are working on photo-elastic testing, a
process in which structural models made of plastic are
p ! aced under stress and polarized'light is passed through
them. The light projects patterns on a screen which
reveal to the tramed engineer the weaik points of a
design. Ccê.'. :..-
Dr. Gurdas Ram is a physicist who gave up excel-
lent job in an industrial research laboratory because
he is convinced that the station's studies in irrigation and
harbour problems deserve top priority in India. He
also believes technical assistance has a major role to
play in his country.
"What we lack is practica ! expérience", he explain-
ed."We have the theoretical knowtedge, but we
have not hacf enough opportunity to put it to use.
"In testing structures, for example, we are merely
beginning and we're at about the same point as were
Europe or the United States a few decades ago. But
we cannot wait for these decades to go by in India.
Our people have freedom and they expect gréât thjngs
of it now. When you are dealing with water power
and, especially irrigation to produce more food, time
IS precious.
"In India, we cannot afford to wait."-
; OURIER
