FEBRUARY 1952 Page UNESCO COURIER
A DOUBLE CHECK : This modern calculator is, in fact, two calculators, identical twins, each operating simultaneously yet independently, each noting
the results of the other. A disparity in results immediately causes both to stop working. The printers (foreground) recording at the rate of 24, 000
digits a minute, give a running account of the results produced, thus enabling scientists to Lfollow progress of a calculation and modify their
programme in the light of results obtained.
THE'MIRACLE I ON 57th STREET
A day in a giant computing laboratory.','
AMONG the luxurious windows of New
York's 57th Street, displaying fine
furs, expensive fashions and valuable
paintings, is a store-front that stops
every passer-by. It is a broad glass wall that
permits an impressive view of a giant elect-
ronic calculator at work. It shows a high and
spacious hall with its three other walls
solidly covered with row upon row of glowing
vacuum tubes and tiny lights flashing in swift
succession.
It seems a vision of some other and super-
human world. This calculator, this machine
that"thinks"with lightning speed and
remembers endless numbers and equations,
dwarfs the few men that sit at desks beside it
as if they were but pigmy servants of its
higher intelligence.
Timidly one steps into the hall and hears
at once the steady confused chatter of relays
and switches, sounding as if a thousand
telegraph keys were racing to spell out end-
less messages. One's first impulse is to
retreat and be lost again among the ordinary
human beings out there in the street.
But no ;. a charming young lady steps from
the mathematical altar with a welcoming
smile and bids you enter. She is hostess for
the"thinking machine,"and radiantly
human. But she is a mathematician too, and
offers to guide you and explain its operation.
Both mathematics and mathematicians have
changed since I struggled with them in
school. Improved, I should say.
She tells me that the great calculator has
by Dr. Gerald WENDT
just finished a task that has occupied it for
many months of day-and-night operation. It
was a calculation which by ordinary methods
would have taken many men countless cen-
turies-and therefore would never have been
attempted. She shows me the result : a closely
printed book of 327 pages, filled with figures
that give the correct locations in the heavens
of each of the five outer planets-Jupiter,
Saturn, Neptune, Uranus and Pluto-at 40-
day intervals for a period of 407 years, from
the years 1653 to 2060-more than a century
into the future.
The book itself contains 1, 500, 000 numbers,
many of them in ten digits. But these are
only the final result of more than 150, 000, 000
figures used in the calculation and temporar-
ily remembered by the calculator. The
operation involved over 5, 000, 000 multiplica-
tions and divisions, and more than 7, 000, 000
separate additions and subtractions of large
numbers.
This is an inconceivable number of opera-
tions in a short time. But the operations
themselves are simple. Even the ancient aba-
cus can add and subtract ; and multiplication
is merely repeated additions. The most com-
plicated mathematical calculations can be
reduced to these simple operations. And
there I found the secret of the success of this
great calculator which has neither magic nor
intelligence.
Its secret is speed. Electric impulses pass
through it with the speed of light and they
can be added one upon another with the speed
of lightning. Actually, additions or subtrac-
tions of numbers with 19 digits each can be
done at the rate of 3, 500 per second. Numbers
with 14 digits can be multiplied at the rate
of 50 per second and divided at 20 per second.
Only in its speed is it superhuman. And
that speed is made possible only by the elec-
tronic engineers who built into it 12, 500 elec-
tronic tubes, 21, 400 electric relays and 40, 000
connections that can be made, changed or
broken by electric wires and plugs. All this
is big and complicated, but not superhuman.
In one other respect it does better than
man. It can remember more. Figures obtain-
ed in one part of a calculation are retained
until they can be used in a later part. Or
they can be so recorded (on punched cards)
that they are remembered forever. But that,
too, is old. Any record put on paper is
remembered there as long as the paper lasts.
What is new is the vast capacity of this
electronic memory. No less than 400, 000
separate digits can be stored in the"me-
mory"of the calculator, ready for instant use.
The machine has colossal memory and in-
credible speed in arithmetical operations.
But it cannot think. Every operation must
be prescribed for it by the mathematicians
who analyze the problem into its parts, supply
the necessary data and instruct the machine
(Continued on next page)

UNESCO COURIER-Page 12 FEBRUARY 1952
A mathematical error : The'Miracle'stops dead
(Continued from previous page)
what to calculate and in what order. Far
from being the servants of the electronic
giant, they are the masters whose thoughts it
obeys. It can do only what they order.
I saw them sitting quietly at the desk, two
young mathematicians and two engineers, as
the calculator went on and on with flashing
light and chattering relays, through dozens or
thousands of operations each second. I
thought of the months of inaction ahead for
them. But suddenly there was dead silence
and the lights stopped blinking. Instantly
all four men leaped from their chairs to
various parts of the calculator. The machine
had made an error, detected it, and stopped
dead.
There must be no error, so every single
operation is done in duplicate. Indeed,
the calculator is two calculators, identical
twins, each operating independently, doing
each operation at the same moment that the
other does, and each noting the results the
other gets. For hundreds of thousands of
steps the results are identical. The instant
they are not, everything stops.
Then the mathematicians get busy to
discover in which operation the error occur-
red ; the engineers must find the tubes or
relays that were involved in that operation
and repair or replace them. With more than
12, 000 electronic tubes, failures are inevitable,
for no tube is perfect and none lasts for ever.
An average of four tubes fail each day.
Sometimes they can be replaced in a few mi-
nutes. Sometimes it takes days to locate the
faulty tube or connection.
Then part of the calculation is repeated
and the steady hum and flicker of the cal-
culation resumes, without error-but only
until the next tube burns out. So a team of
four mathematicians and engineers is on duty
at all times, 12 men for the three daily shifts.
They are, however, only part of the staff
that is required to keep the calculator at
work. Three more men are engineers for the
air-conditioning that keeps an even tempera-
ture for the calculator. The thousands of
tubes require no less than 180 kilowatts of
electric power for their operation and all this
power becomes heat in the tubes, wires and
relays. So the calculator stands in a stream
of cool air behind a glass wall. The electric
refrigeration equals the melting of more than
two tons of ice per hour.
But there is more staff. There are the two
attractive guides. There are specialists pre-
paring instructions for the operation of the
AN.. ASTRONOMICAL"CALCULATION
It would have taken human mathematicians
many centuries to calculate the exact location
in the heavens of the planet Jupiter at 40-day
intervals from 1653 to 2060. The giant IBM elec-
tronic calculator did the job in about two months.
Page (above) shows only small part of awe-
inspiring figures produced.
machine, days and weeks into the future.
There are the mathematicians who spend
weeks studying the next problem that the ma-
chine is to solve, dividing it into its parts,
indicating the changes in circuits and pro-
gramme that will be required.
All in all it takes 30 people to keep the
machine going. It is not surprising that the
cost of its operations is about $300 an hour.
Who can afford such a cost ? There are a
few industrial and engineering corporations
who have rented the use of the calculator for
short periods. But for the most part it works
for pure science. It is a unit of the Watson
Scientific Computing Laboratory, operated
jointly by Columbia University and the
Department of Pure Science of the Interna-
tional Business Machines Corporation. Under
their management, the giant calculator is
available without cost to scientists under
three conditions :
1. The problem must be of general in-
terest to science ;
2. The results must be published and
made available to all ;
3. The scientist or laboratory that
wishes to use it must have insuf-
ficient funds to pay for its use.
The Watson Scientific Computing Labora-
tory occupies an entire building at Columbia
University. At the University are other,
smaller and more specialized computing ma-
chines which may solve smaller or more spe-
cial problems. The entire research staff of
27 experts, under the direction of Dr. Wallace
J. Eckert, Professor of Celestial Mechanics, is
engaged in the analysis of future mathemati-
cal problems for the computers to solve, in
the training of operators for the machines,
and in the design of newer and still swifter
calculators. Here, if anywhere, are the super-
human hrains, for here the giant calculator on
57th Street was conceived and designed.
Though colossal and impressive, it is only the
product of the brainwork and vision of this
group of modest, hardworking men.
