MARCH) 952 Page 3-UNESCO COURIER
Southern
fights the I
against illii
by Carlo LEVI
Author of'c hrist
Stopped at Eboli'
Photo, raph. by DavId Seymour
POST-WAY Italy has shown an amazing spiritof enterprise, as if a long pent-up vitality
had suddenly found release and come out
as naturally as the leaves on the trees unfolding,
after winter had ended, under the first warm rays
of the sun. Every man has gone his own way
and set about working out the solution of his
individual difficulties, but at the same time an
effort has been made to attack some deep-rooted
evils which are incompatible with today's
atmosphere of freedom. One of these. efforts,
which has been carried out with scanty financial
support, but with genuine energy and devotion,
is the battle against illiteracy.
Illiteracy is a long-standing plague of Italian
society and varies greatly from one end of the
peninsula to the other. In the last century,
when Italy was in the process of achieving
national unity, illiterates made up the majority
of the population. The Government hastened to
install compulsory elementary schools and within
a few decades the population of the urban and
industrial North was as literate as that of the
most advanced countries of Europe.
But for many reasons, progress in the South
was much less easy. The most recent nation-
wide statistics (1931) indicated 40 per cent of
illiteracy in Sicily, 46 per cent in Lucania and
48 per cent in Calabria. During the Fascist
regime the problem was passed over in silence and
appeared to have been forgotten. Then, with the
war, the destruction of roads and school buildings,
the dispersion of families and the general poverty
and confusion, the problem became more difficult
to solve than ever.
THIS complex phenomenon of large-scaleilliteracy is, of course, closely tied up with
the economic and social conditions of the
South. We may say, in a general way, that illite-
racy is born of poverty and breeds more poverty
in its turn ; it arises where there is an absence of
democracy and tends to perpetuate this absence.
But if one of its causes is strictly economic, the
other has social, political and spiritual impli-
cations which are a concomitant of the structure
of the state and the form of its culture. The two
causes are connected and, indeed, interdependent,
and for this reason no partial solution of the
problem can be achieved.
Anyone can see the relationship between
illiteracy and poverty. A map illustrative of its
distribution would show that it goes hand in hand
with barren land, bad sanitary conditions, mala-
ria, and the lack of industries, communications
and public works. Miserably poor families must
put their children to work early. They send the
boys to watch over herds of goats grazing on the
desolate clay, and put the girls to cooking,
cleaning, watching over the babies, weaving
baskets and carrying jars of water from the
distant well. The school is, in most cases, far
BESIDES these causes of illiteracy, there is, tomy mind, another category of underlying
reasons which, paradoxically, make the
peasants'ignorance an asset in their own eyes.
They live in an immobile and timeless world.
circumscribed by ancient rites and customs and
the tasks imposed by the changing seasons ; yet,
a world that is rich in human values and a culture
all its own. There is a peasant way of life that is
radically different from our modern urban civi-
lization ; a peasant art and a peasant philosophy
that have been handed down without benefit of
the written word in the heritage of legends, folk-
tales, popular dramas and songs, all of which
have inspired or enriched our more sophisticated
art forms.
The peasant, living alone on the land, is
content with this artistic and philosophic
tradition, with this poetry of proverbial wisdom
transcribed into doggerel verse. The observant
traveller cannot fail to be struck by the frequency
with which the peasants speak in rhyme and
make use in their dialect of highly poetic images
(Continued on next sage.)
away ; there is not enough money to buy books
and notebooks, and frequent illness keeps the
children at home.
The townships and villages are as poor as the
families, and the central Government is distant.
Schoolhouses, like roads, sewers, heat and light,
are often lacking. When the winter wind blows
snow down from the mountains people become
isolated.
Under these conditions it is easy to appreciate
the difficulties of learning to read and write.
And, to the illiteracy of children, we must add
that of those adults who once had some schoolir. g
but who, for lack of practice, have forgotten all
they ever knew. The hard life of the peasants
does not leave much time for that miracle of
communication, the written word. And it is
plain enough why poverty and illiteracy fall into
a vicious circle. The illiterate peasant is
hampered in any attempt to better. his lot ; he
is condemned to stay on the land without any
possibility of migrating or raising his social
status. And so it is that he hands down the state
of servitude into which he was born.
Italy
battle
reracy


Only 6,000 people live

in Regiano Gravina
— but it is the most
active Calabrian vil-
lage in the fight against
illiteracy. In four years
the illiteracy rate fell
from 68 to 22 per cent,


One-roobm home for
a peasant family is S

not unusual in the”
south part of Maly.

UNESCO COURIER-Page 4 MARCH 1952
Children and adults willingly walk miles from outlying
farms to reach classes in southern Italy. This
Calabrian road, blocked by snow during part of year,
branches off to a path leading to Saucci village.
Entrance to People's Cultural Centre in Rogiano
Gravina. Children attend school here by day, adults
in the evening. Twenty-eight similar Centres have
now been set up in this region to fight illiteracy.
Elementary school in San Nicola da Crissa, Calabria.
Until recently the fifth grade was the end of schooling.
Now instruction continues for older boys and girls,
and libraries and youth clubs playa very active part.
The workshop at the Rogiano Gravina Cultural Centre. The boys are busily pre-
paring relief maps of Italy for schools in the neighbourhood. The Centre also
orga"i" ; ne cultural evenings, musical bands, amateur dramatics for young people.
Antonio Janni teaches in Saucci, but lives in Bagaladi, ten miles away. Every
morning he drives his motor scooter over tortuous roads to school. When the
children leave in the afternoon, Janni stays to teach adults reading and writing.
NEW ENTHUSIASM FOR LEARN ING
ITS SWEEPING SOUTHERN ITALY
(Continued from previous age)
such as would put to shame not only the average
city dweller but many a professional writer as
well.
The written word is for the peasants a symbol
of the remoteness of the central Government, of
a feudal bond which has never grown into a right
to full citizenship. It is, in short, the expression
of a hostile civilization. And the peasants oppose
it with their own hostility. They react by
defending their own ignorance, as if by so doing
they could protect ancient values from corruption
and shield themselves from a hostile world.
FINALLY, there are two factors that makethe peasants feel that book learning is
superfluous. First is the virtual lack of
publications concerned with life as they live it,
with the work they do seen from their own point
of view. And second is the existence of varying
dialects, and the fact that the peasants think
of the Italian language, properly speaking, as a
literary creation or one reserved for public
documents. The survival of dialects is another
form of self-imposed peasant segregation.
It is plain from the above that the problem of
illiteracy is a complex one. It is not sufficient
to allot specific funds to combat it or even to
concentrate upon raising the living standard c
the population. In order to overcome deep-rooted
subjective and psychological obstacles the state
must become more truly democratic. The peasants
must realize and join in what the Government
is trying to do, so that they may no longer
consider themselves estranged from the rest of
the nation, but feel themselves to be an integral
part of it. Of course, the opposite is equally
true, and the battle against illiteracy is one of
the chief means to render the nation more
democratic.
In every period of political and economic prc-
gress peasants feel the need of wider knowledge.
They then spontaneously abandon their position
of resistance and hostility. At such times they
look on their ignorance as standing in the way
of a freedom within their grasp.
With political parties and trade unions thrown
open to them, and a possibility of improving their
situation and becoming fully-sledged citizens of
the nation, instead of serfs and outlaws, the
peasants of the south have shown a real urge in
the last few years to achieve education. We must
take advantage of this state of mind and not let
them sink back into their old discouragement
and resignation. Every effort to satisfy their
needs is a blow struck for enduring democracy.
For if the peasants are given a fair chance they
will not turn to desperate political remedies or
anarchical acts of violence and plunder. The
brigandage of the last century had the same
causes as those which give rise to illiteracy.
its the end of the last war, the Italian Governmentundertook an extensive campaign against illiteracy
in southern Italy. Since 1947, when a special law
was passed, the lIlinistry of Public Education has set up
11, 000 public courses which have been attended by some
300, 000 adults and young people. This government action
was paralleled by the creation of a series of private
institutions, one of the most outstanding of which is the
National League for the Struggle Against Illiteracy. The
League began its u'ork in 1948. It opened numerous
schools tor illiterates and semi-literates. In 1949, the
most original institution of the League took form : the
People's Cultural Centre. Today} 28 such centres are
active, scattered through the regions of Calabria, Lucania
and Sardinia. Each has a structure and character of its
own. The head of each centre is a teacher appointed by
IT is a hard job to prepare a corps of teacherswho know their material, are aware of the
social importance of the job, and an.
acquainted with the customs, needs and interests
of their pupils. There is a pressing need for
textbooks which would appeal to the adult
peasant, with his store of ancient wisdom, rather
than to a school child ; and for newspapers, ma-
gazines, books, calendars and pamphlets adapted
to the world in which the peasants live. No
Government office is likely to think things out
so subtly and yet the means required are almost
too large to be provided by private initiative.
Government action is necessary, but it is also
inadequate, for it cannot altogether dispel the
peasants'lingering distrust. Lasting results can
be obtained only if their spontane9us desire to
learn is satisfied with the proper tools.

the League who invites all competent persons in the coy-
munity-the agricultural engineer, the doctor, the
mechanic, the veterinarian, the parish priest-to answer
questions asked by the students.
The'work of the League against illiteracy has O'wakeneà
great interest. It has obtained the moral and financial
support of numerous national and international organiza-
tions. Recently, Unesco decided to include the National
League for the Struggle Against Illiteracy among its As-
sociated Projects in Fundamental Education, and will
provide information to aid it in its work. Reciprocally,
the League will inform Unesco regularly of its progress
and accomplishments. An international expert from
Unesco is now in Calabria helpin. q to organize specific
methods of dealing with students'questions and class-
room discussion.
Immediately after the war circumstances were
propitious. A group of somewhat romantically
idealistic young men of Calabria and Lucania
were inspired by the ferment of popular feeling
to start a large-scale drive for person-to-person
teaching, such as was carried out so effectively in
Mexico. Soon they had joined their efforts with
those of the National League for the Struggle
Against Illiteracy in Rome, an organization of
women volunteers.
- w ACK of funds somewhat curtailed this group'sefforts but at the same time gave them a
more definite and practical character.
In May, 1947, an investigation was conducted by
young social workers in Lucania in order to get
an exact picture of what should be done. As we
have seen, there were no up-to-date statistics on
illiteracy, and those of almost twenty years ago
could not be considered reliable. This inves-
tigation proved that the problem was indeed a
serious one. In all of Lucania there were only
thirty-six school buildings : twenty-eight in the
121 townships of the Province of Potenza and
eight in the twenty-eight townships of the pro-
vince of Matera. In other localities, schooling
was given under private roofs, often in attics,
cellars or shacks.
When the statistics that were garnered from
these investigations were compared with Army
records it was discovered that illiteracy was
more widespread among adults born in 1926
than among those born between 1915 and 1920.
These same statistics also showed the extent to
which adults who once learned to read had
relapsed into illiteracy. Questionnaires were used
to determine the exact reasons for failure to
attend elementary school and a study was made
of local living conditions. In this way there was
some concrete basis for further action.
The first step was to provide a channel through
which the peasants could express their ambition
to learn, and this took form in local village
Committees to Battle Illiteracy. So many of
these were created that on January 24-25, 1948,
their secretaries held a regional meeting in
Matera and agreed to work closely with the
mayors and school-teachers of their villages.
Gatherings were held in the public squares,
loudspeakers carried the message into the streets
and persuasive people of goodwill made a door-
to-door campaign. Their propaganda was
sincere because they were not strangers but
people on the spot who understood the peasants
with whom they were dealing.
WITHIN a fortnight adult education groupssprang up all over Lucania. They were
lodged in a strange variety of quarters.
There were so many applications that courses
were swamped. Where three classes had been
announced, they had to be increased to five the
next day and ten the day after, until there was
no place left to hold them.
At Muro Lucano a carabiniere had to preserve
order among those who were turned away ; and
at Tricarico they sat silently outside the impro-
vised schoolroom while their more fortunate
fellows attended the lesson. The village of
Bernalda, which is subject to frequent electric
power failures, decided that private houses could
remain dark while the lights were on for night
classes in the school-house. The peasants
themselves strung wires and installed the light-
ing. Now it shines out over the mountain-top
village.
(This article is copyright and must not be reproduced
without permission.)
Page 5-UNESCO COURIERMARCH 1952
300, 000 ADULTS AND CHILDREN
HAVE ATTENDED 11, 000 COURSES
