UNESCO COURIER-Page 6
P  P  R
,
W P ! M
JANUARY 1952
by P. L. BRET
IF we put aside myths and assumptions, our civilization rests
on certain fundamental acquisitions. Among them are
those corner-stones of our age, the achievements of techno-
logy, which smooth and regulate our lives, enable us to move
easily from place to place, ensure our wellbeing and simplify,
yet complicate, our work ; all this for good or will, according to
whether we make them our servants or our masters.
Take paper, for example, whose beginnings seem almost
like a fable.
What must have been the astonishment of man when, after
long endeavour to perpetuate his name in stone or other mineral
substance, he first held in his hand this pulp, product of his
ingenuity, with its instant appeal to his mind. He must have
felt the delight of a child who wins a game, but fear, too, of that
blank surface in which can be discerned the duplication of the
self, a mirror in which the reflection outlives the original, in
which expression has to discover its rules and work out its forms,
a miraculous springboard off which the mind will plunge, silently
and alone. Through tentative gropings, clumsy reflections of
everyday life, the written word, by dint of toil, adapts itself to
human speech. Joy inspires songs, fear engenders myths,
until at last we get the first thoughts that reveal the man
himself, alike friendly and hostile to the world about him, proud
of controlling events and of mastering time, transforming the
past into the present, the present into the past, and proposing
that the future shall preserve the record of these changes.
Then scattered thoughts make room for systematic thinking.
The age of simplicity is past. Pride reverts to humility.
"Alas, for my glad thoughts of yesterday,"cried Nietzsche,
"what have I done with you ? What has become of you ?" Self-
knowledge is a labyrinth from which no one can find the way
out ; the enchanted path pursues its tortuous way, the writer a
prey to alternating moods of rapture and despair.
But writing leads to reading, and we can imagine the first
reader as we did the first writer-she was probably a woman
and certainly inquisitive-turning back and forth the page on
which another hand than hers had traced signs that convey the
sound of the writer's voice and the movement of his lips with a
subtlety known only to the author.
Who can say if the inventor of paper was not tempted to
preserve his secret, to keep this mute and indulgent confidant to
himself, this unfailing memory, this evidence now made lasting
by paper ? But the key to dreams was surrendered. We shall
never know at what cost, nor what part was played by vanity,
fear, ambition and curiosity in that very ordinary yet crucial
colloquy by which the secret was extorted-a colloquy that
never took place.
Thus author and reader were born. The presence of another
person was no longer needed for the communication of ideas.
Man could speak to man, yet be alone, provided he had this link
with his fellows. This is one of the world's great miracles.
Its effects were prodigious. Paper and the written word
broke over the world like a tidal wave. And, with them, men's
brains were set awhirl by the products of genius and stupidity,
vileness and sublimity. Their minds became distraught by
anxiety, swayed to and fro by contradictions, now bound by
earthly chains, now exalted to the skies-all at the whim of
paper.
For writing means choosing.
Or rather, it once meant choosing, both for author and reader.
The choice was between truth and falsehood, beauty and
ugliness, good and evil, with no other guide than a man's own
judgment, and this became more and more incapable as writing
grew more complex and more specialized, creating a language
of its own, understood only by the initiated."One used to be able
to read", Lucien Febvre says,"and to read nearly everything
worthwhile in one's own field. Nowadays it is impossible to
read even the essentials. And, what is more, one doesn't want
to. One is surfeited before one begins."
Does this mean that paper is leading us from daylight into
darkness ?
"The idol of Progress", writes Valéry,"has its counterpart
in the idol of anti-Progress, and that gives us two clichés."And
it is true that the pendulum always swings back.
Ortega y Gasset's"Torrent of Books", the avalanche of
imbecile publications and the sacrifice of quality to quantity, have
made paper so scarce, that unless we deliberately choose non-
sense, circumstances will force us to pay heed once more to the
voice of reason and good taste. We shall be driven to sacrifice
some of our frivolity in order to safeguard education and science,
on which our future depends, and to bring the blessings of
reading and writing to the millions who know nothing of either.
Surely it is remarkable that the sale of"serious"books
is going up, while the sale of light reading falls off. This is an
unforeseen result of the rise in the price of books. People do
not want to pay as much for a book bought to pass the time as
for one of lasting worth. Authors themselves, knowing that
their public matters more and more and that their publishers
are quite aware of it, try to polish up a manuscript that may
sell, rather than dash off three books that will find no readers.
The number of specialists who indulge in esoteric language
and in jargon is increasing. But, in terms of human beings,
the man who tries to understand is more important than one
who has understood. What matters is the attitude, the thirst
for knowledge, the direction a man gives to his enquiries and
his need for an answer.
Paper, as a factor in this dialogue, is only the pretext. An
aid to expression, we wrongly identify it with expression itself
and bless it or curse it as such. Actually it remains the passive
tool in its master's hands, who alone can be held answerable for
the use made of it.
Whether it is ideas or confetti, the product of an author or
of a lawyer's scribe, platitude or conceit, a poem or wrapping-
paper, an engraving or a photograph, posters or transfers, cigar-
ettes or lithographs, postage-stamps or wallpaper-paper
unwinds itself about our lives like a streamer, from the registra-
tion of our birth to the signing of our death certificate.
Thoughts cannot be expressed without a material basis, but
it is not to be supposed that evolution stops or that paper is the
ultimate form of invention. Others, at present only foreshadow-
ed, will follow.
In future ages, it may be that man will express himself by
groups of coloured sound-waves, which, replacing the discon-
nected utterances of our day, will merge in a complete unity of
thought and tone. Transcending the limits of worn-out words,
we should thus attain to a more perfect form, which, opening up
new horizons to the mind, would impart to it a renewed, vitality.
A fragment of paper of the Eastern Han period (A, D. 25-220), the most ancient paper known to exist in the world. (lI, irish foIo.. eum)
