MEN AGAINST IGNORANCE
RITCHIE CALDER-CONT'D.
BY THE LIGHT OF
HURRICANE LAMPS
SIGOTA GOES OFF TO
THE BAMBOO SCHOOL
If THE JUNGLE, BORNEO.
ccoT is a jungle schoolgirl, aged
twelve. She is the eldest of four
children, three girls and a baby boy,
who share house with their father, mother,
both sets of grandparents and 200 other
people.
They are Dyaks, or headhunters, except
that they do not hunt heads any more,
and are much more peaceable than the
nations who regard them as uncivilized,
and much more moral than some of those
who deplore the fact that they are pagans.
Sigota lives in the tree-tops. Her home
is a"longhouse,"built on stilts which
support a platform of bamboo slats big-
ger than a football field,, with a hut
stretching all the length-just one
long room with plaited screens of banana
leaves partly separating each family.
Maybe a longhouse may seem curious
to people outside Borneo, but a city
tenement or an American skyscraper
would seem just as curious to Sigota. It
depends upon whether you think of a
longhouse as horizontal or vertical.
Last night, I shared the same room as
Sigota and her family. I slept on a straw
mat, on the uneven floor of bamboo
stems, and after a day in the jungle I
slept soundly-once I could ignore the
stirrings in the jungle around us and the
slitherings and scratchings of miscellan-
eous reptiles and night-prowlers.
This morning Sigota and I and the rest
of the occupants of the longhouse were
wakened at dawn by a chorus of roosters
under the bed-because the village
chickens roost, and the village pigs root,
in the space between the floor and the
ground. They are the scavengers who
deal with the refuse and sewage which is
disposed of quite simply and crudely
through the slats of bamboo. One has to
forget the refinements of modern plumb-
ing in a Dyak longhouse.
But the longhouse is nevertheless kept
clean. This itself is quite a fact, for all
the water has to be carried from the river
which tumbles through a gorge some dis-
tance away through the jungle.
And that was the jungle schoolgirl's
first job-to collect the water from the
river. She had no pitcher or pail, only
a dozen bamboo bottles-just sections of
bamboo, with the knot as the bottom.
When she went down to the river her
first concern was her morning bath. This
meant plunging into the rapids in her
sarong which she kept around her and
washed at the same time as she bathed.
(Laundering is simple in equatorial Borneo
- the sarong was dry on her before she
reached home.) Then she cleaned her
teeth by rubbing them with the useful
bristles of a sliver of coconut shell.
Her own morning ablutions over, she
filled her bamboo bottles with clear run-
ning water. One bottle was leaking.
She called to a boatman who left his
canoe, ducked into the jungle, took his
heavy curved knife whetted to razor-
sharpness, and with a few deft slashes
cut another section, then stripped and
cleaned it. It did not take a minute.
Sigota filled her new bottle and strapped
it, with the others, on a rack which she
slung on her back, and with that straight
back and perfect posture that gymnastic
teachers spend laborious hours giving to
schoolgirls, she climbed back to the
longhouse.
Her mother was squatting on the floor,
fanning a charcoal brazier on which the
rice was cooking. Rice and a mess of
vegetables, spiced with chili pepper, and
a banana from a bunch just cut in the
jungle, was Sigota's breakfast, washed
down with a draught of cool, clean-tasting
juice (not yet"milk") from a young
coconut, freshly broached.
The head of her group-the longhouse
is divided into working parties-called
Sigota, who picked up her basket of rice
seed, like a small fishing creel, and joined
the party. And so did I.
We filed off, down the notched tree-
trunk which is the staircase from the
longhouse platform to the ground, and
along the jungle trail.
An old crone led the way, chewing a
ball of lime, betel-nut, and red tobacco,
which'had already blackened her teeth
and turned her mouth to an oozing, scarlet
gash. She was muttering all the way-
on gossiping terms with the spirits, who,
because she was so old, could not harm
her.
Her job was to watch the omens.
Perhaps Sigota and her lively girl-friend,
Sengos, who were walking along so de-
murely (one must not be sprightly with
sprites) were hoping that they would hear
The blackboard was'lit by a swaying hurricane lamp... Each pupil had a tiny
wick-lamp in front of him by which he had to read his books and tote his sums.
the bukang-bird, because if they did
they would all have to turn back and
abandon the rice-planting for the day.
But no ill-omen crossed our path on
the long trek through the steaming jungle
to the rice field.
This was a patch of hill-jungle, a few
acres in area, which the villagers had
laboriously cleared by cutting down the
bigger trees and setting fire to the under-
growth and the bamboo trees. The ash
lay heavy on the untilled ground.
In the middle of the patch was an
erection of bamboo canes supporting a
thatched roof and a platform on which
was laid a variety of trinkets, a banana
leaf of food and a bottle of rice-beer.
The spirit whose shrine it was likes a
square meal and strong drink, washed
down with water from bamboo bottles.
It is one of the duties of Sigota and
Sengos to replenish these bottles, through-
out the heat of the day, with cool water.
This water is brought from a stream high
up the hill on a frail aqueduct of split
bamboo cane, supported above the ground
on crutches of branches-a simple and
satisfactory pipeline.
But the aged Mistress of Omens, ignor-
ing this permanent shrine, went to a
corner of the patch, on the edge of the
jungle, rigged up another shrine of thin
canes about three feet high and thatched
it with-green leaves. She squatted on her
haunches and laid a leaf like a green
salver on which she put some food and a
sprinkle of rice from the baskets of each
of the sowers, adding some of her own
chewed betel-nut. Then for about half
an hour she alternately scolded and ca-
joled the Rice Spirit until finally she got
some sort of assurance and signalled for
the planting to go on.

This is a daily ritual which is very
important because, if the Spirit sends the
wrong omens, if he lets the wrong kind
of snake (not neoessarily a deadly one)
stray on to the ricefield, the villagers will
abandon the patch and all the labours it
has meant.
The planting was very simple. The
men of the party went around stabbing
the ground with pointed staves and the
women and girls followed, dropping a
pinch of rice seed unerringly into each
hole. The holes were left uncovered, an
invitation to the birds (another good reason
for appeasing the Rice Spirit, under whose
jurisdiction bird-thieves come).
Sigota and Sengos, as schoolgirls will,
were giggling over some private joke (pro-
bably me !) and sprinkling rice seed.
All morning they worked in the heat of
the clearing, occasionally douching their
faces and having a drink at the spout
of the aqueduct.
When the sun was vertical in the
heavens and seemed to be focussing on
that jungle clearing with the intensity of
a watch glass, the group-leader called a
halt and we all retreated into the shadows
of the Jungle. Shadow, yes, but with
the marrow-melting humidity of a Turkish
bath.
On the way back we met Bait (Ba-eet),
a twelve-year-old schoolboy friend of
Sigota. He was also on his way home,
alone, from the rubber-tapping. Since
early morning he had been out with his
curved parang (heavy knife), carving
spiral cuts in the barks of the rubber
trees. Skilfully he had shaped each cut
into a runlet, which drained the oozing
white sap into a cup. He was carrying
back his morning's collection to pour into
shallow tins like toffee-trays in which the
sap congeals to a dough-like consistency.
Bait's afternoon work would be to roll
and knead the dough into slabs, and place
them in a press, each separated by a sheet
of cheese-cloth. The remaining moisture
is squee2Jed out, the sheets passed through
a mangle and hung on a spar to dry until
the Chinese merchants come and buy it.
The chromium-plated wrist watch on
Bait's arm and the fountain-pen in his
Dyak working dress are his share in the
rubber-boom, which has reached deep
into the jungle. For some longhouses it
has meant wealth which runs to outboard
motors for their canoes, wireless sets and
even generators for electric light. In this
longhouse I have seen a bicycl'e, although
there is not a jungle trail along which
anyone could ride it.
After her midday meal, not very differ-
ent from her breakfast, except for a slice
of pineapple which her mother had gone
out and collected gratis in the jungle,
Sigota had other duties. She looked after
her baby brother, taking him for a stroll
along the platform, with him sitting
astride her thighbone-not pickaback
but pickaside.
They relieved her younger sister who
had been sitting waving a long bamboo
cane over the rice spread out on mats to
dry. This was to keep off marauding
poultry. While Sigota swung this, the
one-year-old beside her waved a cane
three times his size, joyously shooing off
the persistent hens.
When her mother wakened from her
siesta, Sigota turned to more serious
work. She had to thresh some of last
harvest's rice, beating it until the chaff,
winnowed by the wind, dropped through
the slats (with quite a lot of rice) to feed
the poultry below. As a reward she was
given a chunk of sugar cane to chew.
When darkness fell, without even the
dimming curtain of a twilight, she was
still at work, milling the rice by rubbing
it between two heavy chunks of wood.
Schoolgirl ? Yes, Sigota is a schoolgirl.
She was working since seven this morn-
ing but at seven in the evening, with the
crescent moon just making the darkness
visible, she, together with Sengos (both
of them in bright sarongs and ornaments
in their hair), and Bait and a dozen
other"schoolchildren,"some of whom
were over 20 years old, joined a procession
of hurricane lamps and flashlamps.
They went downstairs to school which
i a thatched open hut in a clearing beyond
the longhouse.
The blackboard was lit by a hurricane
lamp which periodically dimmed out
behind a screen of moths. Each pupil
had a tiny wick lamp in front of him by
which he had to read his books and tote
his sums.
And they began to read in unison"Ay
man saw a tiger"..."I cennut towch the
top of the coconut tree"..."My father
went to mercut today."
Sigota is a star pupil. Solo she recited
"My mother is tired. I am sorry."
Proudly the teacher in white pyjamas
showed to me his certificate accrediting
Ibrahim bin Mantali, aged 45, as a tem-
porary teacher. It stated that he had
passed standard four in Malay and stan-
dard three in English.
He may not have had much schooling
himself, but he has brought literacy to
these jungle Dyaks. And Sigota and Bait
and their friends want to learn, even if it
means going to school in jungle darkness,
alive with strange sounds-including the
echoes of the A. B. C.
Ritchie Calder covered 25, 000 miles
on his United Nations expedition
to study conditions in the coun-
tries of South-East Asia. Stars
and white lines on map mark his
route from the dense jungles of
Sarawak to the bleak mountains
and plains of Afghanistan. Here
live some 800, 000, 000 people, most
of them citizens of new nations
which have won independence
since the last war., The great
majority of the inhabitants are
poor. Most merely exist, with
no margin of food or wealth above
mere subsistence level. Not only
are they poor in respect of worldly
goods, but illiteracy is the rule
and they are often bound by tradi-
tion, custom, religion or fear to
continue living in the manner of
their ancestors. Diseases are
endemic and frequently cause
wide-spread epidemics. At each
point of his journey, however,
Ritchie Calder found the people
of this huge area awakened to
new possibilities and discovered
new evidence of the co-operation
between the Orient and the Occi-
dent which is helping to raise the
standards of living of about one-
third of the population of the world.
