: O : OURIER OCTOBER) 952. Page 3
THE UNITED NATIONS
AND
NAT) ONAL LOYALDES
by Jaime Torres Bodet
HE United Nations has been in existence since 1945, No
longer is it just a vague pacifist hope or a sentimental,
intellectual aspiration ; il is the embodiment of a world
order which must be consolidated and perfected and
which must be defended. But a big question mark
remains. Are aIl the governments in a position to
teach the citizens within their own countries the things
they have prüclaimed to the world outside over their
solemn signatures following the horrible havoc of
the last war ? Are they, in other works, prepared to
teach that aIl States enjoy"'equal soverèignty"but that in thé exorcise
of their sovereignty aIl the nations that joined together to form the
United Nations admitted certain obligations-obligations which every
single one of their citizens has the right to know in full, and the right to
know from school age onwards ?
Unesco's activities on behalf of education for living in a world
community are in no sense subversive : What we are trying to do is to
train citizens who will be faithful in their duty to their own country and
who for that very reason will also be loyal to the international obligea-
tions which their country has assumed. The activities of Unesco are
founded on texts that have been officially approved and are publicly
regarded as the guarantee of peace and essential to the progress of
the whole would.
It has never been the purpose of Unesco to turn citizens from their
national'loyalties. Each one of us belongs to a country, and has
towards that country an essential duty of loyalty which we cannot and
should not evade. But each of our countries, in turn, is engaged in
accomplishing a series of acts, in taking a series of measures, without
which the peace, security and progress of ale would constantly be
threatened. Now, these duties are so closely linked together that it
is difficult to draw a line of demarcation between them that would hold
good for everybody, and in every particular case.
Few sentiments are so spontaneous and lasting as love of the
country where we are born. It is perfectly legitimate that we should
long to see it great. But great by what means ? By violence ? By injus-
tice ? By aggression ? It is very obvious that, in extreme cases, the
patriot who does not care a straw for international obligations delibera-
tely accepted by his country is a queer kind of patriot.
Unesco did not make history, but it cannot ignore history. There
are millions of people who yearn to live in a free and peaceful world
community, but who are discouraged by the difficulties and dangers
which beset them. Let none of us underestimate the magnitude of the
obstacles in the way of adjusting national policy and national interest
to the new system óf international co-operation.
Faced with the discouragement that such difficulties might produce,
we adults need to be reminded, our children need to be informed, III
what circumstances and for what purposes the peoples of the world
established the international organization of the United Nations. Yes,
we adults need to be reminded again and again.
Twice in our lifetime the tidal wave of war has s\vept across the
\vorld.'r'wicp. we set our hands to the task of rebuilding the shattered
community of nations and making it secure. We have seen private
hopes and plans of individuals wrecked in the castastrophe of society.
Economic systems have been wrecked, thé norma ! development of
manufacture and commerce has been violently distorted, currencies
have been debased, savings made worthless, rich landes made desolate,
great cities reduced to rubble and to ash.
Twice in our generation young men throughout the world have
been torn from their homes and families to lose their lives or waste
their years in fields of battle while their wives and children lived
or died under a rain of bombs. Each day brought news of death to
countless homes. Twice this tide of destruction has swept through
the \vorld-through the whole world-and given us in common only
sufTering and tears.
Unesco bears no responsibility for the political evolution of the
past, but must nevertheless insist that this evolution should be kno'wn.
Unesco lives in a would where, whether we like it or not, we are aIl
dependent upon one another. Governments are only too sadly and
precisely aware that they are not free to take décisions in accordance
only with their own immediate and limited interests, unless they wish
to expose themselves to aIl kinds of sanctions, or else to expose other
countries to ail kinds of troubles. Unesco considers tbat thé peop ! e
whose destiny  lies in the hands of these governments should know
this, too.
So long as the obligations which hold the United Nations system
together remain valid, it would be contrary to the spirit of democracý
to keep populations in ignorance. To d'o so would mean in practice
that education was being used, not as a means of access to a better
and fuller life, but as a preparation for aggression, or to confirm the
resignation of weakness in the face of aggression.
To teach young people about the obligations which arise out of
the necessity of living in an international community, does not imply
that we should hoodwink them with the promise of an immutable
world order that can be established as if by magic. International
laws, like national laws, always run the risk of being broken by the
most powerful and the most cynica). But although this danger exists
III every country, education has nevertheless continued to include
courses in civics. The more fragile the protection which the law offers
us, the more necessary it is to train people to help ensure that protec-
tion. To say that comprehensive teaching about the machinery, activities
and problems of the United Nations would incite young people to
forget the respect they owe their own country, amounts to saying that
the country in which that teaching took place either did not belong to
the United Nations system or else be) onged tp it only in appearance.
1 do not believe in virtues which lessen a man. He who, out of
so-called love of his country, despises his native tdwn, loves neither
his town nor his country ; and whoever, out of alleged devotion to
some international order, repudiates his loyalty to his own country,does not really love his own country nor the international order he
daims to admire.
In a system of interdependent nations, internationalism can consist
neither in the predominance of one State nor in the development of
a superficial cosmopolitanism. Education for national democracy
accepts as a corollary, and often as a premise, a clear idea of what the
individuat owes to the nation and'what the nation owes to the world :
whence the expression"international understanding"which was used
. in the programme of Unesco in its early days. But understanding
others is not everything. lt has been said that"to understand every-
thing is to forgive everything". But international solidarity depends
less upon forgiveness than upon justice-not a vindictive justice, but
social justice applied to ail sections of the population alike.
It is therefore right that the notion of collective security, as the
United Nations has proclaimed it, that is to say, peace founded on
respect for law, should be universally known and valued, for once the
moment for decision arrives, everyone'will be called upon to pay Hie
price. What sense is there in having a principle for which millions
of men may lay down their lives and which teachers do not mention
in their classes, or else, at the most, resserve for the higher stages of
university education, that is to say, for a minority, a procedure quite
out of proportion to the unanimity with which the entire population
is called upon when the hour of sacrifice strikes.
Nor is it sufficient to adhere simply to the principle of collective
security, for the light which this throws on l'vents shows only one
aspect of international solidarity and that the most severe, the most
urgent today, perhaps, but not the most exalted. For many, collective
security unless it is accompanied by the hope of economic and social
improvement, is no better than the maintenance of an unsatisfactory
order of society. Now, what helps to give collective security its noblest
human significance is the progress which it enables aIl the peoples of
the world to make. The founders of the United Nations solemnly
recognized this ! when they laid it down in the San Francisco Charter
that :
"With a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-
being which are necessary fOI'peaceful and friendly 1'elations
among notons oosed on respect for the p1'Ínciple of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall p1'omote,
(a) higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions or'
economic and social progress and development ;
(b) solutions of international economic, social, health, and 1'elated
problems : and international cultural and educational co-ope1'-
ation : and ;
(c) universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms fM all without distinction as to race,
ses, language or religion,"
Such is the function which, within the United Nations, devolves
principally upon the Economie and Social Council ; such is the role
assigned to the Specialized Agencies ; such is the goal which the
Technical Assistance Programme, with inadequate resources, is trying
to attain. If we really want these organizations and enterprises to
succeed, it is not reasonable to keep schoolchildren in ignorance of the
reasons which led to these efforts being made and of the objectives
which, in the opinion of Governments, justify them ; for schooichildreil
will'become essential collaborators in this work, the builders of the
community of the future.'If Governments cannot recommend that the children in their
schools should be taught what their representatives publicly declare at
the rostrum of the United Nations, whom are we to believe ? The diplo-
mat who makes speeches, or the teacher who keeps silence ? History
is no doubt full of these tragic discrepancies between the man who
commands and the man who teaches. And that is one reason why
history is bathed in tears and blood.
Unesco invites you to think over these matters. Our activities in'
this field are faced with two dangers : one is propaganda, and the other
verbalism-by which 1 mean paying too much attention to the letter
and not enough to the spirit.
We do not want teaching about the United Nations to be a mère
repetition of political slogans more or less happily conceived. te
want the pupil to use his judgment before he expresses an opinion, to
form his own persona ! views and not just to absorb placidly and
automatically the ideas of other people. Nor
have \VI'l'ver wanted to bore young people with (cont, nued on
a purely \"t'l'bal-education for citizenship. No next poge)

Page 4, OCTOBER) 952
ACTS, NOT TEXTS, TEACH
HUMAN SOLIDARITY
(Continued from previous page.)
doubt it is important to have a tex-
tuai knowledge of the documents
which govern international rela-
tions in the world today ; but soli-
darity is learnt from acts and not
from texts.
It is neither wise noir désirable to
"play"at Collective Security and
Human Rights. School is more
than an introduction to life : it is
a part of live, even an essential part.
It offers numerous opportunities
for putting into practice the funda-
mental principles of ail'thé docu-
ments 1 have been speaking about.
Unless teachers make an effort to
use thèse opportunities, it wiM not
be of much use to g'ive long textual
explanations of aU the Articles in
question. Schoolchildren will al-
ways be intelligent enough to
understand that education which
cannot be translated into actions
and attitudes cannot be applied to
real lifte. And so most of them,
while paying lip-service to equal-
ity, will take care not to extend
the hand to their obscure feUow-
creatures belonging to another race,
another religion, another latitude,
and wearing quite different clothes.
1 think it is necessary that chil-
dren should know about the Uni-
versal Deciaration of Human
Rights. But it is still more neces-
sary that through the way they are
brought up they should learn to
respect the rights of others. We
want children to have such infor-
mation as they need to be good
citizens in the twentieth century.
We are much more deeply
concerned that their education
should develop those predisposi-
tions, those attitudes to their fellow
human beings, that wiU enable
them to enter fuUy and co-
operatively into the life of our com-
munity of peoples on this planet.
There are many ways in which
this may be donc. When 1 am
asked how 1 view the relationship
befween education and peace, 1 say
that although there is some teach-
ing that may promote peace
directly, the essential contribution
of education to peace is indirect.
Inculcation of a doctrine that we
must live at peace with one an-
other, learning by heart the Decla-
ration of Human Rights, and so
forth, is infinitely less important
than growing up so that we do in
fact co-operate freely and equaUy
with other men of goodwill.
A lively sense of the world
T N some countries where this isappropriate to the educational
tradition, direct courses may be
introduced into the curriculum so
that children are taught formally
about the United Nations, about
the Declaration of Human Rights,
and about their own country's rôle
in the community of nations. I,
of course, welcome that. But it is
not thé onty way. Such instruc-
tion runs the danger of being too
isotated, too compartmentalized,
too divorced from the main stream
of study. And precisely because
it appears to be so direct it may
have to be so hedged about with
précautions-deaMng as it does
with questions that often arouse
bitter controversy-that it be-
cornes almost denatured. The
introduction of direct courses in
international affairs by no means
excludes the promotion of acti-
vities, in school and outside, which
will give a youngster a lively sense
of the world in which he lives and
encourage the right attitudes to be
formed.
To the two dangers 1 have just
mentioned, propaganda and ver-
balism, which it is imperative to
avoid, must be added yet another
undeniable difficulty : education
which aims at teaching people to
live as citizens of a world commun-
ity must be, in every country, a
national education. No one can
impose it on anyone else. lt must
above ail be adapted to the condi-
tions of the environment it aims
at improving, and must proceed
directly from that environment. 1
do not hesitate to say that
nowadays it is national needs
which can best open our eyes to
<. he Ileed for an international order.
Respect for each culture
THE goal is the same for us all,but the means we apply to
reach it are not and should not
be identical. \oVe must respect the
originality of each separate culture,
and appreciate the differences
which distinguish one country
from another ; we must try to win
consent but never to force sub-
mission. This proviso is ail the
more important in that the Uni-
versai Declaration of Human
Rights, for instance, is, as 1 have
often said, a programme of action,
and one extremely difficult to
carry out. What State in the
world can boast that it applies
without distinction, and in ail
circumstances, all the principles
proclaimed on December 10, 1948
by the Assembly of the United
Nations ?
If we don't want to discourage
young people from the outset, we
must explain to them that the
application of each one of these
principles represents the laborious,
slow, patient triumph of good over
evil, humanity over cruetty, co-
operation over setfishness. Unless
teaching about Human Rights is
illustrated, as it should be, from
the data of history, geography,
literature, and the fine arts, then
the traditional training in"civics"
will'achieve nothing.
Perhaps 1 should say a littie
more on that point. 1 will use the
terminology to which 1 have
become accustomed as an old hand
at conferences. One might like to
think of Human Rights in terms
of the agenda of a meeting, and
the minutes of the previous
meeting. Thé Dectaration of
Human Rights states part of the
agenda for the human race. It
declares tasks before us, the work
to be done. The task is to win our
young people to accept as their
own this common human agenda.
But perhaps you will say :"The
trouble with these young people
is that they never read the minutes
of the last meeting". The minutes
of this meeting are nothing less
than thé recorded history of
mankind. In those minutes you
will see what good intentions have
been expressed, what aspirations
avowed, what steps have been
taken, what victories achieved,
and alas, what failures recorded.
It is a long story, this quest for
human freedom. Our children
should know it. It is their story.
Let them read the minutes of the
last meeting. And let them then,
with that knowledge and under-
standing, enter as responsible
citizens into the human assembly.
Let them undertake their part in
the never-ending endeavour to
build a community of free men
and women who one and all enjoy
the rights proper to human dignity
in a world of peace.
This article is a summary of the
address made by the Director-Gene-
ml of Unesco at Woudshouten, Near
Utrecht, in the Netherlands, when he
opened a seminar to study and deve-
lop methods of education for living
in a world cornmunity. The serninar,
which was sponsored by Unesco,
lasted four weeks, and was attended
by more than 80 educators from all
parts of the world.
Fisheries development in Jndonesia.
land reclamation in Israël.
-.
