Page 12. APRIL 1952 UNESCaOUR'E !
NEW Yorkers recently flocked to an exhibitionshowing that the American Way of Life is a
combination of many (mostly non-American) ways.
The exhibition was unusual in a number of aspects. Tt
was not housed in one building. Instead, the exhibits
were shown in a hundred shop-windows in leading stores
in and around Fifth Avenue. To organize the
exhibitions, 32 of the city's museums had got together
in their biggest joint enterprise ever.
The exhibition, which was called"World on View,"
was held in honour of the National Conference of the
United States National Commission for Unesco."World
on View"chose as its theme one of Unesco's main
tasks-helping the man in the street to visualize the
interdependence of all men and all nations.
Americans were reminded that they are surrounded by
everyday objects which have their origin in many parts
of the world. They were shown, for instance, that when
"Mr. Average American"awakes to begin a"typical
American day,"he is muffled to the ears in materials of
Oriental origin. Whether his pyjamas and bedclothes are
made from cotton, linen, wool or silk, they all came
originally from Asia.
It might be imagined that nothing could be more Ame-
rican than the American breakfast ; but, the exibition
shows that nearly every item on the breakfast menu
originated far away on the other side of the Atlantic or
Pacific. Bread was first eaten in the Near East, the use
of butter began as a cosmetic in the same region, and
coffee was an Abyssinian plant discovered by the Arabs.
Dishes had their origin in China, and the table fork was
first used during the Middle Ages in Mediterranean
countries.
Not all the exibits, however, were a5 light-hearted as
this ; but, whether matter-of. fact, grave or humorous, they
all were aimed at interesting the passers-by in the way
people work, play, dress, eat and think, not only in
their own country, but in others too.
There was an exhibit on"Speed and World Space,"
Thirty-two New York museums joined in arranging
Fifth Avenue"World on View"exhibits showing
interdependance of nations. Left : theme poster
AT least half the men and women who came to theThird National Conference of the U. S. National
Commission for Unesco were connected with
education in one form or another. Over 100 colleges
and universities sent officially accredited delegates.
A score of university presidents and representatives
from the country's leading educational associations
were there. Even more heartening was the number of
classroom teachers, principals, and specialists in
various fields from art to zoology, who had come to
Hunter College from all parts of the United States.
University professors and school administrators took
a prominent part in the leadership of the sections,
panels and work groups into which the conference was
divided. Also meeting with the professional educators
were several hundred students whose comments and
observations carried equal weight in defining problems
and offering suggestions. Students too joined with
adult leaders to formulate many findings related to
the educational phases of the conference.
Group after group took hold of the need for a
complete programme of education that would translate
information about the United Nations and better
knowledge of other peoples into the familiar facts of
everyday living. Experts in elementary education, as
well as those from the secondary schools and at the
college level, were agreed that teaching about the
UN and the Specialized Agencies be regarded as an
important part of all regular school activities. When
it came to a discussion of science clubs, student assem-
blies, college newspapers and other extracurricular
activities, the same thinking prevailed-do not separate
an interest in foreign affairs from any field that
attracts the regular attention of students, talk about
the UN whenever its work fits logically with the sub-
ject matter under discussion, introduce special projects
for international understanding whenever they can be
related to other learning experiences. In brief, the
conference was bent on making the United Nations a
part and parcel of every class and student interest
from nursery school to graduate seminar.
The importance of realizing why our international
organizations have come into existence was brought
out at a joint meeting of educational groups. At this
session over 1. 000 educators heard that the United
States is faced with a whole re-orientation of our
schools toward the world in which we are now living.
The United Nations and Unesco are a bridge to that
world, and educating for world understanding in the
broad sense, rather than merely teaching about UN
AMERICAN EDUCATION AND THE
UN) TED NAT) ONS
by Dr E. arl J. McGrath,
U. S. Commissioner of Education
and Unesco, is part of the challenge for school people.
Several educators suggested that possibly the main
difficulty faced by adults in their work with interna-
tional agencies may be that their own schooling in
these matters started so late-an observation which
highlights the task of bringing the work of the inter-
national organizations close to the people of UN
member nations, often designated the peculiar respon-
sibility of Unesco.
During an earlier panel report on"The Fight
Against Igncrance,"Unesco had been referred to as
the educational arm of the United Nations. Its
programme of fundamental education was described
as reaching out to lift the uneducated people in various
parts of the world. There was a clear recognition that
the elimination of illiteracy throughout the world was
essential if peoples generally were to understand the
work of the UN and to dedicate themselves to the
permanent establishment of peace.
Those attending this panel were also reminded not
to lose sight of the secondary purpose of fundamental
education, which is to improve the community itself.
Constantly alluded to and illustrated throughout the
conference were stories of how this is being done.
The problems of the underdeveloped areas, where
hunger, sickness and early death are the common lot,
were mentioned in several section meetings. Other
world problems of interest to school people are :-
(1) The continual need to expand and hold gains
made by free and compulsory schooling-eventually
guaranteeing to all children and young people the
right to an education expressly set forth in the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights.
(2) Education for adults, including a discussion of
how interest and methods usually vary to meet vastly
different situations and needs.
(3) Improvement of textbooks and teaching mate-
rials. A brief report on Unesco sponsored seminars
was included in one of the working papers.
Such were the ideas and the information which the
professors and the school teachers, the administrators
and other specialists, had fresh in their minds when
they met in the work sessions of their choice. They
also brought to these informal group discussions a
wealth of practical experience, innumerable questions,
and some doubts.
How to help parents, teachers and children gain a
feeling of responsibility toward other people, was
identified as a main task for those engaged in pre-
school and elementary education.
In a Pennsylvania school the sixth graders had cut
the problem down to size by asking,"What are the
greatest needs of children in the world today ?"
Each child represented a UN member nation to give
the presentation. A Minneapolis classroom posed a
series of questions about the United Nations, organized
into teams, read as much as possible on each subject,
and, after holding group discussions, worked out a
simple dramatic programme to be presented to the
school and the Parent-Teacher Association. But
especially needed are music and drama, and book
materials pictorially interesting, based on experience
and suited to the child's reading capacity.
When the question of materials and teaching
methods came up in work groups devoted to the
Secondary Schools, leaders thought that major respon-
sibility for their development rests with the teaching
profession itself. One group expressed firm belief
that, although UN information has a place through
the entire curriculum, all students before their educa-
tion terminates should have an opportunity for a


SCqOURIER
APRIL 1952. Page 13
which presented the expanding horizons in a shrinking
world. Another,"The Book,"covered the history of
reading matter from the Babylonian clay tablets of 4, 000
years ago to the present day.
"Mankind speaks through the Arts"was a synopsis
of sculpture from Asia, the Middle East, Europe, Africa
and the America, Furniture, clothing, jewellery, cera-
mics, silverware, textiles, glassware and many other every-
day objects were all dealt with from a universal point of
view.
The aim of the exhibition-in the words of Mr. René
d'Harnencourt, who headed the specially-formed New
York Museums Committee for the National Conference-
was to show how museums"may be used to increase an
understanding by the public of its own heritage, and
show each citizen his place in the world as a whole."
The exhibits were designed to interest passers-by in
exploring further the immense world resources at their
own doorstep.
.'A knowledge of the world and its people has never
been so important to every individual as it is now."
declared Mr. d'Harnencourt."Every political and eco.
nomic event, no matter where it may take place, eventually
affects the lives of every one of us. To know the world
and its people has become a necessity for all."
Mr. d'Harnencourt, who is Director of New York'
Museum of Modern Art, said that the exhibition could
"strengthen our consciousness of the interdependence of
the world, and create a desire for international co-
operation without which the efforts of UN and Unesco
cannot be successful."
At the same time as the National Commissions
Conference discussed how the citizen can play a greater
part in solving world problems, thousands saw these
exhibits which, although largely a spectacle of the live-
of others in the past and the present, succeeded in bring-
ing home to many an onlooker his function in the field-
of human activity.
designed by Leo Lionni ; Centre :"Speed and
World Space" ; Right : air view of New York, where
Unesco National Commission conference was staged.
systematic study of the United Nations, and suggested
the world history course as the logical place for it.
Definite plans for extending school programmes in
international relations were mapped out by a second
group. One specific recommendation advanced was
greater use of foreign students and exchange pro-
fessors, and of other speakers available from consulates,
diplomatic missions and the United Nations.
Finding out that basically people are more alike than
they are different, that differences do exist, and that
somehow ways must be found to live together in peace
in the face of these differences, was believed to be the
crux of the matter.
It was the sense of another work session thai 0-
day students should be led to an understanding of how
foreign policies have often reflected national interests,
but how in recent times they have taken account
increasingly of humanitarian concerns for other people.
An effective demonstration of many of these teaching
principles was given by the schools of the greater New
York City area during the Unesco gathering. Two
junior conferences were arranged by the local board
of education-one for ninth grade students, one for
the tenth to the twelfth grades. Junior confer-
ence activities culminated in a Youth Forum sponsor-
ed by the New York Times and televised from the
Hunter College Auditorium.
At the college level, not only knowledge but insight
into other ways of life is required for evaluating inter-
national issues. The value of developing a capacity
for mature judgment, rather than formulating the
judgments and attitudes of students, was stressed.
The working session given over to the exchange of
persons was concerned with the administrative pro-
blems as well as the value of the interchanges. Over
200 people attended, many of them officials of colleges
and universities charged with the responsibilities of
orienting foreign students in the United States.
American colleges and universities have long realiz-
ed responsibilities for extending their services beyond
the physical bounds of their institutions. It is logical
that a conference on"The Citizen and the United
Nations"should include a work session which urged
closer co-operation between the universities and the
various community agencies and organizations interest-
ed in motivating more serious adult study of the UN
and international problems.
