AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 7
(Photo Pierre Ver. er'
by Gilberto FREYRE
Author of The Masters and the Slaves
IT has been said by more than one author thatany account of the Negro in Brazil would be
no less than the history of the country itself.
This is obviously an exaggeration, for the same
thing has been said of the Portuguese, who made
a nation of Brazil through the development of a
patriarchal slave-holding, agrarian system, in
which the Negro was a basic element, but not the
whole system.
There are also interpreters of Braze's social and
cultural development who consider that the Indian
- and not the European or Negro"intruder"-
should be the central figure. According to them,
Brazilian history should be Indocentric (to use the
technical term), and not Lusocentric of Afrocen-
tric.
The problem of which group has played the
greatest role in Brazilian historv is a difficult one
to deal with objectively ; but the best evidence so
far assembled by social anthropologists and histor-
ians seems to indicate that the Negro is second
only to the Portuguese as the ba'sic element to
which Brazil owes not only its economic existence,
but also the main extra-European traits in its
modern culture and social organization.
Throughout America. Brazilian culture is noted
more for these extra-European traits (although
it remains predominantly European in culture)
than for its passively colonial sub-European
characteristics. And much of what contributes to
thm vigorous beginning of an original Brazilian
culture comes from the fact that the Negro, as a
result of the comparatively iiberat treatment given
him by the Portuguese, has had an opportunity
to express himself as a Brazilian and not as an
intruder, either ethnically or culturlly. It is also
because he has had an opportunity to express
himself as a Brazilian of African origin and not
as an undesirable African who shou) d never have
been introduced into Brazil at all.
The African came as a slave to Brazil as early
as the 15th century, the very century when the
country was discovered by the Portuguese. He
was introduced, first to supplement, but soon to
take the place of the Indian who was so hard to
maintain in slavery that it became uneconomic to
use him as a slave.
Admirers of the Indian regard this as evidence
that he was, and is, ethnically superior to the
African, in whom social psycho) ogists tike McDou-
gall have not hesitated to find a sort of instinct of
submission. More than this, they see here evidence
to confirm the idea that the Indian should be
considered by Brazilians as the really"noble
savage", whose blood Brazilians should be proud
and honoured to have running in their veins.
This may be true, but it is also true that the
insubordination of the Indian slave to his captors,
and his lack of adaptability to routine agrarian
work in the Portuguese plantations were not
enlirely an expression of race, psychology or
character ; they were also a consequence of the
fact that culturallv most Indians were in a nomad-
ic, non-agricuttural stage, while many of the
Africans brought to Brazil as slaves had reached
this agricultural stage and therefore accepted a
sedentarv life more readilv than the Indians.
Beside, it is not correct to say that Africans in
Brazil were always submissive to their masters.
Africans adapted themselves to their sedentary
life, but not always to slavery. From the early
colonization period, right down to the abolition of
slavery by the Brazilian Empire in 1889, there
were a number of slave uprisings, not only on
plantations, but also in towns and cities.
The most important Brazilian city during the
colonial period, Salvador da Bahia, was rocked by
a violent rising of African stave against their
masters in the early days of the Empire. The
astute Mussulman slaves were the"grey emi-
nence"behind this and other slave risings-for
among the Africans imported for household and
plantation work, Brazil was fortunate in having a
considerable number of Mussulmans, and a still
larger number of Negroes who had come under
Islamic influence and adopted that religion and
part of Mohammedan culture.
A number of these imported Africans knew how
to read and write Arabic, and some of them even
imported Arabic books through a French book-
seller in Rio. At that time a large number of
white plantation owners hardly knew how to read
their prayer-books or write notes for their wills,
while the ladies were kept so ignorant that they
were considered accomplished when they could
laboriously trace their own Christian names !
It seems also to have been a fact that a number
of girls were imported from Africa to Brazil to be
the mistresses of Portuguese princes of trade
established in cities like Salvador. Therefore
these girls were selected somewhat according to
Caucasian standards of beauty and European
refinement, and usua lIy from slightly Arabized
and Islamized African groups.
In connection with the history of the Negro in
Brazil, it should never be forgotten that Brazil
was colonized by the Portuguese who, as early as
the 15th century, became captors of slaves in
Africa. These were used in domestic as well as in
plantation work, and some were treated as if
thev were members of the white families to whom
they became attached. The 15th century Portu-
guèse historian, Zurara, teUs us that he'knew a.. _1,.....-...... l'.... 1 ..... number r such cases.
The Portuguese had
probahty fearned from
the Jioors to be humane
(Continued on next page)
: OURIER

Page 8. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952
- 
UNESCC
(Photo Jean Manzon)
(Continued from previous pate)
to their slaves in the
field and more than
humane to theirslaves.......----------------------
in the home. This explains why so many of the
slaves introduced into Portugal during the 15th
century were gradually Christianized and Europe-
anized, instead of being kept apart as.'Negroes"
or"barbarians".
Such an example was followed, to a large extent,
in Brazil, though it must be admitted that, under
the pressure of violent economic and environ-
mental changes, some masters were both inhumane
and cruel to their slaves.
A number of these masters had only one aim : to
become rich in the tropics as quickly as possible.
Therefore, they treated their slaves, not as mem-
bers of their patriarchal family, according to the
best Arab and Portuguese tradition, but as ani-
mals, from whom an ambitious sugar cane or
coffee planter sought to extract the maximum of
productivity for a minimum of expense in food,
clothing and lodging.
But it is only fair to say that,. as a rule, the
patriarchal system of slave-holding and agrarian
family life preserved in Brazil some of the Arab
methods of dealing with slaves that 15th century
Portugal introduced into Europe. A number of
reliable foreign observers tell us that slavery in
Brazil was more humane than in other parts of
America and of the world.
Some of them go so far as to contrast the
situation in Brazil with that of workmen in the
new factories of Europe during the early 19th
century. They reached the conclusion that it was
better to be a slave in a typically patriarchal sugar
or coffee plantation in Brazil than a labourer in
a European factory at that time.
Comparisons have also been made between the
treatment received by slaves in Brazil under the
patriarchal system and that received by free la-
bourers during the years of economic laissez-faire
that followed the liberation of the Negroes in Por-
tuguese America. Some investigators reached the
conclusion that the stave, under the patriarchal,
paternalistic regime, were probably better cared
for by their masters than free labourers, black
and white, during these years of transition. But
it is probably true that this period, cruel as it
was, contributed to the development of a more
virile personality among the ablest groups of black
or coloured labourers.
Throughout the history of Brazil, the contri-
bution of Negroes, both slave and free, has not
only aided Brazil's economic development, but
enriched Brazilian cultural life. In addition, as
more than one foreign observer has pointed out,
the Negro has contributed to what may be
described as the most originally Brazilian types of
feminine grace or beauty.
Brazilian quadroon or octoroon girls have a
special charm that harmonizes peculiarly with the
forms and colours of the tropical iandscape. It is
rarely attained by completely white girls or girls
with only a touch of Indian blood. And it is
common, now, in Brazil to observe, in even the
whitest Brazilian girls, a sort of subtle or indirect
imitation of this type of feminine beauty or grace,
as in the Negro's rhythm of walking, and her grace
in dancing and smiling.
One may say that, even without race mixture,
the profound influence of the Negro has made
itself felt in Brazil. Every Brazilian, no matter
how blonde, bears in his soul something of the
Negro. This influence is to be seen in a number
of intimate aspects of Brazilian life or culture such
as in the colourful form of Catholicism which
delights their senses, and their typical way of
walking, laughing and dancing.
The Negro influence is evident in Brazilian
music too, particularly in lullabies, ghost and ani-
mal stories, and folk tales.
As for Brazilian cooking, it would be nothing
more than that of Portugal, with a touch or two
of Indian influence, were it not for the African
contributions such as African vegetables, African
stimulants to taste of the kind that have been
described as.'aphrodisiac to one's appetite".
These, Brazil has assimilated and blended with
European, Arab, East Indian and American Indian
tastes.
In fact, African culture in Brazil is far from a
mere museum or anthropological curiosity. It is
not merely picturesque, but living and creative.
A Brazilian whose skin is black and whose hair
is woollv does not consider himself an African or
a Negro ; bust a Brazilian. This explains why his
situation is entirelv different from that of the
Negro in the United States or in South Africa,
even though he may not be as well adjusted to
predominantly European ways as he is to those
which characterize modern Brazil.
This also explains why it was so natural for a
famous Brazilian Negro, with a good European
literary education, to have once said in a speech :
*'\Ve. members of the Latin race..."In Brazil, a
Negro with a literary education find no diflìcultv
in considering himself not only a Brazilian, that is
a futi-nedged'citixpn of Brazil, but also a Latin, a
member of the Latin race.
