: COURIER
'·'
IN BRAZIL
:.
SAO PAULO
by Roger BAST/DE
Ecole des Hautes Etudes (Paris) and University of Sao Paulo
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 9
THE OCTOPUS
TOWN
IN 1888, when slavery was abolished in Brazil,Sao Paulo was still only a colonial town where
life followed the traditional rural rather than
the urban pattern. Today it is the second city of
Brazil, with nearly a million-and-a-half inhabit-
ants, and the largest industrial centre in the
whole of Latin America. With its reinforced
concrete skyscrapers and its feverish construction
boom (a new building goes up at the rate of one
every fifteen minutes), its ring of smoking chim-
neys, its mixture of peoples and races-Italians,
Portuguese, Spaniards, Germans, Slavs and
Japanese, mingled with the old Brazilian stock-'
and with its Negro population, flocking from north
and central Brazil to join the army of industrial
workers, Sao Paulo is truly, in Verhaeren's
phrase, an"octopus"town.
Industrialization and city life have given the
coloured man opportunities which he has learned
to take advantage of with practical common sense.
First of all, in the big city where most people pass
unknown, he has been able to melt into the crowd
and thus escape from the patriarchal life of the
old rural families and the tradition of passive sur-
render or servile submission to the whites as a
class. And although he may live in a slum, it does
not prevent him from breathing the air of free-
dom. He has a better chance of giving his children
an education which will help them to rise in the
social scale. Above all, he finds jobs open to him
in factories and industries, both big or small,
where he can earn wages high enough to improve
his standard of living. Already a middle class of
coloured people is emerging in Sao Paulo, who
own their houses or land, and who are distin-
guished from the lower working class by their
puritanical outlook and their sense of dignity.
It was, of, course, possible for the mulatto or the
Negro to make his way upward in the old-time
Brazilian society but such opportunities were then
open to very few. The great families always had
their coloured proves-adoptive children, god-
children, sometimes their own illegitimate
offspring, or those who were singled out from
others of their colour for their intelligence or
their devoted attachment to the family. Such
children were sent to school or found a job in
government service, so that the old families all
had a number of Negroes who advanced socially
under their protection. But these where only the
"elite", and the improvement in the position of
the favoured few did nothing for the mass of their
fellows, who remained in slavery. Industrialization
and the growth of cities, and the labour legislation
which applies to all workers, irrespective of colour
or origin, are now helping to improve the posi-
tion of the coloured people as a whole, rather
than that of a few isolated individuals.
It is obvious, however, that for this very reason
the whites are bound to feel that the privileged
situation they enjoyed in the past is threatened,
and they will try to defend their governing posi-
tions against the increasing numbers of black or
brown competitors. They will seek to put up bar-
riers at least to retard, if not to arrest, the move-
ment. But how can they do this in a democratic
country like Brazil where all mention of colour
is taboo and where the old tradition of friendly
relations between whites and Negroes continues
to exist ? They can only do this by indirect, round-
about ways, by rejecting, on medical grounds, for
example, a successful Negro candidate in a compe-
titive examination. There is thus a policy of
directing coloured workers into certain branches
of industry, such as the building trade or hard
and dirty types of work for which the whites are
not anxious to compete. I myself have known of
several coloured men with academic qualifications
who tried to get"white collar"jobs but finally
had to put up with sweeping floors or acting as
doormen.
The basis and grounds for this policy are to be
found in stereotypes and ideologies, which vary
in different sections of the population. In the old
traditional families, which are accustomed to
submissive affection from the Negroes under their
protection, there is a reaction against the arrog-
ance and aggressiveness of the new generation
of Negroes, a desire to maintain the old patriar-
chal control and to compel the Negro to"keep
his place". Among the descendants of immi-
grants, the struggle to make a living, the compe-
tition for the best jobs and the effort to find work
for newly-arrived compatriots lead them to stress
the"technical inferiority"or the'''unprepossessing
appearance"of the Negro. In addition, for cer-
tain children of foreigners, becoming assimilated
Brazilians has had a tendency to mean acquiring
the outlook of Brazilian society of the past and
adopting the ideas and feelings of the old ruling
class which held sway when slavery still existed.
In spite of ail this, however, with the spread of
education, with the influence of the war which
speeded up both industrialization and the inllux
of needed labour from Europe, with the competi-
tion between political parties and their increasing
bids to the electorate, the Negro has managed to
make his way into positions which he could never
have hoped to reach in the past. The whites have
therefore been compelled to revise their conven-
tional views, to acknowledge the worth of their
coloured colleagues in the office, and even, in some
cases, to take orders from Negroes who have
proved to be more capable.
The whites then usually fall back on a second
line of defence ; they respect official superiors
whose skin is darker than their own, they treat
their coloured colleagues in the office or factory
on the same terms as their white colleagues, but
they do not invite them into their homes. In the
sphere of family or social life, there is a barrier
which the white can pass but not, as a general
rule, the Negro. This attitude is found even among
the working classes. Sports clubs accept Negro
athletes in their games but they will not admit
them to the dances they run, and even less to
their swimming pools. Professional associations
exclude from their social functions those whose
skin is too dark.
This semi-voluntary segregation and the whole
phenomenon of Negro segregation is particularly
striking to the observer of Sao Paulo since it is in
complete opposition to the status of the Negro in
the rest of Brazil. Let us not be led to believe
that the phenomenon in Sao Paulo is simply a
question of class, with the Negroes at the lowest
stratum of society and the whites, occupying a
higher position, anxious to avoid a degrading
contamination. The coloured middle classes are
also excluded and, as their members do not wish
to be assimilated to the lower class, and as the
whites spurn them, they have been obliged to
organize their own recreational clubs.
It would be wrong, however, to exaggerate the
effect of this segregation. The sexual attraction
which, under the Empire, brought about the
mingling of races of different colour and so pre-
vented the formation of distinct castes, is still in
operation to encourage intermarriage, though pos-
sibly mainly among the lower classes and in
illegitimate relationships. Marriages do also take
place, however, between dark-skinned and lighter-
skinned people, the difference in colour being
offset by the economic advantages which the
darker partner can offer. A study of the census
returns for the population of Sao Paulo, and a
comparison of the birth and mortality figures for
Negroes and mulattoes, prove that a certain
number of coloured people cross the dividing line
each year and are absorbed into the white popu-
lation. This is not simply a question of statistics
but of their own outlook and of the attitude of
other people towards them. By this I mean that,
living in the impersonal atmosphere of a big city
where it is impossible to keep track of family
descent, they will be treated as whites and, at the
same time, they will adopt the white man's dero-
gatory stereotypes and prejudices against those
who have remained on the other side of the colour
barrier.
North American sociologists have given the
name of"transition societies"to these commu-
nities where the social structure is undergoing an
upheaval through the action of new economic
factors while many traditional values still sur-
vive. The city of Sao Paulo is an instance of such
a society in transition, where the patriarchal way
of life is succumbing to economic competition, and
the formation of social classes is undermining the
domination of the old rural aristocracy. The
colour prejudice which served to justify slavery
for the Negro is now out of date. It is changing
into class prejudice to justify white retention of
the governing or controlling positions in society.
Nevertheless, the democratic laws of Brazil and
the development of industrialization, with the
accompanying demand for more labour, are
helping to improve the position of the coloured
people as a whole. The classic master-and-man
relations is no longer applicable to the relations
between whites and blacks at work. This
accounts for the reluctance of the white man to
share his social life with the Negro and for his
desire to put the latter"in his place". It also
accounts for the uneasiness of the black man ;
he may still, in some cases, make his way up-
wards, as in the past, through the patronage of
a white but, in others, he may give way to resent-
ment at the obstacles he encounters in his efforts
to rise in the social scale, and in turn may deve-
lop racial prejudices of his own against the
Negro. The unifying forces and the forces of
segregation are thus accentuated and intensified
in the tangled relationships of city life. The ideo-
logical chaos is indicative of the conflict between
opposing social trends. Yet the coloured man has
glimpsed a better world, even though the way to
it lies through the sufferings of a painful period
of transition, in which outworn prejudices seek
to stave off final defeat by assuming a new guise
seemingly even more intense than the old ; a
period, in particular, in which those prejudices,
even when weakened, are felt more bitterly by
men and women who have been taught by free-
dom the meaning of human dignity.
Brazil is one of the rare countries which have achieved racial harmony and racial democracy. Although a few discordant notes can be found
in white-Negro relations in certain large, industrialized towns, they are in complete opposition to the status of the Negro in the rest of Brazil.
(Photos Pierre Verier)
