DECEMBER 1952. Page 3
U. N. Photo.
TEACHING WORLD UNDERSTANDING
IN THE GEOGRAPHY CLASS
CC fN what way can geography teaching helpfoster better international understand-
ing ?" In the past few years Unesco has
provided a number of replies and clarifications to
this question. In 1950, Unesco called an interna-
tional seminar on the subject at Montreal and
published a small volume entitled Some Sug-
gestions on the Teaching of Geography (1). Now,
as a complement to this booklet, it has brought
out a Handbook of Suggestions on the Teaching
or Geography (2) which embodies the main con-
clusions and suggestions of those who took part
in the seminar.
I think that it would be worth while to
return to this subject for it seems to me that
neither the authors of the first booklet (of whom
I was one), nor the members of the seminar (in
which I also participated), nor even the author
of the second booklet, have sufficiently stressed
the tremendous possibilities for the development
of world-mindedness which geography offers.
Nor have they. I feel, laid sufficient emphasis on
the serious difficulties which teachers are likely
to meet in encouraging an attitude of mind
favourable to better international understanding
among their pupils.
But first let us try to reach a clear definition
of the fundamentals involved : What do we mean
by education for better international under-
standing and what, exactly, do we mean by
geography ?
First of all, one thing that education for inter-
national understanding should not be is just a
high-sounding, vague phrase. For it is only
when we understand exactly what we are trying
to achieve through such teaching that we can
determine with any degree of precision or clarity
what methods to use.
 The definition that I propose is one that I
formulated with my study group at the recent
Unesco seminar in the Netherlands on teaching
about Human Rights.
The definition, as formulated by the group, was :
(1) Give youth an understanding of the past
and present-day life of peoples in other countries
- their traditions, their chief characteristics,
their problems and the solutions they have found
for them.
(2) Make youth conscious of the contribution of
each nation to the common heritage of humanity :
technology, science, arts, literature. Civilization
is a vast network of reciprocal debts between
nations.
(3) Make youth conscious of the fact that, if
the world remains dangerously divided as far as
interests and passions of political origin are
concerned, its solidarity in the fields of
(1) Out o {wins.
(2) Price : $0. ì5 ; 4/- ; 200 francs.
\ by Louis FRANÇOIS
Inspector General of Public Education in France,
Secretary General of the French National
Commission for Unesco.
economics, science, techniques and culture is
nevertheless becoming daily more evident, and
that a deep desire for peace exists in all peoples.
The organization of the world on an international
basis is not only possible, but has become a
necessity. It is a question of making the different
citizens conscious of their future responsibilities
towards this international organization, and
towards world peace.
(4) Make youth conscious of the fact that the
nations must work together in international
organizations for the common good, and must
find ways of collaborating even if they are
separated by different ideologies. The world
cannot be uniform, but the different nations must
unite to maintain peace.
(5) Organize schools and universities so that
they are able to initiate children and youth in all
their future social responsibilities from a material,
as well as from a moral and intellectual point of
view, and in the idea of liberty through self-
discipline. Youth can serve this same appren-
ticeship in the various youth movements. It is
personal experience which will make youth
conscious of their duty both as citizens of their
own country and as citizens of the world.
To this definition, however, must be added a
double word of caution :
(a) Education for living in a world community
is merely the complement and the development of
living in a national community.
(b) To understand is not always to accept ; it
is sometimes to censure, even to show opposition
and resistance when certain great higher
principles such as liberty, justice and solidarity
are in danger of being destroyed or of disap-
pearing.
Geography consists in locating, describing, ex-
plaining and comparing scenery and human
activities on the face of the globe. This defini-
tion may appear rather sweeping with regard to
human activities. Do painting and philosophy,
for example, come within the scope of geography ?
Here we should perhaps give a more precise
explanation.
We mean human activies insofar as they
are directly affected by natural conditions and
insofar as they exercise a direct influence on the
appearance of the world's landscape. Thus, the
Moslem religion is of interest to the geographer,
but not in its complicated doctrines nor in the
literary and artistic works it has inspired. The
geographer is concerned with its essential ele-
ments ; first because it reflects an image of the
desert and semi-desert world from which it
sprang and in which it expanded ; second because
it has inspired original ways of life ; third because
Moslem cities with their houses crowded around
their mosques have given the landscape an ap-
pearance distinctly different from that of
European cities dominated by their churches.
Geography, then, is a natural science, but even
more is a human science. These two aspects
cannot be separated because nature directly
affects man's mode of living and because man
exercises a limited or complex action on nature
which varies in degree with time and place. The
pattern of human existence on the earth's surface
is thus one of the basic concerns of the geo-
grapher.
Every society has its individual traits and
sometimes even exceptional characteristics caused
by different factors. It is up to the geographer
to emphasise them for the very destiny of man
speaks for his greatness and explains the flower-
ing of civilizations. But like every science,
geography seeks to generalise and to find a
common measure for natural and human factors
by means of appropriate explanations and com-
parisons.
The mode of life of the Tibetan people, for
example, permits many picturesque descriptions
with which any teacher may let himself be
carried away and by means of which he may
strongly impress his class. But the explanation
for this pattern of life is to be found in Tibet's
high altitude, and the restrictions of mountain
life there are also found in other moutainous
regions of the world. By the same token,
Buddhist practices of Tibet are to be found in
many parts of China and South East Asia. In
this way, the geographer succeeds in situating
people within the framework of humanist)'\ was a
whole, and in fitting them into one vast and
common undertaking. And this applies even to
those people who live at an altitude of 16, 000 feet
on the"'roof"of the world.
If geography is a science, it must also be an
art. It does more than list facts and explain
them ; it ingeniously assembles ideas and shows
their relationships, especially through description !
of countries and their inhabitants. To"'put over"
his subject in such a way that people will reall
profit from reading his work or listening to him
the geographer must possess a mastery both of
composition and of style.
Let us take as an example Holland's polders
which are tracts of low-lying land reclaimed fro : r
the sea. First of all, the geographer describef
these"low countries"just
as they were painted by Ruys- (Connnued
daël and van Goyen ; peaceful, on next page)
COURIER

Page 4. DECEMBER 1952 UNESCO
GEOGRAPHY AND INTERNATIONAL UNDERSTANDING
(Continued from distant landscapes studded
previous page) with windmills and churchtowers and overshadowed by
mountainous, turbulent clouds. He depicts the
dyke walls and, running alongside them, the green
waters of the canals, the meadows on whose
lush grass herds of black and white cows graze,
the multicoloured fields of flowers around Haar-
lem and the chess-board pattern of the market
gardens near Amsterdam. He takes his students
inside the towns criss-crossed by canals, into the
peaceful, prosperous and bourgeois Venices of the
north. Through his description he tries to interest
his class in the country, to arouse in them a
friendliness and admiration for Holland.
MAN'S PACIFIC CONQUEST
THEN he goes on to explain how, through anunceasing fight, polders have been wrested
from the brutal grasp of sea and river waters,
how thousands of acres have been put to
cultivation, and entire provinces have been
created even though the land lies below sea-level.
Finally, the geographer draws comparisons
between the Dutch polders, those of Belgium and
France and the German marschen. He shows
how men of many countries are heroes in a
common effort of conquest-a pacific conquest
waged solely for the benefit of man, for his
progress and for his happiness.
In these areas, war has always brought about
a brutal step backwards to conditions of centuries
past ; the dykes have been blown up ; the locks
have been destroyed, and the sea has once again
invaded land that men had won back patiently
and progressively. Is not this the sort of expla-
nation likely to inspire a better understanding
and a greater affection for the Dutch people, to
show the benefits of peace and the follies of war ?
And is it not also a real lesson in geography ?
There is no need to distort geography in order
to make it contribute to international under-
standing. If it is taught thoroughly, intelligently
and honestly, the result will be obtained quite
naturally.
Geography will be taught thoroughly if the
teacher explains the principal characteristics
and features of a country or of a geographical
phenomenon, always bearing in mind that he
must locate, describe, explain and compare a
given geographical situation It will be tho-
roughly taught especially if the teacher explains
everything that the children of his class are
capable of understanding and assimilating.
Geography intelligently taught makes use of
various scientific facts so as to build them into
a coherent whole ; it must on the basis of
scientific facts become an art.
This transition from science to art requires
skill, flexibility and sureness of touch. Geography
teaching must never be sterotyped, but must vary
in both method and approach. In short, it must
combine the initiative and improvisation of the
creative mind with the logic and sense of propor-
tion necessary in evolving a synthesis.
Geography is honest insofar as it is complete
and establishes true relations between various
facts, insofar as it strives for objectivity and
seeks after the truth, and insofar as it repudiates
sensationalism and political propaganda.
Is this, however, an over-simplification ? It
may be argued that, however skilfully it is done,
geography teaching is aimed primarily at the
pupil's intelligence, and that while it may very
well produce a complete intellectual knowledge
of the country under study, this in itself is not
sufficient to create a desire for co-operation
between peoples. For is not a spy supposed to
have the best geographical knowledge of the
country against which he is operating ? There-
fore, we should not only appeal to the intelligence
of young people, but also to their willingness and
feelings.
A determined and tenacious will is most often
produced by a clear understanding of things.
Intelligence is still the best, the most powerful
driving force of true will power. So all geo-
graphical studies should include recognition of
the following facts :
(1) In order to live and raise their living
standards, men must either fight nature or work
with it. Naturally conditions vary according to
different regions, but the experience and the
efforts are common to all, and all men benefit
from these efforts to some extent.
(2) No nation, even under conditions of
freedom and peace, is self-sufficient. All have
need of one another to live and prosper.
(3) Thanks to scientific and technical develop-
ments, and to the progress of communication and
transport, the earth has so shrunk that it is now
possible to conceive as a not too distant reality
a world economic and political organization
which would be of benefit to all.
The emotional response of children can be
brought into action by a form of teaching that
is concrete, alive and active. Verbal and
didactic teaching which only crams names and
facts into young minds and buries the spon-
taneous enthusiams of youth under a ponderous
weight of knowledge must be abandoned. Young
people must learn to discover the natural beauties
and the worthy achievements of their own
country as well as those of other countries which
are sometimes even more creditable.
I remember a class of boys aged between 13
and 14 to whom a young student teacher had
given a lesson on Yugoslavia.
Towards the end of the lesson I had arranged
for some slides to be shown ; the pupils were
grouped in teams, and asked to identify the
region or city projected on the screen. As I
showed the first, I said :"At the upper left corner
of the slide is a monument which should help
you to name the city."While the boys discussed
the photo among themselves, I asked the student
teacher if he had found the answer. He shook
his head and said'''No.''But very quickly each
team gave me the following report :"In the upper
left corner of the photo is a Gothic church ; Gothic
style usually signifies a Roman Catholic church ;
the photo then shows a large town in the predo-
minatingly Catholic area of Yugoslavia ; the town
in question is Zagreb, capital of Croatia."I went
over to the young teacher and pointed out to him
that teaching should be less concerned with
cramming home facts than with helping the
pupils to discover these facts for themselves.
I should like to stress the enormous interest
that geography arouses in the young people of
the world today, and the difficulties which face
the teacher of geography because of this. The
curiosity of young people about the world is
constantly being aroused by the newspapers and
magazines specially published for them and
illustrated with magnificent photographs. Their
curiosity is aroused by the radio and television
which they listen to and watch as often as, if
not more often than, their parents. Through
these modern media of information the world
throngs into the minds and imagination of the
young ; their memories become filled with notions
that are often confused and false, but sometimes,
too, extremely clear and exact.
This formidable competition must be taken
into consideration by the teacher.
No longer do children obtain all their know-
ledge from their teachers or their textbooks.
Their interest in geography centres on the
living and up-to-date picture of the world
that it brings them. If they realize that their
teacher is not aware of recent discoveries or the
latest changes in economic or human affairs, the
teacher loses his prestige and geography its
fascination.
Today pupils may be better informed than
their teacher and so discover that his knowledge
is out of date. There are some teachers who do
not know, for example, that Canada has
become a great industrial and commercial
power, who have never heard of the extensive
irrigation works already completed or being
executed in North Africa, who are unaware of
the recent upheavals in the geography of oil.
Geography teachers must therefore aim at
a form of teaching that is both concrete and
alive, making as much use as possible of photo-
graphs and even occasionally of films. They
must keep themselves constantly up-to-date,
especially through books and periodicals with the
sudden changes so common in the modern world.
Finally, we come up against the most serious
objection. Can one really advocate teaching which
strives to develop international understanding in
a world where passions and hatreds engendered
by the Second World War are still fresh in many
minds and where new hatreds are growing ; in a
world split into two camps and resounding with
abuse and even the clash of arms ? Even if we
agree that this kind of teaching is to be desired,
in what way can it be achieved, and how can
some of the difficulties be overcome ? What can
a French teacher who may have been tortured
and deported say about the Germans ? What
can an American teacher say about Russia or a
Russian teacher about the United States ?
When emotions are unleashed, a thinking
person worthy of the name tries to rise above the
conflict and to reach as informed and reasoned
an opinion as possible. When the person
concerned is a geography teacher entrusted with
the task of describing and explaining a world
rent by passions and factions, his duty is to give
his teaching as objective a character as possible.
Objective teaching is patterned on its subject
matter. It is not vitiated with subjective prefer-
ences of a personal, social, political or national
character. Because its aim is truth it eschews
all propaganda and is as complete as possible,
for propaganda tends to deform facts.
It takes the form neither of a panegyric nor an
indictment, neither of praise nor of systematic
criticism. It recognizes the many diversities
that exist in the great and common enter-
prise of mankind, because not all peoples live
under the same geographical conditions nor have
they attained the same stage of historical deve-
lopment. Geography also remains apart from
politics. It is the facts supplied by the geo-
grapher which are selected and used to develop
political systems and to justify their aims.
CLEAR VIEW OF REALITIES
*T'0 recognize the speed of recent economicprogress in the U. S. S. R., which has immense
reserves of manpower and resources, does
not constitute a defence of Communism. It
is merely a simple and objective expression of a
geographical fact which is explained by the
manifold possibilities of a natural environment
and the co-ordinated activity of men. Nor is it
an expression of anti-Communist sentiment to
speak of the difficulties of communicating and
trading with the U. S. S. R. and neighbouring
countries which have the same political and
social systems. It is again to state a geographical
fact which hurts the common effort of mankind.
There is no praise implied in recognising that
Germany has become a great economic power in
the 20th century. Rather it is, once again,
a simply and objectively stated historic fact
which is due to the progressive unification of
Germany, the country's rich coal deposits and the
hard-working and dogged qualities of the
German people. Nor is it criticism of Germany
to describe the periodical outbreaks of impe-
rialism-the Drang nach Osten and the Drang
nach Westen. To do so is simply. to state facts
which are explained by the absence of natural
frontiers and the racial overlapping of Eastern
and Central Europe.
Today it is more vital than ever to separate
teaching from political or national passions and
prejudices, and to promote a spirit of tolerance
and of mutual understanding, not founded on
blissful pacifism or timid resignation, but on a
clear-sighted view of present day realities and on
the will to contribute something, however small,
to the achievement of world peace. For the
geography teacher needs a clear vision of his
responsibilities both towards his subject and his
audience-the young people who must go out
into the world imbued with courage and the will
to peace.
