These children are happy but not because the schoolday has ended. They are racing as fast as their legs can carry
them to reach the eight acres of land where their class raises its own ivestock, and grows part of its food. At their
rural school in Cha-Choeng-Sao, they are beginning to learn in terms of soil and seeds how.. knowledge"is not just
a matter oftextbooks, but of hygiène, of agriculture and ofother practica) things that play a role in their daily y) ives.
A NATION TRANSFORMS
tTS EDUCAT ! ON

; OUR ! ER OCTOBER 9S2. Page) 5
Thailand needs skilled workers, carpenters, mechanics, machinists and technicians for her economic development. At the country's request, United Nations
Technical Assistance is helping to meet these needs. Picture shows students at microscopes and micro-dissectors studying laboratory techniques.
TRADITIONALL y Thai teaching was a function of
j thé priests. Althaugh it has been secularized,
the lay teaching is usually done in classes
around the temples. It is appropriate therefore that
the educatianal pilot project in Thailand should have
been set up in the grounds of a Buddhist monastery.
At Cha-Choeng-Sao international experts, brought in
under the Expanded Programme of echnical Assist-
ance, mingle with the yettow-robed priests and work ta
the ttnkling'Of the temple bells. leaf bells which swing
in the breeze. But what they are daing is something
new to this traditional setting ; they have been invited
by the Government of ThaHand to hetp with the
refarm'Of the en tire educatianal system'Of the cauntry.
Cha-Choeng-Sao is 60 miles from Bangkok, and
in the district there is a population of 240. 000 adults
and 42, 000 children. It is a provincial capital which
was chasen as a resuit of a Unesco consultative mission
sent out, as a part'Of the narmal programme'Of acti-
vities in 1949, to advise the Government an its educa-
tional development programme. Cha-Choeng-Sao
cammended itself to international experts because,
while it was accessible by road, ra) I and river. It was a
community typical of most of thé hfe of Thailand-
rice-growing. fruit farming and small industry.
It is a jungle area and nearby there is coastal fishing
It was considered that a pattem of éducation evolved
under these conditions and taking account of thé cir-
cumstances of thé area would apply almost anywhere
in Siam. In addition, it is'One'Of the paarest pra-
vinces with one of thé lowest ratings of titeracy in the
country. so that what is being done there can have
direct benefit for the people as weil as having experi-
mental value for the other 70 provinces.
A fundamenta ! éducation expert from New Zealand
surveyed the possibihties of Cha-Choeng-Sao in No-
vember 1950 and, in conjunction with Thai educators.
produced the plans on which the centre is now based.
There was na living accommodation available, but
some of thé existing classrooms were converted into
living quarters, and an o) d monastery building became
a kitchen. The rest of the schoo ! was redesigned for
the manifold ; ; urposes'Of the project.
One of the first needs was to convince the people
of the value of what was going an amongst them, and
so, in March and April 1951, fairs were organized.
where mode) farmhouses, kindergarten playgrounds
and classroom apparatus and arts and crafts materials
were on display. Health and child welfare centres
were set up, and the people were informed of the edu-
cational plans, which cover every aspect of the coun-
try's education-adult, vocationat. secondary. pri-
mary health, physical, music, arts and crafts and social
éducation, as we) ! as teacher training.
With the co-operation of the Thaj educationa)
authorities and with a staff provided by the Govern-
ment, the international team consists of a New Zealand
expert in fundamenta ! éducation, a primary school
specialist from Denmark, a specialist in language
teaching and a vocational training expert from the
United Kingdom, and an expert from the United States
who is known as"the man with the five dollar labo-
ratory", because he can improvise scientific equipment
from local scrap. Specialists from FAO, WHO and
ILO are joining the project. 50 that classroom teaching
can be extended into the practical lifte of the people.
As an academic exercise the internationa ! assignment
is a chaHenging, if difficult one, because the whole
nature as weIl as the structure of education has to be
transformed. Learning in the past has been almost
entirely by rote, formai and verbal, a case of memo-
rizing and regurgitating. The idea that the chi'ld, or,
for that matter, the grown-up should learn by doing
was something 50 novel as to be revolutionary. An-
other handicap of Siamese education has been the lack
of proper teachers'training colleges. They exist, but
have been used rather as an extension of the secondary
school education than as institutions for teaching
methods or encouraging teachers to have any originality
or enterprise.
Instead of the children chanting their lessons from
age-old fables and acquiring a literacy which lapsed,
the new methods being tried out at Cha-Choeng-Sao
employ illustrated textbooks designed in the Thai's
own visual idiom by their own artists ; sand tables on
which the chrIdren construct their own villages and
their own countryside ; and paints and brushes, till now
unknown to the children, but with which they are
allowed to find their own expression. Thai instruc-
tors. adapting thé ideas brought in from the outside,
are teaching science with a vividness far removed from
the formalism in which science had nO part. Chiidren
and adults are beginning to learn, in terms of soap and
water, soil and seeds in their own fields, and the
forgotten crafts of their own locality, how"knowledge".
is not just a matter of textbooks, but of hygiene, of
agriculture and of other practical things in their own
daily lives. This emphasis on"wanting to know"
leads to"wanting to communicate"and 50 to a literacy
which will persist.
Apart from the Thai educators who are the active
and creative colleagues of the international team,
teachers corne from ail over Thailand for courses from
which they take back new ideas which wiU enliven
their existing curricula and, in the process, produce
local reforms while the wider reforms are evolving.
They take back classroom techniques, but they also
acquire the principle of"dirty hands", which means
that they are non longer peop ! e atoof from the practical
needs of their community. To teach the people, they
work with them and thus provide what is one of the
objects of Cha-Choeng-Sao social leadership.
This is only a pilot project. It is the beginning of
a 0-year programme ; in thé nrst nve years they will
develop by experiment and by experience the techniques
which will be extended to the other provinces of the
country ; but in that time Thailand itself will be
evolving a system of education which will be able to
absorb and apply the methods of Cha-Choeng-Sao.
That will involve the reform of the teachers'colleges,
the production of more and better teachers, the crea-
tion of new schools and adult education centres.
There will be the reform of the primary schools and
the extension of the secondary schools. Compulsory
education is already the law of Thailand from seven
to) 4, but a student can leave at the fourth grade,
and the law has been difficult to enforce beeause of
the lack of school facilities and trained teachers.
It is an ambitious programme and a heavy commit-
ment for the government. Thé United Nations agen-
cies, through this, project under the technical assistance
programme, are providing the example and the stimu-
latin. ion conjunction with the funds available from
United Nations sources a scheme was worked out by
the Government whereby United States bilateral funds
and personnel were made available.
As a matter of principle, money and materials are
less important at Cha-Choeng-Sao than training of the
Thais for'leadership, 50 that the project can be handed
over and repeáted elsewhere through trained Thai
personnes.
