DE-FORESTATtON AND ITS ABUSES
THEN, in a plane heading for Teheran, the
late President Roosevelt saw betow
him vast stretches of desert rock, he
was surprised to learn that he was crossing a
country which in bygone days had been a land
flowing with milk and honey. Gone were the
stately forests ; only devastation remained.
But the President was not unfamiliar with
the devastation caused by man, for his own
Tennessee Valley Project was conceived to
repair similar ravages caused by mal-
treatment and abuse of natural resources.
These abuses are widespread, for through-
out history man has been a great destroyer.
During the past 2, 000 years, 106 unique and
irreplaceable forms of mammal life have
disappeared from the earth ; 67 per cent of
these have become extinct during the past
century.
One-third of the world's original forest land
has been turned into desert by man-and
growing technical ability has hastened this
dread process."If the foresters approved, the
most beautiful and oldest forest could be razed
in a few weeks,"says the Italian Professor
Renzo Videsolt. Scandinavian and Canadian
rivers, for instance, could transport the logs
by the thousands, like so many gigantic
matchsticks".
So far as the problem of newsprint its
concerned, this savage destruction of forests
is not of key importance. The trees ! that
supply us with woodpulp for papermaking
are earefully conserved. But so far as our
everyday lives are concerned, we are intima-
tely affected by the death of the world's trees.
It is not generally realized how far wood is
at the basis of dailv existence. More than
two-thirds of the inhabitants of this earth use
11 for cooking or warmth. In fact, most of
the wood consumed throughout the world is
used as fuel, although this process is extre-
mely wasteful. When wood is turned into
charroal in this primitive way, only one-third
acts as a fuel.
by Maurice Goldsmith
The followi ng table shows, in lIIi Ilions of
cuhic metres, the main purposes for which
wood is consumed per annum :
Fuel............................... 800
Building....................."""45U
Hamper 100
Rayon 5
Hailway sleepers..................... 30
Pit pl'OpS........................... 30
Other uses 85
To provide man with the wood he needs,
the virgin forests are being destroyed.
Forest today covers about one-third of the
surfaces of the earth. This area is twice as
large as the land actually being cultivated.
Of the world's forests, 2, 500 million acre. 
have been used or pillaged, for about half
of them are devastated. It is an unpleasant
truth that less than 10 per cent of the world's
forests are managed in a planned way so that
they are renewed regularly.
This is a crime against mankind. FOI
according to Egon Glesinger, former secretary-
general of the Comité International du Bois,
and now of the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation, modern technology applied to forestry
can greatly increase the world's real wealth.
He suggested, for instance, that in under-
developed areas wood gas"can he the vehicle
for spreading progress and civilization to
individuals, communities and nations which
lack other fuel supplies". Wood will never
he ahle to compete as a fuel with coal or oil,
he adds. But because it is the most widely
used of fuels, it provides an easy means of
starting to turn the whee) s that) ead to modern
civilization.
Without the restoration of forests, economic
independence will he diffieult to achieve in
the underdeveloped territories of the world.
Vtillions of Chinese and Indians do not use
wood for fuse !, because it does not exist in the
regions where they) ive. They use as fuel the
dung that should serve as a fertiliser. Given
adequate wood supplies, food output could be
increased by at least 13 per cent.
The forest, in fact, can provide a complete
industrial economy-and a permanent one,
for, as distinct from coal and oil, forests can
be renewed. The forest can feed, clothe,
shelter and warm us.
Now that we are beginning to understand
the full implications of this, it is time we put
an end to our indiscriminate waste, not only
of this natural resource, but of natural re-
sources generally. It is in our own interests
to understand the workings of nature. That
is behind the work of the International Union
for the Protection of Nature (IUPN), which
was founded in 1948 with the help of Unesco.
The IUPN has set out to facilitate co-
operation in the protection of nature and
natural scenery ; to organize scientific research
and the spread of knowtedgeon the protection
of nature and to help in regional planning for
the protection of nature, and the creation and
conservation of natural parks and reserves.
Unesco is interested, because one of the
principal causes of world unrest is lack of
natural resources and the wasteful use of
pxisting ones. Also the teaching of the proper
techniques for utilization and conservation is
Ihe joint task of Fundamental Education and
the popularizers of science.
As one writer has put it :"Nature provides
us with everything : our nourishment, clothing,
shelter, comfort, in addition to the beauty and
the health gained by taking advantage of the
facilities nature offers. Therefore we ought
to love nature as one loves a generous mother,
who is also beautiful, and in whom we place
our trust.
"Man must not be negligent and impoverish
this mother to whom he owes so much. For
if mother nature loses her riches, her children
will be the first victims."
Aspects of Science SCIENTISTS SEEK NEW

Wood is the basic raw material used for making newsprint and many
other products. Forests can be made to grow again and again, but only
if their exploitation is carefully planned. Ruthless destruction of trees
leads to devastation and prevents the continued use of this natural
resource. Afforestation will not only protect nature-it will also protect
man himself. (Photo Copyright K. W. Gullers, Stockholm.)
