Page 10. JULY 1952 UNESCO
FRESH WATER
FROM THE SEA
By Maurice GOLDSMITH
THE Dutch people have a great problem. The saltcontent in the water coming from their rivers and
underground is increasing. This is causing diffi-
culties in agriculture, horticulture and in the home.
For the past few years, scientific workers in the Nether-
lands have been engaged in research to find an economic
method of taking the salt out of sea water.
But this problem is not peculiar to the Netherlands. Nor
is it the only problem about supplies of water. As indus-
trialization develops and the standard of living for many of
the underprivileged rises, so the demands for more fresh
water will grow. But the supply is definitely limited.
Many methods have been used over the centuries to
increase water supplies. Water works have ranged from
well-drilling and cistern-building to the diversion of large
rivers, and the construction of vast storage dams. Today,
many million acres of otherwise uncultivable land are being
irrigated, and furnish, especially in Asia, the principal food
supplies for millions of families.
But these methods are concerned basically with ensuring
a better use of existing resources. What is urgently needed
is a regular supply of good water from new sources. That
is why eyes are turned longingly to our greatest natural
water hole-the sea around us.
If we can cause the sea to yield fresh water at our
demand, then we shall be able to transform the barren
lands Into productive areas for man.
Distillation is the most ancient method of obtaining fresh
water from the sea. Aristotle noted that pure water can
be obtained by evaporating sea water ; and St. Basil, in his
fourth homily on Genesis, commented :"Saitors, too, boil
even sea water, collecting. the vapour in sponges, to quench
their thirst in pressing need."
During the last century, although distilling apparatus
became comparatively more efficient, it was installed pri-
marily on ships and at naval bases. One at Aden, for
example, was the main source of supply of domestic water
until the completion of 0 deep well in 1927.
The process is howewer too costly to use for domestic
supply ao town dwellers.
An advanced technique developed in recent years is that
of distilling fresh water by compressing steam. It consists
in heating water to produce steam, which is then mecha-
nically compressed. This causes the temperature of the
steam to. be raised, and raises the temperature at which it
condenses into water. The heat produced is used to eva-
porate more water.
As long as the pressure is maintained, the process is
continuous. The fuel that is used is not needed to heat the
water, but to maintain the pressure.
This process of vapour compression distillation was tried
out on a large scale during the second world war. Over
1, 000, 000 men were supplied with fresh water from sea
water on islands in the Pacific. Stills with capacities of
1, 000 gallons a day are now manufactured for the process,
and one with a daily capacity of 50, 000 gallons is being
made for use in Bermuda.
At Kuwait, on the Persian Gulf, a plant with a capacity
of many thousand gallons a day supplies practically all
the drinking water for this developing oil centre. This
process, however, is basically for use in an emergency,
where it is cheaper to make fresh water from sea water than
transport the fresh.
The late President Roosevelt was fascinated by the bri-
quettes that were used during the last war by shipwrecked
or airwrecked servicemen. These briquettes contained
chemicals which could turn sea water into something
immediately drinkable.
The basis for this is a method known as ion exchange.
It is this process which is used to soften ordinary water and
to purify the water entering into the home. The term ion
exchange describes exactly what happens in the process.
tons are atoms, single or in groups, that carry an electric
charge. When salts are dissolved in water, they break up
into ions. It is possible to take one kind of ion out of the
solution and to replace it by another kind. In this way, for
example, salt can be removed completely from a solution.
But to do this on a large scale has been prohibitively
expensive.
Scientists at the Weizmann Institute in Israel claim that
they have perfected an inexpensive method of purifying the
underground brackish waters by using an adaptation of this
chemical approach.
What is stated to be a significant advance in the use
of this process is the technique developed by Dr. Walter
Juda, of the Harvard Medical School, and his associates.
He uses special ion exchange materials. These are manu-
factured in the form of membranes, and are continuous
films of inexpensive synthetic plastics, less than forty-thou-
sandths of an inch thick. They are made largely of
cheap coal-tar and petroleum chemicals. The process is
simple because there are no moving parts, no artificial heat,
and no chemicals except the natural salt.
When a stream of water is fed to a unit using the mem-
branes, it emerges in two forms-a fresh-water stream made
up of two-thirds of the original stream and containing
practically none of the salt ; and a. brine stream, containing
the salt and other chemicals :
The fresh water may be used in the home, in industry, and
in agriculture. The brine stream may be further treated to
yield salt, magnesium or other chemicals obtained from
sea water.
This technique is still in the experimental stage, but if
it fulfils its developmental possibilities it will prove of high
significance in the revitalization of the arid zones.
