A world-wide
problem which
all mankind can
help to solve
by
J. Torres Bodet

WORLD Health Day 1952 takes
H5 i Is motto : Healthy sur-
roundings make healthy peo-
ple.
Education, science and culture are
also part of the environment in which
people live. That is why Unesco
views this celebration with satisfac-
tion. Each day, the efforts of the
World Health Organization and Unes-
co are combined in carrying out
educational campaigns, and this is
no fitful or transitory collaboration.
The rules of health and the possi-
bilities of observing them depend
upon the progress of scientific re-
search. Tropical medicine and clima-
tology, rural economy, the science of
nutrition and dietetics, biology and
pharmaceutical chemistry, and a host
of other theoretical and applied
sciences are necessary for a normal
existence. How can a man be healthy
if he has neither food nor shelter !
Even the most highiy-devetoped
countries must have regular recourse
to science and technology. Heatth
forms part of a global problem whose
solution demands the enlistment of
all our resources, and particularly of
our intelligence. That is why Unesco
helps scientific organizations in all
fields-cultural, physical and social- to develop and to carry out their
work and to serve the higher interests
of mankind. Today it is particularly
engaged in promoting scientific
research for the rehabilitation and
exploitation of the arid zones, which
have graduatty extended untit they
cover more than a quarter of the land
surface of the globe.
Amongst populations living by
force of circumstance outside the
range of technical progress, education
in health and hygiene is closely link-
ed with instruction in reading and
writing, and with the domestic arts
and crafts. The training centres for
specialists in fundamental education,
which we are trying to set up all over
the world, give hygiene a very promi-
nent place in their curriculum. In the
Far East, a team of doctors, teachers
and artists, using the theme of
"A healthy village,"have developed
the most modern techniques such as
posters, animated cartoons and films,
and have adapted them to the country
where they have been operating, so as
to make the rules of individual and
collective hygiene known and adopt-
ed. In Latin America, Africa and South
Asia, the fundamental education
experiments in which we are taking
part would be inconceivable without
a simultaneous raising of the level of
economic and social life, and an im-
provement in sanitary conditions.
There is nothing visionary about
work of this kind. Health and educa-
tion cannot be kept in watertight
compartments. We are dealing with
human beings and the environment in
which they live. That is our one and
only preoccupation.
Looked at in that light ; World
Health Day. is therefore a call for
solidarity.'\Vith populations increas-
ing and the means of communica-
tion sfeadily speeding up, human
communities are less segregated than
ever before. Good and evil can no
longer be localized. That is both a
threat and a promise. Whichever
wav we take it, our duty is clear and
inescapable : we must work together,
by all means in our power, to create,
in the full'. 3sense of the term the
healthy surroundings that make
healthy people.
