THE WORK OF A
CENTURY-IN A
FEW MINUTES
Calculating machines,
and the revolution in
science which they are
helping to bring about
by Dr. S. LILLEY
University of Birmingham,
Department of Extra-Mural Studies
OW much... ?""How many... ?" A surprisingly large number of important questions of
modern life begin with those words. How many skilled mechanics can India rely on for
. building much-needed machinery ? How much will a sixpence-in-the-pou d increase in
income tax yield ? How much energy can you get from a pound of uranium 235 ?
Some of the most important questions of all do not, at first sight, take this form :-For instance, can
India avoid a famine in 1956 ? But to answer it, we have to ask : How many mouths will there be to
feed ? How much food can India's own agriculture produce ? How much of her manufactures
can she export to make up for the deficiency ?... and so back to that first question about skilled
mechanics. Without"How much ?" and"How many ?"we should not make our modern world
work.
In science, more than anything else, these two questions are of vital importance. There is scarcely
any major scientific problem-from the nature of the universe to the workings of the endocrine glands,
from the utilisation of atomic energy to the assessment of an adequate diet-whose solution does
not depend essentially on counting and measuring, and then making calculation.
Making calculations-that is the important point. To answer"How much ?"and"How many ?"
it is usually not good enough to measure, weigh and count. We must also do immense calculations
to deduce facts about a whole population in 1956 from a few thousand answers to a sample survey
in 1951, or to calculate the energy obtainable from a uranium pile on the basis of data produced from
small-stale experiments with cyclotrons.
It is with this process of calculation and the ingenuity that has gone into making machines to do
it for us that this article is concerned.
"How much ?" and"How many ?" have not always
been so important. They are characteristically
modern questions. Until some 350 or 400 years ago
they mattered rather little. The small peasant
communities that made up most of the world till
then could get along very well with a minimum of
calculation.
Even the cities of Greece or the Empire of Rome
needed less in the way of statistics than a town
council does today. And in science before the 16th
century, the characteristic questions were not"How
much ?" and"How, many ?" but"What sort ?" and
"Why ?"
Calculation played so small a part in ancient life
that most people were content with cumbersome
systems of arithmetical notation, of which Roman
numerals is only one of the worst examples. It is
hard enough to add with these old systems ; it is
almost impossible to multiply. And so calculations
were commonly done with an abacus-by moving
beads on wires or counters on a marked board.
In a sense, the abacus was the first calculating
machine. But it does not count for much in our
story. Though it can be extremely quick, it is less
efficient than calculation on paper. And the first
step towards our modern arithmetical world was
the development, mostly in the later Middle Ages,
of our familiar methods of adding, subtracting,
multiplying and dividing, so that calculations could
conveniently be done on paper without the help of
an abacus.
Towards the end of the 16th century the modern
world was fast emerging. The local, almost self-
sufficient units of feudalism were being bound
together to form truly national states-which
needed statistics of taxability and military resour-
ces. Large-scale commerce was growing ; custom or
guild rules no longer served to guide the business-
man, but had to be replaced by extensive and accu-
rate calculations of cost, selling price and profit.
Surveying, mining engineering, military engineer-
ing, and a host of other techniques were coming to
rely more and more on mathematical accuracy.
Science was taking on its characteristically modern
form with its emphasis on"How much"and"How
many."Men grew very interested in saving time
and trouble in their calculations. In 1585 the
Dutchman Simon Stevin published his little book
advocating the use of decimal fractions and so
inaugurated a new era in arithmetic. And in 1614
John Napier of Scotland made logarithms known
to the world.
In this atmosphere it could not be long before
some genius or other would invent a calculating
machine. In fact two of the really outstanding
scientists of the 17th century-Blaise Pascal and
G. W. Leibnitz-besides numerous minor men of
science, devised such machines. Pascal's father,
as a Government superintendent in the French
département of Haute-Normandie, had to check an
enormous number of accounts, and it was to aid
him in this work that his 18-year old son designed
the first machine for adding and subtracting, and
constructed it in 1642 with the aid of a Rouen
blacksmith.
WHAT A CONTRAST between the first calculatinl
Pascal in 1642 and the giant computing marvels o1
(above) known as the IBM Selective Sequence Elec1
a number such as 16, 457, 895, 753, 902 and multiply it t
It can add or subtract even larger numbers 3, 500 timl
Several other similar machines were invented. In
1694, Leibniz produced the first machine that could
do all the ordinary processes of arithmetic : add,
subtract, multiply and divide.
During the 18th century many more inventors
tried their hands at calculating machines, and
before 1800 they had created practically all the
devices that go to make up a modern"general pur-
poses" (adding, subtracting, multiplying and divid-
ing) machine.
But none of these instruments was a practical
success. Some would work well enough when
handled carefully by experts, but the engi-
neering technique was not available to turn out
calculators good enough and reliable enough for
day-to-day use.
However, with the gradual improvement of en-
gineering techniques, practical machines came
during the 19th century. The first was that of the
Frenchman Thomas de Colmar, which appeared in
1820.
In 1892 came the best known of all calculating
machines, the Brunsviga, which was such a success
that some 20, 000 were sold within 20 years. By now
the general purposes machine had reached the end
of its basic evolution-though many improve-
ments have been added since, the most important
being the electrical drive, to relieve the computer
of the labour of churning away at a handle.
The machines we have so far been describing are
called"digital machines,"because they work with
BLAISE PASCAL
At the age of 18, he
became the first man
to make a mathemat-
ical calculation by
mechanical means
with his invention of
the original"Arith-
metical machine."

machine (left) invented by
today. Mammoth machine
'onic Calculator, can select
, itself fifty times a second.
s a second. It can multiply
numbers, store the results in its mechanical memory and then feed them back
into a problem in a week or in a thousandth of a second. Built in New York in
1948 for $ 750, 000, it was first electronic calculator for pure scientific research
in the physical and social sciences and education. Newest electronic marvel in
U. S. is Whirlwind"built last Decemberfor Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
LORD KELVIN
helped prepare the
way for development
of modern comput-
ing machines with
his plan for applying
mechanical techni-
ques to complex ma-
thematical problems.
the actual digits with which numbers are
written. The later 19th and especially the 20th
century have also witnessed the development of a
wide variety of machines of a different class-
"analogue machines,"as they are called.
The basic idea behind all these is very simple.
The behaviour of any machine can be represented
by a set of mathematical equatians and their solu-
tion. Conversely, given a set of mathematical
equations, one can construct a machine whose
behaviour would be represented by them ; if one,
then, sets the machine working and observes the
motions of its various parts, one has the solution
of the equations. A speedometer, for example, is
an analogue machine which calculates speed
from the relation between distance travelled and
time (mathematically, it differentiates).
A very important class of mathematical problem
depends for its solution on the reverse of this pro-
cess (integration). For instance, if you know the
relations between the rates at which various quan-
tities are changing (differential equations), and
their starting value, where will they get to in a
given time ? Or, to give an easier example : given
the motorist's speed at every point, how far will he
go in an hour ?
As early as 1876 Lord Kelvin sketched a plan for
a"differential analyser"-an analogue machine for
solving problems of this type. However, he was not
able to overcome the mechanical problems involv-
ed, and the development of the differential ana-
lyser had to wait till 1931, when Dr. Vannevar
Bush hit on a very simple way of dealing with the
difficulties. Since then differential analysers have
been in constant us. e at dozens of computing labo-
ratories, while many other types of analogue ma-
chines have been developed.
Analogue machines have one great advantage
over the digital machines we described earlier-
they will solve a complete problem at one fell
swoop, whereas the digital machine will only do
elementary additions, subtractions, multiplications
and divisions, and the computer must arrange to
combine thousands of these elementary steps to
solve the complete problem.
Against that, analogue machines have several
disadvantages. Their accuracy tends to be rather
low, and they are not flexible-each machine will
solve one type of problem only, whereas the com-
puter and digital machine between them can solve
any problem, if given time.
Would it be possible to make a machine with the
advantages of both-a machine that would solve
complete problems without the minute-to-minute
guidance of a computer as the analogue machines
do, but which will tackle any problem and give
results to any desirable accuracy ? The answer is
Yes.
In the last few years, remarkable machines (of
the digital type) with just these powers have been
built and put into use. One starts by feeding the
machine with a list of instructions and a few initial
numbers, and then it gets on with the calculations,
adding this pair of numbers, dividing that pair,
storing results in a"memory,"picking out of the
store the numbers it wants for the next step-and
so on until the whole complex calculation is
finished without any human help.
This is not quite the miracle that it seems at first
sight. The duties of a computer using an ordinary
digital machine to solve a typical problem can be
reduced to a series of instructions which read :"At
such-and-such a stage, take the two numbers that
are written in such-and-such places in the first
column on the paper before you, add them (or
subtract, multiply or divide), and write the answer
in such-and-such a place in the second column."
There may be a few dozen of these instruc-
tions-and then will come the order"Repeat
(Continued on next page)
INDEX OF CALCULATOR
FLOOR PLAN
The machine is housed in a specially-designed room. Visit-
ors see only the panels, arranged along three walls
of a room 60 feet by 20 feet. Out of sight are complex
maze of wiring and apparatus through which pass the
electric currents that carry numbers and instructions from
circuit to circuit. Equipment in 5, 6, 7, 8, of diagram is
located behind rear wall, and is not shown in photo above
1. Card reading tubes.-2. sequence tubes.-3. se-
quence relays.-4. table look-up.-5. relay memory.
6. metres.-7. control relays.-8. power distribution.
9. tape memory.-10. arithmetical unit.-11. pulse
generator.-12. sequence interlocks.-13. electronic
memory.-14. console.-15. printers.-16. card
punches.-J7. card readers.

FEBRUARY 1952
Machines that relieve man of mental drudgery
(Continued from previous page)
all this, but using the numbers in the second
column,"and so on. Obviously a process like
this can be mechanised.
The machine will have to have units which
will add, subtract, multiply or divide any two
numbers supplied to them ; it will have to have
a"memory"in which it can store the results of
calculations until they are wanted again ; and
it will have to have some means of receiving
instructions about the routine it is to follow
and of transmitting these instructions to its
various parts. It needs a few other elements
too, which we need not bother about now. The
point is that each of these units is simple in
itself and the only complication arises in
connecting them together to make one very
complex and highly integrated organism.
In 1833 Charles Babbage, a Cambridge ma-
thematician, proposed the construction of a
machine on just these lines. His plans in-
cluded in principle practically every device
that is used by the modern machines, but he
never succeeded in putting them into practice.
It is probable that such a machine built en-
tirely in mechanical terms-of gears, levers
CHARLES
BABBAGE
The British mathe-
matician who, in
1833, designed a
mechanical cal-
culating machine
which included al-
most every device
that is now in use.
and the like-would have been unworkable in
practice, and no other form was possible in
the 19th century.
But in the 20th century we have two new
types of devices which alter the picture com-
pletely-electro-mechanical relays (in everyday
use in automatic telephone exchanges) and
electronic devices such as radio valves, photo
cells and cathode ray tubes. By using these,
instead of mechanical elements like gear
wheels, practical problems become manage-
able, and in addition much higher speeds are
obtainable. Machines that do all that Babbage
planned have within the last seven years be-
come almost common.
The first of these giant calculators, the Au-
tomatic Sequence Controlled Calculator at
Harvard, brain-child of Professor H. H. Aiken,
started work in 1944. It was an electro-mag-
netic relay type. By the standards that have
since been reached it was a slow machine-
taking about a third of a second to add two 23-
figure numbers or about six seconds to multiply
them-yet even at those speeds it could work
about 100 times faster than a computer using
an ordinary calculating machine.
The Harvard machine was of momentous im-
portance as the first proof that the idea of a
fully automatic calculating machine would
work, but the future lay not with relay ma-
chines, but with those using electronic
elements. The first of these, the Electronic
Numerical Integrator and Calculator, designed
by John W. Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert, Jr.,
went into action in 1946. Intended specifically
for ballistic calculations, it was limited to a
rather narrow range of problems, but the
speed had now gone up to 5, 000 additions a
second.
Since then a dozen or more of these
machines have been built in several countries.
There is no point in describing them in detail
here, and instead it will be better to note
briefly what the general abilities of a fully
automatic digital calculating machine are.
Such a machine can work at a rate of any-
thing from 15, 000 average operations a minute
upwards-that is, 10, 000 or more times faster
than a good computer with an ordinary
calculating machine.
Given appropriate instructions at the begin-
ning of a run, it can carry out a long series
of calculations without further human inter-
vention, and so solve in minutes or hours
mathematical problems that would have need-
ed years with earlier methods. Though most
of the applications have been mathematical,
these machines are by no means confined to
mathematics-they can deal with any type of
information that can be precisely stated, and
deduce its logical consequences.
These calculating giants open up vast new
possibilities for humanity. There are very
many scientific problems-in such fields as
aerodynamics and nuclear physics-in which
the theoretician can write down a set of
equations and say.'Solve these equations and
your scientific problem is solved."But in
H. H. AIKEN
Head of Harvard
University Com-
putation Laborato-
ry, he has been
ca) ! edthe"father"
of the first of the
world's great cal-
culating machines
many cases, the process of solution would be
so long that with the older methods it could
not be carried out in a lifetime, and so
experiments-often costly ones-had to be
done instead. Now the speed of the new
machines enables us to get practical results
from the theory.
Again, in using X-ray crystallography to find
out how the atoms are arranged in various
solids, a process of trial and error is involved.
If the scientist can make certain initial guesses
correctly, then the data on the X-ray photo-
graphs can be used to calculate the positions
of the atoms. But there are often so many
choices for the first guess that the solution
is in practice beyond us ; the crystallographer
usually confines himself to cases in which some
other sort of evidence gives a strong hint on
how to start.
Now, an electronic calculator could be set
to try out all the possibilities one after another
and to stop and give a signal when it finds
the right one. In this way it could run
through many thousands of guesses in a day,
and give answers in cases which previously
could not be tackled. In these and many
other ways the new machines should help
enormously to accelerate scientific advance,
and particularly to facilitate the application of
theory to practice.
There will probably be a comparable revolu-
tion in the handling of social and economic
statistics. One of these machines (on a larger
scale than the present ones) could be fed with
all the available information about the eco-
nomy of a country, and then in a few hours it
would tell us what would be the effect of in-
creasing a particular tax or introducing new
machinery to cheapen the production of steel
screws, taking into account all the complex
ways in which such a simple change would
react on all parts of the economy. All sorts
of economic problems which are at present
tackled by hit-or-miss methods would be
brought within the sphere of reason.
But to see the full long-term implications
of these machines we need to set them in a
broader historical perspective. For some
6, 000 years or so-ever since the first cart
was harnessed to an ox or the first sailing
ship launched-men have been developing
more and more machinery for relieving them
from physical drudgery. But until very re-
cently no machine has done much to relieve
us from mental drudgery-and, let us make
no mistake, the.'brainwork"of an office rou-
tine or even the more skilled work of a com-
puter is just as much drudgery as the manual
work of a navvy.
Now machines are beginning to take over
our brainwork too-only our second-class
brainwork, of course, the parts we can reduce
to a routine, not the creative effort of the
painter, research scientist, poet or philo-
sopher. As this new trend develops, we can
foresee a world in which all uncreative rou-
tine work, all drudgery, whether manual or
mental, has been taken over by machines, and
VANNEVAR
BUSH
Succeeded in
building the first
differential ana-
Iyserin 1931, which
is now in constant
use in many com-
puting laboratories
men and women are liberated to develop to
the highest degree their creative faculties.
To end on a more sober note, it is necessary
to say that the development of these calculat-
ing monsters does not mean that the earlier
types of calculating machines will become
useless. One does not use a steam-hammer
to crack nuts (although it will do so). And
similarly there will be plenty of work still to
be done by our humbler mathematical ser-
vants, the Brunsviga, the slide-rule, the diffe-
rential analyser-and even pencil and paper.
ELECTRONIC NIGHTMARE : With more than 12, 000 e) ectronic tu. bes bui ! t into modern calculators,
failures are inevitable. That is why engineers are on permanent duty, ready to locate faulty tubes or
connections. Sometimes they can be found and replaced in a few minutes. Sometimes it takes days
to track down the failure among the 21, 000 electric relays and 40, 000 connections inside the calculator.
UNESCO COURIER-Page 10
