Page 14. APRIL 1952
HOW EUROPEANS FEEL ABOUT AMERICANS
MORE and m. >re these days, one hears people talkingabout how important it is if we are to have peace
for the peoples of the world to understand one
another. And there is increasing recognition that the
public opinion survey can play a major role-if only an
indirect one-in bringing about such understanding.
Before we can go about straightening up whatever mis-
understandings exist in the minds of people, we must
have some notion of what the conceptions are that people
have of one another. One way of discovering what
images one people has of another, is to ask questions of
a cross-section of the population and analyze their
answers.
In 1948, the Social Sciences Division of Unesco, as part
of the International Tensions Project, sponsored a public
opinion poll in nine countries-six of them European.
People in each of these countries were shown a list of
12 adjectives and asked to indicate which of those
attributes they thought applied to their fellow-country-
men, then to the Russians and then to the Americans.
There are many interesting things to be seen in the
results of this study. You might want to compare the
image these peoples have of themselves with the one
they have of Americans. Or you might look at the
stereotype of the Russians and compare that with the
stereotype of the Americans. Or you might want to
compare the Frenchman's image of his fellow French-
man with the Britisher's view of Englishmen. And so
on.
One way of getting some idea of the differences which
the Europeans feel exist between themselves and Ameri-
cans is to look for the adjectives they use more frequently
to describe themselves than to describe Americans. And
theft, on the other hand, to look for those adjectives they
apply more often to Americans than to themselves.
'Progressive, pratical, generous'
LOOKING at the data from this point of view, we lind
-- that as compared with Americans, Europeans much
more often think of themselves as : brave, intelligent,
peaceloving. As compared with Europeans they see
Americans as : progressive, practical, generous.
It is fairly easy to understand our reputation in Europe
as practical and progressive people. Our economic
development and our technical proficiency speak for us
on that score. And considering the role the U. S. has
played in the post-war economy of Europe, it is not
surprising that we are thought of as generous. There is
nothing uncomplimentary in any of these attributes
themselves.
But the fact that Europeans pay scanty tribute to our
courage and our intelligence is not so easy to swallow.
In terms of international understanding in this critical
period, however, perhaps the most important thing to
consider is that while Europeans think of themselves as
predominantly peace-loving people, they do not think of
Americans in this way. We think of ourselves primarily
as a peace-loving nation. The Europeans evidently have
some doubts and possibly even some fears about this.
While we aren't considered as un-peace-loving as the
Russians, a peace-loving nature is not thought to be one
of our prime assets as people. It seems, therefore, that
there's a job for us Americans to do if we are to win
the confidence of the West Europeans as regards our
interest in peace.
Recently, we had occasion to interview Poles who had
crossed into the Western Zone of Germany. Among
other things, we asked these people to give us their
impressions of the kind of people Americans are, and
how they compare with the people of their own country.
Again, one is struck by the contrast between the self-
image and the image of the American.
'Materiatistic, setf-centred, nervous*
A 26-year-old chemical engineer stressed the psycho-
logical difference between the Poles and the
Americans. He said :
"The Americans are fond of a fast, nervous, eventful
life. They need strong stimuli, films with ghosts and a
lot of murders. They are after sensation, they adore film
stars, they set no great store by sentimental life. The
Americans are guided in all their doings by reason and
calculation whereas the Poles are led by sentiment in all
their thoughts and deeds."
And a 29-year-old woman who taught high school and
holds a master of arts degree in Polish literature, talked
about the self-centredness of the American :
"Americans are characterized by unceremonious be-
haviour, by nonchalance which gives the impression
of'a lack of orderliness, but after all, they must be pretty
smart people. However, the Americans are rather snper-
ficial and consider their America the navel of the world.
What goes on in the outside world is of no interest to
them. The greatest point of interest to an American is
his personal prosperity. In America, materialism reigns
in every field."
This view of the American as materialistic, self-centred,
nervous and unsentimental, is not inconsistent with the
view of the Americans as primarily"practical,""pro.
gressive,"and"generow ;," which was revealed by the
Unesco stereotype study. It is just another piece of
evidence which points to the fact that the European may
find qualities which he admires in the American, but
nevertheless feels that there is some intangible quality
- lack of sensitivity to spiritual values, if you like-that
distinguishes the American from the European and
by elms C. Wilson
President, International Public
Opinions Research, Inc.
makes for a barrier to understanding and genuine
sympathy between the countries.
Now let's turn to the subject of American foreign
policy. During the last few months of 1950, the Inter-
national Public Opinion Research, Inc. conducted public
opinion surveys in several West European countries.
We interviewed cross-sections of the populations in Great
Britain, France, Western Germany, Italy and Sweden.
We asked these people a lot of questions : about problems
in their own countries, about their feelings concerning
the possibilities of war, about their views on Russia and
about their views on the United States. (I should say
that the actual interviewing was done, of course, by
natives of each of the countries concerned.)
We found then-and this study was begun just about
the time hostilities broke out in Korea-that the popu-
lations of these countries were generally more sympathetic
to the United States than they were to Russia (with
the exception, of course, of the small groups of
Communists in each country). But this sympathy was
rather obviously a qualified one : West Europeans did not
regard American policies with complete trust.
In addition, we found that there were difference be-
tween countries in this respect. At the time these surveys
were conducted, the evidence seemed to point to the
conclusion that the British, West German and Swedish
population were definitely more pro-U. S. in their
sympathies than the French and Italians. In these last
two countries, large proportions of the population had
doubts and suspicions about the intentions of the United
States.
It is not that large numbers of West Europeans
actually fear or actively dislike the United States. Far
from it. When people in Great Britain, France, Germany,
Italy and Sweden were asked what countries they feared
or what countries they like least, fewer than 10 per cent
anywhere named the United States.
On the other hand, the United States does not
necessarily occur to Western Europeans when they are
asked to name a country toward which they feel
particularly friendly or sympathetic. The British are
more often friendly toward the U. S. than are members
of the other nations. Even in Britain, however, only
about four out of 10 named the United States as the
country they feel most friendly toward. The French
mentioned the Low Countries and Switzerland more often
than the U. S. ; and the Swedes named Great Britain as
often as the United States.
The question of what makes for suspicion about the
intentions of the U. S. in the mind of the Western

European is a tough one to answer. But we get some
clues from responses to questions we asked that bear
on specific policies and possibilities.
In Italy, for example, we found a residue of resentment
against America which dates back to World War II.
Fifty-six per cent of the Italians, or instance, made no
secret of the fact that they thought Allied bombardments
during the last war had been nothing more than useless
brutality, rather than military necessity.
We asked people directly whether they thought the U. S.
was doing everything it could do to prevent another
world war. As can be seen from the chart, large
majorities of the British, Swedes and Germans had no
doubt about the honesty of U. S. efforts to prevent war,
even though they may have some quarrel with U. S.
methods of prevention.
CHART)
U. S. EFFORTS TO PREVENT WAR
It is important to note that a fairly sizeable portion
of the Swedish population (26 per cent) was reluctant to
give the U. S. full credit for its war-prevention activities.
But it was only the Italians who were really doubtful
about our intentions. Few of them felt that we
Americans were really doing everything in our power
to avert a major war.
There were, therefore, groups of British, Frenchmen,
Germans, Italians and Swedes who in 1950 had doubts
about U. S. integrity, politically and morally. But the
majority in most cases took a more sympathetic view of
American foreign policy.
The idea of international co-operation meets with
fairly widespread approval from the British, Italians and
Swedes. In the 1950 survey, we found that about one-
half the population in each of these countries endorsed
the idea of a federation of West European nations. This
figure was somewhat lower in France, but sentiment in
favour of such an organization had increased between
Winter 1949 and the Spring of 1950.
As for the United Nations, as you can see from this
chart, just about the time the United Nations was
catapulted into the headlines as a result of developments
in Korea, the UN was a familiar name to many
Europeans.
CHART If
CONFIDENCE IN THE UN
Almost all the Swedes had heard of the UN ; and the
British public was also quite well informed. On the
other hand, one Frenchmen in three had never
even heard of the UN. And, I might add, the Italians
were similarly ignorant : About 40 per cent of the
Italian public had not heard of the UN or did not
know that Italy was not a member. (Italy does not
appear on the chart because Italians were not asked
about the UN's ability to prevent war).
People who had heard about the UN were asked
whether they thought the UN might be successful in
preserving peace. Only the Swedes had any great
confidence in the ability of the United Nations to avert
a war. The British were as a whole more optimistic than
pessimistic, but less so than the Swedes. And the
French were even less hopeful than the British.
In France and Sweden it was possible to compare
answers to this question before and after the outbreak of
hostilities in Korea since the field work was going on
just about that time. Perhaps understandably, it
appeared then that the war in Korea damped the hope
that the UN would be successful in keeping peace.
So far, the optimism of the Swedes has been justified.
Undoubtedly, feelings about the UN's ability to handle
delicate international situations will have undergone
several shifts as tensions eased and then tightened in
Korea during the months which have elapsed since this
survey was taken. But the figures do seem to show that
the Europeans were at least more often willing to give
the UN the benefit of the doubt than to feel that its
chances of success were doomed from the start.
(This l/OfIl'l'is a slIrmllary of an address givell l>efore the
Soliol/ol ('ollf,'rPlw,'of the U. S. Natiol/al ('ommissiOIl at
HlIlltf"t'olleye, Npw t-urk.)
