THE U. S. CITIZEN
AND THE
UNITED NATIONS
by
Luther H. Evans
Librarian of'Congress ; Member, Executive Board of Unesco ;
Chairman, U. S. National Commission for Unesco
HUNTER COLLEGE, New York City wasa recent focal point for American
interest in the United Nations as
2, 500 delegates to a national conference
took over its 16-storey modern building
on Park Avenue during the final days of
January. The meeting was called by the
U. S. National Commission for Unesco-
the third such gathering since the Com-
mission was formed nearly six years ago
to advise the U. S. Government on Unesco
affairs. From every one of the 48 States
came people responding to the Commis-
sion's appeal. Delegates included experts
from the fields of science and education,
prominent writers and artists, professionals
from radio, stage and screen, leaders from
religious, labour, youth, government and
other fields. Some participated as repre-
sentatives of organized groups, others as
individuals. But-all came motivated by
aims spelled out in the broad conference
plan, to consider together opportunities,
obligations and resources of responsible
citizens for the solution of international
problems through participation in world
affairs.
Education about the United Nations is
the Commission's priority programme for
action in the U. S., and on this effort the
conference has already had a tremendous-
ly stimulating effect.
For four-and-a-half days, the Conference
delegates filled classrooms and audito-
riums, swarmed through halls, listened to
capable and stimulating speakers, saw,
heard, and took part in radio, television
and film showings. In small work
sessions they came to grips with a long
list of basic questions on"The Citizen
and the United Nations."Participating
with them in many of these meetings
were observers and students from over
15 countries and a score of UN and
Specialized Agency officials. Highlight-
ing the general conviction that an under-
standing of international problems must
begin at the local level of U. S. towns and
cities, and in the schools, one delegate,
who spoke from the floor at the closing
session on January 31, urged his colleagues
to"rouse the apathetic, inform the (nor·
ant and combat the opposition."
Popular ideals
In order to accomplish this, the confer-
ence stressed that mass support of these
objectives can best be obtained by inter-
preting them in terms of popular ideals,
interests and aspirations. The co. opera-
tion of the press, motion pictures, radio
and other mass media was urged in help-
ing to further this task, and represent-
atives of the industries concerned assured
the delegates of their understanding and
desire to support the principles of the
conference.
The need for expanding the present
international exchange of persons pro-
gramme, to bring foreign leaders, workers
and student groups to the United States,
and to send their American counterparts
abroad, was also stressed.
General sessions were devoted to U. S.
participation in the United Nations and
the problems of constructing peace. A
keynote was sounded in the address by
the Director-General of Unesco, M. Tor-
res Bodet, who warned that"Behind
every evmt that aggravates the present
pol {jcal crisis there always lies the old
story of hatred and hunger, of poverty
and ignorance and the eternal problem
of selfishness and want of understanding."
The Assistant Secretary of State for
Public Affairs, Howland H. Sargeant, em-
phasized a similar theme when he told
the conference that"We Americans can.
not'go it alone.'We need the other free
peoples, even as they need us. Freedom
as we know it is being subjected to an
assault which has had no parallel in
modern history. And we who believe in
freedom must meet that assault together."
Delegates were asked to.. specialize"
by selecting one of thirteen afternoon sec-
tion meetings. Simultaneous panels 6derv.
ed to focus first on the world problem
faced by the UN or one of its Specials-
zed Agencicô ; second, the contributions
which the United Nations have already
made, and third, the tasks ahead. Parti-
cular attention was given to the efforts
American citizens must expend if pro-
gress is to be assured.
In a mid-conference review, George N.
Shuster, the humane and intellectually-
gifted president of Hunter College, gave
a brilliant summary of these deliberations.
Following this it was my task to remind
the delegates of the opportunities that
were theirs during the work sessions.
Meeting with one's colleagues in small
work groups was answering a need often
voiced at previous conferences when eager
delegates had said,"We are interested in
what the experts have to say, but what
we really want is more time to talk things
over with others who have the same pro-
blems that we have."In subsequent
meetings difficulties that seemed unique
were found to be just commonplace. The
discouragement born of loneliness vanish'
ed and the courage of a common cause
took its place.
Ideas contributed by mid-conference
resource panels also enabled the delegates
to bring fresh grist to further meetings of
their working sessions. A great deal of
comment was caused by a meeting devot-
ed to the Merging World Outlooks at
which Ralph Turner of Yale University
spoke. Professor Turner is chairman of
the editorial committee of Unesco's Inter-
tional Commission for the Scientific and
Cultural History of Mankind. His observa-
tions on the cultural unity of man gave
rise to many lively discussions.
Delegates asked if it really would be pos-
sible to write a single impartial history pre-
senting a balanced point of view on all con-
troversial subjects. Most agreed that the
exchange of ideas which would result
from the process would inevitably illu-
minate problems exposed to impartial
presentation. The conference members
also welcomed Unesco's plan for present-
ing conflicting theories and airing ques-
tions in an historical periodical pending
the completion of the single comprehensive
study. Several leaders pointed out, how-
ever, that among history and social science
teachers in this country there was a grow-
ing tendency not to rely on any one text,
but to acquaint the student with a num-
ber of"authorities"and encourage him
to form his own judgments.
Mutual misconceptions
The panel given to examining Foreign
Attitudes on World Affairs pointed up the
need for a clearer understanding here of
many peoples whose biased attitudes
about us are in some measure a reflec-
tion of our own misconceptions of them.
A discussion of Area Studies in U. S. col-
leges and universities revealed the extent
of preparation that would be necessary to
equip increasing numbers of young people
for the foreign service roles they would
undoubtedly play in all parts of the world.
"What do Americans know and think
about the U. S. participation in foreign
affairs ?" posed many [I problem to be
mulled over in conference discussions and
then taken home. For example, when an
opinion was advanced favouring teaching
about the United Nations through emotion-
al appeal, there were some who expres-
sed concern that we might be defeating
our purposes by too emotional an empha-
sis. Facts interestingly and convincingly
presented carry with them their own emo-
tional appeal. The enlightenment and
conviction which ensues from them should
generate its own power of developing atti-
tudes.
It was especially heartening to learn that
teaching about the UN in the schools is
no longer considered unusual, but taken
for granted as natural and proper. These
very strides, however, have given rise to
criticism and misunderstanding. For under-
lying all the discussions was awareness
that the principles of international co-
operation and support of the United Na-
tions are subject to opposition from some
quarters. Many of the prepared papers
and oral presentations took account of this
fact and emphasized the need to meet such
opposition through public education and
continued explanation of the objectives of
UN and Unesco and their supporters.
Many of the delegates also expressed
concern over current controversies involv-
ing freedom of discussion, and the pro-
blem of securing the broadest possible
support in the U. S. for the principles laid
down in the American Bill of Rights. Some
observers might read into these remarks
a danger that freedom is on the wane, but
those familiar with the American scene are
hailing them as present day evidence that
the"eternal vigilance"long hailed as
"the price of liberty"continues to be
healthily exercised. The final day when
the conference findings were reported
showed delegates agreed that the best way
to combat confusion and misinformation is
through more and better education, and a
fresh presentation of the facts. They were
prepared to go back home backing their
recommendations with renewed vigour.
(Other reports on U. S. National
Commission-See page 12 to 15.)
UNESC'.
