NEW HIGHWAYS lN
THE SKIES OF IRAN
OCTOBER) 952. Page 7
A,'airman entering Iran for the first time,
across the dangerous"hump"of the
Zagros Mountains, will be surprised by
the strange la dscape around Teheran
the capital. He will see the ground pitted
with curious holes, running in straight hnes
which criss-cross each other.
The pits are the vertical shafts of the
horizontal wells, or banats, a Persian water
system which is supposed to date back 5, 000
years. The horizontal wells are mined along
the underground water courses back to their
sources in the mountains. Some of them
are 30 miles long and the qllallat miners keep
their bearings underground by means of
a primitive lodestone compass which, the
Persians claim, preceded the marine compass
by. centuries and was therefore thé ancestor of
the navigational aids which made ais travel
possible. So, in a way, the services which
ICAO is providing for Iran is a return for the
"technical) assistance"which the Persians
rendered to aviation in remote history.
Iran today stands in need of aIl the assistance
which ICAO can give it because it has a
communications problem which is one of the
biggest obstacles to its development. This
country is a vast territory, as big as France,
Italy, Norway and Spain combined, but with
about a tenth of the population of this
European area. It is mainly a high plateau,
surrounded by battlements of mountain ranges.
About 70 per cent of the country's area consists
of mountains, forests and salt desert. In the
whole country there are only 17, 000 miles of
roads and 2, 000 miles of rai) ways. In thé
north, the mountain passes and railway tracks
may be blocked for weeks by heavy faits of
snow. Isfahan, the former capital of the
country and one of its three biggest industrial
centres, is not sernd by a railway at aH, and
its connection with the capital is by a
road across the desert. GovernmentaIly and
economically the various parts of the country
are isolated by poor communications. LHtimate
development will de pend on ground traffic
arteries, but an urgent problem is how to
establish communications within the country
by air and how to maintain and extend the air
services to neighbouring countries. In this
connection, the country is subject to con-
siderable climatic variation, so that air safety
is a priority problem.
In response to a request from the Govern-
ment of Iran, ICAO agreed to send an expert
to assist Iranian airways in improving their
organization and service. Simultaneously, a
team of experts would be provided to help
the Department of Civil Aviation to train its
personnel in the operation of ground facilities
and services. The team began to operate in
Apri ! 1951. Classes in radio techniques have
been supplemented by regular on-the-job
training and by expert advice on setting up,
operating and maintaining radio equipment.
Air traffic control classes were organized, and
advanced instruction in actual operation of
control towers has been given to the existing
staff.
One of the important functions of the
ICAO mission was to produce meteorological
observers and forecasters and to train and post
observers in various parts of the 628, 000 square
miles of country which has not so far had a
proper weather service. The weather-reporting
stations are beginning to form an effective
network and to provide the forecasters with
the weather data indispensable to safe ftying.
In conjunction with this practical training
the mission has been able to advance its
advisory functions through a General Commis-
sion which the Government has set up, whose
chairman is the head of the mission. This
operates through six sub-commissions con-
cerned with aircraft search and rescue work ;
communications and radio navigational aids ;
meteorology, climatology and statistics ; opera-
tions ; training, licensing and aero clubs ; and
air worthiness.
The mission, which included four experts
from the Netherlands, two from Norway and
one from the United Kingdom, and one stateless
expert, has been able to help in other directions,
and especially in the fields of organization and
operation. Apart from this ICAO has been
able to provide three fellowships by which
Iranians can gain experience abroad in aero-
nautical engineering and electronics.
Since the ICAO mission began its work in
A pril HI ;) ! the economic situation of the
country has deteriorated, thus making it
difficult for the Department of Civil Aviation
and Iranian Airways to take full advantage of
the mission's advice and work. ln spite of
this handicap, the work of the mission has
continued with results which encourage the
hope that when economic conditions improve
the Government will be better able to provid''
the necessary support for civil aviation. At
least it will have trained personnel.
Iran has only 17, 000 miles of roads and 2, 000 miles of railways. Ultimate development will depend on both ground traffic arteries and air communication networks.
With technical assistance, Iran is beginning to form a chain of weather-reporting stations (similar to one shown below) which are indispensable for safe flying.
. OURIER
