Page 16. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952 UNESCO
AROUND THE WORLD
to mail a letter or a newpaper to a friendon the other side of the globe is a
simple, everyday affair. So simple,
indeed, that few of us ever realize that it
took many centuries for the postal service
to achieve its present reliability and effi-
ciency, and to grow into the vast and com-
plex system which now spans the world.
For thousands of years, primitive man was
limited for his means of communication to
smoke signals, tom-toms and stick messages.
It was only when Middle Eastern scholars
devized the first form of writing that mail
services by runner or horseman began to be
organized. From this humble beginning, the
post has developed into one of the most
effective instruments of civilization.
Many nations have contributed to the ad-
vancement of this oldest of public services,
and today the world's postal systems, grouped
under the Universal Postal Union (UPU), play
a vital role in promoting the free flow of
word and image. It is only within the past
60 years that printed materials have enjoyed
low postal rates in more than a few coun-
tries. Until then, they were usually mailed
at the more costly letter rate. And it is
only within the past 150 years that the letter
post itself has been made available to people
generally. Before then the post was in most
cases reserved for royatty, the aristocracy and
State officials.
The first recorded post was founded about
500 B. C. by Darius the Great of Persia, who
used relays of horsemen to send messages
throughout his vast empire, ranging from
India to western Egypt. Macedonian, Egypt-
ian and Roman rulers followed suit. The
Chinese emperors then devised an e ! obo-
rate courier system, which Marco Polo des-
cribed centuries later during his journey to
the court of the Grand Khan.
The Romans raised the imperial post to a
height of efficiency surpassed only in
modern times. Julius Caesar's tetters to
Cicero, written from Britain, reached Rome
in 26 days. Letters carried along the same
route were still taking a month as late as
1800.
The word"post"dates from the Roman
period. It is derived from the Latin posifuS
meaning'''placed'', because horses were
placed at set distances to carry dispatches.
Private persons employed slaves to carry
letters or entrusted them to obliging travel-
lers. Around 300 A. D. the Emperor Diocte-
tion started the first public post for Roman
citizens.
With the fall of the Roman empire, the
European post collapsed, though Charle-
magnepartly restored it during the eighth
century. Medieval rulers maintained royal
couriers, but no regular public post. Mer-
chant's guilds in England, France, Germany
and Italy conducted private services, and
from the l3th century right up to the revolu-
tion of 1789 the University of Paris main-
tained an international post for its cosmo-
politan body of students and professors.
By 1550, royal couriers in England, France
and Spain were permitted to carry private
letters. Queen Elizabeth's master of posts
authorized his messengers to convey private
mail by cutter to the Continent. The Em-
peror Charles V had meanwhile extended the
German post to Austria and Holland.
In 1635 Britain's postmaster, Thomas
Witherings established a public service be-
tween London and Edinburgh. Rates, payable
by the recipient, were 2d for a letter conveyed
under 80 miles and 8d to Scotland. Wither-
ings also organized a foreign service through
France, with the consent of the French
Government.
Cardinal Mazarin, Prime Minister under
Louis Xt !) and Louis XIV, was responsible for
improving the parcel post in France. In 1653
Renouard de Villayer created a local post
for Paris, which was run from a central
office. Under this scheme, the many letter
boxes set up in the streets of Paris were
emptied several times daily. The postal
charge (one sou) was paid by the sender, and
the receipt slip accompanying the delivery
thus constituted the first use of a form of
postage stamp. An English imitator, William
Dockwra, organized a very efficient daily

AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1952. Page 17
FOR THE PRICE SOFA STAMP
by Philip L. SOLJAK
penny service for the London area, but was
gaoled by James, Duke of York, who enjoyed
a monopoly of postal revenues.
The regular international governmental, or
official, post dates from 1670, when England
and France established the"Lyons Mail"by
special treaty. England provided twice-
weekly mail packets across the Channel, and
France furnished the overland service to
Lyons. Fees to this point were prepaid, but
charges for further transmission were col-
lected from the addresses.
British and French correspondents wel-
comed this innovation. Delays in the foreign
mail had become frequent, and were offi-
cially blamed on irresponsible post-boys who
spent too much time"peddling their own
traffic"and"lying in tippling houses."
A new Anglo-French treaty of 1713 provided
a basis of accounting for transit mails which
continued with little change until 1870.
Letters could be franked to Italy, Spain and
Turkey. Accounting between the English and
French post offices was based on the total
of amounts due on separate letters, mail by
mail.
Queen Anne's postmaster-general had in
1711 reorganized the British post and regu-
lated the services in the North American
colonies and West Indies. The celebrated
Falmouth packets began running from
England to Spain, Portugal and the West
Indies about this time, and by 1800 served a
large part of the world.
To supplement their low pay, the crews of
these little ships often indulged in smuggling
or capturing foreign vessels as prizes of war.
Their activities brought the luckless post-
master-general into frequent conflict with
other government departments, such as the
customs and the navy.
In North America, Benjamin Franklin
expanded the inter-colonial post and in 1755,
as deputy postmaster-general for the colonies,
started a packet service from New York to
England. The Continental Congress founded
an independent American post when war
broke out between Britain and her American
colonies in 1775.
The fate of empires has often depended
on the mails, as was illustrated during
this conflict. In October 1777, General
("Gentleman Johnny") Burgoyne, commanding
loyalist and Indian troops at Saratoga, near
New York, was waiting for General Howe to
advance up the Hudson Valley and
join forces with him. But London officials
failed to send instructions to Howe by fast
ship. The luckless Burgoyne was isolated and
overwhelmed by the Americans.
This victory was a turning point in the war,
for it encouraged France, Spain and Holland
to support the Americans openly. Bernard
Straw incorporated this incident in his play
The Devi/'s Disciple.
By 1790 the British mailcoach service,
founded by William Pitt six years before, was
carrying letters and parcels at half the cost
of the post-boy system. More and more
people were writing"Post-Haste ! * on
their letters. But the rates, based on the
distance carried, rose rapidly during the
Napoleonic wars. In France, the National
Convention put an end to the farming out of
mails to private contractors in 1795, and in
1804 Napoleon established a nationalized
service under a director-general.
By 1835 an Englishman was paying ls 5d
to mail a letter 700 miles, or to receive one.
Sir Rowland Hill, urging that rates should be
based on weight, not on distance carried, pro-
posed the adoption of a uniform led fee, and
prepayment by postage stamps. Both reforms
were in force by 1840 and soon after were
followed in the United States, France and
Germany. Before long, Britain was also first
with cheap rates for newspapers and books.
Trade and communications were expanding
rapidly throughout Europe, and pioneer
settlers were opening up vast new territoires
overseas. Railways and steamships carried
the post faster and in greater volume. Mail
subsidies enabled shipping companies like the
CunardLine, theP. andO., andtheRoya)
Mail Line to start running to the America :
and colonies.
Before this, in 1834, the Canton firm of
Jardine, Mathieson and Company had esta-
blished the famous China Clippers which
raced across the seas under full sail with
cargoes and dispatches.
In Indian, the service started by Lord Clive
in 1766 was following the British example of
low uniform rates, despite the great distances
involved. Stage coaches and horsemen were
carrying mails to isolated settlers in the
United States, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand and South Africa. The Australian
post, founded in 1810 by Governor Macquarie,
had regular sea communication with the
United States by 1866. The post first
employed Maori runners in New Zealand, and
Hottentot post-boys in South Africa.
A famous pioneer service was the"Pony
Express", which carried mails over 2, 000 miles
from St. Joseph (Missouri) to San Francisco
for 16 months during 1860-1861, when it was
replaced by Western Union telegraph.
Eighty riders and 400 horses in relays co-
vered the distances in under ten days,'or one
third the time taken by stage coach. Brav-
ing blizzards, floods and attacks by Indians,
these horsemen won a renown which time has
not diminished.
Another colourful service was the"tin can"
post maintained until recently at the South
SeaistandofTofua, in the Tonga group
Coral reefs prevented ships from approaching
the island closely, so a tin can containing
mail was thrown overboard. The island's
strongest swimmer dashed out through the
surf and towed the mail ashore.
As international mails expanded, more
postal treaties were conclude. But due to
the many differences in rates and procedures
in various countries, rapid and accurate
handling of the mails became almost
impossible. In 1863, at the suggestion of the."'r------_.-..----,--.
United States, an inter-
national conference in
Paris agreed on a code
(Continued on
next page.)
COURIER
