Page 14. NOVEMBER 1952
THE VITALITY OF THE UNIVERSAL DECLARATION
THROUGHOUT the long process of drafting, the. Universa)Declaration was a controyersial document, sharply
challenged in its general concept and textual details.
But the four years since its solemn adoption (without a single
dissentient vote) by a plenary session of the U. N. General
Assembly have obscured its controyersial character. Yet, in
effect, the controversy is still with us, albeit on a different
plane, the challenge today being no longer to the contents
of the Declamation, but to its value.
The United Nations is criticized for having spent so much
time and energy on a document which has no legally binding
force and has failed to redeem the high promises held out
by the Charter of the United Nations for the protection of the
individual through effective international machinery.
This line of criticism rests mainly on the grounds that, in the
drafting of those additional instruments which are designed
to lend legal force to the principles of the Declaration, very
real difficulties have been encountered. As a result, despite
continuing efforts, the rhythm of our progress towards a
genuine International Bill of Rights is still slow and uncertain.
The difficutties, which ore both political and technical, are
undeniable. The question is : do they reflect adyersely on
the conception and utility of the Universa) Declaration itself ?
In attempting to answer that question, we must first bear
in mind that the revolution intended by the Charter was,
by its nature, a long-term aHair. In its final implications,
that revolution aimed at a new type of relationship between
the individual and the State, between the individual and
international society, and between international society and
its component units.
We have never been entitled to hope that, even if condi-
tions had been normal (which they were not), these bold
initiatives could be accomplished within the short period that
has elapsed since the ratification of the Charter.
QECONDLY, the Universal Declaration was never meant tobring about, by itself, a spectacular improvement. It was
meant to turn the Charter into a more effective instrument
in the service of humanity. By the Charter, every State
which had joined the United Nations was pledged to promote,
by joint and separate action, universal respect for Human
Rights, and their observance ; but no State was pledged to
regard as"Human'Rights"any particular group of rights
other than that which it may already have recognized in its
own laws.
A wide gap was left open for the individual interpretation,
by each State, of its obligations. The Universal Declara-
tion was designed to narrow that gap by supplying a common
standard on which all national definitions of Human Rights
were gradually to converge.
Thirdly, in o matter so essentially political as the status of
by Dr. Andrew Martin
Lecturer on international affairs
at Ruskin Cohere, Oxford.
Human Rights, purely legol arguments are by no means
conclusive. As a matter of strict low, no State is, as yet,
under compulsion to adapt its national laws to the common
standards established by the Universal Declaration, even
though there is considerable force in the argument that no
Member of the United Nations is entitled to change its
existing laws in a manner that would amount to retrogression
from that standard.
A LL students of politics will agree that the conduct ofGovernments is not prompted solely by the pressure of
their obligations under international law ; likewise, the vitality
of the Declaration cannot be measured solely in terms of its
legally compulsive force. Its impact depends, first and
foremost, on its success in creating an effective demand for
the grant and observance of the rights that it proclaims.
Given an articulate demand, purposefully maintained in
each country by a growing number of individuals and groups,
and given unfailing support from the appropriate organs of
the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies, the Declare-
tion is capable of exerting a vital influence on the legislative
and administrative programme of Governments.
It would have been wholly unreasonable to hope, particu-
larly in countries where political conditions are not favourable
to the rapid penetration of new political conceptions into the
consciousness of the masses, that so short a time as four
years would bring forth a pressing and articulate demand for
the Declaration being translated into actual governmental
programmes. And yet, even though the demand may not yet
be measurable everywhere, we are entitled to assume that it
is in the making.
The United Nations and Unesco have mobilized truly
impressive resources to assure that the Universal Declaration
should reach every stratum of human society, even in the
remotest parts of the globe. In this effort, they have
received generous assistance from many Governments and non-
governmental agencies, including a large number of trade
unions and religious organizations and the wide network of
United Nations Associations. The volume of evidence
showing the effect of these labours presents a more and
more encouraging picture every year.
The impetus of the campaign is immensely strengthened
by the activities of those organs of the United Nations which,
in their day-to-day work, have occasion to deal with concrete
problems affecting Human Rights. Their attitude may be
summed up in one sentence : they tend to treat the Universal
Declaration as a standard of conduct which is applicable here
and now, without waiting for the adoption of additional
international instruments.
That goes, in the first ploce, for the General Assembly
which, when confronted with actuoJ complaints relating to the
observance of Human Rights-for example, the treatment
of national minorities, the protection of immigrating tobour
from discriminatory practices, the rights of women to marry
foreign nationals and join them abroad-has time and again
inyoked the proyisions of the Universal Declaration in support
of recommendations calling for the liberalization of national
laws and practices.
Within their own respectiye spheres, the Economic and
Social Council and the Trusteeship Council have followed a
similar policy on a wide variety of subjects, ranging from the
principle of equal pay for equal work, the nationality of
married women and the prohibition of all forms of forced
labour, to the free flow of information through all frontiers
and the abolition of corporal punishment in trust territories.
The importance of this attitude adopted by organs of the
United Nations cannot be exaggerated. Their tendency to
treat the Universal Declaration as authoritative, regardless of
its lack of formally binding force, giyes a strong incentiye
to Governments to adopt a correspondingly positiye attitude.
Since 1948, new constitutions have been enacted in a
number of countries, notably in Indonesia, Costa Rico, Syria,
EI Salyador and Haiti ; on all these enactments the Decla-
ration has exerted an unmistakable influence, in some cases
to the point where the wording of the Declaration was
reproduced verbatim.
In other countries, including France, Western Germany and
Canada, the principles of the Declaration are clearly
reflected in certain new laws dealing with fair employment
practices, the status of displaced persons and other subjects.
A LL these examples point to the conclusion that, even duringthe first four years since its adoption, the Universal
Declaration has proved its worth as a potent ferment which
has a stimulating effect on the vitality of the body politic
into which it has been introduced. And yet, its beneficent
effect cannot be assessed solely in terms of achievements
in a positive direction.
We must not forget that, throughout the world, these past
four years have been a period of tension, danger and fear,
such as in the past almost invariably resulted in the severe
curtailment of fundamental freedoms.
If, during the past four years, we have been spared any
such distressing experience on a scale comparable with the
past, if, regardless of a mounting tension, we have been able
to maintain and in many instances to increase our standards
of political freedam and social justice, that is in no small
measure due to the impact of the Universal Declaration on
the minds of Governments and the governed.
