COURIER MAY 1952. Page 3
Dormitory in a well-regulated school."Attention !... When I clap my hands, eyes... The third time I clap, you will all fall sound asleep." (Lithograph by Dau-
you will place your head on the pillow... When I clap again, you will shut your mier which first appeared in the review"Le Charivari"on February 3, 1846).
CARICATURES SATIRIZE A CENTURY
OF TEACHING
ALTHOUGH the 19th cen-tury was certainly one
of progress in the field
of education, many men in
public office, as well as
teachers, too often forgot or
ignored the wise words of
the Swiss educator Pestalozzi
who, in the early 1800's, de-
clared :"Learning is not
worth a penny when courage
and joy are lost along the
way."
Few indeed were the chil-
dren who, in the first half of
the century at least, found
courage or joy in the class-
room, for all too often
goading and flogging was the
rule, and teaching came al-
L rarely from the heart-ways from the head, rarely fro  the heart.
For the past two months, a retrospective view
of education as it developed in France in the
century between 1805 and 1905 has been provided
by an exhibition organized in Paris by the Musée
Pedagogique. Entitled"A Century of Teaching
seen through Caricatures and Pictures,"you get
an impression at each exhibit of turning the pages
of a family album filled with relics of a strange
yet hardly distant era.
This was the century when education won its
rights. But so slowly and painfully were they
gained, and amid so much hate and hypocrisy,
that at each picture of a forbidding-faced minis-
ter or schoolmaster, visitors could hardly help
reflecting with pity on the fate of their parents
and grandparents, shown in smocks or embroi-
dered coats and wearing boots or wooden clogs,
who were once the youngsters of that era-and
also the guinea pigs of conflicting doctrines and
politics.
1805-1905. This was the century of Roman-
ticism, of growing industry, of great discoveries,
of bourgeois virtues, of the first stirrings of demo-
cracy. It was above all, in the terms of the
exhibition at the Musée Pedagogique, the century
of forgotten children who were gradually redis-
covered.
First we see various official documents, laws,
decrees, pictures of solemn, bearded faces and
by Georges Fradier
frightening or humorous drawings. But we see
nothing of the children. The children ? They
were not important then. What counted was
teaching and the clashes over political and reli-
gious questions in teaching. What counted were
the school buildings and the teaching hierarchy ;
the schoolchildren not at all.
The children were only statistics, registration
numbers or budget items. For in that century
of noble ideals it was the budget that mattered
and, perhaps more important, the administration,
the school and State reports submitted by the
schoolmasters and the government. These were
things that raised heated discussions, became
elements in the political scheming of localg vernment officials and even
shook the Chamber of De-
puties. But children had
hardly any place in this
world of grandiloquent
grown-ups.
A century of progress.
Many an educator must have
been grateful to the Musée
Pédagogique for recalling a
phase of history which, on
the whole, turned out well,
for it ended quietly in a sort
of victory for justice and
freedom. But only after a
long struggle.
The enlightened people
who, around the 1830's
preached the doctrine of
universal education, already
proclaimed by the FrenchtT.... _^...", 11.."_.... _n_rfnA nro C" ; 11'9 : 7Revolution, were generally regarded as silly
cranks. Schooling for all-what a crazy idea !
Everyone knew that small boys were needed in
the mines, young girls in the factories. Besides,
they were not taken on until they were eight or
nine years old, and were only made to work 12
hours a day. And what if they were whipped ?-
it was only for their own good !
Some years earlier, King Charles X had already
agreed to a"draft decree"which envisaged
primary instruction in France.'to inculcate in
everyone the habits of order and all the religious
and moral virtues."A dangerous road, said
many people. It'tit were followed there was no
telling where these starry-eyed Utopians and
revolutionaries might lead the country.
It was with narrow-minded thinking and
brutal frankness that the clashes first. began.
Respected, thinking people asked one another in
all seriousness :"Is it wise to educate children ?"
(they meant, of course, the children of the mass
of the people>. This was the tenor of the discus-
sions that continued for some twenty years.
In 1850, Adolphe Thiers, a cabinet minister and
a noteworthy champion off, the established order
of things, exclaimed in a moment of righteous
indignation :"I have already said, and I main-
tain, that primary education should not necessar-
ily be within the reach of all. I will even say
that education is the starting point of an easierexistence, and such an existence is not meant
for all."
Similar remarks were heard in almost every
tongue. Today, it is easier to be shocked by them
because the"Utopians"and the"'revolutionaries"
have apparently carried the day. But, in point
of fact, these professions of faith sprang from
a conception of teaching even held by many an
advocate of compulsory schooling. This concep-
tion, innocent in appearance, is perhaps not as
completely discarded even today as many believe.
It holds that the true function of public education
and the real reason for its existence is to provide
moral support for the power
in which the State incorpo-
rates and justifies itself. In
other words, the school at
the service of society ; the
child at the service of the
adult.
Whether or not they did so
consciously, the majority of
our parents cherished this
idea, and against it the
efforts of the most ardent
defenders of freedom were
often of no avail. When
Michelet was expelled from
the College de France, Dau-
mier sprang to his defence
(Continued on next page.)

Page 4. MAY I 9 S2
UNESCO COURII
Map showing the state of illiteracy in France in 1825. The darker tints indicate areas with highest
illiteracy rates. A census among young people at that time showed the tremendous difference
between the Meuse, a département in the north-east (26 per cent illiteracy) and Corrèze in central
France (88 per cent). The Paris area took sixth place, with 29 per cent unable to read or write.
"Wretched boy ; now look where your anarchist ideas have got
you. You shouted'down with grammar and those who teach
it !'. I regret the day you were born."Many schoolboys at
that time-1849-also had cause to regret they had been born.
"So, you knave, you don't know the names of the three sons ot King Dagobert...
tt's obvious that you know nothing about anything... Do you want to be a useless
member of society all yourlife ?" (Lithograph by Daumier in his series"Teachers
and Whipper-Snappers,"originally published in"Le Charivari"on March 3 1846.)
"Just you wait a minute. I'all give you a taste of what a schoolmaster really
does,"When Daumier produced this cartoon in 1846, the symbols of teaching
were the birch and the cane. These gradually disappeared, and discipline based
on fear and authority gave way to affection and an understanding of young minds.
When schooling for every child was considered
i
a da ngerous cranes idea...
" (Continued from previous page.)
with a biting caricature. Thanking the artist,
Michelet wrote :"I see with joy a time coming
when the goverment being the people itself and
thus becoming an educator, will surely call on your
genius."As if any government ever pretended to
be anything else but the embodiment of the
people !
At any rate, the day came when children were
accepted in schools (or ordered to go) by the
million. Then differences arose over another and
much more serious question. The new problem
was :"How should children be taught ?"and
"What should children be taught ?"
Once, a delightfully simple solution seemed
possible. Society being divided into rich and
poor, the former could be taught to shoulder
their responsibilities with dignity and the latter
shown how to earn their living usefully. The
well-to-do would become good magistrates,
officers and employers, and the poor, skilful
artizans, obedient soldiers and contented workers.
The first group, shut up in school"barracks"
whose grim atmosphere Balzac, Daudet and so
many other writers have evoked, would be fed on
a diet of Greek and Latin, grammar and rhetoric.
The rest would be taught the rudiments of
reading, writing and arithmetic together with a
few lessons on morality. All would grow up with
a developed respect for authority and imbued
with the cult of national glory.
Towards the end of the century, however, pro-
gress was made, not by combatting this cult or
feeling of respect, but by removing the most
striking inequalities, by broadening school pro-
grammes, changing teaching methods and
rewarding intelligence rather than riches, enthu-
siasm rather than docility.
Progress also opened the windows on the world
and let in the sun and the air. The expression
"the wind of freedom"was then on everyone's
lips. Gradually, the austere professor-that
dreaded civil servant-and the village teacher, so
often dominated by the mayor and other autho-
rities, disappeared and gave place to a new figure,
the educator.
Little by little, too, the true face of the child
was revealed. No more bad instincts to be
broken, no more cramming of knowledge into
young heads, no more"little beasts"to be forcibly
transformed into respectable citizens. Instead
the child came to be regarded with respect as a
human being, endowed with a personality and
character worthy of study and tender care.
Developing the child came to mean helping
rather than forcing him ; virtues were to be
guided and not imposed by severe training. In
short, the child was to be treated as an individual ;
and with this fresh psychological approach, a
new form of teaching was born.
This then was the misty dawn when the first
clumsy steps, so vividly recalled by the yellowing
papers and touching photographs of the Paris
exhibition, were taken. Experience showed to
adults that a mechanical memory is not the be-all
and end-all of intelligence. They realized too
that a little experience is worth a lot of theory.
The exhibition traces this long path : the first
geography maps, the first"object lessons,"the
first illustrated textbooks. It shows playgrounds
that no longer resembled prison courtyards,
teachers who looked less like ogres, women
teachers who braved ridicule and scandal to join
in gym classes. It also shows happy school-
children gardening or setting off on rural explo-
rations. For these, at least, the century ended
on a more idyllic note.
One after the other came laws and regulations
to define in detail the working of primary and
secondary schools, technical and professional
instruction, teachers'colleges and adult classes.
But the real and vital change was not found in
written laws. It was in mental attitude. Hence-
forth the school existed for the child ; no longer
the child for the school, elr for a social class, a
political party or a single religion.
It may be said that this revolution was still
incomplete in'1905, not only in Europe but
everywhere else. Yet the progress accomplished
in a few decades was enormous. No one would
suggest, however, that it has since been followed
up with the same faith or at the same speed.
In 1850, Victor Hugo, in a famous speech at the
Chamber of Deputies, called for"a vast plan of ;
public education provided and regulated by the
State ; for the doors of science to be thrown wide
open to all minds.""Wherever there is a mind,
wherever there is a field,"said the noted author,
"there should also be a book. There should be
no community without a school, no town without
a college, and no city without a university."
Since then many more schools have been
opened and many more books distributed. But
not"wherever there is a field"-even today.
For millions of minds"the doors of science"are
still hardly ajar. We are told that in 1952 more
than half of mankind is still illiterate. The
battle for universal education then has still to
be won. (illustrations photographed by Lei ! Larsen)

MAY 1952. Page 5
Illustrated textbook in 1863 explains use of adjective :
"Handed over by a grieving family to a severe but just
friend because he's lazy, greedy and untruthfut."
"Personally, I believe above all in using the force of reason with my pupils-and they worship me. Just
ask them. There isn't one who would dare tell you the contrary !"As the century advanced, teachers
behaved less like ogres transforming"little beasts"into respectable citizens. (Lithograph by Daumier 1847.)
,.---
"What adjective could better describe this boy than
wicked ? This little girl is saying to her brother :
'Just look at that wicked boy. Isn't he ridiculous ?'"
Photograph taken at the Women Teachers'Training College in Coutances in
1905, when, to join in gym classes, women teachers had to brave ridicule. In
the preceeding century pictures illustrating the education of girls were rare.
This reflected the attitude of an era when education for women was almost
completely neg ! ected. A privileged few attended private classes to learn French
grammar, water-colour painting, deportment, music and tapestry-making.
For the poorer girls there were only the charity schools or classes where nuns
taught practical needlework and the rudiments of mathematics and reading.
