Page 10. OCTOBER 1952
THE three provinces of Libya (Tripolitania, Cyrenaica,
Fezzan), are islands in vast seas of sand. Racially
and geographically, the Libyan population of one
and a quarter million people is divided into several groups
and have never before constituted an independent political
unit ; they have been united on) y as port of the larger
empire of foreign conquerors. Over a fourth of the poputa-
tion consists of wandering desert tribes. Only one in ten
of the people is literate.
It is doubtful whether Libya can be called an underdeve-
loped territory. Historically, it is an over-developed territory,
in the sense that large tracts of the country are a dust-
bowl created by greedy development. These are the areas
which supported a considerable colonial population and were
the granaries of Greece and Rome from 500 B. C. to 500 A. D.
Through the neglect to maintain the wells, cisterns and
trees on which this agricultural prosperity had been based
and after the collapse of an effective administrative orga-
nisation, thé depradations of the nomadic tribes which
replaced the system of cultivation by indiscriminate grazing
and deforestation, this area was largely reduced to desert.
Today Libya is a deficit area to a degree matched by few
other countries. Atthough govemmenta) services are on a very
modest level, the deficit of the ordinary administrative budget
exceeds 30 per cent. There are deficits in the budgets of
ail three provinces and most of the municipalités. There is
a deficit in the balance of trade of ail three provinces, with
a consequent deficit of about 40 per cent in the balance of
payments. This, in the recent past and present, has been
met not by receipts from foreign investments, but by grants-
in-aid and military spending by foreign powers. The wheat-
growing project at Barce operates at a deficit ; so does the
tobocco-growing scheme.
The agriculture of the Fezzan incurs o deficit ; so does the
power plant at Tripoli, and its harbour, and its gas works,
and the raitwoys. The Italian colonization scheme, heavily
subsidized by the Italian taxpayers during the Italian occupa-
tion, still operates at a deficit. Thus the Libyan economy
cannot maintain even the present low standard of living, which
averages in income per capita not much more than $30 o year.
Arresting), 000 years of decay
THE United Nations has eccepted its clear responsibility
for assisting the independent state it created by an
act of the General Assembly to achieve higher standards
of living and social welfare as a member of the family of
nations. This carries with it the recognition that there are
no undisclosed natural resources waiting to be developed, and
that Libya is not only a country with no highly developed
industry-it is a country with no firm basis for industrial
development. It has no water power, no coal, no petroleum
and no commercially-exploitable minerai ores, so far as is
known.
Development must necessarily be inclined toward the
establishment of light industry to process agricultural mote-
rials. The pressing problem, therefore, is one of arresting
the decay which has been going on for over 1, 000 years, of
regenerating its agriculture and reconstituting its forests and
. vegetation. The Libyan potential lies in the recovery of its
desert and developing the skills and resources of its people.
United Nations and specialized agency experts assisted
the U. N. Commissioner in Libya, the Libyan Provisional
Government and the Administering Powers (United Kingdom
and France) to lay the foundation for the new state. Experts
of the United Nations, FAO and the International Monetary
Fund advised the Commissioner and the main interested
Powers on the establishment of a Libyan currency and on two
Libyan economic and social development financing agencies,
one to attract grant-in-aid funds from friendly governments,
the second to attract governmental loan capital. These
agencies have been established by Libyan law. They can
consider on) y proposa) ! from the Government for the financing
of projects approved by the Government.
Experts of the United Nations have also assisted the
Commissioner in preporing the Libyan budget for 1952, the
establishment of a civil service, a provident fund law and
other fundamental public administration acts. The result was
that, on independence day, Libya had in operation, or pro-
jected for the immediate future, a governmental organization
in the administrative, economic and financial spheres, a plan
for the basic operation of the new Government prepared in
full co-operation with representatives of the inhabitants of the
country which would assure the continuing operation of the
governmental machinery.
This plan had already provided for a progressive transfer
of nearly ail powers to the Provisional Libyan Government 50
that the transfer to the government on the day of independ-
ence was only for matters relating to foreign affairs and
defence.
The U. N. Resident Technical Assistance Representative
(who is also personal representative of the Secretary-Generqt)
has an important role in the Libyan picture. ln addition to
the normal functions of such an officiât, he is available to the
Government for consultation regording economic, financial and
social development matters. He is a member of the Libyan
economic planning committee, sits on the board of manage-
ment of the Libyan Development Agency, and serves as
technical assistance adviser of the Libyan Government in the
Libyan Finance Agency. Thus the Resident Representative
has un important role in assisting Libya at 011 stages of its
economic and social development programme.
The problems of the new Government and Administration
which came into existence last December are immense, despite
ail of the above-mentined planning which gave Libya what
was probably the most planned and orderly transition to
independence in modern times through a combination of nor-
mal United Nations and technical assistance effort. The
take-over of the machinery of Government is a major
undertaking in a country which has so seriously lacked edu-
cational facilities for so long.
Great strides in the education of the indigenous population
were made by the administering powers. Now there are
50, 000 pupils in schools, although only about 1, 100 are in
secondary schools. Education in the Fezzan was even more
difficult, because there were no indigenous teachers ; it is dif-
ficult to recruit foreign teachers to serve in this bare and
isolated region.
Every small number of leaders and government officiats
received an adequate training abroad before the last war. A
few who were refugees during the colonial period have return-
ed. There is, however, on overall shortage of people even
with the elements of éducation. Yet somehow the adminis-
tration has to recruit, not only higher civil servants, but cJerks
and typists and postmen capable of reading an address. It has
to find the staffs for new organizations and institutions
without which the first steps in devlopment are impossible. It
has to contemplate somehow, sometime, establishing a univer-
sity.
To futfi) its aspirations as a nation, therefore, Libya needs
ail the assistance it can get in practically every aspect
of civil development. On behalf of the Technicat Assistance
Board, du ring 1951 a general economic appraisal and subse-
quently recommendations for an economic and social deve-
lopment programme for Libya were produced for consideration
by the Government when it took over responsability for the
affairs of the country.
Skill-'the major untapped resource'
E VEN before the transfer of authority, however, the U. N.
agreed with the British and French Governments, then
responsible for administering Libya, on assistance by
experts. On the initiative of the U. N. Commissioner in
Libya, the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assemb) y ogreed that Libya could continue to receive tech-
nical assistance after its independance had been achieved,
and even before it became a member of the United Nations
or the Specialized Agencies.
The economic and social development scheme for Libya
contains no proposais for new industries, new transport
facilities, new public utilities or big investment projects of
any kind. It is o plan recognizing the realities of the exist-
ing situation and the limit of the rate at which the country
could absorb large-scale assistance.
The plan proposes projects and programmes for the im-
provement or expansion of existing activities or restoration of
physical plants destroyed by war. Recognizing that Libya's
.'one major untapped resource"is the latent skill of its
people, it lays heavy emphasis on educational and technical
training. Improvement in agricultural and animal husbandry
techniques and practices was a basic recommendation. Tech-
nical Assistance to Libya during the past year has embroced
education, agriculture, engineering and technical works,
public health and social development, public administration
and finance, statistical services.
Typica) of the urgent measures taken, Unesco began in
Tripoli in 1950 a Clerical and Technical Training Centre,
following requests from the United Kindom and France, as
administering powers. The Centre ils now running under a
technical assistance agreement signed by the new Government
of Libya and Unesco and ILO. The school is under the direc-
tion of an expert from the U. K. with 13 other teachers and
instructors provided by Unesco. This represents the creation
in less than two years of a combined school of trades and
business administration. At present there are 25 students at
the Centre, the equipment of which has been provided by
Libya, Unesco and the U. S.. Point IV programme.
Courses for technical students are designed to train fitters,
turners, blacksmiths, we) ders, carpenters, foundry workers and
motor mechanics. The course of study is two years, but it is
hoped to reduce this to one year although the delay in pro-
vision of equipment will require a third year for present
students in the technical programme. Unesco is also helping
a centre where elementary school teachers will be trained and
where Libyan textbooks will be developed.
UNESCO
