Page 10. JUNE 1952 UNESCO
THE WEST HAS MUCH
TO LEARN FROM ASIA
IF there is one notion that a Eu-ropean seeking to understand
the problem of South Asia must
banish from his mind, it is that of
the"exotic". Contrary to what so
many suggestions in literature and
travellers'experiences may imply,
the civilizations of the East are, in
essence, no different from those of
the West.
Let us take a look at the bare
remains that the passage of the
centuries, sand, floods, saltpetre, rot
and the Aryan invasions have left of
the oldest culture of the East-the
sites in the Indus valley, Mohenjo-
daro, Harappa, 4, 000 to 5, 000 years
old. What a disconcerting expe-
rience ! Streets straight as a bow-
string, intersecting each other at
right angles ; workers'quarters with
houses of dreary, unvarying design ;
industrial workshops for the milling
of four, the casting and chasing of
metals, or the"mass-production"of
those cheap goblets whose remains
still litter the ground ; municipal
granaries occupying (to use a modern
term) several"blocks" ; public baths,
drains and sewers ; residential quar-
ters providing comfortable yet
graceless homes designed more for
a whole society that lived in comfort
than for a minority of the well-to-
do and powerful-all this can hardly
fail to suggest to the visitor the
glamour and blemishes of a great
modern city, even in their most
advanced form as Western civiliza-
tion knows it, and as presented to
Europe today, as a model, by the
United States of America.
One would imagine that, over four
or five thousand years of history,
the wheel had come full circle-
that the urban, industrial, lower
middle-class civilization of the towns
of the Indus valley was not so ba-
sically different (except of course as
regards size) from that which was
destined, after its long European in-
cubation, to reach full development
only on the other side of the Atlan-
tic.
Thus, even in their earliest days,
the most ancient civilizations of the
Old World were giving the New
World its lineaments. Admittedly,
this twilight of an ancient history
of uniform design marked the dawn
of other, heterogeneous histories.
But the divergence was never more
than occasional.
From the days of pre-history down
to those of modern times, East and
West have constantly striven to re-
establish that unity which diverging
lines of development have undermi-
ned. But even when they seemed to
diverge, the systematic nature of
their opposition-the placing at
each extreme, geographically and
one might say even morally, of the
most ancient and the most recent
scene, India on the one hand, Amer-
ica on the other-would supply
additional proof, if such proof were
necessary, of the solidarity of the
whole.
Two con f1ieting theories
BETWEEN these two extremes.Europe occupies an inter e-diate position, a modest posi-
tion, no doubt, but one she strives
to make worthy by criticizing
what she regards as excesses in
the two extremes-the para-
mount attachment, in America,
to things material, and the exag-
gerated concentration, in the East,
on things spiritual ; wealth on the
one hand, poverty on the other,
situations with which it is attempted
to deal by two conflicting economic
theories involving, as an article of
faith,"spending"in the one case
and"saving"in the other.
When, having spent long years in
both the Americas, the writer last
year received, from a Keeper of
Bengali manuscripts, his first lesson
in Asiatic philosophy, he might have
been enticed into an over-simplified
thesis. The picture was this :
against the Amazon region of
America, a poor and tropical but
under-populated area (the latter
factor partly compensating for the
by Claude Levt-StrouK
Professor at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Paris.
former), was set South Asia, again
a poor and tropical, but this time
over-populated area (the second
factor aggravating the nrst), in the
same way that, of the regions with
temperate climates, North America,
with vast resources and a relatively
small population, was a counterpart
of Europe, with comparatively small
resources but a large population.
When, however, the picture was
shifted from the economic to the
moral and psychological plane, these
contrasts became more complex.
For nothing seemed further from
the American pattern than the
style of life of this sage, whose
pride lay in walking barefoot and
having, as his sole earthly posses-
sions, three cotton tunics which he
washed and mended himself, and
who thought he had solved the
social problem by cooking his food
on a fire of dead leaves, collected
and ground up with his own hands.
The'reverse side'
WHEN one flies over vast terri-tories of South Asia, from
Karachi to Saigon, and once
the desert of Thar has been crossed,
this land, divided up into the
smallest plots and cultivated up to
the last acre, at first sight seems
somewhat familiar to the European.
When it is looked at more closely,
however, a difference emerges.
These faded, washed-out shades of
pink and green, this irregular for-
mation of fields and rice-paddies
constantly appearing in different
designs, these boundaries, blurred as
if in patchwork-the whole carpet,
so to speak, is the same ; but, because
form and colour are less clear, less
well-defined than in the landscapes
of Europe, one has the impression
of looking at it"wrong side up".
This is, of course, merely an image.
But it reflects rather well the
different positions of Europe and
Asia in regard to their common
civilization. From the material
point of view, at least, one seems
to be the"reverse side"of the
other ; one has always been the
winner, the other the loser, as if in
a. given enterprise (begun, as we
have said, jointly) one had secured
all the advantages and the other all
the embarrassments.
In one case (though will it always
be so ?) an expansion of population
has paved the way for agricultural
and industrial progress, so that
resources have increased more
quickly than the number of people
consuming them ; in the other, the
same phenomenon has, since the
beginning of the eighteenth century,
assumed the form of a constant
lowering of the amount taken by
each individual from a common pool
that has remained more or less
stationary.
It is to the birth and development
of urban life that Europe has come
to attach its highest material and
spiritual values. But the incredibly
rapid rate of urban development in
the East (e. g. in Calcutta, where the
population has increased from 2 to
5 1 million in the space of a few
years), has merely had the effect of
concentrating, in the poverty-strick-
en areas, such misery and tragedy
as have never made their appearance
in Europe except as a counterpart to
advances in other directions. For
urban life in the East means
nothing but promiscuity, the most
elementary lack of hygiene and
comfort, epidemics, undernourish-
ment, insecurity, and physical and
moral corruption resulting from
over-concentrated, collective exis-
tence. Everything that, in the
West, seems merely to be a patho-
logical accident attending, for the
time being, a normal process of
growth is, one might say, a normal
state of things in the East, which
plays the same game but is con-
demned to hold all the worst cards.
Yet, without going back four or
five thousand years, this striking
misfortune seems to have been
neither inescapable nor of very
ancient standing. As recently as
the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries-thanks no doubt, very
largely, to the Mogul emperors, who
were admirable administrators-
the population of South Asia was
not over-numerous, and there was
an abundance of agricultural and
manufactured products. European
travellers who saw bazaars extending
from 15 to 20 miles into the country
(as, for instance, from Agra to Fati-
pur Sikhri) and selling goods at
what seemed to them ridiculously
cheap prices, were not sure whether
or not they had arrived in the"land
of milk and honey". It can never
be stated often enough that it was
Europe which, by forcibly incor-
porating the still primitive Asia in a
world economic system that was
solely concerned to exploit raw
materials, manpower and the pos-
sibility of new markets, brought
about (involuntarily no doubt, and
no less through the benefits than
through the abuses of the process)
a crisis which, today, it is its duty
to remedy.
Comparing itself with America,
Europe acknowledges its own less
favourable position as regards
natural wealth, population pressure,
individual output and the average
level of consumption ; rightly or
wrongly, on the other hand, it takes
pride in the greater attention it
pays to spiritual values. It must be
admitted, mutatis mutandis, that
Asia could reason-similarly in regard
to Europe, whose modest prosperity
represents, for her, the most un-
warranted luxury. In a sense,
Europe is Asia's"America."And
this Asia, with less riches and more
population, lacking the necessary
capital and technicians for its
industrialization, and seeing its soil
and its livestock deteriorating daily
while its population increases at an
unprecedented rate, is constantly
inclined to remind Europe of the
two continents'common origin and
of their unequal situation in regard
to their exploitation of a common
heritage.
Europe must reconcile herself to
the fact that Asia has the same
material and moral claims upon her
that Europe often asserts she her-
self has upon the United States. If
Europe considers she has rights vis-
d-Ms the New World whose civiliza-
tion comes from hers, she should
never forget that those rights can
only be based on historical and
moral foundations which create for
her, in return, very heavy duties
towards a world from which she
herself was born.
Inseparable worlds
THE West however need not fearthat, in this s ttli g of accounts
with the East, the latter alone
will be the receiver. Preoccupied as
it has been, and for too long, with
the economic aspect of the relations
between the two worlds, the West
has possibly overlooked a number of
lessons it can learn from Asia, and
which it is not too late to ask for
now. Despite the interest evinced
by scholars and the remarkable
work accomplished by Orientalists
in the nineteenth and. twentieth
centuries, the mind of the West has
not, as a whole, been very open to
the messages of Asiatic thought ; it
seemed difficult to comprehend
when attempts were made to in-
troduce it to groups of peoples who
lacked the basic experience under-
lying it.
All Western civilization has tended
to separate corporeal from spiritual
activities as completely as possible,
or rather to treat them as two
uncommunicating worlds. This is
reflected in its philosophical, moral
and religious ideas, and in the forms
taken by its techniques and every-
day life. Only recently, with the
development of psychiatry, psycho-
analysis and psycho-somatic medi-
cine, has the West really begun to
grasp the inseparability of the two
worlds. This key, which is new to
it and which it handles so clumsily,
Asia has long known how to use-
for purposes, it is true, which are
not exactly the same. For the
West, which for three centuries has
concentrated mainly on developing
mechanical processes, has forgotten
(or rather has never tried to
develop) those processes of the body
which can produce in that instru-
ment-the only natural and also
the most universal one at man's
disposal-effects whose diversity
and accuracy are generally un-
known.
This rediscovery of man's body, in
which Asia could be a guide tohumanity, would also be a redis-
covery of his mind, since it would
(as in yoga and other similar
systems) bring to light a network
of actions and symbols, mental
experiments and physical process
which, unless they were known,
would probably prevent the psycho-
logical and philosophical thought of
the East from being, for the West,
anything more than a series of
empty formulae.
Peaceful co-existence
THIS keen feeling, found in Asia,of th  interdepemlence of
aspects of life which elsewhere
one tried to isolate and close off
from each other, of the compa-
tibility of values sometimes consi-
dered to be incompatible, is also
found in the sphere of political
and social thought. The first
illustration of this is in the
field of religion. From Buddhism
to Islam, proceeding by way of the
various forms of Hinduism, the
religions of South Asia have shown
that they were supreme in the art
of living together, comprehend-
ingly, with other very different
forms of belief. In East Bengal,
not far from the frontier of Burma,
we have seen, side by side, mosques
bereft of images, Hindu temples
with families of idols each of which
enshrined a god, and Buddhist
pagodas filled with images (simple
objects for contemplation) of a
single sage, superior to gods and
mem. These irreconcilable yet at the
same time definitely complementary
forms of human faith could co-
exist peaceably, to such an extent
that Moslem authorities supervised
markets where the only meat dis-
played was pork (the staple food of
the Mongol peasants in the hin-
terland of Chittagong), and young.
Buddhists, under the amused eyes
of their bonzes, helped enthusia-
stically to drag the goddess Kali's
chariot to the river, on the occasion
of the annual Hindu festival.
It would be easy to set against
this idyllic picture the burnings and
massacres that marked the separa-
tion of Pakistan from India. But
in the case of these universal after-
effects of nationalist poison, is it
not the West that bears the primary
responsibility ? The only attempts
South Asia made in the way of
political unification-before Europe
compelled it to think in European
terms-developed in quite a dif-
ferent atmosphere. From the time
of Asoka-of whom the Director-
General of Unesco, in his speech to
the Indian National Commission,
said that he"attained to the concept
of a universal comity seeking the
good of all created things"-to
that of Gandhi, the ideal always
sought was that of peaceful brother-
hood. This ideal is particularly
evident in the political and aesthetic
achievements of the Emperor Akbar,
whose ruined palaces-a combina-
tion of the Persian, Hindu and even
European styles side by side-
affirm the will, and the possibility,
that different races, beliefs and
civilizations should live together in
harmony.
The article published 01) 01'1' ; s aI/N. trod
/rom the one wllich aj/peared il/the'ViI/tel'
1 OJ 1 i,'sl/e of Ihl'International Social Science.
Bulletin, de/'oled 10"Docllmellls Oil Suuth
Asia" (I'olllme He, IVo 4-Jllllllishl'd by
['''''1<1'0. P,. ; ce i8 $ 0. 45 ; 2/6 ; 120 (r8.)
