Page 13-UNESCO COURIERFEBRUARY 1952
A WOMAN BATHING, by Rembrandt, photographed by
filtered ultra-violet light during the cleaning undertaken in
September-October 1946. A former coating of darkened
varnish can be seen at (a) and (a'). Splotches (B) and (C)
under this ittumh. ation show the many layers of over-painting.
"We
The condition of the picture, photographed on October 31, 1946 as cleaning approaches completion (left). Losses in the paint caused by former damage
have been restored. Photo on right shows a specialist in the restoration of paintings at work in laboratory. (Photo Agenzia Fotografica Internazionale.)
An X-ray shadowgraph taken in September 1927, shows
the condition of the original paint 19 years before the cleaning.
Crack in panel is evident at (a). Paint dragged unevenly over
the surface during the original application can be seen at (b).
Detail photographed by filtered ultra-violet light on Sep-
tember 27, 1946. Old over-painting at (b) and (c) has been partly
removed. It lacks the fluorescence of the original paint and
there are still many dark patches or streaks to be removed.
Detail photographed on October 1, 1946. All except a slight
residue of former varnish has been removed. Former over-
painting on leg, arm and hand is also gone. Another master-
piece can once again be appreciated in its original beauty,
FOR many hundreds of years, man hassought ways to protect the great master-
pieces of paintings from the ravages of
time. Of all works of art, paintings-whether
on canvas, wood or plaster-are without doubt
the most fragile. Plaster flakes off, wood
rots, and canvas tears or wears away. Paints
and pigments lose their brilliance, become
grimy, crack and ultimately chip off. Even
sudden changes in temperature can cause
irreparable damage to paintings. Intense
damp or dry weather, heat, cold, smoke or
dust often have similar effects.
For long, two problems have faced art
experts : how to protect these fragile treasures
from disfigurement, and how to restore the
original éclat to a disfigured painting.
Should the damaged parts be repainted, for
example ? Some 200 years ago, many art
restorers did not hesitate to do so. But
today's experts are quick to condemn such
audacity. It is generally agreed that a
by Georges FRADIER
picture should receive a protective coat of
varnish to guard it against the attacks of the
elements, and this has been widely practiced
for many years. Unfortunately, for more than
a century, until about 1850, it was the custom
to cover pictures with a dyed varnish,
producing a uniform brownish tint. This
"gallery varnish"gave paintings an"atmo-
sphere"which then seemed more romantic.
But with the years, this varnish often
tended to go yellow and mixed with the
colours, eliminating some of them completely.
The resin varnish protected the picture, but
at the same time plunged it into shadow.
For even the most transparent varnish
darkens as the years pa. ss. Thus, a morning
sky can be transformed into a night scene.
This is exactly what happened in the case
of Rembrandt's famous masterpiece The Night
Watch, which was the subject of one of the
most extraordinary errors caused by the
darkening of the varnish of a painting.
This title, which is now confirmed by
custom, was not given to the work until late
in the 18th century, when accumulated grime
had so changed its appearance that it was no
longer possible to make out what its subject
was. There seemed to be a shadowy night
scene, shot with gleams of artificial light,
whereas Rembrandt had actually painted a
company of militia setting out on a march in
broad daylight.
When, in 1945, after lying for six years in
shelters, The Night Watch was unrolled from
its cylinder, it was found that a new canvas
was needed. Old records were consulted in
order to establish as definitely as possible the
history of the canvas since its completion by
Rembrandt in 1642. It was found possible to
(Continued on next oge)
THE CARE OF OLD PAINTINGS

(Continued from-previous-page)
draw up a chronological account containing
much information about the condition of the
picture and the treatment it had been given.
Notes discovered show that, as early as 1696,
the masterpiece underwent periodic cleaning.
One of the methods used by the painter Jan
Smit was to soak the picture from the back
with boiled linseed oil. In his Guide, dated
1758, the painter Jan van Dijk wrote that the
picture had been so plastered with boiled oils
and varnish that it was no longer possible to
make out certain details. These details came
to light only after he had removed the
varnish. He admired the brilliant sunlight.
Cleaning, revarnishing, recoating and appli-
cations of boiled linseed oil, however, succeeded
one another periodically every 30 years or so.
Repeated complaints about the deplorable
condition of the coat of varnish were made
after 1851, and from the end of the last
century, the picture was treated at more and
more frequent intervals. This treatment
consisted mainly of revarnishing with special
oils and resins-copaiba and mastic-which
became necessary every five or six years.
The history of all these successive operations
and the application of these temporary
remedies suggested that hardly any of the
original coat of varnish could have survived,
and that if the balsams, oils and resins which
then covered the surface of the picture were
removed, it would perhaps be damaged but,
at least, freed of the distortion caused by the
accumulated concoctions of several genera-
tions of restorers.
The Amsterdam museum authorities there-
fore decided that the coat of varnish should
be almost entirely removed. Today, there is
a rejuvenated painting, with the same strik-
ing luminous treatment of light and shade
which delighted the painter Jan van Dijk
when he cleaned it in 1751 and admired the
high relief of the impasto,"rough as a nutmeg
grater."
Nowadays, the conservation of pictures
nearly always involves the removal of the
varnish. And for art experts this is one of
the most difficult of problems, for every case is
not as simple as that of The Night Watch.
Is it always justifiable to remove the coats
of varnish ? Must they all be removed, right
down to the last one ? Is there not the risk
of altering the original tones in trying, some-
times arbitrarily, to impart a freshness that
the painter may not have desired ? This old
controversy has recently given rise to very
animated arguments.
There are two schools of thought. One,
which has been called that of the.'total"
cleaners, declares that all those later addi-
tions such as overpaint and coats of varnish,
whether dirty, yellow or otherwise discoloured,
give a wrong idea of the painting and of the
artist's purpose. Accordingly, if the painting
is in a suitable condition, it is, they assert,
logical and desirable to remove all such
foreign elements. They may quote the example
of such paintings as Rubens'Le Chapeau de
Paille, which was cleaned in 1946 by the
National Gallery.
This cleaning was so severely criticized, and
the Times published so many indignant
comments from art lovers, that a commission
of enquiry was set up. The experts used every
modern aid in their examination of Le Cha-
peau de Paille, as well as a number of other
paintings whose treatment had been criticized.
Their findings (the Weaver Report) expressed
complete approval of the cleaning methods
used, and added,.'There is no evidence of loss
or of any substantial deposits of extraneous
material left on the original paint."
But the.'moderates"claim to be more
prudent..'Radical methods do not produce
the theoretical result aimed at, which is to
restore the picture intact,"they say,"and do
not allow each stage in the gradual removal
of the varnish to be watched so that the
process can be stopped at the point required
by the actual condition of the picture and by
its safety."
They claim that radical cleaning does not
achieve the desired result, since it does not
restore the original picture. They point out
that, under its coat of varnish, the picture
has undergone various changes in the course
of time. Not only have the colour values
changed, but earlier cleanings, usually badly
carried out, have often caused grave wear and
tear.
Worse still, they say, total cleaning may
alter or even ruin what remains of a picture's
original condition. In addition to painting in
heavy impasto, old masters, at various
periods of history, used light, more or less
transparent coats, scumbles, glazes or even
varnishes and patination like the Italian
veZatura.
Is it certain that, in removing the varnish,
damage will not be done to the surface parts
FEBRUARY 1951UNESCO COURIER-Page 14
The Company of Captain Frans Bannings Cocq, known as The Night Watch, was painted by Rembrandt in 642.
This photograph was taken after the picture was cleaned.
'THE NIGHT WATCH'BY REMBRANDT
During the cleaning the dirty varnish still remaining on the officer's uniform contrasts with
the parts that have been cleaned : (I) close-up, under raking light, of part of the strip of
dirty varhish on the officers's uniform ; (2) the thick layer of varnish has been removed from
the embroidered border on the left, but still covers the border on the right, where it blurs
finer details ; (3) after cleaning, lions holding arms of Amsterdam can be seen.

FEBRUARY 1952 Page 15-UNESCO COURIER
Nations are pooling resources in the preservation of paintings
of the colour, which were designed by the
artist to play an essential part in the final
appearance of his work ?
On this score the"moderate"school also
produces its examples. When the Louvre
cleaned the Raft of the Medusa, it would have
been easy, by boldly removing the varnish, to
give the foam of the waves that clear, white
colour which, in the original sketches for the
picture, it possessed. But, in the background,
this white has been deliberately"dirtied"by
Géricault with the aid of lacquer and ochre.
The artist used this patina to add to his
linear perspective a perspective of values,
darkening for distance. If the white of the
impasto had been revealed, the result would
have been a clear distortion, flouting the
intentions of the artist and rendering his
efforts of no avail.
Such, then, were the views which their
supporters backed up with arguments involving
evidence of an historical, chemical, aesthetic
or radio-electrical order. While the radicals
stressed the importance of technical research,
their opponents laid emphasis on historical
facts as well as on the sensibility of the
restorer.
"The main thing,"said the first group,"is
to have a properly-equipped laboratory."
And the second retorted :"No one has ever
had the crude notion of substituting chemical
analyses for the wine taster ; a trained and
gifted human being has a sharpness of per-
ception which no mechanical process can ever
equal."
At this point the clash of opinions too often
led to misunderstanding and confusion, so
much so that it was felt that the problems
should be'studied in an atmosphere of co-
operation, not only in the professional sphere,
but also the international, for schools of
thought and practices showed a dangerous
tendency to become national. Thus it was
that the International Council of Museums
(ICOM) set up in 1948 a commission of experts
from a dozen countries to obtain full infor-
mation on means of conserving paintings,
with emphasis on the thorny problem of
cleaning.
When the commission held its first meeting
in London, an observer remarked that all that
seemed to separate members was"a tiny part
of a varnish coating."And in fact it was
not so much the general principle as the
extent of cleaning which was at stake.
Detailed inquiries were made, visits were
arranged to the laboratories and workshops
of the National Gallery, the Louvre and the
Istituto Centrale del Restauro in Rome. To
clear up the ambiguity of current terminology,
so often a stumbling block, the ground was
prepared for a general polyglot glossary
dealing with the conservation and restoration
of paintings.
The adoption of a general programme, the
free exchange of information and the first-
hand discussion of specific methods or cases
were the preliminary moves towards a better
understanding of these problems.
As further meetings were held-in Rome
in 1949, in Paris in 1950, and in Brussels last
autumn-a rapid decrease in misunder-
standings and prejudices was noticeable.
Even the advocates of opposite courses who,
with some exaggeration, have been called
"total"and"moderate"cleaners, today admit
that no one dreams of destroying what belongs
to the original picture and that, when in
doubt, it is best to stay one's hand, since
caution should be the first and foremost
guiding rule in cleaning. One and all seem
to accept the existence of glazes in ancient
paintings, which was unduly questioned at
one time. Also, and most important of all,
they grant that every case presents its
particular problems and that every painting
requires individual treatment.
By thus re-establishing the atmosphere of
trust and understanding so essential to any
progress, the International Council of Museums
has brought about a true international
collaboration in regard to the conservation of
paintings. One of the best examples of this
collaboration is provided by the treatment of
the polyptych Adoration of the Lamb.
During the war, this masterpiece by Jan
van Eyck, the"inventor of oil painting,"was
kept for a time at Pau, in France, and later
transported to Germany, where it was dis-
covered by the American Army in a salt mine
where Hitler and Goering stored their booty
of art treasures.
When it was returned to the Cathedral of
St. Bavon at Ghent, the ravages of time
showed so alarmingly that something had to
be done quickly if the famous masterpiece of
the Flemish School was to be saved. It was
therefore decided that it should be given
treatment at the Belgian Laboratoire Central
des Musees.
Instead of relying solely on their own know-
ledge and skill, although these had earned
them world-wide respect, the Belgian experts
decided to invite the co-operation of an inter-
national group of specialists, among whom
were museum heads from England, France,
the Netherlands, Italy and the United States,
as well as representatives of the International
Council of Museums and of Unesco.
This was an initiative without precedent.
As M. Georges Henri Riviere, present director
of ICOM, declared at that time :"For the first
time in history, a country owning an out-
standing masterpiece regards itself as trustee,
and summons to its aid some of the greatest
specialists in the world for consultation and
advice." (1)
These specialists and the Brussels experts
have now finished their task. The Adoration
of the Lamb, with its 19th century additions
removed, and treated on each side with
beeswax, is back in its chapel at Ghent
Cathedral. Innumerable masterpieces else-
where in the world, however, are in danger
and no one has thought of assembling the
proper"doctors"to treat them.
This year the Committee of the Inter-
national Council of Museums is to meet III
Lisbon to study a new problem : the conser-
vation of paintings on wood which, as a base,
can sometimes prove even more fragile than
canvas or paper. The problems of cleaning
are not, after all, the most arduous or most
complicated connected with conservation.
In any case, it is certain, as Murray Pease,
of the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art,
has pointed out, that"no museum can hope
to keep up with the task of conservation in
solitary independence. The problem can be
met only by the utmost in co-operative effort,
by pooling resources, sharing technical data,
and by resolute concentration on common
fundamentals."
(1) The Care of Paintings, a 1M-page illustrated mono-
graph published by Unesco in 1 g51.
 THE ADORATION
OF THE LAMB
The lower panels of The Adora-
tion of the Lamb, painted by van
Eyck in 1432, as it appears when open
(below). At left was the Righteous Judges
panel, stolen in 1934. Visitors to Ghent
Cathedral, where the polyptych is hous-
ed, are chiefly interested in the
strange history of this polyptych, often
forgetting the quality of the work, and
its importance in the birth and deve-
lopment of Dutch painting. They
remember the wars, fires, thefts and
other vicissitudes which the polyptych,
now reconstituted, has survived. The
artistic value of The Adoration of the
Lamb. the learned discussions which
continue to centre around it, and the
difficulties which it has surmounted
over a period of more than five cen-
turies, have given this work a special
fame of its own, a world prestige.
Last year, a group of international
experts used modern techniques to
restore the masterpiece, which was
deteriorating rapidly due to the ravages
of time. Photo (right) shows a detail
of the upper part of the central panel.
