Ten countries have joined together at F. A. O. Rice Research Institute in India in a comprehfSive
for i mproving the yields of rice. For millions of Asians, their experiments are a matter of[e an
Women pounding rice is a familiar sight in Sarawak.
Thai airl aathers basic food of half the world's people,
lu thé Terai area of India at thefoothills ofthe Himalayas, U. N. agencies are working to spurfood production. From newfields, Terai now wrests its harvests of rice. Photos show

 ! Cf
THE BREAD OF ASIA
FOR hal ! the world's population, the experiments at the Rice-Re-search Institute at Cuttack, in Crissa, India, have a concern which
is more than academic. For many, it is a matter of life and death.
Seventy per cent of the Asian peoples depend on rice as their staple
diet, and while the population has increased by over ten per cent in the
past twelve years, the production of rice is still below pre-1940. The
region, as a whole, instead of being an exporter of food has. become a
net importer of food, depending on bread-grain from North America
and even rice from Egypt and Brazil. Countries like India are poised
on the verge of rice-famine.
Rice-production depends on methods which are difficult to change
and, even though the peasants may recognize the value of new ideas in
cultivation, it takes time for them to learn new skills and modify tra-
dition. On the other hand, better seeds, if they are available, can de-
monstrate their value and carry conviction in a single season. If, there-
fore, the plant-breeders can produce varieties of rice which can give
higher yields from existing acreages, they can bring about an increased
food-production which improvements in the rice-husbandry will further
enhance.
At the Cuttack Rice Re. search station, with the Indian Government
as host and FAO as the sponsor, ten countries-India, Pakistan, Burma,
Ceylon, Indonesia, Indo-China, Thailand, Malaya, the Philippines and
Japan-are combining in a comprehensive scheme for improving the
yields of rice.
Just what that means can only be gathered by comparison between
the yields of differents countries. Japan, for example, gets 2, 352 lbs.
of rice per acre, while the Indian yield averages less than a third of that.
India has the largest acreage in the world under rice, but she has rela-
tively the lowest production. Its 350 million people live continually on
the edge of famine because of rice shortages.
If, then, India could increase her rice yield per acre, if not to the
prize-crops of Japan but only to that of China, which is double, she
could have 25 million tons more rice per year from its present acreage.
The reason for the vast difference between the yields of Japan and
those, not only of India but of the whole of South East Asia, is the fact
that the varieties of rice are different. One is'japonica'and the other
is'indica'.
The following figures show the comparatives average yields in Ibs.
of rice per acre of the two types :
Japonica. indica.
s show harvest being loaded oncartand carriedon peasants'headsfor sacking and weighing at mit).
Apart from the rice-strain, there may be other factors at work, such
as methods of cultivation, but the disparity between the countries with
high yields and those with lower yields is apparent enough to suggest
that japonica has definite advantages.
It is not just a simple matter of substituting one variety for the other.
Japonica is the rice of high latitudes and indica is the rice of tropical
and equatorial Asia. There can be no direct transfer ; the process can
only be by hybridizing the two varieties and that in terms of the local
adaptations of indica in the various countries. Nor is hybridization a
simple process, because japonica in the long daylight of higher latitudes
flowers within 100 days and indica in regions of shorter daylight takes
four to six months.
To achieve cross-fertilization, both have to flower at the same time
and at Cuttack, the process is speeded up by exposing the plants to
artificial light. Experts do the pollinization by hand, and the breeding
rice is protected by paper bags. This, has to be done with individual
plants of each of the different strains from the varied natural conditions
of the participating countries. From the first 60, 000 plants pollinated,
12, 500 seeds were collected-again by hand.
AU kinds of variables complicate the task of finding an effective
hybrid. For example, a cross-breed may produce a magnificent head
but the head will be too heavy for the straw, while straw may be sturdy
at the expense of the head. Others may incline to the japonica parent,
with its preference for a cooler climate and long daylight. Others may
develop quite usefully under Indian conditions and be unsuited for
Javanese cultivation.
There can, therefore, be no standardization but only a systematic
process of adaptation and acclimatization. This takes time, but the
rewards are high. If, for example, a suitable hybrid could be produced
for India it is (theoretically) possible to double the rice yield from the
existing acreages, which, quantitatively, at least, would transfprm the
precarious food situation of India.
The Central Rice Research Station which houses the project is an
All-India centre in the State of Orissa. The International Rice Com-
mission wanted to promote this hybridization work for the benefit of
the whole region. The Government of India has made available the
necessary land and other facilities. The extension of the work is in
the plant-breeding stations of the countries concerned.
FAO's function under Expanded Technical Assistance has been to
provide modest finances for the labour costs of technical personnel, who
are under the direction of the director of the station (who has the status
of consultant without remuneration) and ta arrange for the operation
of a centre there for the training of fellows from member countries of
the International Rice Commission.
The Government of India is providing the director of the centre and
FAO the associate director and certain other instructors, as weIl as any
essential equipment. The Colombo Plan is providing buildings which
will be of permanent value ta the centre as weIl as housing those con-
cerned with the immediate programme and the work of the international
training scheme.
This. is an example of how the enterprise of one government in the
creation of such a centre, the recognition of a common interest through
the International Rice Commission, plus the discreet use of Technical
Assistance funds, can bring together a whole group of countries on a
regional basis. The results, on an optimistic assessment, may transform
the rice situation in South-East Asia and the Pacific and benefit
hundreds of millions. Short of that fulfilment, it still has an Immediate
value in focussing the attention of many nations on a common problem
and demonstrating the value of co-operative investigation.
Java 1, 034
rhailand"'"''''''''''''888
: 816
nia 772
ndo-Chma.............. 716
'philippines 703
Japan 2, 352
Egypt 1, 890
Korea,,..,.,,,..,,,...,,,, 1, 593
Chine1, 549
U. S. A................... 1, 390
This Indian worker is extracting rice with pedal thresher.
Beneath microscope, rice pollen is examined at Institute.
htSive scheme
) ffe and death.
