) TRIER JULY 1952. Page I I
PAKISTANI SCIENTISTS AND A UNESCO MISSION STUDY THE QUESTION
IS ARTIFICIAL RAIN POSSIBLE IN THE
PARCHED LANDS OF BALUCHISTAN ?
A TRAVELLER passing* through theBaluchistan desert of West
Pakistan begins to realize what
scientists mean when thev talk of
the"problem of the arid zone".
Mile after mile, on both sides of the
North western Railway, there is
nothing but cracked ground, tor-
tured bv thirst. On the rim of the
bowl of desert outside the train
windows rise up mountains stripped
to their very bones, with foothills
re. sembling gravel dumps left by a
Brobdingnagian construction crew.
woe had an opportunity to see this
"arid zone"at first hand ourselves
on a recent trip from Karachi to
Quetta, 500 miles to the north and
only 600 miles from the Khyber
Pass and the Afghanistan frontier.
The purpose of the trip was to
obtain a glimpse of what the
Meteorological Department of the
Government of Pakistan, with the
help of a Unesco technical assistance
mission, is proposing to do about
the weather.
The men who had the answer to
our question were Mohammed
Aslam, the 36-year-old director of
the Meteorological Department, and
Dr. Edward Fournier d'Albe, a Lon-
doner who was sent to Karachi-and
subsequently to Quetta-by Unesco.
In Western Pakistan, Mr. Aslam
explained, meteorQlogists have two
distinct tasks on their hands : the
arid zone in Baluchistan where
little more than five inches of rain
falls in an average year, and the
problem of river floods in rich
Punjab in the north which may
ause heavy damage. In East Paki-
wotan, there is the job of keeping
track of cyclones which sweep the
country in the monsoon season,
playing havoc with the river naviga-
tion upon which much of its econo-
mic life depends.
Quetta, in Baluchistan, Mr. Aslam
explained, is a key-point in the
Meteorological Department's pro-
By Daniel BEHRMAN
gramme to learn more about what
goes on in the atmosphere above
Pakistan. Part of this programme
consists of the establishment of a
chain of stations in six cities to
track thunderstorms by taking
bearings on lightning fia. shes. These
bearings are needed by flood control
authorities to obtain advance warn-
ings of heavy monsoon storms which
may dump as much as ten inches of
rain in one day upon certain
regions.
All in all the Government of Paki-
3tan has undertaken what amounts
to a nationwide inventory of all its
resources.
This inventory, part of which is
being conducted by the Meteorological
Department, Mr. Aslam said, has
resulted in the plan to establish a
geophysic and atmospheric research
centre to help survey Pakistan below
the earth, on the'surface, and in the
air. Since April, 1951, an inter-
national team of geophysicists re-
cruited in Australia, Denmark, Ger-
'many and the United Kingdom by
Unesco, has been working in Pakistan.
One of these scientists is Dr. Four-
nier d'Albe, a pleasant soft-spoken
man with a decided coolness towards
newspaper reporters who, ever'since
he conducted his first"cloud-seeding"
experiments in 1948 in the mountains
of France's Massif Central, have
persisted in calling him a rainmaker.
Strictly speaking, Dr. Fournier
d'Albe is a cloud physicist, which
seems a rather ethereal term until
you realize that his studies may help
solve the problem of increasing
rainfall in this water-starved land.
"Newspapers have a weakness for
rainmakers,"he told us sadly.
"According to some published reports,
we're on the verge of turning Balu-
chistan into a green and smiling land
of vegetable gardens."
Actually. Dr. Fournier d'Albe and
a team of Pakistani meteorologist
working at Quetta do not intend
to make any"cloud-seeding"
experiments for a long time to come.
They are more interested in finding
out exactlv to what extent such
experiments can bring permanent
. benefits.
The British physicist explained
that certain factors involved in rain-
fall-such as the thickness, up-
draught and water content of clouds- cannot be changed artificially.
However, through"seeding"of
clouds, it is possible for scientists to
add to the air quantities of"conden-
sation mlclei,"the tiny particles upon
which water vapour condenses to
form cloud droplets.
The head of the Quetta Meteoro-
logical Station, Mr. Ama Lateef, and
Dr. Fournier d'Albe have begun tests
to count these hygroscopic nuclei
from selected points throughout
Pakistan, beginning with Quetta.
Equipment used is inexpensive and
much of it i's produced by skilled
Pakistani instrument makers at the
Meteorological Department's work-
shop in Karachi.
We were able to watch one of
these experiments at Quetta where
Mr. Lateef and his assistants had set
up their instrument, a"cascade
impactei", outside the meteorological
station. For several minutes the
impacter, suspended from a gallows-
like stand, fluttered in a steady
breeze with a vacuum pump on one
end sucking in air for sampling (we
weren't allowed to smoke during the
test ; no-one was interested in count-
ing tobacco particles). Then glass
slides, which had collected the
samples, were removed from the
instruments and carefully labelled
for study under the microscope.
Pakistan is interested in counting
the"big"particles-about 1/100the
of a millimeter in diameter-in
her atmosphere. If the survey shows
that these water-collecting nuclei
are not in the air, then it may be
feasible to put them in frnm the
ground on a large scale. And if they
are already there ?
"In that case, we will have learned
that cloud seeding doesn't have much
chance of success here-and we
will learn the truth at a much lower
cost than if we had tried experiment-
ing with airplanes for 365 days a
year,"Dr. Fournier d'Albe declared.
Linked with the particle-counting
is the photogrammetric study of
cloud behaviour-a form of aerial
mapping from th"ground. The
purpose of this work is to help
answer the most perplexing question
arising in any rainfall experiments :
"Would it have rained anyway ?"
"No-one is'making rain'in
Pakistan,"Dr. Fournier d'Albe em-
phasized,'''But we hope to be able to
tell the Government exactly what
the chances are for large-scale
attempts at raising rainfall in the
future to succeed."
The geophysical research centre at
Quetta is still in its beginnings
because Pakistan has preferred to
build slowly and soundly. After its
first year of operation, the basic
preliminary work has been accom-
plished. A site for the centre has
been chosen-this itself was no
easy task-certain instruments have
been procured while others are on
order and, above all, a long-term plan
of action has been adopted and is
now being put into practice.
Unesco's scientists in the field at
Karachi and Quetta have accelerated
the programme, Pakistani officials
believe, and also have made a lasting
contribution by training personnel so
that the work may go on when the
mission has ended.
With one-third of the vast area of West Pakistan a desert, Pakistan and Unesco have joined forces in a research effort to determine just what the possibilities
are of increasing rainfall. Dr. Edward Fournier d'Albe (photo right) British physicist sent to Pakistan by Unesco, goes over plan for equipment with an instrument-
maker in Karachi. Fish-tailed apparatus (photo ! eft) hanging from gallows-like stand is"cascade impacter"used to collect air samples for analysis
by scientists of tiny particles which help form rain. Conducting the experiment is Ama Lateef, director of Pakistan's meteorological station at Quetta.
