SAFETY ON THEHIGH SEATS
Man of the sea (I) today benefits from increased international cho-operation and modern
techniques. Eyes of radar (2) on U. N. weather ships in mild-ocean trace course of ship
or plane on twin screes. As soon as distress signals are intercepted, weather ship speeds
to rescue (3). Research has produced new life-saving devices for shipwrecks on high seas
such as this plastic device (4) which converts sea water into drinking water. Every night,
37, 000 lighthouses pierce darkness ; optic signals from powerful lamps (5) can be under--
stood by sailors (6) everywhere approaching foreign ports. (United Nations photo.)

FEBRUARY 1952 Page 7-UNESCO COURIER
A FIELD as old as man's spiritof adventure and enterprise
is now coming within the
scope of United Nations activities.,
as the seafaring nations take
new steps for joint action to deve-
lop and improve measures for
bringing maritime hazards under
control.
Two international conferences
have prepared the ground. The
U. N. Maritime Conference, which
met at Geneva in 1948, established
IMCO (the Inter-Governmental
Maritime Consultative Organi-
zation), which will join the U. N.
Specialized Agencies. This organi-
zation is still in the early stages
of formation. As soon as it comes
formally into being, its task will
be to promote higher standards of
maritime safety and efficiency of
navigation. Another important
step was a Sea Safety Conference
held in London the same year. It
prepared and opened for ac-
ceptance the International Con-
vention for the Safety of Life at
Sea, 1948, which will replace the
old convention of 1929.
37, 000 lighthouses
MARITIME co-operation is notnew. Faced with the perils
of the sea, man early
understood the need for common
action. Beacons sprang up all
over the world to mark perilous
waters, shoals and reefs, and today
the globe is dotted with some
37, 000 lighthouses. Between the
ancient Lighthouse of Alexandria,
one of the seven wonders of the
world, and the helicopter patrol of
today, lies a story of practical and
effective co-operation among na-
tions to establish common methods
for guiding and guarding ships
wherever they sail. Lifeboat ser-
vice, maintenance of buoys,
weather charts and international
signalling codes are only a few
examples. A typical measure is an
international agreement of 1930
establishing the International Load
Line, designed to prevent over-
loading of vessels with cargo and
passengers. Similarly, rules were
laid down for collision prevention ;
and since the Titanic disaster in
1912, a regular iceberg patrol has
been operated by the U. S. Navy for
the benefit of all nations. Now it
is financially supported on an in-
ternational basis.
Although modern science has
placed at the seafarer's disposal
new means of making shipping
safe, nature still takes a heavy toll
of man's life and property. For
instance, in 1946, the first year of
peace, as many as 179 vessels were
lost on the high seas, representing
a gross tonnage of 370, 000. This
indicates clearly that, due to the
vast increase in sea and air traffic,
the need for international co-
operation is as great as ever.
Weather-rescue ships
TODAY, under direct or indirect
U. N. encouragement, new
progress is being made in ma-
ritime safety. An important part
is played by a patrol network of
weather-rescue ships established
recently along the main traffic
routes in the North Atlantic. These
vessels, equipped with the latest
scientific devices, make periodic
observations of weather conditions
and relay their information to
shore stations for incorporation in
weather forecasts. At the same
time, they supply weather data to
ships and transoceanic planes, and
keep constant watch for any craft
in distress. The scheme, sponsored
by the International Civil Aviation
Organization of the United Nations,
is operated on an international
basis.
When the Safety of Life at Sea
Convention comes into force, and
its provisions embodying the latest
scientific advances are generally
accepted and put into practice, the
men who sail the seas, both pas-
senger and sailor, will greatly
benefit from this new agreement
among nations.
FIRES ABOARD SHIP have long been the scourge of the seafarer. These
strange-looking asbestos suits-a product of research into safety at sea-
enable many a fire-fighter to save life as well as valuable cargoes. (U. N. Photo.)
