Page 10. JULY 1953
'WE SHALL KEEP OUR WOODEN PLOUGHS ;
THEY ARE MUCH KINDER TO THE EARTH' EY AR
TECHNOLOGICAL c h a n g e inagriculture is directed at the
resources available for cul-
tivation, at methods of production,
and at the organization of pro-
duction. These three factors are
interrelated, and whether we deal
with water control, the improvement
of land or seed or livestock, basic to
ail is the work of man, his division
ci labour, his groupings, his tra-
ditional procedures, his relationship
to the land. His survival and often
also the reason why he wants to
survive, depend on these. He will
be the instrument of change ; and
all change, even in techniques and
tools used, will affect his way of life
and his relations with others.
The immediate need for agri-
cultural changes arises from the
great increase in population in
recent years. Certam general
changes with specific suggestions for
particular regions are proposed.
These include soil conservation, in-
cluding reforestation and contour
ploughing ; livestock improvement ;
seed improvement ; pest control ;
land improvement ; introduction of
casn crops ; mechanization.
Non-human as these categories
appear to be, they actually concern
the life of people at every turn. For
example, prevention of overgrazing
and of the burning of brush mean
that shepherds, abandoning the
ways of their fathers, have to take
on a strange occupation out of
necessity, not from choice. Water
control may mean that the course
of rivers must be changed, as it does
in Greece, perhaps moving people
away from the land of their fathers.
Pest control and seed improvement
involve persuading people that these
measures are necessary for a better
crop. Indians in Mexico, who see
agricultural mishaps as acts of God,
often see no reason why they should
not sell their good seed, since it
brings more money, and plant their
poorer seed.
To introduce change effectively, it
is necessary to know existing con-
ditions. Where it--involves im-
plementation by people, it must first
be accepted. Otherwise the new
proposals, however simple, will be
. defeated. When pest control is im-
perative, people will nevertheless
release the rats from their traps.
Where immunization of cattle is
necessary, farmers will hide their
cattle. And where land reform is
introduced without accompanying
measures for a reformed credit
system, the land will again be
concentrated in the hands of a few
within a few years.
Seeing is believing
AND since change is proposed inthe interests of human welfare,
it is important to see to it that
it is introduced constructively or, at
any rate, with a minimum of dis-
ruption and destruction of esta-
blished interrelationship and values.
Basic attitudes, concepts, and values
must, therefore, be considered.
Agricultural activity is often con-
ceived of as an interrelationship
with the cherishing earth. In India
the Baiga refused to use an iron
plough since this would repay with
harshness the generosity of the land,
tearing her breasts and breaking her
belly ; they found the wooden hoe
more gentle. We find the Hopi
who do not think of themselves as
wresting a living from the arid land,
but rather conceive of their re-
lationship as one of aid to the land
which wants to grow the valued corn
for the Hopi, but cannot do so
without their help.
In many parts of the world we
find cultures adhering to the belief
that man has no causal effect upon
his own future or the future of the
land ; God, not man, can improve
man's lot It is difficult to persuade
such people to use fertilizers, or to
save the best seed for planting, since
man is responsible only for the
performance, and the divine for the
success, of the act.
In many groups we find the atti-
tude of doing with what is there,
rather than changing it, of coping
rather than fixing. Such people see
no reason why"anything should be
done about it."When traditional
methods produce some crops, main-
tain a measure of health, keep some
of the soil from running off, or when
a cow has some vigour, it is better to
cope with these shortcomings, des-
pite their inadequacies or incon-
veniences, than to effect a disturbing
change ; in fact, it is possible that
adjustment is such an automatic
reaction that the inadequacy is not
even noticed. It is difficult to
persuade people with this attitude
that reforestation is necessary until
it is too late to do anything about
it ; they adjust to a poor yield, or
to the diminished vigour or milk
supply of their cow until the
situation may develop beyond the
help of man.
. All of these attitudes are, of
course, related to the positive value
which the traditional way of life
holds for many of the people. Where
this is paramount, change is either
re. sisted or, if accepted, it is kept
along the fringes. Most of the
farmers of the world are not
motivated by abstract ends or
speculative results. Statistics that
show what will happen if vetch is
planted or fertilizer applied are
meaningless to them. For them,
"seeing is believing."
The distru. st of new and untried
ways is an obverse of the faith in
the known, that which with all its
ups and downs has supported the
society since time immemorial.
Unfortunately, it is also rooted in
the mistakes made by the agents of
change who sometimes managed to
persuade the peasants to use new
ways which proved disastrous
because of local conditions. In
Burma, deep ploughing introduced
by European agricultural experts
broke up the hard pan that held
the water in the rice fields. In
Turkey, experts trained abroad
persuaded some of the younger
peasants to remove the stones from
their tilled land ; when the grain
sprouted, the fields of the old men
had a better crop, since, in that dry
climate, the stones served the
function of preserving moisture.
Mistakes of this sort are acceptable
to people who are willing to take
the risk of trying the new ; but they
shake the faith of those who believe
in tried and proven procedure alone.
Programmes for improvement are
sometimes rendered ineffective
because of failure to take account
of what the people specifically value.
Values may range in intensity from
strong preferences to highly emo-
tionally charged attitudes of a
religious significance.
We have, for example, the religious
status of the cow in India and
Africa. Here we have to find a way
of helping without taking away from
the people their faith and the
meaning of life. If the sacred cows
are allowed to eat the crops un-
molested while the people are on
the brink of starvation, the agri-
cultural expert can give aid in
making the land more productive
and introduce crops which cows do
not like to eat, as was done recently
in Mahwa of the United Provinces.
Poverty amid plenty
AMONG those who are pastoral/-\ nomads, there are conditions
described as extreme poverty
in the midst of plenty, since money
is nonexistent for food and clothing,
and cattle will not be killed or sold.
Among such people the application
of veterinary science has resulted
merely in overstocking. Such people
name themselves after their cattle,
compose songs for them, spend their
leisure contemplating them, form
personal attachments to them. To
introduce an economic conception of
the cattle to these people, if this
were possible at all, would be to
destroy valuflnd security. In many
primitive societies the large amount
of time and human energy spent in
ritual, magic, and other religious
practices seems to be wasted in the
eyes of the agricultural expert. But
to the native, they give him faith
in his work, saving him from the
anxieties which so often attend the
work of the cultivator. It is against
this background that proposed
measures should be viewed.
The introduction of mechanized
tools is confronted by an obstacle in
the small size of many holdings.
Even so apparently small a change
as that from a wooden to an iron
plough may have widespread reper-
cussions as in the case of villages
of the United Provinces of India.
Here it threaten established
human relationships. A man
inherits a relationship to a carpenter
family whose task it is to make and
repair the ploughs. This family is
always invited to the farmer's feasts,
and the women are given saris. The
relationship, the"pay,"and the
gifts continue whether ploughs are
made or not.
Perhaps the farmer can be taught
to repair his own plough, but it
would mean personal reorientation
as well as a change in the valued
relationship structure. Again,
because of the extremely short
ploughing season, it is necessary that
there be no delays ; an iron plough
with brittle shears needs frequent
repairs and replacements by experts
who can be reached only after
covering a distance over bad roads.
But the carpenter is in the field
with the farmer, ready to repair the
wooden plough.
Then too, an iron plough would
require heavier draft animals which
in turn would need more fodder
than is now available. The wooden
plough is light and can be carried
easily from strip to strip, and a
farmer has probably five widely
scattered strips to plough. In order to
introduce a heavy plough at all it
is necessary to persuade the villagers
to consolidate their holdings. The
government has decreed that when
seventy-five per cent of the villagers
demand consolidation, the rest will
have to accede. Until a few months
ago, only one village had demanded
consolidation of holdings, and even
then when the farmers realized that
this meant each would have to give
up strips treasured because of loca-
tion or ancestral association, the
project fell through.
In some areas it is uneconomical to
introduce mechanization because
human labour is cheaper, and re-
mains cheaper because the people
themselves place a low valuation
upon it : In Indone, sia, the workers
fatalistically accept the fact that the
rate of pay for buffalo labour is
twice that of human labour.
In general, mechanization can
have an overwhelming effect on
human welfare by rupturing the
nourishing continuity of man with
the land, with his own body rhythms,
and with his traditional past. In
cultures such as those of the Middle
East and Greece and of Latin Amer-
ica, where desires and aspirations
have limits, mechanization will
probably mean, not that man will
cultivate more land, but that he will
work less, and at a less satisfying
occupation at that.
Where work, particularly tradi-
tional work, is life, this may be a
serious matter. It has been found
that mechanization, such as the use
of tractors designed for soggy
riceland and the self-propelled
threshers in Southeast Asia, has
meant the shifting of tenant labour
to hired labour and has led to the
dislocation of the tenant group,
often separating the members from
the burial place of their fathers,
from land which they had previ-
ously owned and with which they
and their families had been
continuous.
