Page 12. JULY 1953
Roger van der Weyden. Portrait of
a Young Woman.
Thomas Surly. The Torn Hat.
Tiziano Vecillio (Titian). The Artist's
Daughter, Lavinia.
Lukas Cranach the Younger. Princess Elizabeth of Saxony. Albrecht Dourer. St. Paul and St. Mark
(Fragment).
EI Greco. Mater Dolorosa. Pieter Bruegel the Elder. The Land of Cockayne. Agnolo Bronzino. Maria dei Medici.
Tosa School (Japanese). Breaking in a Horse.
UNESCO

COURIER JULY 953. Page 3
GREAT PAINTINGS FOR EVERYONE
FOR those many persons who onlyoccasionally have the chance to
see the originals of great paint-
ings and, even more, for the vast
majority of people all over the world
who can never hope to see the mas-
terpieces in countless galleries and
private collection, the colour repro-
duction is the best substitute. But
many of the existing colour repro-
ductions are of poor quality, and
many paintings of little value are
reproduced.
With the aim of making the best
colour reproductions more easily
available to teachers, students and
the general art-interested public
throughout the world, Unesco has
produced, with the aid of interna-
tional art authorities, two catalogue-
lisping more than 1.000 paintings of
which high-quality reproductions
exist and can be obtained. These
volumes are intended not only to
bring art into homes and schools and
to foster the understanding and en-
joyment of it ; but al so to encourage
the increased production of colour-
prints and the improvement of
standards and methods.
Unesco has just published a new
and revised edition of the Catalogue
of colour reproductions of paintings
prior to 1860 (1), which replaces a
similar volume issued in 1950 and is
the companion to another Unesco
catalogue devoted to paintings exe-
cuted after 1860. In the case of each
work listed, there is an identification
photograph of the original painting
and a biographical sketch of the
artist. The price, size and other
facts about each reproduction, as
well as the name and address of the
publisher from whom it can be
obtained, are also given.
The main critpria bv which the
prints have been chosen are the
fidelily of the reproduction, the
significance of the artist, and the
importance of the original painting.
Since the first edition of the cata-
logue of paint in prior to 1860 was
issued, publishers throughout the
world, with whom Unesco maintain-
ed contact, submitted new colour
prints. Of these 130 were chosen
for inclusion in the new edition.
Moreover, a careful review of the
first edition led to the elimination
of 43 reproductions found to be
below the standard it was possible
to adopt for the new edition.
At Unesco House in Paris and at
the Arts Council of Great Britain in
London, complete sets of guide-
prints are kept so that visitors may
see the reproductions themselves.
It is hoped that other countries will
provide similar facilities, so that the
collection of good reproductions
made by Unesco in the catalogues
may lead to bringing into hundreds
of homes, class rooms and libraries
throughout the world great pictures
from other countries which other-
wise would remain unknown.
On pages 12 and 13 we puhlish a
few of the reproductions which have
been added to the new edition of the
Unesco Catalogue.
(1) Price $3, 15/- or 750 Fr. frs.) Hieronymus Bosch. The Hay Waggon.
Jean-Baptiste Corot. The High Wind. Master of the female half figures. Three Musical Ladies.
