Page 10. APRIL 1953
THE VillAGE, PIVOT OF ARAB liFE
THE most typical way of lifethroughout the Middle East
is that of the agricultural vil-
lage."With few exceptions, (for
example, fishing villages on the
coasts of Arabia ; marsh villages in
southern Iraq), the settled villagers
are cultivators of the soil. For
thousands of years, the villages have
been the foundation stones vf Middle
Eastern life, barely supporting their
own inhabitants while providing the
food and luxuries consumed in big
cities.
The bulk of the agricultural popu-
lation lives in dire poverty and in
extremely unsanitary conditions.
Most of the villages are tightly
packed conglomerations of buildings
with no sewage system and with no
more adequate water supply than a
single spring or well, which is often
situated at some distance from the
village, and the water of which is
frequently polluted. The problem of
water shortage (which lies at the
basis of the nomadic way of life)
is a critical one for living standards
in Middle Eastern villages, not only
because it limits agricultural pro-
duction and is conducive to disease
- the wide prevalence of eye and
skin diseases is attributed in good
part to the lack of fresh water-but
also because it may involve a serious
cost affecting the peasant's real
income. In some areas, water rights
are owned separately from, or in
addition to, the land, and the
peasant share-cropper has been
traditionally obliged to give up to
one-fifth of his crops in return for
water supplied by the landlord.
The peasant family lives in a
single one-or two-room hose
built of the raw material available
in the district (stone, mud, reeds,
etc.). The need for heating facilities
is felt chiefly in the more northerly
latitudes and above a certain eleva-
tion ; but fuel supplies are scarce
and expensive. Manure, in the form
of kneaded and dried dung cakes,
is widely used as fuel for heating
and cooking, a practice which
deprives the soil of much-needed
natural fertiliser.
The typical Middle Eastern vil-
lage possesses some traditional
institutions which, at present, are
being brought increasingly under
the control, or at least the influence,
of the government. The village
guest-house (mad : 7 in Arab lands,
Kay Oodasi in Turkey, etc. J, found
in many but by no means all villages,
serves both as a place for the enter-
taining of guests and as a gathering-
place for the villagers themselves.
In Turkey, these guest-houses have
in many instances been either
replaced or supplemented by the
more recently established"people's
houses" (Halk Odalari). In the
larger Middle Eastern villages, there
are also usually a number of coffee-
shops, and, in some cases, a com-
munal bath.
Fami) y traditions
ANOTHER important traditionalviII age institution is the
mosque, or in Christian vil-
lages, the church. Most villages
possess one or more mosques, and,
in some cases, also a church. The
mosque is under the care of a
sheykh, or religious leader, who
usually exercises considerable in-
fluence over the beliefs and atti-
tudes of the villagers and who
teaches the children attending the
Koran-school housed in the mosque.
In many cases, the sheykh owns and
works land like any other peasant.
The forms of social organization
in the village depend on several
factors, of which the most important
are the size of the village and the
history of its inhabitants. Many of
the smaller villages are inhabited by
various families all of whose members
are related to one another and
regard themselves as the descen-
dants of one common ancestor who
first established the village. Larger
villages may contain two or more
such family-groups, between whom
there may be some rivalry.
The chief of one of these family
groups is, as a rule, the village head-
man, whose pre-eminent position,
traditionally based on his headship
of a leading family, is latterly under-
going a transformation as a result
of which he must now frequently be
elected by the villagers and con-
firmed by the government, or else be
appointed directly by the govern-
ment. The headman is usually
economically better off than the
average villager and has consid-
erable influence and prestige in the
village. Assisted by a council of
village elders, the headman does the
administrative work in the village,
has in many cases limited jurisdiction
to resolve small disputes, and is the
intermediary between the village
and the government. On the one
hand, he represents the interest of
the village vis-a-vis the head of the
district to which the village belongs ;
on the other hand, his duty is to
enforce government orders, to assist
the tax collector in his work, and
to exercise a general responsibility
for the village to the government.
The extended family, consisting of
an elderly male head and all his
male descendants and their wives,
plus unmarried females, is the norm
in the Middle East. It is most firmly
established in the villages and
among the nomads, although it
likewise survives, in a modified form,
in the cities. The extended family
is the basic unit of Middle Eastern
economy. In the village, it owns and
works the land jointly. (In the
nomadic tribe, it holds the flocks and
herds in common, and in the cities,
it often carries on in common a
traditional industry or a commercial
enterprise.)
The women marry early-usually
at the onset of sexual maturity or
even earlier ; the number of un-
married adults, male or female, is
very low. Polygamy is permitted in
Islam with certain restrictions ;
however, not more than 5 per cent
Turkish farmer and son : Turkey is one Middle East country which is expanding its rural school systems. To ensure that its
village training institutes produce rural teachers, it opens them only to the sons of peasants. By 1948-49 more than 12, 000
had graduated, and it is hoped that by 1956, some 37, 000 teachers will be ready to take jobs in the villages. (Photo Reahtes)
of the married men of the region
as a whole have more than one wife
at a time. Although veiling is not
practised in the villages, and women
have traditionally worked in the
fields alongside their men folk as
well as in their households, segreg-
ation of the sexes remains the rule.
As long as the family lives to-
gether and earns its livelihood
together, and as long as the property
of the family is held and controlled
by its head, paternal authority is
strong, and the career of the young
people is clearly cut out for them
along traditional lines. Each suc-
ceeding generation continues the
occupation handed down to it by its
predecessor : animal husbandry in
the nomadic tribe, cultivation in the
village, and a trade or artcraft
belonging to the"old industries"in
the towns.
Change of authority
IN traditional Middle Easternsociety the family is thus the
principal social structure within
which the individual must fit close-
ly and to the control of which he
must submit. When this control is
weakened by village-to-town migra-
tion, industrialization, employment
on an individual basis, growing
force of governmental control, etc.,
serious disturbances in social and
psychological equilibrium may ensue.
The replacement of family and
paternal authority by more imper-
sonal social forces (government,
public opinion), and at the same
time by more personal individualistic
forces ("self-determination","self-
reliance), is rarely a smooth
process, and is often fraught with
dangers of maladjustment.
The income of the Middle Eastern
villagers is determined essentially
by what they derive from the land,
plus minor supplements from live-
stock and from some handicrafts.
The actual levels of personal income
and consumption of the agricultural
village populations have never been
systematically measured, except for
a few surveys of doubtfully re-
presentative villages ; but they are
generally known to be extremely
low. National income estimates
assign per capita incomes of $100
or less to most countries of the area
(8389 in 1949 to Israel, however, and
H25 to Lebanon and Turkey), yet
these estimates do not take account
of the very wide differences in
income of different groups-differ-
ences, for example, between large
landowners and peasants, which
arise from the fact that a single
landowner may receive as much as
half the crops produced by a great
many peasants. Some observers
believe that rural living conditions
have not improved, and possibly
have become worse, during recent
decades.
One available study on the
Egyptian economy indicates that in
the twenty years up to 1940,"the
volume of agricultural production...
only just succeeded in keeping pace
with the population, in spite of much
technical research and improvement
in methods of cultivation". At the
same time, prices of export crops
declined, and there was a falling off
in the national consumption of such
staple articles as cereals, sugar,
coffee, tea, tobacco and textiles.
Studies by the Fellah Bureau in
Egypt have shown that, in 181 vil-
lages, rents had risen in 1944-45 by
242. 5 per cent in relation to 1938-39
rents, while income from the main
crops had risen 230 per cent. The
FAO estimates that, since World
War II, the region as a whole has
exceeded pre-war food production
by about 10 per cent, but that the
population has increased faster, and
per capita food production has
therefore decreased slightly.
Some of the causes of low per
capita productivity, low income and
low consumption in the Middle East
are common to the region as a
whole ; others are peculiar to certain
countries. Egypt, for example, is
particularly affected by the problem
of population pressure on the arable
land ; productivity per unit of land
there is high, but productivity per
person is low.
There is about ten times as much
arable land in the United States per
person as in Egypt, and nearly 40
tiines as much per person of the
UNESCO ;

: OURIER APRIL 1953. Page II
Most of the villages of the Middle East are tightly packed conglomerations of buildings with no more adequate water supply than a single spring or well. There is
a deep cleavage between town and country. The town is widely regarded as the focus of everything desirable, while the village is the symbol of backwardness.
This partly explains the constant flow of migrants from village to town. This tendency was accelerated by conditions during The Second World War.
agricultural population. (This does
not take into account the permanent
meadows and pastures and other
lands potentially cultivable in the
United States, none of which exist
to any great extent in Egypt). The
intensive cultivation of the arable
soil in Egypt by many farm workers,
and the richness of this soil, produce
a higher yield per hectare than is
achieved through mechanized farm-
ing in the United States : never-
theless, the yield per unit of land in
Egypt, would have to be 40 times
greater in order to produce the same
income in terms of production per
person as in the United States.
Also, it may be anticipated that
Egypt's death rate, which is now
relatively high but declining, will be
significantly reduced in the near
future through public health mea-
sures, and that the already dense
agricultural population will become
even denser, since there is no evi-
dence that the birth rate will decline
correspondingly in the near future.
Quite clearly, then, Egypt's diffi-
culties cannot be resolved without a
major attack upon the problem of
land-and-population.
On the other hand, the Middle
East region as a whole is not land-
starved. There is, for example, a
fair amount of cultivable but, as yet,
unused land in Iran and Iraq ; yet
the rural poverty in these countries
is little different from that of Egypt.
According to FAO estimates, the
amount of unused land that can be
potentially brought under cultiva-
tion in the region as a whole is
twice the amount now cultivated.
In such countries as Turkey, Iraq,
Syria, and Saudi Arabia, very consid-
erable expansions of cultivated
areas have actually taken place in
recent years. But the rate of ex-
pansion has not in general kept up
with the rate of population growth.
Much of the land now under culti-
vation, moreover, has become se-
riously and progressively eroded
(partly because of the eating habits
of the many free-ranging goats in
the area), and conservation and irri-
gation are crucial needs.
land share problems
THE type of land tenure systemprevailing in large parts of the
Middle East has been widely
commented upon as a reason for
low productivity and low income of
the agricultural villager. Much of
the land is owned by a small
number of wealthy families who
commonly live in the towns (and
who do not usually run centrally-
organized estates but let out sepa-
rate pieces of land to tenants or
middlemen). A great many of the
villagers are tenant sharecroppers,
others own such small plots that
they must seek additional land on a
share-cropping basis or work part-
time for wages on large properties,
in order to maintain themselves at
even a subsistence level. By tradi-
tion and law, land is subdivided
amongst heirs, and this has meant
more and more families on minimal
plots and a growing body of landless
labourers.
The unequal distribution of land,
as well as the heterogeneous forms
of tenure found in the Middle East,
result from historical processes, some
going back to the Ottoman conquest
or earlier. Available statistics give
a very imperfect picture of the num-
bers of large landowners, smallhol-
ders and landless peasants, and the
relative importance of the holdings.
In Iran, about 50 per cent of the
claimed land reportedly belongs to
some 100, 000 large landowners ;
about 15 per cent is in small hold-
ings ; and 35 per cent is in State
domaine or religious endowments
(waqfs). Here, and in neighbouring
Iraq, which also has highly-concen-
trated land ownership, much of the
land is leased by the owners to mid-
dlemen, usually town dwellers, for
fixed rents, which the latter collect
along with their own profit from the
peasant who works the land.
In Syria, only 30 per cent of the
agricultural workers are reported to
be independent peasants. In Egypt,
while most peasants possess land,
only a minority can and do make a
living from their own land. In 1947,
11, 000 land owners with 50 feddans
(21 hectares) or more owned 36. 8 per
cent of the cultivated area of Egypt ;
143, 000 owners with 5-50 feddans
(2. 1-21 hectares) owned 29. 7 per
cent ; 587, 000 owners with 1-5 fed-
dans (. 42-2. 1 hectares) owned 20. 4
per cent ; and 1, 921, 000 owners vith 1
feddan and less owned 13. 1 per cent.
The last-mentioned group, 70 per
cent of the total number of land-
holders, hardly have enough land for
the maintenance of a family.
It is important, however, to note
that, as in the case of land shortage,
inequality of land ownership does
not fully explain low standards of
rural income throughout the Middle
East. Turkey, for example, has tra-
ditionally been a country of indepen-
dent farmers, without excessive
concentrations of ownership. Tur-
key, moreover, does not generally
suffer land shortage (and a govern-
ment Act was introduced in 1945 to
help the existing landless peasants
and those with undersized plots to
obtain land). There is also exten-
sive individual ownership or small-
holding in Lebanon, although many
large estates have arisen as a result
of the chronic indebtedness of the
peasants. Yet, rural incomes in
these countries-while probably
higher than the regional average-
are extremely low, and, of course,
are in no sense comparable to those
in an economically developed area
like England (where most of the
arable land is held under tenancy,
highly regulated by law).
The confusion of land titles ; the
prevalence of narrow, inefficient
"strip"holdings ; and the excessive
fragmentation of land into plots
consisting of as little as a fraction
of an acre in consequence of the in-
crease of farm population and of
inheritance laws which encourage
the subdivision of land, are among
the additional obstacles standing in
the way of agricultural development,
especially in Egypt, Jordan, Leba-
non, Palestine and Syria.
The poverty of the villages of the
Middle East is also due to a complex
of other factors-widespread dis-
ease, which cuts down productivity
at critical periods ; underemploy-
ment, which means that many heal-
thy villagers find nothing to do a
good part of the year ; rural indebt-
edness, which means that the pea-
sant cannot enjoy the surplus of
good crop years because of the finan-
cial pall cast by bad
crop years ; illiteracy, (cont'd on
ignorance of improved next page).

Page 12. APRIL 1953 UNESC)
GROUND TO BE BROKEN ; Jewish immigrants help meet great
S L U M S T 0 B E R A Z E D shortage of farm labour In Israel.Abode, a group breaks new ground
for cultivation. Below, Turkish peasants who have moved to Istanbul set up
"home"in an abandoned mosque where 50 people, including 30 children, live
ineleven"rooms". Governmentauthoritiesare working to improve conditions in
overcrowded and antiquated buildings. (Top photo,'Magnum. Below : Unesco photo.
farming methods, and a complex of
mental attitudes which make im-
provements difficult to introduce
from without ; lack of communica-
tion among the peasants and lack
of organizational means for taking
common action to improve condi-
tions ; etc.
Agricultural duties call for a
concentration of effort at certain
times of the year, but at other times
there is a vast amount of poten-
tially productive manpower which is
idle in Middle Eastern villages.
Studies carried out in certain villages
on the Delta in Egypt, for example,
showed that the average peasant
worked no more than 180 days a
year. Similar underemployment has
been reported for other countries in
the region-Lebanon, Turkey, Iran,
Iraq and Syria. Pressure of popula-
tion upon the limited land available
aggravates the underemployment in
Egypt and Lebanon, but Turkey,
Iran, Iraq and Syria are not coun-
tries with a land shortage. In fact,
Syria requires foreign labourers
during harvesting.
Putting this idle manpower to
productive work is obviously one of
the basic requirements for raising
standards of living in the Middle
East. Among the solutions under-
taken or proposed are : diversifica-
tion and rotation of crops, the devel-
opment of handicrafts (Egypt has
used rural social centres for this
purpose), the organization of effec-
tive services for distributing man-
power among different occupations
at different times of year (as done
already in Israel), the use of spare
village manpower for village impro-
vement and development projects
under a nominal incentive payment
from the government ("Community
Development Employment", as un-
dertaken in Greece), and the ex-
pansion of industries.
Closely related to the problem of
the maldistribution of land is that
of rural indebtedness. The uncer-
tainty of the rainfall and the low
income of the farmer, whether pea-
sant proprietor or sharecropper,
combine to drive him into debt,
while the lack of well-organized
agricultural banks-and his lack of
collateral that may be required by
available banks-forces him to have
recourse to money lenders whose
rates are extremely high, especially
in years of crop failures when the
demand for loans rises sharply.
In recent years, a noticeable im-
provement has taken place in this
respect. In the first place, there has
been a marked increase in agri-
cultural credit facilities, mainly
through governmental efforts, which
has resulted in an appreciable
reduction in interest rates. Thus,
the institution in 1930 of the State-
sponsored Agricultural Credit Bank
of Egypt has resulted in a sharp de-
crease in the business of money
lenders. Secondly, the growth in
the co-operative movement in some
countries has provided an alterna-
tive source of credit.
In Cyprus, the services of the co-
operative societies cover virtually the
whole rural population.
In Egypt, the number of rural
credit corporations was increased
from 738 in 1939 to 1, 654 in 1948 and
the membership from 70, 021 to
527, 073. They furnish their mem-
bers such services as buying sup-
plies, marketing produce, carrying
out certain agricultural work and
securing loans. Their activities
also include the social welfare of
their members through fighting illi-
teracy, spreading co-operative edu-
cation, creating social clubs, foster-
ing preventive health education and
medical services, introducing rural
and home industries and organizing
local charity.
In Turkey, the number of rural
credit co-operatives rose from 601
in 1940 to 879 in 1948 and their
membership from 138, 412 to 411, 204 ;
about one-quarter of the total num-

APRIL 1953. Page 13
TRADITION v. DESIRE FOR CHANGE
ber of villages are linked up with
the co-operative credit system.
Israel is unique in that a high
proportion of the rural population
live in settlements organized entire-
ly on co-operative lines ; about
45 per cent of the population are
covered by these and other types of
co-operatives.
In Iraq, Iran ; Lebanon and Syria
the co-operative movement has as
yet spread among rural areas only
to a limited extent, in spite of the
encouragement of governments. In
view of the fact that the peasant
who markets his products is fre-
quently exploited by the merchant,
the FAO considers that co-operative
marketing societies"could do
much... to secure a fair share of the
price to the farmer".
The majority of Middle Eastern
villages have no motorable road
connection with even the nearest
urban centres. Newspapers, radios
and telephones are rarities (though
radios are increasing).
Isolation is most extreme in the
mountainous hinterland of Afghan-
istan and Iran ; in the border
region of Iran, Iraq and Turkey ; in
southern Arabia ; and in the sou-
thern part of the Sudan.
Educational transition
LIKE nomadic culture, villaget culture has been predominantly
'-non-literate. There is, to be
sure, a rich traditional body of folk
stories, songs, and the like ; but
most villagers speak local dialects
differing more or less widely from
written Arabic, Persian, or Turkish,
and learning to read write has
meant in effect learning almost a
new language. Only very recently
have any efforts been made to take
these difficulties into account in
mass-communication media. For
example, the Egyptian State Broad-
casting Corporation started in
1940 and had expanded in recent
years a programme of broadcasts
offering subjects of special interest
to the rural population and employ-
ing Egyptian colloquial Arabic ra-
ther than the literary Arabic custo-"mary for its radio programmes.
Village schools, where they have
existed at all, have traditionally
been religious schools, in which, as
previously stated, the shevkh of the
village mosque taught some of the
village boys to read and memorize
the Koran, along with the rudi-
ments of writing and arithmetic.
Girls were rarely sent to school, and
the small percentage of village boys
who attended left after one or two
years of study. Up to a century
ago, these Koranic schools (kuttab
or maktabl were almost the only
schools in the Middle East, but their
number is diminishing with the
increase of facilities for secular
education. In many villages, how-
ever, they remain the only schools
available, and in some places there
is still an opposition to sending
children to secular schools, even
though in the secular schools in
most Middle Eastern countries
teaching of the Koran and other
religious subjects occupies a promi-
nent place in the curriculum.
Transitional phases are apparent.
In Afghanistan, for example, where
the development of a rural school
system has only just begun, the
most recent government plan states
that such schools shall be housed
in community mosques and taught
by the community religious leaders
until the government is able to
construct separate school buildings
and train teachers.
Rural school systems are gradual-
ly being expanded, but the goal of
a school in each of the thousands
of villages is still distant in most
countries. In 1945, some 12, 500 vil-
lages in Turkey (or 37 per cent of
the total number of villages) had
schools, as against 21, 500 (63 per
cent) villages without schools..
By 1948-49 more than 12. 000 teach-
ers had graduated from 24 village
institutes established for the pur-
pose of training teachers for the
rural areas. It is hoped that by
1956 approximately 37, 000 village
teachers will be ready to take jobs
in the villages, thus providing an
average of more than one addition-
al teacher to each village.
The need of village families to
utilize the labour even of young
children on the land, the financial
burden of building thousands of
schools and paying thousands of
teachers, and the difficulty of find-
ing and training teachers willing to
undergo the isolation and discom-
forts of village life, have prevented
most Middle Eastern countries from
making rapid progress in the field
of education.
Furthermore, in spite of the fact
that the towns are already better
off with regard to schooling than
the rural areas, some governments
continue to pay much greater atten-
tion to the increase of urban edu-
cational facilities rather than those
of the countryside.
Contradictory picture
A COMPLEX of mental attitudesassociated with the isolation
and illiteracy of the Middle
Eastern villagers, as well as with
their historical experiences, some-
times renders outside efforts at
improvement of living standards
difficult. A suspicious altitude
towards everything that comes from
outside, and especially from the
authority of the government, is
still widely reported. Until recently,
c h a n g e s of government usually
meant little to the villagers, their
only contract with government
having been payment of taxes.
Accustomed not to an"expanding
economy" (where new wealth may
add to the total wealth) but to a
static economy (where increases
in wealth of one person or group
are apt to be at the expense
of others), the villager has been
rather more concerned with hold-
ing on to what little he has pos-
sessed than with pursuing ideals of
progress and material improvement.
Furthermore, living not too far
above the bare survival level, with-
out capital reserves, he has been
loath to take risks that might prove
disastrous for himself and his
family. These adjustments to a
situation of poverty have served to
impede action against poverty.
The Middle Eastern village today
presents a contradictory picture of
adherence to tradition and anxious
desire for change. The villager
clings to the family, community,
and religious institutions which
have in the past contributed to his
security, and is mistrustful of out-
side forces which threaten to
weaken these institutions. At the
same time, he cannot ignore these
forces. In many cases, the increas-
ing pressure of population on village
landholdings prevents the villagers
from maintaining their accustomed
subsistence level and weakens the
ties of the extended family. Im-
provement of communications per-
mits a search for alternate
means of livelihood. Some villag-
ers drift away to the city in search
of wage-labour, and the idea that
change may be possible and desir-
able trickles back to the villages.
The villagers themselves are begin-
ning to demand land reform,
schools, health services and co-ope-
ratives, and the governments are
beginning to meet these demands.
The demands, of course, are fre-
quently vague ; the villagers know
that something must be done, but
are not sure what. And govern-
ment measures are, in many cases,
adopted without full planning, and
frequently changed with changes of
government.
Since the village population cons-
titutes two-thirds of the total pop-
ulation of the Middle East, the
problems of the village are also
the problems of the whole region.
It is obvious that, because of the
interdependence of the various
factors affecting rural welfare, a
comprehensive programme of
change is desirable-involving im-
provements in health and sanita-
tion, housing, education, communic-
ation, techniques of agricultural
production, credit, uses of manpow-
er, etc. An interesting experi-
ment in comprehensive rural deve-
lopment projects has been under-
taken in Egypt where a series of
"rural social centres"has been set
up, based upon the principles of :
1) co-ordination of comprehensive
services involving economic, social
and cultural elements ; 2) co-opera-
tion of the community in the cons-
truction of the centres ; and 3) sim-
plicity and low cost in capital and
recurrent expenditures. The endea-
vour is to promote change by
concentrating on local problems,
taking local attitudes into account
and encouraging local leadership.
The"People's Houses"in Turkey
have had similar goals of compre-
hensive social services.
At the same time, it is also appar-
ent that improvements in the wel-
fare of the village communities will
also depend greatly upon the
overall development of the country
at large, including, particularly, in-
dustrial development.
In an Arab refugee camp in the Middle East, this Palestinian farmer tends young tree seedlings in re-afforestation plantation. Trees will eventually be replanted
to check soil erosion, one of the major problems of Arab agriculture. This is partly due to eating habits of many free-ranging goats in this area of the world.
COURTIER
