Page 10. JANUARY 1953 UNESCO
(Courtesy"Scientific Américan"o
Radiosonde (left) is modern weather measuring instrument used at heights
up to 10, 000 feet. Radio-transmitter sends signals giving temperature,
air pressure and humidity. Between radiosonde and balloon (right)
are a parachute and a reflector to aid in tracking the balloon by radar.
A WORLD-W) DE WATCH
ON THE ATMOSPHERE
by Maurice GOLDSMITH
FROM August 1957, for a period of 12 months, hundreds of scientists at keypoints throughout the world are to keep a day-and-night watch on the earth's
atmosphere. It will be one of the greatest multi-national efforts ever made to
gather data that will enable us to understand more about the physical influences
governing our daily lives.
All sorts of different scientists will work at it because 0 study of the atmosphere
will help us to find out-among other things-not only what affects our weather
and radio communications, but also something about the earth's fundamental nature.
Systematic scientific study of the atmosphere started in the 17th century with the
works of Italians like Torrieetti. Since then, we have learned a great deal about the
atmosphere immediately around us, but very little about the upper atmosphere, and
almost nothing about the relationship between them.
The lower region of the atmosphere is known as the troposphere. It extends up
to seven or eight miles on the average. In this region the air is never still : in fact,
the prefix tropo means a turning over of the air. The weather that we enjoy-or
complain about-consists of changes in the troposphere.
Above this region, and separated from it by a boundary area known as the tropo-
pauses, lies the stratosphere. This region has in recent years become familiar because
its lower part has become the'''roadway''for our fastest aeroplanes.
The average thickness of the stratosphere is about 50 miles, and the first half of
this is l1Jade up of an ozone layer. This filters out much of the sun's ultraviolet rays,
and allows only as much as we can tolerate to get through to the earth. Our weather
is directly affected by the fluctuations that vccur in the amount of ozone.
It is in the stratosphere, too, that there exists a warm layer directly influencing
radio broadcasting. Short radio waves are absorbed here, especially during the day.
Above the stratosphere lies the vast region of the ionsphere. It derives its name
from the fact that free ions (that is, electrically charged atoms or groups of atoms)
exist there. It is mainly this region that the scientists want to know more about.
Within the ionosphere there are two distinct layers : the E-tayer which is important
because it reflects radio waves back to the earth and makes long-wave broadcasting
possible, and the F-tayer.
It is in the lower part of the ionosphere that the aurora borealis or northern
lights, and the aurora australis or southern lights occur most frequently. This fasci-
nating natural phenomenon, in which streams of different colours dance through the
skies, is even today in parts of the earth regarded as a warning of impending doom.
There are a number of theories explaining the origin and nature of the aurora,
but many problems of the utmost cemplexity and importance await solution. Involved
also is the whole field of magnetic storms, about which more data is needed.
In 1882, scientists co-operated in studies which they called the first International
Polar Year. This was concerned with the investigation of such geophysical phenomena
as magnetic storms and the aurora.
It was believed at that time that the aurora was 0 reflection of light from
icebergs at the North Pole, but this was disproved when it was found that aurora
did not increase in frequency as one went further north.
The second Polar Year was arranged 50 years later, principally to gather data
about magnetic storms. Facts ascertained at that time are still being studied.
Now it is planned in 1957/8 to change the name to the International Geophysical
Year, reflecting the more comprehensive purposes of the studies, and to have about
150 ionosphereic observatories ready for action. The original idea for this Geophysical
Year came from the British scientist, Sydney Chapman, and the American, Lloyd V.
Berkner.
The investigation is so vast that a central planning committee is being set up,
with a secretariat that will remain in being for five years afterwards to organize analy-
sis of the data.
And from all this will emerge knowledge necessary for the international institutions
which serve us continuously. Thus, there will be something for the scientists working
at the International Seismological Observatory in Kw, England, where earthquakes
are mapped ; for those at the International Isostatc Institute in Helsinki, Finland
concerned with the ever more exact determination of the changing shape of the earth ;
for the International latitude Service in Turin, Italy ; and for the Bureau de I'Heure, in
Paris, that gives us our internationally accepted time signals.
These, important as they are, constitute only a small part of the service which
will be rendered to all of us, directly or indirectly, through one of the most massive
co-operatives efforts in the history of science.
