) COURIER AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953. Page 3
A MAN WITH RACIAL PREJU. DICE
IS AS PATHETIC AS HIS VICTIM
ONE might almost say of racial prejudice whatDescartes once said of common sense-that
it is the one thing in the world that prac-
tically everyone has a smattering of. The absence
of open discrimination by no means implies the
absence of false and injurious notions with regard
to other racial groups. And the fact is that the
number of individuals in our own civilization who
are prepared to consider all men their potential
equals and capable of the same progress, is
extremely limited.
For Unesco, therefore, the problem is a dual
one. It is not only that of fighting racialism as a
doctrine but also of combatting the root-ideas
which render the existence of such a doctrine
possible. In other words the real problem is to
break the naive, yet extremely powerful associ-
ation which continues to exist between the notions
of"culture"and"race",
Racialism will exist so long as the belief prevails
that the Negroes have a certain type of civilization
because they are black and have fuzzy hair, or
that the Chinese behave in a certain way because
they have slanting eyes and yellowish skin. So
long as people continue to speak in mystic mumbo-
jumbo terms of"racial temperament","the soul
of the people","racial instinct"and similar
expressions, racial prejudice will not even be close
to disappearing.
The advocates of racialism are forever citing
science as an"objective"basis for their ideas.
But whether they realize it or not their"objective"
basis is nothing more than plain intellectual
fraud since the scientific theories they advance
have been discarded by scientists a long time ago.
It is because the racialists have put the question
on the scientific level and lean iso. heavily on
science as their authority that the challenge must
be met by the scientist.
It has been argued that trying to overcome
racial prejudice with true scientific facts is a sheer
waste of time since race prejudice is based neither
on ignorance nor on any number of facts, but
rather on certain emotional attitudes. The roots
of racial prejudice, the argument continues, reach
by Dr. Alfred Metraux
deep deep down into the. subconscious where they
are nourished by anxieties caused by inward
suffering, anguish or worry of an economic or
social nature. Racial prejudice is, among other
things, one expression of the anxiety of man lost
in a mechanized society which no longer respect
his individual personality.
There is only one way we can hope to destroy
racial prejudice, this school of thought states, and
that is by transforming the economic conditions
of the environments it develops in, and taking
legislative action to prevent its abuses.
Does this mean, then, that Unesco is wasting
its time when it publishes a series of pamphlets in
which scientists of various nationalities sum up
present scientific knowledge about race ? I do not
think so. For can it be denied that the race
problem is indissolubly joined to the development
of scientific thought ? The clichés and pseudo-
anthropological theories which are used to justify
racial discrimination are a means of setting the
mind at ease by cloaking injustice with the dignity
of a system prescribed by science and reason.
If true men of science remained silent they
would be allowing the most fantastically false
ideas and the most naive myths to be transformed
into"true scientific facts". And this. science
cannot permit to happen. For if racialist propa-
ganda is. so successful-and the Nazis showed how
successful it could be-it would be folly to permit
it carte blanche.
Some reply, some form of action had to come
therefore from men of science. The very notion
of science is one of the guiding principles of our
civilization, one of its driving forces. Even those
who have falsified it and twisted it to suit their
political aims have recognized this and indirectly
paid tribute to science's role by their use of it-
distorted though it was.
The fact is that racialism has found scarcely
any support among anthropologists worthy of the
name, and with rare exceptions anthropologists
the world over have consistently repudiated
racialist doctrines. This, however, has never
prevented racialists from declaring unscientific
every statement which tended to establish the fact
that no evidence at present exists proving the
absolute superiority of one ethnic group or race
over another.
The role played by science in the racial question
was clearly shown by the repercussions caused by
the Uneseo"Statement on Race"drawn up in 1949
by a group of sociologists, anthropologists and
psychologists. Hailed by some as a prejudice-
breaking document, it was greeted by others as a
Utopian text with no bearing on present-day
realities.
So that there could be no doubt as to Unesco's
objectivity a second group of scientists composed
exclusively of physical anthropologists and gene-
ticists was called upon to re-examine the question.
This group drew up a second statement (1951) in
which, generally speaking, the main conclusions
of the first statement were upheld. The second
statement was published only after it had been
submitted to nearly one hundred scientists who
were asked to study it carefully and criticize it
freely. Their comments, both favourable and
unfavourable were published in the Unesco
booklet containing the text of the declaration,
and entitled"The Race Concept-Results of an
Inquiry".
A problem-to my mind a false one-which
obsesses many people today is that of the differ-
ences in mental aptitudes of the races of man-
kind. This is a point in the Declaration on which
anthropologists and geneticists have the most
difficulty in reaching agreement. First of all,
available scientific knowledge does not enable
us to determine how mental aptitudes are trans-
mitted and unlike blood groups which we have
now begun to isolate, science is still unable to iso-
late the genes which determine mental aptitudes.
Furthermore, it is difficult, in fact
practically impossible, to measure (cont'd on
the effect of environment on the de-
velopment of intelligence and mental next pare,)

Page 4. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953 UNESCO
SLAVERY. ENDED WHEN MEN
THOUGHT IT SHAMEFUL ; THE SAME
WILL HOLD GOOD FOR RACIALISM
capacity. Even more serious is the
frequent failure to consider his-
torical factors when discussing
racial differences. People speak
of racial aptitudes as if they had
always been the same and never
changed. That is why I believe
that no statement in the Declar-
ation is more realistic than the
one which reminds us that"vast
social changes have occurred that
have not been connected in any
way with changes in racial type.
Historical and sociological stu-
dies thus support the view that
genetic differences are of little
significance in determining the
social and cultural differences
between different groups of men".
Racialism has taken on a
greater intensity at the very
moment when historical events
and scientific research emphatic-
ally repudiate it. Future histor-
ians may well regard the most
important and significant revol-
ution of our time to have been
that which is thrusting the col-
oured peoples into the orbit of
our modern civilization.
The rapid advance of the peo-
ples of all the world towards a
single material type of civilization
is a tremendous event, the far-
reaching consequences of which
are still hard to grasp. How can
the doctrines of racialism possibly
hold water when the races of the
world are setting such an exam-
ple of pliability and adaptability ?
1953 is not 1853
THESE factors which ought tostrike everyone who follows
world events, are just as
eloquent as, indeed even more elo-
quent than, all the scientific
conclusions put together, but such
is the force of habit that facts
and theories long since out of
date are still used by people in
judging races.
To consider Africa and its inha-
bitants in 1953 in the same way
as one did in 1853 is to display
unpardonable ignorance. The
awakening of Africa and the
formation before our very eyes of
a constantly growing native elite,
are things that the racialist
consciously or unconsciously
forgets or prefers to ignore.
One of the things Unesco has
set out to do is to study the
manner in which so many peoples
are effecting their transform-
ation from an ancient form of
civilization to our complex indus-
trialized way of life, and to
make this information widely
known. Of what value will be the
innumerable writings which seek
to prove that Negroes have no
capacity for certain kinds of
intellectual activities once Ne-
groes in constantly increasing
numbers have joined the ranks of
our writers, engineers, research
workers and statesmen ?
Negation of a myth
THE African who succeeds inwinning the highest distinc-
tions in the Humanities, as
happened recently in England,
has a double merit. First for
having triumphed in a stiff exam-
ination, second for having over-
come the numerous handicaps
which do not face European can-
didates. We all of us know the
effort required to adjust ourselves
to another form of culture even
when it is close to our own.
What then, must be the amount
of effort and intelligence call-
ed for in order to assimilate
a form of civilization based on a
social structure and a way of life
as different as that of Europe and
the traditional African. Is not
the intellectual effervescence
which is taking place today in
Africa and Asia and which in
(Continued from previous page.)
several African regions can be
seen in the rapid modernization
of institutions and of economic
life, the very negation of the
racial myth ?
Race relations, of course, are
not always marked by signs of
antagonism. Even in countries
where racialism is rife, the go-
vernment or groups of individuals
and organizations have attempt-
ed through varying measures to
improve contacts between races
and put a stop to abuses and
injustices. What was needed,
however, was that the effective-
ness of such measures be ap-
praised and the results carefully
studied.
Anti-racial laws
ONE of the basic questionsraised in the struggle against
racialism is :"What prac-
tical effect does legislation pun-
ishing any act of racial discrim-
ination as a crime really have ?"
Opponents of such legislation
have always maintained that
custom was stronger than law
and that racial prejudice could
not be broken by legal texts. The
experience of various American
States has shown quite clearly,
however, that anti-discrimination
laws have had beneficial results
even if they have not in them-
selves modified prejudices or basic
attitudes.
The policy of the assimilation
of different ethnic groups ha. s also
been highly successful in certain
countries such as Mexico where
great efforts have been made in
the past century to"integrate"
the large indigenous population.
The progress achieved by the
Negroes of the French West Indies
since they were freed from slavery
in 1849 would also deserve careful
study. From studies such as the
few just mentioned and others,
certain facts could emerge and
analogies be made which would
ultimately enable us to say. how
two groups separated by race and
civilization can blend and form a
single unit.
Race and religion
No civilization has ever hadcause to regret its action in
welcoming other peoples. It
has always been amply repaid for
its interest and generosity by the
contributions with which the
newcomers have enriched it.
Today, for example, many Negro
writers have enriched English
and Frenc. h literature and there
is every reason to believe that in
the not too distant future Negroes
will be participating to a still
greater degree than they do today
in scientific and cultural activi-
ties. Discrimination and racial
persecution wither and impov-
erish societies which seek to pre-
serve the myth proclaiming the
virtue of racial"purity".
Doctrines of racialism are not
only contrary to the present
findings of science but also scorn
the principles which are the foun-
dation stones of the world's great
religions and philosophies. A
world-wide attack on racialism
therefore cannot be won without
the help of religion. All univer-
salist religions are, by definition,
anti-racialist by the very fact
that they are addressed to all
mankind. Unfortunately, the
message of human brotherhood
embodied in their teaching is too
often ignored.
In the struggle against all forms
of racialism it is therefore useful
to recall the doctrines and texts
which proclaim the equality of
all men in the eyes of God and
which condemn the myth of race,
often in the severest terms, while
exalting the dignity and worth of
man whatever his physical traits
may be. The churches-the
word is used here in its very
broadest sense-are therefore
powerful allies in the struggle
against racial discrimination and
racial prejudice.
Unesco has therefore called
upon eminent representatives of
the world's great religious faiths
to present brief and simple
accounts of the position of their
churches regarding the racial
problem. These will soon appear
in a new series of books under the
general title"The Racial Problem
in Modern Thought", presenting
the Catholic, Protestant, Muslim,
Jewish and Buddhist point of view
as well as that of other great
religious faiths. The first books
to be published in this series have
been written by Father Yves Con-
gar, an eminent Roman Catholic
theologian of France and by W. A.
Visser't Hooft, General Secretary
of the World Council of Churches.
(On pages 8 and 9 of this issue
the Courier has published two
articles on Christianity and the
Racial Question, specially prepar-
ed by these religious authorities.
(See also Bibliography, page 18,)
Present-day fanaticism
THE texts published in theseforthcoming books and the
facts they will bring before
the public no doubt take on new
and profound significance in view
of the intolerance and fanaticism
so prevalent today. They are
aimed at touching the conscience
of men and at creating in the
minds of even the most pre-
judiced a feeling of uneasiness
and of doubt which is the first
step towards a change of attitude.
The efforts displayed today
against racialism have many
points in common with those
employed less than 150 years ago
in the fight against slavery. At
that time slavery, too, was con-
sidered an institution dictated by
the laws of nature and reason.
Today, we look upon the argu-
ments advanced against the abo-
lition of slavery as nothing more
than naive and we find it diffi-
cult to believe that in support of
this doctrine such heated discus-
sions and impassioned polemics
were unleashed. True, econ-
omic laws worked against slavery
but it would not. have been abol-
ished so quickly had public opin-
ion not come to look upon it
as a thing of shame. The same
is true of the fight against racial-
ism.
No longer respectable
A S the sociologist GunnarMyrdal has so well express-
ed it :"It is significant that
today even the white man who
defends discrimination frequently
describes his motive as'prejudice'
and says that it is'irrational'.
The popular beliefs rationalizing
caste in America are no longer
intellectually respectable. They
can no longer, therefore, be found
in current books, newspapers or
public speeches. They live a sur-
reptitious life in thoughts and
private remarks. There we have
had to hunt them when studying
the matter in this inquiry. When
they were thus drawn out into
the open they looked shabby and
ashamed of themselves. Every-
body who has acquired a higher
education knows that they are
wrong. Most white people with
a little education also have a
hunch that they are wrong.
There is today a queer feeling of
credo quia absurdum hovering
over the whole complex of pop-
ular beliefs sustaining racial dis-
crimination. This makes the
prejudiced white man nearly as
pathetic as his Negro victim."
