ART EDUCATION
IS AS OLD
AS HISTORY
by Pierro Bargellini
Writer and art critic, Florence, Italy
WHENEVER I hear anyone speak-most
often, it must be admitted in
derogatory terms-of what are
known as picture-stories or strip-cartoons with
balloon-captions, my thoughts turn immediately
to the man who has been called the father
of modern painting-Giotto.
After all, are not the great series of
paintings at Assisi, Padua or Florence
precisely this-picture-stories designed for
the people of the fourteenth century ? Take
a close look at the individual pictures and
you will see, inserted, verses from the evan-
gelists or excerpts from the lives of the saints,
though the painted matter will always far
outweigh the written texts.
The comic artist Buffaimacco, the hero of
some of Boccacio's stories, suggested to a less
gifted colleague the device of making written
words issue from the mouths of drawn
characters. He, therefore, seems to have been
the first to hit on the idea of the"balloon",
now so widely used.
None of this would have come to pass had
not the Franciscans of the Middle Ages used
art, deliberately and methodically, as a means
of educating man, the eternal child. Church
paintings were known as the"poor man's
Bible"-the Bible of the indigent and ignor-
ant, the illiterate masses, to whom the true
faith was offered not through the written word,
but through pictures which, as any teacher
knows, make 0 direct appeal to the imagin-
ation and the emotion.
I have quoted this special and particularly
interesting stae in the history of art because
it illustrates, vividty, the use of art as a
means of education.
All societies, directly or indirectly, de-
liberately or involuntarily, have to some extent
used art for educational purposes.
One relatively recent example of obviously
educational art was that of the Romantic
movement in the nineteenth century.) It
evoked the glories of the past in order to
cause the various peoples to respond to the
ideal of freedom, in opposition to the despotic
governments of the day ; it recalled historical
examples of heroism, and of fortune good or
bad, so as to kindle in the hearts of men the
fire of patriotism and independence.
Thus we had the historical novel, the
historical melodrama and the historical
picture. We had, too, the historical statue.
Statuary in the Middle Ages was exclusively
religious and symbolical ; in Renaissance times
it was primarily mythological ; in the eighteenth
century it was vaguely idyllic and decorative.
It was not until the nineteenth century that
it became commemorative.
This was the signal for monuments to
national heroes and geniuses to be erected in
every public square. Such monuments served
as examples. They were historical reminders
to the people, of the civic virtues of those who
had rendered distinguished service to a city
or civilization. They were, therefore, historical
documents, somewhat idealized, designed to
provide education in citizenship and patriotism.
Romanticism, with its emphasis on history,
exercized a deep influence on the average
citizen of a nation ; it crystallized national
feeling in the new middleclass society which
was born of the French Revolution.
It was precisely in this middleclass society,
however, that the "crisis in art" shortly
afterwards occurred. Romanticism, having
effectively proclaimed certain national and
These two paintings."Rural Scene" (left) and"On the Nile", are the work of
two Egyptian boys. The first of these young artists is aged 14. the second is 15.
* Languages : What is the best age at
which to begin the study of foreign
languages ? Should two or more lan-
guages be learned simultaneously ?
These and a host of other important
problems were discussed by some
70 language teachers and experts from
all parts of the world at a Unesco-
sponsored seminar on modern languages
which began in Ceylon in August.
Among other subjects considered : how
language teaching can better be used to
further understanding of other peoples ;
the latest techniques in teaching lan-
guages in primary and secondary
schools, and universities ; problems in
countries with more than one official
language. (This subject will be dis-
cussed in detail in a forthcoming issue
of the COURIER).
* Deserts : A display prepared jointly
by Unesco, the World Health Organiz-
ation, the Food and Agriculture Orga-
nization and the International Labour
Office on the scientific work of these
Agendes on problems of the world arid
zones is a feature of the large exhibition
"The Conquest of the Desert"which is
being held at Jerusalem from 22 Sep-
tember to 14 October.
* Fellowships : During the past year,
ten students (average age 14) from the
Fezzan desert, the most distant pro-
vince of the new Libyan Kingdom have
been studying elementary and technical
subjects in a specially organized course
in Tlemcen and Biskrah, Algeria,
through the Unesco Technical Assis-
tance programme and with the co-
operation of the French Government.
The students are probably the youngest
group currently being trained under the
Unesco Technical Assistance pro-
gramme.
* Education : How education helped to
transform a Mexican Tarascan Indian
village is described in"New Horizons
at Tzentzenhuaro", an illustrated booklet
published by Unesco. The booklet
reviews more than a year's work by the
Regional Fundamental Education Centre
at Patzcuaro, Mexico, which is operated
jointly by Unesco, the Organization of
American States. and the Mexican
Government. (Obtainable shortly in
English, French or Spanish from Unesco
Sales Agents, price : 2'5 cents ; 1/6d ;
75 frs.)
* Films : How films, film strips and
other visual aids can be used most
effectively in fundamental education was
discussed last month at a Unesco spon-
sored international meeting in Messina,
Italy. Specialists studied the application
of visual aids in relation to agriculture
and forestry, health and hygiene,

COURIER OCTOBER 1953. Page 15
THE UNDERGROUND SPIRITS.....-..............,
Children in the school at Riggisberg, Switzerland, were talking about some earthquake shocks that
had been felt in the Canton of Valais. One 9-year-old child suggested that they were caused by
underground spirits. This is how he depicted the spirits in a painting. Having four arms, the chief spirit (centre) was able to produce the most violent shocks.
civic principles, settled down quietly in the
complacency of a society satisfied with the
ideals which it had attained, and which
coincided perfectly with its own interests.
Bourgeois civilization of the second half of
the nineteenth century is symbolized in the
various arts. Architecturally, by the little villa
on the outskirts of the town, and sculpturally
by the small terracotta lions or dogs
"guarding"the little gardens and squatting on
the pillars of the gate. In painting, by family
portraits or naturalistic landscapes, to adorn
the modest drawing-room, in music, by the
ballad, and in literature, by the sentimental
short story.
Can it be said that this type of art had any
educational value ? In fact it had, though on
a less exalted plane. The art of bourgeois
society was designed to help form the
character of the'"perfect gentleman"and the
outlook of the'''well-bred lady of good
family".
However, artists instinctively and almost
unconsciously, rebel against such a humdrum,
not to say paltry task. Beneath the
apparently contented existence of the middle
classes, they sense discontent with a life bereft
of great ideals-and they suffer the tragedy
of virtue devoid of heroism.
They then become rebels, bohemians, social
outcasts. They proclaim the famous doctrine
of"`art for art's sake". They deny that art
has any educational purpose at all.., Art",
they say,'''has no function ; art is a function."
As a matter of fact, it is not so much the
artists who say this as the theorists and critics,
who, arguing on the premises of subjectivity,
refuse to admit that art has a purpose over
and above itself. Their error consists in the
belief that the educational purpose of art is
something which is external to the actual work
of art, whereas, inreatity, it<stheworkofart
itself ; the work, as such, cannot fail to have
an educational effect.
Thus even the art of the bohemian, the
decadent or the outcast is educational, be-
cause it denotes suffering, sin, anguish, a
search for supra-realistic truth. It is, to use
a current term,'''disturbing art"-an alarm
bell of which society should take heed.
In recent times, many social and political
programmes have been drawn up in which art
was assigned an educational purpose, but since
they all more or less partook of propaganda,
they failed both artistically and educationally.
I am discussing, of course, modern art, the
art which makes or should make immediate
impression on the adult mind. Some people
believe that a certain measure of education
can be achieved through a study of the arts
of antiquity. I doubt it. The teacher must
always be contemporaneous with the pupil.
Plato, for instance, can be studied but we
shall always need a commentator to render
him"actual" ; hence there must always be a
living bridge between past and present.
Ancient culture and art can, however,
recover their educational power if they are
taken as indicative of some contemporary
trend. The Greeks, for example, were evoked
by illuminism in the light of a specifically
rational approach. The Pre-Raphaelite move-
ment was especially fortunate in the prevailing
romantic mood ; and Baroque art, after suffer-
ing a total puritanical condemnation is now
undergoing a re-evaluation as the expression
of a world at once fantastic and conscience-
ridden, similar in many ways to the world of
today.
Ancient art no longer lives of itself alone ;
it is continually being re-absorbed into life
and evaluated through a spiritual process
which endows it with a contemporary quality,
therefore making it actual.
It may seem to the superficial observer that
the discovery of certain works of art has been
responsible for forming certain tastes. The
contrary is true. It is the emergence of
certain tastes that has led to the discovery
of the works.
What is important, therefore, is the spirit of
actuality which animates art. Art never
precedes a spiritual trend ; it follows it and
communicates it to the general public. One
thing only, therefore, is essential f art is to
have an educational function, and that is that
mankind, or at least a given society, should
identify itself unreservedly with a form of
truth from which something can be learned-
to which human conscience and will can
sincerely subscribe.
handicrafts, home economics and voca-
tional training. More than 200 films
and as many film strips were shown
and were analysed for their usefulness
in this work.
* Students : The Japanese National
Commission for Unesco was not yet one
year old when it announced recently
that there are already one hundred and
twelve Unesco co-operative associations
and one hundred Unesco student clubs
functioning in the country. Unesco co-
operative associations are responsible
for the steady growth of"Unesco
Schools"in Japan, where children get
free courses in drawing, music, dancing
and languages.
* Workers : During recent months
Unesco's workers'group travel grant
project has enabled some 44 groups
totalling over 800 workers from 12 Euro-
pean countries to visit, their colleages
in other countries for periods of study
of from 2 to 3 weeks duration. The
following'trades and occupations were
represented in this year's scheme :
building and wood workers, land wor-
kers, textile workers, bakery workers,
shipyard engineer and metal workers,
food and drink workers, train conduc-
tors, paper workers, police, commercial
and clerical workers, firemen and postal
workers and co-operative employees.
* Libraries : West African librarians
have founded the first West Africa
Library Association in which are repre-
sented Nigeria, the Gold Coast, Sierra
Leone and Liberia. This was one of
the results of the Unesco Seminar on
the Development of Public Libraries in
Africa, held at University College, Iba-
dan, Nigeria, in August.
* Medical : Unesco and the World
Health Organization have just issued a
new publication listing the four thou-
sand medical periodicals currently being
published in ninety-four countries and
territories. This publication is intended
to help specialists in medical document-
ation and scientific research.
* Geophysics : The Pakistan Govern-
ment has begun construction of a
magnetic observatory in Quetta, five
hundred miles north of Karachi. Mea-
surements taken there of overall
changes in the earth's magnetic force
will be used as a basis of comparison,
so that field observers prospecting the
region for mineral resources can check
their findings The observatory will be
part of a new geophysical research
centre at Quetta. A Unesco technical
assistance team has been helping in the
project.
* Oceanography : Following on its
comprehensive scientific study of the
arid zones of the earth with a view to
increasing their productivity and
improving the conditions of living
among their populations, the Depart-
ment of Natural Sciences of Unesco is
now embarking on a similar study of
the oceanography and the plant and
animal resources of the sea. The first
discussion of the programme will be
held during the Pacific Science Congress
at Manila on 16 to 28 November.
* Science : The first series of 80 work-
shop designs of"blueprints"for the
construction of scientific apparatus for
schools was exhibited, with finished
models, to a working party on small
industries of the Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East at Bangkok,
Thailand, on 18 September. The designs
were prepared by Unesco to enable non-
industrial countries to equip their
schools for modern science instruction
with a minimum of foreign purchases,
by manufacturing apparatus either in
small industrial machine shops or in
vocational schools.
* Ancient paintings : With the approval
of the Governments of India and Egypt,
Unesco has arranged with the New York
Graphic Society, one of the leading
publishers of art reproductions, for the
publication of colour reproductions of
the ancient paintings at Ajanta (India)
and in the Valley of the Kings (Egypt).
* Science Exhibition : The Unesco trav-
elling scientific exhibit on"Our Senses
and our Knowledge of the World"has
completed its tour of Japan where it
was seen by 120, 000 persons in Tokyo,
Morioka and Fujuoka. It has previously
been shown to 380, 000 persons in
Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, Cambodia,
Hong-Kong and Manila.
* Fellowships : A group of five Liberians
who are now studying teacher training
and the teaching of science in New
Zealand, are the first from their country
to go as students to this South Pacific
country. The Liberians are undergoing
special training in connection with
Unesco's Technical Assistance Programme
to develop staff for the Faculties of the
University of Monrovia and the Liberian
Teacher Training College.
* Korean Schools : A scheme to help the
rehabilitation of Korean schools recently
went into operation at United Nations
Headquarters, New York, with the open-
ing of an exhibit and a counter for the
sale of Unesco Gift Coupons. People
purchasing gift coupons can send them
to Korea where they are used to buy
school and laboratory equipment and
visual aids.
