COURIER JULY 1953. Page ! 5
Why does an airplane fly ? With two ping-pong balls and a knitting needle, a Philippine teacher demonstrates Bernoulli's principle. The pressure at the side of
a stream of air is inwards toward the centre of the stream. Pupils can prove this to their own satisfaction ; when they blow on the balls, these come together.
THE ADVENTURES OF A BURNED-OUT BULB
THIS is the story of how a youngSwiss teacher travelled half-
way around the world to help
bring science classes to life for
school-children in the Philippines-
but it might also be called the in-
ternational adventures of a burned-
out electric light bulb.
It was in January, 1952, that
Viktor Holbro left his native Basle
on a 15-month mission for Unesco
in the Philippines. In Manila, he
joined a Unesco technical assistance
team working with the Philippine
Government on a nation-wide pro-
gramme of expanding education.
As for the burned-out light bulb,
it first began its travels in 1951. It
was part of a"five-dollar labo-
ratory"of odds and ends that
accompanied another Unesco science
teacher, Dr. Ellsworth Obourn of
the United States, to Thailand.
Dr. Obourn had designed his labo-
ratory as a way out for schools and
teachers whose budgets could not
cover the cost of science laboratory
apparatus.
With tin cans, cigarboxes, rubber
bands and other assorted materials
available in forgotten closets,
Dr. Obourn had proved he could
duplicate the experiments of an
elementary science course. The
most important item in this kit was
the light bulb for, with its base filed
off, it could be transformed into
almost anything from a laboratory
flask to a water barometer.
On his way to the Philippines,
Mr. Holbro stopped off in Bangkok
to see what Dr. Obourn had been
able to accomplish with the light
bulbs and other cast-off items. The
results were promising, so much so
that science was already becoming a
living subject for Thai children in
classes where the equipment was
being used.
Then, in the Philippines, Mr. Hol-
bro found a strange situation.
"At first, I wondered why I had
come", he recalled in an interview
in Paris after his return from Ma-
nila."The Government had de-
by Daniel BEHRMAN
veloped an excellent philosophy of
science teaching on American lines
and they certainly did not need my
advice."
But Dr. Cecilio Putong, Philippine
Secretary of Education, took him
behind the scenes and the picture
was not so bright. Manila's schools
had suffered heavily during World
War II and science teaching
equipment had gone up in smoke.
A shortage of foreign exchange
made it impossible to replace this
equipment through new imports.
It was then that Mr. Holbro
decided to concentrate simply on
showing teachers how to make their
own apparatus so that science would
not remain a dry textbook subject.
A workshop was first opened for
teachers in Manila's Araullo High
School. Then each of the capital's
seven high schools sent one science
teacher and three teachers of
vocational education to Araullo for
training.
There, with the help of materials
brought in by Araullo's pupils in a
junk collection campaign, they went
to work, first learning how to
convert bulbs into flasks, tin cans
into tripods and ink bottles into
laboratory burners.
The rest was merely a question of
their own ingenuity. By the end of
their courses, teachers were pro-
ducing such complicated pieces of
equipment as manometers-that is,
pressure gauges-and steam engines.
In all, they were taught to construct
50 different models of laboratory
apparatus.
Meanwhile, Mr. Holbro also worked
with the Philippine School of Arts
and Trades in Manila, helping to set
up a small plant where vocational
training students went into pro-
duction on saleable supports, clamps,
test tube racks and demonstration
equipment. The school is now
working on its first order to supply
equipment to an educational centre
established by the Philippine Go-
vernment and Unesco at Bayambang,
130 miles north of Manila.
It is at Bayambang where science
teachers from all over the islands
are to be trained in the use of this
equipment and in applying it to their
teaching methods. Bayambang is
serving as a general training centre
in primary, secondary and adult
education.
Costs of this programme, Mr. Hol-
bro emphasized, are being borne
almost wholly by the Philippine Go-
vernment. His own work is being
carried forward by Tomas Tadana,
recently appointed by the Philip-
pines as the country's Superinten-
dent of Science Education, a new post
growing out of Mr. Holbro's work.
Blueprints of the light-bulb baro-
meter and other apparatus are now
being sent to schools throughout the
country.
The credit for this new approach
to science teaching belongs to the
Philippines, he believes..'They
knew what to do and what was
needed", he explained..'It was no
fault of their own that they did not
have the resources."
Mr. Holbro Is now returning to his
classroom at Basle's Madchengym-
nasium (Girl's College) where he
had previously taught physics and
chemistry for sixteen years. He
summed up. his stay in the Philip-
pines as a period of"mutual giving
and taking". As an educator, he was
especially impressed by the Philip-
pines'system of community schools
in which the school is playing a
major part in raising village living
, standards.
"That is one advantage of
teaching in a new country", he
commented."I hate to think what
would happen in Switzerland if a
boy came home from school and told
his father that the family's way of
raising chickens was all wrong".
These odds and ends are the nucleus of a laboratory which can bring elementary
science to life in a secondary school. Burned-out electric light bulbs serve as
flasks while tripods are cut from tin cans. Bunsen burner is an old ink bottle.
