Saudi Arabian camels drink eagerly from water trough
at the foot of a towering oil derrick. (Photo : Corstni, Esso.)
Village girl : About sixty-five per cent of all people in
the Middle East are village dwellers. (Photo : studio Apkar.)
The peasants-or fellahin as they are called-and their families make up seven tenths of Egypt's
population. Many of the younger fellahin seek better lives by migrating to the cities. (Unesco Photo.)
Part of lass · ;
crops in landrl
AN ARAB PEASANT HEADS FOR TOWN OF TRIPOLI ON GRAVEL MOUNTAIN ROAD OVERLOOKING ONE OF THE FE
The farmer : I
farmers are tr,
The Great Nile : Piercing the arid lands it has given Egypt a narrow strip of richly fertile ground.
But beyond this stretch of cultived land lie two immense deserts. (Egyptian Embassy photo.)
A traditional landmark : Pigeon towers are a familiar
sight in most Egyptian villages. (Egyptian Embassy photo.)

THE MIDDLE EAST IN THE
GRIP OF A SOCIAL UPHEAVAL
war's locust invasion which ravaged
'om North Africa to India. (U. N. photo.)
TILE VALLEYS OF LEBANON. (Unesco Photo).
FROM remotest antiquity, the Middle East (1) has servedas a highway linking together the three continents,
of Africa, Asia and Europe. It is the birthplace of
the world's earliest recorded civilizations, of monotheistic
religions, the art of writing, and many other major
cultural developments without which"Western"civiliza-
tion would be unthinkable.
A region with such an ancient and diversified historical
background naturally exhibits important variations among
its constituent parts. Yet, underlying these differences is
a basic unity which is also the product of a long historical
process. From earliest times, the river valleys of Egypt
and Mesopotamia radiated their civilizations to neigh-
bouring lands. Conquests, migrations and large-scale
deportation of populations diffused religious and cultural
patterns throughout the region. For over one thousand
years, the greater part of the Middle East was politically
unified, under the Persian, Macedonian and Roman
empires. During the first six centuries of the Christian
era, most of the region was subjected to the influence of
Christianity, which gave it a greater degree of cultural
unity than it had experienced before. In the course of
the following two centuries Christianity was replaced by
Islam, which constitutes today the main factor of cultural
unity.
Approximately 90 per cent of the population are
Moslems ; 4 per cent are Christians (divided among several
denominations) ; less than 2 per cent are Jews ; 2 per cent
(in the southern Sudan) belong to African tribal cults ;
most of the remainder belong to semi-Moslem sects. All
the political units in the region excepting three of the
smaller ones (Cyprus, Israel and Lebanon) have Moslem
majorities. Together with its religious beliefs and prac-
tices, Islam brought with it a legal code, the Sharia, which
until recently regulated almost all aspects of life of the
Moslem communities and many activities of non-Moslems.
It still exercises a deep influence on Middle Eastern
society..
Islam also helped to unify the Middle East by diffusing
the Arabic language, which for several centuries constitut-
ed the sole linguistic medium of science and literature,
and until very recently was likewise the official language
of religion and of the law throughout the region. More-
over, the three most widely spoken languages of the region
- Arabic, Persian and Turkish-have interpenetrated each
other to a marked degree and, as recently as fifty years
ago, a knowledge of two or three of these languages was
widespread among the educated classes.
Upon this relatively homogeneous Islamic society, the
impact of modern Western civilization has been, with local
variation, both marked and progressive since the end of
the 18th Century. The countries in which Western influ-
ence first made itself felt, and in which it penetrated most
deeply, bordered on the Mediterranean : Turkey, Egypt,
Palestine and Lebanon. The countries of the Arabian
peninsula on the other hand, have experienced the impact
of the West only during the last two or three decades.
This has introduced an important element of diversity
into the region which makes generalization extremely
difficult.
Moreover, Westernization has in no country affected all
classes equally. Even where it has penetrated deepest, its
influence tends to be much stronger in the urban areas
and in the upper and middle classes.
These classes (particularly the upper class) already
approximate the Western world in respect of birth and
death rates, life expectancy, housing, food and clothing,
medical services, education and other similar character-
istics. The great majority of the population, on the other
hand, and especially the three-quarters of the people who
live in rural areas, still largely continue to live according
to patterns that were developed in the Middle East many
centuries ago. It should be borne in mind, however, that
in practically all Middle Eastern countries there is a small,
but rapidly increasing and very influential, segment of
the population to which the statements made do not
generally apply.
Division of desert and sown
IT must also be noted that Israel differs widely fromthe region as a whole, not only because of traditional
religious-cultural differences between Moslems and
Jews, but also because of the effects of recent immigration,
particularly the immigration of European middle-class
professional families. An outstanding and highly
significant feature of other Middle Eastern countries is
their lack of a professional middle-class. The resulting
situation is that Israel has, for example, the largest
number of physicians for the size of its population of any
country in the world (one physician for every 380
inhabitants), while in other countries of the Middle East,
the gravest shortages of physicians are to be found (e. g.,
Iran has only one doctor for every 63, 000 inhabitants).
Geographically, the Middle East is characterized by a
dual division between Desert and Sown. Over 90 per cent
of the region is desert, or at best grazing steppe, with
great extremes of temperature, almost no rain at any
time of the year, and a very scanty vegetation of low
grasses and drought-resistant bushes. The narrow sown
tract is, generally speaking, Mediterranean in character,
having long, hot, rainless summers ; rainy, temperate
winters ; and a native vegetation ranging from grass to
open forests. The transition from the Desert to the Sown,
as a rule, is gradual, with the notable exceptions of the
two great river zones of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates
valleys, where it is abrupt and clearcut.
The peoples of the Middle East, in their adaptation to
Turkey, where this photo was taken,
litionally independent. (Photo"Réalités".)
(1) Here considered as incll/ding Afghanistan,. 4n, qlo-Egyptian Sl/dan,
E ! !//jt, iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, LelJanon"Sal/di Arabia.. Syria, J'/lr/, ey,
alld Yemen, together telth the smaller territories of the regioll.
their physical environment, largely conform to this basic
regional dichotomy between Desert and Sown. The desert,
where the only feasible mode of existence has been that
of the wandering herder, has served for centuries as the
home of nomadic, animal-breeding tribes, the members
of which today constitute about 16 per cent of the total
population of the Middle East. The Sown, with its very
different physical conditions, has for at least as long been
the abode of the settled cultivators, who today make up
some 66 per cent of the peoples of the region. The
remaining 18 per cent live in towns, some of which can
boast an uninterrupted history of several thousands of
years.
Living conditions vary somewhat from one nomadic tribe
to another, and even more appreciably from one settled
area to another ; yet these differences (as between tribe
and tribe, village and village, town and town) seem
superficial indeed when juxtaposed to the profound dif-
ferences which separate the total living conditions of
each type of community from those of the others. These
dissimilarities are so pronounced that demographic, social,
economic, and cultural characteristics, which are expressed
statistically in national or regional averages, have little
meaning unless they are immediately followed by a break-
down of each figure according to the aforementioned
three major population types. At present, however,
statistical data from the Middle East as a whole are
sporadic, inadequate and unreliable, while figures relative
to any specific type of community in most cases simply
do not exist.
Poverty and endemic disease
souT 20 per cent of the region as a whole is composedof urban population (definitions of"urban"vary
'*'widely), about 65 per cent is composed of settled
rural population and about 15 per cent is composed of
nomadic or semi-nomadic peoples. The urban population
is estimated to be no more than 10 per cent in Afghanis-
tan, Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and the Arabian Peninsula,
but 40 per cent in Lebanon and 50 per cent in Israel. The
nomadic and semi-nomadic population ranges from 0 per
cent (Cyprus, Egypt, Lebanon) to 33 per cent in Afghanis-
tan and the Arabian Peninsula and 40 per cent in Jordan.
The Middle East is in general an area of high birth
rates ; death rates while still very high, have been partially
controlled, resulting in rates of population increase of
10 to 20 per thousand a year. High rates of increase are
drived in part from the virtual elimination of famines
and pestilential diseases, such as cholera and plague,
which until very recent times periodically decimated the
population ; and from decreases in infant and child
mortality, although rates are still very high in comparison
with those of more economically'developed countries.
Thus, in Egypt, for example, which has more facilities
for child care than most of the other Middle Eastern
countries, one child out of three dies before reaching his
fifth birthday.
Both general conditions and social attitudes appear to
favour the continuation of high birth rates for some time
to come. These conditions and attitudes include the over-
whelmingly agrarian structure of society, the isolation and
illiteracy found in wide parts of the region, the traditional
family pattern (the extended family), the widespread
desire for heirs, especially male heirs, and the absence of
economic incentives to limit the number of offspring.
At the present time, the Middle East is in the grip of a
social upheaval, the causes and ingredients of which are
varied and complex. Chief among the factors involved
are the long-standing problems of. poverty and endemic
disease, brought to focus by increasing contact with the
West and consequent awareness of its higher standard of
living ; the disintegration of the traditional family pattern
and the decline of patriarchal authority ; the growth of
national selfconsciousness and nationalist aspirations ;
the increasing pressure of population upon land in some
areas ; the expansion of cities and industries, attended by
a gradual reduction of the isolated hinterland ; and the
increasing demand for the social and political equality
of women.
The byword in many quarters is change, though there
is little unanimity on what change is desirable, or how
it is to be effected, or at what pace. In governmental
and professional circles, thinking about the problem of
social change has crystallized into two contrasting points
of view : the one envisages the destiny of the Middle East
as lying in the direction of a return to the pristine ideals,
values, and traditions of Islam, and seeks to effect changes
and reforms within that framework ; the other advocates
radical and sweeping innovations along Western lines, and
the scrapping in large part of indigenous traditions. Yet
a third view, however, takes a middle position, and
considers that the basic need is for an organic develop-
ment of Middle Eastern society in which desirable in-
novations borrowed from outside are integrated and
merged with strong and wholesome forces of traditional
culture. In many parts of Turkey, Egypt, Syria, and
Lebanon, economic and social change is already quite
far advanced ; yet in other parts of these same countries,
as elsewhere throughout the Middle East, such change
has been slight.
Beneath the surface of the ideological divisions, however,
there is a growing restlessness among the masses of the
people. At the same time, the significance of the masses
and the need for improving their lot are being increas-
ingly recognized by all classes. Leaders of government
have, to a greater or lesser extent, initiated or planned
reforms (e. g., social welfare programmes, political suffrage,
land reform, expansion and improvement of primary and
secondary education). Yet the technical skills and
facilities available for the implementation of these reforms
are not adequate to the need-hence the crucial import-
ance of programmes of technical assistance.
