Page 6. JUNE 1953 UNESCO
THEY PUSHED OUT THE WALLS
Equipment in control room of radio station run by Louisville Library. Fourteen hours a day it offers good music, condensed versions of
books and plays, significant speeches and open forums and other programmes for the enjoyment and enlightenment of listeners.
A LOUISVILLE, Kentucky, housewife one daylast spring finished an afternoon's shop-
ping, then hurried into her city's astound-
ing Free Public Library. Inside the door she
dropped her bundles into a wire basket on
wheels, pushed it to the reservations desk, and
announced :"I want a framed picture for my
living room."
She was told that there were few to choose
from ; most of the 100 originals and fine repro-
ductions in the library's gallery were already
out on loan. But she did find a water colour
by a Kentucky artist, which she decided would
be just right for her « all. A librarian stamped
her card, and the picture was hers for a month
free.
Next she said she'd like to hear some Beet-
hoven. Through earphones she listened to pass-
ages from a dozen records, at last borrowed five
for a Week-also on her library card. At the
book desk she picked up a light novel and a
heavy volume on race relations-one of the
subjects most in demand in Louisville-then
hurried downstairs to a darkened room where
a score of other taxpayers were enjoying tele-
vision, another free library service. On her
way she put a nickel into a dispensing machine
for a soft drink which she sipped while she
rested her feet and watched the show.
Not for long, however. It was nearly five
o'clock and she had to get home. There at
home, along with thousands of other Louisville
citizens, she would tune her FM radio to Station
WFPL to hear the Chicago Round Table, fol-
lowed by a half hour of Mexican folk songs and
another thirty minutes of Brahms. This radio
station, a 250-watt transmitter, is run by the
library from studios in the basement of the
main library building.
THE public schools give a helping hand, too,and use it as one of the city's most versatile
educational tools. Fourteen hours a day it
broadcasts good music, significant speeches,
open forums, condensed versions of current
books and plays, and transcriptions of the best
network shows-each of the latter by special
permission from the networks-and it also
transmits hundreds of other programmes each
week over a citywide system of leased telephone
wires.
by Karl Detzer
These lines connect the library with all Louis-
ville's junior and senior high schools, such
parochial schools as want them, the municipal
university, the school for the blind, children's
wards in the hospitals, the city's psychopathic
ward, and all branch libraries. Each of the
thirty-five outlets can get any programme it
desires at any hour of the day merely by asking
for it. The library's collection of recordings,
although less than five years old, now numbers
thousands of records and wire-and tape-re-
cordings, including opera, folk songs, sympho-
nies, language lessons, poetry, Broadway plays,
aud transcriptions of network programmes.
Teachers need only call the library to bring
into their classrooms exciting radio programmes
on whatever subject their pupils are studying.
Sitting at their desks the youngsters explore
with Marco Polo, ride the Oregon Trail, gallop
with Paul Revere, hunt birds with Audubon, or
float down the Mississippi with Huckleberry
Finn. They hear masterpieces of prose and
poetry read by famous actors. They hear, too,
the actual voices of Jane Addams, Amelia
Earhart, Woodrow Wilson, Marconi, Edison,
and many others.
Schools, clubs, or just plain citizens may
borrow from their library's impressive collec-
tion of 550 motion-picture films. Last summer
a neighbourhood grocer who was worried about
idle youngsters on the streets borrowed a film
from the library, set up a screen and a sound-
box in the vacant lot beside his store. Each
evening fifty to one hundred and fifty children
sat on the ground, got excellent free movie fare,
stayed off the streets. And in three years 3, 000
adults were enrolled in the library's"neigh-
bourhood universities", with classes held four
evenings a week in four branch libraries. Pro-
fessors from the municipal university teach
subjects which range from music appreciation
to the natural sciences. Instruction is free
except for students working on college credits.
Of course the library also has books-half a
million of them. In two years their circulation
has risen 40 per cent, in spite of television,
from 1, 200. 000 to 1, 7fit, 000 a year. The"trans-
action cost"-the cost of lending a book, film,
picture, or recording-is slightly under ten
cents compared *with a national average of
twenty-five cents. Louisville has done this by
streamlining methods and introducing business-
like techniques. Cost of aJI the library's extra
services, including radio, all salaries, purchases
of films and records, and rental of leased wires,
was $4i, 541-about twelve cents for each of the
city's 386, 000 inhabitants.
if) EHiND the plan to take the library to thepeople who pay for it are two energetic 46-
year-old officials known to most of their
fellow citizens as Skip and Charlie. Skip is Pub-
lic Librarian Clarence Reginald Graham, who,
depending on his mood, can talk like a philo-
sophy professor, an evangelist, or an irate
teamster. Charlie is Mayor Charles F. Farns-
ley, a big, blond man equally at home in a
rough-and-tumble argument on garbage collec-
tions or a discussion of Chinese culture. Both
are native sons. It was Farnsley'who started
it all. Graham makes it tick.
The library has a checkered past. A group
of citizens more than seventy-five years ago
decided that the town needed a library that'was
free. They bought a collection of books, lent
them at no cost, and supported the project with
a lottery ; eventually they bought a big business
block in the middle of town'where the library
was housed until forty-five years ago. Then
Andrew Carnegie gave a building which the
institution still occupies, and the original quar-
ters were leased to a department store-the ren-
tals paying a large part of the annual expense.
The library still is not city-owned ; the board of
trustees, appointed by the mayor and city
council, holds the title as a non-profit corpora-
tion. About twenty-five years ago Louisville
built a bridge across the Ohio River, bonded
the city to pay for it by charging tolls. Under
a law passed at that time any money left over
in the toll fund after the honds were retired
could be spent by the mayor as he saw fit.
Farnsley happened to be mayor five years
ago when the last bond was paid-and he found
$ ;) 0, 00 left over. He had served on the libra-
ry's board of trustees, kne\v the institution's
need for cash. Many department heads at the
City Hall came forward with ideas about how
to use the money-to improve everything from
parks to parking lots. But Farnsley walked

I C COURIER JUNE 1953. Page 7
Louisville Orchestra plays in a conceit-lecture series offered by city's library. Patients at children's hospital view films furnished by the Free Public Library.
into the office of startled Librarian Graham,
laid a cheque for $ : : >0, 000on the desk.
"Here's some money, Skip,"he said."Tear
down the walls. Take the library out to the
people."
It was not the first time in Farnsley's regime
that the library had broken with tradition. The
free library had been free only to white citi-
zens. After he became mayor Farnsley and the
board quickly agreed that the"White Only"
signs must come down. There were some
dissenting rumblings but now Negroes and
Whites use the library together in perfect
amity.
The radio transmitter itself costs Louisville
only $5, 000. The station is one of the World's
busiest, for in addition to the programmes that
go on the air as many as twelve may be going
out over the leased wires. Because the ope-
rating budget is small only a handful of
employees man the intricate network. There
are times when a single young operator-
announcer-engineer-a girl, at that-juggles
all twelve programmes running simultaneously.
But WFPL gives the people what they want,
whether it's a dissertation on flower culture, or
a symphony orchestra. The listener-owner is
assured of one thing. He can turn on his radio
without being assailed by jazz, by give-away
shows, by commercials. Over the leased wires
special music is piped twelve hours a day to
the city's psychopathic ward, music chosen by
the doctors for its soothing effect.
In the schools teachers build their classes
around the programmes. Thus,'when a history
class is probing the American Civil War the
teacher divides the time between textbooks and
radio. The youngsters hear a dramatization of
the life of John Bro'wn, which points up the
stresses that led to the war. They hear Henry
Fonda as"Young Mr. Lincoln"and Raymond
Supermarket carts are placed at convenience of library users for carrying books, gramophone records, maga-
zines, pamphlets and paintings. (Photos on this page copyright"Courier-Journal and Louisville Times".)
Massey as Sherwood's"Lincoln in Illinois".
Excitement mounts as the children hear the fir-
ing of the first gun at Fort Sumter, then the
battle between the tllonilor and the AI en'Ímac
described by professional radio announcers in
the present tense as if by actual observers.
Classes sit on the sidelines at Bull Run and
Appomatox. They hear the murmur of the
crowd as Lincoln talks at Gettysburg, are pre-
sent in Ford's Theatre on the dreadful night
when the shots rang out and the President
slumped in his box. They ride with the pur-
suers of assassin John Wilkes Booth, are in
on the capture.
No matter'what the topic-the coronation of
Charlemagne, the discovery of oil in Texas, or
a historic session at the United Nations-it's in
the library in dramatic form'waisting to live
again in any classroom that needs it. Sixteen
public school teachers form the"evaluation
committee"'which picks the recordings for
school use, prepares the printed material for
classroom use with the records-a summer-
long job. Department heads at the municipal
university serve as consultants. Local radio
stations give technical advice when needed.
TELEVISION in the libraries caused several ofLouisville's cultural eyebrows to lift
sharply. Statistics prove that in each
branch the advent of television stepped up
book borrowing. It's easy to stop at the desk
after watching a free show and pick up a book
to take home. When a local educator com-
plained about the cultural level of the average
television. programme Mayor Farnsley quickly
replied :"I'd rather the people came to their
corner branch libraries to watch the shows than
go to the corner saloons. Women can take
their kids and their knitting there, have a good
time-without having to buy a drink."
Farnsley backs Graham in his efforts to dis-
tribute the services of the library in ever-
widening circles, often prods him to step up the
process. It was he who talked the Art League
into turning over its fine collection to the library
for distribution to Louisville's living rooms.
Art dealers greeted the innovation coldly but
soon found that it paid off in dollars and
cents. When a citizen after living with a pic-
ture for a month decides that he'd like to live
with it always Librarian Graham puts him in
touch with a local dealer, arranges a pay-as-
you-go plan.
Mayor Farnsley recently walked into the
librarian's office, brandished his card, and
challenged,"Skip-try putting this thing into
your pallet ! See, it can't be done. Fits into
a woman's handbag-but don't you want men
to borrow books too ?" Graham quickly
agreed. Hereafter Louisville's library cards
will be convenient wallet size.
Thus in big and little innovations the librarian
and the mayor have"pushed out the walls"and
taken books, music, art, and education to the
people. Graham, who several years ago was
president of the American Library Association,
stated his credo in a message to that organiza-
tion."The librarian,"he said,"must not only
be a scholar and educator, he must be a shrewd
advertiser of his library's goods. He must buy
his materials, display them, and promote them
with all the skill of a salesman."
That may be heresy in some library quarters,
but in Louisville it's working out fine.
(This article is copyrigllt and reproduced (rom the
"Saturday Revieu ;", U. S. A., by courtesy o {the pu-
blishers.)
