COURIER FEBRUARY 1953. Page 13
A fanciful representation of the Tower of Babel, painted by Pieter Brueghel
the Elder. This work was recently shown in Paris for the first time as part of
the D. G. Van Beuningen Collection. The Tower of Babel is the symbol of
incomprehension between peoples resulting from the inability to understand
one another's languages. Modern archaeological research has discovered
that the Tower of Babel was actually built by the ancient Mesopotamians near
the Euphrates River (present-day Iraq). The Tower was the greatest of the
Sumerian-Babylonian ziggurat temples, or staged pyramids, with a total height
of 288 feet. Fifty-eight million bricks were used to build the Tower, which
was also known as the"House of the Foundations of Heaven and Earth"
THE W) SDOM OF UL-JAHtZ CROSSES THE FRONTIER
MANY an author has won fame in his own countryand, long after his death, his books continue to
be admired and to give pleasure-but only to
the relatively few who happen to know the same language.
To the rest of the world he is unknown and will probably
remain so.
And then suddenly comes a change. Someone decides
to translate him into a language understood by perhaps
50 or 100 million people. Our author, long dead, takes
wings. He finds a welcome among strangers. To them
he brings new treasure, something of the wit, wisdom and
poetry of his own folk and times.
This does not happen as often as might be imagined,
but it has now happened to a rare man of letters who
died eleven centuries ago. The name of Abu Uthman
'Amr Ibn Bahr UI-Jahiz was unknown outside the Moslem
world (except to a few orientalists) until his Book of
Misers was translated into French by Charles Pellat and
published recently in the Unesco Collection of Repre-
sentative Works.
UI-Jahiz was born in 776 or 777 A. D at Basra, then
a flourishing city, traversed by countless canals, thronged
with merchants, singers and grammarians, the gateway to
the East and a centre of Mesopotamian trade with India
and China. Its inhabitants were notorious for their sharp
wit and difficult character.
But UI-Jahiz seems to have inherited only their
intellectual capacities. Tactful and polite, he knew that
a man of culture deserves a quiet life, one that neither
requires him to stake his all upon reputation, nor makes
excessive calls for self-denial.
Though he was a contemporary of Charlemagne, his
career in the craft of letters was like that of any talented,
ambitious young man in 17th century Europe. Success
meant living in the capital and finding a patron there.
For an author who wished to live by his pen, there
was no alternative but to offer a few dedications in return
for gifts and a pension.
UI-Jahiz, therefore, dedicated a book to the Caliph-and
became a success in Baghdad. But his success owed
nothing to sycophancy. There are no fulsome praises
in his book, ! which is about the thorniest and most
controversial problems of those times, the political and
religious system of the Caliphate. It does not take
sides, but gives an unruffled account of the most divergent
trends of opinion.
All subjects came naturally to his pen : theology,
natural history, poetry, geography. Neither palace
revolutions nor revolts disturbed his output. The Vizir
fell into disgrace, the Caliph died. Their rivals and
successors Were equally friendly to UI-J ahiz, who grew
old wisely and only retired from the Court when
compelled to do so by a stroke and rheumatism.
Ul-Jahiz'Book of Beasts and Abu-Hanifa's Botany are
among the first works devoted to the study of nature.
by Georges FRADIER
The Book of Beasts contains many quotations from
Aristotle, though Greek influences are not otherwise
particularly conspicuous. There are also passages from
the poets, used-as in all mediaeval treatises-"to point
a moral and adorn a tale".
But our author has set down some observations of his
own as well. His object is to prove the unity of nature,
to show how, in the eyes of a sage, all things in nature
are of equal value. He had an odd predilection for
insects-and the Book of breasts foreshadows certain
modern theories concerning the evolution and adaptation
of species.
UI-Jahiz, however, was not a scientist, nor a specialist
in any particular subject. He Wrote books on COTn and
the Palm-tree, on Metals, on Whites and Negroes,
though not as one versed in the science of husbandry,
or of metal, or of mankind. His aim was to give a
stimulus to such studies-and pleasure to the reader.
Even when he wrote about theology, elegance of style
did not desert him : he eschewed speculative theories in
favour of historical fact and personal experience.
The Book of Misers, for instance, is not an essay on
avarice, but a collection of anecdotes, recollections, apt
quotations and original ideas, the whole apparently flung
together haphazardly. It is the obiter dicta of a sage
with a smile on his lips and a fluent pen, who has
ceased to have much faith in education, and refers to
it only with a touch of humour.
"In this book", he writes,."shalt thou find three
things-original arguments, subtle artifices, amusing
tales. Therein mayst thou draw, according to thy
mood, matter for laughter and distraction, if grave
things weary thee".
And thereupon he launches out-he has always a
weakness for digressions-upon an enchanting apology for
mirth. But he closes in dignified fashion :
"Laughter and jesting have their measure and
golden mean. That boundary passed, we fall into
frivolity ; but short of it, we are found wanting
in the scales."
The main pleasure in this book for us today lies in
the picture it paints of mice and men. Few are the
historical documents so close to life and the stuff of
things. The Book of Misers throws a dazzling light on
Mesopotamian society in the ninth century. It describes
its customs, fashions, culture, folklore, money troubles,
police, trade, the funny stories men told each other and
what they ate-in fact, the whole'ladle of daily life, which
is ignored by schoolroom history.
Our author did not think of depicting only misers in
this work, and when he comes to them, he supplies us
with an essay on manners. And strange birds they
are, his misers. Their vice is usually kept for the dinner-
table, like the one who rationed his guests'helpings, but
loaded them with gold and jewels !
We have a glimpse of a brilliant civilization, though
one not far removed from the austere living of the
nomadic tribes who gave it birth, and still imbued with
the poetry wherewith the men of the desert transmuted
their poverty into gold. Listen to a Bedouin describing
his meal :
"They brought us wheat red as nightingales'beaks,
and we kneaded bread, which we threw upon the
fire ; the embers tumbled out as the belly tumbles
over the belt. We then made of it a pottage that
went around in the melted fat as the hyena goes
around in the sandhills. Then they brought us
dates like the throats of lizards, so soft that the teeth
sank into them."
UI. Jahiz had too much learning and too keen a sense
of humour to compose this prose poem himself, but he
must have felt happy as he copied it out. Through
it we catch a glimpse of one who was always good
company, a man of insatiable curiosity, not very deep,
but always on the watch for"wise saws and modern
instances"wherewith to make his meaning clear and help
the mutual understanding of peoples.
The Book of Misers was one of a series of essays on
society : others include Of Thieves, Of Young Lovers, Of
Schoolmasters, and Of Singers. The essay on Women
is crammed with sex psychology and, in another series,
our author pleads for equality among the three races that
then made up the Moslem world-the Arabs, the Persians
and the Turks.
All Basra mourned him when he died at the ripe old
age of 91. They mourned him as ail admirable writer,
but above all, as a lovable man. It is a pity we have
no portrait of him. He was, it seems, extremely ugly,
with big bulging eyes, and that is the meaning of his
nickname, Ul-Jahiz. It is, too, the reason why the Caliph
AI-Mutawakkil felt unable to make him tutor to his
sons.
But we are reminded of Socrates ; his ugliness must
have been offset by his smile and his intelligence, and
it must have been forgotten in the enchantment of his
speech. Maybe he would not have stuffed his pupils
with strategy and the Law of the Koran. He would
have taught them to cultivate an open and inquisitive
mind, tolerance, a taste for friendship, respect for their
mother tongue, the whole seasoned with a pinch of
scepticism, for he would certainly have imparted all he
had to give.
It would perhaps be fantastical to see in him an early
Francis Bacon. In any case the sons of the Caliph are
to be pitied for what they missed.
