MARCH 953. Page 7
CHART SHOW'S TELEVISION COVERAGE IN THE U. S. IN 1952.
U
5
A
HOW FUTURE STATIONS ARE EXPECTED TO COVER THE LAND.
ONE TV VIEWER FOR EVERY TWO AMERICANS
EDUCATORS made the biggest news in Americantelevision during the year 1952. The
persistent efforts of. a small group of
enthusiasts who had faith in the great possibil-
ities of educational television, led the United
States Government to recognize officially for the
first time the need for non-commercial, educa-
tional stations side by side with commercial
broadcasting.
On April 13, 1952, the Federal Communications
Commission announced its plan for the future
development and expansion of American TV, and
authorized the establishment of 2, 053 new stations
throughout the country. The challenging and
perhaps revolutionary feature of this plan is that
242 stations-or over 10 per cent of the total
number authorized-were reserved for educa-
tional institutions and non-commercial broad-
casting.
It is not difficult to imagine the sensation that
this decision has caused in educa-
tional circles in every part of the
United States. One educator, Harold
E. Wigren, director of audio-visual
education in Houston, Texas declared
that"April 13, 1952, may go down in
the annals of American education as
the date on which a new era of
educational opportunity was opened to
the American people."Another stated
that'''nor meeting of the American
Council on Education nor any other
group of educators will ever again be
the same. Something new has been
added. That something new is
exciting, it is challenging, it is
revolutionary."
All American educators do not share
this enthusiasm, and point to the
staggering difficulties, both in financ-
ing, and in programming, that
television raises. The FCC decision,
too, was made over the strong
objections by most segments of the
TV industry, led by the National
Association of Radio and Television
Broadcasting, which held that such
educational institutions never could
make a financial success of television.
and might"waste"their allotted
channels.
Up until now, television in the
United States has been operated as a
system of free commercial enterprise
within a framework of regulations
and controls set by a government
agency, the Federal Communications
Commission. The 128 stations now
on the air all carry commercial broad-
casts, and all, except one (run by
Iowa State College) are owned by
private interests who operate them for
profit. Many of these stations are
linked together in coast-to-coast
chains of four networks which provide
nation-wide programmes. In addition.
local stations., even when affiliated
with the networks, televise their own shows. In
the U. S., TV programmes are either commercially
sponsored or"sustained", that is, they are
produced at the stations'expense to meet their
responsibilities as a public service.
Commercial broadcasters point out that it was
only through their effort and capital outlay that
the enormous development of TV was made
possible in America. About one half of all
families in the United States today own televiion
sets. Some don't have it because they don't like
TV, others just cannot afford it, and others live
in areas which are not yet reached by TV
signals.
With the inauguration of coast-to-coast trans-
mission in 1951, people in San Francisco have
been watching programmes every day coming
from New York, 3, 000 miles away, and they accept
this technical miracle as a matter of course.
Children grow up with the idea that it is quite
natural to see the inauguration of a president
in their own living room, or animals pacing about
their cages in a zoo at the other end of the
country.
All parts of the country can take part instant-
aneously in events of national significance.
Dramatic performances can be seen by many
who may never have attended a theatre in their
lives. Many educational and cultural broadcasts"are produced in co-operation with schools and
universities. But the effects of cheap entertain-
ment, of crime stories and of excessive commer-
. cialization, have aroused the public to demand
an improvement in the quality of broadcasts.
Mindful of this criticism, broadcasters in
December 1951, adopted a TV code which
recognizes that"'television, and all who participate
in it, are jointly accountable to the American
public for respect for the special needs of child-
ren, for community responsibility, for the ad-
vancement of education and culture, for the
acceptability of the programme materials chosen,
for decency and decorum in production and for
propriety in advertising. This responsibility
cannot be discharged by any given group of
programmes ; it can be discharged only through
the highest standards of respect for the American
In this photo, the lines (formed by dots) which make up all television images
have been greatlyexaggerated to show how a picture is reproduced on the screen.
home, applied to every moment of every program-
me presented by television".
But the question has been raised as to how
effectively this code has really been applied.
Surveys in past years have pointed to the high
percentage of crime and low standard entertain-
ment in many TV programmes. Since the be-
ginning of this year, a veritable wave of appre-
hension and criticism seems to be sweeping
across the United States, and is evident from the
many newspaper articles, public statements, city
council hearings, parent-teacher association
declarations, etc.
Commercial broadcasters point out that they
are meeting the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the public when they furnish not
only information and education but primarily
entertainment and"escapist"programmes. The
great response to television in America, they
state, is in itself evidence of this.
They feel that they are already making many
serious efforts to meet their responsibility to the
government in broadcasting a certain percentage
of"public service"programmes in return for the
privilege of being permitted to use one of the
limited numbers of broadcast frequencies.
It should be pointed out, in fairness to com-
mercial broadcasters, that almost all the educa-
tional programmes and experiments referred to
in the articles on the next pages have been
conducted over the facilities of commercial sta-
tions. In addition, these stations are co-operat-
ing with museums, zoological gardens, observa-
tories, and other institutions in creating
educational shows of wide interest.
"Zoo Parade", for instance, comes regularly
from the Zoological Garden in Chicago. Through
commentary and demonstration by the director
, and the keepers, it provides instructive and
. entertaining insight into the life of many animal
species."What in the World ?" comes from the
University of Pennsylvania Museum and stumps
', experts who have to identify rare objects such
as a ritual cup from Africa, an old sword from
Siberia, or statues from Peru.
The San Francisco Museum of Art has been
very succesful with a regular programme entiti-
end art in Your Life."Its audience
has grown to more than 80, 000 view-
ers."This means reaching approxi-
mately half the museum's annual
attendance with one TV programme,"
notes the producer, and another
comment notes that"`interest has
been stimulated among people never
before reached by the museums."
TV viewers have had the exciting
experience of watching the stars
through the telescope of a famous
observatory, and the museum at
Stamford, Conn., co-operated with one
network in describing the phenome-
non of a lunar eclipse.
Such broadcasts, however, can be
no more than isolated examples in
a programme pattern which is design-
ed primarily for commercial reve-
nue and must meet the demand of
maximum popular appeal and not
merely of minority groups partic-
ularly interested in education. Many
educators have felt therefore that the
great opportunities of television for
the school and adult education could
not be exploited fully under a purely
commercial system. To change this
situation, their organizations united in
the Joint Committee for Educational
Television.
During the winter of 1950-51, at
hearings before the FCC, this group
representing teachers, educators, ad-
ministrators, men and women in pub-
lic life and other citizens, pleaded
strongly for the reservation of TV
channels for non-commercial educa-
tional institutions. They presented
75 witnesses and a great amount of
evidence to show the need and the
practical possibility of operating non-
commercial television stations devot-
ed to regularly scheduled courses
for children and adults both in cities
and rural areas. They said that
many programmes of these stations would be
integrated with state educational systems and
prepared by local TV councils drawn from
schools, universities, and cultural institutions.
The organizers of this movement had to con-
vince not only the government but also many of
their colleagues in the world of education who
were opposed to large expenses for this pur-
pose. Obviously, such stations could not be set
up unless the majority of educators actively
backed the movement.
When the FCC met the demands of this group
it stated the principal reasons which had convin-
ced it of the need for educational stations in these
words :"'The justification for an educational
station should not, in our view, turn simply on
account of audience size. The public interest will
clearly be served if these stations are used to
contribute significantly to the educational pro-
cess of the nation."
Replying to the contention by the TV indus-
try that the solution lay in educational pro-
grammes over commercial facilities, the FCC
concluded"that voluntary co-operation cannot
be expected to accomplish all
the important objects of edu-
cational television. In order
COURIER

Page 10. MARCH 1953 UNESCO OU
THE CASE FOR AND AGAINST
light entertainment TV shows reach millions of
viewers each week. Above, Jimmy Durante in a
song number that also amuses studio staff.
for an educational
programme to
achieve its aim it is
necessary that
broadcast time be
available for educa-
tors on a regular basis. An audience cannot be
built up if educators are forced to shift their
broadcast period from time to time. Moreover,
the presentation of a comprehensive schedule
of programmes comprising a number of courses
and subjects which are designed for various
age and interest groups may require large
periods of the broadcast day-difficult if not
impossible to obtain on commercial stations."
It is important, however, to point out the
FCC did not relieve commercial stations of
their responsibility to serve the public when
it set aside the 242 non-commercial channels
for educational purposes. As the FCC stated,
"this provision does not relieve commercial
licensees from their duty to carry programmes
which fulfil educational needs and serve the
educational interest in the community in
which they operate. This obligation applies
with equal force to all commercial licensees,
whether or not a non-commercial educational
channel has been reserved in their commun-
ity, and similarly will obtain in communities
where non-commercial educational stations
will be in operation."
Educators had won their first victory. Per-
haps it was also the easiest victory, for the
FCC had given them no more than paper
allocations and in addition had warned that
these allocations might be turned over to
commercial broadcasters after June 1953 unless
educators could give practical assurance that
they would be able to use the frequencies
reserved to them. In short, the FCC plan
simply handed to the educators the urgent
task of finding the necessary resources to set
up TV stations all over the country. TV
costs are staggeringly high. Roughly $ 250. 000
are needed to put up the simplest station and
another $ 250, 000 for operating expenses.
Educational organizations in every State of
the Union are now busy preparing the way.
They must convince legislatures in order to
obtain the needed subsidies, they are consult-
ing engineers on production costs, they are
debating with boards of trustees of universi-
ties on the need for a TV station. They seek
to convince boards of education about the use-
fulness of school TV. And almost every day
the American press carries such headlines as
"TV for Education Urged as a Right" ;
"Chicago may go to public for educational TV
station fund" ;"Teachers in South back TV
network" ;"Milton Eisenhover forms group
pushing for educational TV stations" ;"Non-
commercial Video stations must be spoken for
now or forever lost."
Educators have realized that they must
work together now and in the future. Educa-
tional stations are planning to co-operate
closely on the production of programmes, in
exchanging films and in many other ways.
Statewide TV networks are in preparation and
the U. S. may eventually be covered by a na-
tionwide educational broadcast network. In
New York State, for example, the State Uni-
versity has already been granted licences for
stations in six different cities which will bring
education not only to citizens of large cities
but especially to rural areas and small towns.
By the end of 1952, only 19 applications for
educational TV stations had been filed with
the FCC and 10 construction permits issued.
But none of these stations is yet on the air.
There is a long and. hard road ahead for
educational TV in America. But educators in
the United States are seeking to meet this
challenge which may vitally affect not only the
future of the country's educational system but
the entire character of television broadcasting,
that new force which has struck so deeply into
the heart of the American family.
