JANUARY 1953. Page 5
Pakistan subscribes to the Declaration of Human Rights with its insistence on the equality of women, but it has, through religious habit, although not by Koranic
precept, the problem of"purdah". There are lady members of parliament, but barely one per cent of the women of Pakistan are literate, and women have in the past
been kept out of the country's economic and social life. Here, Tabinda and other Pakistan nursing trainees find new opportunities for emancipation through service.
MM
Symbol of the emancipation
of the women of Pakistan
by R) tch ! e CALDER
T ABINDA Is nineteen-and very lovely. Babanda claims to be a hundredyears old and is as ugly as a witch. Like characters in a fable, these
two are wrestling together for the lives of the mothers and infants of
the Punjab.
.. Behind Tabinda are the forces of new enlightenment and modern
science ; behind Babanda is dark superstition and the black arts of spells
and potions. One is the trained maternity nurse ; the other is a dai, or
traditional midwife.
Babanda lives in the dim, cave-like recesses of a back-street hovel in
Lahore ; it just needs the flapping of bats'wings to complete the picture.
There she crouches, a toothless crone, her white hair yellowed by smoke
and filth, hanging in wisps about her eyes. On a leaf on the dirty clay
floor she is mixing a strange concoction for childbed fever. If the baby
lives she will claim her reward, so much for a girl, so much more for a boy.
If the mother and infant die, it will be"Allah's will", not Babanda's fault.
She sneers at modern hygiene and cackles her lies-like the one of how the
arm of the infant presented itself first ; how she touched the hand with a
live coal, so that the baby instantly withdrew it and, five minutes later,
arrived normally.
She croaks her ill-will towards girls like Tabinda, shameless hussies
going around with naked faces.
For Tabinda is more than a nurse. She is the new Continued on
emancipated woman of Pakistan. When she arrived next page
at the training school staffed by international sister-

Page 6. JANUARY 19 B UNESCO
Teach a woman
and you teach a
whole family
(Continued from previous page)
tutors of WHO. and equipped by Unicef, she wore
a burqua or hood which covered her head and
face. Through its lace visor she glimpsed the
world.
Her father has three wives, of whom her'mother was the first, and three families. He is a
Moslem traditionalist but her mother is not.
When he took a girl as his third wife, she moved
Tabinda and her elder sister away, to give her
daughters the advantages which purdah had
denied her. One has graduated as a doctor ;
Tabinda is qualifying as a nurse, to go out into
the villages.
When Tabinda raised her burqua for the last
time and unveiled her beauty, she joined a
sisterhood of pioneers. Only five years ago the
first Moslem nurse was recruited to a hospital in
Lahore. Before, in pre-partition days, nurses
were mainly white girls or Christian Indians.
Since maternity nursing is"pollution"and
midwives less than the Sweeper Caste, Hindus
were infrequent in that branch of nursing.
Segregation and purdah which strictly applied
means that no Moslem woman should reveal her
face to any man except her husband (and for the
first time to her bridegroom at the wedding)
kept Moslem women out of nursing and the
medical profession generally.
These things are changing. The violent
upheaval of partition which meant the movement
of millions of refugees in and out of Pakistan.
created a volume of human misery and a need
for desperate measures. Refugees arrived wound-
ed, without food and without clothes. Then the
women of Pakistan who had never had an
opportunity of going out and doing any social
service, rallied. Although they were not trained
they volunteered in their thousands-mothers,
grandmothers and daughters went into the
refugee camps. At the same time, Pakistan
women formed a para-military organization in
which they drilled and trained to act in self-
defence. A nursing service on a voluntary basis
was started and these part-trained volunteers
now give regular help in the hospitals.
In addition, a college for women doctors was
opened in conjunction with the Fatima Hospital
at Lahore where 260 women are in training for
their degree in medecine. Women patients must
Tabinda and other nurses make their round through refugee compound.
be treated by women doctors, which means a
duplicate service-one for men and one for
women-so that only an intensification of train-
ing and recruitment can remedy the lot of suffer-
ing women.
In this the international agencies, WHO and
Unicef, are playing their part. Heading the team
is a remarkable, white-haired Scotswoman, Dr.
Jean Orkney, who has spent nearly 20 years in
the service of the women of the subcontinent.
Scene in refugee compound, Lahore.
Local midwives are taught modern methods.
Tabinda examines small refugee boy.
Returning to hospital after day's work.
Around her she has gathered an enthusiastic
team of international nurses, specialists in mid-
wifery, public health and district nursing. Each
has her'"opposite number"in the equally
enthusiastic Pakistan women who will take over
when the UN staff moves on.
They are teaching an increasing number of
girls like Tabinda who very often come, as she
did, veiled to the training college to start their
course which consists of 3 months'preliminary
training ; a year in hospital which includes ward-
training and going out in batches to get experi-
ence in the villages ; then 2i months'nursing
sick children and nine months of public health
nursing.
Until there are enough of these community
midwives, with up-to-date training, the Govern-
ment has still to rely on the untrained dais or
traditional midwives.
Fortunately, they are not all like Babanda.
They may be illiterate and they may. depend more
on lore than on skill, but they are willing to learn.
And there is another inducement-15 rupees a
month scholarships if they attend the Public
Health Centre twice a week for lectures and
demonstrations.
Some like AlIa Raki work with the international
team just for the love of their fellow-beings.
AlIa Raki is poor, young and cheerful. She lives
in an abandoned Hindu Burning Ghat, with
50 other families. The Ghat was the crematorium
where the Hindu dead were burned. The pyres
are still there but around them are the mud-
brick, one-roomed homes of the refugees who
have sheltered there.
With Tabinda, the educated, and AlIa Raki, the
uneducated-both of them the new hopes of Pa-
kistan-I went to the Burning Ghat to see a few-
hours-old baby, born in a stupa or bell-shaped
chapel of a Hindu god. This was dimly lit by
the sunlight through the narrow doorway but the
clay floors had been carefully swept and covered.
Primitive ante-natal preparations had been made
and there was lots of hot water, boiled-up on
fires under the peepul-tree in the temple court-
yard. The delivery had been made under
reasonably safe conditions. The Pakistan nurses
with the coaching of their international tutors
were indoctrinating the mother in child-care.
It is a beginning but women are needed by the
thousand to go out into the villages, where
health services barely exist.
Mother and child services are not just a system
of care and treatment ; they are an education
service as well-a means of breaking through the
isolation of the women, which has meant in the
past that only one woman in a hundred is
literate.
"teach a man", said the Begum Liaquat Ali
Khan, widow of the assassinated Prime Minister
and herself a leader of the women's movement
in Pakistan,.'and you teach one person. Teach
a woman and you teach a whole family."
And Tabinda, her vivid face uncovered, is one
of the teachers. Her example will inspire others.
(Photos Eric Schowb.)
