Page 8, AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953 UNESCO
THE CHRISTIAN ATTITUDE TOWARDS RACE
THE Church's attitude towards the racial question is
clearly indicated in the story of Whitsun. This festival.
as Christians well know, celebrates the birth of the
Church and the revelation of its mystery to the world. Let
us reread the story, as we find it in Acts II, 5, 7-11 :
"And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men,
out of every nation under heaven... And they were all amazed
and marvelled, saying...... how hear we every man in our own
tongue, wherein we were born ? Parthians, and Medes, and
Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judaea,
and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia. Phrygia, and Pam-
phylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and
strangers of Rome... Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them
speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God..."
This passage contains both a certain affirmation and a
negation of the racial concept-two contrasting ideas which,
however, are reconciled in the Church. For the Church
recognizes race for what it is, and at the same time goes
beyond it.
To begin with, race is accepted as a fact, and as a fact
which the Church regards as providential. That is why the
first chapters of Genesis, where the Bible serves as the mouth-
piece of God in setting forth those great realities of the
universe which we cannot help seeing and experiencing, men-
tion the multiplicity of races and languages, giving the
genealogies of the sons of Noah and describing the dispersion
which followed the episode of the Tower of Babel.
Few pure races exist
THE Church regards the variety of races (but not theirA antagonism) as something willed by God, and therefore
as something providential. For mankind, made in God's
image, has potentialities which can find an outlet only in the
various different ways in which the creation is conceived and
expressed. This is true, in the first place, as regards man's
temporal work on earth and, it may be said, as regards
history. And it is even true of the Church, whose unity is
not narrowness, but comprehensiveness. That is why the
Apocatypse, the last book'of Revelations, says of the New
Jerusalem that"they sholl bring the glory and honour of the
nations in it."
The"notions", both the sacred books say. When we
speak of"races", we are using 0 word which belong neither
to Biblical or liturgical terminology, nor to canon law or
theology ; all these prefer the term peoples. The word
o'Racialism implies a
denial of God, for there
can be no God if He is
not the Father of a) !
By Father Yves CONGAR
"race"indicates a homogeneous group of people having
certain genetically determined physical, psychological and
moral features in common. Christianity does not deny the
possibility of such groups ; whether they exist or not is a
matter for science to determine, and if science confirms their
existence Christianity cannot but admit it. But science also
tells us, and the Church is well aware, that in the course of
generations the human melting-pot has been so active that
few pure races are now to be found.
The genetic factor has been by no means alone in forming
the peoples of today ; other factors have been, for example,
similarity of climate, culture, food, way of life, education,
customs, and history. We are confronted not so much by
races as by peoples ; not so much by unadulterated biological
and genetic facts as by"human"facts, impregnated with
human history. It is not only birth, but upbringing, that
makes a man ; he is"brought into the world", in the real
sense, not when he leaves his mother's womb but when educa-
tion has drawn him into the culture of a particular country
and into the life of 0 particular group of human beings with
their own historical background.
People are thus divided among groups which are not all at
the same level of culture, or at any rate of civilization, if we
admit the distinction, traditionally accepted in Germany,
between Culture (Kultur) and Civilization. The first of these
terms denotes the style of life of a given community (that of
the men sometimes known as'''savages''is not necessarily
inferior to our own ; it is suited to the conditions in which
they live, and often reflects a remarkable degree of adaptation
to those conditions). The second means the whole body of
external resources tending to ensure a high standard of com-
fort, knowledge and technical skill.
The Church recognizes these historical inequalities,'t is
not resigned to every'aspect of them. From the outset it has
striven to raise the various peoples to a higher level of human-
ity by emancipating women and children ; by teaching men
how to work, read, write, practise justice and respect the
lives of others ; by founding hospitals and orphanages and so
on. Yet it makes realistic allowance for differences of culture
and civilization. For this reason, the Church's very firm stand
on behalf of unity and equality does not necessarily imply that
everything should be mixed up and reduced to one dead level,
or that all men should be subject to exactly the same rules.
We are not expected to have all things in common with those
whose standard of education, hygiene and manners is lower
than that of the group to which we ourselves belong.
But it will be seen that, in whatever measure it may be
justified, discrimination must not be based on colour or on
racial prejudice. It can stem only from historical and cultural
facts ; it relates not to the"'race"but to the"people"
concerned. Furthermore, respect for the rules that guide each
man's life, and for the customs of his country, is a very
practical form of respect for his human status in itself.
And in saying this-in the very act of affirming the exist-
ence of differences-we find ourselves confronted by that
affirmation of unity which is perhaps the most definite and
energetic pronouncement ever made by Christianity with regard
to the racial question.
Basic equality of all
FOR in the first place, it affirms the unity of the humanspecies, beyond and above all differences. That is the
meaning of the well-know story of the creation of Adam,
and of Eve from Adam-a theological affirmation not to be
invalidated by any attempt on the part of palaeontologists or
anthropologists to impose the theory of polygenism, in the
unlikely event of such a theory being one day favoured by
science. Mankind is a single family, and that fact carries
decisive implications.
It implies the basic equality of all men, in dignity as in
nature. It implies an underlying community of destiny or
vocation, regardless of individual historical destinies. it
implies the genuine capacity of all men to attain to civilization
and its benefits. Not all are at the same level, but all are
capable of rising to the greatest heights. Since all men and
all peoples are associated in an enterprise of humanity that
is of essential interest to each of them, the most advanced
have a certain duty to help the others forward.
Another decisive implication is the rejection of discrimination
based on racial arguments-discrimination whose various
forms, combined and placed at the service of some virulent
nationalist theory, go to make up racialism. Racialism strikes
at the very heart of Christianity, for it destroys that respect and
consideration for'''others''without which charity-the core
of Christianity-cannot exist. Moreover, it denies that God
is the Father of all men, since it refuses to recognize certain
of His children as brothers. In effect, it proscribes the saying
of"Our Father", the Lord's own prayer. It really implies a
denial of God, for there can be no God if He is not the Father
of all. Racialism implies atheism, and its various more or less
pantheistic statements about"Destiny"or even"Providence"
are powerless to conceal that fact..
The Catholic Church has therefore opposed racialism
wherever is has met with it. Such opposition has some-
times lacked the full measure of vigour required, because
Christians and churchmen do not always posses a discernment
and strength of character measuring up to their principles.
But it has been very effective, and often decisive. It is
noteworthy that the Papacy's first anti-racist pronouncement
was made at the very time when the first colonists were
claiming the right to enslave human beings, and confiscate
their property, on the pretext that they were inferior beings :
see Paul H's Bulls referring to Spanish colonization, of May
and June 1537 (quoted in my booklet The Catholic Church and
the Race Question). And it is known-or rather, not well
enough known-how outspokenly the contemporary Papacy
resisted the Nazi race policy and its frenzied anti-Semitism
("Spiritually, we are Semites"said Pius XI).
Colour of no significance
\V/HEN the race question presents itself in the naked andbrutal fo m of a race theory such as Hitlerism, the
Christian attitude is comparatively easy to decide, and
comparatively simple. But this ceases to be so when racialism
is engendered by a complex situation to which historical, cul-
tural, economic, political and even psychological factors have
contributed. A simple reaction may fail to allow for certain
important considerations, not all of them unworthy, and may
thus fall short of what is required. We have the example of
certain very concrete problems that have arisen in South
Africa, and of the very subtle, though sufficiently clear
statements made by the Catholic Bishops in that country in
May and September 1952 (cf. the booklet already mentioned).
Within the Church itself, matters are, once more, simpler.
St. Paul tells us that"there is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female ;
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus" (Galatians III, 28). That
is true. How many examples might be mentioned here ! It is
perhaps rash ( ?) to disobey the regulations concerning railway
compartments at Cape Town or Pretoria, but there is no
difficulty in a Negro kneeling beside a white man at the
Lord's Table, or in a coloured Bishop ordaining European
priests.
The Church, as we have seen, accepts the fact of race and
regards it as providential ; but the Church itself is above race.
Its essential existence takes place at a deeper revel, where
questions of colour, or even of culture, lose their significance.
The event which marked the day of Pentecost is constantly
being repeated, in different ways, in the life of the Church.
For instance, on 29 October 1939, at the beginning of the last
world war, His Holiness Pius XII, to demonstrate the unity of
the Church transcending frontiers and nationalities, conse-
crated twelve Bishops in St. Peter's in Rome-a Chinese, a
French foreign missionary, an Indian Jesuit, a Mexican Satesian,
an Italian Dominican, a Dutch Father of the S. Y. D. (Steyl),
an American, an Irishman, a German Franciscan, a White
Father from Belgium, a Madagascan and a Congolese.
This simple fact gives a clear indication of the Catholic
Church's attitude towards the racial question.
