o ONE M
THE low level of nutrition in most areasf the world is one of the main
concerns of our time. Sheer hunger is
prevalent, and there is the hidden hunger of
pecpte who) ive on inadequate food. We
do not know whether the food supply of the
world was ever adequate everywhere. Cer-
tainly with the increase in population which
accompanied contact with Western civilization
itself, with industrialization and its by-
products, the supply has become inadequate,
for increase of crops has not kept up with
the population growth.
Again, the increase and concentration of
population has sometimes destroyed the very
sources of the food. Overpopulation has
meant overcultivation, and the poverty of the
soil has been reflected not only in diminished
returns but also in crops deficient in essential
minerals. It has meant soil erosion and the
carrying away of the top soil as silt.
Not all difficulties in the realm of nutrition
are due to contact with Western civilization,
however. In the Middle East and the Far
East, for example, nutrition is affected by the
lack of methods for preservation. Lack of
adequate transportation has also meant poor
nutrition. Egyptian fellahin need citrus pro-
ducts, but cannot get them even though they
joe
UNE :

JULY t953. Page))
'S FOOD IS ANOTHER MAN'S POISON'
grow not far away. In China, a surplus of
food in one area cannot alleviate famine in
another, since the food cannot be brought to
the hungry population.
Poor nutrition cannot, then, be attacked by
the dietitian atone. Agricultural specialists
in Greece are working for nutrition when they
institute reforestation. And in many areas,
public health workers, becoming aware of the
pressing need for better nutrition, find them-
selves in the field of agriculture, advocating
better seed and more efficient methods of
preservation.
It is not enough, however, to increase the
available food supply. What has been supplied
must be considered food, and acceptable food,
by the people. In Africa, the British Govern-
ment supplied veterinary service to cattle-
raising tribes, but this did not increase their
food supply at all, and actually contributed to
soil erosion and depletion. These people love
their cattle and kill them only on ceremonial
occasions ; since the ceremonial occasions did
not increase in number, the saving of cattle
through veterinary aid merely resulted in too
many cattle on the land.
To introduce adequate nutrition, it is impor-
tant to bring about changes that are in
keeping with the established food habits of
the people, and are acceptable within the
framework of their value system.
It is undignified
to eat an orange
FOR example, in the United States in theSouth mothers cook food the way each
child likes it, compensating for the
poorness and monotony of the ingredients ; and
any change in the preparation of food would
introduce change in personal relationships. In
some societies, the breast or other food is
offered to the child after punishment ; if we
persuade these people to offer the breast only
at scheduled feedings, or teach them that it
is harmful to eat between meals, we have made
ourselves responsible for finding some way in
which the mother can show reassurance and
acceptance to the punished child.
In some societies, where meals end with a
sweet dessert, mothers withhold dessert as a
way of punishing the child ; this results in a
devaluation of that part of the meal which
contains essential elements necessary for nutri-
tional balance, and the child has to be urged
to eat them because"they are good for him".
Yet mothers depend on this form of punishment,
and will resist attempts to change this stress
on the dessert.
Again, where milk and pulped food are
associated with infancy, men will resist the
drinking of milk, or eating of pulped foods
in special diets which call for them. Where
home and food are strongly identified, chil-
dren reject the school meal, and men the
meal art the plant ; and business concerns in
such countries often give their employees a
longer lunch hour, or arrange the work day
in such a way that men can eat their meals
at home.
A study made by the Committee on Food
Habits of the National Research Council in
the United States during the last war has
made workers aware of the importance of the
"rote which learning plays in the maintenance
of a viable dietary pattern. We now ask, not
how we change a people's bad habits into
good habits, but what are their habits, how
are they learned, by what mechanisms are the
self-preservative choices of some foods and
rejections of others, perpetuated".
There are specific preferences and objec-
tions which affect nutrition and health as well
as the introduction of any new food or way of
preparation. West Africans, for example, have
an aversion to food in its raw state, as fit only
for cattle. The older people think it undig-
nified to eat oranges and discourage children
from eating them as oranges will make them
"soft". Greeks like raw vegetables and fruits,
but not all vegetables are considered edible
when raw. Cucumbers can be eaten only raw,
but zucchini squash must be cooked ; green
beans and peas can never be eaten raw ;
cabbage is good when raw, but cauliflower is
inedible. The fact that many leafy vegetables
go into the salad does not mean that any
such vegetable belongs there.
In sections of Africa, meat is eaten raw,
and food is seasoned with mineral salts ; and
both these practices lead to the spread of
intestinal diseases. Puerto Ricans, living pre-
cariously on too little food, often will not eat
even fruit which grows wild, as they consider
fruit to be poisonous, or dangerous, or a cause
of indigestion. Among many, there is the
feeling that fruit is"cold", a term used for
something objectionable.
Mistakes have been made in the past,
before we knew the importance of food habits
and the cultural and social context of the
food. We tried to introduce supplementary
nutrients through the medium of cream soups
to people who, though they liked soups, would
eat nothing bland and nothing creamy unless
it also contained pieces offering resistance in
chewing.
The right to a diet
of fried chicken
WE upset dietary balance by persuadingSpanish Ame ican schoolchildren in
New Mexico to eat white bread
instead of cold corn tortillas, when their main
source of calcium came from the lime water
in which the corn of the tartillas had been
soaked. We persuaded their mothers to
substitute canned spinach for wild greens, and
when there was no money to buy spinach, the
children went without greens. Hopi mothers
were forced to wean their children if these had
to be hospitalized after they were a year old ;
and when the children came back, the expense
of giving them canned milk out of individual
small cans-since no refrigeration was avail-
able-was sometimes too great for the family
to maintain.
Agricultural experts warn of possible dis-
ruption of dietary balance with the increase of
commercialization. For example, in many parts
of rural India where large amounts of ghee
butter are consumed, the farmer's family
depends heavily on the accompanying butter-
milk ; if butter-making is to become industria-
lized, nutritional planning should take into
account the gap this will leave in the family
diet.
Child care services have often urged new
foods for children, which have perhaps been
good for nutritional adequacy but have made
for strain in family relations. In Greece, where
one nutritionist persuaded mothers to intro-
duce raisin bread and other unacceptable
items into the family meal, this often created
a split between the father's and the children's
food, or brought derision from the father, or
otherwise produced discontinuity in an occa-
sion which is essentially a family communion.
It would probably be equally effective, and
less destructive, to introduce change through
less emotionally important eating situations.
For example, if a Greek child must eat raisins,
these can be introduced into the frequent
snacks,"the passing of the time"in which all
Greeks indulge, as dry chewy raisins, fitting
into an already present food pattern. Cer-
tainly very valuable nutrients can be added
by persuading Greeks to eat more of the
roasted chickpeas they like so well, and which
are so easily and cheaply available. In Puerto
Rico, fruit, if eaten at all, is eaten between
meals, and there would be less resistance if
consumption of more fruit was introduced at
such times.
One commonly practised method of im-
proving nutrition is through supplementary
feeding of children and of expectant and
lactating mothers. This does not attempt to
change or stop existing practices. Such
attempts have met with resistance in the
past, as in an instance when a public health
nurse in a Chinese district was rejected
because she tried to persuade parturient
mothers to eat vegetables instead of a diet
of fried chicken ; these women had been eating
mainly vegetables all their lives, and had
looked to this period when their special status
would be acknowledged by this special diet.
However, in giving supplementary feedings
it is well to remember, in addition, that food
is sometimes the coin of society, of social
ritual, and that much of its emotional suste-
nance is lost when it is not part of the family
meal. During the last war, the Greeks in
Athens voiced a preference for eating cold
food in their unheated houses, rather than hot
food in warm soup-kitchens. UNRRA workers
found 0 similar preference in Germany, also.
Food preferences and aversions have success-
fully been taken into consideration in intro-
ducing change. In nSiam, where there is an
aversion to cow's milk, canned milk did not
evoke the image of the cow, and was intro-
duced acceptably. Wheat products are
increasingly being introduced in the Far East,
either in terms of existing foods such as
noodles and chapattis, or as rolls for snacks,
or bread for an accompaniment to the rice.
