I
iCOURIER JUNE 1953. Page 3
Excavations of ancient cities in Egypt have uncovered some of the early temple and palace libraries dating back some 2000 years B. C. In the ruins of Karnak Temple
at Thebes archeologists found an inscription for a"House of Books". At Idfu, 50 miles away, a well-preserved library building was uncovered which was known as
"The House of Papyrus". A catalogue inscribed on a stone wall of the building reveals that the library contained books on religion, hunting, astrology, astrono-
my and many other subjects. Here, Egyptian scribes are seen writing on papyrus during the 17th century B. C. (Photo Florence Archeological Museum.)
BOOKS WITHOUT CHAINS
SINCE man first set down histhoughts in writing-on clay
tablets or papyrus, on bamboo
or silk scrolls-he has sought to
collect and preserve his writings
for posterity. The idea of a library
must be almost as old as civil-
ization itself, and the story of
libraries is the story of thought
and knowledge recorded, preserved
and made available for use.
It was in Western Asia and
Egypt that man first learned the
art of writing. He seems first to
have produced what we should
now call documents or archives-
such as laws and tribute lists-
together with religious and magic
texts and epic poems. Collections
of such writings were stored in
palaces and temples and formed
the first libraries : and since refer-
ences have been found to official
scribes in Egypt more than 0, 000
years ago, we may safely conclude
that there were libraries at that
date. At Idfu, near Thebes, a
well-preserved library building
was found, with a catalogue cut
into one of its stone walls. A
Greek writer tells us that the
library of King Osymandyas,
dating perhaps from about 1300
B. C., was called"The Dispensary
of the Soul".
The greatest of the ancient
Iesopotamian libraries was that
of King Assurbanipal at Nineveh,
dating from about fi50 B. C.. where
some 30, 000 clay tablets were
discovered by Sir Henry Layard in
1850. Some of these bear marks
of ownership, or classification or
arrangement indications, and the
THE STORY OF LIBRARIES
By Francis L. Kent, Head, Unesco Library,
library is believed to have been
thrown open for the general use of
the King's subjects. This col-
lection is now in the British
Museum in London and is our most
valuable source of information
about the civilizations of Mesopo-
tamia.
No ancient people loved learning
more than the Greeks. Aristotle
had a large collection of books
which served as a sort of university
library for his school of philos-
ophy : and it was one of the
students of this school who, as a
political refugee from Athens,
inlluenced and helped King Pto-
lemy I of Egypt to found the most
famous of all the libraries of
antiquity-that of Alexandria.
The Alexandrine library rapidly
became the centre of a continuing
Greek tradition, and is said to have
contained at one time 700, 000
volumes-a figure we need not
perhaps take too seriously. It is
indeed ironical that Julius Caesar,
who is himself credited with
planning the establishment of
public libraries in Rome, was
responsible for its partial des-
truction during the fighting in
Egypt in 47 B. C. In the declining
years of the Roman Empire all
Libraries in Roman territory, in-
cluding what remained of the
Alexandrine library, were closed bv
the Emperor Theodosius and their
contents destroyed or scattered.
Let us here leave the Western
world, at a point in history when
culture must indeed have seemed
to have disappeared for ever, and
look for a moment at the libraries
of China. An imperial library
existed at the time of the Chou
dynasty (1122-2W B. C.) ; but the
so-called"First Emperor", in 221
B. C., decreed that all books save
those on magic, medicine and
agriculture should be burnt, and
himself took charge of the'work
of censorship. Many treasures of
learning, including the work of
Confucius, were preserved only
through concealment, and it was a
hundred years before Hsiao Wu re-
established libraries and began to
collect and transcribe the surviving
masterpieces of Chinese literature.
During the Sung Yuan and l\1ing
dynasties (060-1C44) some of the
imperial libraries were opened to
students. Like the early libraries
of India, Japan and other Asiatic
countries, those of China are
especially noteworthy for their
magnificent collections of philos-
ophical, religious and literary
manuscripts, many of which are
even now only partially known to
Western scholars.
In the West, the gap left by the
complete cessation of all Greek and
Roman culture at the end of the
fourth century was gradually and
at first unobtrusively filled by a
rising power-the Christian
history. In the course
of military operations
by the Turks, the last
Byzantine Emperor'
(Continued
on next
Page.)
church, interested much in theo-
logy but little in the classics, toiling
in the monasteries amid a world 01
turmoil to produce for the glory of
God and the enlightenment of man
the illuminated manuscript Bible,
liturgical book our treatise on
ecclesiastical law.
We owe the monastic library to
St. Benedict, who in the sixth cen-
tury enjoined reading and study
upon his monks, and to monastic
libraries we owe many features of
library administration as we know
it to-day. The Carthusians and
Cistercians even had a system of
loans. Intellectual horizons began
again to widen, and contacts
between man and man to increase.
From the monk in his cell to the
early collegiate 01'un i \'e I'sit Y
library, usually a large room with
separate small compartments or
bays, was a slow but easy transi-
tion. First, the books chained to
the shelves and the readers sitting
facing them ; then, the books un-
chained and the readers taking
them to desks set in the bays, with
some kind of central corridor
giving access to all bays-an
arrangement still much used in
modern libraries, since it places
the maximum number of readers
close to the books they require and
at the same time affords a degree
of privacy and quiet.
And at this point, about the middle
of the fifteenth century, occurred
one of the great miracles of

Page 4. JUNE 1953 UNESCO COl
"SOME LIBRARIANS TRY HARD TO
BE GOOD CUSTODIANS OF BOOKS ;
A FEW UNFORTUNATELY SUCCEED"
(continued from previous Page)
met his death at Constantinople in
1453, when the city was captured.
The resulting migration of scho-
lars and students westwards
towards Rome recalls the migration
of a former generation of scholars
to Alexandria. But in this second
Renaissance there was a difference.
Within a year or two of the fall
of Constantinople, there was dis-
covered far off in the Rhineland the
art of printing, one of the most
revolutionary inventions of all
time. How, without printing and
the almost equally miraculous
discovery in Europe at about the
same time of the craft of paper-
making, already long known in
Asia, could the vast intellectual
potential of the European monas-
teries and universities and of
the migrating scholars from the
East have found expression and
achieved synthesis ? Even scribes
turned printers to cope with the
flood of work-the English
Caxton among them. And the
revival'of Greek and Roman
learning, with all the philosophical
and scientific advances which it
inspired, had a profound effect on
libraries.
The mediaeval arrangement of a
library in bays was now felt to be
insufficiently expressive of the
universality of knowledge, and
new libraries began to be built of
which the principal feature was a
large general reading hall with
book-cases round the walls and
readers'desks in the middle. The
first of these was the Royal Library
in the Escorial near Madrid, built
in 1584 ; it was the forerunner of
the reading rooms of the Vatican
in Rome, the Bibliothèque Natio-
nale in Paris, and, by a further
development, the great circular
rooms of the British Museum in
London and the Library of Con-
gress in Washington.
Some of these libraries, with
their high rooms, book-lined to the
cornice, are quite incredibly incon-
venient from the modern point of
view, and many have risked their
necks on wavering ladders only to
find the wanted book still just out
of reach-but they were of the
very spirit of the Renaissance :
classical and not Gothic, compre-
hensive and not divided into separ-
ate compartments. The only really
continuous thread connecting the
intellectual life of ancient Rome,
the mediaeval Church and the
Renaissance was, of course, the
Latin language.
For four centuries from the
Renaissance, libraries grew and
multiplied rapidly, and the great
libraries of the modern world
began to take their present shape.
Various forms of copyright law
ensured the growth of their collec-
tions, and if access to some was
restricted, they were in general
open to all students.
There was one more great
change still to come, and it was
that which was brought about by
the extension of education, with its
related demand for"recreational"
reading available for all. Author-
ities may still be trying to settle
whether England or the United
States of America possessed the
first modern public library ; what
is undeniably true is that the
public library movement began in
both countries about 1850, and has
been spreading to almost every
country in the world ever since.
The public library movement
was an old idea in a new form.
As we have seen, the library of
King Assurbanipal at Nineveh was
probably open to the public, and
there were certainly public librar-
To prevent theft, the old libraries used to chain the books to the cases. This
old print shows the famous Dutch library of the University of Leyden, founded
in 1575. It soon became one of the foremost universities of Europe.
ies in ancient Rome. A number
of town or communal libraries,
open to all who could read, arose
in various countries soon after the
Renaissance, while the contents
of many others were thrown open
to public use in consequence of the
great European revolutionary
movements of the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries-
even though it frequently happen-
ed that no provision was subse-
quently made for their upkeep.
But the modern movement is
based on several new assumptions.
Firstly, the present-day public
library is in general supported
from national or local taxes spec-
ially set'-aside for its upkeep ;
secondly, it acts on the supposition
that all citizens of all ages, in all
walks of life, either can read or
are being taught to do so. From
this has followed a new conception
of the function of the librarian,
who is no longer a"keeper", res-
trictive in outlook and fearful of
losses, but a man actively concern-
ed to get the right book to the right
reader at the right time-a man
who takes delight in seeing his
shelves half-empty because he
knows his books are well and
frequently used.
As one librarian recently put it,
"Some librarians try hard to be
The Melbourne Public Library in Australia is regarded by experts as being in the highest world class. With more than
600, 000 books, it provides information on all subjects required by research students and business men. This picture of
the reading room was taken from one of the galleries on the fourth floor of the library. (Australian Official Photo.)
good custodians of books ; a few of
them unfortunately succeed."
Moreover, the librarian no longer
contents himself with supplying
what is asked for ; he now strives
to anticipate demands and even to
create them. Not only do books
go out for home reading from
libraries in the large towns ; there
are also rural libraries, libraries
carried by motor vehicle or on
horseback to remote villages or
sent by train or air in boxes ; there
are libraries in hospitals, schools
and prisons, there are libraries dis-
tributed by boat to seamen.
And with all this has come a
growing awareness of the essential
unity of librarianship. In many
countries the popular libraries have
stimulated a demand among their
own readers for books for study as
well as for recreation, and inter-
library loan systems have arisen to
make the best possible use of
available resources. In these sys-
tems the learned libraries too have
played a most important part, and
it is no uncommon thing for a
library van to call at a remote farm
bringing a book on veterinary
science, borrowed perhaps from
some university, for the farmer, a
book on some aspect of household
management for his wife, and
fiction, magazines or other reading
matter for both the grown-ups and
the children. The ideal inter-
library loan system would provide
any book on any subject for
anyone at any place and at any
time-and some systems are not
far from achieving this ideal.
As long ago as R77 Dr. Poole,
librarian of the Chicago Public
Library, said that he could see no
more valid reason for excluding
children from a library than from
a church. Forty years earlier,
indeed, a juvenile library had been
established at West Cambridge,
Massachusetts, but the children's
library movement really dates
from about 100, when children's
sections began to be considered as
normal as reference and loan col-
lections.
Some of the more modern
children's rooms, attractively decor-
ated and with small tables and
chairs, under the supervision of a
specially trained assistant, are
most inviting and have met with
well-deserved success. The un-
derlying value of the children's
library resides in the opportunities
it gives for early lessons in good
citizenship, care of public property
and independent thought and
judgment. The library becomes
part of each citizen's heritage fpom
childhood onwards.
The latest chapters in this long
history concern such developments
as film and gramophone record
libraries, and improvements in
library techniques. Even the use
of automatic machinery for library
purposes is being studied. But all
take their place within the main
framework of service to the com-
munity-a service which has now
become international, not merely
local or national, and is one of the
most potent forces for international
understanding in the world to-day.
