DECEMBER 1953. Page 17
Teachers all over the world are
forever hunting out new
ways of breaking old rou-
tines. New ways, that is, of
making subjects come alive. New
ways of capturing youthful imagi-
nation and enthusiasm. In Japan,
there is an especially interesting
experiment now underway. Tea-
chers have just joined forces with
the national radio and television
network. And together, they are
trying to determine how television's
magic powers can best be put to
work in Japanese classrooms.
The basic idea of this new Japa-
nese experiment is to find out exact-
ly how the animated images of
television can help young students
take in abstract and complicated
ideas. Often, teachers have used
photographs and film-slides for just
such a purpose. Sometimes films
or radio talks have helped. Now.
Japan's teachers have decided to go
still further. Like teachers in
France, the United States and a few
other countries, they are trying out
the teaching powers of the newest
medium of all-television.
Here is what they are doing.
Every afternoon at one o'clock, the
national network sends out a fifteen
minute programme intended for
young viewers seated in their class-
rooms. The programmes go out
over each of Japan's new transmit-
ters-in Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya
Special school programmes have now been added to those for general audiences.
Japan's young students find educational television a new and lively medium of
instruction. It aids teachers and supplements text-books in a truly vivid fashion.
(Photos : Broadcasting Corporation of Japan-N. H. K.)
- three tran8mitters that have been
functioning only since the begin-
ning of this year when Japan first
began television broadcasting.
At the same time, a few classes
conveniently located near the capi-
tal have been selected for a guinea-
pig role. These try-out classes are
in both primary and secondary
schools. They are probably the
most important aspect of the whole
experiment. For educational tele-
vision is still so new and its tech-
niques so untried, that before at-
tempting to teach the'youngsters,
the programme producers themsel-
ves first have to do some pretty
active research work. It is like
serving an apprenticeship in a new
trade.
And it is not always easy. Take
this example, for instance. One
education television producer a few
months ago managed to create a
special series that he called"Tele-
vision Travels". In this program-
me, two children journeyed all over
Japan-one of them a boy named
Terebi, the other a little girl named
Tereko. Everywhere they went,
they spoke to the local inhabitants
about their cities, their local monu-
ments, and so on. It all seemed an
excellent technique for teaching
school children about their own
country. And to make the idea
even more appealing, the roles of
little Terebi and Tereko were given
not to young actors but to mario-
nettes.
It did not work out well at all.
'When the teachers and the televi-
sion experts checked up at the gui-
nea-pig schools, they found that
they had made a bad mistake. All
the children had been so absorbed
watching the puppets that they had
not taken in any of the information.
And anyway, the puppets had creat-
ed a special atmosphere of un-
reality, and that, too, conflicted
with the factual descriptions of the
geography lessons.Similar presentation problems
have arisen in televising other ex-
perimental programmes."Fables of
the World"set out to tell fairy
tales of many nations, but limited
resources prevented the visual side
of the programme from being
attractive enough to make the story
vivid.
However, other programmes have
succeeded magnificently from the
very start. One such success is a
series called 'Understanding Classi-
cal Art". It is meant for fifteen-
year-olds, and it is produced with
the help of specialists from Japan's
leading museums. Here, the televi-
sion cameras focus on examples of
the great art of the past, draw out
their beauty and show comparisons
- while a commentator explains
and. appropriate classical music
plays in the background.
For the six-year-olds, there is a
television series called"Let's Play
with Rhythms"-a sort of rhythm
and dance course. There are also
scientific programmes for the older
children-anatomy courses, for
example, or chemistry courses.
Here, the television camera takes
the youngsters into magnificently-
equipped laboratories of the sort
that most of the world's schools
don't even dare dream about. Here
they can watch experiments that in-
volve equipment too expensive for
their own schools.
In another successful program-
me,"The State of Nature", chil-
dren were given explanations of
various geographical features.
They were shown how volcanoes
were formed, why tides rise and
fall, and many other natural phe-
nomena. In addition to using pho-
tographs, films, models and expe-
riments, programme planners made
a maximum use of real objects,
and these were sometimes viewed
through microscopes. Though the
scale of experiments was limited
by available studio facilities, good
results were obtained.
In'"Our Bodily Structure", the
functions of various organs such as
the heart, lungs, stomach etc., were
shown in individual programmes.
Here again the results were good as
long as there was plenty of move-
ment in the pictures on the screen.
Emphasis was placed on demon-
strations in the studio.
Each week, the"Saturday Club"
has entertained young audiences
with drama, ballet, instrumental
music, choirs, gymnastics and reci-
tations presented by semi-profes-
sional drama groups of children or
by pupils from the schools.
Television is eminently suited for
such educational work. It is prac-
tical and it is appealing. For Ja-
pan's young students, educational
television is a new lively medium
that hacks up teachers and text-
books in a truly vivid fashion.
URIER
