EscaOURIER DECEMBER 1953. Page I
SYMBOL OF EUROPEAN
COLLABORATION FOR
NUCLEAR RESEARCH
WITHIN a single lifetime theatom has changed its aspect
completely. When Roentgen,
Becquerel and the Curies
discovered the X-ray (1895), radio-
activity (1896) and radium (1898)
no-one had considered that the
atom could have an interior. Less
than sixty years later, scientists del-
ve within the atomic nucleus and
discover the maze of fundamental
particles of matter and of energy
that have been reported in the
preceding articles : electrons and
positrons, protons and neutrons,
mesons and neutrinos.
These particles compose the atom
as atoms compose the earth and the
stars. All this new knowledge has
multiplied the majesty and the
mystery of the universe. It has had
terribly destructive uses as well as
enormously beneficial ones. But this
is only the beginning. Far more
will certainly be revealed in the next
fifty years than in the past fifty.
The scale and pace of research
have changed too. Roentgen and
Becquerel made their discoveries
almost accidentally by noticing that
photographic plates wrapped in black
paper, beyond the reach of light, had
been fogged by unsuspected ra-
diations from a vacuum tube in the
one case and from a small package
of uranium salts in the other. It
was, to be sure, no accident that they
investigated the cause of these
mysteries and thus made their great
discoveries.
A job for teamwork
IT was superb skill and vast pa-tience that enabled Pierre and
Marie Curie to track down the
"Becquerel rays"and to discover
their origin in radium. But those
epoch-making researches were done
in small, cold, university laboratories,
at Wurzburg and at the Sorbonne in
Paris, with a supply of plain dishes
and a few simple but accurate
instruments, designed and built by
the investigators themselves-plus
long hours of hard work, often at
night after professorial duties.
Those days are gone. Today the
frontiers of atomic science are so far
from the everyday world that it
takes large, expensive and organized
expeditions to reach them. A cy-
clotron for penetrating the nucleus
costs millions of dollars. To operate
it at thousands of horsepower costs
thousands of dollars per day and
requires the combined work of large
teams of physicists, chemists, ma-
thematicians, engineers, electricians
and also biologists and physicians.
The whole undertaking is so
expensive that no university any-
where can establish a modern
nuclear research laboratory without
the financial aid of its government.
And there are very few governments
in these days of economic strain that
can afford a major programme of
nuclear research. So most students
and scientists the world over have
little chance of participating in this
greatest scientific adventure of the
twentieth century. Yet the pioneer
work had been European.
The European Cultural Conference
meeting at Lausanne in 1949, first
recommended that specialized Euro-
pean institutes be established in
fields where the costs exceed the
resources of individual governments
and specifically urged the setting up
of such an institute in nuclear
physics. At the General Conference
of Unesco at Florence, Italy, in 1950,
Professor Isidor Rabi of Columbia
University in New York, proposed
that Unesco should take the lead in
bringing together European scientists
and governments to establish a
European centre for nuclear research
using their combined intellectual and
financial resources. Three years
later, in July 1953, the Convention
for the European Organization for
Nuclear Research, drawn up under
Unesco auspices, was signed at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Paris.
It will be a reality when formally ra-
tified by seven nations.
The resolution passed by the
Unesco General Conference at Flo-
rence was, in fact, somewhat broader.
It authorized the Director-General
"to assist and encourage the for-
mation and organization of regional
research centres and laboratories in
order to increase and make more
fruitful the international cho 1-
laboration of scientists in the search
for new knowledge in fields where
the effort of any one country in the
region is insufficient for the task".
Thus Unesco has also sponsored
the establishment of an Inter-
national Computation Centre, pro-
bably to be located in Rome, where
modern electronic computers will be
available for the use of the scientists
of member nations. And, on the
other side of the earth, Unesco is
studying the possibility of an inter-
national research centre in oceano-
graphy in the Indo-Pacific region.
Twelve European nations have
taken part in the discussions and
planning and are expected to become
members of the European Organi-
zation for Nuclear Research. They
are : Belgium, Denmark, France, the
German Federal Republic, Greece,
Italy, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and Yugoslavia. Other
states may later be admitted to
membership by unanimous vote of
the member states. The cost is
estimated at 120 million Swiss francs
(28 million dollars, 10 million pounds
sterling) for the first seven years, in-
cluding construction and operation,
which will be provided by the
member states in proportion to their
average national Incomes.
Rivalling cosmic rays
WHILE the new organization willactively footer the co-operation
between separate national re-
search centres especially in nuclear
theory, it will have a central labora-
tory located on a site approximately
2, 000 feet square about three miles
northwest of Geneva, Switzerland,
and adjoining the French border on
land offered by the Geneva Canton.
A staff of about fifty experts, many
of them part-time consultants, has
been at work for a year and a half
on detailed plans for the buildings
and the powerful machines. The
Secretary-General is Professor
Edoardo Amaldi, professor of Ex-
perimental physics at the University
of Rome. The group responsible for
the design of the laboratory itself is
headed by Professor Lew Kowarski,
Scientific Director in the Atomic
Energy Commission, France, while
the Director of the theoretical group
is Professor Niels Bohr, Director of
the Institute of Theoretical physics
in Copenhagen.
There are also two special study
groups for the design of the two
major high-energy accelerators.
That for the 600 million electron-volt
synchro-cyclotron is headed by Dr.
C. J. Bakker, professor of physics at
the University of Amsterdam, and
that for the great 25 thousand
million electron-volt proton-syn-
chrotron is. under Dr. Odd Dahl,
Head of the Section for Applied
physic. s at the Michelsen Institute in
Bergen Norway.
The smaller of the two machines
will have ample power to generate
mesons for detailed study. It will
have an electro-magnet sixteen feet
in diameter, weighing 2, 500 tons and
fitted with two electric magnetizing
coils that together will weigh another
180 tons. It will be surrounded by a
thick concrete wall and covered by a
concrete roof. It will cost about
17 million Swiss francs (4 million
dollars, 1. 4 million pounds sterling)
and will take about four years to
build so that it should be ready for
operation in 1957 or 1958.
The proton-synchrotron, however,
will be far larger and more costly.
It will generate particles with ten
times as much energy as is provided
by any existing machine and will
embody a recently discovered prin-.
ciple for controlling them. It will
be the first machine to produce par-
ticles with as muc. h energy as is
carried by the cosmic rays from outer
space. No one can predict what it
will reveal but the experts have great
expectations of reaching the inner
secrets both of matter and of energy.
Its great magnet will be relatively
small in cross-section but will form
a circle some 650 feet in diameter,
buried in a deep trench in the earth
and covered with thick concrete.
Each time a high-speed particle goes
around the ring it will travel nearly
- 2. 000 feet and in half a million
circuits-which would require only a
little more than a second-it will
travel as far as from the earth to
the moon, at practically the velocity
of light. Emerging then it will be
the most energetic projectile ever
produced by man.
The proton-synchrotron will cost
about 55 million Swiss francs (12. 8
million dollars, 4. 5 million pounds
sterling) and will probably take
seven years to build so that it will
not be ready for use until 1960.
It is important to mention that the
Convention of the European Organi-
zation for Nuclear Research states
that its purpose is"to provide for
collaboration among European States
in nuclear research of a pure scien-
tific and fundamental character".
Also, it.'shall have no concern with
work for military requirements and
the results of its experimental and
theoretical. work shall be published
or... made generally available".
This means that its work will have
no relation to war and none of its
results will be secret but will be the
property of mankind. It will, in
fact, be the beginning of a new era
in science, one of maximum co-
operation among scientists across
national and linguistic borders, and
a common peaceful effort to master
the secrets of nature in order to in-
crease the resources of humanity.
A model of the future European Laboratory for Nuclear Research which will house the world's most powerful instruments to explore matter and energy at
Meyrin, near Geneva. The centre's proton-synchrotron (A) will be the largest of its kind in the world. Its giant magnet (some 600 feet in diameter) is buried in a
concrete filled trench. The building to house another giant machine, a synchro-cyclotron is shown at B. Remaining buildings (C) are laboratories and workshops.
0
