SC<OURIER APRIL 1953. Page 3
A dike in the making. From an artificial island (top
photo) ribbonlike form of dike begins to wind its way
across what was once Zuider lee. When tugs and
workers have completed their task and pumped out
water, the dike will protect a new polder, and the Nether-
lands will have won more productive land from the sea.
by Michel SALMON
W RILE the full force of last February's devastating storm was. stillsweeping over the southern provinces of the Netherlands, a Dutch
official declared :"Not one inch of flooded land will be abandoned"
From the Governor of the stricken province of Zeeland also came words
with a courageous ring :"New land will be conquered."
Thus, in the midst of a catastrophe in which 430, 000 acres of land were
inundated, the Netherlands were not only preparing to throw back the
invading waters, but also to undertake new conquests against the sea.
Anyone not acquainted with the tenacious and enterprising character
of the Dutch people might well judge them rash to offer once again the
age-old and impudent challenge to their eternal enemy : Deus mare,
Batavus litora tecit-"God made the sea, the Dutch made the coastline."
Since the recent noods, the distinctive, deeply indented shape of
Holland's coastline has become more familiar to most people. But the
extent of the disaster has surprised those who do not realize the
vulnerability of this country, some parts of which are situated more than
20 feet below sea level.
If Holland's entire system of dikes, which total some 2, 000 miles in
length, had been breached, instead of only those in Zeeland, nearly half
the country including the rich provinces in the West would have disap-
peared under several feet of water. Amsterdam, The Hague and Rotter-
dam, the most densely populated centres, would have resembled the
legendary cities of Ys. Only the countryside of Drenthe and Gelderland,
and the poor lands of Overijssel and Brabant would have been spared.
this will be just an unpleasant memory III'tWo years or Sic
Go and see our polders-those around the Zuider Zee
that the sea was unable to conquer.
And so, at the invitation of the"Waterstaat en Verkeer",
(Continued
on following
pages.)
Today, the traveller who crosses Holland, by-passing the"zone of opera-
tions"in the south-west, cannot help being struck by the spirit of calm
determination he encounters everywhere. The Dutch people go about their
normal activities with perhaps even more energy than usual, but neither
feverishly nor with an air of despair.
As an engineer at Dordrecht calmly remarked to me :"After all, we
shall have less work this time than we did after the war, when we had
to drain about 570, 000 acres of land."
Later, at The Hague, another Netherlander told me :"We are filled
with gratitude by the immense example of international co-operation
which has been shown by countries all over the world. But we should
like our friends in other countries to know that we shall recover from
this tragedy by our own work, that Dutch agriculture will, except in the
devastated areas, meet its commitments, that our factories will continue
to turn out their products, that our workshops, shipyards and ports will
continue their activities. The inundations have not reduced our export
capacity. One of the most effective forms of help the world can give
us is to realize this fact and act upon it."
It was also in The Hague that I was given the following advice :"Don't
go away with the picture of the Zeeland devastation in your mind. All..-------------..............................-.......-... 1

Page 4. APRIL 1953 UNESCO
ZUIDER ZEE
protective dike which was now losing :
its effectiveness anyway. This prev-.
ented any more of the materials being
lost in the gulf.
All the ships, floating cranes and
tugs in the area were warned to
stand by to assist in the work at the
danger spot. After hours of super-
human effort the battle was won.
All the gaps were sealed. The last
opening was finally closed on May 28.
1932, at 1 p. m., as the ships gathered
around sounded a salute on their
sirens. The radio announced the
news to a waiting nation, and as the
victory was celebrated in every town
and village, joyous peals of thanks-
giving rang across the flat country-
side from all the church towers and
belfrys. And at the place where the
great dike was finally closed a simple
monument was placed, bearing the
inscription"Een Volk dat leefs, bouwt
zign toekomst" (A people that lives,
builds its future).
Thus confined, the Zuider Zee
became a fresh water lake, safe from
the tides, and was renamed the
Ijsselmeer. Divided up by smaller
dikes and pumped dry through
gigantic sluices emptying into the
North Sea, the former Zuider Zee
will, in a few decades, give the
Netherlands its largest province,
increasing the country's total area by
some 12 per cent. So far, 168, 034
The greatest dike in the world, some twenty miles long stretching from North Holland to Friesland, separates the Zuider
Zee from the North Sea. It is planned to lay a double line railway track beside the present motor road and cyclists'path.
(Continued from the Netherlands
. previous po ge) Ministry responsib-
le for the drain-
age of the polders and for river
traffic, I went north to see the newest
of these polders.
Race with the sea
ABOVE my head, I saw a ship glidemajestically past me. I spied
several light-houses left high
and dry among the fields ; islands,
with meaningless jetties, surrounded
by a completely flat landscape which
reminded me of the sea itself. This
was the polder-a land wrested from
the sea and the rivers, and proudest
of all the empires won by the bold
and enterprising Dutch.
It brought to my mind the vivid
description of the Czech writer, Karel
Capek :"Imagine a stretch of sea built
round with dikes and then pumped
dry, leaving behind a great beach of
fine sand and a bottom rich with the
deposits carried down by the rivers
through the centuries. The Dutch
drain this fertile soil and plant grass ;
they set their cows to pasture and
make the cheeses which are sold at
Gouda and Alkmaar..."
The story of the transformation of
the Zuider Zee, once an enormous
stretch of sea 1, 351, 400 square miles
in area, concerns one of the finest
achievements of our century. It began
when C. Lely, an engineer whose name
is as honoured in the Netherlands
today as are those of Rembrandt,
Vondel and Spinoza, conceived the
idea of creating a dike which was
to span the twenty mile gap separat-
ing North Holland from Friesland.
At the start of the 20th century the
vast bay of the Zuider Zee separated
the provinces of Friesland and Overijs-
sel from Noord Holland. However,
after serious floods in 1916, the Dutch
Parliament approved a project for the
partial draining of this immense sheet
of water.
On May 1, 1919, the work began and
by 1923, engineers had started to close
up the narrow stretch of sea between
the coast of northern Holland and the
island of Wieringen. Two years later,
Wieringen was joined with the main-
land and the area of reclaimed land
became the first of the Zuider Zee
polders, the"Wieringermeerpolder".
Work on the main dike now began
to the east of Wieringen, between this
former island and the Friesian coast
20 miles away, with the construction
of an artificial island on which two
ports with equipment and workshops
were installed. These artificial ports
provided shelter for floating equip-
ment, such as giant cranes, and for
dumps of construction materials.
The foundations of the main
causeway, which was formed of two
separate dikes of clay and stones bet-
ween which many tons of sand were
poured, were laid in several different
points at once. But almost immediate-
ly, engineers ran into difficulties
because of variations in the depth of
the sea bed. Channels, some of which
were extremely deep, cut across the
path planned for the dike, and it was
foreseen that the sea currents in the
Zuider Zee, amplified by the effects
of the construction work, would scour
more and more sand from the beds
of these channels, making them still
deeper.
To counteract this, the engineers
began to close the channels with
underwater protective dikes, thus
forcing the currents to rise off the
sea bed and now over the top of these
protective works. But, as the main
dike grew longer and the still open
sections more narrow, the currents
raced through these gaps more
fiercely at each tide. Finally their
force was sufficient to sweep away
all the material which was being
dumped in to fill the remaining
openings.
Then began a dramatic race bet-
ween man and sea. For a moment
it seemed that the sea would win the
contest. So fast were the currents
that they had formed a chasm nearly
90 feet deep in front of the protective
works which were in danger of being
swept down into the tremendous hole.
If this had happened the men work-
ing there would have irreparably lost
the battle, despite all their technical
knowledge. It became useless to
continue dumping earth and stones
in the water for the current carried
everything away.
A quick decision was needed as the
protective dike might have been swept
away at any moment and, moreover,
a storm already sweeping southern
Holland was reported to be coming up
the coast. The engineers decided to
start work immediately at a point
some 30 feet to the rear of the

: COUR) ER APRIL 1953. Page 5
..
DIKE-THE GREATEST IN THE WORLD
acres have been drained, out of
538. 696 acres which are to be estab-
lished. These are the"Wieringer-
meerpolder"whose dikes were wan-
tonly destroyed by the Nazis in
April 1945, a fortnight before they
capitulated, and the North-East
Polder.
Dutch"far west"
A T Kampen, a picturesque Hans-eatic town, I left the"oude
land", or old country, and soon
reached the North East Polder. The
typical chessboard landscape, with its
roads intersecting at right angles and
its scattered houses unrolled slowly
before me.
The Dutch sometimes speak of the
Polders as their"Far West"and, in
fact, this polder is a sort of Far West
- prefabricated and surveyed in
detail even before it emerged from
the waters. Like the"new"lands of
America in the 19th century, the
fertile soil of the polders will soon
provide land for settlers from other
parts of this small country-the most
densely populated in Europe (more
than 770 people to the square mile).
Even the inn where I lunched, the
"Het wapen van Ens"brought to
mind the saloons one used to read
about in one's youth. And though
the"polderjongens"-the young
men working here and leading an
almost monastic communal life-do
not wear a cowboy's picturesque garb
or go chasing outlaws over the prairie
on horseback, they are engaged in
one of the most thrilling adventures
of modern times here on the northern
borders of the Netherlands.
At the tiny village of Markness I
was welcomed by the"Staat-boer",
one of the government farmers.
Here, everything was clean and
orderly-an enormous farm kept
scrupulously clean and equipped with
a radio and telephone ; rooms that
were bright with hot-house flowers.
All the outbuildings were equipped
with air conditioning and in the fire-
proof cow-houses, the plump Frisian
cows operated their own automatic
drinking water suppliers. Great sums
of money have been invested in the
polders and to supervise their devel-
opment an elaborate administrative
and social structure has been created,
in which the"staat-boer"has a
leading place.
When a polder is drained and the
mud and peat of the sea bottom
revealed, the ground is quite unfit for
working and is so soft that it will not
bear a man or a machine. This is
where the Ministry of Works engineers
take things in hand.
They dig canals-the first lines
of communication
in the polder-
thousands of miles
of drainage tren-
ches and ditches,
and lay countless
pipe-lines to carry
off the water from
deep down in the
soil and remove the
salt. As soon as the
earth its dry and
firm, it is analysed
by other specialists.
They then prepare
a detailed geologi-
cal map so as to
determine w h i c h
crops shall be allo-
cated to different
sections, while the less fertile areas
are marked out as sites for towns
and villages and for the planting of
woodlands.
The"Waterstaat"builds farm-
houses, makes motor roads (there are
310 miles of roads in the North-East
polder), plants various species of trees
and puts up public buildings. All this
is done with the technical advice of
an expert known as a"landscape
architect". Only when everything is
ready and the earth has produced one
or two satisfactory crops, thanks to
the concerted endeavours of public
works, agricultural science, botany,
geology, microbiology and even ar-
Building the dike is a slow, painstaking job.
cheology, are the ordinary farmers
called in.
But there remain other things to
do before the farmers take over the
land."'Land hunger"in the Nether-
lands is very great and the polder is
too small to satisfy everyone's needs.
The State therefore distributes the
land by a democratic process-a
competitive examination ! Jan from
far away Limburg, Kess from Zeeland,
and Piet from Friesland, assemble in
a large farm to sit for written exami-........... +,................ n............ 1 +-.... 1", 0.nations, and take
an oral and a
"practical"under
the control of
(Continued
on next page.)

Page 6. APRIL 1953 UNESCO : YOU
THE POLDERS WRESTED
FROM THE SEA
This map of the Zuider Zee (or the Ijsselmeer, as it is now called)
and the cross-section of the area bounded by the letters A-B-C, shown
above it, make it easy to understand why Holland is also called"The
Netherlands". The map shows the sites of five polders. The Wier-
ingermeer polder, to the northwest, was completed in 103 ?, hut the dikes..". 1---
had to be repaired and the area
pumped dry after war damage in
1945. Work on the North East
Polder was delayed by the war,
and it was only completed in re-
cent months. work on the East
Polder is now being carried out,
while the two remaining polders
in the south and the west are in
the planning stage. The rest of
the Ijsselmeer is separated from
the North Sea by the great dike
completed in 1932.
At the point"A"of the cross
section are shown the natural sand
dunes of the West coast of
Holland. Their height can be
measured by the fact that even the
highest of the tides (the storm
flood level) is well below their
summits. But the area lying
behind them is well below sea
level. Further east, the'Vier..
ingermeer Polder (protected by the
dike shown at B") is actually
13 feet below sea level. Between
the cross section B-G"is the
Ijsselmeer, now a fresh water lake.
It was a combination of storm
and exceptionally high tides which
brought about the disastrous
flooding of Zeeland (not shown in
this map) on February 1. In
exactly the same way, it was
a mutual fury of winds and tides
which crumbled the dikes protect*
ing the fertile region to the south
of Dordreeht on the night of Nov-
ember 19, 1491. More than 80, 000
acres of fertile land were covered,
72 towns and villages disappeared
under the waters and 100, 000
people lost their lives in this trag-
edy, which was known as the
Sl Elisabeth's Flood. This disas-
ter and the recent inundations are
the only two notable defeats suffer-
ed by the Netherlands system of
dikes, and both events were due
to quite exceptional circumstances.
(Continued from previous age)
agricultural experts. In 1952, there
were more than 3, 000 applications
for the 129 farms offered.
Successful candida tee. choose,
according to their means, one of
the 17 types of houses available,
along with which go plots of 30, 60,
90 or 120 acres. These are let off
at moderate rentals on renewable
twelve-year leases. In this way, a
well-balanced social and economic
structure is developed from the start.
The"polder-boer"is not an entirely
free agent, however ; he has to grow
the crops best suited to the type of
soil on his holding. He can always
ask for the advice and help of the
"staat-boeren"or farm experts,
salaried State employees who offer
a practical demonstration of the
rational use of land. The"polder-
boer", however, is able to defend his
interests in the.'Polder Council", a
sort of small-scale local government,
representing the settlers on the new
This was once a sea bed. Trees of former island of Schokland can be seen at upper right.
Before reclaimed land can be used salt must be washed away and new soil dried out.
lands in their dealings with the
State.
Agricultural statistics show that
the North-East Polder, whose recla-
mation was not completed until
1949, gave the following yields (in
kilogrammes per hectare) in 1951 :
Winter wheat : 4, 280 ; summer
wheat : 3, 990 ; oats : 5. 060 ; flax :
5, 380 ; potatoes : 31, 590 ; sugar beet :
47, 310.
When the whole polder is under
cultivation and fully populated
(about 1956, according to the official
estimates) it will support
some 40, 000 inhabitants
and will produce over
60, 000, 000 florins (about
L 6, 000, 000), w 0 r tho f
various agricultural
products each year.
But agriculture is not
the only aspect of future
development which in-
terests the people of the
North East Polder. The
Tour ist Development
Board at Emmeloord,
c. hief town of the area,
has published a 150-page
booklet which is particu-
Jarly striking because of
its references to forests
and towns that are today
no more than building
sites and new planta-
tions. One illustration
shows fine avenues lined
with impressive buildings
and tall trees. This is
Emmeloord as it should
be in 1960.
In point of fact
Emmeloord is at present
a sort of"mushroom"
town, but one whose
growth is controlled.
Along its wide streets
three storey buildings stand side by
side with huts and tents. One
unpaved avenue lined with wooden
buildingsthe temporary homes of
leading banks-calls to mind a
Klondyke settlement during the
"Gold Rush". But the permanent
parts of the town-the three enor-
mous churches (1), Catholic, Lu-
theran and Calvinist, the neat shops
where cigar merchants preside over
their fragrant merchandise, the
well-kept schools and the boldly
designed houses-are typically
Dutch.
The tourists who already visit the
North East Polder learn something
of the past history of this area from
a museum on the former island of
Schokland where relics found at
the bottom of the Zuider Zee-
mammoth tusks, pottery, flint
implements, fragments of caravels
and old Spanish weapons corroded
by salt water-are exhibited.
There is something awe-inspiring
in the contrast between this"ants
nest"activity around the Zuider Zee
and the dreadful desolation in the
province of Zeeland. But then, the
Dutch have always found strength
to face up to the blows of fate with
a serenity which has nothing of
indifference to fate or of dumb
despair about it.
The progress and technical devel-
opment which have made possible
the"miracle"of the Zuider Zee
should also prevent any repetition
of the Zeeland disaster. The Dutch,
who dwell like sentinels on a
frontier of Europe, are convinced
that they will.
(Official Netherlands govt. photos.)
(1). \ white line on the base of their
steeples is a reminder that the 1ü'.""n 1"13 feet e) ow sea level.
