FRANCE'S UNIQUE
CONTRIBUTION TO
TV FOR THE MANY
by Alexandre Leventis
FRANCE is the only country, apart from theUnited states, which has thus far devel-
oped formal educational TV. While pro-
grammes are as yet modest and the hours of
transmission limited, they include services both
for schools and as a basis for adult education.
When most people think of television, they
tend to think of a highly industrialized country
in which millions buy sets for their homes, and
families are grouped around the little screen in
the living room. This is the way TV has grown
in the U. S. and Great Britain during the past
six or seven years.
An entirely new approach to TV, however, has
sprung up n France. From the limited
resources of tiny villages scattered over the
countryside east of Paris, a small movement has
been born which may eventually be more signif-
icant for many countries than the more general
pattern television has so far assumed elsewhere.
In the French villages (whose experiments
were described in detail in the August-Septem-
ber 1952 issue of the Courier) a receiver is
bought collectively and placed in the local school
for the use of the community. Adults pay a
small admission fee to see broadcasts in the
evening. During the day the set is used exclus-
ively to receive school programmes for children.
This movement has given the French villages
the only way to get TV at all. The vast majority
of people in most countries cannot afford to
buy a TV set. But many might be able to afford
small entrance fees at regular sessions which
would help pay for a set whose initial pur-
chasing price was advanced. It is basically
immaterial whether all, part, or none of the
money for the set is advanced by members of
the community. Naturally though, there is a
more vivid interest in the venture if the villagers
have a personal stake in seeing to it that the
set is paid for, and it is easier to spread the
movement if it is not dependent entirely on
initial government funds. In France, villagers
usually advance 85 per cent and the schools 15
per cent of the cost of the set.
The rapid development of TV in Latin Amer-
ica and the plans for its use in the Middle
and Far East, point to the need for collective
purchase of sets if they are to serve the mass
of the people. In societies where there is a vast
gap between a very rich minority and the
poverty of the majority of the people, television
is today spreading largely as a luxury for the
upper income groups. To turn TV into a power
for the education of the mass of the people,
fundamental changes in its structure and pro-
gramming would no doubt be required. But no
amount of educational broadcasting can be of
value if extensive reception is not equally or-
ganized. It is here that the French movement
points the way.
Monsieur R. Louis, head of the National
Federation for Educational and Cultural Tele-
vision (an organization set up last year to help
collective viewers and now grouping about 75
local"telecluhs") recently described some of the
changes that the movement has brought about
not only in the habits and way of life of the
villagers but in their attitudes and thinking.
Thus the very purchase of a set, he points out,
leads to a new sense of community spirit and its
operation requires group action to arrange
and supervise the shows. In two of the villages,
made up mostly of workers at a nearby engine
factory, a friendly rivalry sprang up to see
(Continued on next page)

Page 6. MARCH 1953 UNESCO
THE'TELECLUB'CHANGES
FRENCH VILLAGE HABITS
(Continued from previous page.)
which would collect the needed
money first. A thermometer, grad-
uated in thousands of francs, was
hung at the school entrance of each
village. Each day the workers
gathered together and heatedly
discussed the results of the two
collections. Within a week both sets
had been bought.
"The chief form of amusement in
the villages before the introduction
of TV,"M. Louis writes,"'consisted in
playing cards at the local café late
into the night. Now this has lost
considerable ground in favour of the
various shows offered two or three
times a week."
At first, many villagers came on-
ly to watch the horse-racing and
wrestling matches broadcast on the
popular newsreel show,"Television
Journal", but as the sports events
were often preceded by programmes
on political, economic and scientific
questions their interest was slowly
drawn to these subjects as well.
Many television sessions attended
by the villagers are now followed by
lively discussion under the direction
of the local teacher, who usually
organizes the"teleclubs". Villagers
eagerly participate, and the move-
ment is generally considered a
success.
Where community television has
been installed in the schoolhouse
under the guidance of the teacher,
a radical change has come about in
the place of the school and of the
teacher in the community. Through
personal acquaintance, the villagers
take a closer individual interest in
the school ; equally important, the
teacher gains new stature and res-
pect in the community.
No funds needed
COLLECTIVE viewing, moreover,may well be the answer to the
big dilemma facing most schools-
how or where to get the money to
buy a television set ? Collective TV
offers a unique method of installing
a receiver, often without using any
school funds. In fact, instead of
spending money, the school in the
long run finds in it a valuable source
of new income. Once the cost of
the receiver has been amortized from
the entrance fees (in France, where
75 per cent of the receivers are
already paid off, adults pay 20 francs
or about six cents for admission, and
children in the evenings pay 10
francs or three cents), the set
becomes the property of the school
and future receipts can be used to
finance school trips, extra equip-
ment, general improvements or cul-
tural activities within the com-
munity.
In the first village where a receiver
was installed (February 1951) the
cost of the set has been recovered
and the village TV co-operative had
a credit of 60, 000 francs (8170) by
June 1952, which will be used to buy
sports equipment and stage scenery
and organize an excursion for chil-
dren and adults.
The French Television Service has
been in contact with leaders of the
movement from the start and has
been receiving regular audience
reaction reports, suggestions for
improvement and criticisms. Thus,
villagers'objections to the number of
crime films offered eventually con-
tributed to their suppression. Ar-
rangements were recently made for
programmes specially designed to
meet the requirements of the village
audiences.
The wide gap between the
broadcaster and his audience is one
of the fundamental problems of
radio as well as TV. Present me-
thods of surveying, observing and
polling home audiences rarely give
more than quantitative reactions of
like and dislike. Co-operation with
group viewers can help to bridge
this gap and open up new perspec-
tives for improvement.
Efforts to meet the interest and
requirements of teachers and pupils
are also being made by the Televi-
sion Française in its three weekly
half-hour shows broadcast to schools
in 10 departments in the Paris area
and retransmitted in northern
France through the Lille relay sta-
tion. Two of these programmes
consist exclusively of filmed material
. and include a science series, geo-
graphy, history and man's applic-
ation of recent technical discoveries.
The third, is France's first"live"
show for schools, entitled"La Classe
en images" (the class on the TV
screen). Inaugurated in October
1952, the programme is designed for
children 6 to 14 years old in one-
room schoolhouses which, even
to-day, are by far the most common
primary schools of rural France.
Broadcasts are divided into sections
of about five minutes duration each
in an attempt to balance content, as
far as possible, for all pupils in this
wide age group. Shows are still
experimental and may be modified
in the light of comments and sug-
gestions sent in by teachers.
Last year, sections included a
series on a land of the French
Union ; great civilizations of the
past ; monuments of Paris ; our ani-
mal world ; and songs of France.
For the first half of this year,
drawing lessons and a gymnastics
course are being offered, as well as
a film sequence commemorating an
historical event, and the adventures
of a small donkey called Bim. When
"The Class on the TV Screen"is one of three weekly school programmes televised in France. The presence of a"live"
class on the screen heightens pupils'interest and encourages letter writing between the studio and village classes.
possible, subjects specially requested
by the schools are also given.
The"`Classe en images"uses as a
setting a typical rural schoolroom in
France along with a number of
lively youngsters. It is considered a
convenient background for the
action and dialogue of the children
and a way to stimulate young
viewers, to join with this class"just
like their own". Hundreds of letters
and reports on the programme come
from schools whose pupils are also
inspired to make models and do
designs and drawings.
The usefulness of the programme,
however, has been questioned by
some teachers.'''Is it really necess-
ary to have a make-believe class in
the studio ?" asked one..'Why must
we be shown the wall charts, maps,
tables of statistics and other familiar
classroom objects ? Of what interest
can these be to our pupils who see
them every day anyway ? Besides,
we don't teach three or four children
but forty ! The conditions you
show are not those we experience, so
the problems are not the same..."
Many letters are full of praise.
One headmaster recently wrote :
"My pupils, peasant children for the
most part, are not easily roused, but
they were wild with enthusiasm over
your programme from the moment
it started."
Some criticism comes from well-
meaning people who forget that
enthusiasm and ingenuity must
often make up for lack of funds.
Constructive letters like the follow-
ing are far more useful : "Dear
Television, I don't think you should
give lessons on the past participle.
And do you really think we need the
camera to tell our classes-and at
what speed-the meaning of vert-
ical and horizontal ? On Wednes-
day, our class was thrilled to watch
the very interesting documentary on
soil formation ; but on Saturday,
attention wandered while the P. T.
teacher babbled on with his wonder-
ful theories about breathing in class.
And during all this time, the screen,
ironically enough, showed several
children with their arms folded so
tightly across their chests that they
probably couldn't breathe at all.
If such demonstrations are to be of
any use the chidren must show some
life ; the instructor must talk less..."
Sorbonne telecasts
QUITE a different viewpoint wasexpressed by another teacher
who wrote :"I think the greatest
success with my boys was the
drawing class, and I believe that TV
will break down a certain inequality
now existing between city and
village schools by making lessons by
. highly specialized teachers available
to us all."
French TV producers note all
remarks and comments and then
take steps to remedy shortcomings
and faulty methods.
Last month, French television
embarked on a series of six exper-
imental programmes to be shown
each week on screens installed at
the Sorbonne. This is France's first
effort in university-level educational
programmes.
"We wish to discover the possibi-
lities of using television as a new
technique for presenting scientific
subjects to the public, and eventually
as an auxiliary of higher educa-
tion,"the Dean of the Faculté des
Sciences declared.
These programmes have been
prepared by professors at the Faculté
who personally produced the films
and photographs shown during the
half-hour transmissions.
The first, which went on the air
on 17 February, was devoted to Mi-
croscope cinematography, and show-
ed the multiplication of cells by
a tiny organism which throws light
on the process of heredity. In an-
other telecast this month, an anthro-
pologist will present scientific data
on the races of Africa and the Pyg-
mies in particular. Other telecasts
will deal with the Birth of the Stars,
Some Physiological Experiments on
Animals, Early Man and the Growth
of the Human Mind.
The Sorbonne hopes that these
highly scientific programmes will
mark the beginning of a new ven-
ture in educational television for
French university students, scientists
and the thinking public in general.
The schools of many villages in
the Paris region have now become
community meeting places where
people gather to watch telecasts
and to discuss them each evening.
In the afternoon children have been
watching the school programmes.
