Page 6. MAY 1953
THE ENCHANTMENT
UNESCO,-,
OF THAILAND
by Leonard COTTRELL
Two centuries ago, King Rama I chose the small village of Bangkok as the site for his new capital.
Today it is a city of 800, 000 people, whose skyline is studded with the elaborate roofs and spires
of 400 temples, one of which, the Royal Temple, is shown above. (Unesco photo)
SIAMhat does the name con-jure up ? Pagodas with steep,
many tiered roofs of red and
green tiles, with gilded, pointed
eaves ? Buddhist priests in yellow
robes gliding among the tricycle
taxis and swarming traffic of Bang-
kok ? A group of dancers in scarlet
and green robes spangled with gold,
and high, golden head-dresses, mov-
ing gracefully through the move-
ments of the classical dance to the
clashing music of xylophones and
high, thin, flutes ? Those who have
visited Thailand-the modern name
for old Siam-will certainly recollect
those impressions, as I do whenever
the name is mentioned.
But there is another side to
Thailand. In Bangkok, the capital,
one can buy practically everything
the West can provide ; the latest
motorcars, refrigerators, washing
machines, cameras, radiograms. You
can even buy television sets, although
Thailand as yet has no television
service. Transmitting equipment,
however, has been ordered. There are
luxurious hotels, restaurants with a
European cuisine, and, in the sub-
urbs, beautiful modern villas set in
landscape gardens, and as'well-
appointed as any in London or Paris.
Yet, side by side with huge modern
ferro-concrete cinemas showing Hol-
lywood Sims, cheek by jowl with the
modern banks and office blocks, are
the ancient"klongs"or canals on
which lives an enormous, literally
floating population of Thai families
in covered-in boats. And as one
drives beyond the broad, smoothly-
asphalted Raj-Damnem Avenue one
comes upon dusty lanes between
rows of wooden houses raised on
stilts above the flood-water, and sees
mothers washing their babies in the
same muddy water from which most
of them have to drink.
It is partly this clash between East
and West that has brought about the
need for new educational methods in
Thailand. Not only is there an ur-
gent need for Thai technicians to
operate western machinery ; en-
gineers for the power-houses, build-
ers. garage mechanics, machinists
and so on, but, in the words of a Thai
teacher"it is necessary to make the
children understand the relationship
between nations, to make them
know their own country better and
to understand their
responsibility to
improve it."
Thailand has had
compulsory educa-
tion for more than
thirty years and
big advances have
been made in that
time. All the same
the Government
believes that sub-
stantial improve-
ments could be
made in the teach-
ing methods. In
1949, it invited
Unesco to send out
a survey mission
to study the coun-
try's educational
system, especially
in the primary and
secondary schools.
After. considering
the recommenda-
tions made by this
mission, the Thai
Government decid-
ed on a ten-year
plan to improve
education in all its
aspects-pre-pri-
mary, primary, sec-
ondary vocation-
al, adult, and tea-
cher training. It
then invited Unes-
co and other UN
Specialized Agen-
cies such as the
Food and Agricul-
tural Organization
and the Interna-
tional Labour Offs-
ce, to take part
in an experimental
educational pilot
project in the area"',.. n....'".........-nl1. f.". round Cha-choeng-sao, a small town
some seventy miles from Bangkok.
In this area there are a number of
Thai schools, Primary and Second-
ary, and at Cha-choeng-sao itself
there is a Teacher Training College.
The idea is that in this limited area
an attempt will be made to introduce,
into certain selected schools, the
new methods recommended by the
United Nations commission. If the
Pilot Project is a success, then the
Government of Thailand may intro-
duce similar methods in schools
throughout the entire country.
I travelled by train from Bangkok
to Cha-choeng-sao, through mile
after mile of completely flat country.
Immediately outside Bangkok there
are a few trees, chiefly bamboos, and
here and there small cultivated plots
- long straight rows of vegetables
with irrigation canals between them,
and mew with bare feet and huge
straw hats moving among the plots.
Then come the rice-fields, mile after
mile of pale green-the green of an
English meadow in spring-stretch-
ing to the horizon. Thailand is one of
the greatest rice-producing countries
in the Far East and the country's
prosperity largely depends on the
quality of the rice crop.
Cha-choeng-sao itself is a small
town, built mainly of wood, like
most Thai country towns, and
standing on a broad, brown river, the
Bangpakong. Scattered around it,
on the riverside and beside the
innumerable canals, are smaller
villages, each with its wooden school-
building, usually with a balcony
overlooking the river. It is in these
schools that UN Agencies personnel
and their Thai"counterparts" (for
each adviser works alongside a Thai
teacher or"counterpart") are con-
ducting their experiment. The pro-
ject's headquarters is in a big
wooden building adjoining one of the
schools at Cha-choeng-sao, which is
now being extended to accommodate
members of the mission.
The Europeans and Thais live and
work together ; there are offlc, s, a
conference room, a dining-room and
dormitories, but life at Cha-choeng-
sao is by no means luxurious.
Water has to be carried from the
river in big earthenware jars, from
which one pours water over oneself
when taking a shower, which, during
nine months of the year is pretty
often. At night the staff sleeps
under mosquito nets, and DDT
sprays are used in the constant war.
against the insects which swarm in
after dark.
In spite of these discomforts, the
atmosphere is happy and comradely
at Cha-choeng-sao. One could hard-
ly help feeling happy in Thailand,
for the Thais are a friendly people,
generous almost to a fault. In fact,
I was told by one of my colleagues
to be very careful about accepting
hospitality, because, he said, it is
quite common for a Siamese official
to spend almost his entire month's
salary on entertaining a stranger,
and then have to borrow against his
next pay-day ! The U. N. advisers
and their Thai counterparts dine
together, and the discussions which
take place over the dining-room
table, or in the little riverside cafe,
are both friendly and outspoken.
"They work alongside us"the
head of the mission, Mr. Kendrick
Marshall, told me,"they watch our
methods and discuss them with us.
Sometimes they agree with us ; some-
times they have better ideas of
their own. But it's a joint effort all
along the line."
What are these new methods
which the Unesco consultants are
trying to put into practice, and how
do they differ from the older me-
thods used in Thai Schools ? A Thai
teacher to whom I put this question
replied :"The old system had its
good points but on the whole we
have come to think of it as too
stereotyped and academic. In the
old days education was the responsi-
bility of the Buddhist priests, and
even today you'll find that many of
our schools are still in the grounds
of old monasteries. Nowadays all

CCpURIER MAY 1953. Page 7
Thailand is anxious to accept the best of Western ideas and techniques. But the country is equally determined to maintain its deep-rooted cultural traditions such
as the teaching of the graceful classical dances. Here, United Nations photographer Eric Schwab, focuses his camera on two young classical Thai Dancers.
the teaching is done by secular
teachers, but often the methods are
out-of-date. The teacher just reads
out facts from a book, and maybe
draws a few diagrams on the black-
board, and the children are expected
to learn those facts by heart. There
is nothing to stir the child's imagi-
nation, nothing to encourage him to
use his hands, nothing to arouse his
interest in what is being taught,
whether it be history, geography,
science or any other subject.
I saw an example of the older
methods, which are still in use
throughout most of Thailand, when
I visited a class for five to six-year-
olds at a primary school, near Cha-
choeng-sao. When I arrived the
teacher was taking the class in
geography. The children squatted
on the bare wooden floor, resting
their exercise books on low benches
in front of them. There were no
maps on the walls, no models, no-
thing but a broken blackboard
before which the teacher stood
reading out facts about rivers and
mountains and estuaries, while the
bored children attempted to mem-
orize them. If it had been a
history class the method would have
been exactly the same.
Then, as a contrast, I visited an-
other school in which the new
methods are being introduced by
Thai teachers, guided by Unesco
consultants. An excited group of
children was sitting at desks arrang-
ed in a square around a big tray
containing sand. There were maps
and coloured diagrams on the walls,
and on the table beside the sand-
tray were twigs, leaves, and small
stones.
After asking questions about the
source of a local river, to which the
pupils were quick to respond, the
teacher invited the children to come
forward and make a model in sand
showing the source of the river and
its course from the mountains to the
sea. The children set to work eager-
ly, making first a model of a moun-
tain, then tracing channels in the
sand leading from the mountain to
the coastal plain, and planting twigs
and leaves as trees and rice-fields
beside their model river.
At another school I watched a
most fascinating experiment in
history teaching. The subject was
an episode in the life of King
Ramakamheng the Great, one of the
Thai kings of the Sukhotai period
(13th century). This King is one of
the heroes of Thailand. He de-
veloped his country's administration,
religion, and especially home and
industrial pottery-making.
After the teacher had described
certain events in the life of the King,
several small children came forward
dressed in the costume of the period.
One boy wearing a black jacket with
a gold belt, a long white robe
trimmed at the sleeves with gold, an
enormous black and gold hat and
pink trousers, who represented the
King, seated himself on a school
chair which served him as a throne.
His Prime Minister, played by an-
other small boy, and dressed with
similar magnificence, came forward
on his knees to receive the
commands of the King.
`We have given justice in our gov-
ernment", piped the little King,
"and if there are any abuses people
can address themselves to me. The
provinces are inspected by our own
chosen men, who are our eyes and
our ears... Let us do this work with
all our hearts so that in the future it
may provide a livelihood for our
people."
Then two even smaller boys ap-
peared, dressed in green jackets and
black skull-caps. They represented
Chinese craftsman whom King Ra-
makamheng introduced into Thai-
land to teach his people the art of
ceramics. These boys then handed
out modelling clay, and, to the ac-
companiment of singing, the chil-
dren set about making pots, vases
and dishes under the guidance of
the two"Chinese"potters.
The whole idea, of course, was to
turn what would probably have been
a dull lesson in history into some-
thing alive and interesting, some-
thing in which the children could
take an active part.
Another river-journey brought me
back to Cha-choeng-sao, just in
time to watch a demonstration of
science teaching by a Thai instruc-
tor, Mr. Singto. Under the old sys-
tem science teaching consisted sim-
ply of reading
facts from a
textbook for the
pupils to mem-
(Continued
on next page)

'I THINK THAT IN THE END WE SHALL
TAKE THE BEST WHICH THE WEST HAS
TO OFFER, AND LEAVE THE REST TO YOU'
At the Unesco education centre in Cha-Choeng-Sao, Thai children learn by doing. Here, a puppet show given
by the children strikes a new note. In other parts of country children still learn by rote. (Unesco photos)
THAILAND
(Continued)
orize. There was
no experimenta-
tion or demon-
stration of anykind. The familiar science equip-
ment of a western school-retorts,
flasks, Bunsen burners, etc. were
absent, and it was economically
impossible to buy such equipment
in any quantity. So Dr. Obourn, the
first Unesco adviser on science teach-
ing, soon showed the Thais how to
make simple science equipment out
of local materials. For example,
Mr. Singto showed me glass flasks
made out of discarded electric light
bulbs, a galvanoscope manufactured
from a cheap pocket compass and a
few bits of wire, and a model steam
engine ingeniously constructed from
an old DDT tin (the boiler) and a
small brass pipe to lead the steam to
a tiny wind-vane which revolved un-
der the impact of the jet-a steam en-
gine of the original Greek type invent-.
ed more than 2, 000 years ago.
"This method of science teaching,"
said Singto,.'is quite new for Thai-
land. All we had here before this was
one funnel, one thermometer, and one
conical flask."
Agricultural training plays an im-
portant part under the United Nations
scheme. Mr. Dickinson, the FAO ad-
viser attached to the Cha-choeng-sao
Project told me that Thailand won
first place for rice-production at the
Chicago World Fair for several years
running..'And yet", he added,"at the
same time the yield of rice in Thailand
could be considerably improved."
This puzzled me for a time since I
knew that the Thais had thousands
of years experience in rice-farming.
How therefore, I asked Mr. Dickinson,
did the UN advisers think that they
could help these people to improve
their yield ?
"By selection,"he answered, and
took me to an experimental rice field
which is being looked after by the
students of the new primary exten-
, : ; ion school at Bangkla, a riverside vil-
lage some two hours'journey from
Cha-choeng-sao. Here I saw students,
under Mr. Dickinson's guidance, se-
lecting the best ears of rice and putt-
ing them aside for replanting during
the following season."When you take
tens of thousands of these,"Mr. Dick-
inson said,.'and select the very best,
then you proceed gradually to greater
yields and uniformity."
In this same village of Bangkla I
talked to Mr. Roger Wilson, an Eng-
lishman attached to the Project from
the International Labour Office as
consultant on Vocational Training for
the Cha-choeng-sao Centre. Before
he joined the ILO, he was connected
with a Technical Training College in
England. His last job before joining
ILO had been in Southend, in Essex.
Now, this quietly-spoken Englishman
in his shorts and open-necked shirt,
was working in very different sur-
roundings, in a Thai village with its
collection of wooden huts sprawled BETTER THAN MANY WORDS, THIS PHOTO :
These Thai children at Bangpakong seem to be having lots ot tun learning"satety
first"traffic rules since their teacher began using more modern class methods.
In the primary schools of Cha-Choeng-Sao children are taught the care of live-
stock, and from school gardens learn the fundamentals of irrigation and plant growth.

SHOWS THAI CHILDREN'S DELIGHT WITH THE NEW TEACHING METHODS INTRODUCED IN THE CHA-CHOENG-SAO EXPERIMENTAL AREA BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND AND UNESCO.
along the riverside, with its tall-\. chimneyed rice-mill, and the inevit-
able Wat or Buddhist temple, whose
glittering eaves reflected the hot
sunshine.
"The idea of the new primary
extension school at Bangkla"he told
me,"was that of Thomas WiLson, my
namesake, the original leader of the
Technical Assistance Mission. He
thought of it as a way of extending
the existing primary school system
which only lasts for four years for
children between the ages of seven
and eleven. This kind of school is to
provide a three-years post-primary
course based on practical work."
Wilson went on :"The idea is that
these children will be working in the
usual occupations in and around
Bangkla, in rice mills and in the rice-
fields, in sawmills and so on.
The training will be a sort of pre-
paration for life, although this does
not mean that the children are going
to be trained as artisans, solely. The
idea is that they should have a general
education as well as plenty of practical
work and the whole of the curriculum
will be based on the rural background
that the children understand."
After a two-hour river journey
I was back at Cha-choeng-sao. It
was my last night at the Centre and
a memorable one, not for any
information I received-I had already
taken in more than I could digest-
but as an experience of Thai
hospitality. The members of the
mission-Siamese, American, English,
Canadian, Czech-gathered in the
little riverside cafe. Healths were
drunk in Mekhong, with the local
ricewhisky, and afterwards, inevitably,
the local orchestra, composed of Thai
teachers from local schools, appeared.
Far into the night they played the old
songs of Siam, some of which had been
considerably influenced by American
"Swing", each member taking a
chorus on. his instrument and im-
provizing on the original theme with
amazing skill and rhythmic zest.
Early the following morning I was
on my way back to Bangkok, travelling
once again through the monotonous
landscape of green paddy-fields laced
by brown canals along which sampans
glided.
My last evening in Bangkok was
spent at the Silpakorn Theatre, the
Thai equivalent of a National Theatre.
Here students of the Institute of
Fine Arts present episodes from the
country's classical drama, based on
the ancient Hindu epic"The Ra-
mayana"which in Thailand is called
"The Ramakien". It was a masked
play, called in Thailand the"Khon".
Almost all the actors wore masks, and
mimed their parts, the voices being
spoken or sung by a chorus off-
stage. The costumes were mag-
nificent, scarlets and greens and
yellows spangled with gold ; towering
gold head-dresses, gold embroidery,
golden ornaments, all scintillating in
the brilliant stage lighting. The play,
which was more of a ballet than a
drama, took a leisurely course,
watched by the attentive Siamese
audience which knew every line of the
verse, every note of the music, every
movement of the dance. For more
than three-and-a-half hours I was
dazzled by the colour, bewitched by
the grace of the dancers, fascinated
by the music. The effect was such
that when eventually I left the theatre
and threaded my way through the
clamorous traffic of Bangkok I felt
confused and bewildered.
When I said to a Thai friend that
night,"as a Buddhist you have as
your ideal the attainment of serenity
of soul, inner peace", he agreed.
"Then,"I asked him,"how do you
expect to attain serenity of soul by
bringing in Western ideas, Western
hustle, Western machinery, auto-
mobiles, refrigerators and so on ?"
"The play which I saw tonight", I
continued,"was a superb work of art,
the product of a culture as old,
probably older than ours, something
supremely civilized and worth-while
Surely you don't want to exchange
that for canned music and Western
films ? It seems to me that you are
on the wrong track. Sometimes I
think that instead of the West
bringing technical assistance to the
East, the East should be bringing
spiritual assistance to the West !"
I said this to test his reactions,
adding that the Thais whom I had
met seemed a very happy people,
generous to strangers, contented,
smiling, serene, even if some of them
were relatively poor. His answer
was interesting, and did much to
strengthen my faith in what the
United Nations are attempting to do
in Thailand.
"It is true"he replied, after some
reflection,"that not all the things
which the West has brought to
Thailand are good things, although
many Thais like them. But you should
remember the good things too. Take
health for example. Those people you
saw in the country, and here in
Bangkok, living on the canals, bathing
in the same water from which they
drink, they are happy, it is true. But
only if they are well."
He paused and then added :"Have
you thought of the thousands who die
each year from malaria, typ. hoid and
Jther preventable diseases ?"
He went on to speak with high
praise of the work of the WHO team
operating in northern Thailand, and
reminded me that a huge area had
been cleared of that dreadful disease,
yaws, by the use of penicillin in-
jections. *'As for your fears that the
culture of Thailand may be destroyed
by Western innovations", he said,"I
don't think there is much fear of that.
You will never turn the Thais into
Westerners. Our religion and culture
are too deeply rooted for that. No ! I
think that in the end we shall take
the best which the West has to offer,
and leave the rest to you."
