Page 12. JUNE 1953
· 1
is out
on loam
by A. J. Branston
AN ingenious uggestion by a libra-rian in Britain's Walthamstow
Pubic Library a few years ago has
given joy and inspiration to tens of
thousands of British music lovers, who
had hitherto been sharply restricted in
their choice of music.
The idea-that gramophone records
should be made available on free loan
from public libraries in the some way
that books are lent to borrowers-has
spread so rapidly that nearly all the
larger public libraries in Britain's cities
now have a record library.
The City Librarian at Westminster
Public library, in the heart of London
was one of the first to organize a record
library for his public. But neither he
nor his staff anticipated the result.
Opening in August 1948, within a week
every one of the 5, 000 records in the
new) y-acquired stock was"out on loan"
and newcomers had nothing from which
to make a selection.
So popular has the idea proved itself
that, today, Westminster has over 11, 000
records and some 4, 000 regular borrow-
ers, and both numbers are growing
larger week by week. On an average
100 peop) e a day visit the record
library, taking away with them as many
as six records each.
Providing they fulfil one of two special
conditions, anybody may borrow records
from these public record libraries. These
conditions are that the borrower must
either reside or work within the boundar-
ies of the borough concerned. Young
people (under 21) and residents who
are not rate-payers are usually asked
to obtain a guarantor's signature on
their membership-proposal card, but
some libraries dispense even with this
precaution.
Operation of the scheme proved to be
less expensive than had been feared.
Westminster Public Library puts its
expenses thus : cost of 5, 000 new records
f2, 000 ($5, 600) ; boxes and covers for
the records H5 ($210) ; annual cata-
logue (printed) abut £350 ($980) ;
annual replacements ; records f1, 650
($4, 620), boxes, covers and stationery
JE100 ($280). Though some additional
staff was required to help to run the
record library, no extra space was
needed.
For comparison purposes the expenses
of the record library at Lewisham (be-
lieved to be Britain's second longest)
may be given. The initial cost, including
additional furniture, 1, 000 records,
covers, stationery, etc., was abut £1, 000
($2, 800). An annual grant of f1, 000 is
made to cover replacements, new records
and so on. Except during rush periods,
only one person is needed to run the
record Library, doing all the clerical
work, renewing covers, indexing and cat-
aloguing new records and so on.
It is an obvious necessity, of course,
that borrowers hould take care of their
records and see that they are returned
undamaged. Some librarians foresaw a
great deal of carelessness with records
on loan. They expected to find that
returned records would be badly scratch-
ed, chipped or crocked, while some
borrowers, they thought, would either
keep the records or sell them !
Astonishingly, none of these things
happened except to a very minor degree.
Music lovers, it was found, almost in-
variably handle the records with loving
care.
Occasionally, of course, a record is
damaged, and the borrower is asked to
pay a fine according to the extent of
the damage. For a slight scratch or
chip, the fine is one shilling ($0. 14).
To some observers, this ever-increasing
demand for music by peoples of all
classes is all the more extraordinary
because it is all for classical music. No
joz- or swing, none of the latest.. hot"
numbers, or even what is commonly
known as.. right popular music", is
included. But all the major forms-
operas, ballet music, symphonies, concer-
tos, chamber music-are available.
young folk, to sit and listen to the
world's finest music-free.
Humanity's need for good music has
been so universally recognized that no
Many record libraries give weekly or
monthly recitals, using their own records.
To these come elderly people as well as
opposition has been expressed against he
idea of music as a free public service.
