'COURSER MARCH 1953. Page 3
THE WORLD TELEVISION PICTURE
A LL over the world people are talkingtelevision. Almost every day one reads of
new transmitters b=ing installed in one
country, new stations going up in another,
plans being completed in a third. In Morocco,
engineers are at present staking out the site for
a new TV centre at Casablanca. In Japan, daily
television broadcasts were inaugurated only a few
weeks ago. The Government of Thailand has
purchased television equipment from abroad, and
technicians from countries as far apart as the
Philippines and Haiti, Australia and Guatemala,
Indonesia and Finland are visiting TV centres in
Europe and the United States to learn more about
this powerful new medium of communication.
Reports received by Unesco show that in
January 1953, fifty-five countries were developing
television activities : thirteen had introduced
regular services, while 11 were conducting
experimental broadcasts. At least 30 additional
countries and territories are preparing to establish
TV stations or are seriously studying the idea.
It is in the United States that television has had
the greatest development. There are now 128 TV
stations on the air and over 20, 000, 000 sets in use ;
2, 053 new stations are envisaged including up
to 242'non-commercial educational stations.
In Great Britain, the war put a temporary halt
to the pioneer work undertaken by British
engineers, but today five powerful stations cover
80 per cent of the country and over 1, 700, 000 sets
are in use.
In France, television resumed slowly after the
war. Lack of capital resources and other
economic hardships, uncertainty about broadcast
standards and line definition retarded the
construction of stations and the production and
sale of receivers. In recent years, however,
France has advanced rapidly in the TV field.
More than 60, 000 receivers are now in use and
sets are being sold faster than the industry can
produce them (about 6, 000 sets a month).
Public television broadcasts in the U. S. S. R.
were first begun in 1938. Here too, the war halted
its development, but transmissions were resumed
immediately after the war on 7 May, 1945. Today,
powerful stations in Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev
are broadcasting regular programmes which reach
over 60, 000 sets. Other stations are. planned by
the government and a highly developed movement
of amateur TV broadcasters.
Perhaps the most surprising and rapid growth
of television is taking place in Latin America.
Cuba, for example, which did not begin tele-
casting until October 1950, is today : one of the.
few countries in the world where programmes can
be seen in every part of the land. Six stations are
now on the air andi at least three more
are scheduled to begin transmission this year.
Broadcasts reach an estimated 100, 000 sets and
several. hundred thousand viewers. Most of the
programme. s are highly commercialized, but the
need for educational and cultural programmes
has been recognized. Last July, a conference of
broadcasters, advertisers and educators at the
University of Havana, unanimously urged that
certain educational broadcasts should be tried out.
The Cuban Ministry of Education is now working
with one station in the production of a Sunday
night, top-listening-time show entitled"One Hour
of Art and Culture". Dramatic productions,
children's films, news reports and current events
discussions are also telecast by other stations"to
contribute to the enlightenment of the public".
Similar programmes are offered in Mexico, where
four stations are now on the air and 50, 000 sets
in use. Over 20 new stations are planned.
In recent years, Brazilian technicians have not
only been working to expand TV reception in the
cities but also considering its enormous possib-
ilities for the nation's vast rural areas. By
January 1953, three stations were broadcasting
daily programmes to 35, 000 homes and 287 new
transmitters in 180 communities were foreseen in
a government plan just published. Of special
importance is the municipal station which the
government is now completing at Rio de Janeiro
to be used exclusively for educational program-
mes. In Sao Paulo, educational programmes
during the past two years have included a regular
half-hour weekly show devoted to Unesco in
which articles and photographs from the COU-
RIER have been extensively used. The first TV
station in Latin America to be used exclusively
for educational purposes was inaugurated at Ca-
racas, Venezuela, at the close of 1952.
Something like a television"fever"is sweeping
across most of the other Latin American
countries. New projects are reported almost
every week."Televisiån en Guatemala... !"
triumphantly proclaims the journal"Antena
Popular"in its issue of June 1952. Even the tiny
Dominican Republic has been transmitting since
August 1952. Argentina began in October 1951 ;
a station its about to open in Puerto Rico ; and
plans are being made for broadcasting in Bolivia,
Chile, EI Salvador, Peru and Uruguay.
In Europe, many countries are still officially in
the"experimental"stage of TV Although
several now have daily or weekly programmes, the
final form of their TV organization has, in many
cases, not yet been settled. In the Netherlands,
two programmes a week reach about 5, 000 sets.
In Italy, two well-equipped stations at Milan and
Turin beam programme. s to a similar number of
receivers. Educational aspects of TV are now
by Dr. Henry R. Cassirer
being studied, although drama and light opera
are already regularly broadcast. Among other
European countries now experimenting with
television or planning its introduction, are Spain,
Hungary, Switzerland, Poland, Denmark, Bulgaria,
Rumania, Yugoslavia, Monaco and Sweden.
Germany became the third country on the
European continent to begin regular broadcasts
in December 1952 (the first two : France in 1937,
the U. S. S. R. in 1938). Five stations now operate
in the German Federal Republic, including one
in Berlin. With the separate transmitter oper-
ated by the German Democratic Republic, Berlin
is so far the only city in Europe where more than
one programme is available to the viewing public.
The arrival of TV in Western Germany was
greeted with considerable reserve and even scep-
ticism by those who feared its effects on children
and the cultural life of the nation. Producers
have sought to overcome such attitudes by trying
to offer high quality programmes and stressing
adult education, on-the-spot coverage of current
events, and good dramatic productions.
Public bodies are taking great interest in the
development of television in Germany. The
Catholic and Protestant churches have formed
TV committees and hope to co-operate in
producing certain programmes. The'.'People's
High Schools" (adult education schools) are
studying the use of this new medium for their
purposes ; and German schoolteachers have
formed an organization in preparation for the
introduction of TV in classrooms.
Outside Europe and the American continent
(Canada has 160, 000 receivers and 2 stations),
public television services exist only in Japan.
But plans are being studied for its development
in the Middle and Far East, in Africa, Australia
and New Zealand. Among countries discussing
the possible introduction of television are India,
Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Turkey. At Istan-
bul, the Technical University now has a small
experimental broadcasting unit. Thailand, as
has been mentioned earlier, has purchased equip-
ment for educational broadcasting.
In Japan, television research goes back as far
as 1930, and experimental programmes were
begun in 1940, suspended during the war and
resumed in November 1950. On 1 February, 1953,
the Japan Broadcasting Corporation began a
regular, four-hours-per-day TV service over
stations at Tokyo, Nagoya and Osaka, and will
emphasize educational, cultural and news pro-
grammes with occasional entertainment. Two
commercial companies have received preparatory
licenses for TV and expect to start a competing
network of sponsored programmes later this year.
At the moment, there are about 3, 000 receivers in
Japan, and although the cost of sets is much
beyond the purchasing power of the average Jap-
anese, the television authorities believe that this
cost will soon be reduced, and that the number
of sets will rise to about 10, 000 within a year.
While television is rapidly developing as a
world-wide movement, countries are far from
agreed as to how it should be run. For one thing,
there are great differences in the technical
standards which are being adopted in different
parts of the world. The number of lines which
make up the televised image vary considerably
from one country to another. In Great Britain,
the picture has 405 lines ; in the U. S. and most of
the American continent as well as Japan, 525
lines are used. Most European countries use 625
lines ; France and those countries dependent upon
France have adopted a definition of 819 lines.
There are also basic differences between Western
European standards and those adopted in the
Soviet Union and other countries of Eastern Eur-
ope. It is as if many countries were building
railroad systems but adopting different gauges.
The system under which TV operates as well
as programme services vary greatly from country
to country. Generally speaking, the character of
television corresponds to the traditions and
cultural patterns of the land in which it is being
developed. In the U. S. and most Latin American
countries, the basic system is commercial. The
drawbacks of this system as far as educational
programmes are concerned, have been recognized
by the U. S. Government, and it Ls now planned to
set up non-commercial educational stations. In
Europe, television is generally operated by gov-
ernments or public corporations, but the intro-
duction of commercial stations, or commercial
sponsorship of public-owned stations, has also
been considered.
Certain countries whose past practice and
present inclination run counter to commercial
television may therefore be forced to have
recourse to it. On the other hand, countries
which began television purely on a commercial
basis are now finding it necessary to add non-
commercial educational stations.
Whatever road is taken, however, and despite
its high cost, television will continue to spread
around the globe. As its potentialities are further
explored and discussed, it is to be hoped that
television will grow not only as a new force for
entertainment, but as a powerful new instrument
of education and enlightenment.
Photo M. Zalewski
