The narrow street, in the heart of Bombay, had no lighting, no sidewalks.
THE narrow street, deep in the
heart of the slums of Bombay,
had no lighting, no sidewalks,
and its dusty surface did not make
a comfortable resting-place. It was
far from one's conception of a
suitable classroom. Nevertheless, a
few yards from where our car
stopped, a class was in progress. By
the flickering light of kerosene
lamps, about twenty adults were
painfully learning to read and write
their own language. Each had a
small primer and a notebook in
which to write down the symbols the
teacher outlined on the blackboard,
and that about summed up the
equipment.
This class was typical of the many
organized by the Bombay Social
Education Department. Every night
at least a hundred such classes are
being held in the street, in unused
shops, in trade union halls, in
schools, in temple courtyards. It is
a principle that the class must be
held near where a group lives, and
that the accommodation must be
free, so that where none is available
the class is held in the street.
In a two-day tour, I saw many
facets of the work of the Bombay
Social Education Department-com-
munal radio sets and loudspeakers,
film vans for the showing of films on
health, hygiene, and similar subjects,
a superb display of gymnastics
presented by one of the athletic
clubs, but always the emphasis was
on the problem of overcoming
illiteracy.
My own personal interest was in
one particular aspect of the problem
- the provision of public libraries
and the use of books. As Unesco
Consultant to Delhi Public Library, I
had come to see what was being done
to help the illiterate use this new-
found knowledge and increase it by
practice. It is not difficult, given
the right methods, to teach an adult
to read and write. But what comes
after ? What facilities should there
be to enable him to progress further ?
The Bombay Committee was trying
to help by providing boxes of books
at Social Education Centres. But
book boxes are not libraries, and a
complete public library system for
Bombay appeared to be very far in
the future.
Later, I had the opportunity to see
something of the rural problem when
I was invited by the State of Madhya
A few yards from where our car stopped, a class was in progress. By the
flickering light of kerosene lamps about twenty adults were painfully learning to
read and write their own language. (Photo : Bombay Social Education Committee.)

COURIER JUNE 1953. Page 15
A SIKH TAXI DRIVER DISCOVERS
THE ROAD TO THE LIBRARY
Bharat, in Central India, to tour the
province and report on the possibility
of an integrated public library ser-
vice. Madhya Bharat is a compound
of several Princely States, with a
population of over nine million
people, and an area of some 30, 000
square miles. It has three large
towns, Gwalior, Indore, Ujjain (one
of the holy cities of India), several
small ones, and innumerable villages.
Like all Indian States, it has many
problems. Roads, education, public
health services, agriculture, irrigation
- all need improvement, and that
Madhya Bharat should be thinking
of library services at all showed some
courage and vision. But someone
had realized that literacy and
libraries went together, and the
Rural Development Service had the
establishment of village libraries in
its programme. Sometimes it pro-
vides a box of books. Sometimes,
it supplements existing libraries.
A small beginning
WE saw one such library atBhitarwar, a typical enough
Indian village, more prosper-
ous than most perhaps, for it lies in
an irrigated area suited to sugar
cane, and it has a pleasant school, a
dispensary, and, accidently, some
claims to the picturesque. It lies on
a bend of a river, and on the far side
the ruins of a fort command the
plain from an outcrop of rock. India
is littered with such ruins. The forts
and tombs and temples decay, but
the villages remain. In a sacred pool
of the river by the Panchayat House
huge fish swim in contented im-
munity.
Greeted, garlanded, and refreshed
with sweet milky tea, nuts and fruit,
we entered the Panchayat House and
mounted a narrow stair. Here, in a
small room about 12 feet by 12, was
the village library. Some 500 books,
neatly classified, and very clean. I
made enquiries about use, and about
other books in the village. Of a
population of 1, 600 some 200 people
used the library from time to time.
One or two people had a few books
of their own. The schoolmaster had
several. Two or three people sub-
scribed to newspapers. There was
only one radio set in the village.
Here, in this small room was the
centre of culture in the village, it
was evident that the village council
was very proud of it. They had
founded it, levied a tax to pay for it,
and now it was to be enlarged as a
library for other villages in the area.
It was, of course, a very small
beginning. Bhitarwar is the centre
of a Kendra Panchayat, or rural
council, of about 100 square miles,
consisting of 70 villages and over
30, 000 people. Would the movement
thus started spread, or would it falter
for lack of funds, until the ideals
became a memory, and the clean
books a pile of tattered rubbish ?
Such daunting thoughts were
inspired by inspection of many
libraries in India, and by knowledge
of the previous history of the Public
Library movement.
"Gentlemen's club"
THERE have been Public Librar-ies in India for almost as long
as there has been Indian civil-
ization, and particularly in the 19th
and early 20th centuries. Public
Libraries were founded in most
Indian cities. But they were libraries
founded as memorials, or cultural
efforts by social service or charitable
foundations, and Western experience
has shown that the Public Library
can only flourish with sustained and
communal assistance-a basis of
taxation rather than subscription or
donation.
In India, the legislative basis has
always been lacking, and as a result
much effort has gone to waste. I
saw in India many libraries, good in
conception, inspired by high ideals,
that had become almost derelict
through lack of continuous support,
or were eking out a precarious
existence by subscription and do-
nation. In one large Indian city, a
most commodious building housed an
almost valueless collection of books,
and was used by a hundred or to
elderly gentlemen for its periodicals
and newspapers. It may have been
a quite'pleasant gentleman's club,
by Frank M. Gardner
but its original function as a public
library had disappeared.
In another city, two public libraries
existed within two hundred yards of
each other, one supported partially
by government grant, the other by a
social service group, with little or no
co-operation. In one of the largest
cities of India, a most beautiful
building bearing a famous name, has
become an almost derelict library
through lack of financial support.
Its shelves are crammed with 19th
century classics, with a number of
rarities, but classification and cata-
loguing are rudimentary, readers are
almost non-existent, and not only is
there no money for new books, but
the salary of the librarian is usually
in arrear.
The problem is not entirely a
financial one. In terms of use, it is
actually more expensive to maintain
a poor library than a good one. In-
variably, judging any library by the
rough and ready criterion of annual
cost per member, I found that the
cost was higher than similar cost in
England for a far superior service.
then progress has been continuous.
In two years, a complete modern
library service has been established,
with adult lending library, reading
rooms, children's library, and ex-
tension department for lectures,
discussions, and film shows. A
mobile library for outlying districts
is nearing completion, and with the
co-operation of the Ministry of
Rehabilitation, branches in the new
housing colonies for refugees are
being established. And to aid in the
conquest of illiteracy, small col-
lections in Social Education Centres
are maintained, and close con-
tact between the two departments
ensures that new-literates are pro-
perly introduced to the public library.
It has been a remarkable ex-
periment, and even more remarkable
has been the response of the public.
In the first year that the library has
been open, it has registered over
14, 000 members, loaned over 180, 000
books, and recorded 580, 000 atten-
dances. From the children's library
- one of the few actually lending
books to children for home reading
For practical reading-books on
engineering, radio, carpentry, re-
creations-it was impossible to gauge
the demand, because there were few
if any books available. The English
bookstock must remedy any deficien-
cies in technical books, any.. this was
deliberately limited at first, since the
library was intended primarily for
the ordinary reader. The Indian
Public Library has a double role-it
must not only provide books, it must
encourage their production.
Chester Bowles has said wisely
that India is not a poor country, it
is a country with many poor people.
In the pressing problem of de-
veloping Indian resources, where
does a Public Library fit in ? How
far is it worthwhile compared with
the demand of health, agriculture,
industrial production ? The most
obvious answer is that all progress
depends on a literate, socially
conscious community. New ideas
cannot be accepted unless un-
derstood, new techniques practised
unless learned.
The Delhi Public Library is a small
beginning, though it is on the way,
if allowed to develop, to providing an
adequate library service for the
To sit in a bus or tram one day and see a man in front, a very ordinary-looking fellow, pull a book from his pocket...
One is brought sharply to the
conclusion by this object lesson that
the public library can only fulfil its
function as an instrument of culture
and education if it is organized on
the basis of support from taxation,
free and unrestricted membership,
and access to the shelves. The
librarian of a library supported by
subscription looks on himself as a
custodian rather than an interpreter,
and comes to look on use as leading
to theft. Locked bookcases and
public libraries are a contradiction
in terms.
There is no lack of realization of
these facts in Indian librarianship.
A growing movement is agitating for
library legislation and modern
libraries, and is making progress.
To provide a focus for this growing
interest, the foundation of the Delhi
Public Library in 1951 as a de-
monstration project under the joint
auspices of Unesco and the Indian
Government was most opportune,
and its immediate and tremendous
success has shown that the con-
ception of the modern public library
is eagerly grasped by the Indian
public. The first director on behalf
of Unesco was Edward Sydney, well-
known for his work in furthering the
wider purposes of libraries, and he
did the foundation work on the
project. I acted as Unesco Con-
sultant from the opening of the
library to its firm and nourishing
state in the middle of 1952. Since
in India-200 books a day are issued,
and extension is only hampered by
the great difficulty in finding
suitable books in Hindi for children.
In the extension department, self-
governing groups sprang up with
very little nursing, covering theatre,
music, debating, music, Hindi litera-
ture, and a group for old people.
Lectures sponsored by the library
were always crowded, and film
shows had to be run in triplicate to
accommodate the crowds.
Accustomed to unresponsive lecture
audiences, I was surprised to see
large crowds for severely factual
talks on Indian affairs, and even
more to hear the knowledgeable
questions showered on the 1 : speaker
at the end. It was also pleasant to
see the readiness of eminent men to
come and talk to the public and the
immediate contact they made with
an audience. Democracy in India
may be new, but it is a vigorous, man
to man affair
The Delhi Library has emphasized
the existence of a very obvious need,
and it is well-used not only in
numbers but in quality. Most of the
stock is in Hindi, and much of it is
elementary and crude, but the
proportion of purely recreative read-
ing is no higher than in the West,
despite a generally lower educational
standard. For contemplative read-
ing, philosophy, religion, sociology,
the demand is much higher.
people of Delhi. But that was not
the object behind its foundation. To
succeed, it must act as a pilot for the
creation of similar services in other
parts of India, backed by legislation
and taxation. Beyond India lies
South-East Asia, with many countries
facing the same problems. The
Delhi Public Library can bring the
conception of Public Library service
in a practical way, as no text-book
ever could. Next year, when
Unesco's participation in the project
ends, assessment will be made of
what has been so far achieved, and
a seminar may be held attended by
librarians and educationists from
India and other countries. In
showing how a library should open
its doors and its shelves to all,
Unesco has started a whole series of
new ideas..
In my stay in Delhi, I had some
frustrations but many heart-warming
experiences. To sit in a bus one day
and see a man on the seat in front,
and a very ordinary-looking fellow,
pull a book from his pocket clearly
marked"Delhi Public Library" ; to
see an older boy laboriously trans-
lating an English picture book for
the benefit of a younger one ; to see
a bearded Sikh taxi-driver studying
a book on motor engineering-little
events such as these, and every day
one can see something new-prove
that here is a practical experiment
eagerly accepted and approved by
the people.
