DECEMBER 1953. Page 23
R
WARDHA : CENTRE OF GANDHIAN THOUGHT
by Dr J. D. N. VERSLUYS
Unesco Social Science Representative for South Asia
W ARDHA is a small town, 70 milessouth of Nagpur, the capital
of Madyah Pradesh. This
means Central Province, and Wardha
is indeed the geographical centre of
India. It is also the centre of
. Gandhian thought. Here, too, are
situated the buildings of the All-
India Village Industries Association
- one of the material results of
Mahatma Gandhi's teachings.
When I entered the gate leading
to the Association's buildings the
first thing I saw was a Pzeta, a
sculpture of the Virgin Mary holding
the dead body of Christ in her lap,
carved out of granite-a symbol of
Christianity I hardly expected to find
in the heart of India.
But this was soon explained by
Dr. J. C. Kumarappa, the outstanding
Gandhian economist, as he showed
me round the village industries
centre he has directed for many
years. Gandhian ideas, he pointed
out, are not linked to any particular
religion and therefore followers of
any religion whether they are Hin-
dus, Buddhists, Moslems or Chris-
tians, are all welcome at Wardha.
The central precept of the Gan-
dhian ideology-non-violence-not
only implies the generally accepted
sense of the term, but also the
deeper and wider meaning that
nature should not be roughly curbed
at will. It teaches that man should
adapt himself to nature in order to
establish a real harmony. Thip
attitude signifies reluctance to follow
any artificial ways of life such as are
found in large cities.
The family, preferably the joint
family (where brothers and sisters
with their families are living to-
gether as a single group), and the
village are regarded as the natural
setting for human life. The con-
ditions required to maintain this
structure call for both the family
and the village to be self-sufficient.
Therefore as far as possible every-
thing used in the village should be
manufactured by the villagers them-
selves. To meet the principal need
- textiles-spinning and weaving are
taught. But other handicrafts are
also encouraged, and one of the
main purposes of the Wardha Centre
is to teach social workers and the
teachers of handicrafts.
There is another reason for this in-
terest in handicrafts. It is realized
that the enormous rural problem of
under-employment and complete
unemployment cannot easily be re-
medied. The proportion of culti-
vators to arable land is increasing
unfavourably and each year the
population pressure becomes more
serious.
Industrialization cannot solve the
problem, as only a relatively small
number of workers can be absorbed
in big industries. Such industries
would require heavy capital in-
vestment, and capital is scarce in
India. Moreover, Dr. Kumarappa
feels that big industries are not in
keeping with India's own culture,
which flourished during many cent-
uries in various handicrafts until
these were suppressed by the cheap
machine-made products of Western
industry. Gandhi and his followers,
therefore, had economic, cultural
and national reasons for propagating
the revival of village handicrafts.
As is well-known, hand-spinning
became the symbol of Gandhism in
the'''twenties'', and in the Museum
Gandhian ideology regards the family and the village as the natural setting for
human life. With help and advice from social workers and handicraft teachers
trained at the Wardha Centre (seen here at mealtime), villagers can learn to
become self-supporting and improve their standards of health and of living.
at Wardha various models of spin-
ning-wheels, besides many beautiful
products of hand-weaving and many
other handicrafts are displayed.
Hand-spinning gradually gained an
importance far beyond its probably
doubtful economic usefulness. It
became the symbol of nationalism
and even took on an almost re-
ligious significance. But today the
Wardha Centre tries to develop
simple and more efficient village
tools to enable the villagers to
obtain better results more economic-
ally.
This is nowadays one of the chief
purposes of the Centre which tests
various tools, compares implements
from different parts of the country,
and then sets out to modify or
combine them in order to give
village industries a better chance
against the competition of machine-
made products. I was shown a
bullock-driven oil press whose
efficiency had been improved 60%
by a change in design costing very
little and by the introduction of ball-
bearings.
When I asked Dr. Kumarappa if he
did not resent the use of these ball-
bearings, which after all are ma-
chine-made products, he replied
frankly that big factories were
certainly useful for some specific
purposes, but that their use should
be limited to those products which
could not be made by hand. The
Centre uses scientific methods to
improve village tools, but it always
keeps one condition in mind, namely,
thai to be within the reach of the
village artisan, the improved tools
must be cheap, and require no power
supply for their operation.
Paper-making is also demonstrated
at Wardha. Although an ingenious
system is used to make the bullock-
driven mill as efficient as possible,
the product is about 50% more
expensive than machine-made paper.
Yet paper-making as a handicraft is
taught for it enables the villagers to
make use of various sorts of refuse
(old rags, straw, etc.), which would
otherwise be thrown away, and it
prevents the people from using their
money outside the village economy.
This is just one example of action
based on the principle that con-
sumption must be adapted to village
productive capacity. This in turn
implies that the village must be
ready to accept a lower satisfaction
of its needs from local production
than would be the case if it sought
goods manufactured in the cities.
There is another feature connected
with the campaign for handicrafts
which should be mentioned, namely,
the educational advantages. The
Gandhian system of education, called
basic education, makes wide use of
"learning by doing". It lays down
that the child should first of all
understand those things which form
the background of life in the village
and therefore the teacher should
use the children's immediate sur-
roundings as his starting point.
Spinning, for instance, may lead
the teacher to explain how cotton
grows and to describe all the other
processes connected with the cultl-
vation and use of this crop. From
here he may pass on to the mech-
anical principle of the spinning-
wheel and then to the economic
issues of buying cotton and selling
yarn, etc. This system naturally
requires a great deal of effort on the
part of the teacher, but has cer-
tainly the advantage of being a far
more direct approach to the subject
matter.
The Wardha Centre has not only
done useful work in developing vil-
lage industries, but also by teaching
social workers to approach village
life as a whole and through all its
aspects-agriculture, health, educa-
tion and culture.
In India, hand-spinning became the symbol of Gandhism and took on an almost religious significance. At Wardha, which is
both the centre of Gandhian thought and of the All-India Village Industries Association, the tradition continues. The centre'smain purpose, however, is to develop simple and efficient village tools and to improve craft and agricultural techniques,
JRIE
