Page 16. AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953 UNESCO*
-
TRANSPORTATION
The canoe is the only form of transpor-
tation devised by the Australian abori-
gine. Even then he seldom used it
for travelling from one place to another
but confined its use to crossing streams
and fishing close inshore. The canoes
are made from bark stripped in one
piece from trees and in the coastal
regions of Australie many trees may
still be seen bearing the scars on the
places from where the bark was taken.
WATER
Like most primitive races, the
Australian aborigine, living in
country where water holes are
few and scattered, carries his
water supply in the skins of
animals. His water bag is
usually the skin of the kangaroo
or wallaby, which after careful
sleeve skinning, is tied with
fibre or raw hide and filled with
grass to keep shape until it is
eventually dried out in the sun.
WALKABOUT
The Australian aborigine, in his native state, is essentially
nomadic and travels on his walkabout very lightly. His
properly is limited to fighting and hunting equipment.
The gin or lubra acts as his beast of burden, and carries,
according to the season and district, a skin waterbag, a
small dilly bag and a bark basket for the storage of food and ;
on occasion, a piccaninny. These baskets, bound with
native hemp, are light, strong and colourfully decorated.
CEREMONY
Mourning is essentially a feminine
ritual in the life of the Australian
aborigines. The bereaved widow is
required to mourn her husband from
three to six months. During this time
she wears the mourning armlet and
carries the mourning wreath as signs
of her sorrow. Both these are very de-
corative symbols of aboriginal art.
After the mourning period, the widow
is segregated from the males in the
same way as are the unmarried gills,
where she remains until she marries.
GIN
It is generally believed that aboriginal women lead a life
of semi-slavedom. But though life is harder for women
than for men the division of labour between the two is
clearly defined. The male is the hunter and warrior ; the
gin wields the digging stick and forages for most food.
Her"marriage"often takes place at an early age and she
may"re-marry"several times. One strange custom which
is rigidly observed : no man may look at his mother-in-law
nor may she in her turn look at him under any circumstances.
SUPERNATURAL
Djanba, Divine Thunder of the
Nor'-west. The Australian
aborigine thinks a great deal
about things beyond the earthly
sphere. The wld around him
is alive with supernatural
beings, friendly and hostile.
Found in the wilds of Kimberley
(W. A.) by Rev. Father Worms,
this figure was covered with
human blood applied during a
secret rain-ceremony. Inten-
tionally small, it represents
Djanba, the Invisible. Even
more awesome rites have been
rehearsed before it, witnessed
only by the initiated. Who
would dare peer into these
mysterious performances ?

. COURtER
AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 1953. Page 17
CONFLICT
The shield is the on ! y form of
armour used by the Australian
aborigine through the centuries
of almost continuous inter-
tribal warfare. Gaudily deco-
rated to the individual taste of
the warrior, these shields are
made from the underbark of
trees. In the deft hands of the
quick-eyed aborigine fighter,
these shields are most effec-
tive in glancing off the spears,
throwing sticks and boome-
rangs used in native battles.
RELAXATION
Itis not generally known that
the Australian aborigine
enjoyed pipe smoking even
beþjre his contact with the
white man's civilization. His
"fragrant weed"was a
variety of the dock. the
fleshy leaves of which, when
dried, resemble tobacco.
The stems of the pipes were
often decorated or carved
to satisfy the aesthetic taste
of its owner. Smoking,
however, was restricted
by custom to the males
and to the older gins.
FOOD
Fish trapping is an art at which the Australian aborigines
who live in river country become very adept. The traps
are made from reeds, twigs and native string and are set
at strategic parts of streams where fish are known to be.
The shallow waters are dammed back and the traps moored
in a narrow outlet. Usually the tribe drive the river to the
accompaniment of help from lubras, children and dogs.
SURGERY
Surgery is practised by the Australian
aboriginal tribes for ceremonial and
operating purposes. The instruments
are flaked from flint, principally from
the almost legendary Ngillipidgi Quarry,
and are of razor-like sharpness. The
native method of treating wounds is a
crude form of cauterisation, performed
by cutting into the wound and filling
the cavity with hot cinders or clay.
Fortunately the aborigine is more sto-
ical towards pain than the white man.
PICCANINNY
Traditionally fond of children,
aborigines treat their young-
sters with tolerance, amuse-
ment and affection. Hardly
before he is over the toddler
stage the aborigine boy begins
to play with miniature spears
and other weapons. At about
the age of five this play is
taken seriously and from then
a spear is seldom out of his
hand, though he will be well
into his teens before being
considered proficient in its use.
Up to this time, his life will for
the most part be spent with
the women and children of the
tribe except when he is segre-
gated to undergo preparation
for the various initiations-an
important part of his education.
FIRE
cnarcoal which can be blown into life and so obviate the
tedious task of using the firestick. Those illustrated above
are used by the Arunta tribe from Central Australia, the
only aborigines who decorate their fire lighting sticks.
The only method of fire-making used by
Australian aborigines is with firesticks.
By revolving between their hands a
hard mulga wood stick on a piece of
softer wood, heat is generated to ignite
the tinder. On short trips the abori-
gines usually carry a glowing piece of
MESSAGES
One of the Australian aborigine's claims to
literacy is the use of message sticks which
have long baffled leading anthropologists.
The carvings are not writing in our sense,
nor are they hieroglyphics in the Egyptian
sense, but they have been used as aids to
memory, safety passports through hostile
country, requests for medicine and tobacco,
and at means of locating water holes.
THE RAIN MAKER
WITCHCRAFT
There's rarely any escape for the unfor-
tunate aborigine who is the subject of
the awesome bone-pointing ceremony,
even though he be hundreds of miles
away from the"bone"which is pointed
at him. So great is the belief in the
fearful magic of bone pointing that
immediately an aborigine hears"that
the"bone"has been pointed at him,
he lies down and within a few days is
dead, a victim of suggestion. His only
hope is the ceremonial extraction of
the bone by a medicine man. The
"bone"is usually a small round piece
of wood or bone, pointed at both ends,
and it IS ornamented with markings.
