CERTAIN articles, the more daring, of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights have caused many people to
declare :"But this is Utopian ! Un-
fortunately, the world hasn't reached
that stage !"
True, the world has not yet reached that
stage. But the world is in process of evolution,
and that evolution depends on men. We have
seen slavery, a well-established institution,
disappear from English, French, Russian and
American soil within a quarter of a century
(1835-1865), It may be that, in another twenty-
five years, nothing Utopian will be seen in
Article 25 of the 1948 Declaration :
"Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing,
housing and medical care and necessary social
services, and the right to security in the event
of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood,
old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances
beyond his control."
People will still say :"The world would be
paradise if all these fine ideas were put into
practice ; it's far from being the case in most
countries."But the question should be considered
in relation to what has already been achieved.
It is useless to dwell at length on the rights of
the person in Spartan society. There, the
abandonment and sale of children were common
practices. Disabled slaves were put to death.
And the other Spartan customs were not dis-
similar.
The laws of Athens were less harsh. The poor
benefited from whatever relief was dispensed ; the
people cared for the infirm, and adopted the sons
of citizens who had fallen in battle. Public
doctors visited the poor, and artisans were help-
ed by mutual aid societies. But childhood was
ill-protected.
Rome practised social assistance at an early
stage. Poor citizens were forgiven their debts,
land was distributed,
large families were help-
ed ; food was sold at
reduced prices and even,
under the lex clodia,
distributed free.
Trajan founded a col-
lege for needy children,
and Antoninus one for
poor girls. Medical wel-
fare services functioned
in the cities. Septimius
Severus and Diocletian
forbade fathers to sell their children and, finally,
Justinian's Code declared foundlings to be free,
whereas previously they had been classed as
slaves.
A great contribution to social welfare was made
by Christianity. The Christian emperors of
Byzantium, through the bishops, increased the
number of charitable institutions, like alms-
houses, orphanages, hospitals and homes for the
aged. The laws of the Christian Councils and the
first decretals of the Popes enjoined aid to the
poor and to orphans, the l'ansom of prisoners, and
hospitality to strangers. A quarter of the
Church's revenues should be spent on works of
charity.
In the East, meanwhile, there were many ex-
amples of humanitarian effort. In Persia,
Khosroes Anouchirvara, in the sixth century, gave
money to the poor to allow them to marry ; in
India, King Uposadh was famous for his alms-
giving.
In Christian Europe, charity had a hard task
to alleviate the evils that followed in the wake of
almost continual warfare, famines, epidemics,
brigandage and vagrancy.
Famine was rife in eleventh-century England,
in thirteenth-century Bohemia and, during the
Hundred Years War, in. fourteenth-century
France. Leprosy spread to an alarming degree
during the twelfth century. Lepers were objects
of terror and repulsion, and were excluded from
communities, penned up in lazar-houses and
regarded from the civil point of view, as dead.
It is estimated that twenty-four million people
died of the Black Plague in the fourteenth-
century, a quarter of the population of Europe.
When the power of the throne became more
llrmly established in France, a start was made
with organizing social welfare. Saint Louis, who
personally cared for the lepers, was its forerunner.
By an edict of 1536, supplemented in 1545,
Francis I directed that parishes should feed the
poor and give work to able-bodied men. There
FELLOW-PASSENGERS
ON THE SAME PLANET
AND IN THE FIGHT
TO OBTAIN BETTER
LIVING STANDARDS
charitable institutions.
In 1551, a register of the poor was instituted in
each parish. Anyone refusing to subscribe alms
could be summoned before a court. On the other
hand, vagrants and beggars incurred the harshest
penalties, which included whipping, the loss of an
ear for a second offence, prison and, for in-
corrigible delinquents, death.
In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, an Act of 1601
permitted the levy of regular taxes on all
landowners in a parish ; it also directed that poor
children be apprenticed to a trade, that able-
bodied persons be put to work, and that all relief
be reserved for the disabled. Workhouses were
introduced in the seventeenth century.
In the eighteenth century, under the influence
of sociological moralists like Hume, Bentham and
Adam Smith, the ideas of"solidarity"and of
"service rendered by work"were the source of new
welfare laws.
An Act of 1796 included, among persons to be
assisted, all workers whose salaries were judged
to be inadequate.
The custom of paying workers an allowance
varying with the price of living gradually became
a recognized obligation.
The novels and articles of Charles Dickens ex-
erted a tremendous influence on public feeling as
regards pauperism and its attendant evils.
On the international plane, few events have
had greater scope and significance than the
signing of the Geneva Convention in 1864. It
gave the war-wounded a legal status recognized
by all belligerents, and resulted in the estab-
lishment in various countries of Red Cross
Societies designed to aid the wounded (even on
the battle-field) and to provide combined
assistance in the event of calamities (foods.
epidemics or earthquakes) whenever local or
national resources seemed likely to be inadequate.
During the last hundred years, numerous laws
have improved the living conditions of the less
equality, solidarity and
the right to relief for
which the Encyclopedists
had paved the way.
In England, through-
out the centuries, the
process was much the
same. Having suppressed
Catholic organizations at
the time of the Re-
formation, the State,
from Henry VIII's time
onwards, took charge of
was a certain improvement in the general
situation during the reign of Henry IV, but with
the Thirty Years War and the Fronde, social evils
including plague and famine, reappeared.
It was then that St. Vincent de Paul <1581-1660)
mobilized the whole of France in the cause or
charity through the enterprises he set on foot,
which reached full fruition after thirty years of
effort. The parochial associations known as
"Confraternities of Charity", which were estab-
lished in the smallest villages, cared for the sick
and gathered in children who had been
abandoned, with the help of the Servants uf tho
Poor" (later called the"Daughters of Charity").
Under the influence of St. Vincent, Louis XIV
took steps to protect childhood and promote
general relief. St. Vincent had established a
home for foundlings ; the edict of 1662 prescribed
the establishment of homes for the poor and
orphaned"in all cities and market towns where
none such yet exist".. In his Instructions to the
Dauphin, Louis XIV stated :
"I will try to arrange things in such a manner,
not indeed that there will be neither rich nor
poor in the kingdom, but at least that want and
beggary disappear. I mean that there will no
longer be anyone, no matter how wretched, who
is not assured of a livelihood, either by work or
by settled and steady aid."This statement is not
so far removed from Article 25 of the 1948
Declaration.
Despite these efforts, however, the eighteenth
century saw a continuation of the scandalous
social inequalities and cruelties which are always
present when a large proportion of the population
languish in misery and want. Hospitals were in-
adequate ; the sick were harshly treated. Save in
Paris, nothing was done for children or disabled
soldiers. Unemployment remained an unsolved
problem.
It was only the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of
Man, and the Constitutions of 1791 and 1793 that
finally and officially proclaimed the notions of

COURIER NOVEMBER 1953. Page 9
THEY ARE NO LONGER ALONE
favoured classes throughout the world. Hospitals
have been modernized, and social welfare enter-
prises have increased. The world has become
accustomed to the idea that a nation is fully
responsible for the lot of each of its citizens, no
less than to the democratic principle that each
citizen must assume some responsibility in public
affairs.
Contemporary society has gone even farther,
however. It has seen the growth and de-
velopment of the idea of an increasingly inter-
dependent world. It has witnessed the ac-
ceptance by nations of international co-operation
to promote higher standards of living, full
employment and conditions of economic'and
social progress of the peoples of foreign countries
as well.
Nations have become aware that more than
half of humanity lives in poverty, disease and
ignorance. The more prosperous nations have
come to realize that prosperous, progressive
people make better neighbours, better friends and
better customers. They no longer doubt that
economic development and higher living stan-
dards are to their. interest as well as to the
interest of the economically under-developed
countries and of a stable world economy.
The outlook of millions of people is being
transformed from resigned despair to courageous
optimism. For they now know that they can
better their lot-if their resources, their labour
and their skill are put to the best possible use.
The 20th century has seen the growth of
programmes of mutual international aid such as
the American Point IV, the British Colombo Plan,
the Caribbean Commission and the South Pacific
Commission. The United Nations, in co-operation
with its related agencies, today operates the
largest programme ever set up for providing
technical aid through an international orga-
nization.
The U. N. Technical Assistance programme is an
attempt at the interchange of ideas and
techniques which raise living standards. It is an
effort to give freely, without concern for
national boundaries, the vital ideas in science and
ducation upon which modern life depends. It
is entirely a co-operative affair ; it is not only
supported and controlled co-operatively but its
operations within particular countries are also
joint enterprises. And what is not generally
known-there is no assistance from an inter-
national agency without a national contribution
to match it.
By the end of last year, the U. N. and its agencies
had sent over 1, 500 highly-trained specialists to
under-developed countries, and had provided over
2, 700 fellowships to enable selected people in these
countries to continue their studies abroad.
On the next pages we present a few examples
of how, with the aid of the United Nations, the
peoples in one country-the Philippines-are
working to achieve the"adequate standard of
living"proclaimed in the Declaration of Human
Rights.
To help revitalize its craft industries whose output had seriously declined during and after the Second World War,
the Government of the Philippines has opened a number of training centres. Here artisans learn to adapt new tech-
niques to their traditional skills. The United Nations and its Specialized Agencies are co-operating closely in this
effort aimed at improving the country's economy and thereby the standard of living of its people. (See next page).
NEW tDEAS FOR
OLD INDUSTRIES

Page 10. NOVEMBER 1953
SOCIAL AWARENESS AND
DUTIES TO COMMUNITY
"Everyone has duties to the community."At
Punta, an industrial suburb of Manila, civic
leaders elaborated a plan to develop social res-
ponsibility in the community. Workers, teachers
and children of the school all took part in a
programme which included a scheme for a new
town plan, a new library, a campaign for town
hygiene and sanitation. Unesco was asked to
send a specialist on community development to
help the community in corrying out the plan.
UNESCO
Before the programme became a reality, teachers
canvassed each family finding general agreement.
Using a model built by young architects, the com-
munity council, discusses future development.
The people of Punta are proud of their new library
which they have financed and built themselves.
A PROPER STANDARD
OF LIVING FOR ALL
During the fine ! discussion of the Universal
Declaration before its adoption in 1948,
Mr. Carera Andrade of Ecuador commented that
many of the rights had been the heritage of
mankind for years but others, such as the right
of man to work and the right to a decent
standard of living, had only recently come into
existence. The craft weavers of the Philip-
pines recently found these rights menaced when
machine-made fabrics began flooding local
markets. The Government, with UN aid, set up
a workshop to help the weavers improve their
production and thus safeguard their livelihood.
Here a Philippine girl experiments in weaving a mosquito netting which will open new markets on the islands.
In the past all netting had been imported. Experiments are also made with indigenous fibres. U. N. experts
also encourage skilled weavers to design and plan t
products have been sold direct to public from cel
FRIENDSHIP COMES
FROM SHARED SKILLS
The Preamble to the Universal Declaration
states that"it is essential to promote the deve-
lopment of friendly relations between nations".
The U. N. programme of technical assistance
is a practical application of this principle. In
the Philippines, where timber is an important
natural resource now being developed, local
timbermen have invented special methods in this
industry which the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation felt could help other countries. The
Philippine Government therefore invited twenty-
one countries to send timber experts to study
Filipino methods as part of a technical assis-
tance exchange of information programme.
Lumber experts of all races are studying the
Philippines'special mechanical logging techniques.
A model of the logging system is erected by Fili-
pinos for the benefit of foreign timbermen.
Fixing the special cables which will enable the
logs to be brought down from the mountains.
THE RIGHT TO HEALTH
OF ALL THE FAMILY
"Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of him-
self and of his family, including... medical care
and necessary social services..."says Article 25
of the Universal Declaration. The Government
of the Philippines has recently launched a great
programme to extend and strengthen its health
services, It is being aided in this enormous
task by international specialists from the World
Health Organization (WHO) and the United
Nations Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
Here we see Philippine and foreign technicians
working together in an onti-TB campaign, in a
Government laboratories are now producing BCG vaccine not only for the Philippines own anti-TB campaign but for use in Indonesia, Formosa, North
Borneo and Sarawak. Through the co-operative efforts of the Philippines and UNICEF some 500 centres for mother and child care have been equipped.
Doctors and nurses, part of United Nations Tech-
nical Assistance team, leave a hygiene centre
en route for a remote island of the Philippines.
This little boy getting a BCG Injection in a Phi-
lippine welfare centre is a living example of the
application of one of the articles on human rights.
A DDT-team sets out by carabao sledge to spray
houses as well as mosquito-infested localities.

Children help in community activities, volunteering
to work in team to keep the city streets clean.
'warp for weaving on modified looms. Improved
res which have been set up allover the country.
Sharing of skills and knowledge lnternationally is
the basis of all U. N. technical assistance.
malaria control project on the island of Min-.
doro, and in 0 rural hygiene centre. Some
500 mother and child care centres have recent-
ly been equipped in all parts of the Philippines.
The people of Minglanilla, on the island of Cebu,
gather in the municipal square to receive an anti-TB
injection during the widespread health campaign.
A mobile van provided by UNICEF gives people
in remote villages free X-ray examinations.
THE RIGHT TO WORK AND
TO HELP IN ADVERSITY
"Everyone has the right to security in the event of unemployment... or other lack
of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control"says the Universal Declaration.
When a typhoon severely damaged the island of Romblon the Government of the
Philippines decided to create a new source of employment by developing the
island's marbfe quarries. The U. N. helped under its technical assistance pro-gramme by providing four Italian experts to help set up the machinery for quarrying and finishing marble. Here, Romblon islanders with pneumatic
drills work the face of a new marble quarry. The extracted marble is given a finishing process and then craftsmen set to work carving designs.
This young girl Is using the traditional type of potter's wheel. Today potters are learning more
about up-to-date techniques and their newly-designed products are finding fresh markets.
TECHNICAL EDUCATION
FOR LOCAL CRAFTSMEN
'"technical education shall be made gene-
rally available". One of the urgent social
and economic problems facing the Philip-
pines today is the plight of its craft indus-
tries affecting on important part of the
population. To revitalize these industries
and improve the life of workers, the govern-
ment has recently opened technical training
centres where local craftsmen learn to adopt
new techniques to their own traditional skills.
A series of pots made by using the ancient
technique of open-firing with rice straw.
A U. N. expert in ceran.. cs shows local craftsmen how to build a modern high-temper3ture oven, explains a simple production method, and explains
how better results can be obtained by mixing clays. When the potters return to their villages, they will pass on their newly-found knowledge.
COURIER NOVEMBER 1953. Page I I
