Page 14. FEBRUARY ì953
RESTORING QUAKE-HIT CUZCO
ON Sunday afternoon, May 21, 1950, many ofthe people of Cuzco, Peru, were gathered
outside the city watching a football game.
They could see, in the distance, the stupendous
stone structures of the ancient empire of the Incas
glistening in the bright mid-day sun. Suddenly,
at 1. 39 p, m., the ground began to shake and
tremble. A few minutes later, over 100 persons
inside Cuzco were dead and more than 200 were
injured. The city itself was a shambles. Three
thousand dwellings were destroyed, and only
1, 200 remained habitable. The total damage was
estimated at over $33, 000, 000.
Cuzco is really three cities. One is Inca. The
second is colonial. The third is modern. The
numerous monuments of this ancient city testify
to its important role during the different periods
of its long history, which links the civilization of
the pre-Columbian Incas to the present time. A
great number of these monuments were seriously
damaged by the earthquake.
Immediately following the catastrophe, the
Peruvian Government took steps to remedy the
appalling conditions of the city. A special appro-
priation'was later voted by the Congress for the
reconstruction of churches and historical monu-
ments. Opinion, however, was divided over the
best way to plan this work and agreement
appeared difficult. The Peruvian Government
therefore asked Unesco to send an international
technical mission to help in formulating the plans.
In June, 1951, a Unesco mission, headed by
Professor George Kubler of Yale University,
arrived at Cuzco. It made a survey of the damage
and drafted a plan for reconstruction. These are
now incorporated in an illustrated volume, just
published by Unesco, entitled"Cuzco : Recons-
truction of the Town and Restoration of its
Monuments" (1). A detailed description of the
earthquake damage is given, covering religious
architecture, colonial dwellings, streets and
squares. Ultimately, the book points out, the
Cuzco Development Authority, established by the
Peruvian Government in co-operation with the
U. N. Technical Assistance Administration, will
assume control of the reconstruction of Cuzco.
Photo, above, shows damage to main cloister of
one of the Colonial churches, the Iglesia de la
Merced which : was built between 1651 and 1670.
(t) Prince : $1. 50 ; 8/M ; 400 afro
