o* the
N
110 man ever asserts his
right to life except, perhaps, the man
who is threatened by death. And even .he does
so in secret, because he is ashamed and also because
he does not know to whom he could talk about it
aloud.
J. et the Universal Declaration of Human Rights main¬
tains, in Article 3, "Everyone has the right to life..."
The phrase is somewhat disturbing. There's nothing
obscure in it. But the reader can always add... "the
right to life, except when it is refused by justice."
kJociety tells the condemned
man: "Your crime deserves the death penalty. We are
suppressing your right to life." Society has good
reasons: it has every intention of defending itself
against the forces of evil that is, crime which might
endanger it.
So the right to life isn't absolute. In certain cases, it
is wiped off the list of rights. This isn't very simple,
mind you. For if I give my children the right to use my
library and I discover one day that they've torn my
books, I can revoke that right. He who gives can take
away. Is it society, therefore, which grants the right
to life? From whom did the condemned man receive
his life?
T
JL he condemned man is- nearly always a murderer.
His victim too, had the right to life. The condemned
man is an individual who, one day, from the depths of
his passion, his pride or his greed or from the depths
of his terror decreed the annihilation of another. He
made himself a tyrant. Either calmly or in maniacal
fury, he set up a reign of selfishness for his own
benefits.
At the time of his deed or, at least, at the mysterious
moment when he decided to commit it he plunged
into an abyss where no rights and no laws can exist.
He chose savagery of his own will. Can he then dare
to demand the privileges of a free man? Human
Rights didn't worry him very much when he killed.
They belonged to a kingdom from which he exiled
himself. Therefore, it would seem hopeless to try to
save him today by invoking the principles which he
sought to destroy yesterday.
.GW*
ouG
by
Georges Fradier
But, in reality, it is in the name of these very prin¬
ciples that he will be judged, for society considers the
old law of "an eye for an eye" as barbarous. Once he
has been imprisoned, the fiercest bandit alive is no
longer an outlaw. The verdict is pronounced on a
crime... but it is a man who must serve the sentence.
Is it completely certain that this man can be gagged
if he decides to talk about his right to life? Supposing
he discovers the .Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and then pleads guilty. He might say: "I have
violated the most important rights on this list and
there is nothing in it which absolves me of my respon¬
sibility. But it doesn't absolve you of yours. It does not
allow me to drag you down into my world of darkness
This list bears witness to a respected code of values
I have flouted it on one occasion and now you are
making me answer to it. You are on the side of justice
and I appeal to the justice of the Universal Declaration.
-I' read here : "Every man has the right to life." These
words are overwhelmingly against me. But now you
read them yourselves."
s,
'ociety protects itself...
Society condemns... It is too easy to hide behind society.
We are society... you, me and the rest of us. The cri¬
minal is precisely the man who tried tc leave society.
Now he has been brought back. It is I who am protect¬
ing myself, and it is I who condemn.
Happily, I can delegate my powers to a proxy. This
enables me to hold forth calmly over an after-dinner
cup of coffee on the pros and cons of the death penalty.
Of course, there are some very sound arguments on
both sides... the way things stand today and with the
evidence available, we shouldn't jump to conclusions...
our children will find the answer... the tide of human
progress, etc., etc... You and I, we're independent,
We're neither judges nor criminals.
Independent? And what about those judges who
believe that they condemn in our name? And they're
right: in law, they speak for us. In reality, too. The
condemned man stares out from his cell. He sees not
only the judge who sentenced him, but unconscious
judges as well ourselves. Can it be said that we, as
judges, are hypocrites?
c
ourts, gallows and flames from the stake. During
the Middle Ages, so we're told, judges condemned right
and left. In the 18th century, too, witches and thieves
were handed over to the hangman. Our fathers did
not ask themselves the same questions that we do
about the death penalty. It wasn't that they consid¬
ered human life cheap. But the problem of life and
of death was clearer to them than it is to us and, if
I dare put it this way, less serious. Society today

Unesco Courier. Nr 10. 1954
cannot tell itself that it kills the body of a criminal
to save his soul. No one talks about the defendant's
soul in the criminal courts. It's true that they don't
say much about his body, either. Instead, they analyse
his psychology... which is neither a concrete thing nor
an immortal one.
VJo the judges in the Middle
Ages never worried about excuses (Middle Ages a
handy expression to designate societies bound by belief
in the sacred, as opposed to our modern civilizations
which claim to be purely human). These judges
believed that .they had a duty to punish and scourge.
In the death penalty, the word "penalty" took on its
full meaning. It meant that the scales of Justice would
swing back into balance. The criminal atoned for his
deed that is, he purged himself of his sin by under¬
going punishment. At one stroke, he washed away the
stain which he had left on society, and the stain which
he had placed on his soul.
"5.
'end a criminal into the next world"... "He has paid
the supreme penalty for his crime"... There was a time
when there was nothing shameful in these phrases.
They had a meaning, and they gave a meaning to the
penalty.
J. et even today after an
execution some journalists still describe the criminal as
having "paid his debt to society." Do their readers
feel they have now been repaid?
I
n several countries, the courts cling to the terrifying
and imposing garb of sacred justice: black robes, red
robes, wigs, etc. And they keep their solemn and
barely intelligible language. The death sentence is
pronounced in the name of the people, or in the name
of the king or in the name of the constitution.
Who are these people who demand a corpse? Where
are they? In the eyes and in the mind of the con¬
demned man, what is this constitution suddenly turned
into an instrument of vengeance, and what is this law
which demands satisfaction?
JUxecutions, however, are no
longer a public spectacle. Proclaimed pompously, vir¬
tuously and publicly, the penalty must now be carried
out stealthily and quickly at dawn. There can be no
crowd to watch the execution. Even the jurymen are
not invited. When they answered the fateful questions,
they knew, of course, what their replies meant, but no
one asked them to imagine the result. And, at the
moment of this result, no one shall disturb their
slumbers. So all of these weeks of questioning and
testimony and eloquence and headlines, these weeks of
drama and stage direction finish in the furtive half-
hour of an official and shameful execution. During the
trial, with the help of modern means of publicity,
thousands of actors participated in the drama. At the
finale, there are only three or four. All that the others
will do is to read a brief paragraph absent-mindedly in
an afternoon newspaper.
B
efore a man can declare himself for or against the
death penalty, let him first climb the barrier of ab¬
stractions surrounding it and tear away the curtain of
verbiage. He is not reaching a decision which, once
taken, can be put out of mind; not discussing a theory,
but death itself the final physical act. Let him try
to understand the reasons (they must be terribly con¬
vincing) which oblige us to kill a man calmly and
deliberately.
L
Ls it impossible for the
honest citizen, the good husband, the kind father, the
pillar ci society, to put himself for a moment into the
shoes of the condemned man? Is it impossible for him
to visualize himself in a death cell and to tell himself:
"I am not a criminal. I was when I committed this
crime (this murder, or this rape, or this crime against
the State, or this theft, depending on where he lives
and the laws of his land) but since then, months (or
years) have passed and I have changed the way every¬
one changes. I am no longer the same man. Which
man are you condemning? Besides, you do not even
seek to know me for what I am..." Is it impossible for
this innocent man to understand why so many
condemned criminals protest their innocence? Yes,
there's no doubt it's impossible.
A
t least, every man should be able to imagine himself
in the jury box or on the judge's bench. But that only
means that he would be called upon to make his
decision on the basis of his knowledge... knowledge of
law, of philosophy, of anthropology, etc. The one thing
that he will not have time to examine is the right to
life, the right of "John Smith" to his life, a life as
humble, as dangerous, as sad, as miserable and as
mediocre as you care to imagine it, but the infinitely
precious life of the man who does not want to die. No
he will not be able to examine this life... there are too
many abstractions in the way.
-I ou're against the death
penalty? That's easily said, you know. Have you ever
seen the victim of a murderer? Are you capable of
imagining the horrors committed by certain killers?
We are always ready to speak without knowing, and
without engaging our responsibilities. How many
opponents of the death penalty changed their minds
the day they suddenly became "interested parties" and
had to offer a personal opinion.
A
re you for the death penalty? Are you ready to
replace the executionerreplace him officially with all
of the dignity of his profession? When a man has
good and honourable reasons to demand the life of
another man of whom he knows almost nothing, he
certainly should find the courage to go and take that
life himself. Why should such a just and salutary task
be left to obscure mercenaries?
L
Lf the right to Ufe is not
an absolute right, if it must be accompanied by
restrictions which vary according to time and place,
then what right can we count on? Is there any one
right which we can assert under any circumstances?
Not one, but all of these rights must be asserted so
that all of them may become absolute. For all of these
rights stem from a single postulate Article 1 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: "All human
beings are born free and equal in dignity and in rights.
They are endowed with reason and conscience and
should act towards one another in a spirit of brother¬
hood".
Deny or neglect this postulate... and the rest is just
a joke.
21
