From Slave
Colony to
Nationhood
UNESCO COURIER - N° 2 - 1954
by Alexandre Leventis
THE CITADELLE LAFERRIÈRE was the most
massive of the fortresses built by King Henri I
(Henry Christophe). Like the prow of a ship, its
great bastions sweep upwards from the rocky
summit of the mountain, beneath walls which
tower to a height of 240 feet. (Photo copyright
Denise Colomb, Paris.)
WHEN George III, King of England,
asked one of his admirals to de¬
scribe Haiti to him, the admiral
crumpled a sheet of paper into a ball
and, holding it out to his sovereign to
see, said, "'There it is, Sire". The story
may not be true, for it is also told of
Puerto-Rico, with Queen Isabella asking
a Spanish admiral to describe it. All the
same, it fits the facts; seen from the air
the island appears a mountainous mass
furrowed by valleys running in every
direction. Indeed, there is a Haitian
saying, "Behind : the mountains there
are other mountains" and the name
"Haiti" in the language of the Arawak
Indians means "mountainous country"
or "high land."
Christopher Columbus, dazzled by the
beauty of the. landscape when, for the
first time, he saw the wonderful bay
which he named St.Nicholas, exclaimed,
"Es una maravilla!" (It is a wonder!),
and described it thus in writing to his
patrons Isabella of Castile and Ferdi¬
nand of Aragon.
The great navigator had set out from
Palos in Andalusia with three caravels
and ninety-eight companions on August
3, 1492, and on December 6, after having
landed at the Bahamas and at Cuba, he
sighted the large island which the In¬
dians had told him existed to the east.
"Everywhere there you find gold and
untold treasure", they said.
Gold was, in fact, one of the presents
given to the sailors from the Santa Ma¬
ria, the Pinta and the Nina by the In¬
dians of Arawak stock who inhabited the
island. Welcomed with open arms,
Christopher Columbus and his men had
no difficulty in taking possession of the
island in the name of the Queen of Cas¬
tile. Columbus called it "La Isla Espa¬
ñola", whose Latinized form "'Hispa-
niola" was later adopted in English.
LIKE A GRIM CYCLOPS, the fortress of King Henri dominates land, sea and sky from its rocky promon¬
tory called Bonnet à PEvêque (Bishop's Bonnet). It was armed with 365 weighty bronze cannon dragged
by hand up a winding mountain trail. It once held enough provisions to supply 10,000 soldiers during a
year's siege. (Photo Haitian National Tourist Office.)
Small of stature, the Arawáks were a
sedentary and peaceful people. Al¬
though they were skilled weavers of
cotton and lived by hunting, fishing and
agriculture, they went about almost
naked. Columbus described them as
"gentle beings, hospitable... curious and
merry, walking. in beauty..." These In¬
dians were already playing a form of
football using a ball 'made of crude
rubber which they called a bastos, and
which they hit mostly with their knees.
On the whole they were cheerful peo¬
ple, who when not keeping up their
gaiety by singing did so just as effect¬
ively by drinking onycou, - a beverage
made from fermented fruit juice. The
gods they worshipped were the sun, the
moon, the sky, the stars, and they were
so fond of mameys, a succulent island
fruit, that their conception of paradise
was a place where one did nothing but
eat mameys all day. When the Span¬
iards landed there, Haiti was divided
into five small kingdoms governed by
"caciques", who combined the roles of
political and military chieftains, priests
and doctors.
Christmas Day 1492 was a disastrous
one for Columbus. His flagship Santa .
Maria drifted onto a coral reef in Acul
Bay and was wrecked. But this paved
the way for the founding of the first
American colony. "Because it is certain"
wrote Columbus In his Journal, '"that if
I had not run aground here, I should
have kept out to sea without anchoring
in this place... Neither would I have left
people here on this voyage".
This first colony was founded near
what is_ now the town of Cap Haïtien
and a "fortress was built with salvage
from the Santa Maria. When Columbus
set sail for Spain in January 1493 he left
behind 42 colonists. But when he
returned in November of 'the same year
bearing the titles of Admiral and Viceroy
of the Indies, with seventeen ships and
1,500 volunteers attracted by the thought
of gold and adventure, Columbus found
the fort destroyed and the colonists slain.
However gentle and hospitable the
Arawaks may have been, they objected
to being pillaged and had finally taken
counter measures.
This time the "Admiral of the Ocean
Seas" established a settlement further

With scythes, pitchforks and torches
to the east, 25 miles from the 'present
Dominican town of Puerto Plata, and
later, near a gold mine, at the spot
where the town of San Domingo stands
today. In dealing with the chieftains he
resorted alternatively to the sword and
to negotiation (with a preference for
force). Then he ran into trouble from
another quarter: when his companions
realized that their hopes of riches to be
had just for the taking, were unfounded,
they began to make exhorbitant demands
and Columbus could not prevent them
from enslaving the Indians. Finally the
"High Admiral" was forced to seek help
in Spain; but he failed, and in the end
died in destitution in Valladolid on May
20, 1506.
By that time there were only 60,000
Indians left in the Isla Española, a
twentieth of what there had been fifteen
years earlier. The colonists' treatment
of the remaining Indians became so
harsh that Bishop Bartolomé de Las
Cases, horrified by the oppression of the
Arawaks, appealed to the Spanish Court
on their behalf. As a result in 1517 four
thousand Negroes were sent from Guinea
to work for the settlers.
But this did not save the Indians from
extermination. In 1533 when Henry,
"last chieftain of Haiti", abandoned the
struggle for independence, the Spaniards
offered him sanctuary near the city of
San Domingo. He settled there with 600
followers the sole survivors of the
"gentle and hospitable" Indians who had "
welcomed Christopher Columbus some
forty years earlier.
Similar ill-treatment goaded the
Negroes to revolt and "...as they were
captured they were hanged from the
nearest tree, so that the road was lined
with their swinging bodies".
But the Spaniards were no longer the
undisputed masters of the Island.
French, English and Dutch privateers
began to set up bases on its largely
uninhabited north-west coast from
which to prey on the Spanish galleons
and caravels sailing the Caribbean Sea.
Their main base was the small island of
Tortuga (The Turtle), legendary hide¬
out of the filibusters or freebooters
(words derived from "flyboat", a fast,
light boat).
Between raids these pirates developed
a characteristic way of life economic,
political and social on Tortuga. They
often came over to the mainland to shoot
wild cattle and boar which they roasted
whole over a wood fire on a barbecue
THE MAJESTIC RUINS of Sans Souci, the most
magnificent of the nine royal palaces and eight
chateaux built by King Henri. It is said to have
been modeled after the palace of Frederick the
Great. Its main floor was cooled by a mountain
stream which flowed through conduits beneath
it. (Photo Haitian National Tourist Office.)
frame called a boucan (hence the name
"buccaneers").
Among this company of privateers,
filibusters, 'buccaneers and pirates the
French came to outnumber the others, so
that at the signing of the Treaty of.
Ryswick in 1697, France claimed and
Spain ceded the western third of the
Island.
Bertrand d'Ogeron, the first Governor-
General of Saint-Domingue, /the new
French colony, showed himself a great
administrator and also, in bringing girls
out from France as wives for the settlers,
an astute psychologist. To provide
manpower for the development , of the
plantations he organized the importation
of 'the African Negro slaves at the rate
of 20,000 to 30,000 a year.
Colour and caste
AS the colony grew prosperous espe¬
cially with the arrival of new
immigrants from France in the
1720's, there came into being a class
system in which whites, mulattoes and
Negroes were distinguished not only by
the colour of their skin, but by their
social standing. Negro slaves, naturally,
did not figure in this system.
Properly speaking it consisted of three
groups 'known as grands' blancs, petits
blancs, and gens de couleur. The first of
these categories embraced the important
whites owners of large plantations,
wealthy merchants and state officials.
The second covered all other whites of
the colony shopkeepers, artisans, small
planters with only a few slaves, little
people busily engaged in social climbing,
and shiftless whites largely slipping
downhill. The 28,000 gens de couleur
included all free persons who had Afri¬
can blood in their veins.
. This society, where love of money and
of pleasure held sway, was beset by every
kind of prejudice, but chiefly those of
colour and caste. - As the free coloured
people flourished, so also did the jeal¬
ousy of the' petit blancs against them. As
for the Negroes, they were the slave
labour and often served as mere beasts
of hurden.
«First of the blacks'
FOR many years tiny fires of discon¬
tent smouldered in the colony. The
fall of the Bastille in France in
1789 helped to fan them into a larger
flame. Like the grands blancs the freed
mulattoes sent their children to Paris for
an education. Working through a hu¬
manitarian group called the Society of
Friends of the Blacks, some of these
students, and particularly a young mu¬
latto, Vincent Ogé, were influential in
getting the French National Assembly to
pass a decree in March 1790 granting
political and civil rights to freedmen.
But the Assembly left the actual inter¬
pretation of the decree to the colonial
authorities.
Returning to Saint-Domingue, Ogé
joined a friend, Chavannes, a freedman
like himself, and sought in vain to have
the decree enforced. Both were ultimate¬
ly arrested, tried and condemned to be
broken on the wheel. The torture of
Ogé and Chavannes in 1791 gave the
smouldering revolt two martyrs and the
signal for insurrection. It quickly
spread to the proportions of a massacre.
Slave gangs ran riot, setting fire to one
plantation after another. Half the rich
northern plain was laid waste in a few
days. The blacks then turned on their
masters. The massacre of the whites

UNESCO COURIER - N° 2 - 1954
HAITI (Continued.)
He had been a slave for nearly
fifty years when t.'.e insurrec¬
tion of the slaves broke out In
Saint-Domingue In 1791. In
the next eleven years he be¬
came one of the most talked-
of men In the world. Self-
educated, he was to show high
military talents and political
astuteness. By 1797 he was
supreme leader In Salnt-Do-
. mingue. He was eventually
captured and imprisoned in
France where he died in 1803.
Wordsworth wrote a moving
sonnet to him for strengthening
human faith In "man's uncon¬
querable mind."
From childhood Dessalines
rebelled against his life as a
slave. Punishment for disobe¬
dience merely hardened his
resolve tofightagalnsthls mas¬
ters. At the head of the army
of Saint-Domingue he helped
Toussaint to repulse the Span¬
iards and expel the English.
After Toussamt's fall, Dessa¬
lines led the Haitians to final
victory and independence. Ap¬
pointed Governor-General for
life, he took the title of emperor
in 1804. He was killed in an
ambush in 1806 before the ad¬
ministrative reforms he planned
were achieved.
The son of freed slaves, Chris¬
tophe was born In the English
West Indies and became one of
Toussaint's leading generals.
After the death of Dessalines
he was elected president, but
refused to accept the office,
considering It to be merely
an honorary one. He therefore
proclaimed himself king and
reigned in the north until his
death In 1820. He ruled with
iron discipline but he was
an able administrator. He
established schools, built
roads, developed agriculture
and industry, promoted arts
and sciences.
ALEXANDRE PETION
In the first uprisings Pétlon
became famous for his calm
courage and chivalry. Later he
opposed Toussaint, was exiled
to France but returned to |oln
Dessalines and ensure final
victory and independence. He
became Haiti's first president,
gave sanctuary and aid to Bo¬
livar In his struggle for Latin
America's emancipation, estab¬
lished the basis of Haiti's edu¬
cational system, and was the
founder of Haitian rural de¬
mocracy by creating land re¬
forms. At his death the entire
nation mourned the "little
father" they had lost.
which followed is comparable in horror
only to the butchering of the Negroes
which followed the suppression of this
first rebellion.
Whites and mulattoes were sharply
divided in their loyalties, the former
seeking to hold on to their privileges, the
latter inclined to favour the abolition of
. slavery if only for the sake of their own
safety. Some of the more die-hard
colonists blindly called 'on the English
then at war with France for support,
and the situation was further compli¬
cated by the fact that the Spanish
hostile to both the French and the
English were supplying the rebels with
arms and poised on the eastern border.
Three commissioners had been sent
from Paris to restore order. On August
29, 1793, one of them, Sonthonax, pro¬
claimed the abolition of slavery in the
north in order to pacify the rebels and
win support against the invading armies
of Spain and England. The decree was
later extended to the western and
southern regions of Saint-Domingue.
The French would probably have "been
defeated if help had not come from a
black ex-slave, Toussaint Louverture,
who offered his troops to the French
General in the colony and finally drove -
the English and the Spaniards but of
Saint-Domingue.
"The First of the Blacks" as Toussaint
was called had been a slave for over 40
years before the insurrection and lived
only eleven after it, but in that short
space of time he became one of the most
talked of men in the world.
By 1797, Toussaint had become the
supreme leader in Saint-Domingue, his
authority disputed by only one rival, the
mulatto General Rigaud whom he
quickly vanquished after a brief conflict.
By the time Napoleon came to power two
years later he had achieved independ¬
ence from France in all but name.
He had taken' over most of the
functions of government from the
French; under him anarchy and massa
cres had come to an end. Saint-Domin¬
gue was making its own laws, main¬
taining its own army, and negotiating
treaties with foreign powers. A
committee of seven white planters and
three mulattoes drew up a new consti¬
tution abolishing slavery and making
Toussaint Governor-General for life.
Napoleon was infuriated at the me¬
teoric rise of the "gilded African" as he
called Toussaint, and resolved to crush
him. He sent the largest fleet and most
powerful expeditionary force that had
ever crossed the Atlantic to Saint-Do¬
mingue. The war of independence had
begun.
Birth of a nation
AFTER three months of furious
fighting, marked by epic moments
of heroism by Toussaint's officers
and men, both sides were exhausted and
a truce agreed upon. Shortly afterwards
Toussaint was invited to a conference.
In the course of a meal he was seized,
bound and swiftly shipped off to France.
Haiti never saw him again. Less than
a year later, in April 1803, he died of
cold and starvation in a dungeon high
in the mountains near the Franco- '
Swiss border.
The fall of Toussaint was followed by
the Terror,, with rebels .executed en
masse. These executions were answered
by guerilla warfare and then by a full-
scale uprising led by Jean-Jacques Des-
salines, Henry Christophe and Alexandre
Pétion. Armed with everything from
scythes to rifles their troops fought sa¬
vagely. But the French army which had
been largely consumed in the battle
against Toussaint was now also being
destroyed by disease. In four months
18,000 soldiers and 50 Generals were
wiped out by yellow fever. The French
commander, Leclerc fell ill and died.
On November 15, 1803, white authority
on Saint-Domingue was ended forever.
And on the first day of January 1804,
Dessalines solemnly proclaimed the
former colony of Saint-Domingue inde¬
pendent and the first independent Negro
State in the world assumed its former
name of Haiti.
The Haitian nation, however, still
remained to be built. But built on
what? On Independence Day the nation
was nothing but' a "'herd of slaves who
had suddenly acquired their freedom".
No more than 350,000 people remained
out of the 530,000 who had lived in
Saint-Domingue in 1792. Nothing was
left of Haiti's past wealth and prosper¬
ity. The rich plantations had dis¬
appeared in the smoke of the incendiary
torch during the fierce scorched-earth
war of liberation.
The whole structure of the nation had
to be built, new institutions established,
morale, ambition and the desire to work
affirmed. "The master does not work;
to be free is not to work", was the ter¬
rible gospel bequeathed by the colonial
system to the freed Negroes. ,
For over twenty years, until Haitian
independence was officially recognized
by the French in 1825, Haiti remained in
complete isolation constantly fearing the
possible return of the French. This
kept the whole nation in arms and
seriously retarded efforts at organization.
It is hardly surprising therefore that
under such circumstances the unity of
the Haitian people was not achieved
immediately and that several decades
were needed to complete the work begun
by Dessalines on 1 January, 1804.
.As one of Haiti's great historians has
pointed out, "there is certainly not one
among the modern states which started
under such adverse conditions. But the
Haitian nation no longer presents the
aspect of the amorphous mob 'of 1804.
It has created its own institutions and
today it possesses all the elements which
will give it a definite opportunity to de¬
velop. It has planters, skilled workers,
industrial workers, traders, and an intel¬
lectual class of its own. "
