An Historic Indian Name
Revived by A Science Prize
The Kalinga Prize for distinguished pop¬
ular writing in science is awarded
annually by Unesco on the basis of a
grant by Mr. B. Patnaik (right), Indian
industrialist from the State of Orissa.
Centuries ago Orissa was the heart of
the great Kalinga empire of King Asoka.
The four lions of Asoka (left) are today
the emblem of the Republic of India.
he name of Kalinga
achieved a place in his-
Tl tory more than twenty
I two and a half centuries
I ago. In 500 B.C. India
I was a continent of small
| warring states, of rigor¬
ous castes and of con-
I flicting religions. Buddha
had died at the age of 80 in the year 544
B.C. That great spiritual leader attack¬
ed the superstitions and ceremonials of
his day, denounced the metaphysical
outlook, miracles, revelations and deal¬
ings with the supernatural. His appeal,
strangely modern, was to logic, reason
and experience; his emphasis was on
ethics and his method was one of
psychological analysis. For more than
two hundred years, the Buddhist faith
was merely one of many, competing
quietly for the attention of the millions
of people living in India.
Then in 323 B.C., Alexander the
Great, conqueror of what the West
called the whole known world, died at
Babylon. Seleucus, the " general who
inherited Alexander's eastern empire,
stretching from Asia Minor through
Persia to Afghanistan, was forced to
give up for ever the effort to conquer
the East. He was defeated by the ruler
26
of northwest India," who was named
Chandragupta Maurya.
Inspired by Alexander's vast
conquests, Chandragupta turned his
attention eastward and within two
years had won the capital of north
India, Pataliputra, which today is call¬
ed Patna. Soon the Maurya empire
covered the whole of India from the
Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal. It
was the first large centralized govern¬
ment that India had ever had.
Forty-eight years later, in 273 B.C.,
the young grandson of Chandragupta,
named Asoka, inherited the empire.
Fired with his grandfather's ambition,
he set out to conquer what remained'
of India. His one great objective was
the state of Kalinga which extended
along the long diagonal strip of coast¬
line from near the present Calcutta to
the present Madras and inland for
500 miles. The Kalingans resisted
obstinately. In the clash a hundred
thousand persons were slain, many
times that number died and one
hundred and fifty thousand were carried
off as captives. India was united
except for the small southern tip that
is the present Travancore, Cochin and
Tamil Nad.
Asoka's empire was not only the
greatest of all Indian history; it was
also the turning point of that history.
The slaughter in Kalinga so revulsed
the conquering emperor, moved him to
such sorrow and regret, that he swore
never to tolerate any more killing or
captivity. He never moved against the
southern states though he could have
taken them easily. "True conquest"
he said "consists of the conquest of
men's hearts by the Law of Duty and
Piety. Should anyone do him wrong,
that too must be borne with by His
Sacred Majesty. For His Sacred Majesty
desires that all animate beings should
have security, self-control, peace of
mind and joyousness".
This powerful emperor became a
Buddhist and was himself chiefly res¬
ponsible for the spread of that gentle
religion through India and through the
whole of the Kalinga kingdom which
extended far into the Malay States,
Ceylon and Indonesia. By his influence,
Buddhism spread into Nepal, Tibet,
China and Mongolia. Yet Asoka was
tolerant of all religious sects and
generous to them. He was responsible
also for the growth of vegetarianism,
abstention from alcoholic drinks and
(Continued on page 28)

UNESCO COURIER. N» 7. 1954
1932
Louis de Broçjlic
Professor Louis de Broglie, Nobel
Prize winner and Permanent Secre¬
tary of the Section of Mathematical
Sciences of the French Academy of
Science; first winner of the Kalinga
prize, 1952, nominated by the
Institut de France. Celebrated for
his research and findings in wave
mechanics, Professor de Broglie has
also written many popular books,
including : Matière et Lumière (Mat¬
ter and Light), Physique et Microphysique (Physics and Microphysics)
and Savants et Découvertes (Scientists and Discoveries).
1953
Julian II u x 1 e v
Dr. Julian Huxley, of London, first
Director-General of Unesco 1 946-
I 948; winner of the Kalinga award
for 1953, nominated by the Royal
Society of Great Britain and by
the Institut de France. Scientific
subjects have been interpreted by
Dr. Huxley through books, articles,
lectures, radio and films. His many
works include : The Individual in
the Animal Kingdom ; The Stream
of Life ; Essays' in Popular Science ; Scientific Research and Social
Needs ßird Watching and Bird Behaviour ; Evolution and Ethics.
1954
W a I cl c m a r
Kacmpiicrt
Mr. Waldemar Kaempffert, science editor of the
New York Times since I 927, has been awarded
the I 954,Kalinga Prize for his distinguished career
in science writing. Mr. Kaempffert, who was
nominated for the prize by the British Association
of Science Writers, has written, during nearly
30 years, a two-column Sunday feature entitled
"Science in Review". He has also written many
editorials and reviews of scientific books for the
Times and a large number of special articles in
American weekly and -monthly magazines. His
books include : The New Art of Flying, The ABC
of Radio, Invention and Society Today and Tomorrow,
Science Today and Tomorrow (2nd Series), Explo¬
rations in Science.
Mr. Kaempffert was born in New York City
and graduated from the College of the City of
New York. He later received a law degree from
the New York University and an honorary degree
of Doctor of Science from Clarkson Institute of
Technology. He began his career as a patent
attorney but- early became managing-editor of the
Scientific American and later editor of Popular
Science Monthly. He left the New York Times
in 1928 to become Director of the Museum of
Science and Industry in Chicago but returned to
the Times in 1931. He was one of the organizers
of the National Association of Science Writers and
has had a profound influence both on the quality
of science reporting in the U.S. and on the exten¬
sive employment of specialized science writers by
American newspapers.
"Current Biography" says of Mr. Kaempffert that
"no one has done more to bridge the gap between -
the. abstract hypotheses of the laboratory and the
mind of the common man". For more than half
a century he has devoted himself to the popular
interpretation of scientific ideas, always in sim¬
plified language, often in dramatized form. He
has always stressed his conviction that the advances
of scientific research inevitably bring broad social
consequences and that only an educated demo¬
cratic public can wisely adjust to them.
27

it KALINGA (Continued)
the prohibition of all animal sacrifices.
India assumed almost its modern
aspect at the time of Asoka more than
twenty two centuries ago.
H.G. Wells, in his Outline of History,
says "Amidst the tens of thousands of
names of monarchs .that crowd the
columns of history... the name of Asoka
shines almost alone, a star... More
living men cherish his memory today
than have ever heard the names of
Constantine or Charlemagne".
Kalinga, which was the heart of
Asoka's empire, is the modern state of
Orissa in- independent India. The four
Lions of Asoka are the emblem of the
present Indian government. But
Orissa, through the vicissitudes of
history, is now a relatively small state,
indeed a backward one. Yet it has
perhaps the richest concentration of
valuable minerals in all the world, and
the ferment which came with in¬
dependence is now developing that
state to a prominent position.
The business leaders who are build¬
ing steel mills and industries there and
are changing the ancient city of
Cuttack into a modern capital, have
founded the Kalinga Foundation Trust,
based on the entire profits of some of
the new and major industries. It is
dedicated to scientific, industrial and
cultural research and to the develop¬
ment of the state of Orissa. The
Chairman of this Trust is the Honor¬
able Dr. H. Mahatab, Minister for
Commerce and Industry.
One of the directors is a young
executive, a distinguished aviator
during World War II, and friend of
Premier Nehru, Mr. B. Patnaik. In
1951 he took the unprecedented step
of offering to Unesco an annual grant
from the Kalinga Trust Fund to
establish a prize for effective and
distinguished science writing.
In doing so he wrote: "It is only with
the aid of science that we hope to
complete our task and it is to science
that we turn with anxiety and hope for
a solution of our stupendous problems.
I "am particularly convinced of the
necessity of making the great masses
aware of the methods and achieve¬
ments of scientific research, and to
make them understand, in a form
which they can assimilate, the impact
of science on our daily behaviour.
To build a nation, to achieve common
welfare, mutual respect and under-
SCIENCE MAKES SENSE even to young children when it is explained in
simple, everyday terms. It was to give recognition and encouragement to the
type of writing which brings scientific progress into clear focus for the average
person that the Kalinga Prize was established. Another effective medium for
popularizing science is the travelling exhibition. Here, two young Indians
take their first look into a microscope at a Unesco Exhibition, "Our Senses and
the Knowledge of the World", which has recently been touring their country.
standing is, as the Emperor Asoka
wrote, difficult without great zeal.
While doing everything possible to
develop India's strength and industrial
resources, Mr. Patnaik said "I wish to
attract world attention to this part of
the world, indeed to this part of the
country, and wish very much that the
great men of science would help in
focusing world attention on this place
with the object of revitalizing the great
.mass of people."
This outstanding ambition on the
part of one of the young pioneers of
new India is now being realized
through the visits to -India of the
distinguished interpreters and teachers
of science who have received the
Kalinga prize. This year, Dr. Julian
Huxley, grandson of the great Thomas
Huxley and the first Director-General
of Unesco, spent nearly three months
in India as winner of Unesco's Kalinga
prize and as an informal ambassador
from the scientific world.
In -1955, the third prize winner, a
great public educator through books,
magazines and the pervasive columns
of the New York Times, Waldemar
Kaempffert, dean of American science
writers, will also visit India as prize
winner. In future years the effects of
these visits will be visible and the
accounts that they write of their visits
to India will reveal to the world what
independence, high ethical principles
and the best of modern science have
done for the ancient Kalinga Empire
and the whole realm of Asoka.
Language barriers
THE great fund of knowledge
acquired by science in past
decades, steadily increased by
modern research, becomes a resource
for humanity and a means of im¬
proving the conditions of life only
when it reaches the public, is under¬
stood and put to use. Yet science
becomes ever more specialized and
more remote from common life, with
its own technical languages and
disciplines. Although the knowledge is
essentially international, the enormous
cost of modern laboratories and of
organized research campaigns tends to
confine the results to the wealthier
nations. A concerted international
effort is needed to make the new
knowledge available to all peoples
across the barriers of geography,
language and ignorance.
The dissemination of science is
.therefore one of Unesco's vital tasks,
through its own publications like The
Courier, Unesco Features, the Worid
tReview and Impact of Science on
Society. Every possible assistance is
also extended to the established
science writers > of the - world and
especially to their associations.
To give public recognition to the new
profession of science writing, Unesco in
1952 established the Kalinga prize.
The winner of the prize is invited to
spend a month or more in India,
.speaking on the progress of science in
his country and its consequences to the
world, and studying Indian science at
scientific institutions and universities
for use in his future writing.
Nominations for the. prize are
invited annually by Unesco from the
18 national Associations for the Ad¬
vancement of Science and from the
ten existing national Associations of
Science Writers.
