A DOUBLE CHECK FOR
by François Le Lionnais
FLYING SAUCER REPORTS, rash claims of imminent inter-planetary flights and even stories of visitors
from other worlds have become almost commonplace nowadays. As long as such stories are kept In their
proper category imaginative writing no great harm is done. But once the public starts to believe
pseudo-scientific stones a real danger arises. A photograph of a fly's throat (right) as seen under a
microscope, could be presented as a "Man from Mars", just as, recently, a retouched photo was published
as an authentic shot of a "flying saucer". Scientists and science writers are combatting such practices
by making complete and accurate scientific information available to the press.
Inaccurate scientific information
and, what is even worse, pseudo-
sciences, flourish today as never
before. This is a symptom of a very
real sickness in our world which is
not properly recognized.
We need not be unduly concerned
by the slight errors, minor misunder¬
standings or involuntary distortions
that arise. These may be regrettable,
but they are inevitable and do no
very great harm. The pseudo-scien¬
ces especially astrology, radiesthe-
sia and forms of occultism in medi¬
cine and new myths, like the story
of the flying saucers, however, should
be denounced. These do a great deal
of harm. .If writers, publishers and
newspaper owners give these wild
stories and pseudo-sciences space in
their columnsand often a great deal
Mr Le Lionnais is President of the Asso- .
dation of French Science Writers and Assis-
tant Head of Unesco's Division of Science
teaching.
of space it is, no doubt, because they
do not realize the dangers. But the
poisoning of the public mind as the
natural corollary of an enterprising
commercial policy is something which
science cannot accept.
It is one thing to criticize and quite
another to find a solution. To know
what is wrong does not necessarily
tell us how to remedy it. Journalists
have to get through their work quick¬
ly for the presses will not wait
and, at the same time, to appear to
. know all about everything, which they
obviously cannot do. And they have
to accept this challenge every day or
every week. How can we really check
that a. piece of information is reliable
when we are pressed for time?
A recent innovation in Prance
seems to point to one satisfactory way
of solving this problem. This is a
Telephonic Science Reference Service
inaugurated by the. French Associa¬
tion of Science Writers.

This service is assured by some fifty
experts who, between them, cover the
whole field of science. Each of them
has agreed to answer questions, with¬
out charge, for journalists who wish
to consult them or to check on the "
accuracy of a piece of science news.
The names of these experts, printed
on a large wall board and in a pocket-
size booklet, were distributed at a re¬
cent press conference in Paris.
This new departure has been wel¬
comed enthusiastically, not only by
the French daily newspapers, but also
by the various specialized branches of
the press technical journals, wo-
men's magazines, children's papers
and general periodicals and by the
many foreign correspondents in
Paris.
The new Science Reference Service
is now busily at work, covering all sub¬
jects from mathematics to the history
of science, and ranging over physics,
chemistry, biology, psychology and so¬
cial science. The experts are con¬
stantly consulted, and every day are
able to do something to advance the
sound development of scientific train¬
ing in France, by cutting off false
information at the source, by correct¬
ing serious errors which might have
been put out together with correct
information, by - providing useful
comment or clarifying details about
news items, or by making clear the
real importance of some discovery
or an invention which might have
been exaggerated or under-estimated.
Prevention is better than cure. An
entertaining and instructive . book .
could already be written about the -
false information which has not been
published in the last few months. This
Service is certainly an idea which
might well be copied elsewhere.
By no means all the scientific errors
or mis-statements appear in publica¬
tions. Most people have heard .about
broadcasting "scares", such as the
programme broadcast some years ago
which described, as though it were
actually taking place, the invasion of
the United States of America by the
' inhabitants of Mars. The illusion
created was so real and caused such
panic that it led to several fatal acci¬
dents. A few years later, a broadcast
in France, caused a similar scare
although the results were less tragic.
Such incidents in the broadcasting
world are, fortunately, rare, because
those in charge of the radio are con¬
scious of the formidable power they
wield and avoid abusing it.
Those at the head of affairs today
have plenty of problems to solve, but
the intellectual and moral health of
the people, and their resistance to va¬
rious forms of mental toxics is cer¬
tainly not the least important. , This
is a vital point in scientific informa¬
tion, and in the work that science
writers have to do today.
This work carried on through the
media of mass communication the
press, publishing, 'lecturing, radio,
television, films, photography, mu¬
seums, etc consists in the diffusing
of full and reliable scientific informa¬
tion, not only to add to the sum of
our knowledge but, even more impor¬
tant, so as to develop our critical fa¬
culty and, as a result, our capacity
for effective practical action. For
science is not simply a store-house of
knowledge : it also offers an ideal
training ground for the mind. Its
value as a means of training is prob¬
ably the soundest argument in favour
-of the "right to culture".

