OLD LANGUAGES FIND NEW JOBS
Asian and Middle East States remould their ancient tongues
Our planet, as we have seen from
the previous article, is a veritable
jigsaw puzzle when it comes to
languages, with the pieces shifting and
moving about, growing smaller or larger
' or splitting off into new bits with the
passing of time. In Asia and the Middle
East the puzzle is particularly "jigged".
This -is not at all surprising when we
remember that Asia is the most dense¬
ly populated area of the globe, and
that a huge portion of it South and
Southeast Asia is still' more thickly
populated than Asia as a whole.
Within the past ten years, the jigsaw
language pattern of Asia has been made
even more complicated by a new factor :
a great upsurge of nationalism similar
to the one which swept through Europe
in the 19th century upsetting the lan¬
guage pattern that has been rolling
across Asia and producing major chan¬
ges in the world language map.
The Philippines, Burma, Pakistan,
India, Ceylon, Indonesia and Israel are
new-born States, and all of them have
adopted new official national languages.
Their educational problems are now very
closely linked with linguistic problems.
In most of these countries, the setting
up of the national language has meant
ousting European languages as the offi¬
cial idiom or relegating them to a secon¬
dary position. But the truth is that for
some time to come these new languages
will be just as foreign if not more so
to many inhabitants as the European
ones were.
As one Filipino linguist has pointed
out, Tagalog is much less widely spoken
and read in the Philippines than
English, and is a foreign language to
over 70 per cent of the Filipino people.
For the Bengali speaker of East Pakis¬
tan, Urdu is also a new language which
he will now have to learn.
India, where some 100 different lan¬
guages are spoken, has chosen Hindi as
its official federal language. But at the
same time others are recognized as offi¬
cial regional languages. For all official
business and for education, English
the official language during British rule
is being kept for 15 years so that the
change to Hindi may take place gra¬
dually. For the other 86 tongues, the
policy is to start school teaching using
the mother tongue of the child who at
the same time must learn his regional
language as well as Hindi and English.
If you were born on one of the thou¬
sands of- islands which make up the .
Indonesian Archipelago at the extreme
southeast tip of Asia, your mother ton¬
gue would be one of 200 languages and
dialects spoken by 80 million fellow
Indonesians. Most people though speak
one of the four main languages : Java¬
nese (40 million), Sundanese (12 mil¬
lion), Madurese (6 million), or Malay
(4 millions).
Of these "big four?' it was Malay-
spoken by the smallest number of peo¬
ple which, curiously enough, was cho¬
sen as the official national language
when the new Republic was born in
1949.
In reality, Malay is much more impor¬
tant than the figures would indicate,
since they apply only to native-born
speakers. Many people all over the Indo¬
nesian archipelago and elsewhere in
Southeast Asia can speak a form of
pidgin Malay. In fact as early as the
16th century, when European sailors first
landed on Indonesian shores, Malay was
already being used as a trade lingua
franca between the islanders. It was
not until the turn of the 19th century
that Dutch the official language of the
Netherlands Indies Government began
to replace it.
In 1930, agitation to make Malay the
common unifying language of all Indo-
Three quarters of the 80 million people living
in the Indonesian Archipelago speak one of four
main languages: Javanese, Sundanese, Madurese,
and Malay. Malay, spoken by the smallest of these
four groups, and renamed "Bahasa Indonesia" is
now the official language of the Indonesian Repu¬
blic. Today, most Indonesians, young and old
alike, are therefore having to set to work and
study their new national tongue.
nesia was strongly felt when a meeting
of all-Indonesia youth organizations
pledged support for "one nation, one
people and one language" and changed
the name "Malay language" to "Indo-
.nesian language" (Bahasa Indonesia).
The Japanese spurred interest in
Bahasa during their Invasion of the
Islands in the second World War by
banning Dutch and at first using Baha¬
sa to communicate with the people.
Schoolteachers and all government offi¬
cials had to study and use it as well.
As more and more people learned to
speak it freely the language flourished
and its vocabulary grew. By the end of
the war it had attained national stature
and with independence national adop¬
tion.
Yet to most Indonesians even today,
Bahasa remains to some extent a foreign
language or at least so different from
their mother tongue that they must
study the language to master it.
As one Indonesian linguist recently
asked, "What should be the position and
function of the Javanese, Sundanese and
Madurese languages in Indonesian cul¬
tural life in the future? Can a language
like Javanese bearing a rich literary
tradition simply disappear, or shall we
have in the future a rivalry for sup¬
remacy between the different Indone¬
sian languages ?"
It doesn't seem so. The Parliament
has a Javanese majority, the President
and the Prime Minister are both . of
Javanese origin, yet there is no move¬
ment in the Javanese-speaking coun¬
tries to abandon Bahasa as the national
tongue. That a people of over 40 million
should voluntarily accept the language
of a minority as the vehicle of Its politi¬
cal economic and cultural life is in¬
deed a remarkable phenomenon of our
present century.
Several thousand miles away, at the
far western tip of Asia, the new State
of Israel presents a completely different
linguistic problem : that of a dead lan¬
guage suddenly brought back to life and
rejuvenated to serve the needs of a
modern world. For a thousand years
ancient Hebrew had ceased to be a living
language. It existed only in holy books
and in prayers. Its resurrection and
modernization presented an enormous
problem.
Much of this work was done between
the two World Wars by pioneer settlers
who came to Palestine and determined
to use Hebrew as their everyday tongue.
Within a generation It had changed
from an archaic bookish idiom, rhetor¬
ical and involved in style, into a pre¬
cise, realistic modern language.
With the birth of Israel In 1948, the
government proclaimed Hebrew as the
state language. The year marked the
start of an amazing series of mass immi¬
grations. Jewish people came from
every corner of the world bringing with
them scores of different languages and
dialects. The great problem was and
still is teaching them the new national
language. This is no academic goal ; it
is a practical necessity.
The chief burden falls on the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem which sends tea¬
chers out to schools in villages and rural
settlements, In debarkation camps and
hostels. At each of these there are
classes for children during the day, and
night classes for adults. Manual wor¬
kers receive courses aimed at providing
a rudimentary knowledge of Hebrew to
permit immigrants to converse as quickly
as possible with their Hebrew-speaking
neighbours.
It would be idle to pretend that Immi¬
grants are easily acquiring even a rudi¬
mentary knowledge of the new lan¬
guage. On the contrary, it is very diffi¬
cult for many of them. Uprooted from
their environment, often being trained
In new jobs and trades, confused and
bewildereB by new surroundings, by the
housing shortage and unstable economic
conditions, many immigrants find it hard
to concentrate on learning the simplest

Hebrew. The illiterate finds reading
especially difficult.
The effect on the school system of
teaching children speaking many differ¬
ent tongues is shown in an official
Israeli report. "It is practically impos¬
sible", it says, "to keep to the curricu¬
lum in its entirety in the new (primary)
schools. Most of the first years are dedi¬
cated to the teaching of the national
language. The children differ greatly :
those from Iraq are not the same as
those coming from Yugoslavia and Ru¬
mania. The teacher must therefore
adapt himself individually to every one
of these small groups of children coming
from all parts of the world. Only after
several years of adaptation have elapsed,
can there be any real possibility of
following the curriculum, by which time
the child has reached the age-limit of
compulsory education and leaves school
to go to work."
Politically, Israel and the Arab-speak¬
ing countries may not be on the friend¬
liest terms, but linguistically they are
brothers under the skin, and both offer
remarkable examples of how a classical
language can be revitalized to meet the
needs of the modern world. Among the
peoples of ancient civilization who, from
the Pacific to the Mediterranean now
face new linguistic problems, it is those
of the Arab world who have probably had
the longest experience in adapting their
language to the impact of the West.
Theirs is the story of a community
which, after enjoying a high standard
of culture, went through a period of
political, economic and cultural decline.
Arab civilization almost died when
Baghdad fell to the Tartar invaders in
1258 but it was saved by a handful of
scholars who fled to the Nile Valley.
It flourished again until the 16th cen¬
tury when the Turks invaded Egypt and
made Turkish the official language.
Arabic then deteriorated and lost its
vigour. Only a part remained in use :
the rest stayed in the "cold storage" of
old books and records.
The linguistic renaissance of Arabic
really began, interestingly enough, when
Napoleon landed in Egypt in 1798. He
brought with him many scientists and
scholars interested in the people, their'
language and their past. He founded
the Institut d'Egypte and opened the
door to cultural contacts between Egypt
and Europe. The French stayed in Egypt
only three years but their influence was
enormous and they opened the minds of
the people to the possibility of a new
and fascinating world.
As a result, Egypt took the lead in
modernizing Arabic. Western culture
came to Syria at a later date and to the
other Arab countries of the East much
later still.
Following Napoleon's departure, a new
governor, Mohammad Ali, instituted new
courses in medicine, pharmacy and the
sciences. He brought in foreign instruc¬
tors from France and Italy and sent
Egyptian missions to Europe. The diffi¬
culties of rendering the new modern
knowledge into Arabic were plentiful.
Here is an amusing example cited by
Dr. Ahmed Zaki of the Fuad I National
Research Council in Cairo :
"The foreign instructors could not
speak Arabic, and the Egyptians .-could
not speak either French or Italian, so
Mohammad Ali resorted to the help of
a middleman who stood between pro¬
fessor and students to translate. These
were mostly men who understood lan¬
guages but no science, so the system had
to be supplemented by the production of
Arabic books on the subjects taught.
This necessitated the co-operation of
four different people.
"First was the author who was usually
a European scientist. Then came a
translator whose knowledge of the
foreign language was more adequate
than his Arabic. Then came a scholar
whose strong point was Arabic. Finally
there was a man who went over the
proofs and who also had something to
do with the text."
To put an end to such a tortuous
system. Mohammad Ali set up a School
of Languages for Egyptian students, and
in 1821 created a government printing
press.
The creation of the first modern Egyp¬
tian university in 1908 (now.Fuad I Uni¬
versity) marked another important step
in the renovation of Arabic, but the lan¬
guage received its strongest impetus
following the first World War. In
schools and universities, in government
offices, in the press in fact in every
branch of activity in contact with modern
ideas and the West with its deluge of
new words, efforts were made to pro¬
duce Arabic equivalents. But most of
these were individual solutions and some
kind of co-ordinating body was felt
necessary.
In 1932 the Arabic Language Royal
Academy was founded with Egyptian
and other Arab state members. Its pur¬
pose was to create or standardize tech¬
nical and scientific terminology and
generally to modernize Arabic. Since
then it has begun work on a scientific
dictionary and already added over
10,000 scientific and technical words to
the language. It has laid the basis for
an etymological dictionary, discussed
UNESCO COURIER -N» 1-1954
simplification of grammar and spelling
but rejected a proposal to substitute
Latin characters for the Arabic alphabet
after much heated discussion.
However, because of the Academy's
heavy concentration on. scientific termi¬
nology, terms of a general nature have
tended to be neglected. Newspapers,
periodicals and the public must shift for
themselves and this has often led to the
creation of a score of words for one
modern expression. A jet plane, for
example is sometimes called "naffatha",
from a verb meaning "to spit out with
blowing", and sometimes "nafouria"
meaning "fountain-like".
Certain Arabic linguists fear the splin¬
tering effect that this may have on the
language in view of the wide gap that
already exists between the multitude of
colloquial forms of Arabic spoken by the
masses (with its dialects varying consi¬
derably from one country to the next)
and the written language. The written
form, classical Arabic, is closer to the
language of the Koran. There is a
general movement today to bridge the
gap between the two by improving the
classic form so as to make it the general
medium of Instruction at all school
levels.
This point is made by Dr. Zaki, writ¬
ing in the Unesco study "Vernacular
Languages in Education". "Many words
exist in colloquial Arabic", he says,
"which sound perfect to the Arabic ear
but which are not mentioned, in the
classical dictionaries. Writers are there¬
fore reluctant to use them. But words
like these might well be adopted and
used freely in writing, especially where
there is no Arabic equivalent for them."
Language problems are bound closely to educational ones in many recently independent Asian countries
which have introduced new national languages. A child starting school in Bombay Province, India,
will probably speak Gujerati or Marathi at home. At school he must begin by learning the other of these
two regional languages and then go on to learn Hindi, the official federal language. Only then will he
begin to tackle one of the world link languages.
