Employment
discrimination
and its reduction
SKILLED
NEGROES WANTED
®
EMPLOYMENT discrimination as it exists in the United
States persists as the result of a situation involving
contradictory elements. On the one hand, such discri¬
mination can only become a serious problem in a society
that is highly industrialized, that is, a society in which
workers are employed in large-scale, mechanized enterprises
under what is known as a capitalist or entrepreneurial
system of production. Such a system is considered highly
"rational", since it tends to encourage science and technology
and gears itself to making profits through the most efficient
processes of production and distribution.
On the other hand, discrimination could not exist without
such irrational factors ¡j
as prejudice, bigotry, ]
anxiety, etc., all of i
which introduce into j
the process of pro- i
auction . judgments j
based on race, colour, a
religion, or national j
origin that function, \
demonstrably, to mili- j
täte against maximum I
efficiency.
Discrimination I
depends, therefore, \
upon the coexistence of j
two developments, each 3
typical of radically j
different patterns of ]
life. To begin with, \
there must be a high j
proportion of wage- *
workers in the employ of owners or managers and a high
degree of occupational specialization yielding different
rewards from small to relatively large for those working at
different tasks. But alongside these modern, capitalistic
economic modes persist older patterns of thought and
behaviour, which do not have efficiency as their sole criterion
and allow the operation of prejudice, irrationality and
sentiment to influence the process of production.
As the American sociologist, Everett C. Hughes, has pointed
out, modern industry mixes various kinds of peoples, brings
various groups together in a pot-pourri of nations and classes
within nations. While it brings people together on a large
scale, industry also segregates individuals and groups
according to their function .and status.
This kind of segregation is very apt to develop along ethnic
or racial lines. Thus, in almost every country, whether
economically developed or underdeveloped, certain groups
concentrate in particular crafts or industries. When this
sorting process is unrelated to actual qualifications and when
members of particular groups are excluded against their
wish from desirable employments, a discriminatory pattern
may be said to exist.
Occupational discrimination is not confined solely to the
United States. It plagues other countries too, but does not
usually cause so much domestic agitation or so much
comment from foreign observers. The reasons for the in¬
tensity of feeling generated by the presence of discrimination
in the United States are numerous, rooted in its history of
mass immigration and the development of its democratic,
highly industrialized society.
To begin with, successive waves of new immigrants into a
land where no political compulsions exist have created a
(Pliotift USIS)
nation where minorities of one kind or another formed, in
1950, fully one-third of the population of some 150 million.
In that year the United States contained more than
28 million Roman Catholics, over 15 million Negroes and more
than 5 million Jews. Persons of Asian and Latin American
birth or ancestry numbered more than another million.
And though the rate of immigration has been comparatively
low for a generation, there were still 10 million people in the
United States who were born outside its boundaries. The
difficulties of reconciling opposing interests, beliefs and
habits in so heterogeneous a society are readily apparent.
American minority groups have, moreover, a very different
relation to society from similar groups in European countries.
In Europe, for the most part, discrimination is or at least
Was the product of a legally-imposed pattern involving
restriction of the opportunities of genuine "minorities", that
is, groups in a national state which did not wish to become
part of the community but wanted certain rights guaranteed
to enable them to withdraw from the rest of the community.
A "minority" in the United States today is something
else it does not denote a group constituting an enclave
seeking to isolate itself from national life as a whole. By and
large, United States minorities desire and strive towards full
participation in the life of the community. The result is an
emphasis on factors such as prejudice and discrimination

-¿-REDUCING JOB DISCRIMINATION (Cont'd;
WHAT DISTURBS
THE NEGRO MOST
that frustate the powerful urge towards full integration.
Moreover, it is precisely because the United States makes
it possible for all individuals to share in the country's great
wealth that such resentment is created among those who
suffer from unequal treatment. In other countries the
problem is apt to be less acute because there is less wealth,
the approaches to it fewer and the class-structure too rigid
to permit much movement. The greater social mobility, of
the United States, coupled with its philosophy of ambition
and ability to reward successful achievement, means that
any block in the aspirations of a group has the most serious
social and political consequences.
Finally, the ideals and traditions of American democracy,
the highly industrialized economy which militates against
all irrational prejudices that interfere with productivity,
tend to make the existence of inequalities a serious matter,
disturbing the security and way of life of the nation as a
whole.
Discrimination, in America, takes many forms and excludes
individuals from various desirable offices and activities for
a host of different reasons. Thus, it is extremely improbable
at present that anyone but a white Protestant would be
elected President, but this is not yet considered a serious"
grievance to those so barred. Indeed, it is common for
groups to he disturbed very little by certain kinds of barriers,
while those who erect them feel most strongly about their
maintenance.
In his monumental work, An American Dilemma; the
Negro Problem and Modern Democracy, Gunnar Myrdal, the
great Swedish economist, has pointed out that a curious
hierarchy of discrimination against the Negro prevails in
America. Those who discriminate feel most strongly about
items regarding which the Negroes themselves have only
a minimum of concern. Here is the list, going from the
items which arouse the highest intensity of emotion in those
who discriminate to the lowest:
1. Intermarriage, and sexual relations involving white
women.
2. Other personal relations, e.g., eating, dancing, bathing
and general social intercourse.
3. Use of public facilities, e.g., schools, churches, means of
transportation.
4. Political rights, e.g., the right to vote.
5. Discrimination in courts of law and by police and other
officials.
6. Economic activities, e.g., land ownership, . employment,
obtaining credit, public charity.
The ,intensity of the Negro's feelings about these items is
diametrically opposed to those of the white man; he feels,
for the most part, much less disturbed by the items at the
top of the list than he does by those at the bottom. The
chief reason for this is his relatively low economic status.
INDUSTRY AND
FARMING. During
World War II, a million
Negroes went into defen¬
ce industries. In general
they have stayed in indus¬
try ever since. To-day
nearly I l%of all industri¬
al workers are Negroes,
twice as many as in I 940.
During this period the
number of Negro agri¬
cultural labourers has
greatly decreased, but
for those who remain
conditions have become
better. Negro farm
owners today number
more than 18,9,000.
10
IT WAS NOT UNTIL I 942 AND THE LABOUR SHORTAGE OF WORLD WARIlJT

UNESCO COURIERf. N» 6. 1954
HAT RACIAL BARRIERS TO NEGRO EMPLOYMENT IN INDUSTRY REALLY BEGAN TO CRUMBLE.
This accounts for the large proportion of his hopes, energy
and resources that the Negro has put into the struggle for
fair employment practice legislation. A correspondingly
strong reaction from those opposed to this kind of legislation
and the involvement of other minority groups have combined
to make the issue of fair employment a crucial one in the
campaign for equality in the United States.
However, for other groups Catholics, Jews and people of
foreign ancestry, for example employment discrimination
is less of a problem than it is for the Negro, as they are
much closer to full equality. But, occupation discrimination
is more keenly resented by these groups because it represents
almost their sole major grievance, while the Negroes suffer
from other forms of discrimination as well.
The social discrimination from which the other minorities
may suffer, however much it may affect some individuals,
is not of such intensity nor does it cause such resentment -
that the group as a whole feels strongly compelled to take
serious action against it. It is moreover wellnigh impossible
to redress all private wrongs by law.
It is apparent then that discrimination is a complex
phenomenon requiring a complex solution. Forces at work
to end discrimination for one group in
one part of the country are often
neutralized by other forces at work for
a different group or in an another area.
The mere geographic distribution of
the affected groups is testimony to this
fact. Most of the 25 million Catholics
are concentrated in the north-eastern
part of the country; about 60 per cent
of the 15 million Negroes still live in the
Southern states (although this pro¬
portion is declining rapidly) ; about half
the Jews live in New York City. People
of Mexican origin and descent are con¬
centrated in the South-west; Puerto
Ricans are to be found chiefly in New
York and other parts of the East while
the Orientals live mainly in California
and other West Coast areas. The
Catholics, Jews, Chinese, Puerto Ricans
and northern Negroes inhabit mostly
urban areas, thé southern Negroes live
in rural sections, while the Japanese,
Mexicans and Filipinos are about evenly
divided between the rural and urban.
This variegated checkerboard of
colours, religions and ethnic origins is
not merely the result of recent develop¬
ments; the United States has been
heterogeneous from its -earliest colonial'
days. The first white settlers were,
themselves, religious minorities, dis¬
senters frorn the dominant religions in
their European home countries. Fric¬
tion between ethnic groups was
manifested early, among the various
groups of white settlers themselves, as
well as in their relations to the Indians
they were displacing and to the Negro
slaves they were importing from Africa.
Meanwhile, immigration from Europe
continued and increased. Until about
the middle of the nineteenth century,
most of the newcomers were of English,
Scottish, German and Dutch origin.
Since they were not "too dissimilar in
appearance, culture and origin, their
differences were composed without
much difficulty.
But in the 1840's a new element, the
Irish Catholics, arrived, provoking con¬
siderable religious and ethnic discri¬
mination, especially as their numbers
grew. From about 1880 onwards,
during the great period of United
States industrial expansion, a huge in¬
flux of immigration from Southern and
Eastern Europe brought to the New
World millions of people who differed
markedly from the earlier settlers in
religion, appearance and ways of life.
They were mostly Roman Catholic,
Jewish or Greek Orthodox in religion,
and came from Russia, Italy, Poland
and other countries close to those,
geographically and culturally.
From the Orient, too, in the middle of
the nineteenth century came a large group of Chinese who
worked on the growing railroads, in the mines and on the
farms of the West, causing resentment among labourers who
often found themselves displaced because of the willingness
of the Chinese to work for much lower wages.
A considerable number" of Japanese arrived in 1900 and
found employment, for the most part, on West Coast farms.
In 1920, Filipinos arrived in substantial numbers. Mexicans
arrived in small numbers before World War I and have been
entering in larger numbers since. Masses of Puerto Ricans
came to the United States, mainly to New York City, after
having been granted United States citizenship in 1917; in
recent years, still larger numbers of the islanders have
migrated to New York City.
A certain amount of local strife, agitation and discri¬
mination has attended the arrival of nearly all these foreign-
born groups. Most of them found employment in occu¬
pations they had practised in their home countries, or similar
work. By and large they were, at first, confined to the jobs
that appeared less desirable in an expanding economy. But
as time went by the majority of the immigrants and their
children found the road to occupational and educational
advancement relatively open. (continued next page)
1 1

TWO OPPOSING TRADITIONS:
Rugged Individualism; Respect for Law
(CONTINUED FROM PREVIOUS PAGE)
This cannot however be said to be true of the Negroes,
whose history in this country is unique and unlike that of
any other group. Before the Civil War Negro slaves"
performed the labour of the agricultural South. After the
abolition of slavery they continued to work on southern
farms as tenants and then as free workers. In the urban
areas of the South they were employed as domestic servants
and unskilled labourers in mining, the iron and steel
industries and tobacco-processing.
During the slavery period, also, a substantial number of
free Negroes in the South were employed as skilled workers,
mostly in the construction industry. In the period
immediately following the Civil War, when Negroes were
excluded from many kinds of life and work in the South,
they lost their hold on skilled construction jobs. The
introduction of new methods in the industry caused the skill
of the unemployed quickly to become obsolete. Discri¬
mination by employers and the excluslonist policy of trade
unions prevented the Southern Negro from realizing the
promises of emancipation.
In the North, at the same time, there were relatively few
Negroes, and most of them worked as servants, janitors,
porters and labourers. Between 1890 and World War I, a
great wave of labour troubles offered the Negroes the
opportunity to get jobs in some heavy industries as strike¬
breakers. The labour shortage of World War I opened up
employment to them in iron, steel, meat packing, and the
automobile industry.
As can be seen, discrimination in the United States is not a
simple, uniform phenomenon. Nor is it possible to obtain
absolute agreement on the best means for ending it, even
among those most deeply concerned with the problem.
We are primarily interested here in the use of legal means
to end discrimination in employment. This does not mean
that all concerned believe it the best means for the purpose
nor that other methods and agencies have not been tried
with considerable success. Thus, to cite -only one of scores
of organizations, the National Urban League with Negro and
white members and branches in cities everywhere in the
United States, has done remarkable work In securing for
Negroes positions for which they are qualified by education
and training. Since the League relies solely on the goodwill
of employers, its success shows that compulsions of law are
not the only means to effect reduction of discrimination.
Strikes and labour unrest
APART from the work of voluntary organizations and the
effect of legal compulsion, the picture of discrimination
Is constantly being changed and shaken by great social
forceswar, strikes, prosperity, depressions, and population
changes. The very dynamics of American democracy tend to
foster a real equality in order to eliminate internal con¬
tradictions. Strikes and labour unrest often open up avenues
that were formerly closed to minority groups. - ,
A shortage in any given profession, or an overall labour
shortageas during World War IIoften allows new groups
into occupations, industries and jobs from which they Were
formerly excluded. For well over a decade now the United
States has been In a period of "full employment" with
concomitant benefits and advantages to everyone in a
position to put labour power of any kind on the market.
The successful workings of law and legal techniques utilize,
and to some degree require, these other factors. The climate
of opinion created by private initiative, the needs' created by
inexorable social and economic trends, are often simply
expressed by the enactment of a statute or administrative
order. The law in this case tends to accelerate and regulate
a change which would come about in any case but in a
slower, more haphazard fashion. Where a law is arbitrary,
unsuited to the conditions of the period and prevailing
opinion, observance is apt to be difficult to obtain.
Law in the United States is of several Varieties! the statutes
passed by federal, state and local legislatures, and law in
the sense of administrative actions and rulings by the
government; while, as a result of the commonlaw system
and the written Constitution which is interpreted by the
highest court in the land, judicial decisions create law too.
Law in the United States, then, emerges as thé end result
of a great number of pulls and counter-pulls, as the final
resolution of the needs, rights, desires and powers of the
individual, the community and the central government.
II
The American system of "checks and balances" has come
into being as a result of the desire not to delegate too much
to any. one branch of government. The Constitution, itself,
contains a series of compromises, the most important of
which, the distribution of power between the federal and
.state governments, derives from the desire of the original
colonies to retain as much autonomy as possible.
Every citizen of the United .States is a citizen not only of
the country as a whole but of one of the 48 states. The
states have their own judiciary systems; the criminal laws
that are most often actually applied are state laws and, in
daily life, the American citizen is more likely to come in
contact with local than federal authority. .
The drafters of the Constitution, influenced by the liberal
eighteenth-century belief that the great threat to individual
liberty was the central government, specifically enumerated
and described federal powers but left the rest, undefined, to
the states. The resultant federal-state- balance has had
profound effects upon the rights of minorities and the
political freedoms of the individual.
i
Rough justice of frontier days
THE first 10 amendments to the Constitution constitute
the American "Bill of Rights" which secures the rights
of individuals against infringement by the federal
government. On the other hand, no power is expressly given
to the federal government by the Constitution which would
enable it to secure civil liberties and rights against encroach¬
ment by private individuals.
These limitations have seriously hampered efforts by the
federal government to protect groups whose rights have
been jeopardized by state and local governments or by
individuals; and while amendments to the Constitution have
been passed which enable the national government to
protect "minority rights" against violation by states and
municipalities, it is still the state and local authorities which
exercise the police power that most intimately affects people
in their daily lives.
The institutions of the United States, then, reflecting as
they do a delicate balance between the national, state, local
and private interests, make the uniform solution of the
problem of discrimination by legal methods a difficult matter.
Two sharply opposed traditions are at work in the United
States to shape individual attitudes towards law and govern¬
ment. There is the tradition of the moving frontier, derived
from the period when the boundary of the settled area of
American life was constantly moving westward, creating
large border areas in which there was only a rudimentary
state power. In the rough and tumble atmosphere of new
communities in the making, the inhabitants of these areas
became accustomed to doing things for themselves, relying
upon their own power and initiative instead of the distant
authority of a government whose laws and agencies were
shaped to the needs of more civilized areas.
Invasion of 'private' rights
WORKING against the American tradition of '.'rugged
individualism" is the Puritan conception, so powerful
in the original colonies and enduring throughout the
development of the United States, that all aspects of man's
behaviour are amenable to control by law and that men are
better off when their lives are so regulated,
These two tendencies of American life, the frontier
tradition of individuals taking into their own hands things
usually left to law, and the Puritan tradition of legislating
on matters usually left to private conscience, often combine
to produce a uniquely American phenomenon the enactment
of laws that seem Intended as ideals of behaviour rather
than regulations to be observed.
To many Americans, even some of those most earnestly
against discrimination, government regulation of these
matters is regarded as an invasion of the "private" right to
choose one's friends, neighbours and business associates and
to conduct one's business with a minimum of government
interference. On the other hand, the voluntary associ¬
ations, some wholly and some partly devoted to the
elimination of discrimination, have done a vast amount of <
work in the reduction of prejudice through education and in
campaigning for its elimination by legislation.

UNESCO COURIER. N» 6. 1954
(Photos Ropho-ßlack Star and USIS)
EQUAL CHANCES -
In I 945 it was New York
that became the first
state to pass a law outlaw¬
ing discrimination in em¬
ployment. Since then
I 2 states and 30 munici¬
palities have followed
suit. Unions have done
much to break down
colour barriers in indus¬
try. Above, a Negro
woman presents her
views at a factory union
meeting. Whether in
industry or the profes¬
sions (like nursing and
scientific research work
the American Negro is
seeking equal opportu¬
nity and equal pay.
13
