THE DAILY PRESS is full of raw material for classroom" use in geography, history, current events and civic affairs
lessons. Even the, unhappily frequent, street accident report can help to bring hornea lesson in road safety drill.
THE great thing about widespread -literacy, it has been
remarked, is that it has conferred on man the inestimable
blessing -of being able to read the daily press. It is
certainly true that societies which are literate (and which some¬
times like to think of themselves as civilized on that account)
devour quite remarkable quantities of newsprint : for most
people, in fact, reading means reading the newspaper before
anything else and maybe to the. exclusion of anything else.
But just as it is fair to say that the word "newspaper" is
seldom literally accurate, so the word "reading" is for the most
part a courtesy description of what a
newspaper demands of its clientele The
modern newspaper is in reality a topical
magazine; the news is provided not so
much with a view to giving information as
entertainment; it is intended less to
illumine than to dazzle. ...
"By his company shall ye know him" : not only is this true of
the news to be found in the press, it is also true of the form
that the news takes. It explains the emphasis on the human
angle, the emotional afflatus, the over-dramatizations, that
take one often so far from the humblest origins of the story.
There are, of course, the "class" newspapers which are to be
found in nearly every country and which take a serious view of
their mission. They are sober, factual organs of limited
circulation . and considerable influence. They do their best to
Boris Ford was formerly Chief Editor and Director of the Bureau of Current
Affairs London, and then Information Officer at the United Nations Tech¬
nical Assistance Board. He is now carrying out research into further edu¬
cation and training.
observe Scott's famous dictum that news is sacred, opinion is
free. And yet one has only to examine simultaneous issues of,
say, the London and New York "'Times" and "Le Monde" to be
struck with their dissimilarity and even, on many occasions,
with their disparity. Their record of the facts of an event or
conference may well.be much the same, though pressure of
space makes this far from certain. Their estimate of trends,
their interpretation of causes and motives, indeed the whole
character and spirit of their make-up will almost certainly be
profoundly different one from the other.
Reading or at any rate cultivating the
newspaper is not, : therefore, a trivial
undertaking. The press today has a
dominating influence for better or worse,
on the quality of social life. At the very
least, in the words of the P.E.P. (Political
and Economic Planning) Report, it is the
main agenda-making body for the daily conversation of the
This being so, the reader of the newspaper does
well to be alert and on his guard (which is not the same as
being cynical).
He needs to know what kind of a thing a newspaper, his
newspaper, aims to be; how it comes into existence every day,
and what financial arrangements enable it to survive from year
to year; he needs to understand the different character of its
assorted ingredients, to distinguish sharply between an editorial
and a news-story and a feature-article (particularly when the
paper itself tends to blur these distinctions); he needs td be
able to tell a stunt from a cause, a thought from a wheeze, a
fact from hearsay; he needs to be able to detect cant or
16

sincerity, exploration or evasion, in the very style of the words
used; particularly, for this is fundamental, . he needs to be
constantly alert to when he is being treated with respect or
with condescension. -
It may be, of course, that the average person would rather
give up reading the newspaper altogether than submit himself
to so disciplined a regime. Assuming a less drastic reaction,
however, it .seems incontestible that the regime ought to begin
early rather than- late. People make their first contact with
the theoretically adult newspaper long before they are them¬
selves adult : it- lies about the house, it absorbs many hours
per week of parental attention, it contains children's features;
and even the grown-up features are most often painfully intel¬
ligible, being written (according to the best prescription) for
people with the mental age of twelve years.
For these and other reasons, it is now generally accepted
.that the newspaper is an object for classroom appraisal, both
at school and in their adolescent and adult education. And
the kind of work one has in mind is not the formal lesson
or the set description, nor again is it the cautionary sermon;
it is rather through analytical discussion, analytical in both
the intellectual and the practical scissor-chopping senses, that
the distinctions and. contrasts and discriminations indicated
above can be brought out.
Of chalk and cheese
OF all kinds of classroom material,- the newspaper is the'
easiest to obtain and the most satisfying to destroy.- This
process of taking the paper apart can take various forms
which will. bring oufr the different aspects of the matter
earlier. To begin with, there is the question of what,
kind of thing a newspaper is, and here the most successful
method is to work with one newspaper, preferably 'the most
familiar.
It is best, if possible, to have a few copies of the. same issue;
the class can then break up into - smaller groups, each with
two copies (since the pages are printed on either side) and
with numerous scissors or paper-knives. The groups begin by
cutting the paper up into its individual items and classifying
them into separate piles; one pile of news stories, another of
pictures, a third of advertisements, and so on.
When they come to compare their bundles, the groups will
find, in all probability, marked differences; the number of
bundles per group and the items they included will vary, and
in attempting to justify their classifications, to explain why
one bundle contains all political matter, whatever its nature,
or why another bundle lumps together crossword puzzles and
cookery recipes something of the paper's diversity will
become apparent. Also the groups will .find themselves
reading out and analysing extracts, in order to decide then-
classification, which can be instructive as well as amusing;
(one recollects that reading out extracts from the newspaper
in a flat incredulous voice, was one of Will Rogers' most cele¬
brated comic turns).
Having dissected a single, newspaper in this fashion, the
groups go on to do the same with a number of different news¬
papers (for the same day, of course). Everyone knows, in a
general way, that one paper is to another like classroom chalk
to over-ripe cheese, but they may not have realised clearly
that this difference is as much one of purpose as of content.
The groups' bundles will now differ in size and number, one
paper giving more space to advertisments, and another more
to pictures etc., while a third may include features that are
not found in the others (such as an Astrology column or a
political cartoon.) They will differ in literary style, in quality
of paper, in size of type. And, most intriguing of all, their
treatment of the same raw material will vary enormously;
identical episodes will be found to have encouraged feats of
gargantuan imagination, and the lilies in one will be weeds
in another.
What interests the editor?
A later stage of this exercise, which can well include papers
of different nationalities as well, is for the groups to try
to arrange their bundles of contents into what would seem
to be this or that 'Editor's scale of priorities. Which parts of his
paper seem to interest the Editor the most, and which interest
him least ? When the groups come to discuss these Editorial
Contrasts (which they would do well to have summarized in
. some way) they will learn a good deal about their newspaper's
'view of its public, its sense of mission, its relations with
advertiser of party or some other .lobby, for they will have to
< decide why kinds and items ~of news are treated by . editors
as being of such variable importance and even why news as
such is seemingly so inconsistent a product.
In these ways, the chopping up of the daily paper proves a
stimulating and instructive occupation. By this means one
can learn empirically a great deal about the press as an insti¬
tution and about the technicalities of newspaper production and
make-up. The essential queries and cautions raise themselves,
and the groups soon discover the respects in which they can
UNESCO COURIER - N° 3 - 1954
trust their newspapers and rely on their Judgment. They will
develop, unconsciously, a selective attitude to what they read
and an ability to remember all the time that there may be
another version of this story, even that the truth may lie
elsewhere. They will have' become, or be on the way to becom¬
ing, interested and critical, rather than indolent and naive,
readers.
, Lest this kind of work should seem negative and merely des¬
tructive (though that would be the teacher's fault, and not the
fault of the method), it should be added that this work should
be accompanied by the class assembling its own wall-news¬
papers from its many piles and bundles. This will be a genuine
cross-section of the press, taking reports and features on the
same topic, contrasting similar kinds of story and this not in
a mood of superior cynicism but in order to put together a more
rounded version of the facts.
At the same time, the class may care to set its thoughts in
order by working out a blue-print of its own ideal newspaper
or journal (for just the same kind of work can be carried out
. DISSECTING THE NEWSPAPER in the classroom, in the practical scissor-
chopping sense,' is followed by' a classification of the cuttings and an analysis
of their content. "Comparison of story treatment in several papers teaches
children to be interested and critical, rather than indolent and naive readers.

Cuttings then form "copy" for class wall newspapers. ' Instead of "taking
the paper apart", the class can produce its own newspaper. Here, a group
of "editors" are hard at work preparing their next issue. (Photos copyright
" Henry Grant and Magnum Photos.
ft FJ^H Id
fS5- B Jw$m
M St^fl
w£
, f.Sm H '\
on weeklies as well as dailies). What should it contain, and in
. what proportions ? To whom should it appeal, and how ? A
test of the earlier analytical work would be an ability to give
responsible answers to these constructive problems.
But here a word of warning is needed. Many schools produce
their own newspapers, setting up editorial offices and enrolling
reporters who rapidly become the curse of everyone's lives.
This kind of activity is valuable only so long as It does not
become a mere aping of the less attractive features of the
newspaper business. Much that goes into a paper had better
be left out ; in tone, appeal, language, and moral assumptions,
it is reprehensible or at least trifling. Juvenile reproductions
of such features as these are no part of an educational process,
and are simply an encouragement (yet one more) to vulgarity
and irresponsibility.
For the business of the world's news is a serious matter that
vitally affects the minds of meo. It is said that we get the
press as well as the government, that we deserve. Whatever may
be our deserts, however, we undoubtedly need the best today.
17
