FACTS and FIGURES
NEGROES first came to America as explorers not as slaves. Ancient
manuscripts mention Alonzo Pietro, il nigro (the Negro) , as the pilot of the
Nina one of Columbus's ships. The territory now forming New Mexico and
Arizona was first explored by a party led by Estevanico, a Negro. Aviles de
Menendez had Negro artisans with him when he founded St. Augustine, Florida,
in 1565.
IN August 1619 "a dutch man of warre" brought to Jamestown, Virginia,
"twenty Negers" who were sold for needed provisions. This was one year
before the Mayflower landed the first refugees from civil and religious
oppression in England. The first census in 1790 showed 697,000 slaves in the U.S.
of whom 292,000 were in Virginia alone. In 1807, on President Thomas Jefferson's
recommendation, the U.S. Congress prohibited further importation of slaves; but
illegal trading continued. By 1860, before the Civil War began, the Negro
population was 4,440,000. Five years later they had all been set free.
3
THE slaves in the South made three considerable attempts at revolt: in 1800
under 'Gabriel Prosser in Virginia; in 1822 under Denmark Vesey in South
Carolina; in 1831, again in Virginia, under Nat Turner. These and other
attempts failed. During slavery Negroes could gain freedom by some outstanding
service, be freed at their master's death, or if they were children born of free
Negroes or white servants. They could also buy their freedom. Denmark
Vesey had purchased his for $600 after winning $1,500 at a Charleston lottery
in 1800. The first census in 1790 showed 8 per cent of the Negroes, or 59,311, to
be free.
S
SLAVES had no vote during slavery but free Negroes voted in many of the
Colonies. Gradually this right was taken away. After emancipation, Negroes
exercised political rights between 1865-1895. Except for Georgia, Negroes
for a time controlled all Southern state governments. Eight states were
represented by Negroes in Congress and for seven years Mississippi was repre¬
sented in the Senate by Negroes.
31

NEGRO OFFICE HOLDERS have grown
in number as voting rights have been
extended. Illinois and New York are
each represented in the House of Repre¬
sentatives of the national Congress by a
Negro. Others serve in the legislatures
of the 1 7 states. The Negro woman
shown here is a member of the City
Council in Cleveland, Ohio, a city with
a million-and-a-quarter population.
(Photo USIS)




The right to vote and
the movement toward
non - segregated housing
WHEN the North withdrew its
armies and the Southern states
resumed control movements
developed to exclude Negroes from
politics. In 1890, Mississippi's revised
constitution disfranchised the Negro.
Seven other Southern states followed
the example, and by 1910 Negroes lost
the right to vote in nearly all the
Southern states.
3
IN the North during the Civil War
period, only New York and five
New England states allowed Negro
suffrage. After the war a U.S. Con¬
stitutional amendment enfranchised
the Negro. Since then there has been
no significant attempt in the North to
deprive the Negro of the right to vote.
3
VARIOUS methods were used in the
Southern states to bar Negroes
from voting. Voters were dis¬
qualified if they were illiterate, or did
not possess $300 worth of taxable
property, or had not paid a poll tax, or
did not have a regular occupation, or
had not served in the army, or were
not persons of "good character", or if
they or their descendants could not
vote prior to 1867 ("Grandfather
clause"), or did not understand
properly a clause of the Constitution
and could not explain it when it was
read to them. The "Grandfather
Clause" was declared null and void by
the U.S. Supreme Court in 1914.
3
AS the racial animosities generated
in the post-Civil War period
subsided, many restrictions were
relaxed so that in communities
scattered throughout the South small
numbers of Negroes were able to vote
and take part in politics, particularly
in 'cities.
Since 1940 the Negro vote has risen
markedly: over one million in 1952
compared to 250,000 in 1940. This
change has occured as a result of the
growing urban population of Negroes in
the South, improved education, the re¬
organization of life during the second
World War, and an important change
in public opinion regarding the status
of the Negro in American society. It
was also made possible by the elimi¬
nation of the "white primary" by the
courts, the abolition of the poll tax in
six states and other relaxations of
voting restrictions.
3
THE poll tax was "repealed by six
states between 1920-1949. Only
five states still require it for
voting and in several, opposition to it
is mounting. Despite the wide pub¬
licity the poll tax received as a device
for restricting Negro voting, its effects
are now considered to have been
exaggerated. The poll tax had to be
paid before registration for voting.
Registration was held several months
prior to elections and a receipt for
taxes paid had to be submitted.
3
WITH increased voting rights came
an increased political awareness
and a great increase in Negro
office holders. Illinois and New York
are each represented in the House of
Representatives of the national Con¬
gress by a Negro. In 1900 only one or
two Negroes were members of state
legislatures. By 1946 there were at
least 38. In 1952 a Negro woman won
a seat in the state senate of Michigan.
The 17 states in which Negroes now
serve in state legislatures include
Kentucky, in the South, and Missouri
and West Virginia, border states.
3
THE most striking development
since 1947 has been the election
or appointment of Negroes to
offices in communities in the South.
They are members of the city councils
of Richmond (Virginia), Nashville
(Tennessee), Atlanta (Georgia), and
three cities in North Carolina: Winston
Salem, Greensboro, and Durham.
Negroes have been appointed to state
or city boards of education in at least
seven states in the South. In recent
years Negroes in Southern towns have
been elected magistrates, constables,
commissioners. In 20 North Carolina
cities last year Negroes were candidates
for municipal offices. Sixteen major
Southern cities . employ nearly 65,000
Negro persons, 468 of whom are
engaged in managerial or professional
tasks. In the North there has been a
similar increase in the number of
appointive positions held by Negroes.
3
THE great migration of Negroes to
the North that began before
World War I and reached its
climax within the last 20 years has
created a difficult housing problem for
the Negro.
In many large Northern cities,
Negroes often live in overcrowded,
dilapidated buildings in segregated
slum areas. In the South, Negroes
often live not only in the same section
of town but on the same streets with
whites. Most Southern cities today
have several large concentrations of
Negroes with a light scattering over
most of the cities.
Negroes waged a long fight to elimi¬
nate "racial covenants", private real
estate agreements, which confined
them to ' restricted areas. They won
the battle in the courts in 1948 and, as
a result, Negroes have been able to
move into new areas in certain cities.
But although Negro income has in¬
creased considerably in the last decade,
Negroes have benefited from only a
small proportion of new housing built
during this period, and continue to
occupy a greater proportion of sub¬
standard housing than whites. About
9 million new dwelling units were built
by private enterprise between 1935-50
of which 100,000 or slightly more than
one per cent went to Negroes.
3
IN recent years, however, a strong
movement has grown for mixed
Negro-white public housing pro¬
jects. New York City, Chicago, Phila¬
delphia, Los Angeles, New Haven,
Pittsburgh, Seattle, and Washington,
D.C. are some of the cities that have
shown that whites and Negroes can get
along without friction. Though not
32

often publicized these housing pro¬
grammes represent one of the most
important gains in the Negro's struggle
for racial equality since the Civil War.
3
PERHAPS the most outstanding
success in non-segregrated public
housing occurred in New York
City. In 1947 all 14 of the city's housing
projects had Negro and white tenants,
and the authorities reported that :
"Negro and white families live side by
side... in harmony and peace despite
the scepticism this policy met in the
early days." Almost all metropolitan
cities in the North with large Negro
populations (except Philadelphia and
Detroit) made advances during the
1940's in the direction of eliminating
segregation in public housing.
The greatest success in integration
has been achieved where Negroes are
assigned appartments in the same
buildings with whites. Here tensions
have gone, differences have been
adjusted and a peaceful atmosphere
created.
Where only token integration exists
or where the races are separated by
buildings or other lines of demarcation
much less is accomplished. Tenants
cling to their old prejudices and it is
found that the races stay apart and
that white children often do not play
with Negro youngsters.
3
A RECENT study . of four public
housing projects in New York and
Newark, New Jersey, throws light
on the effect of racial contacts on
people's attitudes concerning other
races. Two projects had segregated
buildings, the other two had mixed
tenants in the same buildings. A
comparison of the two groups showed
that in the non-segregated buildings
there were many 'more cases of
friendly, neighbourly, contacts between
different races ; a more favourable
attitude toward Negroes in the project
and Negroes in general ; a more
favourable attitude toward living in an
inter-racial project. The survey also
showed that some white tenants who
had been loudest in objecting to living
next to Negro families came to accept
as neighbours these Negro families.
The experience with racially mixed
public housing has encouraged a
series of privately-financed mixed
housing. In 1944, as a result of pressure
from Negro organizations aided by
white groups, an ordinance was passed
in New York City prohibiting discrimi¬
nation in tax-exempt housing projects
developed by private industry. Many
people predicted that white people in
the higher income brackets would
refuse to live side by side with Negroes
and that investments would be
curtailed. These fears have proved
wrong. Millions of dollars have been
invested in such projects. In 1951 for
example, it was announced that New
York City had obtained sponsors for
the housing settlements amounting to
a cost of $10 million. Rental of all the
units in this project are covered by the
city's anti-discrimination law. Private
investors in Chicago have planned
several similar developments in non-
segregated housing in its slum
"clearance programme in the Black
Belt. But so far projects for mixed
housing by private investors only
exist in New York and Chicago.
BETTER HOUSINGIn many cities across the
U.S. housing construction is under way on a
larger scale than ever before. In New York,
the municipal housing board, labour unions
and insurance companies have built landscaped
dwelling developments for Negroes and whites
(above and below). A city ordinance passed
In 1944 prohibits race discrimination. Plans
exist to destroy all slum areas such as this one
in Harlem (right) where a backyard serves as a
playground for the local children.
(Photos USIS and Rapho-Black Star) 33
