Harri today
About 50 miles to the southeast of Cuba, and ranking next in
size among the islands of the West Indies, lies tropical Hispaniola.
Its territory is shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic (see
map page 2). Haiti's population is estimated at about 3,000,000,
or about 295 persons per square mile, a density greater than that
of China or India, or any other republic in the Americas. About
83 % live in rural areas, noncentrated on the most productive
slopes, valleys and plains. ' About 90 % of the people are Negroes,
the remaining 10 % are mulattoes.
Cric? - Crac! - 'Shall I tell you a story?'
THE Haitians are great story tellers. When a group
gathers and a story is about to begin, the teller says,
"Cric?"that is, "Shall I tell you a story?" and the reply
comes back, "Crac!"or, "Go ahead, we're listening". There
are thousands of "Cric? Crac!" folk-tales current in Haiti
today. The most popular characters of these are simple-
minded Boqui and his inseparable companion, clever Malice.
These stories are told in colourful Creole, a language derived
from French and where words are often doubled with
charming effect. Thus, ioun bel, bel femme an extraordinarily
beautiful woman; U té ben, ben malade he was very gravely ill;
U mâ'ché, l'mâ'ché, l'mâ'ché kept on walking and walking.
Few countries possess a richer folklore heritage than Haiti's
which goes back thousands of years to Africa.
Haitian folklore is especially rich in proverbs.
Here are a few :
fer couper fer You need iron to cut iron, or, great needs
demand great remedies.
Tit cochon tit sang little pig has little blood, or, from each
according to his means.
Others are: "Rotten teeth are strong only on rotten bananas";
"Experience is the staff of the blind." One Haitian was heard
to say, "Nègue riche li mulatte; mulatte pauv' li nègue" the
rich Negro is a mulatto; the poor mulatto is a Negro." This
is a profound comment on an important social problem in
Haiti even today.
Zombi tales are another important aspect of Haitian folklore.
The belief in the possibility of producing the appearance of
death indirectly through plants and drugs, is very widespread
among the Haitian masses. But even houngans the Vodun
priests assert that the practice is absolutely impossible.
African slaves had brought with them from Africa their pri¬
mitive beliefs and superstitions, some of which were later incor¬
porated into a cult called Vodun or Voodoo. The coexistence
of Catholicism and Vodun in Haiti and the frequent sensational
accounts of Vodun practices by unscrupulous foreign commen¬
tators have produced varied reactions in Haitian writers.
Some such as Georges Sylvain gave historical reasons for its
continuation. Others, like the great writer and poet Jacques
Roumain have attempted to explain it in terms of the Haitian
peasants' isolation, the inaccessibility of church and school.
It would be difficult to deny that Vodun contains a mixture of
charlatanism and superstition.
The End of. Yaws
OF Haiti's health problems, one authority has written:
"It would probably not be far from the truth to say that
for two centuries the majority of Haitian Negroes have
been afflicted to a greater or lesser degree with malaria,
hookworm, and yaws, either singly or together. Next to these
dire diseases comes a group which seems to have affected
from a tenth to one half the population; tuberculosis, dysentry,
enteritis and granular conjunctivitis."
Camille Lhérisson, one of Haiti's leading doctors, said some
years ago: "People do not die of hunger, but rather of the
diseases which accompany malnutrition."
During the past two decades, there "has been a strengthening
of the health services, new hospitals, clinics, and dispensaries
have been opened and better use made of existing ones and
water supplies have been improved.
(Continued on page 16)
I) D. H. Toy/or Ottawa; 2,3) D. Colomb, Paris; 4) Haitian Tourist Office.
14

UNESCO COURIER - N' 2 - 1954
WOMEN OFTEN TRANSPORT THE
MOST INCREDIBLE LOADS BALANCED
ON THEIR HEADS.
L
BOB
2 ;-4J-'
A HAITIAN COMBITE, THE TRADITIONAL CO-OPERATIVE OF NEIGHBOURHOOD PEASANTS, GATHERS TO BUILD A NEW HOUSE.
HANDICRAFT INDUSTRY IS EXPANDING. GOODS PRODUCED STRAW HATS, SISAL HANDBAGS, FURNITURE, CARVINGS ETC.
AT THE FOOD MARKET, RICE, MEAL, BEANS, ARE PILED ON MATS. . USUAL MEASURING DEVICES ARE TIN CANS OR BUCKETS.
15

HAITI TODAY (Cont'd)
Today, therefore, the rural people are learning that " even
though there may not be a dispensary or a doctor within easy
reach there is much they can do to prevent diseases. They
are being shown how to drain swamps where malarial mosquitos
breed. Fundamental education lessons teach them elementary
health precautions as applied to food, water, the prevention of
infection and the disposal of refuse. They are made to realise
too that a full stomach does not necessarily provide sufficient
nourishment to maintain good health.
In the past two years the greatest victory over disease has
been the almost complete wiping out of the loathsome running-
sore disease of yaws. ~ This has been achieved during a nation¬
wide campaign, in which the World Health Organization co¬
operated, by giving one single injection of penicillin to more
than 2,600,000 people. If similarly effective action could be
taken against malaria and hookworm, a major obstacle to
Haiti's' progress would be removed.
The Vanishing Soil
HAITI is primarily an agricultural country. Because of the
mountain-and-plain character of the land and the varying
rainfall and water supply, agriculture has developed in
fairly distinct zones: coffee is cultivated on the humid mountain
slopes ; sugar-cane in all irrigated plains; bananas in the plains
and well drained slopes; cotton on the semi-arid plateaus and
plains. However, the Haitian farmer is extremely poor, much of
the land is worn out and the earth has been "bled to the bone".
Erosion, small-holdings and over-population these are the
three main and closely interrelated causes for -the decay of the
rural areas. An extreme, but by no means rare case is the
Valley of Marbial, in the south of Haiti, where Unesco set up a
fundamental education pilot project. In a report on conditions
in Marbial, published in 1951, this is what the anthropologist
Dr. Alfred Metraux, had to say: "The earth in a land deforested
and converted into savanna, has become a brittle substance.
Exhausted by two harvests a year and stripped by erosion, the
soil of Marbial is dying. With every rainy season, hundreds of
tons of humus are swept down by the rivers to the sea. 'That is
our life ebbing away', say the peasants as they watch it go." ,
But since that report was written a change has taken place
in Haiti. - In Marbial, the peasant has found that his precious
top soil need not be swept down the mountain during the rainy
season. He has been shown how to terrace the land; how to
alternate rows of food-bearing plants with rows of grass to
hold down the earth. To replace the lost trees he has been
given seedlings which are cultivated in nurseries and then
planted on the denuded hillsides. - The efforts to save the soil
and increase its yield which have been made in Marbial are
also taking place in other parts of Haiti as part of the five year
development plan, stressing agriculture, which was announced
by President Magloire in 1951. Technical aid has been given by
the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization.
The most ambitious feature of the plan is the damming of
Haiti's biggest (and only main) river, the central Artibonite,
and the irrigation of some 80,000 acres that are now dusty desert
in the dry season and muddy lakes during the rains. It is
planned to distribute the controlled waters of the Artibonite
through canals so as to better the lives of 160,000 peasants. The
main plan of the Haitian Government also calls for agricultural
schools, the co-operative use of tractors, a farmers' bank, re¬
forestation grain storage and the construction of roads to link-
farmers with the markets.
Knowledge to Reshape a Land
SINCE the declaration of. independence, Haiti has attempted
to organize a complete educational system but efforts have
been hindered by lack of funds and the shortage of
teachers. Illiteracyestimated at 80 to 90 % still casts a
gigantic shadow over the peasant masses. Vocational edu¬
cation, so important for training skilled workers, is a relative
newcomer in the educational system.
Until recently there was a great difference between urban and
rural education. Urban schools, modelled after French edu¬
cation and using imported textbooks, were little adapted to
local requirements; rural schools, run by the" Department of
Agriculture, have sought to link curriculum to peasant life and
(Continued1 on page 33)
A TYPICAL RURAL HOUSE IN HAITI. HAS ONE ROOM, BARE.
FINE HAND-MADE EMBROIDERY FOR SALE IN PORT-AU-PRINCE MARKET.
Credits: 1,2,3 H.D. Toy/or, Ottowa ; 4) Haitian Tourist. Office ; 5) UN.
16

UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 - 1954
DIRT FLOOR, WOOD FRAME AND A THATCHED ROOF. HAITI NEEDS MORE SCHOOLS, -MORE TEACHERS,. A MORE MODERN CURRICULUM
.A TYPICAL FOLKLORE DANCE. HAITIANS DELIGHT IN SINGING AND DANCING. SUGAR-CANE IS ONE OF THE CHIEF EXPORTS. FINE QUALITY RUM IS MADE FROM CANE JUICE-
17

UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 - 1954
results aré not immediately apparent. A closer look reveals
striking changes. For the first time, peasants have feelings
of pride and dignity as they sign their own names. The toil
and austerity of life is slowly alleviated as they learn new
techniques of irrigation, soil conservation, planting and eco¬
nomics. As health fundamentals are explained to parents,
fewer children die and energy is no longer sapped by disease.
The protection of law and the rights of the citizen are made
known. Men begin to understand that knowledge gives them
power to control their way of life. Mechanization, only possible
with a literate population, is within grasp. A new energy
knowledge is reshaping the face of the land. .

HAITI TODAY(Contd from page 16)
problems. Unesco and other U.N. agencies are helping Haitian
authorities in an effort to surmount the formidable obstacle the
country faces to eradicate ilhteracy, provide vocational training
and improve the economic and social retardation of its rural
areas. For the major educational problem in Haiti remains
that of the rural school. An agricultural country, depend¬
ing almost exclusively on its production of coffee, sugar,
bananas, cotton, and similar crops for subsistence, Haiti is
compelled to try to intensify its agricultural effort through
educating the peasants in modern methods of cultivation and
soU conservation. "
Until the problem of rural education is satisfactorily solved, fa People's Art Reborn
Haiti seems destined to remain a desperately poor country. r
The converse of this statement is also true, for Haitian eco¬
nomics and education are inextricably linked. Progress has
been made in recent years but the facts remain that four out
of five peasant children never attend school; that teachers'
salaries are inadequate; that many school buildings are hope¬
lessly unsatisfactory; that equipment and textbooks are often
unobtainable.
Only in recent years has real attention been paid to the pro¬
vision of schools. The present five-year plan calUng for an
additional 327 elementary, 12 secondary and 15 professional
schools cannot meet the full needs of the people. But to have
established this goal and appropriated $ 5,000,000 is a tremendous
stride forward in the battle against illiteracy.
Education is compulsory for children of seven to fourteen
years but the law is rarely enforced. The reasons: A shortage
of schools; the dispersion of rural communities; the crowding
of existing schools ; a serious teacher shortage.
Moreover, the language problem continues to plague Haitian
educators. The official language of the RepubUc is French,
but all Haitians understand, and most Haitians speak, Creole.
Creole is now becoming a written language for the first time,
but there are four different spellings and a great lack of
textbooks for teaching it.
Another major problem has been the transformation of the
teaching methods and subject matter. Today such subjects
as health, sanitation and home economics are being given
equal emphasis with the three R's. Schools in both urban
and rural areas serve as adult centres in the evening. Students
may range in age from 12 to 75.
What have these efforts achieved so far? Superficially the
DURING the past decade Haiti has achieved fame by a
veritable explosion of artistic talent which has amazed
critics from New York to Paris and beyond. The ori¬
ginal exponents of this art were simple men. They included
a cobbler, a taxi-driver, a voodoo priest, a book-keeper, a
carpenter and a tailor, aU of them making a scant living, but
with one thing in common. They were able to translate their
sorrows, their beliefs, their joys, their patriotic and emotional
experiences into pictures of powerful simplicity, .utter sincerity
and enchantingly decorative effect.
The man responsible for bringing together all this talent,
guiding it and revealing it to the world was an American, De
Witt Peters. When he founded the Centre d'Art, at Port-au-
Prince in 1944 this American painter had only a slight interest
in the Haiti's contemporary "primitives". Then, foUowing an
exhibition in which the works of three of the "popular" paint¬
ers were shown, he began to follow and encourage their work
more closely. From this has grown a powerful movement of
popular art in Haiti in which the names of men like Hector
HyppoUte, a former voodoo priest, Philome Obin, Louverture
Poisson and Wilson Bigaud stand out.
Haiti has produced an interesting body of Uterature, parti-
îularly in the field of poetry. Haitian poets have been influenced
by French styles, but their rich local colour gives their poetry
a distinctively .national character. Oustanding poets are
Jacques Roumain, Léon Laleau. The MarceUn brothers Pierre
and PhiUppe Thoby won fame in 1943 when their peasant novel
Canapé-Vert was awarded first prize in a Latin American Novel
Contest and was translated into English.
3i
