AJANTA
MASTERPIECE OF
ROCK-CUT TEMPLES
AND OF FRESCO ART
ONE day in 1817, some British soldiers
on manoeuvres in the rugged,
wooded region of western India
inland from Bombay made a startling
discovery that was soon to arouse the
enthusiasm of the entire world of art. .
Some four miles from the tiny village
of Ajanta, in the State of Hyderabad,
they chanced upon a steep ravine formed
by the source of the river Waghora which
drops over a bluff 70 to 80 feet high in a
series of seven waterfalls. Scrambling
to the bottom of the ravine, they stopped
short in utter amazement. Before their
eyes they beheld a long row of cave tem¬
ples, hewn of the solid rock of the
precipitous wall.
Thus it was, by pure accident, that the
rock-cut temples of Ajanta today re¬
garded as one of the most remarkable
sights in India and among the noblest
memorials of Buddhism in the country
emerged from their millenial oblivion.
Here, Ln.the pre-Christian era, Indian
artists slowly, laboriously and patiently
had chiselled the steep, precipitous crust
of the rocks and through the centuries
laid the foundation of the great art tra¬
dition of Ajanta.
The caves, 29 in number, excavated by
Buddhist monks date from the second
century B.C. to about the end of the
sixth century A.D., and comprise a
series of halls of .worship (Chaityas) and
monastic living quarters (Viharas).
In one of the great Chaityas (Cave No.
X) there is a huge assembly hall with a
barrel-shaped roof supported by 39 dec¬
orated pillars. The hall measures over
95 feet in length, 41 feet in width and 36'
feet in height an amazing space to
hollow out of solid rock. In Cave No. I,
the veranda is 64 feet long, 9 feet wide
and 13 feet high. A door in the centre
leads into the central hall which is 64
feet square. The ceiling is supported by
UNESCO COURIER - N" 1-1954
INTERIOR of one of the 29 cave-temples of Ajanta in India showing richly carved and decorated pillars,
walls and ceiling. These temples are among the noblest memorials of Buddhism in India.
PARTIAL VIEW of Ajanta temples carved out of-
solid rock of steep ravine. Site was accidentally
discovered by soldiers In 1817.
a colonnade of 20 pillars surrounded by
aisles over 9 feet wide. Most of these
are decorated by carvings and sculptures.
Beautiful as the -architecture and
sculpture are, however, it is the fresco
paintings that have caused the greatest
admiration. When the caves were first
discovered the frescoes were fairly well
preserved, but today only a few caves
still retain, in varying degrees of preser¬
vation, the wall paintings that once
adorned all the caves.
Centuries of neglect have deposited a
veil of patina on the walls. But through
it can be seen even today the whole scale
of colours:, glowing browns reddish,
greenish, chocolate, and almost black
set off by lapis blue, pearly white, crim¬
son and green.
The walls - are covered with such a
variety of forms and figures, so vibrant
with life, that the earliest Europeans who
saw them could not believe that they
were religious. But the main theme of
the Ajanta paintings centres round the
Jataka stories, the legends of Buddha's
reincarnation. Human life, with its
drama of love, compassion, happiness,
death, suffering and sacrifice, is illumi¬
nated by a glow of religious feeling and
profound piety.
In the Intermingling of human beings,
plants, flowers and animals there is a
feeling of the deep and intimate spiritual
kinship among all forms of life. A broad
humanitarianism is sensed in all the
paintings and the tenets of Buddhist
thought are conveyed through simple
stories such as the one of Sibi Jataka (in
Cave No. I) .
According to Sibi Jataka, a hawk was
once- chasing a pigeon who, unable to
escape from his enemy, flew and took
shelter with the king of the Sibis. This
king was none other than the Compas¬
sionate Bodhisattva. The hawk came
to the king and demanded the surrender
of the pigeon as his lawful prey. The
Great Being, to redeem the life of the
pigeon, cut out an equal weight of flesh
from his own body and gave it. to the
hawk, thus saving the pigeon from death.
Similar sentiments are expressed by
Slokas (or verses) in some of the caves,
such as the one in Cave II which says:
"Blossoms are the ornaments of trees, it
33

MONUMENTS OF A
GOLDEN AGE IN
HINDU CULTURE
is flashes of lightning that adorn the big
rain clouds, the lakes are adorned by
lotuses and waterlilies; but virtues
brought to perfection are the proper
ornaments of living beings.''
Historically, the caves of Ajanta are
associated with the Vakataka and Gupta
dynasties under whose patronage Indian
painting and sculpture reached new
heights in the fifth century. This period
is often called the Golden Age or the
Hindu Renaissance. During this era
religious ideas developed and changed
without persecution. This was the
Golden Age of Sanscrit literature and
music and of the development of scien¬
tific thought and mathematics.
Although the supremacy of the Guptas
lasted only from 320 A. D. to little beyond
495 A. D., the renaissance in art which
they ushered in continued into the sixth
century A. D. Painting in the Ajanta
caves, however, was already a developed
art much before the Gupta age. But
like most other arts flourishing under the
Guptas, the Ajanta paintings reached
their maximum height of glory and
splendour in the fifth century. - With
THE COMPASSIONATE BODHISATTVA with lotus In hand. This painting Is considered one of the great
pieces of Ajanta Art. Cave I. It has been compared to the great figures of Michelangelo.
the sudden decline of the Gupta suprem¬
acy, a decline set in so that by the
eighth century the art of fresco painting
had lost all its vigour, grace and vitality.
The paintings of Ajanta hold a su¬
preme position in Asian art history.
They have for Asia and the history of
Asian art, the same outstanding signifi¬
cance that- Italian frescoes have for
Europe and the history of European art.
For the tradition of Ajanta, bound up
with the history of Buddhism in its
successive stages, gradually spread out
towards countries such as Indochina,
Indonesia and Malaya, Korea and Japan.
In China, it directly influenced and sti¬
mulated the art of the T'ang dynasty,
and the recent discovery of frescoes in
Central Asia, in Khotan, at Turfan and
at Tunhuang, have helped to increase
the interest inspired by the Ajanta
paintings.
The frescoes of Ajanta are generally
considered to be "the greatest monument
of this art" in India. One Italian
authority on fresco painting has said that
they "will bear comparison with the best
that Europe could produce down to the
time of Michelangelo/'
And speaking of one of the finest of
the Ajanta paintings the Compassion¬
ate Bodhlsattva (see photo, left) the
French Orientalist, René Grousset has
said: " "This is a figure that must be .
placed in world art alongside the highest
incarnations of the Sistine Chapel,
alongside those drawings most inspired
with a soul such as the drawing of Christ
In the Last Supper by Leonardo da Vinci."
As the first of a new Unesco World Art
Series devoted to the rare art master¬
pieces of the world, the New York
Graphic Society Is publishing by arran¬
gement with Unesco, an album of colour
reproductions of the Ajanta cave
paintings. (1).
In a preface to the portfolio, Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru has summed
up the importance of Ajanta. "Ever
since the Ajanta frescoes were redis¬
covered and became generally known,"
he writes, "they have exercised an in¬
creasing influence on our thought and
on Indian art generally. They bring
out not only the artistic traditions of
1,500 years ago but make vivid the life
of those distant periods... History
becomes human and living and not
merely a record of some distant age
which we can hardly understand.
"Thus the appeal of Ajanta is not
merely to the artist or the expert, but to
every sensitive human being. Anyone
who would understand the past of India
must look at these frescoes which have
exercised such a powerful influence not
only in India but in distant countries
also.
"If I were asked to name three or four
places of paramount interest in India,
which give some glimpse into India's
mind in successive ages, I would mention
Ajanta as one of them."
(1) Unesco World Art Series. Volume I. "In¬
diaPaintings Prom Ajanta Caves". Introduction
by Madanjeet Singh. Preface by J. Nehru.
Price : $15, or equivalent. Available February
1054.
34

AN APSARAS (celestial nymph). Cave XVII. A PALACE SCENE. (Cave XVII.)
THE CEILINGS of several of the Ajanta caves are covered with an amazingly rich variety of forms and figures, human beings, plants, flowers and animals.
Here are shown three decorative motifs on ceiling of Cave I.
