a new look at the 'Barbaric Nomads of the North'
by Marcel Vanhamme
>
iEW passages of
history have made
a greater im¬
pression on the ima¬
gination of schoolchUd-
ren than the inroads
of the Vikings, thanks
largely to the writers of
history textbooks. Hun¬
dreds . of these books
have . dwelt upon the
terror aroused through¬
out Europe by the
"bloodthirsty Norsemen", and "'the
barbaric nomads of the North", wearing
their strange winged helmets and
pursuing their booty with a single-
minded cruelty and ferocity. Such im¬
pressions, surely calculated to strike the
imagination of the young, are often in¬
tensified by citing the petition: "From
the fury - of the Norsemen, deliver us,
good Lord."
The Vikings, or "'Children of the
Creeks", did undoubtedly spread terror
among the harassed people torn by the
dissensions that followed the death of
Charlemagne, but the picture of them
given by the history books is not only
unfair: it is only half the story.
Considering the general standards of
the time, the geography and climate of
the Northern . countries go far toward
explaining the piracy practised by the
Vikings. But these wild sea-rovers,
driven to their trade, in part, by the
difficulties of existence in their part of
the world, came from countries with a
civilization of their own. Serious
historians know this, but not all of the
writers of textbooks. So, to give a truer
and more fitting picture of ancient
Norway, a joint committee of Norwegian
and Belgian history teachers met in
Oslo in 1952 and drew up a series of
recommendations for the authors and
publishers of school books. These were
designed to secure a less biased pre¬
sentation of historical events affecting
the two countries.
These experts had been present at the
seminars organized by " Unesco at
Brussels in 1950 and at Sèvres in 1951
dealing with improvement of textbooks,
and were therefore aware of the
accomplishments of the Scandinavian
countries, among others, in improving
standards of history teaching on the
basis of joint consultations.
One result of the Belgian-Norwegian
agreement has been the presentation of
an important exhibition in Brussels in
February of Norway's finest examples of
ancient, mediaeval and popular art.
This exhibition, presenting "A Thousand
Years of Viking Art", offered the general
public and crowds of schoolchildren a
practical lesson which enabled them to
correct the false impressions they may
have gained from the over-coloured
accounts in certain books.
The exhibits made it clear, even to the
most superficial observer, that the
Marcel Vanhamme is professor of history at the
Ecole Normale of the City of Brussels.
statements contained in many text¬
books, which suffer from excessive
generalization and over-abridgment, are
in conflict with the facts.
-Students have been amazed at the
treasures yielded up by the famous
tumulus of Oseberg, about two miles
from the coast south of Oslo, discovered
by a farmer in August 1903. Professor
Gabriel Gustafson of the University of
Oslo-, identified the tumulus as a royal
tomb dating from Viking times (750-1050
A.D.). It was in fact the last resting
place of Queen Assa, known to us from
the sagas, who was the grandmother of
Harald Fairhair and died in 850.
The tomb was in disorder; this was
probably deliberate, with a ritual pur¬
pose, to prevent the dead from dis-
THE VIKINGS, as many history books depict them: "They were
ruthless invaders. They stole into peaceful communities, killed,
plundered and burned, and then sailed away as quickly and silently as
they had come". Such accounts, historians tell us, are unjust because
incomplete. They urge a closer look at Viking life.
Exhibitions of this kind, which allow
children to "see .history for themselves"
are becoming more and more common."
This seems to be one of the clearest
applications of modern ideas on edu¬
cation, which moves ever farther from
the exclusive dogmatism of the written
word once so characteristic of it.
Thousands of boys and girls, for
example, have travelled great distances
to Tournai, the "Cradle of the French
Monarchy", as Louis XTV called the
Royal City, to see an exhibition of
Merovingian art treasures.
Three eventful centuries have passed
since the memorable day when Adrien
Quinquin, a labourer chanced to drive
his pick into the site of the forgotten
tomb of Childeric. It contained fabulous
treasures, including
three hundred golden
bees from the royal robe
and two hundred gold
coins from the king's
purse. " Unfortunately
these priceless historical
treasures were stolen
and only about twenty
items were recovered,
including two bees - and
the famous mounts from
the scabbard of the
sword, considered
essential to a knowledge
of the art öf the period.
Some, specialists think
the Merovingians had
not the skill to make
such jewels and believe
that they must have
called in Byzantine
artists specially, unless
the latter had opened a
workshop at Tournai.
Other archaeologists
think the Franks could
have made them.
turbing the living. Archaeologists dug
out what was left of an oak-built ship,
70 feet long by 16 feet wide. The galley
had 30 new oars, 13 feet long, and an
improved form of rudder, 9 feet. long,
which could be drawn up by the crew
when saiUng in shallow water. The
mast must have stood some 42 feet high.
A great number of luxuries and articles
of common use were taken from this
ship, including superb, finely carved
state chariots, sleighs, and hundreds of
objects which throw light on the
everyday life of the Vikings.
Exhibits include a replica of the ship's
prow, a twelfth-century wooden .Ma¬
donna, beautiful boxes for the safe
keeping of papers, fine wood-carvings, a
section of the famous twelfth-century
tapestry of Baldishol, jewellery, weapons
and tools, all of faultless workmanship,
and scenes, depicting, folk life and
traditions.
How very far from the truth Augustin
Thierry was when he said, in his History
of the Conquest . of England by the
Normans, that the Scandinavians were
not interested in .the arts!
Many people have
been surprised to find such a high
standard of art among peoples whom
they have too often been taught to
regard as untutored "barbarians" with
no appreciation of beauty."
The recent discovery, at Vix, a few
-miles from Chatillon-sur-Seine, of the
tomb of a sixth-century Celtic princess
or priestess, has once again brought -up
' the question of the relations of the
Northern countries with the Medi¬
terranean world. The tomb contained a
number of imported articles, mainly
Etruscan and Greek, the most surprising
, being the - wonderful bronze bowl,
weighing over 460-lbs and standing over
5-feet high. It has a frieze of soldiers,
surrounding chariots drawn by four
horses. The Vix treasures have been
on show at the Louvre Museum.
These great exhibitions on art and
history help visitors to a better under¬
standing -of the inter-dependence of
civilizations and, by practical dem¬
onstration, correct many errors instilled
into children's minds by the old-
fashioned approach to teaching or by
out-dated textbooks.
28
