PARIS TV AUDIENCES have
recently been getting an entirî^r^
new view of their city's museums
through a series of imaginative
programmes entitled "Jewels of
Paris" in which music, opera,
folklore, ballet and poetry have
brought museum exhibits to life
in an exciting way. Later this
year when a planned international
TV - relay network comes into
operation it will be possible for
people of eight, European coun¬
tries to exchange programmes and
to get to know one another
better. Photos on this page were
taken during a TV gala programme
staged in the- Louvre Museum at
the foot of the Winged Victory of
Samothrace." Through telecasts of
this kind, countries linked by TV
will be able to share their art
treasures with their neighbours.
(Photos Télévision Française.)
One evening in July, 1952, we
were relaxing in the sitting
room oí one of those two-
family brick houses which are
so typical of London's residential dis¬
tricts. Everything was there, the aspi¬
distra plant in the bay window, the
plush-covered easy 'chairs and, of
course, the television set. The pro¬
gramme for the evening: A visit to
Paris. The cameras took us first to the
studio of a painter in the artist district
of Montmartre. Then came a visit to
the Louvre. We saw the statues of
Michelangelo and religious sculptures
of the Middle Ages. To close the visit,
we went down into one of the "caves",
so characteristic of Paris student life,-
where young people danced to the
vibrating rhythm of jazz, and long¬
haired femmes fatales sang of the lives
and loves of Old Paris.
When we turned the set off, we
kneW that we had witnessed an his¬
toric event. We had caught a glimpse
of a new way for man to communicate
with man, across the barriers of lan-
THE CAMERA focuses on sculptures at the Guimet
Museum of Asian Art in Paris. In this French TV
programme actors helped to give movement and
meaning to museum exhibits. A camera coverage
of Chinese figurines, for example, faded into a
Chinese girl telling one of her country's 18 th
' century fables. (Photo Télévision Française).
guage and of frontiers. European tele¬
vision has come a long way since this
beginning, and international communi¬
cation is taking on a new reality as
plans for future co-operation are put
into practice.
Breaking a barrier
What struck us most, as we
watched the broadcast from
the Louvre, was the ability of
television to overcome lan¬
guage barriers. Here we saw two
commentators, an Englishman and a
Frenchman (for the programme was
seen simultaneously in France), who
alternately described the Works of art.
If this had been ' radio, the English
audience would have felt itself com¬
pletely shut out while the French com¬
mentator spoke. But in television,
viewers 'appreciated having more time
to look at the sculptures without having
to listen to the commentary. While
there was some criticism of this
method as being too cumbersome, the
broadcast left no doubt that pictures
can form a bridge between' nations
where sound alone would have failed.
The next step forward was taken in
June 1953 when the Coronation cere¬
monies were broadcast from London
simultaneously to four countries on the
Continent, to France, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Germany. A million
French people watched an English
Queen being crowned. Once more
everything became easy to understand
because Frenchmen were doing the
commentary to the picture, the same-
picture seen by television audiences in
England, Holland and Germany and
accompanied by commentaries in each
of their languages.
The temporary relay network which
made this broadcast possible was the
fruit of long preparations and- con¬
siderable engineering ingenuity. The.
principal difficulty was that the broad¬
cast standard in the participating
countries differs basically. A televi¬
sion picture in England is made up of
405 lines. But in France the picture
consists of 810 lines, while the Nether¬
lands and "Germany have 625 lines.
It had been thought that these differ¬
ences would constitute insuperable
obstacles to international television
broadcasts, just as different railroad
gauges make it impossible for trains
to travel from one system to the other
without special adaptation.
But engineers succeeded in "convert¬
ing" .the broadcasts. The first suc¬
cessful conversion took place between
England and France across the Chan¬
nel in 1051. The second step Was the
broadcast of a week's programmes'
from Paris to Great Britain, climaxed
by the July 14th celebration held in
1052. The third step was the multi-,
national relay of the Coronation cere¬
monies from England to the Continent
in 1953. . And the fourth step will be
the two-way exchange of programmes'
between Great Britain, -France, Bel¬
gium, the Netherlands, Germany, Swit¬
zerland and Italy, and possibly Den-'
mark, planned for June 1954.
How others live
Here is an ambitious goal : the
' establishment of a permanent
(and very costly) relay network
which links in two-way com¬
munication eight countries speaking
between them six different languages,
using four different definitions of the
television picture and having young
television organizations, many of which
are" only learning how to produce pro¬
grammes for their own audience, let
alone for other countries.
The eight countries will each pro¬
duce one programme designed to give
a picture of their own country, and all
22

UNESCO COURIER - N» 2 - 1954
of them will during the same period
carry broadcasts of the international
football championship games which
will be played in Switzerland. A new
approach will be tried out this time to
overcome the language difficulties. In
none of the broadcasts will there ap¬
pear people who speak in their own
tongue directly to the camera. In¬
stead, the programmes will be narrated
What interests viewers in these coun¬
tries is to see the life of Madame Du¬
pont or Mr. Smith, the way they make
both ends meet, what they can buy on
the market, what amusements they
enjoy, how they bring up their child¬
ren, how they work in railroad sta¬
tions or factories, in fashion salons or
on farms. And then, of course, view¬
ers want to see the best shows each-
Mît
S .*-..!" .-A? *£S
by unseen commentators whose words
will be translated into the language of
the country receiving the broadcast.
And what do these countries Want to
show to each other? Are they setting
up such an elaborate network only for
the broadcast of national ceremonies
and spectacular events? Whether you
talk to British or French, to German or
Dutch producers of television program¬
mes, you always get the same answer :
we want to see how other people live
and show them a slice of our own life.
f
m *
country can produce, the .best enter¬
tainment. There is going to be a Eu¬
ropean competition for the applause of
the European viewer.
The French television audience had
a taste of this new feature of interna¬
tional television When "Cafe Conti¬
nental", a BBC television show, was
broadcast as part of the programmes
carried during the Coronation period.
In this programme English viewers
have seen, for instance, German acro¬
bats and Austrian dancers, Dutch ma
gicians and French singers, as well as
British entertainers. The entertainers
are introduced by a French girl who
lives in London and Whose French
accent is loved by English viewers.
This show is good television in Eng¬
land. But it is also good entertain¬
ment elsewhere. In fact, it drives
home, in its own way, that peoples are
not so different whatever _ their lan¬
guage.
Pooling Programmes
Tins international exchange serves
a double purpose. Not only does
it seek to promote better under¬
standing between nations, but it
meets the serious problems which each
individual European country finds in
trying to produce an adequate number
of good programmes for its own
audience. Everywhere there is a
shortage of money, a shortage of
artists and a shortage of good ideas
and scripts. Europeans point out
that television has developed success1
fully in- the United States on what
amounts in fact to a continental scale.
They hope that similarly the great
human and artistic resources of
Europe will aid them in making a
greater success of television on this
continent.
Television is going to teach us much
about the other fellow and about our¬
selves, and not all that we will learn
will be favouiable or welcome. But
such is life and such are the relations
between individuals' and nations. If
television gives us a chance to find Out
more about others, to' adjust ourselves
better to them, to learn that underneath
the differences there is an even great¬
er community, it will have contributed
its share.
23
