From Afghanistan to
the Banks of the Nile...
UNESCO COURIER. N° 7 1954
A DRAMATIC CHANGE is taking place in the
Middle East today as countries adopt modern techni¬
ques to attack the roots of ignorance and poverty.
Photos show a technical training centre under con¬
struction in Iraq and a village audience attending an
evening class at a " cinema school " in Egypt.
*o*
FTER a 10,000 mile
journey through the
Middle East where
I toured Unesco's
technical assistance
missions, I frankly
hesitate to use the
expression "Middle
East" at all. Most
of us have the
curious notion that
it is a homogeneous
region where all the countries are more or less alike, with
the same Arabs and camels, deserts and palm trees, and an
almost equal degree of illiteracy, poverty, and disease.
Except for the fact that the Muslim religion has been an
important factor in the development of the region as a whole,
there is really little in common between Afghanistan and its
mountain solitudes and Egypt with its teeming Nile Valley;
between Iraq and its vast open plains and the Lebanon with
its narrow constricted terraces; between ancient Iran and
the newly created or re-created nation of Libya.
All of these countries are today receiving technical
assistance from the United Nations and are seeking to adopt
modern technological skills and train new technicians. This
doesn't mean though, as some people think too, that they
. have no technical skill.
Iran, for example, has so many skilled craftsmen and their
workmanship is of such superb quality that it made me think
of the great craftsmen's Guilds of Medieval times. Vocational
training one of the high points of modern technical
assistance is nothing new in this country where so many
young people are learning to engrave on copper and silver,
embroider leather, paint on ivory arid produce magnificent
in-laid work in mother-of-pearl. To the master mason
laying his sun-dried bricks to the rhythm of a song, illiteracy,
I thought, was undoubtedly a handicap in many ways but
GREEN
LIGHT
for
EDUCATION
by Georges Fradier
it certainly had not prevented him from constructing the
perfect vaults and arches I saw.
I marvelled at the "ganat" and the "foggara"the
extraordinary system of underground waterways which
generation after generation of specialist workers has
maintained and extended for the past 5,000 years in Persia
and Syria. The shafts follow underground water courses to
sources in the mountains sometimes as much as 30 miles
distant. For centuries, the workmen digging these shafts
have taken their bearings with a primitive form of compass
which probably ante-dates the marine compass by several
hundreds of years.
Irt all countries, farmers are always looking for better
ways to cultivate their land. But there is probably not very
much the West can teach the Syrian cotton producer, or the
vine grower of the Lebanon, or the Iraqi farmer I saw whose
palm groves were so carefully cultivated they looked like
gardens. As for the peasants of the Nile valley, they already
manage to produce three crops each year from every acre
of land despite their primitive implements.
I know that it has been pointed out time and again that
traditional skills have not prevented these countries from
falling behind others, often to an alarming degree. Nor
have they solved the major economic and social problems
which plague them, and in fact they have helped to intensify
them. Today, however, these traditional skills do form a
solid foundation for the important changes which are taking
place throughout the Middle East.
One thing struck me above everything else. The apathy and
resignation which was said to be widespread among the people
of the Middle East is completely gone today, particularly
amongst the younger generation. Everywhere the battle has
been joined against poverty, against inequality, and, more
precisely, against their deep basic causes. Each nation,
without exception, has its plan for modernisation and re-
equipment. Not all schemes for improvement are of equal
scope of course, nor -are the funds allotted to them of equal
29

* GREEN LIGHT FOR EDUCATION (Cont'd.)
'our future depends
on our schools'
NEW FACTORIES like this modern cotton mill in Damascus, Syria, are
springing up all over the Middle East, under national plans for modernization-.
importance, but everywhere new land is being conquered for
cultivation, new industries are springing up, and new roads
and hospitals, new laboratories and new schools are being
built. Sweeping land reforms are taking place alongside
significant administrative* changes and amazing improvements
in the social structure. Everywhere the "unchanging East" is
changing.
This desire for progress, for new techniques and new ideas,
has seized not only statesmen and other top-level leaders but
every section of the population in the Middle East. Today, from
Afghanistan to the banks of the Nile, the common slogan is
"Our future depends on our schools*', and the green light is
being given to educational improvement.
In the past ten years literally thousands of new schools have
been built in the countries of the Middle East. Primary schools,
destined first for those regions where hardly any existed before;
secondary and technical schools, industrial training centres;
universities; engineering institutes as well as new libraries and
laboratories have been created. Education, these countries have
discovered, can no longer remain the slow percolating process
of the past, starting at the top social stratum and only rarely
getting down to the broad mass at the base. Today the
ordinary people who need education most can no longer afford
to wait. They want education at all levels and they want it now.
. Some countries have given first priority to expanding
secondary education, others to .the development of higher
education. But nowhere are the funds used for one branch of
learning obtained at the expense of another. ' ;
Afghanistan has launched a vigorous campaign against
illiteracy, has revised its teacher training and recruiting methods,
and in the past few years has also opened a number of new
secondary schools. In 1950, the Afghan Institute of Technology
was founded in Kabul, the capital, and it has now graduated
civil and electrical engineers, mining and automobile
technicians. This year courses are open for civil aviation
technicians too.
Iran's problems are different. It can be proud of its secondary
schools, engineering colleges and its fine university, but it is
handicapped by a lack of skilled supervisors and foremen to
man its industries. The traditional methods of the copper
engraver's shop or the goldsmith's workroom cannot be applied
in operating a mine, a seaport, a railroad or an oil refinery. -
NEW LIFE is coming to parched Middle East lands through
large scale irrigation schemes which will eventually provide
millions of acres of new cultivable ground in former deserts.
NEW KNOWLEDGE is being gained here by Iraq's future
science teachers in the spacious laboratories of Baghdad's College
of Arts and Sciences. Three years ago Baghdad had no laboratories.
30

UNESCO COURIER. N» 7. 1954
NEW TECHNIQUES are being taught here to apprentice metal workers In
Iraq which plans to train enough specialists to staff all its growing factories.
> So today Iran is giving technical education the biggest green
light. All children (aged 11 to 13) in the last two classes of
primary school will henceforth spend 50 per cent of their time
on manual work at work benches in city schools, at school
farms in the villages. Each rural school will have its own fields
for cultivation and experimentation and special watering
systems for market gardens. Each city school will have its
workshop complete with tools and equipment.
Within the next five years some 3,000 of these new classes
will be giving practical instruction to over 90,000 children.
Iran's revolutionary programme, to cost about 300 million rials
(about $65,000,000), is one which many technically advanced
countries might well envy today.
¡ In the Lebanon educators are busily revising the school
textbooks using scientifically exact criteria, and are now
applying psychological tests to teacher trainees and primary
and secondary school children in order to select better qualified
teachers and provide vocational guidance for young people.
Since this work began, Lebanese industrial leaders have>
adopted similar methods in recruiting personnel, and govern-
NEW SKYLINE in the countryside at Horns, Syria, is made by
silhouette of a newly built, electrically powered grain mill.
ment services are contemplating doing likewise. This is current
practice in the most modernized countries but many people are
quite unaware of how up-to-date and modern the Lebanon
really is since it is in the "Middle East", and they have heard
only of its ancient past and its ruins of Byblos, 'Tyre and
Baalbek (see page 29).
This is equally true of Syria, which is known mostly for its
magnificent architecture of antiquity and its picturesque
villages. But Syria is also a country of new factories, new
dams and new schools. Since 1946, some ' 337 primary and
48 secondary schools have been built, new colleges have been
founded (Faculties of Letters, Science, Engineering, Education
in Damascus and -Aleppo) and building' is still going on.
Within the past seven years this tiny nation of three million
inhabitants has ended the teacher shortage in primary,
secondary and vocational schools. The next goal is to train
enough qualified teachers in higher technology and advanced
science.
Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, is a city whose name once
ranked high in the history of science. "It will once again
become a great centre of science" say the people of Iraq. A
few years ago the idea would have seemed simply absurd.
Baghdad had no laboratories, no science faculty, not even a
scientific library. Iraq's chemists, physicists and biologists are
usually graduates of British, American or German universities.
Today, students who want to study science at college are no
longer obliged to go abroad. Baghdad now has an excellent
school of engineering, a medical school, and a newly created
College of Arts and Sciences which will ultimately form part
of the future University of Iraq. The departments of chemistry,
physics and mathematics are only three years old but the
standards and quality of instruction are already on a par with
other 'long-established college faculties in other countries.
"We've started from scratch", one professor told me, "but
now we're in full swing". As I visited the spacious laboratories,
and saw how fully equipped they were, with students in white
blouses busy working over Bunsen burners, test tubes, scales,
microscopes and other apparatus installed on long tile-covered
benches, I could not believe that only three years before none
of this had existed.
Egypt has not had the same predicament of creating a higher
educational system overnight. Its very modern universities in
Cairo and Alexandria attract students from many countries, and
the celebrated El Azhar University, once restricted to theological
teaching, is now a new centre of modern learning.
Today Egypt is expanding technical education to meet the
expected acceleration of industrial development. Training is
31

GREEN LIGHT
FOR EDUCATION
(Continued)
being geared to research in the sciences, and particularly
research in industrial chemistry. But for the man in the
street in Egypt, "scientific research" means the Desert Insti¬
tute at Heliopolis, north of Cairo. When the Institute was
founded in 1951 it was chiefly a museum of natural history
of the desert. Now it is becoming the national centre for
specialized research on soil, climate, desert flora and fauna,
desert chemistry and geology.
"More than any other people", one scientist told me, "we
Egyptians are influenced by the desert. Shut in on two sides,
our great Nile flows in reality like a trickle between two'
immense deserts. The lands watered by the Nile are among
the most fertile in the world, but only a thin green strip of
land can be irrigated despite the water stored up by our huge
Aswan barrage." The Nile Delta supports a population of
17 million fellahin so crowded together that the density is
747 per square kilometer. Every acre of barren ground that
science can turn into arable land means a new chance for
life for a peasant family.
All the countries of the Middle East, thus, are on the move.
Their educational problems in practically every case are now
directly linked with . technical and economic development
plans. Even in Libya, where almost no primary schools at
all existed in the past, every school built has an immediate
repercussion on local crafts and agriculture (the modern
schools now going up stress manual work). Hence, one
cannot speak of technical assistance in the Middle East
without also speaking of the new education in the Middle
East, for the assistance would mean little without the
remarkable progress being made in education.
It is here that the technical experts Unesco has sent to
the Middle East are working in technical school workshops,
in university laboratories, in libraries and nursery schools,
and sometimes in the offices- of a Cabinet Minister where
new education programmes are being drawn up.
The work of most of these men may seem undramatic and
uninspiring but in reality it is filled with moving excitement
and drama. The Unesco experts working in this part of
the world are in fact a fortunate and enviable group. For
they are conscious of helping old nations suddenly grown
young in reaching for a new future. One thing they are
certain of: they are not wasting their time. As one of them
told me, quoting a phrase of Charles Malik, the Lebanese
delegate to the United Nations: "The sun is risen in the
Orient on a world hard at work; only those who are asleep
do not see it."
OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES form an important
part of the primary school programme. The
school is also a training ground for the young Iraqi "
teachers who have been recruited.
A BREAK FROM CLASS for the boys and girls.
At Dujaila, Iraqi children have discovered a new
kind of learning in which games and " dressing
up " also have their place in the programme.
HOUSEWIVES
have come to learn
about improved
health and home
conditions in the
women's classes.
Sewing, cooking
and baby care are
among the sub¬
jects taught them.
A SCHOOL
FARM and a gar¬
den now provide
practical lessons in
benefits of new
farming methods.
A club for young
farmers and co¬
operatives are also
in action here.
A NEW SPIRIT
IN DUJAILA
Ten years ago the flat alluvial plain at Dujaila in the bend
of the Tigris river, south east of Baghdad (Iraq) was a parched
wilderness. Today, irrigation canals fed from the Tigris
have made it a huge chessboard pattern of fields and farms
where 2,000 colonists cultivate wheat and barley and raise
sheep and cattle. Dujaila is the largest land settlement in
the Near East and also the site of the first fundamental
education pilot project in this region. Helped by farmers,
a Unesco team has been developing this centre since I 952 and
today it has become the first village and the " nerve centre "
of this land of farms. Men, women and children come to
its schools and workshops to free themselves from illiteracy,
to learn the skills of metalwork, carpentry, weaving, spinning,
building and simple farm mechanics and to find out how
they can protect themselves from disease. Since prejudices
against education for women have been overcome, a new
girls' school has been opened and now has over 50 pupils.
Young Iraqi are trained at Dujaila as teachers in fundamental
education: Above all, this village education centre has
made the people of Dujaila a community-minded group.
32
