UNESCO COURIER. N» 7. 1954
The city of Tripoli in northern Lebanon is noted for the peculiarly
oriental fascination of its narrow streets teeming with life, its historic
souks (bazaars), khans (caravanserais), hammams (baths), mosques and
madrasahs (Mohammedan colleges). These are set among houses and
shops in an amazing tangle of arcades, vaults, projections, domes and
minarets. The old town owes its distinctive character to the old
madrasahs, converted into mosques, rather than to the mosques them¬
selves. (Photo shows AI Burtasiyat madrasah with square-minaret
near the old bridge crossing the Nahr Abu-Ali). Lebanese authorities
are today faced with problem of modernizing the city and Unesco spe¬
cialists have suggested schemes for doing so by careful re-planning which
will enhance rather than destroy the beauty of the ancient monuments.
II

Minarets of Damascus
The Mozaffari Mosque (1202-1213)
Al-Muradiya Mosque (15th century)
Sheik Mohiy ad-Din (1518)
Manjak Mosque (1368)
Jami Juban (14th century)

UNESCO COURIER. N" 7. 1954
'THE CITADEL OF ALEPPO, with its deep moat and Its steeply sloping bank, etches a lacy crown- around the hill formed by the accumulated
ruins of older civilizations. At its foot spread out the serried network of thoroughfares converging from desert and sea. Relic of the struggles between
Arab and Crusader, the citadel is symbolic of the city which, throughout its long history, has weathered events that brought ruin and death everywhere
around it. The Syrian Government has already done considerable work on the restoration of the citadel, the city walls, and other monuments. Aleppo
has over 200 mosques. For a better idea of the steepness of slope around the citadel, turn photo upside down.
Between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean there are
lands which are literally sown with the relics of civi¬
lizations gone by. In towns, villages and deep in the
desert, there are marvels which might well be the envy
of a score of nations.
These countries, among the richest in history and in its
heritage of stone, are today setting an example to the rest
of the world in protecting the past. The names of their
monuments have a grandiose ring : Tyre, Sidon, Byblos,
ever-prosperous Tripoli, and Baalbek in the Lebanon where
the emperors of Rome trekked in pious pilgrimages
1,800 years ago; Damascus, Aleppo, St. Simeon Stylites, Quse-
el-Heir, the Krak des Chevaliers, Palmyra in Syria...
Here preserving ancient monuments requires more than
good intentions. Many of them lie in remote oases separated
by hundreds of parched miles from the nearest city. Others
are buried in sand, still others nest like eagles on isolated
peaks.
During the early centuries of the Christian era, villages
huddled around monasteries sprang up on Syria's northern
plateau, bounded on the west by the valleys of the Orontes
and the Afrin Rivers. Water tanks made life possible on this
great stretch of limestone and villages prospered with their
olive groves and vineyards. These were peaceful centuries;
oil and wine travelled down roads protected by Rome.
But Rome fell. The roads were no longer safe and the vil¬
lages became deserted islands. For 1,200 years, the plateau
remained lifeless and its ruins were left in the hands of time.
Today, peace has returned to the plateaux and with it the
people of an independent Syria. Obviously, this is progress.
But what about the old basilicas in the forgotten villages?
How can you stop new farmers from tearing them down and
using their stones to build barns ? Ideally, the answer would
be to station a curator with a platoon of guards in every
village but *;hat would not be a practical solutionfor Syria
or any other country.
Obviously, the military and the religious works left by the
Crusaders deserve to be saved. They contain some of
the most beautiful vestiges of medieval architecture on the
face of the earth. But the mere maintenance of these enor¬
mous stone blocks to say nothing of reconstructing entire
sections ready to crumble at any moment is far beyond
the budget of any one ministry.
In Syria, as in the Lebanon, the Government's Antiquities
Service has done remarkable work, but its means are limited.
The' Krak des Chevaliers, one of -the most famous of all
Crusaders' Castles, was restored in 1936 after tremendous
effort. Walls were rebuilt, arches were repaired, an entire
staircase was reconstructed, missing sections of windows
were fitted together and the entrance to its great hall was
completely restored.
Then new disasters struck; lightning demolished the tower
and plants began to invade the foundations. Maintaining
the Krak des Chevaliers is a »ever-ending taskand this is
only one castle among the many to Sprisu
Still, this problem is simple eempared to the dilemma in
13

the expanding cities of Syria and the Lebanon. Since the
war, these cities have been confronted with the need to
adapt themselves to new ways of living. Within three decades,
they have watched their populations double or triple with
a corresponding increase in political and commercial activity.
New buildings, offices, factories. and hotels have sprung up
on the sites of ancient cities. New municipal services have
been grafted onto the old ones or else have replaced them.
In new sections the engineer and the technician have been
able to find solutions. But there remain the old hearts of
cities with their crystallized architecture dating back centu¬
ries. Can they be changed without being destroyed or, at
best, disfigured?
Faced with these problems, Syria and Lebanon both decided
to enlist the help of impartial international experts. The
two countries requested advice from Unesco and, in 1953,
Unesco was able to furnish them the services of Professor
Paul Collart of the Universities of Geneva and Lausanne and
Armando Dillon, superintendent of historical monuments at
Palermo, Sicily. In the Lebanon, the two men worked with
Emir Maurice Chebab, Director of the Lebanese Service of
Antiquities; in Syria, they carried out their mission with Dr.
Selim Abdul-Hak, Director-General of Syrian Antiquities.
Illustrated with maps, plans, sketches and photographs, two
reports which were drawn up these missions have just been
published by Unesco (1).
These books, written in elegant
but simple style, are intended
not only for specialists but for
any reader interested in the fas¬
cinating history and beauty of
Syria and Lebanon. Their pages
contain moving passages on
Baalbek and Palmyra, Tripoli
and the Crusaders' Castles, on
"the land of countless ruins", the
"dead cities of the North", and
"the great ruins in the desert."
The authors point out that
even the most illustrious of pala¬
ces or temples needs to have a
good road leading to it if visitors
are to be able to reach it and
provide the money required to
keep it alive.
In the words of the mission :
"It should only be necessary to
improve certain sections of roads
and establish one or two con¬
veniently situated and unpre¬
tentious but well-run hotels or-
rest-houses, where visitors can
eat and sleep in pleasant sur¬
roundings... to organize tours
either by road or air. In this
respect, Greece, where the tourist
trade has advanced by leaps and
bounds in the space of a few
years, and is now making a con¬
siderable contribution to the
country's economic resources,
seems to us to provide a particu¬
larly good example of what can
be done in this way."
From the wonders of the
desert, the missions then turned
to the growing pains of the historic cities of the Middle East.
The old quarters of Damascus, Aleppo and Tripoli hide un¬
believably beautiful works nearly always ignored by tourists
in a hurry. Most of these buildings are inextricably tangled
in a seething mass of shops, warehouses and homes which,
together, form the picturesque souks.
Of course the souks are anathema to a certain school of
city planning which holds that a street must be a mighty
river ignoring the houses on its banks and mercilessly
washing away any. pedestrians who might venture onto it.
In these cities of the Middle East, many a planner has pro¬
posed at least the partial destruction of old quarters as alive
and as useful today as at any period in their history.
The Syrian and Lebanese Governments, disturbed by the
possible effects of these plans on the historical and artistic
value of ancient buildings and on the character of the
bazaars, asked the Unesco mission to weigh the arguments
for the preservation or destruction of the old quarters.
Concerning the Syrian city of Tripoli, for example, the
authors explained the character of the quarters affected,
their peculiar features and their right to survival after
KHANS such as the Al-Khayyâtin khan in Tripoli (above)
are the business centrescaravanserais or storehouses of
the old towns of the Lebanon and Syria. For 600 years tailors
have been working in the shops among the arcades of this one.
making allowances for the requirements of a modern city.
They wrote:
"The bazaars, set among houses, mosques, khans, ham-
mams, and madrasahs, might be compared to the arteries
and veins of a living body; time and use have made them
throb with a life that gives some inner meaning to every
corner, every view. They are inseparably linked with the
motley-dressed" crowd and the shops crammed with wares.
"These are not streets in the modern sense of the word:
nowadays, in the new districts, the street is public property;
at the same time it is necessary to all the houses on either
side. But here, the street is hewn, as it were, from the
substance of the architecture itself. Making One's way
through the. souks is like joining a natural process of ebb
and flow, drifting with a current, walking through the very -
buildings. Every corner has an air of its own.
"Yet one can pass repeatedly along the same stretch of
road, or walk round and round the same khan quite unaware
that one is doing so. Merely to turn back is to have the
impression of seeing something fresh, as though peering at
the ever-changing forms and colours of the patterns in a
kaleidoscope. In the maze of streets which seem to put
out fresh tentacles, intertwining to lead us astray, the mo¬
numental doorway of a mosqüe or madrasah, the lofty pin¬
nacle of a minaret, or a glimpse of some dome or khan,
serves as a reassuring landmark.
"AU big modern towns now
have their 'stores' great com¬
plex buildings which, like the
khans and caravanserais of for¬
mer times, are planned to include
large warehouses, and where
goods of every type can be found.
To a visitor, the old town of Tri¬
poli looks like one enormous
store, with its different depart¬
ments for produce and manufac¬
tured articles, handicrafts and
business negotiations.
"It is delight to stroll through
the souks, sheltered from sun and
rain, wind and dust, admiring
the wide range of goods on sale,
from costly jewellery offered by
the goldsmiths, deep-piled car¬
pets and an endless variety of
multicoloured textiles, to fruit
vegetables and sweetmeats.
"The visitor has the same pleas¬
ure here that he feels in wander¬
ing through the by-streets and
mercerie of Venice or the old
parts of Vienna, Paris or Flo¬
rence. Leaving the wide streets
where the traffic is controlled by
police and signals, to plunge into
the old districts where modern
vehicles cannot penetrate, 'he
feels relaxed and rested."
(1) "Lebanon" Volume VI (price $1.25; 7/6; 350 fr) and "Syria" Volume
VII 'price $1.50; 8/6; 400 fr) inthe collection "Museums and Historical
Monuments".
The report recognizes that these
quarters may have to undergo
change, but it pleads for prudence.
The authors lay down a principle:
the preservation of historical
monuments is not merely a convenience, but is a moral obliga¬
tion as well. These monuments stand as symbols of spirit¬
ual values; as long as they stand, they are part and parcel
of the education of a people. Their destruction means turn¬
ing our backs on what we have inherited from our ancestors.
The conclusions drawn from this study of a few cases in
Syria and the Lebanon are valid in every country at least,
in every country where man has been able to leave age-old
traces of his labour and of his genius. In . every city with
historical monuments worthy of the name, citizens are
coming to realize that saving their monuments is in then-
own interest, v It is the responsibility of the town planner
to conserve these monuments and even to create more'
favourable surroundings for them, taking into account their
proportions, their character and their style.
As Professor Collart puts it, "far from hindering the na¬
tural development of a city, (historical monuments) should
continue to embellish it, being given their rightful place' in
the scene so as to do full justice to their cultural significance
as well as to the needs of modern life. To that end, efforts
should also be made to allow historical monuments to serve
their original purpose, or to find a suitable new one for them,
so that they are not left aside as useless relics of the past
but play a real part in the Ufe of the city."
14
