in which a father tells his 13-year-old
American daughter about Unesco
Herbert J. Abraham
The average man in the street would be hard put to give a reply if he were
asked "What is Unesco and what is it trying to do?" The same question
would probably draw a complete blank from most children throughout the
world. The fact is that school lessons on the JJnited Nations and its specialized
agencies like Unesco are still few and far between. Here, an American father,
'Mr. Herbert Abraham, has taken the bull by the horns and set forth his personal
reply to his small daughter, Jennifer, in the form of a letter. To help Jennifer
understand Unesco's work and objectives better, her father has naturally linked
them directly with examples in American history she has studied in school. We
present this interesting effort with the knowledge that parents in other countries
who may wish to follow Mr. Abraham's example, will have little difficulty in finding
other examples, just as striking and as numerous in their own country's history.
"A Letter to Jennifer" was originally published in the National Education Asso¬
ciation Journal United States.
You asked -once, what is Unesco ?
I said it was part of the United
Nations. I said that the UN means
that countries get together and help
each other. They help each other if
one of them is attacked by. an enemy,
and they help one another to settle
quarrels sensibly and fairly, and they
help one another to look after hungry
"children and to get better doctors and
to farm their lands better and to get
better schools. Unesco is the part of the
United Nations in which countries espe¬
cially help one another to get better
schools.
I didn't tell you much more about
Unesco then, because I didn't know how
to explain it so that you would under¬
stand it. -
Of course, you know one or two things
more about Unesco now than when you
asked the question, because we have
since lived in Paris. You know that I
worked for Unesco in the old building
on Avenue Kleber and that quite a lot
of people from different countries' work¬
ed there, like our friend from Iraq
with his wife from Lebanon, and the
young man from Holland, and the
Frenchman who thought American
schools were wonderful because children
can have real discussions with their
teachers.
Now, here you are back in the United
States, and you have been learning
eighth-grade American history. Here is
something that may surprise you. You
have been learning some things about
Unesco. and all the rest of the United
Nations while you have been learning
the story of America.
It's true that your history book
doesn't mention Unesco, and you may
Dr. Abraham is a member of the Unesco Ilela-
tions Staff o¡ the US National Commission [or
Unesco, US State Department.
23
" wonder what I mean when I say. you've
been learning about Unesco in the
process of learning American history.
I'U try to explain what I mean.
There is a map of the world in your
American history book; around the map
are some pictures. One picture shows
the Parliament in England with a title
"representative government." There is
a picture of a page of a dictionary, with
a label "language." There are other
pictures marked "reform," "health,"
"people," "art," "religion," "literature"
(that's a picture of Shakespeare) , "archi¬
tecture" (a Greek' temple), "music,"
"science," and "domesticated animals."
The map shows arrows pointing to
America, and the whole page is entitled
"Civilization Spreads to America."
Later there's another map with arrows
going from America, and pictures mark¬
ed : "Declaration of Independence,"
"agricultural methods," "medical seien- ,
ce," "new plants," "'sports," "engineer¬
ing,1" "inventions," "music," "motion pic¬
tures," and "literature" (a page of Tom
Sawyer). The title of this map is:
"Americans Contribute Their Civilization
to the World." Get the idea?
Two-way culture
NOW put the two - ideas together.
Where do we get a lot of the good
things in our civilization? Where
do other countries get many of the good
things in their civilization? OK, so what
about Unesco?
Just a minute. I'd like to change a
word. The book says, "Civilization
spreads to America and Americans
contribute their civilization to , the
world." I would like to substitute the
word "culture" for the word "civiliza¬
tion." - The two words have almost the
same meaning, and culture has an
advantage: you can't make an adjective
out of civilization (except civilized) and
you can make an adjective from culture.
I want to write a sentence with the
word "cultural." Here it is: "Cultural
exchange has been good for America
and for all other countries." That is
an idea you have learned just by learn¬
ing the true story of America.
Well, that American-history idea is
also a Unesco idea. All the countries in
Unesco more than 60 countries have
the same idea, "Let's help one another
learn about one another and from one
another; let's have more cultural ex¬
change." So they put the "cultural" right
into the name of Unesco.
(Of course, Unesco is a made-up word.
It is made up of the initials in the words
in Unesco's real name "United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Or¬
ganization")
It's interesting how the countries help
one another to have more "cultural in¬
terchange." They help artists, musicians,
and writers from different countries to
get together and exchange ideas. They
give scholarships so that people can go
to other countries to study. They make
catalogues of reproductions of famous
paintings that people can buy.
That gives you an idea of what
Unesco does to help "cultural exchange."
There is a lot more you, could learn
about it, but you have learned the main
idea already from American history.
Another American-history fact I no-
. ticed in your book was that people from
many different countries learned to
know each other and. to live peaceably
together in the United States. For
example, there is a page of pictures of
men with many different national origins
who fought bravely side by side in the
American army in the last world war..
You know that people came to America
. from all over Europe and somehow
learned to get along with one another.
They discovered they didn't have to hate
and fight one another.
This is Unesco's idea, too. The coun¬
tries in Unesco are saying, "Let's help
our people get to know each other better,
and also let us learn how to live peace¬
fully all over the world."
Unesco is tied in with the story of
American economic development, too.
Do you remember this sentence, "Power-
driven machines begin an industrial
revolution"? H|ere are some more words
and phrases that mean quite a lot to
you, now that you have studied American

history. They are all in the American-
history book: interchangeable parts;
mass . production; transportation and
communication link the oceans; science
and machinery multiply the production
of food; machines make the peoples of
the world more dependent upon each
other...
You understand now that the world
today is different in many ways from
what is was when the American colonies
got their freedom. You have learned-
that the world has shrunk, tho' it is stiU
the same old 25,000 miles around.
Today it is like one big community where
we all depend on one another.
Knowing this, you can understand
quite a number of things Unesco is doing.
For one thing you can see that we shall
be in a mess unless a lot of people in
many countries learn about the great
. technical and economic changes that
have taken place. People can't act very
sensibly to solve problems together if
they don't understand what kind of
world they live in.
And this poses quite a question for
teachers all over the world: Are. they
really helping their pupils learn what
kind of world we live in, and how it got
that way?
Chopsticks for the teacher
TO help teachers do a better job,
Unesco organizes meetings for
them summer schools where
they can trade ideas. Do you remember
the Hindu gentleman who came to see
us in Paris? When our maid went in
the garden , and cut somes sticks, you
asked her why, and she said, "I'm
making chopsticks for the Indian
gentleman." He was a teacher who was
attending one of the Unesco summer
schools, along with teachers from
Mexico, USA, England, Belgium, Japan,
and other countries. Incidentally, letting
people talk things over freely and trade
ideas is quite an old idea forAmericans^-
look up what your textbook says about
the Bill of Rights and how "democracy
is government by discussion."
Another thing about Unesco and the
industrial revolution remember that
scientists were behind all those inven-,
tions, how agricultural scientists found
out how to grow more crops.
"Help the scientists learn from each
other," says Unesco, "and help every¬
one «Ise learn from the scientists."
Unesco helps the scientists organize
international meetings and publish ma¬
gazines in which they let other scientists
know the new things they have learned
or what problems they are working
on.
The more the scientists know, the
more puzzling questions they find they
don't know the answers to, about the
infinitely big universe and the inflnitesi-
mally small atom and everything in bet¬
ween. Even tho' America has a lot of
the best scientists, places for research,
and equipment, we still want to learn
from scientists in other countries.
Of course, the people in very poor-
countries are especially eager to learn
more science, so Unesco helps them to
learn it. There is a piece in your history
book that explains this: how Japan was
"backward" and saw the manufactured
articles which Perry brought, and decid¬
ed it must learn western science and
technology.
"" All those countries that have become
free and independent in recent years,
like India, Pakistan, and Indonesia
they want to learn science, and that
means training thousands of scientists,
and getting' equipment and' so on.
Unesco helps them by sending out
experts to train them and advise them.
This kind of help is called "technical
assistance."
-One important problem (it's really
hundreds of scientific problems, I
suppose) is whether people can possibly
turn dry, barren, lands into good fertile
lands. Millions of people around the
world live in dry lands. American his¬
tory tells us that scientists were able
to help our farmers by finding out what
the soil consists of, and what crops
grow better in some soils, and how to
use water resources more effectively.
Unesco is putting that idea to work for
the "arid zone," by helping scientists do
the research and keep in touch with
each other.
I have told you about the "cultural"
and "scientific" parts of Unesco's work.
Next comes the "educational." But it's
fairly obvious, isn't it, now that you
know some American history?
What did the Americans do when they
first started settling the lands in the
Northwest Territory? They set aside
one- section in L every township for
schools. What was the big thing Horace
Mann did? Introduce good ways for
training teachers. What do Americans
UNESCO COURIER - N» 3 - 1954
think every child should have? Equality'
of educational opportunity. America
has tried to give every child the chance
to get all the education he can profit
from.
Today, all over the world countries
are saying, "We, too, must educate all
our people." What a job! Half the people
in the world can't read or write. In
some countries, 70 % or 80 % never get
into a school. But these people in lands
that have been "underdeveloped" so
long are now saying, "We can never be
really free and able ,to rule ourselves or
get rid of starvation and pestilence,
unless all our people go to school." The
countries in Unesco believe they should
help one another to learn.
Models for the world
UNESCO doesn't build schools, tho';
it doesn't have the money. Besides,
- each country is responsible for its
own education and must do most of
the work itself. But Unesco does send
experts to various countries to help train
their teachers, and advises them how to
set up good public-school systems.
It helps to set up "model" training
centres. There's one in Mexico and one
in Egypt. Experienced teachers come
from many countries, learn how to train
others, and then set up teacher-educat¬
ing centres in their own country. Many
of the young teachers have had no more
schooling than you have, because their
countries haven't been able to afford
higher education for them, and teachers
have been needed so desperately.
Another big thing in education is
libraries. Your history book tells you
how Andrew Carnegie became a mil¬
lionaire and then used a lot of his
money to build public libraries where
everyone can borrow books.
When I was a boy in England, we
had a library near us called the Andrew
Carnegie Public Library, and I learned
that a wealthy American had made this
library possible for us.
Well, all the countries that are
building schools need libraries too.
Unesco is acting a little bit like Andrew
Carnegie, tho' it isn't a millionaire. For
example, it is helping India set up a
"model" library.
I HOPE you have a good idea now whv
we have Unesco and what it does. If
we were having a class discussion,
you could ask questions and I would try
to answer them. I can think of one or
two questions you might ask.
For example, is Unesco a kind of
government? No Unesco is an organi¬
zation which countries belong to and
pay dues to, and it does what its
member countries want it to do.
You might ask, what do we pay?
That is decided each year. This year
the budget was about nine million
dollars, and the dues of the USA were
about one third of that (because we are
so much the wealthiest country). That
means USA pays something like three
million dollars a year which costs
each taxpayer less than the price of
one candy bar.
I should remind you that Unesco is
just one part of the UN. Other parts
are doing the things I mentioned in the
beginning, and all the parts help each
other. I suppose all the work of all
parts of the UN costs me less than a
dollar a year. That's what I pay in
order to be one of the millions of people
all over the world who want to help
keep peace and make the world a better
place.
29
