WHAT IS A 'PRIMITIVE'?
Tribal dance of the Bapendé in the heart of the Congo. (Photo D.F.F.)
by Claude Levi-Strauss ,
here .was a time when if you spoke about
savages everyone had a fairly clear idea what
you were talking about. Etymologically, the
savage was a man of the forest, and the term
denoted those people who lived in close
contact with nature. The German word naturvölker (nature
folk) conveyed this idea directly.
But apart from the fact that all savages do not necessarily
live in forests (think of the Eskimos), the word soon took on
a figurative meaning which quickly became derogatory.
Then too, the idea of living in close contact with nature was
also confusing. Peasants live much closer to nature than city
dwellers yet both belong to the same civilization
Scientists came to realize that you couldn't classify the
people of the world according to how close or how far
removed they were from nature. In fact what distinguishes
mankind from the animals is that man, with his universal
use of language, his fabricated implements and tools, and
his submission to customs, creeds and institutions, belongs
to a higher order than any living thing in nature. The
world of man is a world of culture that is rigorously and
unequivocably opposed to nature whatever the level of civi¬
lization. Every human being talks, makes implements and
behaves according to set rules whether he lives in a skyscra¬
per or in a thatched hut in the middle of the forest. And
it is this that makes him a human being, not the particuliar
materials he builds his house out of.
Prof. Claude LEVI-STRAUSS knows the life of "primitive" civilizations at first¬
hand, haying lived among the Indians of Brazil's Amazon basin. During his long
career he has taught at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil, the Institute of
Ethnology in Paris and served as Assistant Director of the Musée de l'Homme in Paris.
At present, he is Research Director in the Section of Religious Sciences at the Ecole
Pratique des Hautes Etudes and Secretary-General of the International Social Science
Council in Paris.
Modern anthropology prefers therefore to use the word
primitive to designate the people who used to be called
savage. There are an enormous number of primitive socie¬
ties several thousand according to a recent estimate. But
trouble starts when an effort is made to describe the charac¬
teristics of such societies.
First of all, we can discount the factor of numbers, that is
the size of the society. Of course, size does have meaning
from the global point of view, for societies comprising several
million members appear only rarely in the history of man¬
kind and are found only in a few great civilizations. More¬
over, these civilizations appeared at different historical epochs
and in regions as far apart as the East and Far East,
Europe, Central and South America. Yet these are differ¬
ences so great that the factor of numbers or size can have
no absolute value. Some African kingdoms included several
hundred thousand persons and oceanic tribes had several
thousand members but in the same regions of the world we
find societies made up of a few hundred persons or even at
times of only a few dozen.
In addition, such peoples (for instance, the Eskimos and
some Australian tribes) are often organized in an extraordi¬
narily flexible way : a group is able to expand on festive
occasions or during certain periods of the year, so as to
include several thousand persons, while at other seasons it
splits up into small self-sufficient bands of a few families, or
even of single families. Obviously if a society consisting
of 40 members and another of 40,000 can both be called
primitive for the same reasons, the numerical factor alone
doesn't provide an explanation.
We may perhaps be on firmer ground if we consider an¬
other feature, undeniably present in every culture we call
primitive: each of them is, or was at least until very
recently, outside the range of industrial civilization. But

PEOPLES WITH A FORGOTTEN PAST
HUKA-HUKA is the name these Indians of the Xingu River in Mato Grosso, Brazil, give to their wrestling sport. (Photo S.P.I. Foerthmann.)
here again, the yardstick won't work.
Consider the case of Western Europe.
It has often been stated, and rightly,
that the way of life of Western Euro¬
peans scarcely changed from the be¬
ginning of historic times until the
invention of the steam-engine ; there
was no fundamental difference be¬
tween the life of a patrician in Impe¬
rial Rome and that of a well-to-
do Frenchman, Englishman or Dutch¬
man of the 18th century.
Moreover, neither Rome in the
second century B.C. nor Amsterdam
about 1750 is comparable with a Mela-
nesian village of today, or with Tim-
b u k t u in the middle of the 19th
century. Civilizations which preceded
the birth of our industrial civilization
shouldn't be confused with those which
existed outside it, and would probably
have remained outside for a very long
time if industrialization had not been
imposed upon them.
The fact is that when we speak of
primitive peoples, we have the factor
of history (or time) in mind. The very
word primitive implies the idea of a
beginning. Then, can we say that pri¬
mitive peoples are those which have
retained or preserved to the present
day a way of life that goes back to the
beginnings of human society ? This is
an attractive hypothesis and it is valid
within certain limits. But it is also
liable to cause serious confusion.
First, we know absolutely nothing
about mankind's actual beginnings.
The earliest traces we have discovered
arms and implements in chipped
stone some thousands of centuries old
are certainly not the very first pro¬
ducts of the human brain. They
already reveal complicated technical
skills which must have developed little
by little. And above all, these tech¬
niques are found to be the same over
vast stretches of the earth's surface,
implying therefore that they had time
to spread, to influence one another,
and to become homogeneous.
A simple matter
of relativity
IN the second place, the peoples
whom we call primitive are all or
nearly all familiar with at least
some of the arts and techniques that
appeared extremely late in the devel¬
opment of civilization. Although the
oldest chipped stone implements may
date from 400,000 or 500,000 years ago,
agriculture, stock-raising, weaving and
pottery appeared only about ten thous¬
and years ago, perhaps less. Thus the
"primitiveness" of peoples who culti¬
vate gardens, breed pigs, weave loin¬
cloths and make cooking-pots is quite
relative in the time span of the total
duration of human history.
But we can ask another question :
after all, don't at least some of
these peoples continue to follow a
way' of life much older than ours,
much more like that of man in the
earliest ages? At once, some examples
come to mind: the aborigines of Aus¬
tralia or of South America. They lead
a nomadic life in semi-arid regions,
live by hunting, and by picking and
gathering from the earth what food
they can. They are ignorant of weav¬
ing or pottery, and until quite re¬
cently used stone implements. The
natives of Australia had no knowledge
even of the bow and arrow, while those
of Tierra del Fuego had only a very ru¬
dimentary type.
Nevertheless, the progress of ethno¬
logical knowledge provides the expla¬
nation. It has shown that in these
cases and in all the others that could
^ ^Ä
1Í
WW * WW- «w * w
M *
Ceremonial dance, Brazil.

UNESCO COURIER N°" 8-9 1954
be mentioned, the apparently primi¬
tive state is not the result of any mira¬
culous preservation of an ancient mode
of life, it is the effect of regression.
The Australians can only have reached
their continent by boat, so they must
at some time have known the art of
navigation, and since forgotten it.
Men who know nothing
of writing
A CHANGE of environment to an
area which lacks good quality
clay often explains the disap¬
pearance of pottery, sometimes even
from human memory. Language
often proves that peoples whose
low level of civilization might sug¬
gest their immobilization and isola¬
tion in the same place from the most
distant times, have in fact been in
contact for thousands of years with all
kinds of much more highly developed
populations. Far from these alleged
primitives having no history, it is their
history, that explains the very special
conditions in which they have been
found.
For it would be absurd to think that,
because we know nothing or almost
nothing of their past, primitive peoples
have no history. Their remotest an¬
cestors appeared on the earth at the
same time as our own. For tens and
even hundreds of thousands of years
other societies preceded theirs and
throughout that time lived, endured
and therefore changed as ours did.
They knew wars, migrations, periods of
want and prosperity. They had great
men who left their stamp on technical
knowledge, on art, morals and religion.
All this past exists; only they know'
little about it and we know nothing.
The latent presence and pressure of
a past that has disappeared are enough
to show the falsity of the word primi¬
tive, and even of the idea of a primi¬
tive people. But at the same time we
must take note of a feature which all
societies we call primitive have in com¬
mon and which distinguishes them
from ours. It is the reason for ap¬
plying to them all the same term,
however inappropriate it may be.
All these societies from the power¬
ful empire of the Incas, which suc¬
ceeded in organizing several million
men into a politico-economic system of
exceptional efficiency, down to the
small nomadic bands of plant-gather¬
ers in Australia are comparable in
at least one respect: they knew or still
know nothing of writing.
They could preserve nothing of their
past save what human memory, was
able to retain. This remains true, even
for the small number who have, for
lack of writing, developed some system
of mnemonics (such -as the Peruvian
knotted strings or the graphic symbols
of Easter Island and of certain African
tribes). Although these societies are
not, strictly speaking, more "primitive"
than ours, their past is of a different
kind. It could not be a past preserved
in writing and thus available at any
moment to be used for present advan¬
tage.
It was a fluid past which could be
preserved only in small quantities, and
the remainder, as it came into exis¬
tence, was condemned to be forgotten
with no hope of recovery. To borrow
a simile from the language of naviga¬
tion, societies with some form of
writing have a means of logging their
course and therefore of keeping on the
same track for a long period.
On the other hand, societies without
some form of writing are reduced to
following an unsteady course which
may in the end (although the distance
covered is the same in both cases)
bring them back very near to their
starting point. Or at least it deprived
them of the means of systematically
drawing away from it, that is to say,
of making progress.
Danger of ambiguous
expressions
THEREFORE I cannot too strongly
warn that readers and even
scientists themselves should
beware of ambiguous terms like savage,
primitive, or archaic. By taking the
presence or absence of some form of
writing as the sole criterion in our
study of societies, we shall, in the first
place, be invoking an objective quality
which implies no philosophic or moral
postulate. And at the same time we
shall be relying on the only feature
capable of explaining the real diffe¬
rence that distinguishes certain socie¬
ties from our own.
The idea of a primitive society is a
delusion. ' On the other hand the idea
of a society with no form of writing
makes us aware of an essential side of
mankind's development; it explains
the history, and enables us to foresee
and perhaps influence the future of
these peoples.
(Photos copyright E. Aubert de la Rue, Gusindé.
S.P.I.)
Kakamoeka girls in French Equatorial Africa.
A Fuegian family of Tierra del Fuego.
% 6
lé--
Colorado Indians in Ecuador. Abron women from the Ivory Coast. Masai women in Kenya.
