Unesco Courier N1 II. 1954
SPIRIT MEN called Eradbatti and Kumail-
Kumait are depicted in bark paintings by
artists of Oenpelli, Western Arnhem Land
(Unesco Album).



A
U
S
T
R
I
s
A
An art on bark and stone
The aborigines of
Australia still
practise an art
comparable with
that of our stone age
ancestors of Europe. This
art permeates all aspects
of the aborigines' life. It is
the vital medium through
which they keep alive
their philosophies, laws and the stories of their creation.
Throughout southern and central Australia, this art is
remarkably simple and abstract, consisting almost entirely
of spirals, concentric circles, wavy and straight lines. In
other parts of the continent, however, the art tends to
become representational. In the Ilawkesbury Biver basin
of New South Wales, the natives engraved, on the flat
rocks, outlines of huge men, animals, birds and fish, some
of them reaching a length of sixty feet. Because the
meanings and the underlying myths of these engravings
were not collected whilst the aborigines who produced
them were still living, that knowledge is lost forever.
In North-eastern Australia, on the opposite side of the
continent, the art of the caves is dominated by large
anthropomorphic figures with halolike ornaments known
as the Wandjina. These paintings are associated with the
ceremonies of rainmaking, spirit children and the increase
of food.
In Arnhem Land, Northern Australia, aboriginal art has
developed in some of .its most interesting forms. The
volume published in the "Unesco World Art Series" deals
with the rich and varied art forms of the cave and bark
paintings found within the boundaries of that remote land.
(Continued on next page)
15

A neat and animated
short-hand script
ADUNGEN, an evil spirit, with an aborigine in hot
pursuit. Spear thrown by aborigine has missed its
mark. Painting (above) was found on cave wall at
Unbalanya Hill, Western Arnhem Land. Another
rock painting from same region, four running women
(right) is remarkable for its grace. All this art is a
neat and animated short-hand script depicting action.
(Unesco Album plates).
DANCE OF JAMBUWAL, which tells the story of the man who creates
storms, is performed by aborigines from Yirrkalla (Arnhem Land). The dance
takes place during the circumcision ceremony of the tribe's young boys
(Australian Official Photo).
(Continued from previous page)
The most decorative and colour¬
ful cave paintings have been found
along the western edge' of the Arnhem
Land plateau. Becent investigations
have shown that they are of
two different types: the static, poly--
chrome, X-ray paintings some of
them produced within the memory of
living men of animals, birds, fish
and reptiles, but seldom of human
beings, in Which the internal as well
as the external details are portrayed;
and an older, more vital, monochro¬
matic art, consisting almost entirely
of single-line drawings of human
beings in action men running, fight-
AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINAL CULTURE, a
travelling exhibition prepared by the Australian
Government and offered for circulation through
Unesco, has given the people of many North
American cities an insight into a strange and
fascinating world, since it began a two-year tour
Of the United Stares and Canada in June, 7953.
It tells the story of the aborigines attractively
and instructively. After its North American tour
it will be widely shown in Europe.
16

Unesco Courier N' 11. 1954
5&
V-
**v
mg or throwing spears and women
carrying their food vessels. These
single-line monochromatic drawings
have a sense of movement entirely
lacking in the polychrome paintings.
The aborigines believe that these
drawings most of them less than
half a metre high are the work, not
.of their own kind, but of a tall
thinbodied fairy people known as the
Mimis, who live in the rocky plateau.
No one has seen a Mimi, though
they collect food and hunt in the same
way as the* aborigines, for the Mimis
are a shy people, particularly keen of
hearing, who, at the faintest sound of
an intruder, run to a cleft.in the rocks
of the plateau and blow upon it.
The cleft opens, admits the Mimis to
their underground home, then closes
behind them to keep out all intruders.
The belief in the Mimi artists is, it
vvould seem, a rationalisation on the
part of the aborigines to explain
an ancient art form which they
themselves do not practise.
Although most of the cave paintings
belong to an age not yet defined, few
of the bark paintings of Arnhem
Land could be more than a year old
when collected. The bark sheets,
the walls of the wet-weather shelters,
on which the men paint their designs
during the enforced idleness of the
monsoon season are generally des¬
troyed by bush-fires, the elements
and insects in less than a year.
The bark paintings illustrated in
the Unesco volume are from five
localities in Arnhem Land, Oenpelli
in the west, Goulburn Island and
Milingimbi on the north coast, Yirr-
kalla at the north-eastern corner and
Groóte Eyelandt in the Gulf of Car¬
pentaria.
Arnhem Land aborigines are
divided into different clans, each
clan having its own particular totem,
with its attendant songs, ceremonies
and designs. These clans, and their
territories, were determined by the
mythical creators who lived during
the early days of the world, and the
myths which describe the exploits
and adventures of those creators and
which are, in essence, the philosophy
of the aborigines, explain how they
made the firmament, the world
beneath, and the creatures upon il.
Two of these creators, the Djunkgan
Sisters, occupy an important pla<¿e in
the beliefs- of the aborigines of
Northern Arnhem Land. Corning
from some place near Hie sunrise, the
mythical women landed on the shores
of the Gulf of Carpentaria and,
travelling westward, named all the
clan territories, the animals and tin-
plants in their path. Certain bark
paintings, high totems of the Narra
ceremonies of the Djunkgao Sisters,
illustrate incidents of that journey.
On a plain south of Milingimbi, the
sisters wishing to create wells of fresh
water, pushed their digging sticks into
the ground at p. number of places.
As the water gushed out, they named
each well, decreed the design and
chanted the song that would, forever
altcrwards, be associated with them.
(Continued on next page)
17

AUSTRALIA
(CONTINUED)
KANGAROO HUNTERSmen and womenand their quarry are
depicted in painting, above, from Unbalanya Hill. Below, mangrove
crab and a spiny ant-eater (Unesco Album plates).
The discs on the bark painting
indicate those wells, the intersecting
lines, the path made by the Djunkgao
Sisters as they walked from one place
to another, and the cross-hatched
areas, the open plain.
The basic art of Arnhem Land, of
which the bark paintings of Groóte
Eylandt are typical, consists of single
or grouped figures on a plain ground.
This arrangement is used over most
of the area, extending southward
until it reaches the simple abstract
designs of Central Australia, and
northward, until it is absorbed by the
more complex symbolism of the north
coast. Toward the west, however,
the paintings, though still retaining
their basic characteristics, are mo¬
dified by the curious X-ray art.
Within a limited area on the north
and north-eastern coast of Arnhem
Land, the range of designs becomes
wider and the figures more complex,
and the ground, instead of being
plain, is filled in with cross-hatchings
of various colours.
The material and tools used by the
artists of Arnhem Land could hardly
be simpler. The painting surfaces
are either the inside of a sheet of bark
stripped from a eucalyptus tree, or
the walls and ceilings of caves. The
colours are black, red, yellow and
white pigments ground to a thin paste
on a flat stone. The fixative is the
18
sap of a bruised orchid bulb, rubbed
directly on the painting surface. The
brushes, too, are no more than strips
of chewed bark for the broader lines,
thin sticks for making dots and a
single feather or strands of palm leaf
for cross-hatching and finer details.
When watching the artists at work
one is impressed with their sureness;
each man appears to have a complete
mental image -of his picture before he
begins ; he seldom alters his design
or even corrects a brush stroke.
Many of the bark and cave
paintings have- no ceremonial or
religious function, but are produced
tor pure pleasure of creative effort, a
pleasure which stimulates the true
artist in all cultures.
There are paintings, both on bark
and in caves, which have more im¬
portant functions. In the initiation
rituals, secret designs, painted on
sheets of bark-, instruct the novitiates
in the esoteric myths of the tribe.
Although the culture of the- abori¬
ginal artist is vastly different from
that of our own, the subject of his
painting beyond the realms of our
knowledge, his symbolism unlike
anything we possess and his ma¬
terials and colours extremely limited,
he uses the same principles of line,
colour, balance, and spacing of design
elements present in all great art.
