Going to school
Willi the Negro
As long as he was ignorant and illiterate, the American Negro
could not hope to qualify for the better jobs. Today, more
Negroes are going to schools and colleges than ever before.
Above, a Negro studentone of the 130,000 enrolled in U.S.
universities and collegesreceives his diploma. Right, students
on Howard University campus in Washington, D.C., one of the
great Negro universities in America, joke with a class president
candidate. Below, white and Negro youngsters in New York
City enjoy school puppet show. (Photos USIS and Black Star).
|EW people who were
¡not right in the midst
of the scenes can form an exact idea
of the intense desire which the people
of my race showed for an education.
It was a whole race trying to go to
school. Few were too young and none ,
were too old to make the attempt to
learn."
Booker T. Washington, the great
American Negro teacher who was born
a slave, wrote these words half a
century ago in his powerful auto¬
biography, "Up From Slavery", in
describing the fever for education
which gripped the newly-freed Negro
slaves in the United States.
The Negro has travelled a long road
since he was brought to the American
continent in chains, and education is
perhaps the most significant index of
the American Negro's over-all progress.
As long as he was. ignorant and
illiterate, the Negro could ,not hope to
qualify for the better jobs; without the
improved income from better jobs he
was unable to afford better housing;
and with poor housing, disease, crime'
and discouragement often go together.
Education enabled the Negro to speak
up for his rights, to increase his own
26

self-respect, bring prestige to his
community, and develop relationships
of real friendship with his white
neighbours. Most of all, it permitted
him to achieve a true cultural status
and a sense of social responsibility.
Professor Harry J. Walker of Howard
University, Washington, in a study
under preparation for Unesco on
changes in the status of the Negro in
American society, writes: "Although
the provision of education for Negroes
has been inadequate, it has been a
-means of bringing Negroes into wider
contact with the larger world, and thus
has contributed to their desire for
equality in American society."
Literacy in 1865 : 5 %
At the end of the Civil War, Negro
literacy stood barely at five per
cent. In 1900, thirty-five years
later, it had risen to 55.5 per cent; in
1950,. over 90 per cent out of a total
Negro population of 14,894,000 was liter--
ate. Today, illiteracy has been all but
ended among Negroes between the ages
of 14 and 24.
Formal education for Negroes did
. not really begin until the Civil War.
And though facilities existed in a few
Northern cities before the War, there
were laws prohibiting the instruction
of Negroes in Southern states where
slavery existed.
After the War between the States,
thousands of missionary schools were
opened for ex-slaves in the South and
'state legislatures began public educa¬
tion systems for both white and Negro
children. For a short period, in certain
towns in Louisiana and South Carolina,
schools were available for white and
Negro children to attend class together.
But since opposition to Negro educa¬
tion had existed all during the' slave
period and because of the acute racial
tension at this time (about 1876),
whites generally boycotted these
schools. This, added to some instances
of violence, resulted in the establish¬
ment of separate schools.
For the Southern Negro, then,
segregation came with the first schools
he knew, and this was hardly surpris¬
ing for the time, since he lived in a
wholly segregated society. A similar, if
less dramatic social process was going
on in other parts of the nation in the
post-Civil War years. Negroes concen¬
trated in sizeable numbers in the non-
South ran into social and economic
pressures which forced them to live
apart from the white community.
If the South did little to provide an
education for Negroes in these post¬
war years, it did little more for the
whites. The industrial revolution which
was transforming the North and the
newly-opened West, completely by¬
passed the South which remained
agricultural and extremely poverty-
stricken. By 1900, only one Southern
state Kentucky had made school
attendance compulsory and less than
40 per cent of all children of school age
attended school regularly. Over 11- per
cent of the whites were illiterate.
At the beginning of the 20th century,
public education generally in the South
received a strong impetus as the region
began to move toward industrialization.
Negro education also .profited, though
by any measurement it still lagged far
behind white education. In 1933 for
example, over 200 state counties in the
South still had no Negro high schools
at all. The number of Southern Negro
high schools, it is true, had risen from
67 in 1916 to 1,860 in 1928 with a corres¬
pondingly sharp increase in enrollment.
Except in rare instances, the Negro
rural schools which then served two-
thirds of the South's Negro children
had never reached even the minimum
standards, and half were primitive one-
room frame structures.
Demand for equality grows
Many Negro leaders of the 1920s
and 30s condemned the post-Re¬
construction spokesmen of their
race as too conservative. Yet signifi¬
cant progress was made in the period
which was symbolized by the states¬
manship of Booker T. Washington.
Washington argued for the advance¬
ment of Negro education but avoided
any attack on segregation in the
schools. Shortly before his death in
1915, however, he raised his voice
against segregation laws as unjust,
unnecessary and harmful to both races
in the long run. His earlier moderate
philosophy prevailed in the South until
the 1930s.
The thirties saw a great change take
place in the popular conception of the
role of government in the life of the
community. It saw the growing in¬
sistence on the part of Negroes for
equality of treatment and the develop¬
ment of public opinion favourable to
the extension of minority rights.
In the South, liberal white leaders of
standing began to question the old
notion that Negroes were entitled to no
more than a limited education. They
did not challenge the dual school
system itself«; instead they advocated
that the word "equal" in the Plessy
doctrine of "separate but equal" for¬
mulated by the Supreme Court in 1896,
be made a greater reality as regards
Negro education. A school of "gra¬
dualism" arose for the equalization of
Negro schools with those of whites so
that the Negro could ultimately achieve
the full status of citizenship.
This liberal point of view gained
considerable ground and led in effect
to a reduction of a great number of
.inequalities in the schooling available
to Negroes as compared to whites.
Negro teachers' salaries were raised,
funds for school buildings and equip¬
ment were increased, and school terms
were lengthened. Progress varied bet¬
ween states and within each state, but
the general trend was upward.
It was in the new climate of opinion
27

Victory in 1935
First Negro
student enters
a university
in the South
by court order
of the thirties that Negroes turned to
the courts in their determination to
achieve equal status.
In the latter part of the 1930's dis¬
crimination in teachers' salaries came
under attack through various court
suits. Favourable court decisions in
some of these cases, together with the
insistence of the National Educational
Association, were effective in bringing
about a number of improvements.
From 1865 until about 1935, a total
of 44 cases involving the constitu¬
tionality of the separate school came
before the higher state and federal
courts. All decisions held the bi-racial
school system constitutional. Negro
leaders then focused their legal atten¬
tion on higher education for Negroes.
After the first World War there had
been a great increase in the enrollment
of Negro students in elementary and
secondary schools in the South. As a
result increasing numbers of students
sought training in institutions of
higher learning, including graduate and
professional schools.
Since it was financially difficult for
each Southern state to maintain
separate institutions of this kind for
Negroes, several states devised pro¬
grammes for out-of-state scholarships
usually to Negro institutions or
Northern colleges and universities.
Eventually all Southern states except
Mississippi provided such scholarships.
In 1935, a young student named
Donald Murray entered the law school
of the University of Maryland at Balti¬
more and. became the first Negro to
cross the colour line of a Southern
campus under court order.
Murray had applied for admission to
the law school and had- been refused in
accordance with Maryland's segregation
laws. He took his case to the state
court and argued that Maryland had
no law school for Negroes within its
boundaries. Instead it offered less
than 100 out-of-state scholarships for
some 280 Negro applicants, in order to
meet the Plessy doctrine. The state
court ordered Murray to be admitted
to the Maryland law school, holding
that the scholarship arrangement.was
discriminatory.
Following the Murray case, the U.S.
Supreme Court three years later, in
1938, invalidated the legal basis for
providing out-of-state scholarships for
specialized training. The Supreme
Court later ruled on a number of other
specific cases and largely invalidated
28

segregation in graduate and profession¬
al schools.
By 1953, all but five state universities
in the South had opened their doors
to Negroes. In two states they have
been admitted to the undergraduate
college which had formerly been res¬
tricted to whites. Also, some 45 priv¬
ately-supported white institutions have
voluntarily departed from the practice
of excluding Negroes. It was estimat¬
ed in 1953 that between 1,000 and 2,000
Negro students were enrolled in Sou¬
thern institutions which a few years
ago maintained a policy of exclusion.
If summer school attendance is
counted, the total figure is probably
three to four times as large.
Facing the inevitable
The University of North Carolina
Press has just published the
result of a long investigation
carried out by 45 scholars under the
auspices of the Ford Fund for the
Advancement of Education. In the
study called The Negro and the
Schools, the author, Harry S. Ashmore
of the Southern state of Arkansas, re¬
views the long legal history of the issue.
These are some of his comments on
racial integration at the university
level:
"In most cases there was a marked
contrast in official attitudes before and
after the fact of Negro admission. All
the Southern universities firmly
excluded Negro students until the
Supreme Court had systematically
undercut the legal basis of their
admission policies.
"It is impossible to determine how
often this represented the attitude of
university administrators, and how
often it only reflected passive accept¬
ance of existing statutes and prevailing
public opinion.
"In any event, it must be noted that
no university administration in the
South, public or private, actively sought
to abandon segregation until it was
faced with what its board of trustees
could agree was the inevitable."
Outside of the South, school segrega¬
tion has been the result more of resi¬
dential patterns than of law. It is
almost inevitable that segregation in
housing should produce segregation in
education. Children usually attend
the school nearest their home and
when they live in an all-Negro neigh¬
bourhood they will in all likelihood
attend an all-Negro school.
' About 94 per cent of the Negro
population outside the South resides in
urban areas. Since the Negro popu¬
lation in the larger cities is usually
segregated into residential areas it _
makes possible the maintenance of
some separate schools. The exceptions
are the children of Negroes living in
rural areas and small towns and those
who live in sections of the great cities
inhabited by both whites and Negroes.
Certain practices such as gerrymander¬
ing school districts and encouraging
"voluntary" transfers to schools in
Negro areas have helped to tighten
segregation in some cities.
Recently, however, a strong trend
away from segregation has been
apparent. In certain border states
school segregation laws have been
repealed or liberalized ; where segreg¬
ation was not sanctioned by law legal
and administrative action has been
taken to apply desegregation.
As shown on the map published on
page two of this issue, only four states
outside the South permit segregation
by option of local school authorities.
Eleven have no laws on segregation
and in 16 the law specifically prohibits
it. Many communities which have had
bi-racial schools for many years have
moved away from segregation volun¬
tarily.
This voluntary trend towards de¬
segregation has had a variety of
reasons. Foremost among these reasons
has been the pre-occupation of the
American people with the question of
civil rights for minority groups since
the last World War. It has been
spurred by the uninterrupted pressure
from Negroes, from church and civic
groups, from educators, school adminis¬
trators, and social scientists. The press
has been a positive force, particularly
outside the South where even the most
conservative newspapers are now sym-
do is shoulder the burden the courts
have placed upon them and work
. soberly to redirect their educational
effort along lines that will be acceptable
to all..."
Two states, Delaware and Kansas,
have already started to abolish segre¬
gation in elementary and secondary
schools. On June 22, the Board of
Education of St. Louis, Missouri,
announced that the integration of
white and Negro students in the city's
public high schools would begin next
February 1, and that racial segregation
in the elementary schools would be
eliminated by September 1955.
' South has reached a point in
its development," the author of The
Negro and the Schools has written,
"where educators and laymen alike
are going to have to take a close, new
look at their educational problems.
Wise leadership at the upper levels
can help, and emotional excursions by
TWO RACES, FOUR FRIENDS "Mixing white and Negro in the same university will only lead
to incidents". People who advanced this idea have been proved wrong by time and experience. Except
in a few isolated cases the best of relations exist between white and Negro students in universities
which have put an end to segregation. (Photos USIS and the Council Against Intolerance in America.)
pathetic to the Negro's demand for .
complete equality.
The United States Supreme Court
has now handed down its decision
placing a ban on segregation in schools
anywhere in the land. The verdict is
a- momentous one but fraught with
difficulties and complexities. It affects
the 8,200,000 white children and the
2,530,000 Negro children attending
school in the District of Columbia and
the states where segregation is
sanctioned by law. But there is more
involved than putting Negro and white
children into the same schools. ' The
absorption of Negro teachers, super¬
visors "and administrators into the
desegregated system, the re-arrange¬
ment of buildings, finances and tax¬
ation all will require a decade to
complete.
As one Southern newspaper, the New
Orleans Times-Picayune, put it, "...In
the states where most U.S. Negroes
live, the public school systems face the
prospect of considerable "turmoil for
some time to come... all the South can
the leaders of either race can do great
harm. But in the end the new
patterns will have to be hammered out
across the table in thousands of
scattered school districts, and they will
have to be shaped to accommodate not
only the needs but the prejudices of
whites and Negroes to whom these
problems are not abstractions but the
essence of their daily lives.
"In the long sweep of history the
public school cases before the Supreme
Court may be written down as the point
at which the South cleared the last
turning in the road to reunion the
point at which finally, and under
protest, the region gave up its peculiar
institutions and accepted the prevailing
standards of the nation at large as the
legal basis for its relationship with its
minority race. This would not in itself
bring about any great shift in Southern
attitudes, nor even any far-reaching
immediate changes in the pattern of
bi-racial education. But it would re¬
define the goal the Southern people,
white and Negro, are committed to
seek in the way of democracy."
29
