VILLAGE MOUN¬
TAINEERS on Ma-
laita Island perform
one of their tradi¬
tional dances (above).
When . Mr. Gaudin,
newly appointed act¬
ing Director of Edu¬
cation in the Solo¬
mons, first visited
the island in 1949
he found the people
distrustful of "edu¬
cation". Village feast
(below) is being held
on Vella Lavella Is¬
land, some 300 miles
to the north west of
Malaita. (Photos COI).




ASSIGNMENT:
SOLOMON
I SLA N D S
by
H. W. Gaudin
UNESCO COURIER - N« 2 - 1954
When Mr. H.W. Gaudin, a New Zea¬
land teacher, set off in a small motor
vessel in 1949 to take on the job of Acting
Director' of Education in the British
Solomon Islands, he knew very little
about either the territory or its peoples.
But he quickly became familiar with the
islanders and their way of life. He found,
in fact, that educational problems were
indivisible from many other island pro¬
blems linguistic, cultural, economic and
social.
Mr. Gaudin's experiences, published
below, are taken from a recent issue of
the "Newsletter for New Zealand Teach¬
ers Serving in' the Pacific".
ONE of my first assignments after
arriving in Honiara, the capital
of the Solomons group, was to tour
the neighbouring Island of Malaita,
where it was hoped to show the people
that the ' Government really. was trying
to do something for them by building a
school there. When I arrived in the
Protectorate some of the school buildings
were already complete, but there were
no teachers and no pupils. Did I say no
pupils? Well, that is not quite correct.
By superhuman efforts five boys had
been brought together. It had proved
impossible to get a single other candidate
from any part of the Solomons.
But I had a job to do, so a doctor and
I boarded a small vessel, the "Nelly",
he to do something for the yaws and
malaria, and I to see what could be done
to help with the education of the
Malaitans. The doctor did his best to
look at the diseased ones and I did mine
to look at the uneducated ones. To tell
the truth it was not too easy to have a
look at either, for the people were so
opposed to government that' they
thought they would be hurting it by
refusing to have their diseases healed
by a government doctor. They preferred
to die in the bush rather than to come
down and see the doctor. As for this
new "education" idea, they distrusted
that too.
At the beginning of our tour, on the
first sign of our ship coming, a series of
warning fires would spring out from"
each spur on the mountains, running
further and further into the distance,
telling every good tribesman that a
- government ship was on the way. As
that usually meant that the District
Commissioner with all his policemen was
on the way to arrest tax-evaders, the
men merely took to the bush till all was
clear, and only the "marys" (womenfolk)
remained to greet us.
However, I did manage to get a few
, of the chiefs from the bush when they
found that there were no police aboard,
and I got promises of boys for my school.
Not that I put much faith in promises
there had been a lot of promises given
one way and another in the past. Still,
at the end of a three weeks' tour, things
had begun to look up a little, and there
seemed a chance that the new govern¬
ment school would have at least a
nucleus of pupils. And so it turned out.
King George VI School, as it was
eventually named, was a residential
school for about 130 pupils, and was
designed to produce boys for training
colleges. The boys were to come from '
the better mission schools and to have
a knowledge of elementary spoken
English and the other normal subjects
of a school of this type.
A curriculum was provided in which
the following were the main studies:
English, Arithmetic, Writing, Reading,
Social Studies, Nature Study, Music and
29

Assignment: Solomon Islands (Cont'd)
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES in the Solomons
were almost entirely those of missionary schools
until a government experimental school was
Physical Education. English was a
necessity. In the Solomons, according
to one anthropologist, there are 50
languages as different as English and
French. In the school, out of the first
20 boys there were 12 different lan¬
guages. There was no adequate printed
material in any of these languages, so
we were forced to teach in English.
Once the King George VI School was
established I had to see what could be
done about other educational matters,
and" problems hit me in the eye from
everywhere. What languages are you to
teach the junior and the senior schools?
What about the ilUterate adults? Will
the adults really be enthusiastic about
their children going to school while they
themselves remain ignorant? Won't
they be jealous even though they profess
the reverse? And what will the men
think of any idea to educate the women
when it will certainly mean that they
will have to take over duties formerly
performed by women?
There also had to be an - Education
Regulation promulgated in the Solomons
so designed that it would satisfy all
authorities concerned. "Which of ' the
problems was most urgent? , A lingua
franca? Women's education? Adult
education? Economic education? The
Education Regulation?
As soon as the Education Regulation
had been hammered into shape not
without many struggles and concessions
on all sides I" decided that the best
policy for the infant Education Depart¬
ment was to establish a nucleus of better
government schools and to prosecute a
programme of Mass Education. Mass
Education is a technique whereby in the
cheapest and quickest way backward
areas are given a. minimum standard of
education in various aspects of social
life literacy, health and economics are
the three facets of the one problem.
The facet I was interested in, of course,
was literacy. Here is how I went about
my programme.
I decided that the principles of Mass
Education as being now carried out in
all backward colonial areas would -be
applicable to the Solomons with certain
modifications. To shorten the story I
will take you with me on tour to one of
the Mass Education Pilot Schemes which
I helped to inaugurate in the Solomons.
My aim was to bring literacy in the
native tongue to the adults of the area.
The Agricultural Department had
schemes of rice-growing and so on to
Improve the material well-being of the
MELANESIAN STUDENTS impressed Mr. Gau¬
din, who began the first mass education campaigns
in the Solomons, by the speed with which they
learned to read and write their language. Mission
school (left) is established on Gela Island. Contact
with Solomons by white men was first made by
explorer Alvari de Mendana who sighted landfall
at Santa Ysabel Island in I 568. He was convinced
he had discovered an El Dorado, the "Isles of King
30

opened on Malaita Island in 1950. The boy
completing a drawing of an island canoe is a third
year student ata missionary school on Ugi Island.
people so that they could afford the
luxuries of education that they desired;
the Medical Department had plans for
maternity annexes and elementary
hygiene ' to lower the horrid infant
mortality rate of 50 per cent. But I
" won't deal with anything but the facet
I was mainly concerned with.
We loaded all our paraphernalia onto
our ship. We took food for four or five
weeks, our bedding, and my precious
rifle that I used for getting fresh meat
pigeons. Then, late at night so as to
have a calm crossing, we set out from
the war-torn shores of Guadalcanal for
Malaita. Along the coast we steamed to
the village of Hauhui situated in one of
the wildest 'parts of a wild island, among
the depressed and dwindling Areare
tribes. My wife came too, and so did
Peter, aged 11, on the theory that a little
Solomon". After this, no Europeans visited the
islands for two centuries: Village "green" (right)
is at- Kia, on - Ysabel Island. (Photos COI).
real education in an Areare village
wouldn't hurt him and it didn't either.
At Hauhui we unloaded the ship, for
the coast is open and the ship cannot
stay off-shore to serve as a base; then
it steamed off; we were alone on the
wildest island of the Solomons with no
European nearer than several hours
steaming. We couldn't speak a word of
the language. We had come to give the
natives that mysterious "'something"
-that the District Commissioner had been
filling their ears with for months now
Mass Education.
They all know the word. They had
been told that . Mass Education was
something that would help them, but
that they would first have to help
themselves and pay either with money
or work towards it, although, goodness
knows they have little enough to give in
the way of money. But we did expect
labour from them labour for the new
school, labour for the maternity annexe,
labour for the new rice field rice, that
wonderful food they like so much, but
never grow although the climate is quite
suitable.
We had to teach these people parti¬
cularly the older ones to read and write
using the "'each one teach one" techni¬
que used by some of the more successful
organizers of Mass Education projects in
other Colonial areas. The idea is that
as soon as a man knows, say, the letter
"a", he is to teach this to another man
who is more ignorant than he is, and
so on by a cumulative process.
That night by the light of the ubi¬
quitous kerosene pressure lamp, seen
everywhere in the less populous parts of
the colonial empire, in the palpable
blackness of the equatorial night the
villagers, silently on bare feet, padded
into the "church" that was to be the
centre of our activities.
" Marys " join the class
At the inaugural campaign the vil¬
lagers were avid to learn and were
prepared to sit by the hour, working
fiercely all the time. All reading was to
be done in the native tongue of the
village, a dialect of the Areare language
spoken, as is normal in the Solomons, by
only a thousand or two people. There
were only about 19 sounds that I could
distinguish, and probably only 18, as the
"1" and the "r" which they professed to
be able to distinguish were interchange¬
able. Probably a skilled linguist would
have distinguished more, but whether
that would have made the learning easier
I doubt.
Just as in English, the', people soon
learned to distinguish the look of the
work and did not bother about the indi¬
vidual letters. But here is a fact that
will amaze those who have never
attempted to make adults start from
scratch and learn to read in less than
a week the more able members of the
group were able to read simple words in
their own language, which is completely
phonetic, and these were using the "each
one teach one" technique to instruct
their neighbours.
. The women were there too. This was
a minor triumph, as women normally
took little part in .the social life of the
village, and it had .taken a long time to
persuade the men that -it was a good
thing for the "'marys" to be educated.
When the women did get into class they
were jso fiercely proud of the honour that
they were considerably better students
than the men, in spite of the fact that
they usually had babies hanging round
their necks in a sort of shawl. The only
time they stopped working was in the
UNESCO COURIER - N° 2 - 1954
brief moment it took to soothe the baby
when he cried: to soothe it in the
age-old way. No false modesty here.
In a very short time there were enough
people in the village who could read
words in their own language slowly and
it. was now time to produce something
interesting for them to ' read. This
problem was not nearly so formidable as
might be imagined. To be sure I did not
know the language nor did any avail¬
able white person ; nor for that matter,
was there much use in trying to learn
the multitudinous languages of the
Solomons, and there was no printed
matter available in Areare. But some of
the men spoke pidgin and so did I.
Dog chases cat
To get a story I merely drew a picture
of, say, a dog chasing a cat up a
tree, and showing it to one of the
more intelligent men, (the women didn't
usually speak pidgin) asked him to relate
the story in language "blong him". This'
I wrote down phonetically, and in no
time had plenty of simple "'stories".When
these stories were tested on another
member of the tribe, who could repeat
to me in pidgin what I had told him in
his own tongue. I had checked that the
sentence was correct. While all this was
goins on mv wife was busy making
suitable drawings and reproducing the
whole thing on a "'Fordigraph" dupli¬
cator.
On the momentous night when these
simple stories were first issued to the
class there was a hushed gaso as the
implications struck home, and then a
steadily erowing roar of voices as
evervone in the room started to read
aloud, or to help his more ignorant
neighbour.
For the first time in their history these
people had read a storv in their native
language. The psychological effect
seemed enormous, as these adults, who
an their lives had admired the occasional
villager who had been to a mission
school and learnt to read a -few words in
English from the Bible, realized that it
was possible, in fact fairly simule, for
them to learn 'to read in their own
tongue. They were visibly excited.
In a month the majority of the adults
could read slowly in Areare, and,
although writing progressed more
slowly, all could draw the nineteen
letters of the alphabet, and in that way
slowly make words. The more able
students even wrote letters and stories.
Melting stone-age
In my considered view the only hope
of making this under-privileged peo¬
ple melt into the European culture
which 'is fast enveloping its stone-age
one, is to get a basic minimum of literacy
instilled into the people, particularly the
adults. It is little use expecting the
young generation to accomplish much in
a village ruled entirely by the older and
completely ilUterate generation.
First of all let the people be able to
read and write, at least in their own
tongue. This is not a long business, at
any rate the reading part of it, and then
it will be easier to bring to the villages
propaganda so that the old agricultural
methods will be improved; so that that
modern marvel, the hoe, will take the
place of the digging stick ; so that
schools and hospitals will be built by
community effort, and money subscribed
for their operation ; in short, so that the
peoples of under-developed areas may
make haste to join the new culture.
31
