The worlds hungry readers
IT would be difficult to think of life
today without paper. Everywhere
we turn we find it. In fact, the
only other commodity for which hu¬
manity has a greater hunger is food.
Because of man's insatiable desire
for education and information, paper
has attained a priceless value, for what
the wire conductor is to electricity, so
paper is to knowledge the medium
without which its wide conveyance and
use would be impossible.
We might even say that our civiliza¬
tion is based on paper. Without paper
for textbooks and exercise books there
would be no proper education; without
cheap and plentiful paper for printing
newspapers it would be difficult to
circulate information, and the people
in different countries would be igno¬
rant of one another's ideas and activi¬
ties; without letter paper there would
be no normal cultural, administrative
and business correspondence.
The greatest demand is for news¬
print the endless miles of paper
which feed the world's newspaper
printing presses. In a single year the
newspapers of the United States and
Canada, for example, use enough
newsprint paper to make a band fifty
miles wide around the earth. In the
form of the standard roll this paper
would have a length of. 13,000,000 miles.
In 1951, the consumption of news-
Philippe SOUPAULT. a French writer and journalist,
was formerly editor of "Excelsior" a daily paper,
and a founder (with André Breton) of the surrealist
movement. In 1933 he gained the Strassburger Prize,
awarded for the best article on United States affairs
published in the world press. Until 1940 he was
director of Radio Tunis and in 1945 he headed the
foreign broadcasts service of the Radiodiffusion Fran¬
çaise Since 1951 he has been a member of Unesco's
Division for Improvements of Means and Techniques
of Communication (Press Section). He carried out a
Unesco study into Press. Film and Radio resources in
thirty-four countries and territories.
by Philippe Soupault
print throughout the world was
9,460,000 tons (*) according to a study
published by Unesco (Nos. 10 and 11 of
the Reports and Papers on Mass, Com¬
munication). During the same year
the world used roughly 9,000,000 tons
of printing paper (other than news¬
print) and writing paper.
But the world's hunger for paper
grows larger each year. According to
a study made for Unesco by the Intel¬
ligence Unit of "The Economist", of
London, (No 12 of the Reports and
Papers on Mass Communication), the
world demand for newsprint will pro¬
bably continue to increase so rapidly
that by 1965 it will be over 15,500,000
tons. The demand for printing paper
(other than newsprint) and writing
paper -will be in the region of
12,500,000 tons.
The basis for these forecasts was an
analysis of population and illiteracy
trends, the availability of educational
facilities, the trend of domestic paper
production, and political and economic
developments. An evaluation of each
of these factors was made for every
country and territory.
The single most important fact
which these figures bring home is that
unless a large-scale effort is made to
increase paper production the world
will become more and more starved of
this vital commodity. That is why
Unesco, primarily concerned with the
serious effects this would have on
educational, scientific and cultural
development and on the free flow of
information, has been working with
the United Nations and the other UN
Specialized Agencies to put the facts
before the public. Only a world-wide
effort in the planning and production
of printing and writing paper will
meet the increased demand.
What are some of the facts brought
out by the Unesco studies? One of the
most surprising is the disproportion in
paper consumption between different
countries. For example, in 1951, while
a citizen of the United States "con¬
sumed", on the average, 35.1 kilogram¬
mes of newsprint a year and 28.6 kilo¬
grammes of printing and writing
paper, an inhabitant of Indonesia was
obliged to make do with the meagre
ration of 100 grammes of newsprint
and 400 grammes of writing and
printing paper.
This is no "freak" example for a
more general view confirms this lack
of balance, and shows the extent to
which the per capita consumption of
newsprint varies from one part of the
world to another. In 1951, for ins¬
tance, that of the United States was
over 350 times higher than those of
Eritrea, Haiti, Indonesia and Pakistan.
There have also been some striking
fluctuations in newsprint consumption.
The United Kingdom which, between
1935 and 1939 was the world's most
hungry newsprint consumer had, by
1951, dropped to eighth place, coming
below Hawaii and the Bermudas. In
the four years prior to the Second
World War, "Mr. Britain" got through
26.4 kilogrammes a year, or 1.3 kilo¬
grammes more than "Mr. U.S.A." at
that time, but by 1951, he had been
reduced to 11.9 kilogrammes per year.
However, as this fall in British con¬
sumption was due to the severe post¬
war restrictions imposed by the
British Government on the size of
newspapers, the relative "loss of
(*) All the quantities (jiveri are quoted in
metric tuns and in round figures.
PER CAPITA NEWSPRINT CONSUMPTION. PRINCIPAL CONSUMING COUNTRIES
a I i i
Average per capita consumption in
1935-1939.
Per capita consumption in 1951.
44

UNESCO COURIER N°" 8-9 1954
appetite" can be considered as abnor¬
mal and unlikely to last indefinitely.
As a matter of fact, if we disregard
those countries in which the use of
paper has been restricted by govern¬
ment order, we see that the consump¬
tion per head was almost everywhere
higher in 1951 than it was before the
.war, despite the difficulties of obtain¬
ing supplies. This was true not only
of underdeveloped countries where the
press has expanded as illiteracy has
been reduced and education spread,
and where per capita income has
increased, but also of very highly
developed countries, such as the Uni¬
ted States, whose economic activity has
increased still further and which have
less difficulty in satisfying their needs.
The biggest appetite
THE world's appetite for paper is
thus growing with amazing
speed. In 1928, the -world con¬
sumed 6,130,000 tons of newsprint,
and in 1951 9,460,000 tons, which
means that, in spite of the economic
depression . which began in 1930 and
the effects of the second world war,
the consumption of paper went up, on
the average, by 145,000 tons a year
between 1928 and 1951. In the United
States of America which uses more
paper than any other country, the
consumption of newsprint increased
nearly fourfold between 1915 and 1951,
and doubled between 1933 and 1951.
In 1951, 120 countries each consumed
more than 50 tons of newsprint. These
120 countries were distributed as fol¬
lows: 26 countries in Africa, 22 in North
and Central America, 12 in. South
America, 26 in Asia and~33 in Europe,
besides the U.S.S.R.
How can this enormous demand
which is getting bigger from year to
year be met? While all the countries
in the world which are able to pur¬
chase enough to meet their needs are
consuming larger quantities of paper,
a relatively small number of countries
are producing this commodity. In
1951, only 36 countries manufactured
newsprint, 3- in North America, 4 in
South America, 7 in Asia, 20 in Europe,
besides the U.S.S.R., and 1 in the South
Sea Islands. The world production of
printing paper (other than newsprint)
and writing paper is much less central¬
ized than that of newsprint. It is
estimated that in 1951 42 countries or
territories each produced over 50 tons
of these two types of paper.
Threat to literacy
BY far and away the largest paper
producer is Canada. It has held
this position since 1928, and from
1932 to 1945 turned out a larger and
larger proportion of the total world
output. It was the only country whose
production in 1951 showed a consider¬
able increase over pre-war figures.
Between 1945 and 1951 this figure rose
from about 3,260,000 tons per year to
rather more than 5,000,000 tons an
enormous quantity representing 52.7 %
of the total world production.
In 1951 when Unesco began to alert
public opinion to the dangers of a
" DEVOUR BOOKS" this was the title of a recent
poster published by the National Syndicate of French
Editors showing the French actor Gérard Philipe
" devouring " a pile of books.
newsprint shortage, the situation was
already hampering the fight against
illiteracy in many countries because of
the difficulty of importing paper for
primary and secondary school text¬
books and notebooks. It had also forc¬
ed some newspapers to close down.
At that time, however, it was not
known how enormously the world
demand was going to increase. Will
the existing and planned production
resources be able to meet the ever-
increasing demand? The equipment of
large paper mills involves heavy capi¬
tal outlay and a relatively long study
of organization and building plans.
Of course the growth in production
and consumption noted over the past
25 years was an indication that a large
increase was to be expected in the
future. But other factors such as the
spread of education, the new literacy
campaigns undertaken in many coun¬
tries, the continual growth of the
world's population and the increase in
the real per capita income of its in¬
habitants had also to be considered.
Unesco therefore set out to make at
least an approximate* assessment of
man's future needs in paper. In co¬
operation with the Food and Agricul
ture Organization, the Economic Com¬
mission for Europe and the Economic
Commission for Latin America, Unesco
collected world information about the
development of the paper problem.
It also commissioned the Intelligence
Unit of "The Economist" which spe¬
cializes in economic investigations on
an international scale, to work out
estimates of the consumption of
printing and writing paper for each
country and territory. These indicate
that in 1965 the world will need some
65 % more newsprint than in 1951 and
that the rise in the demand for other
printing paper and writing paper will
also be considerable.
Here is a hunger which must be
appeased. Lack of paper to carry
information means lack of the aware¬
ness, the interest and the personal
responsibility that play such a large
role in sound citizenship. Lack of
paper for textbooks deprives children
and adult illiterates of the means of
learning, and limitation of education
penalizes all forms of progress. The
availability of paper for newspapers,
for books, for exchanges of facts and
ideas is therefore .a matter of world
concern and world action.
45
