I SPEAK
ENGLISH
SNAKE SNAKE
FISH FISH/
The trials and tribulations- of a
language student in Thailand
by Manich Jumsai
According to a Thai language teacher, books for children learning a foreign language should not contain
stories and illustrations of the foreign country only, since these may not always be comprehensible to
youngsters in far-off lands. They should instead compare the life and customs of the foreign land
with the children's own environment. Here is a typical river scene of the interior of Thailand taken
from a Unesco film""World without End".
I WAS born in a. typical provincial
. village in Thailand far from modern
civilization. From my early child¬
hood I was eager to learn English and .
dreamt of strange lands where lived
those funny white-faced people (of whom
we sometimes heard) with blond hair,
who spoke in a strange tongue and had
strange customs... . I had never met any
one of these people. Why should I, when
even my provincial teacher had never
seen one of them, and our grim-looking,
strict headmaster, most learned of the
village people, did not know them?
One day, my curiosity getting the better
of me, I asked my master, and he in turn
asked the headmaster, the name of the
capital city of these strange white people
who spoke the foreign language we now
had to learn in all secondary schools,
even in the remotest village. But neither
of them could give me an answer. Such
were the conditions in Thailand when I
started to learn English forty years ago.
Of what use to us then were the direct
method theories? My teacher did not
speak English, he only read and trans¬
lated words from the blackboard, together
with their meanings, so that we could
learn them by heart. At the next English
-lesson we had to tell him the meanings
of the various words. As to writing, the
teacher would avoid it very carefully so
that, during my childhood, I did not have
much chance of writing anything other
than translations of sentences from
English into Thai or Thai into English,
usually from books. There was no
question of free translations being made.
Even when translating from books, an
English-Thai dictionary had to be used.
When we encountered a peculiar word or
grammatical construction, we had to use
it as instructed by our teacher. If we
asked why it should be used in that way,
we were told that that was the strange
English way of saying it.
As for the meaning of words, there was
no distinction in our minds between
apples, pears, peaches, cherries, grapes,
strawberries or raspberries, however large
or small, whatever their colour, whether
grown on vines or on trees. All we knew
was that they were "a kind of fruit"; the
teacher said so. We had never seen
them; and neither had the teacher. They
were English fruits which could not be
grown in a hot country like Thailand.
They were strange fruits which puzzled
our minds and our imaginations.
As to trees, flowers, animals, insects,
etc., while learning English at school I
had stored away in my mind many
strange names for each of them, but they -
were all the same to me-a kind of tree,
a kind of flower, a kind of animal, which
the English people had but we did. not
have. At last I grew impatient, and one
day I asked my teacher, the English
names for some of our local fruits,
flowers, trees and foodstuffs. Of course,
he could not tell me, and he looked
somewhat surprised that I should ask
such a silly question. Was I becoming
Insubordinate? Such things did not exist
in English books, nor in English! Then
I argued: "Supposing one of these days I
meet an Englishman, for I would like to
meet one, then I shall ask him many
things about his country. I .will take
10

UNESCO COURIER - N" , 1 - 1954
mm Kpiiiatiinai 1 MlM
1 Ë" V
1
«É
ImmW * ^m\ mmr
H \ t W
4 C vi^LXW
/ 1
j M ip
English is the most popular foreign language taught ¡n Thailand today. Then come French,- Chinese and German. Certain private schools teach English
In the first four primary classes at the same time as Thai. But teachers are often bewildered when some beginners' textbooks prefer unusual words to the
more common equivalents, such as "jumbo" for "elephant", "nanny" for"goat", "cot"for "bed", "pup" for "dog", and "Brer Rabbit" for "rabbit" (U.N. Photos).
him round to see things. I will show him
the fruits we have (Noi-na, _ Lam-yai,
Chompoo, Mafuang) and ask him to taste
some of them. But what shall I call
them?" "Oh, curious child, what else
. would they be for these Europeans but a
kind of fruit?"
I would therefore repudiate a list of
basic words, if it contained words like
"bread", "apple", etc., instead of words
appropriate to the food grown in the
country where English was being taught.
I consider that such a list should contain
words which have a real meaning for the
child because he sees and uses the
articles described in his everyday life.
When it comes to English spelling and
pronunciation, we people of Thailand find
that the words are never pronounced the -
way they are spelt. It is of no use to
learn any rules, but only exceptions.
'Ou', for instance, is usually pronounced -
as in 'cloud', but in 'through' it is 'oo' in
it is 'oh'; and in 'tough', it is
'uf. Then comes a new invention: the
international phonetic script. This is a ^
device whereby we can see how the
various peculiar English words are
pronounced; but then we are introduced
to new signs and symbols. This, again, is .
like learning a new language. Is not
English difficult e"nough that we must
now read a new language?
Even this phonetic system is not a
satisfactory solution .to our problem.
Whatever signs and symbols are invented
for us, we do not pronounce them in that
way since our own language is so
different. We don't sound the endings
of our words as do the English, we don't
twist and roll our tongue to sound an T,
or an 'r', we do not make sounds through
our teeth like 'th', We do not have hissing
sounds like 's' and 'ss'. These are only
English idiosyncracies to make things
harder than they look.
After a certain time, we go back to the -
ordinary English spelling, but what is the
point when words are not all spelt in the
same way? Our eyes see different words
on paper, but our minds cannot identify
them as being the same. We have to
learn over again the quaint spelling and
irregular pronunciation. Words are not
written the way they are pronounced, as
is done in the international phonetic
script. What is the use of struggling to
learn all these quaint symbols if they are
not going to he used? Also, there are
exceptions and unusual things in the in¬
ternational phonetic script itself.
Then there are the various ways of
expressing oneself. The Thai and
English languages are fundamentally
different, having absolutely nothing in
common. Why should they? When all
is said and done, the English and Thai
peoples had never met until recently.
They are not descended from a common
stock with ancestors common to both
races. While the original Thai people
were still living in the valley of the
Yellow River, in brick buildings, and with
a fairly advanced civilization, the British
were living in prehistoric times; Britons
still wore leaves and animal skins and
dwelt in the forests. The two peoples
lived in worlds far apart, each developing
their own language to suit their different
needs without ever having , the op¬
portunity to discuss what they should say
for certain things, or how they should
express certain feelings or ideas.
Therefore, a Thai student starting to
learn English would say: "I speak English
snake snake fish fish." This does not
mean anything to an Englishman, but it
means everything to the Thai student.
When a person knows only a few odd
words of a language, such as snake or
fish, and has to use those same words all
the time because he knows no other, it is
obvious to a Thai mind that he really
knows very little of that language. On
the other hand, when he knows so much
of the language that the words flow from
his mouth without hesitation, like water
flowing from a spout, he will say: "I
speak English like water."' He un¬
derstands this clearly, although it will
not be understood by an Englishman.
Thai ways, sentiments, feelings and
understanding are not the same as those
of English people, and an Englishman
must not be led astray by thinking that

i "5*.
General view of Bangkok klongs (canals) showing floating fruit market (mahanark) and vegetable and
pottery markets. Fruits in the tropical land of Thailand are totally different from European or American
fruits. To Thai children learning English, the words apples, peaches, strawberries or pears convey no
real image. They are merely "a kind of fruit". (U.N. Photo.)
whatever he says is simple, straight¬
forward and therefore easily understood
by a Thai. For instance, look at these
phrases which are perfectly obvious and
clear to a Thai:
I have ox two body.
He woman have son ox two body.
Why should one say: -" "I have two
oxen"; "she has two young oxen", etc.?
Why should the language be made more
difficult by using has on one occasion and
have on another? Why should the_words
be changed to plural when singular can
mean the same object. Why should one
use a new word "she", when one can say
"a female he" or "he woman"? Why
should one say "young oxen" when they
are really "sons or daughters of oxen",
and so on?
There are two instances when a Thai
would say "yes" and an Englishman
"no", and yet both expressions have the
same meaning. Here are some typical
comparisons:
Englishman
Q. Have you never been to England?
A. No. (I have never been.)
Q. Good morning, John, how are you?
Or Fine Weather, isn't it?
Thai
Q. Have you never been to England?
A. Yes. (The fact that I have never
been there is "yes" in this case.)
Q. May you be (well, where have you
been.
In the opinion of a Thai, it is ridiculous
or even hypocritical to say "Good
morning" when it is actually cloudy and
cold, and therefore a "bad morning".
The English are great inventors; they
make grammatical rules and then start
to evade them by making exceptions and
creating more and more language
difficulties. The Thai language, on the
other hand, has no tenses, no -feminine
nouns, no comparative and superlative
adjectives and adverbs, no plurals. It is
quite straightforward. English grammar
is perhaps one of the most difficult in the
world to learn, owing to the number of
tenses and irregular verbs. Compare
these expressions:
English
He goes to school.
He is going to school.
He went to school yesterday.
He has already been to school this
morning.
' He went to school.
He did not go to school.
That
He go school.
He active go school.
He go school yesterday.
He go school already morning this..
He go school finished.
He ho go school finished.
As far as Thailand is concerned, I do
not know of a single book which has been
written by any of the eminent exponents
of a number of accepted methods of
teaching -English which would be per¬
fectly satisfactory and thoroughly un¬
derstood by the pupils. English is made
infinitely more difficult by the fact that
the books are written about things which
the indigenous child has never seen or
heard of during the whole of his short
life. .
During the seventeen years I worked
for the Ministry of Education in Bangkok,
I was fed profusely with samples of
various English reading series from
various English publishers, who pressed
me to prescribe their series for use in
Thai schools. Despite the fact that some
of them were beautifully printed and
illustrated they were not. ideally suited
for the teaching of English in Thailand.
Attractive illustrations are not the main
need of an English reader for a foreign
country; the contents of the book are
much more important.
. A Thai child starts to learn English at
the age of 11 plus, by which time his mind
is fully developed. He is a big boy or a
young man no longer a child. He has
a thirst for true stories, for adventure,
for culture, for his own social inheritance
something which is no longer childish,
-but which will fill his mind with future
ambitions, aspirations, adventures and
heroism. He is not a fool who can be
easily led to believe things which are
untrue, such as fairy tales, spirits, goblins
that inhabit the forests, and animals that
talk. English primers . written for
children of lower age level are therefore
not suitable for him. -
The books are full of childish things,
simple (not to say. foolish or stupid)
beliefs, and always contain the famous
Grimm and Hans Andersen fairy tales, or
stories taken from the Arabian Nights.
What is more important, they contain
| 'x~''Î:'a^ **J&JÊSËÈËi
r W
%y *$ "«t¿¿>.
i
; !
P* * vWfe'.
-JÊL3m\ mf.

UNESCO COURIER -N" 1-1954
strange words .which are never used by
adults and which cannot be found in
ordinary dictionaries, thus making it
more difficult for -the average Thai
teacher to understand and translate, his
method being to translate everything.
Instead of "'Bear", the books use "Teddy
Bear", "Brer Rabbit" for "rabbit", "Jum¬
bo" for "elephant", "Nanny *' for "goat",
"cot" for "bed", "pup" for "dog". Then
there are all the terms of endearment
which an English mother uses when
speaking to her baby.
Such things are outside the ordinary
English vocabulary. Also, children in .
England start to learn by using words
which are orthographically and phoneti¬
cally simple and not too long. So, in¬
stead of the usual word "'sleep", they use
"'nap", and in order to keep to simple
monosyllabic words they use the most
extraordinary words and stories. And a
Thai boy of 11 plus has to learn this
nonsense.
When writing primers for children of
11 plus, the mentality, curiosity, previous
knowledge and experience, as well as the
understanding of the child should be
taken Into account. Special books should
be written for children of this age in
order to make them feel that English is
not so difficult, confusing or nonsensical,
books which will help them to master the
simple normal language form.
Various primers have been' written to
cope with different factors, from the
phonetic and from the orthographic
angle, from the monosyllabic word list,
from the nursery word list, from the first
basic word list and so on, but none has
dealt with the difficulties of grammar.
English grammar and construction are
beyond the grasp of children whose
mother tongue is Thai. So many differ¬
ences and_ distinctions have to be
accounted for. Grammar should be
carefully analysed and graded, and
explanations introduced step by step as
these points occur in new phrases and
sentences. If there is a list of basic
words in English, there should be also a
list of basic grammatical points.
Those who attempt to improve the
teaching of English in Thailand should
make a complete analysis of the Thai and
English languages to see where lie the
parities, similarities and discrepancies in
both languages. When this has been
done they will then be able to understand
the mind of the child who is struggling
to understand a foreign language like
English. So far, no such analysis has
been made.
In many other countries, children
learning English as a foreign language .
often use textbooks written by English
people or by people whose mother tongue
is English,-who take for granted, as being
understood, so many of the small, trivial
details which are - confusing to a child
brought up in surroundings entirely
different from those of an English-
speaking person.
- In Thailand, for example, there are dif¬
ferent contentions about this. One per¬
son wants the books to be written with
an English background, while another
prefers a Thai background with, names,
objects and stories all derived from Thai¬
land. I think that it would be an ideal
I SPEAK ENGLISH
SNAKE SNAKE FISH FISH '
way to write the first book or two using
the boys' own environment as a back¬
ground, and discussing the things he
knows and understands. Then as his
vocabulary grows, English subjects could
be introduced English boys and girls,
their homes and customs, and the things
the student would see and do if he were
to visit England. Textbooks must show
comparisons between the things that
happen in Great Britain and Thailand;
that is to say, the first textbook should
cover the experiences that the student
encounters all the time in his own coun¬
try and then pass on to comparative
ones in England.
I feel that in order to understand the
many local difficulties encountered both
in teaching and learning English as a
foreign language, one must be a native
of the country, a person who knew no
English for the first few years of his life,
who, when he did start to learn it, had
to struggle through the various diffi¬
culties of the language until he had
mastered it. Only a person who has
passed through this experience himself
can comprehend the difficulties encount¬
ered by a child of his own nationality
who is learning to speak a foreign lan¬
guage 'and grasp what the child is
thinking of when he interprets certain
things in a certain way.
Notwithstanding the theories put for¬
ward by various eminent specialists of
modern languages, it is my firm opinion
that the series of books on this subject
will not be complete until consideration
has been given to the complete cycle of
effective development of the indigenous
child's mind.
13
