FROM THE ARCTIC
To THE EQUATOR
and from the Equator to the Antarctic there rises a babble of different tongues. Some In the heart of Africa
and In the Northern wastes are spoken by no more than a few hundred or a few thousand people ; others by
450 million. But a study of the world's languages brings home to us a major consideration: whatever the
number of their speakers, all languages, be they "primitive" or "civilized", adequately express the concepts
of the culture from which they spring and of the people or peoples who use them. (Photos C.O.I, and N.F.B.)

THE JIGSAW
PATTERN OF
THE WORLD'S
LANGUAGES
UNESCO COURIER - N" 1-1954
By Felix Walter
WE live in a world that seems to be
becoming increasingly aware of
. the problems of language. That is
probably because our generation bumps
its nose against the barrier of language
more often and more violently than our
ancestors did. How could it be other¬
wise in an age that has made travel so
swift and devised ways of communication
that are almost instantaneous?
But it is all very provoking to the
human ego. We can devise atom bombs
to wipe out half the world or jet planes
to girdle it, but, so far as the tangle of
language is concerned, we are still in the
era of the Tower of Babel. Actually the
situation is much worse than that: we
have slipped back and are continuing to
slip back. Linguists say that there are
approximately 3,000 languages spoken
in the world to-day, and they don't
pretend they have finished counting yet.
What really aggravates the situation is
not that many completely different
tongues are spoken by groups of a few
thousand, or even a few hundred, in the
interior of New Guinea, or in the jungles
of Amazonia or in the heart of Africa.
What counts is that the thrust and drive
of new nationalisms are constantly
setting up new national languages with
full official status. There is nothing
iniquitous about this; a distinctive lan¬
guage is a very natural though not an
essential attribute of sovereignty, and it
TODAY as far as the tangle of languages is concerned we are still in the era of the Tower of Babel thousands
of years ago when this metal cylinder of Babylonia was made. In fact we are slipping still further back for
linguists say there are now nearly 3,000 languages in the world. (Photo Palais de la Découverte, Paris.)
is clearly silly and a waste of time to
scold the Irish, for instance, for reviving
their ancient tongue or the Indonesians
for adopting Bahasa in preference to a
European language of wide diffusion.
It is no wonder, though, that there is
an increasing desire, to solve what is a
world problem, once and for all, by radi¬
cal means. One drawback is that the
reformers offer so many different pana¬
ceas. Some advocate that we should all
learn one of the languages already widely
spoken in many parts of the world.
Unfortunately the identity of language X
nearly always depends on the nationality
of the advocate. The British and the
Americans see great inherent advantages
in English. French-speaking people are
persuaded that French has certain in¬
trinsic merits which give their language
a prior claim. Speakers of Arabic or
Chinese or Russian or Spanish can think
up equally good arguments without any
difficulty at all.
If the choice is to be one of the so-
called artificial languages, then which
one? Is it to be Esperanto, which has the
advantage of an undoubted head start
over the rivals, or one of the rivals them¬
selves with claims to being even more
scientific and even more simplified?
The ultimate solution may well lie in
one of these suggestions, or it may be of
a different nature altogether, but if the
solution is to be effective, it must be
adopted on a world-wide , basis and
arrived at by general consent. That will
be extraordinarily difficult and will
depend in the long run on the decisions
arrived at by governments and by the
peoples on whom governments depend.
That suggests that a first and very
necessary step in the solution of the
world problem of the diversity of lan¬
guages is for people everywhere to try
and understand the extent and nature of
that problem. Only then can they
properly come to grips with it.
Covering the centre pages of this issue
of the Courier is a language map of
the world. It is constructed on tradi¬
tional lines: that is, it shows languages
by "families". This is a convenience to
linguists but it should not lead ordinary
people astray. Thus the English-speak¬
ing person who imagines it should be
easy to learn Dutch or Danish, because
they also are "Germanic" languages, may
be disappointed. Languages, like mem¬
bers of human families, have a habit of
drifting away from one another.
It is this instable or dynamic charac¬
teristic of languages, coupled with the
fact that languages are often the play¬
things of political and economic forces,
which now favour and now retard their
expansion, that makes a languages map
and the general language situation so
changeable. The picture today is not at
all what it was even a generation ago.
A generation hence it will probably be
quite different again. To grasp this fact
one has only to survey the continents
briefly one by one.
Europe makes a good starting-point for
such a survey, because in Europe the
number of official national languages has
just about doubled in the space of a ge¬
neration. This is due to a number of
causes. When the Russian and Austro-
Hungarian empires collapsed as a result
of the First World War they were suc¬
ceeded by a number of smaller sovereign
units or by new regimes that took a more

FROM EGYPTIAN PICTURE-
WRITING TO A MODERN
FORM OF HIEROGLYPHICS
liberal view of the aspirations of lin¬
guistic minorities. Languages like
Slovene, Slovak, Czech, Lithuanian, Let¬
tish, Esthonian, White Russian and
Ukranian ceased being just picturesque
survivals, achieved full national or
regional status became official languages
of instruction in the schools.
In Western Europe, not all at once, but
certainly since the Second World War,
there has also developed an increasingly
liberal attitude towards the languages of
minority groups. People who now want
to talk Frisian or Breton or Basque, and
to have their children learn these lan¬
guages, are not in most countries any
longer looked on as anti-national agi¬
tators. Governments now go out of
their way to give such language groups
an equitable status in the community and
make reasonable linguistic concessions
to them. Even . Switzerland, already
saddled with the problem of three
national languages, judged it advisable
a few years ago to admit a fourth lan¬
guage Romansh, on a sort of junior
partnership basis.
Totting up the balance sheet for Eu¬
rope, the debit side shows a great
increase in the actual number of official
languages, the credit side a decided im¬
provement in the attitude towards mino¬
rity languages. This may be more
important than it seems, for nations, like
individuals, cannot hope to assess the
language problem sensibly unless they
divest themselves of prejudice.
A somewhat similar process has been
going on in the Americas. Ostensibly
the language pattern is simple with the
original European colonizing nations
providing either English, French, Portu¬
guese or Spanish (with Danish in Green¬
land and Dutch in Surinam and the West
Indies) as the official language or lan¬
guages for every one of the 22 countries
between Baffin Land and the Antarctic.
But a closer look reveals a rather more
complex weave. Mass immigration has
helped to complicate matters, especially
nowadays when the doctrine of the
Melting Pot with its insistence on lin¬
guistic and cultural uniformity is
nowhere applied as strictly and as illi¬
berally as previously.
When we talk of language we usually mean Its
spoken form, but the term can also be applied
to any conventional signalling system. We have
flag language or code, the language of road signals,
deaf and dumb language and written language.
Canada is a good example of the lan¬
guage patterns produced by immigration.
When Louis XV lost New France, 60,000
French-speaking Canadians changed
their allegiance. Their descendents
now constitute a durable linguistic block
of three and a half millions. But there
are many other second languages in Ca¬
nada besides English or French. A
school-boy in Winnipeg may study Ice¬
landic as his first foreign language, while
a farmer in Cape Breton may tune in to
broadcasts in his ancestral Gaelic.
Newspapers and books are published in
Bas-reliet of the Giotto Tower, Florence, symbol¬
izing language, and logic. (Photo Brogi-Viollet).
Ukranian and Finnish, in Polish and
Italian and thousands speak these lan¬
guages in their homes and pass them on
to their children.
In the United States the extension oí
the teaching of Spanish in the elemen¬
tary schools of the South Western States,
of French in those of Louisiana, and the
opportunity now given in many big city
schools of learning Hebrew or Polish
shows, among many other examples, that
a similar Une is being followed. No race
One form that has come down to us from the past
Is the ancient Egyptian picture-writing (above).
A modern version of this is the road signalling
system, but this, as Steinberg, the American car¬
toonist, has shown in drawings (right) can be
has been more affected by this liber¬
alizing trend than the American Indian.
It is now at last realized that language is
a vital and inseparable part of the cul¬
tural fabric and that the Indian who
has not been detribalized should not be
deprived of his language.
This knowledge has had even more
important consequences in Mexico and in
Central and South America where the
populations speaking pre-Columbian
mother tongues can be counted in mil¬
lions rather than in hundreds of
thousands. The former country,- after
centuries of unsuccessful efforts to turn
Nahuas, Tarascans and Mayans into
monolingual Spanish speakers, has set up
most enlightened programmes for tack¬
ling the problem of illiteracy in the native
language 'first, leaving instruction in the
national language to a subsequent stage.
Further south still, an increasingly pro¬
gressive language policy bids fair to bring
back into useful circulation languages
such as Quechua and Aymarâ.
A few significant dates, grouped closely
together, serve to set the pattern for Asia.
The independence of the Philippines was
proclaimed in 1946, of Burma, Ceylon,
India and Pakistan in 1947, of Israel in
1948, of Indonesia in 1949, Cambodia,
Laos and Viet-Nam have joined the pro¬
cession subsequently. These political
events have inevitably meant greatly
enhanced status for Burmese and for
Hebrew, for Singhalese and Tamil, for"
Bahasa and Tagolog, for Cambodian,
Laotian and Vietnamese, for Urdu and
its close cousin Hindi, to say nothing of
the fourteen officially recognized regional
languages of the new Republic of India
and all the regional languages of the
other nations which have recently
attained or recovered their independence.
In the meantime, north of the Hima¬
layas, great progress seems to have been
made in endowing the complex of lan¬
guages in Central and Northern Asia
with alphabets and also with new dignity
and status. What is bewildering in the
new Asia linguistically is that it seems to
consist more and more of a series of
Switzerlands on a gigantic scale.
Let us take the *ase of a boy or girl
just starting school somewhere in Bom-

UNESCO COURIER -N» 1-1954
T'V IRä/B
just about as baffling as the ancient Egyptian
variety. However, motoring abroad is becoming less
harassing for " Mr Smith" since many member
states of the United Nations have adopted a
simplified and standardized system of road signs.
bay State. The case is typical enough
of many other states both in and outside
India. The pupil will at home probably
speak either Gujerati or Marathi. His
or her first task will be to learn the other
state language, whichever it may be,
going on then to Hindi, the new federal
- language, and only after that tackling
one of the world link-languages.
It may seem a desperate situation but
no continent is attacking its language
problems with greater vigour. Teachers
are recruited in Syria to teach Arabic as
a living link-language to the Bengali-
speakers of East Pakistan; chairs of
Chinese are endowed in the great univer¬
sities of India; Indonesia sends future
teachers of English to study this world
language in Australia its nearest
English-speaking neighbour.
Though geographically far removed
from one another, Africa and Oceania
present similar patterns of linguistic di¬
versity and these patterns seem to be
shifting and changing in much the same
way. The dominant tongues, for official,
and generally for educational purposes as
well, are still the languages of the Euro¬
pean countries that hold political .autho¬
rity. ' More and more, however, the
tendency to use the local vernacular, at
least in primary education, is spreading.
But in areas where languages change
completely almost from village to village,
this otherwise sensible course cannot be
followed and in such cases the teaching
of the European language must be re¬
garded as the only alternative.
Another way round the obstacle is to
use a lingua franca, and these have a
considerable vogue in both Africa and
Oceania. Nationalism, particularly local
nationalism, is a factor that must be
reckoned with here too; it has a charac¬
teristically stubborn way of preventing
all-wise authorities from imposing one
dialect in preference to others and thus
"simplifying the language problem in the
interest of the native".
What the Immediate future holds
for these areas must depend in a
large measure on political developments
during the next quarter century, and a
(Continued on page 32)
ir^j ZZOiBAAVTUKQ

LANGUAGE JIGSAW PATTERN
(Continued from page J)
great burgeoning of new official lan¬
guages on the Asian model is well within
the bounds of probability.
This very hasty scamper across the
continents has been undertaken mainly
to help the reader catch a glimpse of the
outline at least of the shadowy forest of
language, a forest which like the one in
Shakespeare's Macbeth is threateningly
on the move and never stationary.
Anyone who wants to take a closer look
at the individual trees of this forest
would be well advised to consult a recent
Unesco publication, The Use of Verna¬
cular Languages in Education (1), which,
in addition to much detailed information,
gives, in an appendix, a useful tentative
classification of the world's languages.
There remains the question of the so-
called link-languages, those languages
which are widely distributed over the
earth's surface or at least spoken by
many millions of men and women.
Estimates of the actual diffusion of such
languages vary greatly, but the list of the
13 languages spoken by 50 million people
or over which Professor Mario Pei of
Columbia University gives in his sti¬
mulating book, The Story, of Lan¬
guage (2), is probably accurate enough
for the layman. His list runs as follows:
1. Chinese (all dialects) : 450 million.
2. English: 250 million. 3. Hindi-Urdu:
160 million. 4. Russian: 140 million.
5. Spanish: 110 million. 6. German:
100 million. 7. Japanese: 80 million.
8. French: 75 million. 9. Malay: 60
million. 10. Bengali : 60 million. 11
Portuguese: 55 million. 12. Italian: 55
million. 13. Arabic: 50 million.
There is, of course, no guarantee that
the same 13 languages will appear in the
same order fifty years from now, or even
that such lists, drawn up in the not too
remote future, will necessarily show
Western languages in such an ad¬
vantageous position. In any case, people
,who speak a world-language as their
mother tongue should recognize their
good luck but refrain from being arrogant
about it. Above all they should refrain
from attributing this wide diffusion to
the intrinsic merits of the language in
question. AH languages, be they those of
"primitive" or "civilized" communities,
adequately express the concepts of the
culture from which they spring and of
the people or peoples who use them. All
lead the learner by the straightest and
surest road, perhaps by the only road, to
a knowledge and true understanding of
other cultures and other peoples.
Nor can one distinguish between
"'beautiful" languages and "ugly" lan¬
guages without falling into the same
absurdity. To people speaking a lan¬
guage with few gutturals or none at all,
German may appear "harsh" and Arabic
even "harsher", but are they "harsh" to
those who speak German or Arabic?
Assuredly not.
That wise old man Voltaire went
straight to the heart of the problem in
his philosophical tale L'Ingénu, for when
the Abbé de Saint Yves asked the in¬
genuous Huron which language he
preferred, Huron, English or French, that
simple American Indian replied, "Huron,
of course". Our own language is always
the best for us. All the more reason for
not imposing it on others.
(1) Available' through - Unesco National
tributors. Price $ 1.00 ; 6/- ; 300 fr.
(2) George Allen & XJnwln. London, 1952,
Dls-
32
