India's policy for its 30,000,000 tribesmen
NEITHER ISOLATION
NOR ASSIMILATION
-PROTECTION
b y Dr. Verrier E I w i n
N modern times,
there have been
three different
methods of ap¬
proach to the
problem of the
thirty million tribesmen who live on
the frontiers of Indian civilization. The
former British Government tended on
the whole to leave them alone, partly
because the task of administration,
especially in the wild border areas, was
difficult and unrewarding; partly from
a desire to quarantine them from pos¬
sible political infection; and partly
from a genuine belief that they were
happier and better as they were.
In sharp distinction to this is a
policy of "assimilation" which has
bpcome very DODUlar sinre Inripnpnd-
ence. Both Christian missionaries and
Hindu social reformers have, in their
different ways, desired to see the
primitive civilized, their "inferior"
social customs and ideas eliminated
and their identity assimilated either
into the Christian church or into the
general framework of Hindu society.
The Christian missionaries have
had striking successes in some tribal
areas, though they have failed in
others. Especially in Assam, they
have converted a very high percentage
Dr. VERRIER ELWIN has spent most of the past two
decades among aboriginal tribesmen in India as
anthropological consultant to the Indian Government.
Founder of a settlement devoted to aboriginal welfare
and humanitarian research on their problems, he was
the editor of "Man in India", from 1943 to 1949
He is the author of Tribal Myths of Orissa, The Tribal
Art of Middle India, ana* Myths of Middle India.
of such tribes as the Lushais, Khasis
and the so-called Naga groups. The
Christian Khasis have preserved their
matriarchal social structure, and the
Lushais and Nagas have retained
certain aspects of their life (in par¬
ticular their very beautiful hand-
weaving), but in the main they have
lost most of what is distinctively tribal,
adopting a semi-western culture.
Similarly, the ambitious program¬
mes of education, reform and change
now being initiated by most of the
State Governments, while bringing
many economic and social benefits to
the people, are likely to bring to an
end the older values, good and bad
alike, of tribal life. For though a
sincere desire for tribal welfare is now
everywhere apparent, this is not
matched by an equal interest in or
respect for tribal culture.
You cannot make an omelette with¬
out breaking eggs, and the continued
existence of the tribes as tribes is
regarded as of less importance than
the march of civilization. This policy
has led to strong zenophobic reactions
in some areas, and in Bihar, for
example, the separatist Jharkand
Party is the largest opposition group
in the State Assembly.
Between these two extremes of do¬
ing too little and doing too much,
there is a third policy, with which the
name of the Prime Minister, Mr.
Nehru, is associated. In one of the
most remarkable speeches ever made
by a public man on the problem of
HORNED HEAD-DRESS is part of the
traditional costume of the Durwas of
Bastar, a tribe in Central India. It will
remain so under India's policy of improv¬
ing living conditions among her tribes¬
men 7 % of the country's population
without sacrificing their way of life.
primitive peoples, Mr. Nehru spoke of
the strong attraction which he had for
the tribesmen and described how he
approached them' "in a spirit of
comradeship and not like someone
aloof who had come to look at them,
examine them, weigh them, measure
them and report about them or to try
HANDICRAFTS are at"the base of many tribal
economies in India. Here, a young Muria prepares
rope from fibre; other major crafts are basket-
making, weaving and spinning.
36

and make them conform to another
way of life."
"I am alarmed", he said, "when
I see not only in this country, but
in other great countries, tooAhow
anxious people are to shape others
according to their own image or like¬
ness, and to impose on them their
particular way of living." He declar¬
ed that he was not sure which, the
modern or the tribal, was the better
way of living. "In some respects I
am quite certain theirs is better/'
"There is no point in trying to make
of them a second-rate copy of our¬
selves." He emphasized the^ import¬
ance of encouraging the tribal langu¬
ages, so that they would not only
prevail but flourish. He- insisted that
a measure of protection must be given
so that "'no outsider can take posses¬
sion of tribal lands or forests or inter¬
fere with them in any way except with
their consent and goodwill."
He hoped that the high sense of
discipline, the power to enjoy life, the
love of dance and song would endure
among the tribesmen. Schemes for
welfare, education, communications,
medical relief were no doubt essential:
"one must always remember, however,
that we do not mean to interfere with
their way of life, but want to help
them to live it."
Now this attitude poses a serious
problem to the administrator. The
assimilation policy which holds, broad¬
ly speaking, that there is not much to
be said for tribal life ; that if it disap¬
pears it will not matter greatly ; that
the "backward" must be brought for¬
ward and that the low are to be
"uplifted", is simple and straightfor¬
ward ; it is logical, and it brings many
benefits at a price. So did the
British policy of leaving well alone
though at a different price.
But the new attitude, the Nehru
attitude, has complex implications.
For unhappily, tribal culture is the
most delicate thing in the world. Of
it we may say what Oscar Wilde said
of innocence : it is a delicate exotic
fruit touch it, and the bloom is
gone. Tribal social organization in
India has to some extent managed to
survive, though many acculturated
tribal communities have suffered a
tragic moral decline. The tolerant
influences of Hinduism have enriched
tribal religion with a loftier ethic and
vitalized it with a nobler conception
of deity, but at the same time they
have often brought the more dubious
'There is no point in
trying to make of
them a second-rate
copy of ourselves'
J. Nehru
accretions of new gods to be placated
and new taboos to be observed.
The contact of civilization has
generally had an adverse effect on
tribal art and culture. His exquisite
taste for design and colour disappears
when a tribesman enters a shop in the
bazaar. The splendid tribal dress and
ornamentation is rapidly abandoned
in favour of a parody of western cloth¬
ing. The tribal languages have shown
an alarming lack of vitality when
confronted by a system of education
in another tongue. In some areas the
dance has died out altogether, in
UNESCO COURIER N" 8-9 1954
others it has become. woefully debased.
The tribal craftsman does not seem
able to maintain his standards before
external competition.
The task set by Mr. Nehru, there¬
fore, is no easy one, for it involves
several ideals that have rarely been
found compatible. The first is to
preserve, strengthen and develop .all
that is best in tribal society, culture,
art and language. The second is to
protect tribal economic rights. The
third is to unite and integrate the
tribes in a true heart-unity with India
as a whole, so that they may play a
full part in her life. And the last is
to develop welfare and educational
facilities so that every tribesman may
have an equal opportunity with his
fellow-citizens of the open country
and the plains.
India has one advantage in attempt¬
ing to fulfil this exacting programme.
She is starting late. The older
British administrators, as we have
seen, rarely attempted anything of the
kind. This had its disadvantages, but
at the same time the tribesmen were,
on the whole spared the exploitation
and degradation that has overcome
their brethren in other lands.
Today India is able to approach her
task with an informed and enlightened
public conscience to inspire her and
the findings of the " anthropological
and social sciences to direct her. And
if there is need to protect the tribes¬
men, India is awake to the need of
protecting and helping all her many
millions of poor peasants. The tribes¬
men are being integrated into a
country that is on the move, that is
vitally alive to economic inequalities,
whose best men do in fact worship at
the altar of Daridranarayana, the
Lord of the Poor, which was Mahatma
Gandhi's favourite name for God.
(Continued on next page)
A FEAST in Bastar calls for a table service made of large leaves woven together.
The diet of Indian tribesmen varies according to their region and their stage of
development. The most primitive tribes live on forest products tubers, fruits
and roots and whatever fish and animals they catch.
THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM of the Kabuis in Manipur.
A young girl hauling bamboo containers. In general, drink
plays an Important part in the life of Indian aborigines espe¬
cially alcoholic beverages prepared from plants.
37

FASHIONABLE WOMEN among the Juans
of Orissa wore leaf dresses for ceremonies until
recently and, in the past, they wore them every
day. Today, however, they have adopted cloth,
in general, India's tribal women still make their
clothes from local raw materials. On the lofty
plateaus of the Himalayas, they wear homespun
clothes of wool produced by their own flocks.
INDIA'S
TRIBES
No interference in
village life and customs
(Continued from previous page)
Since Independence, India has done
a great deal for her tribes. Nowhere is
this more evident than on the North-
East Frontier, that great area of over
30,000 square miles of tangled hill and
forest, where something like a million
tribesmen, have lived almost untouched
and largely unknown until recent times.
Here a special administration of hand-
picked officers is extending its activi¬
ties number of administrative
centres has risen from 12 to 43 in four
years according to a policy based on
the ideas of Mr. Nehru, that with
everything possible done for the people,
there should be no direct interference
in tribal life and custom.
To this, however, there were bound to
be certain exceptions. On this frontier
the problem of peace has been para¬
mount. As recently as 1942, a former
Governor of Assam, Sir Robert Reid,
could write that "general orders stop¬
ping wars would be impossible to en¬
force without constant punitive expe¬
ditions. The remedy might well be
worse than the disease." Yet within
the last few years, inter-village warfare
has been largely checked and head¬
hunting has become a thing of the
past. By a combination of friendliness,
courage and firmness, a method of
warfare at once heroic and treacher
ous, valiant and despicable, has come
to an end. And where formerly life
was continually disturbed, the people
are now able to cultivate the arts of
peace.
In this area the method of schooling
being introduced is that known in India
as "basic education" which, with its
emphasis on manual activities and the
tribal languages as medium of instruc¬
tion, is admirably adapted to the needs'
of simple hill-people. In addition there
are many centres for training the
tribesmen in a variety of crafts, care
being taken that this shall be on lines
native to them.
Improvement of agriculture, the first _
essential for economic improvement, is
being energetically pursued, and com¬
munications, of vital importance in
these wild and lonely hills, are push¬
ing forward. Slavery, which has been
practised from times immemorial, is
disappearing; the opium problem is
being scientifically tackled; the doctor
and the vaccinator are extending their
gentle offices of mercy to the wildest
tribes. And everything is being done
in a spirit of friendliness and res¬
pect, so that there shall be a mini¬
mum of psychological disturbance and
no loss of self-reliance or of pride in
the classic heritage of tribal culture.
This is an enterprise, at once scien¬
tific and humane, of which India may
well be proud.
HOMAGE TO A SNAKE GOD Is being paid by this Saora
shaman in the hills of Orissa as he adds his contribution to
a cluster of simple gifts. But more and more tribesmen in
India declare themselves as Hindus or Christianswhich adds
to the difficulty of keeping statistics on their population.
Today people are classified according to their tribal origin
instead of their tribal religions.
THE LONG DRUM of an Orissa tribal village leaves its shelter on the backs of
four Juang youths. It symbolizes the tribal traditions India is determined to preserve
within the framework of a campaign against illiteracy. In I 93 I, only .58 % (one out
of 1 72 persons) of India's tribesmen were classified as capable of reading and writing.
"It would be over-optimistic to assume that the situation among tribal peoples has
improved", the International Labour Organization has commented in a recent survey.
However, an active government effort promises to bear fruit for the future.
38
