INDU
The lonely grandeur
of Ajanta
By
Francis
Brunei
Ajanta's twenty-nine rock-hewn shrines and sanctuaries are shown in
this general plan. They were numbered from West to East by the
archaeological service responsible for their conservation. Cave XIV
is situated directly above Cave XIII, and has not been represented.
O
ne day, over 2,000 years
ago a group of Buddhist
teachers and their dis¬
ciples, searching for a
place to set up a spiritual re¬
treat in a secluded part of
western India, came across a
deep, semi-circular gorge sur¬
rounded by overhanging cliffs.
On the flank of the southern cliff face they discovered
caves which from distant times had probably been the
dwellings of hermits. All around was the jungle in its
coat of verdure, bright with its flowers and contrasting
with the warmly tinted rock of the mountain. Below, a
torrent the source of the river Waghora cascaded
through the rocks.
In its harsh and lonely grandeur, the site seemed an
ideal one to these men searching for solitude and tran¬
quility. They saw from the rock formations that the
caves could be enlarged, and arranged as living quarters
and places for meditation. So they set about transforming
them.
The news of the Buddhist monk's arrival and their set¬
tlement in this secluded valley, soon spread throughout the
surrounding countryside. People in search of knowledge,
work or mysteries came to visit them and stayed to. help
them in their enterprise, as a few weatherbeaten inscrip¬
tions in old Sanskrit still bear witness. In the tenth shrine
10
is written : "The gift of a doorfront by Basathiputa"; in
the sixteenth monastery, "Salutation first to the renowned
Buddha, who dispels the intense fire of misery from this
world, a King" ; and in the twelfth monastery, "The meri¬
torious gift of a dwelling with cells and hall by the mer¬
chant Ghanamadada.".
Little by little this spiritual retreat became a small
university, where Buddha's teachings, philosophy, ethics,
the traditional sciences, and techniques like art, could be
studied and practised. One of the world's centres of
learning had been born.
Faith and enthusiasm fed the efforts of a multitude of
monks, artisans, artists and students who, through the
centuries, hewed and chipped away the mountain rock.
Inspired by a common purpose, they filled the peaceful
valley with the sound of their hammers and chisels. The
first shrines and monasteries took shape, were decorated
and painted. Ajanta, as the place was called, became a
pilgrimage centre as well as a home of learning.
From the 2nd century B.C. until the 7th century A.D.,
a whole series of monasteries and temples Was hewn out
of the solid rock at different levels along the cliff, and
these were linked with each other by narrow paths and
many steep stairways. Finally, they were large enough
to shelter hundreds of monks, students, visitors, or bene¬
factors.
In the daily life of these monastery dwellers study and

Unesco Courier Nr 11. 1954
'AéS^^-Î^^*8* **
Entrances of Caves Vil to XVII are seen
in this view of the southern cliff face. The
wide façade of the chaitya (temple) in Cave X
stands out from among the rest of the caves.
Bas-reliefs cover the façade of the shrine in
Cave XIX Buddha is shown in a number of
classical attitudes, expounding his teachings.
This chaitya can be considered as one of the
leading architectural wonders of the world.
Detail of a fresco in monastery (Cave I) showing a young woman with a tonet tray.
(This plate and those published on the following pages are taken from the Unesco Album).
meditation alternated \vith physical exercises and manual
and artistic occupations, inspired by the serene and peace¬
ful Buddhist doctrine. And from their high-perched stone
verandahs, the monks could look out on a scene of wild
and magnificent natural beauty, enhanced by the torrent
twisting through its seven cascades at their feet.
The approximate periods of the Ajanta community's
development have been fixed by a comparative study of
architectural styles, sculpture and paintings, which show
two main periods of expansion. The first of these is
identified with a group of two shrines (IX and X) and five
monasteries (VII, V11I, XI, XII, and XIII), which were
constructed between the 2nd century B.C. and the 2nd
century A.D. The second period followed some centuries
later, and it -is thought to have ended towards the begin¬
ning of the 7th century.
The gap between these two periods was probably due
to the division of Buddhism into two streams when
the conception of Ilinayana was being challenged by
Mahayana, which saw in Buddha not a mere teacher but
a being, eternal and divine, Who came to sojourn among
men. Some of the temple monasteries were never
completed either because the rock resisted further work
or for other, unknown reasons.
It is difficult for anyone who has not actually seen these
temples hewn from the.mountain to imagine their grandeur,
which becomes still more amazing when we realize all
the difficulties which had to be overcome by those who
built them. In the largest and oldest shrine (No. X), the
main hall is 95 feet long, 41 "feet wide and 30 feet high.
The central hall of monastery No. XVI is 03 feet in length,
05 feet in breadth and 15 feet in height. These monastery
temples are among the earliest rock-cut remains in India ;
and in their monumental galleries the whole of India's
ancient life can be seen anew, With its scenes, settings
and atmosphere preserved for us in an artistic description
of extraordinary variety and quality.
The caves are of two main types the Chaityas, shrines
or meeting-places, in the form of an apse (semi-circular in
shape) and the Viharas, four-sided monasteries or living
caves.
. The Chaityas have a monumental portico, and the
vaulting is supported on both sides by massive colonnades,
flanked by secondary side-aisles. The style of these
shrines seems to be inspired from wooden structures of
the secular communities mentioned in early Buddhist
literature. In the "choir", is a slupa a kind of symbolic
dome serving also as a reliquary. In later years these
slupas were adorned with effigies of Buddha.
The Vihara are the cave monasteries, with a verandah
in front of a square hall, cells provided with stone beds
on three sides and one or more minor shrines. Sturdy
pillars support the roof and the vaulting ; the façades are
adorned with columns hewn from the rock which, by its
overhang, forms a protection for them.
(Continued on page 14.)
II

I INDIA (Continued)
Floating in the night air, Indra,
the King of Heaven, is attended
by three celestial nymphs. The
purity of drawing, the elegance and
harmony of composition and the
grace of movement in the group
distinguish this small fresco, one
of the finest and most charming
in Cave XVII. Right, a crowd of
monks devoutly listening to a sermon.
12

Unesco Courier Np 11. 1954
Paintings of plants and animals
are imbued with the Buddhist
spirit of affection for all living
things. This monastery painting
in Cave I shows a pink elephant
emerging from a lotus pond.
Below, two antelopes are depicted
13

INDIA
(Continued) Early Buddhism on a ' magic carpet'
A walk round
these many-levelled
temples is like a
journey "by magic
c a rp e t" to the
ancient world
of early Buddhist
times. Wonderful
decorations, sculp¬
ture, bas-reliefs and
paintings cover the
walls, columns and
roofs and reveal the
full splendour of a
supreme "moment"
in Art one of its
"golden ages".
The sure techni¬
que and undoubted
mastery of these art forms are evident as far back as the
2nd century B.C. They have a remarkable freshness and
a complete absence of rigidity. Their easy-flowing lines
caress, emphasize or enliven the forms and figures. Their
refined style and the flexibility in the composition of the
captivating crowds and groups, whether in movement or
in repose, is remarkable. A whole
range of nuances is displayed in the
isolated figures, full of strange ma
jesty or tenderness, grandeur or aban¬
don, meditation or compassion, yet
always vibrant with life.
Alongside the tangible world of
people and objects, the other, the one
of feeling and thought, is also admi¬
rably expressed with a powerful force
of suggestion. And.even though the
artists' main concern is with the life
and message of Buddha, it is life as
a whole that is portrayed.
"Human life", says the introduction
to the Unesco Volume on Ajanta, "in
the crowded drama of love, compas¬
sion, happiness, yearning, death, suf¬
fering and sacrifice, is illuminated by
a glow of religious feeling dominated
by a sense of transience of existence
and profound piety."
All this, found in the frescoes, is
perhaps the secret of their creators.
At one juncture an atmosphere of intense fervour, of
religious feeling and love is created in these soberly or
sumptuously sculptured shrines; at another, the religious
subjects come to life and the love scenes are filled with
spirituality. At one moment, vast scenes show the pre¬
tentiousness of official events caparisoned elephants,
knights on prancing mounts, princes or princesses bedeck¬
ed with jewels and surrounded by the flowing concourse
of their subjects, hunting scenes', the capture of wild ele¬
phants, legends like the landing nf King Bijaya in Ceylon,
processions and offerings.
At other times, intimate family scenes are depicted
lovers embracing beneath pavilions supported by red and
blue lacquer^ columns, or beside richly coloured beds of
flowers ; a princess at her toilette, musicians and dancers
preparing to entertain ; groups of lightly or barely clad
women revealing a charming beauty of human form ;
children playing by their mother's side, with their favour¬
ite birds or animals.
In these life-like frescoes of living beings the artists
have given free rein to their inclinations in portraying
the human body, feminine slenderness, in particular,
being one of their favourite themes. The modelling, the
contrast of flesh-tints, the airy lightness of_ celestial beings
such as Indra, God of the Heavens, with his escort of
14
nymphs all are expressed with thé same intense interest.
What is the explanation for a choice of subjects that
seem "profane" and apparently so far removed from the
cloistered life of the seeker after wisdom ? It is perhaps
because the Master, when confronted with the many
aspects of life and desire, and having renounced all, had
said : "Passing beyond the forms of beauty, ye may find
beauty itself."
This is one of the outstanding features of an art which
is steeped in humanity, and in which design, colour, form
and composition were simply artistic elements of a
spiritual inspiration underlying all of it. It is a truly
Indian tradition, found as long ago as we are able to go
back, that the divine is not separated from the human,
nor the spirit from the body. For he who has been freed,
the body is a "garden of delight"; no longer the slave
of the senses it remains calm and detached.
When Buddha's disciple Ananda asked him whether
friendship, association, and intimacy with the beautiful
were not half of the holy life, the Master replied: "Say not
so, Ananda, it is the whole, not the half of the holy life."
Inspired by this principle, disciples and teachers, artisans,
sculptors and painters, have tried to convey a better
understanding of Buddha's message of love and compas¬
sion for every living thing, and of
universal peace. They have left the
world this moving testimony of their
research and their discovery.
, After being forsaken and neglected
for centuries, and -despite the damage
or destruction of so many of its paint¬
ings by weather, swarms of wild bees,
insects, birds, bats and even by human
hands, Ajanta still remains an out¬
standing treasure trove of Indian art
from the 3rd century B.C. to the 7th
century A.D. a joyous and serene art.
Every evening, the last rays of the
setting sun penetrate for a few
moments into these places of medita¬
tion. As they light up the faces in the
frescoes and sculptures, one by one,
they invest these achievements of
bygone times with new life. In the
shrine of the Vihara XI the shafts of
sunlight bring a sudden divine ecstasy
to the face of Buddha as he sits upon
his throne with, at his feet, a kneeling
man, and on each side, two lions lying peaceably with two
deer. In the presence of the splendours at Ajanta, the
words of Buddha take on their full meaning: "Discov¬
ering the life that is in himself, everywhere and in
everything, the wise man embraces the whole wbrld in
one feeling of peace, compassion and limitless love."
"Be ye kind
all that liveth."
to
"Be ye the heirs
of truth."
Francis Brunei has studed
the cultures of the East
for many years and has
travelled extensively in
Asian countries. From
1944 to 1947 he was head
of the French cultural
mission to India. He has
been a member of the
Unesco Department of
Education since 1949.
