The last of the Fuegians
r' I»
THE LAND OF THE ONASthe large island of Tierra
del Fuego is depicted here on two maps drawn four
centuries apart. The first, prepared some thirty years
ago by Father Martin Gusinde indicates the area (Selke-
nam) once occupied by members of the Ona tribe. The
second was drawn in the early part of the 16th century
from information supplied by Pigaffetta, chronicler of
the Magellan expedition. Drawing (above) also dates
from the 1 6th century. It shows the Onas as they
appeared to a European explorer of the time. Photo¬
graphs taken by Father Gusinde (below left) reveal that
four centuries later life had hardly changed for those
who had managed to escape extermination.
TABVLA GEOGRAPHICA RECNI CHILE
14

UNESCO COURIER N" 8-9 1954
Dr r r l] O r A P A | M Q T Body painting with red ochre, oil or soot may sometimes serve the Indian as a defence against weather,
L r t 11 U L H U H I H U I flies and mosquitoes, but is more commonly used as protection against supernatural enemies the malig-

Mfll 10 11 A II T 0 D I 0 I TO nant sP'r,ts- Óna tribesmen painted their bodies and wore large conical masks (above) during the kloketen
A L I U 11 A N I UllKlIu rites> the most important of their social and religious functions at which boys were initiated to manhood.
This was also a male device to frighten the women into submission. Men appeared disguised as various
spirits, threatening women with punishment for disobedience. Believing that spirits took the form of natural phenomenathe heavens, clouds, thunder,
mountains, etc.the Onas used imitative masks. The one representing the heaven, Olemmg, was painted with red and white spots. His wife, falpen,
wore a completely white dress to imitate the colour of the clouds. The Onas believed that if one offended a mountain.it would send rain and winds.
IN 1880, the Ona Indians of Tierra
del Fuego at the southern tip of
South America were a hardy vi¬
gorous tribe numbering more than
4,000. Today, they can almost be
counted on -the fingers of two hands.
What happened in "the meantime?
There could be no more striking illus¬
tration of the tragic destiny of millions
' of "primitive" people than the fate of
the Ona Indians. The details of this
particularly sordid episode in the his¬
tory of white colonization have been
obtained from Dr. Martin Gusinde,
an Austrian-born anthropologist at the
Catholic University of America in
Washington, D.C., who knows more
about this tribe than perhaps anyone
in the world.
Hunters become
the hunted
AFTER several thousand years,
these Indians had become adapt¬
ed to the harsh physical environ¬
ment of Tierra del Fuego (its name
means Land of Fjre). Primarily hun¬
ters, they roamed the plains and moun
tains of their island tracking the gua¬
naco, an animal related to. the llama.
To the Onas, the guanaco was exactly
what the bison of the North American
prairies was to the Redskins. It pro¬
vided them with food, and with skins
for clothing and shelter, and bones and
sinews for weapons and tools.
The Onas' first contact with the white
man goes back to 1520, the year they
were discovered by Magellan as he
sailed through the straits which have
since borne his name. In succeeding
centuries, navigators who braved the
storms of Cape Horn landed on their
coasts, but only long enough to murder
some of the Indians or kidnap a few
unfortunates to be shown in Europe.
These incidents had little effect on
the state of the tnbe as a whole, and
the Fuegians might have survived to
our own day but for rumours, spread in
1880, that the island contained gold.
Adventurers began to roam over it and,
if they did not grow rich, they at least
had time to massacre the small bands
of Indians who crossed their path.
This first encounter with civilization,
though devastating, was only the pre¬
lude to a drama of mounting horror.
The bloody history of the Indians of
Tierra del Fuego began with the estab¬
lishment of sheepfarms in the last
years of the 19th century.
Not content with cutting up hunting
grounds by barbed wire enclosures,
sheep-raisers, running these enormous
farms, destroyed the guanacos and
other game on which the Ona Indians
depended for survival.
One pound for
a pair of ears
THE starved Indians began to
"hunt" the sheep, or "white
guanacos" as they called them,
and that enraged the colonists who put
a price on the Indian's heads, offer¬
ing one pound sterling for a pair of
ears the rate paid for killing a puma.
Hunting Indians became a profitable
business and people still talk of one
man who made £ 452 at it in one year.
In the interests of efficiency, the "hun¬
ters" organised big beats and their
human quarry sometimes started with
the aid of mastiffs was slaughtered
without pity.
15

The last of
the Fuegians
(Continued)
The Indians, armed only with bows
and flint-tipped arrows, were in no
position to defend themselves. In des¬
peration, they took revenge on the
sheep.
At the beginning, the Onas killed the
sheep in order not to die of hunger; in
the end, they slaughtered them to vent
their hatred. They cut the barbed-
wire fences, stampeded the flocks, and
trained their dogs to bite sheep.
Disease, poison
and deportation
THIS absurd vendetta only exas¬
perated their persecutors and led
them to greater cruelty. More
than ever the Indians were treated as
dangerous animals, to be destroyed by
every possible means. "Hunts" became
more frequent and more cruel, new
horrors being added to old brutalities.
Dr. Gusinde recounts that chil¬
dren were captured,' purposely exposed
to contagious diseases, and returned to
their parents to spread -epidemics. A
new method of slaughter was employed
on a huge scale: mutton poisoned with
strychnine was distributed to the
starving.
This accumulation of horrors finally
aroused public opinion and authorities
decided to act, but the measures they
took proved cruel and deadly. The
Indians were torn from their land and
deported without any regard for their
living conditions. Most of them were
herded onto Dawson Island; others
were put into veritable concentration
camps behind barbed wire.
There is no need to describe what
happened to the deported Indians.
The women and children who were
lent or sold to colonists were probably
better off as slaves than their kin im¬
prisoned under military supervision.
Only a handful
now remain
WHEN Dr. Gusinde went to live
among them in 1919, the Fue¬
gians then numbering 279, had
taken refuge in the southern forests of
their island. They were trying more
or less successfully to live according to
their traditions and to avoid contacts
with the whites.
But just when there might have been
hope for their survival under the pro¬
tection of missionaries, they were deci¬
mated by influenza to such an extent
that only a handful now remain.
These "children of nature" had led a
happy and satisfying existence for
centuries in their solitude at the very
southern end of South America, Dr.
Gusinde writes. Generation had fol¬
lowed generation in a fruitful way of
life. Other generations might have
succeeded them without harming a
soul on the face of the earth.
Then, the anthropologist continues, a
handful of fortune-hunting Europeans
invaded their lands. In less than fifty
years, an ancient Indian tribe whose
past went back beyond the dawn of
history had been exterminated.
_
;
^^J>> .
J
««A*/*1
*i.s
* c^VKH D'^y If^Sr-l^l^u^^
dÊmm
ÉHk
¿¿¡¡£^3T5P'3L. Â w
^j^Jh JP ^F ^^K
J ^-O-
-***¥£¿(SsJr f **^£ - ?*
*^ß*- [
i -m^
. ¡j
	
DEATH WAS ONCE
A TRIBAL GAME
Death was attributed by the Ona people
to a supreme being called Temaukel whose
will was executed through such causes as
old age, sickness, war etc., and the spells
of sorcerers. It was also the theme of
one of their ceremonial games in which
the leader, named Kotaix (left) painted his
body and wore a horned headdress. At
one stage in the game those taking part
had to lie down and feign death. In
wintry weather they first spread furs
on the ground (below). But the game they
were finally forced to play was far more
cruela ruthless, man-hunt (top photo)
In which as the defenceless human quarry
they were nearly all exterminated.
16


UNESCO COURIER N" 8-9 1954
SPARTAN LIFE IN
A GOLD CLIMATE
Ritual circle is formed by men in front of the ceremonial hut, which only they can approach, to invoke the spirits
responsible for the weather. The severity of the climate on Tierra del Fuego over which chilly winds constantly roar
is proverbial. But the people acquired an amazing resistance to cold. Immediately after birth infants were plunged
into the sea or a stream and underwent similar treatment as they grew up. Only the most robust survived such a
Spartan childhood. Scanty clothing consisted of guanaco furs, and for shelter Onas built windbreaks of hides.


^A^dnh&dma**5¡
FEATHERS SPED THE
FEET OF RDNNERS
Games and sportswrestling, foot races, archery duelswere very popular pastimes among the Onas and all
helped to develop a physique capable of resisting the terrible weather on Tierra del Fuego. But superstitions
also found their way into sports. Before starting a foot race runners tied a bunch of feathers to the left arm,
being pursuaded that this would give them greater speed. It is, in fact, difficult to speak of games in the normal
sense in relation to peoples for whom almost everything has some link with -a superstition or religious rite.
17

FU EG IANS (Cont'd.)
ON VIEW AT 1889
PARIS EXHIBITION
The first Europeans who came into contact
with Tierra del Fuego Indians considered
them as being little better than animals.
Their language was reported to be rudi¬
mentary, but this Idea was completely
destroyed after the Rev. Ernest Bridges
went to live among them and later pub¬
lished a dictionary which, though in¬
complete, contained some 23,000 words.
Their reputation as "savages" was such that
visitors to the Paris Exhibition of 1889
were willing to pay to see a group of-
these "curious animals" who had been
forcibly taken from their Island homes.
PAINTING UP
FOR "KEWANIX
>»
Ceremonial rites such as the initi¬
ation of young men were always
the occasion for Ona men to dress
themselves up. But there were
other ceremonies such as the
Kewanix at which women painted
their bodies with traditional designs.
Their strange customs did not
prevent the Onas from having a
developed sense of morality which
required them to live virtuously so
as to earn the goodwill of the gods.,
NEW STYLES FOR
EVERY OCCASION
Ona women generally paid little attention
to their hairstyles except for aslight parting
and a fringe over their foreheads. Painting
of the face was the only way of "making-
up". Here (from left to right) is the make¬
up for everyday use, for the marriage
ceremony and the special hairstyle for
mourning. Another mourning custom of
the Onas was to gash themselves with
pointed bones to show their sorrow.
Men's facial decorations varied in the same
way. Photos (from left to right) show an
everyday design, a typical old man's head
and the warrior's decorations. (All photos
Illustrating this article on the Ona Indians
are copyrighî by Father Martin Gusinde).
i
18
