A TURNING POINT
By Gerald Wendt
THE unanimous vote of the
General Assembly of the United
Nations on December 4, 1954, for
the setting up of an international
atomic energy agency and for a
United Nations conference on the
peaceful uses of atomic energy was
hailed in countries all around the
world.
The problem of making the full use
of the atom for the good of mankind
is not one for scientists and statesmen
alone. Every thinking and literate
person should have an understanding
of the atom and its possibilities. Men
and women everywhere should un¬
derstand the implications of the U.N.
decision, and they should welcome it
with enthusiasm. The reasons, plain
to see, are these:
1 After the years of fixation on
I. weapons and on the chill fear
of destruction, the dark skies broke
and a beam of sunshine brought hope,
if not a promise, of better times to
come. The evil spell of the -atom was
cast off by honest plans for peace and
benefits to humanity from the great
new resource that science had
created. It brought a relief from war
talk, if not an end to it.
2 It was a unanimous vote for
a unanimous benefit. It meant
that all the member states would pro¬
fit together, large and small, east and
west, industrial and agricultural, rich
and poor. And it meant that the
United Nations is a force in being
which can seize upon a great vision
and can act to give it reality. For
once it was not merely a nation or a
power-group but the whole organized
world that agreed to co-operate in
exploring a new road to human
welfare.
3 It is a road that will eventually
lead to a large increase in use¬
ful energy, in power to do the world's
work. And energy creates material
wealth and replaces hard human
labour by leisure and well-being.
4 Just as surely, the by-products
of the atomic furnaces, the ra¬
dio-isotopes, are instruments for the
exploration of nature as powerful as
were the microscope and the telescope
in their early days. Especially in the
revelation of the deep secrets of the
life processes, they will bring a new
era in science and therefore in human
living.
5 In order to achieve these bene-
fits in the nations that are not
now active in the study and produc¬
tion of atomic energy, a major in¬
crease in educational facilities will be
needed. They must be provided in
advance. The production of atomic
energy on a large scale demands
not only highly specialized nuclear
physicists and chemists but also
thousands of engineers, electrical,
civil and mechanical, and many more
skilled workmen to operate and
maintain the reactors, the electrical
generators, the entire electrical dis¬
tribution system and the myriad
motors and electrical machines that
will use the energy. Furthermore, in
order to use radio-isotopes as a
research tool, there will need to be
scientific laboratories, especially in
the biological and medical sciences,
and training schools for the use of the
new techniques in nearly all the
research sciences and in industrial
research. Indeed, in order to provide
training at these levels, the nations
who expect to participate will need a
broad programme of improved ( se¬
condary education, including 'the
provision of modern laboratories and
teaching methods in the secondary
schools. If the atomic energy pro¬
gramme serves as an incentive to
stimulate such programmes of scien¬
tific education in the countries that
do not now have them, this in itself -
will constitute a benefit, quite apart
from the direct benefits from the use
of atomic energy.
6 Finally, the availability of
. ample energy, especially in
lands where power -has been scarce
and industry therefore weak, will
bring a social revolution comparable
with the industrial revolution of a
century and a half ago. The advan¬
ces in agriculture, nutrition, medicine
and health will alone cause rapid so¬
cial changes, even in the industrial
countries. The world has in the past
let such revolutions develop un¬
foreseen, often with disastrous con¬
sequences as well as benefits. This
time we can see it coming. This time
many a people will leap from the age
of bullock-power to the atomic age.
If the prospect is breathtaking, it is
also an inspiring challenge to the
: educators, social scientists, national
planners and governments.
It is because benefits from the in¬
ternational development of atomic
energy are so incalculable and
because the pace at which these
changes will proceed are dependent
on so many factors that the whole
international atomic project deserves
study not only by the international
conference that will be called by the
United Nations in 1955, but by the
informed public in every country.
Much depends on the demand for
energy in various countries, on the
cost of atomic power, on the location
cf atomic reactors, and on the
ability of each country to utilize the
additional energy and the new
knowledge. That is why the reasons
given above for welcoming the U.N.
decision are considered in the sub¬
sequent articles of this series.
* For a biographical note on
Dr. Wendt, the author of the
articles in this issue, see page 50

