UNESCO COURIER. N°» 4-5. 1954
ot long ago, the famous American battleship
Missouri the "Mighty Mo" as she was
called was placed "in mothballs" and
retired from the United States naval
service. It was on her quarterdeck, on
September i, 1945, that Japan accepted the
Allied surrender terms and acknowledged the defeat of militarism.
Nearly nine years have passed since the surrender ceremony
took place in Tokyo Bay; and while time has transformed the
once "Mighty Mo" into a "ghost" ship, it has brought revolu¬
tionary transformations to post-war Japan.
Since their defeat, the Japanese have been looking at a new way
of living de-mok-ra-sie. New types of behaviour and new
modes of thought have grown up in competition with the tradi¬
tional forms. The old Imperial régime and everything stemming
from or connected with it have been profoundly altered. To all
appearances, the only thing left is a façade, with the steel framework
and structural depth gone.
The Emperor remains, but only as a symbol of national unity.
Sovereignty has been restored to the people. Laws concerning
the family and inheritance as well as the legal status of women have
entirely changed. Socially and economically a profound revolu¬
tion has been brought about by agrarian reform and the dispersal
of the Zaibatsu (trusts). Militaristic Shintoism the State reli¬
gion has been abolished, and the nation's educational system
has been entirely recast. By an explicit provision of the new
Constitution, the army has been completely abolished. No
fragment survives of the incomparable metal the Samurai sword
was forged from; the chrysanthemum, emblem of the Imperial
House, disappeared entirely.
In the face of such a total upheaval, where did the youth of
postwar Japan stand and what were their feelings and attitudes
to the changes ? Were they really a new generation "without the
chrysanthemum and the sword ? "
12
In 195 1, Unesco began a great enquiry into the subject. Two
Europeans Jean Stoetzel, a French opinion poll expert, and Fritz
Vos, a Dutch Japanologist joined a team of Japanese including
Eizo Koyama, director of the Japanese National Public Opinion
Research Institute (NPORI), Takao Sofue and Feiichi Izumi,
both of the Japanese Association of Cultural Science.
The investigation was undertaken in several parts. The most
comprehensive was carried out by the NPORI through a repre¬
sentative sampling poll of youth all over the country. Other
more specialized surveys were made in selected areas: on the
southernmost island of Kyusku, with its reputation for tradition¬
alism, and the northernmost island of Hokkaido exactly the
opposite. Students in Tokyo, Kyoto (a rich cultural centre)
and Sapporo (seat of the University of Hokkaido) were also
specially questioned. Persons interviewed ranged from the son
of a purged general and the fatherless student of a middleclass
family whose mother was a labourer, to the secretary of a miners'
union and young fishermen living on the northeastern tip of
Hokkaido within sight of the Kuriles, who had to be reached by
sledge across snowfields.
The Unesco enquiry has now been completed and its findings
are reported in a 300-page study by Dr. Stoetzel (1). Though
the enquiry covered all age groups it focused attention on youth,
15 t02 5 , who make up one fifth of the population or 1 5 million per¬
sons ; two-thirds of whom are country dwellers. In this group all
boys and girls attend school up to 1 5 ; about half of both sexes are
employed between 15-20 years; and a small minority continues
studies after 20.
The questions put to the young men and women of Japan
covered almost every aspect of their life, but they were especially
(1) ' Without the Chrysanthemum and the Sword A study of the Attitudes
of Youtb in Post-war Japan' . By Jean Stoetzel. Published by Unesco. Avail¬
able in July, 1954. Price : $ 2.50: I2¡6: 600 fr.
grouped around a few main themes: what Japanese youth think
about foreigners; their attitudes toward higher authority and their
country's institutions; their attitudes toward tradition vs. social
change and the personal values they most treasure.
The answers can help us assess New Japan's chances of evolving
along democratic lines or reverting to some form of totalitarianism.
For if the young people of Japan have become self-reliant and
independent, if their thinking shows confidence and assuredness,
if they have found the strength to cast off the heavy burden tradi¬
tionally placed on them by the state and their family, then the
cause of democracy will be safely guarded in Japan by the citizens
of tomorrow. If not, then quite different political inferences can
be drawn.
The Unesco investigation was not a political study, however.
The primary aim was to try and reduce the enormous distances
still separating Japan, its people and its customs from other coun¬
tries. It was part of the much vaster Unesco programme for
promoting understanding between peoples. International goodwill
and a co-operative spirit are not enough in themselves; they must
go hand in hand with accurate knowledge about the different
peoples of the world.
In the case of Japan, insofar as Westerners' minds are not a
complete blank on the subject, their knowledge mostly boils
down to a collection of arbitrary clichés whether favourable
or not stemming from misleading propaganda, the warped
judgment of political events, or inaccurate books.
In the past, the Japanese people have been described by certain
individuals as "two-faced", "crafty", and "bellicose". Such
stereotyped opinions are largely based on ignorance and the
emotions of those who expressed them suspicion, hatred and
anger.. They are purely subjective and unrealistic and false.
It must be admitted however that it is no simple matter to
"understand" a nation whose whole social structure, way of
thinking and philosophy of life are poles apart from one's own.
As Jean Stoetzel poses the problem, "For a foreign observer,
Japanese behaviour, like that of other peoples... is on three different
planes. First there is the exotic plane the one that strikes the
tourist, and which Herodotus delighted to note in his descriptions
of Egypt." And he cites the Japanese author, Atsuharu Sakai
who in his book "Japan in a Nutshell" lists 58 contrasts between
Japan's customs and those of the West. Here are a few: Japanese
strike matches away from them, wear white for mourning, write
from top to bottom and from right to left, touch their nose when
they say "I" or "me", beckon with palms downwards.
"The second plane", continues Dr. Stoetzel, "isthat of 'human
nature'... this is normally the plane on which relations with
strangers are established and interchanges between peoples of
different cultures are possible.
"Below these however, there is a third plane, deeper in a sense
than the others, where the motivations, values and mechanism
of the individual are to be found. While something very near
to understanding can be achieved on the second plane, the true
and full interpretation of behaviour can be obtained only on the
third." But even Dr. Stoetzel, who states that the aim of the


authors of the Unesco enquiry was to penetrate that third plane,
frankly admits "We cannot say that we have entirely succeeded."
Whatever the plane, however, any understanding of the Japanese
must accept their right to think and* behave like Japanese. Thus,
the Japanese consider all pleasures legitimate provided they are
given minor importance, but they reject as scandalous the pursuit
of happiness as the serious purpose of life. In fact the word
"happiness" has no exact equivalent in the Japanese language.
Many terms such as freedom and slavery, good and evil,
happiness and misery, democracy and totalitarianism which the
West accepts as clearcut opposites are often pointless when
applied to Japan.
On the following pages, we present some of the findings of
the Unesco enquiry on post-war Japanese youth.
13



UNESCO COURIER. N°" 4-5. 1954
mm
youth eyes the outside world
mm i
| NY attempt to understand
I Japanese thinking and
U behaviour must take into
Bl I I Bk I account the fact that up
^^^^fl until a relatively short time
l ago, Japan was an island-
universe all of its own that
had deliberately cut itself off from all
contact with the Western world.
The Portuguese made a chance
landing in the south of Kyushu in
1542 ; _ Saint Francis Xavier reached
Kagoshima in 1549 and the Jesuits
followed. In 1600 the Dutch appeared.
Within a few years, however, Chris¬
tianity was banished and foreigners
were expelled. By the middle of the
17th century, not a single foreigner
remained in Japan except for the
Dutch who were confined to a small
commercial concession in Nagasaki,
and a few Chinese. Travel by Japan¬
ese outside the Empire on any
pretext was prohibited as was the
building of any ship with a draught- of
over 500 koku (92 tons).
The modern era was ushered in with
the Meiji Restoration (Meiji means
"order of light") in 1868. It marked
the end of Shogun (feudal family) rule
in the name of the Emperor. The last
of the Shoguns abdicated and the
Emperor reassumed full powers ; feu¬
dalism was abolished and a feudal
lord revolt crushed. Japan flung open
its ports to- the commerce, science,
institutions and customs of the West.
And then the Japanese, who had
embarked on only one foreign war of
aggression in 1500 years of their history
(the ill-fated Korean expedition of
1592-98), plunged headlong into mi¬
litary adventure war with China,
Russia, Korea, Germany, Manchuria,
Indo-China, and finally Pearl Harbour
in 1941 which ended with Japan's total
defeat and unconditional surrender in
1945.
- The world saw the Japanese people,
who had waged a savage, bitter war in
the Pacific receive the news of their
capitulation if not without emotion at
least without any mass uprising. The
Occupation provoked no outbreaks of
violence and there was no "resistance".
The Japanese set themselves court¬
eously and diligently to mend their
ways. The defeat, the far-reaching
changes in the regime, the trial and
execution of Japan's military leaders
caused even less protest than the Meiji
revolution which had at least provoked
one revolt in 1877. As Jean Stoetzel
remarks "such docility is not merely
suspicious after the determination
shown by the people in their struggle
against half the world; it is incom¬
prehensible."
This complete turn-about, however,
is an integral part of the conduct of
life in Japan whether in personal or in
international relations. In her re
markable study of Japanese culture,
the late American social anthropologist
Ruth Benedict has emphasized this
point. Writing in "The Chrysanthem¬
um and the Sword" she says "Japan's
real strength which she can use in
remaking herself into a peaceful
nation 'lies in her ability to say of a
course of action, 'That failed,' and
then to throw her energies into other
channels. The Japanese sees that he
has made an error in embarking on a
course of action which does not achieve
its goal. When it fails, he discards it
as a lost cause, for he is not condition¬
ed to pursue lost causes. 'It is no use',
he says 'biting one's navel'."
What, however, was the effect of all
this on , Japanese youth ? How did
they accept the fact of the 1945 defeat?
Did they withdraw into themselves and
nourish feelings of revenge or were
they prepared to turn optimistically
to the future, ready to . co-operate
sincerely with the other nations of the
world ? If so, how did they picture
the other nations. What were their
attitudes toward war, pacifism and the
recent decision to rearm ? These were
some questions that the Unesco survey
of Japanese youth sought to answer.
One fact stands out : The youth of
Japan have not withdrawn into them¬
selves. On the contrary, their eyes are
open wide to the outside world. The
polls carried out for Unesco by the
J 853
The arrival
of Perry
On the night of July 8, 1853, after Commodore Matthew Calbraith
Perry of the U.S. Navy had anchored his small flotilla off the Japanese
coast at Uraga, a meteor shot across the sky. 'This', noted the Commo¬
dore, ' could be construed as a favourable omen '. And so it was
for Perry's visit marked the opening of Japan to international intercourse
after two centuries of almost complete Isolation. This is how a Japanese i
artist depicted the Commodore a century ago. The second illustration
shows a Samurai guarding his homeland against Perry's "black ships".
15

'It is no use biting
one's own navel'
One
girl
out of
eight
In I 949 there were
about 400,000 uni¬
versity students in
Japan of whom one-
eighth were girls.
Nearly two thirds of
the total student body
is divided between the
universities of Tokyo,
Kyoto and Osaka. To¬
kyo University alone
has an enrolment of
over 180,000 stu¬
dents. Here, a crowd
of students from Kyo¬
to University assem¬
bles in the square
outside the "famous
old Kabuki Theatre.
Japanese National Public Opinion
Research Institute showed that as
many as 58 % of the Japanese "want
to know all about events abroad."
Amongst the teen-age group the per¬
centage was as high as 73 %. And
curiously enough, teen-agers living in
the rural areas show the greatest
interest in foreign countries (76 %).
There one can say that if war often
brings nations into closer contact than
does peace, defeat opens the windows
still wider, acts as a spur to national
self-appraisal, to the desire for reform,
and leads to comparisons with other
ways of life and a search for examples
to follow.
It should not be inferred from this,
however, that the Japanese now look
at foreign affairs or foreign countries
through rose-coloured glasses. The
Unesco enquiry clearly shows that the
desire for knowledge about other
nations is closely linked with a deep
feeling of fear and anxiety which
permeates Japanese youth. In fact
nearly eight out of ten young people
who "want to know" feel that "events
in foreign countries can adversely
affect the Japanese way of life".
Unlike the Japan of the pre-war
militaristic period, the post-war
Japanese freely admit that Japan is
16
not the hierarchical superior of all
other nations and see many countries
far ahead of her.
By far the most popular is the
United States, which over 80 % of
Japanese youth considered ahead of
their own country. Although criticism
of the U.S. is not lacking, the credit
side by far overweighs the debit side,
and there is deep Tespect for America
the victorious power. This is an im¬
portant element in the psychology of
Japanese youth.
After the United States, the countries
considered ahead of Japan are England
(18 %), Prance (7 %), Germany (6 %),
the Soviet Union (5 %), Switzerland
(2 %), and Denmark (1.5 %). These
percentages may seem . small but
actually they represent large numbers
of people; one per cent of the
population 15 years of age or over
representing some 500,000 persons (1).
But more interesting perhaps than
the countries considered superior to
Japan are the factors which the
Japanese feel put these nations ahead
(t) It Is Interesting- to note here that 72 % or
Japanese youtli are eager to go abroad, the 10
countries most frequently mentioned being: :
USA (48 %) ; France (8 %) ; Great Britain (6 %);
Germany (3 % ) ; Soviet Union (3 % ) ; Switzer¬
land (3 %) ; China (2 %) ; Brazil (2 %) ; Hawaii.
(2 %) ; Denmark (1 %).
of their .own country. Far and away
above all other considerations the
Japanese admire foreign material
power, that is, scientific, technological
and industrial advances, rather than
foreign achievements in the intellec¬
tual, cultural or moral spheres.
This casts a revealing light on the
idea that the , apáñese really have of
the West, and indirectly on their
opinion of how Japanese civilization
compares with that of the Christian
industrial West. The Japanese look
at the West as materially powerful and
thereby enviable; but not truly cul¬
tivated and a little lacking in soul.
The table published on page - 19
shows the degree of importance at¬
tached by the Japanese to different fac¬
tors they deem superior in the six
foreign countries most- frequently
named.
Thus while technology is the most
important factor which makes for
American superiority in Japanese eyes,
it is even more marked in the case of
Germany. In only two instances is
any other factor of -superiority the
most frequently mentioned for a
foreign country:- economic evolution
for Denmark and intellectual values
for Prance.

UNESCO COURIER. M°« 4-5. 1954
The highest standard of living is
attributed to America, France and
Germany; the most advanced political
development to Switzerland, Great
Britain and the Soviet Union in that
order; and the highest "spiritual
values" (i.e. manners and customs,
politeness and strength of character)
to Great Britain and Germany.
When asked to say what Japan
could learn from the way of life of
foreign countries, by far the largest
number of young people and adults
alike chose Western comfort in the
home: Western labour-saving devices,
improvements in the kitchen, electricity
at home, and scientific appliances
which facilitate the housewife's job.
Some Japanese stressed that Japan
should adopt the Westerners' punc¬
tuality, respect for women, and health
techniques. Western clothing, food
and housing aroused relatively little
interest on the whole. A third of the
Japanese though could see nothing at
all in foreign ways that they wanted
Japan to adopt.
t Despite the fact, too, that a good
half of the Japanese public had
nothing to say about Western traits to
be avoided, criticism of foreign ways
and customs was by no means lacking.
Here are a few of the things par-
JS60
A mission goes abroad
After the signing of the U.S.¬
Japanese Treaty of Friendship
in 1 854 Japan established official
diplomatic relations with Euro¬
pean nations. But the first
Japanese diplomatic mission was
not sent abroad until I860.
Arriving in the United States it
was received by President
Buchanan in the White House,
where delegates were startled
to find that the President was
dressed like other people and
he did not even wear a sword.
The first foreign trading settle¬
ment in Japan was established
in 1 877 at Tsukiji (Tokyo Pro¬
vince). Foreigners who arrived
that year saw the flying of the
first balloon by the Japanese
Navy Ministry. The flags of
nearly every nation which flew
within the settlement showed
that Western civilization was-
beginning to penetrate Japan.
Special foreign areas with extra¬
territorial rights disappeared in
1 894, Under the new agree¬
ments reached with other coun¬
tries Japan was now recognized
as an equal for the first time.
J 877
Foreigners settle in
ÏSS5
First western house
Rokumeikan, the first Western style building
constructed in Tokyo in 1883, caused a great
sensation in Japan. The Japanese Government
held «lavish parties there for the leaders of the
foreign colonies. Rokumeikan was the result of
a Government policy for the "Westernizing of
Japan", and its purpose was to increase Japan's
international prestige. This engraving depicts a
ball given to honour the birthday of Emperor
Meiji who opened Japan to the Western World.
17

Ancient traditions
and new aspirations
Along with the influence of age-old tradi¬
tions symbolized by the statues of Kyoto,
famed city of classical culture, young people
in post-war Japan are now exposed to new
ways and ideas. One of the most important
social revolutions since the war has been
the change in the status of women. For
centuries men have dominated Japanese
culture. Today women can votepreviously
an unheard-of privilege. ~ Schoolgirls of
today are growing up under the influence
of a new feminist slogan, "Lets develop
the power to think and act for ourselves."

UNESCO COURIER. K»' 4-5. 1954
The good and the bad in
'Ijin' the foreigner
ticularly criticized by Japanese youth:
1). Social relations between men and
women are too crude and too free.
"They walk -arm in arm or hand in
hand.'!
2) Women are placed on a high
pedestal. "The position of men is
humiliating."
3) Women's dresses are extravagant
and gaudy. There is slavery
to fashion". Too much lipstick, ex¬
cessive makeup, and addiction to
permanent waves. "Westerners kiss in
the presence of others."
4) Foreigners don't understand the
art of good living. "They are con¬
stantly eating and chewing both at
work and in the street."
5) There is no strong family bond.
"They don't take care of their parents
and have no sense of filial duty."
6) Their outlook is too materialistic.
"Foreigners ' attach too much im¬
portance to money. They depend too
much on science and their mechanical
civilization. They measure spiritual
values in terms of material ones."
The actual percentage of the people
voicing these criticisms is small in
each case (at no time exceeding 8 %
and usually 3 to 5 % of those polled)
but the remarks are significant and
doubtless reflect Japan's close ex¬
perience with the Occupation.
The Unesco enquiry also furnishes
us with revealing information on the
foreign reading habits of Japanese
youth as weH as their interest in
foreign films and radio programmes.
The Japanese are a great reading
nation. Illiteracy contrary to popular
vestigator concluded: "Generally
speaking, Japanese films (historical or
otherwise) and American Westerns are
favoured by the lower classes of the
population and French films by the
upper. One can say that the cinema
is the most popular pastime of the
youth of Japan."
Similar findings are noted by Unesco
for radio listening habits. Japanese
' youth are more interested in pro¬
grammes broadcasting foreign music
than in their traditional music. And
the younger he is the less he wants to
listen to Japanese music.
Thus for the third time in the
history of Japan, the country is wide
open to Western influences. The
nation as a whole clearly is eager to
multiply contacts with the outside
world and this eagerness is greatest
amongst the young.
But we should not forget that the
Nature of superiority
over Japan
United
States of
America
Great
Britain
France Germany U.R.S.S.
Swit¬
zerland
Denmark
Science and Technology . . 71%
14%
18%
7%
N%
5%
6%
55%
. 23 %
16%
22%
11%
14%
3%
38%
55%
19%
>o%
7%
7%
4%
77%
17%
18%
3%
8%
M%
2%
63%
14%
5%
"9%
14%
5%
3%
42%
"2%
14%
29%
15%
6%
9%
26%
10%
12%
14,%
67%
2%
o%
opinion in the West is practically
non-existent despite Japan's complex
system of writing. The public's read¬
ing taste is highly developed. Daily
newspapers are numerous and the most
important have circulations among
the highest in the world (the two
leading papers of Tokyo, Asahi
and Mainichi, have a daily circulation
of over three million each) . Many
weekly and monthly magazines exist,
volumes published in 1950.
and the output of books is considerable
Of the young people questioned by
Unesco in Tokyo, only three percent
never read newspapers and 18 did' not
read the weekly or monthly magazines.
Fifty-two per cent read books. Inter¬
est in' Japanese translations of foreign
publications was high. Foreign books
most often cited are French, especially
the works 'of Romain Rolland, André
Gide and Camus.
The Japanese also seem to prefer
foreign films to their national pro¬
ductions. Out of 100 persons ques¬
tioned in Tokyo, for example, only 7
preferred Japanese films, 12 gave their
preference to foreign films generally
without specifiying nationality, 11
preferred French films, 7 American -
films, and 7 British films.
In interior villages, Japanese films
and American Westerns are most
popular; while in the towns young
workers of both sexes prefer French
and Italian movies. - A Unesco in-
two previous occasions did not produce
fortunate results. The economic and
religious infiltration which began in
the middle of the 16th century ended,
a century later, in the complete self-
Isolation of Japan. The Wester¬
nization of the Meiji period led to the
development in the Japanese of con¬
tempt for the other Asiatic nations
along with hatred and envy of the
peoples of Europe and America. It
was thus responsible for one of the
most brutal attempts at aggression in
modern history.
In the years following the Second
World War the military and industrial
power of the United States gave rise to
a wave of respect and admiration. The
presence of the Occupation troops and
services enabled the Japanese to
acquire direct knowledge and better
understanding of these "strangers"
in Japan as in many other languages
a "foreigner" Xijin) means a "strange"
or "different" man.
According to Unesco's enquiry, the
Japanese harbour no intentions of em¬
barking on any sort of war of revenge
and the youth of the country even less
so. The last war has left deep scars
in the minds of the Japanese, and to
a traveller journeying through the
country, Japan appears one of the most
passionately pacifist nations in the
world today. .
The Japanese have conceived such a
deep fear of war that it finds ex-
19

t~2*l&&xm-£
»V . ¥ <$
J 9 45
'Twentieth century hell'
The first atomic bomb exploded over Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, and caused the deaths of over
260,000 people. This was the final blow which shattered the militaristic regime. Two Japanese painters
Maruki and Akamatsu have depicted some scenes from this "Twentieth Century Hell", spending more
than four years to finish a set of five pictures.
pression on every possible occasion.
When the National , Public Opinion
Research Institute asked "what is the
thing personal or otherwise which
worries you most and makes you most
unhappy at the present moment?", the
most frequent reply was "economic or.
money problems", while the second
was "fear of war". It is here that one
of the most burning problems of post¬
war Japan rearmament is raised.
The new Constitution of Japan con¬
tains an Article solemnly renouncing
war and provides that Japan will not
maintain an Army, Navy or any means
of waging war. .As a result, the only
armed forces in . Japan were the
National Police Reserve Corps and the
Coastguard. In June 1950, however,
the Korean War broke out. Historic
events such" as the Korean War, the
Peace Conference in San Francisco in
1951 and the signing of the peace
treaty restoring independence to Japan
have driven the problem into critical
focus. In January 1952 the National
Police Reserve was reorganized into
the National Safety Force. By degrees,
Japan has started out along the path
of rearmament.
In May. 1946,. immediately after the
adoption of the new Constitution, an
enquiry by the Mainichi Shimbun (one
of the important Tokyo dailies) cover¬
ing some 2,000 intellectuals showed
that a large majority (69 % of the men
and 73 % of the women) thought the
Article in the Constitution renouncing"
war was "necessary ".
Since then, however, a marked
change of adult public opinion has
taken place. In August 1950, 39 % of .
the population was for rearmament,
33 % against. By March 1951, the
figure ' had risen to 47 % for, 24 %
against, and by January 1952, to 57 %
for rearmament and 24 % against.
The Unesco survey, however, shows
a different picture for Japanese youth.
Young people appear to be consistently
more pacifist than their elders, and
this is particularly marked among
university students. Opposition to
re-armament was in fact found to be
strongest in all age brackets among
those people who' had had a university
or equivalent education.
But investigators also reported: "The
forces of pacifism in Japan are perhaps
less substantial and effective than may
have appeared a few years ago... many
undoubtedly sincere pacifist opinions
are seen, on analysis, to be superficial,
sentimental, and easy to upset."
The wave of pacifism which flooded
Japan after the war was only partly
due to a recognition of the evils caused
by military" adventures. It ' also grew
from a sincere belief that war was not
only avoidable, but that it would
undoubtedly be avoided in the future.
There are still plenty of people who
believe this today, but world events
since the war have had a strong in¬
fluence on most Japanese. The ma¬
jority no longer feel that "peace at any
price" is worthwhile and this is a view
which young - people especially are
quick to affirm.
In considering the implication of this
trend in public opinion, it is worth¬
while recalling the words written by
Ruth Benedict m 1946:
"At present the Japanese know
militarism as a light that failed. They
will watch to see whether it has also
failed in the other nations in the
world. If it has failed elsewhere,
Japan can set herself out to prove how
well. she has learned the lesson that
imperialistic dynastic enterprises are
no road to honour."
19§4 A child of Hiroshima
-
When" Hiroshima experienced
its cataclysm this youth was ~
still a small child. Today he
lives in the rebuilt city whose
wooden houses still recall scenes
of disaster and misery. Here
and in other cities the Japanese
have cleared away the ruins,
turned their backs on an
unhappy past. The children of
Hiroshima have not yet grown
to manhood and their memo¬
ries are still scarred by the war,
but* their generation already
offers encouraging signs to sug¬
gest that the Japan of tomorrow
will be a better place than the
Japan of yesterday.
20

UNESCO COURIER. M" 4-5. 1954
THE IMPERIAL WALLS
ARE DOWN
THE question of young Japan's attitudes towards its national Institutions is
the kernel of the whole Unesco study carried out by Jean Stoetzel, Frits Vos
and Japanese public opinion pollsters.. .
The legal and "administrative structure of Japan has undergone a profound
transformation since the end of the war. The economic organization of town and
country has been extensively recast and the Empire has become a democracy
with a strong bias towards decentralization in certain spheres.
Women have been given equality, with men, not only politically, but in the
family and in daily life, while the principle of primogeniture (inheritance by
eldest son only) apparently strongly entrenched in the country areas, has been
severely modified. The young men are free to marry as they wish, and no longer
need the consent of their families; at the same time attention has been drawn
to the dangers of over-population, and to all intents and purposes official sanction
has been given to birth control. Lastly the "established" religion has been abo¬
lished root and branch and freedom of worship has been- granted to all faiths.
But however important laws may be, institutions exist only through the men
who make 'them work. If these radical innovations are to be incorporated into
Japanese society, it will be primarily through the agency of the young. The
Unesco enquirers therefore attempted to determine the attitudes of young people
-towards economics, politics, the family and religion.
The object of all the reforms mentioned was to reduce the excessive pressure
of authority on the individual, in,his family relationships, in his work and in his "
'I am not a living
god'
In the Imperial Rescript of Janu¬
ary I, 1946, the Emperor Hiro-
hito solemnly declared to the Japan¬
ese people: "I am not a living god".
With these words, the Emperor
formally put an end to the absolute
power which he had held until the
Japanese surrender in 1945. Later,
the new Japanese Constitution pro¬
claimed: "The Emperor shall be the
symbol of the State and of the unity
of the people, deriving his position
from the will of the people in whom
resides sovereign power." Tradi¬
tional respect is still paid to the
dynasty which has reigned over
Japan since 600 B.C. The Emperor
Hirohito Is, in fact, head of the
oldest of the world's reigning
families. Previously, the wall sur¬
rounding the Imperial Palace was
a barrier separating the "Son of
Heaven" from his people. Demo¬
cracy in Japan has not yet abolished
all barriers, but between the people
and the Emperor the wall is down.
21

Problem N° 1: Overpopulation
civic and public life. What, in the
result, is the attitude of the young
towards authority in all its forms? "Do
they feel free? Do they want to be.
free? Do they feel what freedom is?
In other words, do they intend to play
an active part in the life of the com¬
munity, with a fully developed sense oí
their responsibilities ?
. On the whole, and despite very real
grounds for apprehension, Japanese
youth are not pessimists. The majority -
think that living conditions through¬
out the world will become progressively -
better and the youngest age groups are
frankly optimistic.
However attached they may be to '
tradition, the Japanese waste no time
on futile regret for the
past. In one of the ~ "
groups interviewed,
barely 7 % said they OQ million
would have preferred
to live in a past era, n_ .,_.
37 % preferred the 87 million
, future while 41 %
(54 % of the men)
were content with the
present. The Japanese put their trust
in their capacity for hard work and
in technology which they admire most
in foreign nations and which they most
wish to import.
The chief cause of their difficulties,
as they see it,' is overpopulation.
The population problem, in fact, has
become the most important question
since the war and both the government
and civil institutes are studying ways
to solve it. The population is increas¬
ing at the rate of one million persons
a year latest statistics show a rise
from 83 million in October 1950 to 87
million in October 1953. In 1950 the
Japanese National Public Opinion Re¬
search Institute asked what should be
done to remedy the shortage of food,
housing and employment; over-popula¬
tion was mentioned in 60 % of the
replies, and the same investigation
showed that the younger generation
was considerably better informed on
the problem than their elders. Many
public opinion polls have been made on
this question since the war. Family
planning has been advanced by many
Japanese as a way of solving the prob¬
lem. However, other views are strong¬
ly advanced : planned emigration,
and the introduction of reforms to eli¬
minate social inequalities.
As far as the general economic pic¬
ture is concerned, Japanese youth are
not highly critical and seem to prefer
personal solutions to their financial
and material problems. Do they have
a more independent attitude toward
political institutions or do they conti¬
nue- to follovv' the traditional path of
submission to higher authority? Unes¬
co's enquiry seems to indicate that the
latter is both more prevalent and more
deeply rooted but with some reserves.
Japanese youth are making a real
effort to break away from the political
thinking of the past and the heroes
and rulers of yesterday are being repu¬
diated. The following question was
put by one of Unesco's investigators to
youth in Tokyo : "Do you think that
the ideas of Japan's military and polit¬
ical leaders between 1930 and 1940
were basically correct though these
leaders were unable to achieve their
aims ?" A total of 49 % said that the ,
ideas were wrong, but 26 % thought
they were correct up. to a point while
15 % considered them correct.
The new watchword "freedom" has
been greeted with en¬
thusiasm by young
people but they do not
jjj 1950 think M» *s as new as
all that. "In the Heian
i inro era", said one 19-year-
DJ 195o old sales girl, "we tried
to find it and now
we're trying again." A
majority of the young¬
er generation, though, do not feel that
regimes such as those in
Great Britain, France or the U.S. would
be suitable' for present-day Japan.
This does not mean that they reject
democracy but rather that they are
searching for a "Japanese democracy"
which has still to be created. " Every
nation is different", they say, "'so each
country's system must differ too."
On the whole political activity or
interest on the part of the young is
not very marked though it is slightly
greater than among adults. Young
people living in the towns furthermore
are more politics-conscious than those
living in the villages.
In the face of the civil authorities,
Japanese youth appears to have more
independence though this attitude is
still more the exception than the rule.
Thus while most Japanese (70 %)
think that citizens should be able to
discuss public affairs in general, the
view that this should
be left exclusively to
the government" is
quite common in the All fan
rural areas for all age
groups. In all instan- ,
ces surveyed, though, must DC
the younger the indi¬
viduals questioned the
more they maintain
that expression of opinion should be
as free as possible. When the investiga¬
tion is pressed further, ' however,
their certainty about "freedom of
speech and the right of discussion
begins to crumble and authority re¬
covers all its prestige. Women tend to
hold aloof from civic life and do not
generally take sides in situations where
the civil authority is implicated.
Up until the end of the last war the
Emperor was the supreme head of the
traditional political structure of Japan.
The terms of the Japanese surrender
on 15 August 1945 put an end to the
absolute power of the Emperor and to
the bases for the "blind subjection of
the people to Imperial power.
Have .these changes, in- effect, meant
an end to the traditional Emperor
worship, particularly amongst the
young people? Reporting on Unesco's
investigation in this respect, Mr.
Stoetzel remarks that "not a few
traces of the traditional devotion to
the Emperor are still to be found in the
young."
In one of the polls conducted the
following question was asked : "Al¬
though Tojo has been sent to the
gallows as a war criminal, the Emper¬
or, who declared war on the United
States of America, was not regarded as
a war criminal. Do you think this is
reasonable or unreasonable? " The
vast majority about 78 % thought
it reasonable : the commonest reply
(73 %) was that after all, under the
dictatorship of Tojo, the Emperor had
. no real power; in 5 % of the replies the
point was also made that it was the
Emperor who gave the cease-fire order
over the radio.
The Emperor remains, at the very
least, the symbol of the nation, not
merely on paper but in the hearts and
minds of the people. This, was the
view of 74 % of the young people ques¬
tioned in Tokyo. As regards Emperor-
worship, 17 % of the same group had
no opinion about it, 37 % had. objec¬
tions to it, but the majority, 46 %, still
thought it good or even necessary.
Attachment to Imperial and national
traditions thus remains very strong.
The great annual celebration of the
foundation of the Empire, on February
11, is now omitted from the list of offi¬
cial holidays. But 85% of the young
people questioned in one series of polls
favoured the revival of Empire Day.
The comments are worthy of note :
" Reviving Empire Day is a good idea;
but all displays of
. fanaticism must be
rigorously excluded. No
a j- j p i a »»i attempt must be made
to treat a myth as if
_ - j it were the truth." "I
excluded am in favour of reviv-.
ing Empire Day but
only as a way of
marking the birth of
the new Japan. We should therefore
change its name/'
These remarks give us an idea of the
sincere desire for -reform which exists*
among some of the people. On the
whole, however, the replies confirm
one extremely important fact that
the youth of Japan have preserved
intact their sense of continuity with
their country's most distant past and
retain a sharp awareness of Japanese
history even in its mythological
aspects. For today's Japanese youth,
Japan is still a nation with a past.
22

UNESCO COURIER. N°» 4-5. 1954
One Japanese out of two
is under 25 years of age
The population of the world increased by 30 million persons between the middle of 1951 and
mid- 1 952, according to the latest edition of the U.N. Demographic Yearbook. If this increase
continues it will take less than 70 years for the world to double its present population. This
rejuvenation of the world's population is nowhere more obvious than in Japan whose population
has tripled during the past 70 years. One out of every two Japanese is less than 25 years of age. -
23

THERE is an old Japanese riddle
which asks : "'Why is a son who
wants to offer advice to his
parents like a Buddhist priest who
wants to have hair on the top of his
head ?" (Buddhist priests shave their
heads). The answer is," "No matter
how much he wants to do it, he can't."
To Western minds this riddle may
seem like an Oriental version of the
Ifefe. '
y
tiS
i
¿k. j¿^l---' ¿";
";|ll ' t ^Bm
"^^
Bfy i^^j^^^^^^! < \ *
.%
. "' ^"ipj-fat*- *t^r1\
"jMri '
! Ï
\ 4 ' ' '
r,
* - * , -
	> * -	
November 3 is Japan's Culture Day.
A national holiday, it is an occasion for
cultural meetings, exhibitions and all kinds
of festivities. Here a juggler balances
a single bamboo on his chin causing 46
paper lanterns (chochin) to bob and sway.
once current remark "Children should
be seen but not heard." In reality,"
there is no connexion between the two
since the son in the Japanese, riddle
means not only a little boy of, say,
eight, but sons of 30 and 40 who are
married with children of their own.
Although the attitudes of young
people toward their family is under¬
going important changes today, the
riddle does help to illustrate two fun¬
damental aspects of Japanese life the
idea of hierarchy and filial piety.
Hierarchy is basic to Japan's whole
notion of social relations. It is to be
found in the many infinitely complex
rules, customs and conventions that
regulate every-day life; every greeting,
every contact indicates the" kind and
degree of' social distance between
people. The Japanese " have built up
a "respect language" which they
accompany with bows and kneeling. It
is not enough to know to .whom one
should bow but also to exactly what
degree, for this . may range from a
slight bow to kneeling with the fore-
*head touching the hands on the floor.
Etiquette and hierarchy
HIERARCHY is observed above all
in family life. Whereas in the
West etiquette is usually quite
relaxed within the intimacy of the
family, this is not the case in Japan
where it is precisely in the family that
respect rules are learned and applied.
The Japanese family is a tightly-
knit social and economic unit. The
sense of family of belonging to a
family, of acting, in the family name,
of defending family honour, of doing
things orí behalf of the family, of being
worthy of the family ancestors is
extremely powerful particularly in the
rural regions. The common cult is a
symbol of the family bond and people
regard reverence of the family shrine
as one of their most important duties.
Membership in many kinds of
organizations is on a family basis.
Marriage is a family affair, and family
continuity is so important that when
there is no male heir every effort is
made to adopt a son to carry on the
family name (usually the husband of
the eldest daughter).
The Japanese family is hardly larger
than most Western families. In
addition to the married couple and
their children, it usually includes either
the husband's or wife's parents, a
brother or two and their children. On
an average there are from 4-6 persons
in the towns and from 7-8 in the
country areas.
First in line for the bath
THE structure of the family is
strictly hierarchical. All author¬
ity is vested ir. the father or the
grandfather (if he is alive). At meals
he is served first and he is the first to-
enter the communal hot bath (men,
women and children bathe together in
almost boiling hot water). All the
rest of the family bow to him; owner¬
ship of the family property is vested in
him; he is the family priest and makes
and breaks the marriages of his child¬
ren even when they are grown up
with children of their own. His au¬
thority ends only with his death or
voluntary retirement.
Immediately after the father in
seniority comes the* eldest son. Accord¬
ing to tradition and former laws he
was the sole heir and inherited all the
family property. Since the war a new
law provides that all children and
relatives have the right to share in the
inheritance on an equal basis.
In practice, though, the law .is not
strictly followed. Most farmers feel
that their land holdings are too small"
24

and that equal partition would ruin
the family economically. They ignore
the law and leave all the land to the
eldest son. Others split it up unequally
according to age, and only a small few
do so equally among the sons (but not
the daughters).
The feeling of dependence on the
family and of respect for hierarchy is
inculcated in children's minds from an
early age. A child learns during baby¬
hood to bow to the head of the family
and takes part in social functions even
before he can walk. His mother who
carries him everywhere on her back
pushes his head down whenever she
herself bows. At all times the child
absorbs the idea that he needs his-
family.
Hierarchical authority comes to be
accepted not as the dictation of auto¬
crats but as a duty in the interest of
the family. As Ruth Benedict puts
it: "The Japanese learn in their family
experience that the greatest weight
that can be given to a decision comes
from the conviction that it maintains
the family honour. It is not a decree
enforced at the whim of a tyrant who
. happens to be the head of the family.
He is more nearly a trustee of a
spiritual and material estate which
demands of them all that they subord¬
inate their personal wills to - its
requirements.
This, then, is the traditional basis
for life and learning. How has it
fared in Japan's changed post-war
conditions? Have official reforms
really changed the way of life? Have
they encouraged young people to show
more initiative and independence
within their own families? Do young
people welcome the new opportunities -
offered them?
KEEP SMILING
When in sorrow, the Japanese do not like
to make others feel sorry and so they often
talk about their misfortunes with a broad
smile. Some Japanese do so even when they
say: "My father died this morning".
The Unesco enquiry focused on the
situation caused by the conflicting
pull between traditional ways and the
new social evolution in Japan. This
conflict is especially strong in the
minds of young people, many of whom
are torn between the age-old tradition
of respect and obedience to their
parents and a desire to display more
independence and initiative.
From the enquiry it soon became
clear that the younger generation in
Japan no longer accepts its elders'
ideas unquestioningly. AU those who
were asked whether they had
disagreements with their parents and
the other older members, of their
families replied that they did. To
Westerners with their much freer and
easier family relationships there is
nothing very surprising about this. But
for young people in Japan to question
their elder's authority and wisdom
involves the whole structure of the
traditional form of Japanese family
life.
Most disagreements arose "between
old-fashioned views and new ideas
about social problems such as divorce,
equality between the sexes and the
principles on which children should be
brought up." As might be expected,
they were at loggerheads with their
fathers more often than with others
in the family.
Some people went even further.
Among a hundred young people ques¬
tioned in Tokyo, 35 accused the previous
generation of not having acted correct¬
ly; and only 21 had no criticism to
make. In the same group, 50 thought
there was a gulf between themselves
and the previous generation; 14 others
said the gulf existed but was not very
wide' and only 27 thought that the
UNESCO COURIER. K« 4-5. 1954
link between themselves and their
predecessors was unbroken.
That youth is viewing its family
relationships from a new angle was
confirmed .by their elders. A National
Public Opinion Research Institute
investigation showed that 66 % of
Japanese consider that "the number of
children who pay no attention to their
parents has increased of late." A Tokyo
Family Court Judge, speaking about
the connexion between juvenile delin¬
quency and family tensions, instanced,
among other causes, the fact that the
family "no longer interests" many young
people. In Sapporo, teachers said that
the conflicts between parents and
children were increasing not because ,
moral training in the schools had. been
done away with, but because the idea
(Continued on page 30)
Firmly anchored
It is only after a baby has been taken to the local shrine at the age of 30 days that his life is thought
to be firmly anchored in his body so that it is safe to carry him around freely in public. He is carried
on his mother's back, a double sash passed round the mother's shoulders and tied in front of the waist.
LJI\lr-Çffl 0'der children carry the baby, too, even at play.
ARCHIVES
25

UNESCO COURIER. N°« 4-5. 1954
Though Michiko Jinuma is aged 20 in Japan,
she is still only 19 by Western reckoning.
In Japan children are already counted as being
one year old on the day of their birth.
Michiko, daughter of a Tokyo judge, lives
with her parents and three sisters in a typical
Japanese wooden house with nine rooms.
Every other day she travels into Tokyo by the
electric trainrarely getting a seat, for young
men don't make room for girls to attend
classes at a fashion school where students
learn dressmaking, designing and dancing.
Out of classes Michiko loves to stroll through
Tokyo's streets, "window shopping" and
admiring the dresses with a growing profes¬
sional eye. Returning home in the evening,
she prepares her work for the next day or
sets about altering one of her dresses. She
has quite an extensive wardrobe: four two-
piece dresses, five one-piece dresses, two
kimonos and six pairs of shoes. VVith the
kimono she always wears the Japanese "gethas"
(wooden shoes). Michiko, in fact, lives the
easy and care-free life of a middle-class girl.
She is on good terms with her parents who
allow her plenty of freedom. "If you think
it is right, then do it; if you think it is wrong,
then don't", her father tells her. She uses
powder and lipstick, nail polish, face lotion
and oil for the hair. In the home she helps
her mother with the houseworkbut without
much enthusiasm. Before meals she always
says a prayer before the shrine of Buddha in the
house, and every two weeks she changes the
flowers and leaves that decorate it. When she
is not in school she likes to read the paper and
listen to the radio (plays and Western classical
music are her favourites). In the evening she
helps her mother to prepare dinner, and then
comes the most delightful time of the day for
the family. They are all together and tell each
other the happenings of the day. Michiko
has plenty of friends, but no boy-friend in
the Western sense. She would like one older
than herself with whom she could talk about
everything. She hopes to marry and have three
or four children, but no more. Overpopula¬
tion in our country is a menace, she says,
"and we women have an obligation there".
CHANGES IN THE WARDROBE. MICHIKO MAKES HER OWN DRESSES. STUDY IN SKIPPING. HEALTH GOES WITH BEAUTY. CONFIDENCES IN THE LUNCH HOUR. A CLASSICAL HEAD IS EAVESDROPPING.
26 27


A UNIVERSITY UNION MEETINGTALK, SMOKE
A BOWL OF "SENCHA" (ORDINARY TEA) IN THE STUDENT CANTEEN.
I «...
life*.*
^ RARE RELAXATIONA CHAT AND "SAKE" IN A KYOTO BAR

UNESCO COURIER. K«' 4-5. 1954
AND SUNLIGHT FILL THE ROOM. GORO WORKS FOR THIS UNION.
'» HI
*r*
J-*~
AN OLD TRADITIONSPORT, BUT NOWADAYS JUST FOR SPORT'S SAKE.
A. BREAK FOR. LUNCHTEA, NOODLE SOUP, FISH STEAKS.
A LIGHT BURNS UNTIL THE EARLY HOURS.
Student's
profile...
(KYOTO)
Goro Suma is a law student at Kyoto University. As his
family lives far away in the north of Honshu, the main Japan¬
ese island, Goro rents a tiny room where he studies and
sleeps. He takes his meals in a restaurant nearby rice,
mussel soup, "natto" (a kind of bean), "tsukudani" (seaweed
with small fish) figure largely on the menuor preferably
at the student canteen where food is cheaper. Apart from his
books, he owns three suits, two uniforms (student clothes),
a pullover, two pairs of shoes and a pair of gumshoes. To pay
for his studies he works as secretary of the university profes¬
sors' and employees' union. For this he is paid 6,000 yen
(almost $20 per month). He spends 3,000 yen on food,
1,000 on books, and every day he rations himself to I 5 cigar¬
ettes of the cheapest brand (30 yen) and he buys a news¬
paper each evening (90 yen per month). As much of his
time is taken up with his work for the University Union,
Goro "burns the candle" until about two each morning to
catch'up with his studies. But he still finds time for games
of baseball and ping-pong and occasionally for skiing. Like
most Japanese youth he is interested in films, especially
"realistic" ones and is fond of Western classical music. He
disagrees with his father on many matters, but when he
is in trouble he seeks his father's advice. He does not belong
to any religious sect. Goro wants to become a teacher and
he hopes to marry soon. He intends to have two children.

Equality between
the sexes, but...
Til
arp a Bamboo Pole
The carp is a Japanese symbol of courage and perseverance. Every May 5th, for the Boys Festival
(Tan-go-no-sek-fcu) bamboo poles are raised outside every house from which fly Ko-noborl, hollow
fish made of gaily painted paper or clothone fish for every young son in the family. The fish (here
floating before the castle of Osaka) serve as symbols for boys In overcoming the difficulties they meet.
30
Well-dressed bride and ¿room:
Autumn (September to November) is the most
popular wedding season of the year in Japan. Most
brides wear very elaborate kimono at the ceremony,
and traditionally are given a taka-shimada coiffure,
with a white hairband to cover the "horns of
jealousy" that all women are superstitiously believed
to possess. The old custom of shaving the eyebrows
(Continued from page 25)
oí freedom had been misinterpreted.
"Democracy is not properly under¬
stood", they said.
But the view held by older people
and teachers that young people" are no
longer interested in family life was not
borne out by other investigations.
Attitudes of the young towards the
hierarchical system in the family are
undoubtedly changing but youth still
appear to attach a good deal of
importance to family values.
Both boys and girls gave first place
to family relationships when asked to
indicate from which activities they
expected to get most satisfaction in
life. They gave it preference over such
alternatives as careers, community
work, religious beliefs, etc. , On another
occasion people were asked to name a
particular thing they hoped to achieve
during their lives.- Many replies
showed concern for family affairs
"to be a good son or daughter;"
"to bring up one's children properly."
A dilemma for youth
no way out
IN Japan young people depend psy¬
chologically on their families and
also look to them for economic
security. And that is why many
attempts by young people to eman¬
cipate- themselves come to nothing.
The psychological predicament of
some is reflected in the following frag¬
ment of a conversation with a youth
of 17, the son of a purged- officer:
Question: Do you think that when you.
are a man you will be happier than
you were as a child?
Answer: Yes, I think so.

UNESCO COURIER. r\- 4-3. 1954
and blacking out the teeth is no longer kept up. According to custom the
room where the marriage takes place is decorated with lucky emblems
storks for fertility, bamboos for plenty and tortoises for wisdom. The '
bridegrooms, however, are usually dressed in Western style. But as soon
as the ceremony is over, most couples start on their honeymoon in their very
best Western dress! Although a Japanese officially reaches his majority
when he is 20 and is granted the right to vote, the real line of demarcation
between adolescence and adulthood is considered to be marriage and even
parenthood since the marriage is often not registered before the birth of
the first child. Fatherhood makes a man a full member of the community
while motherhood entitles the wife to smoke, drink and tell indelicate stories.
In traditional Japan all marriages were arranged by the parents. Todaywlth
new legal freedom, young men can choose their own wives. Curiously,
though, many seem reluctant to become adults and are using their new
freedom to postpone marriage as long as possible. It is quite usual nowadays
for young men to wait until they are 26 or even 30 before getting married.
Do you think your children will
be happier than you have been?
I will try to make them happier.
Will your wife be happier than
your mother has been?
I think so.
What do you want to do in life?
I want to teach in a university.
My father was an officer, but I do not
want to be one. Being a military man
made my father very hard with his wife "
and children. Now that he is a farmer
he is less hard. My brother was an
officer and he too was very hard.
Since he was purged he is less hard
than before.
At what age do you intend to"
marry? Will you follow your parents'
advice?
I shall marry when I am 25 or 26.
. I shall ask my parents' advice and then
decide for myself.
Do you approve of the traditional
marriage by arrangement?
No, I disapprove, but I think that
when one is older, one understands and
approves one's father's advice. I now
realize that my father's orders and
advice to me were sound. My mother
was too soft; she spoilt me.
But you just said- that your
children would be happier than you
have been. In other words you don't
consider that your childhood was
happy. Now you say that you approve
of the way your father brought you up.
Does that mean you will bring your
own children up in the same way?
Before, you said the opposite.
To this the youth did not reply. He
realized the contradiction but saw no
way out of his quandary.
It is easy to imagine how this youth .
was dragooned in his childhood, not
only by his father but also by his elder
brother; how he suffered from it; how
he longs to emancipate himself now
and identifying himself, with his
future children how he wants to give
them a more liberal upbringing.
But the prestige of paternal wisdom
still strongly impresses him. He may
say he disapproves of the traditional
marriage by arrangement, but admits
he will seek his father's advice before
getting married. He may even go
further, for he acknowledges that his
father's advice was sound. And he
. blames his mother for not being
sufficiently strict.
The officer's son was moulded by a
more autocratic upbringing than the
majority of young Japanese so his case
is not by any means representative.
Wider investigations do show, however,
that the country's tradition of respect
Y o f u k u
versus
i ni o n o
Many Japanese, es¬
pecially in the cities,
live a "dual life" wear¬
ing yofuku (Western
clothes) out-of-doors
and kimono (Japanese
dress) at home though
the reverse can also be
seen. Western dress
is preferred in street
because it is easier to
get about in. Here
with confidence and a
sense of total equality.
They no longer walk
the small, mincing
steps of their mothers
and grandmothers in
their kimonos.
31

A new wind blows across
ancient
and obedience
still , remains
strong.
Although on¬
ly a relatively
small propor¬
tion of people
(between 8 %
and 16 % ac¬
cording to age
groups) said
they thought children should .obey their
parents in all circumstances, a remark¬
ably high proportion (50 %) preferred
not tb offer an opinion. This shows
how many are still influenced by a
tradition of obedience and even when
they do not approve of it are still not
prepared to commit themselves."
A drudge and the
butt of mother-in-law
THE same poll showed that it was
not the younger groups who spoke
up- most frequently for emanci¬
pation within the family. "One gets
the impression", concluded the inves¬
tigators, "that it will be difficult for
the young to win emancipation in the
family by themselves; it is more likely
to be granted them from outside."
Similarly, younger groups showed the
. greatest caution in accepting new ideas
regarding the functioning of the family.
A case in point is the status of the
mother-in-law and her traditional
treatment of her daughter-in-law,
whose position is not an enviable one
for, living away from her own family,
she is often the household drudge and
butt of the older woman.
Of the people questioned in Tokyo,
41 % thought that a change was need¬
ed in this traditional relationship,
against only 2 % who saw nothing
wrong in it. Of the remainder, 30 %
condemned the- situation without sug¬
gesting any change, and 27 % had no
opinion to offer.
This, of course, is just one aspect of
a much wider problem raised by
the status of Japanese women who
traditionally are minors and whose
position is fixed according to the
Confucian maxim: "A woman owes
obedience three times in her life, to
her parents when she is young, to her
husband when she is married, and to
her children when she is old."
Though this rule is not applied
rigidly in all parts of the country, the
inferior lot of women is still in many
cases a reality, both established and
sanctioned by law prior to the war,
and recognized in the customs of today.
Before 1945, women had no vote and
were only allowed to own property
conjointly with their husbands; they
32
could claim no share in the estate of
their deceased husbands or fathers and
could not initiate divorce proceedings.
Under the new régime they have equal'
rights with men. But personal status
is not determined merely by law; it is
only given real effect by popular
acceptance. Nowadays women have
the right to demand a divorce, but
many men laugh heartily at the idea
of a wife taking the initiative in break¬
ing up the marriage.
In everyday life, the 'wife takes her
meals separately, serves her husband
and stays at home, or, when she does
go out with her husband, walks some
paces behind him. It is only when a
Japanese woman is wearing Western
dress that she will walk beside a man
in the street and precede him through
doors; back at home in her kimono,
she will serve dinner to her husband
and his European guests but will not eat
with them herself.
It is not only the prolonged influence
of Confucian' .ethics which determines
the social inferiority of women.
Another important factor is her mar¬
riage role. To the Japanese, love counts
among the minor satisfactions and is
kept quite apart from the serious things
. of life, in which the family is included.
A woman's primary role the bearing
of children to perpetuate the family
line overides other personal consider¬
ations. .
The fact that they were able to earn
their own living helped Western women,
to earn their freedom. Japanese women
who aspire to emancipation, also seek it
by the same path. This is why many
country girls, both before and since the
war, have sought employment in the
cities. But progress in achieving
freedom has been slow. A 1948 survey
showed that out of 100 women in paid
employment more than half had
accepted the jobs without knowing
what the work was or what pay was
attached to it."
Casting their votes
to avoid ridicule
POLITICALLY women have equal
rights and crowd the polling
booths at election time, but their
political life usually stops there. An
enquiry in a country area showed that
women voted to avoid ridicule. In
their votes they preferred to
follow the
lead of pro- .
minent local
women ra¬
ther than ask
the advice of
their men-

UNESCO COURIER. N"» 4-5. 1954
33

Giri' the word with a
thousand and one meanings
folk. Men were amused at the idea of
women having political rights ; and,
indeed, women themselves said they
thought it was too early for them to
take part in politics.
In Japan, as in most countries, tra¬
ditions are maintained more strongly
in the countryside than in the cities.
Broader surveys showed that, osten¬
sibly at any rate, the majority of
people had accepted the principle of
equal status of women, and this was
ecpecially so in the case of the young.
'Fine ideas but
they are not for us'
WHEN representative groups were
asked: "Are women right to
profess their own inferiority?"
91 % of the men replied '"No".
Women were slightly less positive, only
86 % giving the same answer. A si¬
milarly large majority of both sexes
thought that girls should be given as
good an education as boys.
Whether the young people of Japan
are already prepared to work actively
and personally for equality between
A Kabuki
'actress'
Japan has two kinds of
dramathe classical and
the modern. Kabuki, the
most important of the clas¬
sical dramas began centu¬
ries ago, so the story goes,
when the shrine darner
O-Kuni danced on a river
bed with improvisations
of her own and caught
the popular fancy. The
company of men and wo¬
men dancers she and her
husband later organized
became the people's thea¬
tre. It underwent many
changes before it attained
its present prestige, one
being that men play all
roles including those of
women (photo right). Ka¬
buki is a combination of
acting, singing and dancing
with costumes and stage
settings of fabulous colours.
Though Kabuki the time-
honoured stage art of
Japan is still enormously
popular with the older
generation the youth of
Japan today prefer modern
drama and the cinema.
V
the sexes is less sure. A discussion
between investigators and a represen¬
tative group of young men and girls in
Nemuro helped to throw some light on
this question. Primarily the questions
concerned co-education, and as. long as
the discussion was restricted to matters
of principle full agreement was shown
on equality of status between men and
women.
But as soon as the practical impli¬
cations of such equality were discussed
'Should it be possible for a woman
to become Mayor of this town?";
"Could any of the girls here become
town councillors?" the young people
first showed astonishment, then inde¬
cision and finally they withdrew from
their first emphatic agreement on
equality of status.
The feeling they expressed was :
"These are very fine principles and we
admire them because we see others
admiring them; but they have not yet
been put into practice here, they are
not for us; elsewhere conditions must
be such as to make them possible;
conditions here are not like that."
Students at Kyoto and Sapporo uni¬
versities were asked this question: "If
you get married and have a family,
who do you expect will be more in¬
fluential in the direction and control
of the affairs of the family?" A clear
majority said they intended to apply
the principle of sex equality in their
own homes. Yet, even among these
cultivated young people, who are
absorbing the whole range of liberal
ideas and are destined to be the leaders
of the new democratic Japan, 12 % of
the male students at Sapporo, and 16 %
of the women students and 21 % of the
men at Kyoto considered that affairs
in their own homes would be run by
the husband.
Most Westerners have the impression
that marriages in Japan are arranged
and decided by parents, and that the
future marriage partners have little or
nothing to say in the matter. In
actual fact, reported the Unesco inves¬
tigators, it is doubtful whether this has
been the universal custom in recent
times. Today, in any case, this type
of marriage is favoured only by a very
small minority.
Though many young people now
regard the love-match as the ideal, it
seems certain that an intermediate
type of arranged marriage, in which
the interests and the preferences of the
two families and of the couple concern¬
ed are all taken into account, is, and
will continue to be the most common.
"It can hardly be said," added the
researchers, "that this particular type
of marriage is a novelty in Japan."
The unimportance of
being in love
LOVE does not seem to occupy a
very prominent place in the life
of young Japanese to judge by the
results of an enquiry made among
students at Kyoto and Sapporo who
were asked to name the three most
significant events in their past exis¬
tence. Love was rarely mentioned in
the answers of these young people who
were at what is generally regarded as
the "romantic age". It was men¬
tioned by 18 % at Sapporo and 10 %
at Kyoto. This second percentage,
being an average of male and female
replies is smaller because only 5 % of
the girls included love in their replies.
The male percentage was 17 % almost
the same as for the Sapporo (all-male)
answers.
In the overturning of traditional
values and beliefs do the youth of
Japan still have a clear pattern of rules
of conduct to guide them in life? How
are they affected by the crisis through
which their country's traditional mor¬
ality is passing ? Since the war the
34

UNESCO COURIER. N"" 4-5. 1954
^nft
> *^
F\
ifc
Democracy
in the class
The Japanese have always been
interested In education as the
nation's 99 per cent literacy rate
shows, but as one teacher recently
put It: "Our pupils are learning
more than facts now. They're
learning how to be responsible
citizens in a closely-knit world."
Since the end of the war Japan's
I whole education system has been
g completely transformed. New text¬
books have been written, the teach¬
ing of militarism and ultra-nation¬
alism abolished and emphasis plac¬
ed on social studies. Strong accent
Is put on oral activities such as
conversation, using the telephone,
school broadcasting transmissions,
"recitations" in class, class discus¬
sions, round tables and symposiums,
extempore speeches and participa¬
tion in discussions conducted on
parliamentary lines. The study of
Chinese classics has been suppressed.
Important reforms have been made
in the teaching of the Japanese
language (there are four different,
ways of writing it and four widely
differing styles). Compulsory prim¬
ary education has been prolonged
for one year to the age of 1 5.
Many more girls now attend senior
high schools and colleges but the
percentage Is still far from high.
teaching of ethics has been suspended
in the schools. Adults frequently com¬
plain about the immorality, of the
young. In the universities, the Unesco
- investigators were sometimes told:
"There is too much academic, and -not
enough moral teaching. We ought to
be teaching a new code of morals."
To test this situation questions were
put to representative groups of people
concerning giri, the basic traditional
moral conduct of Japan. It is not easy
for Westerners to understand giri and
indeed the Japanese in their dictio¬
naries can hardly define it.
Its great importance in Japanese life
and ethics was stressed by Ruth Bene¬
dict in The Chrysanthemum and^the
Sword. This is how she understood it.
The relations between men in society
are regulated that is, a set of rules
of conduct exists. The Western com¬
ment on a person who does not observe '
the rules is "he does not know how' to
behave." What the Japanese often say
is "he does not know giri". A rough
equivalent of the phrase might be "he
does not know his duty" or "he does
not recognize his obligations". But
giri does not mean just any kind of
obligation. ' The Japanese have a
complex vocabulary of. debt-notions,
each . with special types of meanings
which enmesh Japanese life with an
intricate network of commitments. ~~ .
First : there is the on . (pronounced
own). A person who receives a favour
is said to "receive an on" or to "wear
an on". He thus becomes a "debtor".
There are certain debts which
everyone is born with, which are com¬
pulsory, considered limitless, the obli¬
gation never fully repaid. According
to Japanese tradition, this life-long,
universal debt (called gimu) is due to
the Emperor, to one's father and
mother, to one's ancestors and to one's
country. "Japanese say "one never re¬
pays one ten-thousandth of (this) on."
A tradition which is
now dying out
GIRI is not a limitless, abstract con¬
ception of duty or moral obliga¬
tion or even compulsory as gimu
is. It is a form of debt-contract obli¬
gation one underwrites on receiving an
on. To neglect giri means, in a nut-'
shell, failure to honour one's undertak¬
ings, the destruction of one's credit,
exactly as in bankruptcy.
The Unesco enquiry tends to show
that the notion of giri is not as univer¬
sally understood and applied as Ruth
Benedict believed, that instead it is a
tradition which seems to be growing
weaker since the young are less
acquainted with it and less interested
in the concept. At the same time since
it does survive to -a' greater extent in
cities than in rural areas, it appears to
be an aristocratic rather than a popular
feature of Japanese society.
Consequently, if we leave aside tech¬
nical consideration of the nature of
giri and of the way this concept was
disseminated among the Japanese
public, we find, as regards the young,
in particular, that they show a mini¬
mum knowledge not merely of tradi¬
tional and limited moral values but
even of the general morality.
Those who have reached adult status
betray this shortcoming by their less
refined thinking, while among the
youngest obvious gaps can be discern¬
ed. It is not possible to attempt a
forecast on the strength of the evidence
so far available. Will subjects who
have not yet reached the age of twenty
develop, as they grow older, on the
same lines as their elders? Or will
they advance beyond the point their
elders have reached? To answer these
questions we should have to know, not
only the ethical development of the
individuals concerned, but also, without
doubt, the direction Japan will take
now that the end of the Occupation
has left her to her own devices.
All photos on pages I, 2, 12-35, are copyright by
Magnum. Photos, ' Black Star and the Mainichl
' Newspapers.
35
