The decision
was unanimous:
'EQUAL BIT SEPARATE
SIGNIFIES U IM EQ U AL'
by Dr. Murray S. Stedman Jr.
Professor of Political Science, Swarthmore College, Pennsylvania
CPhotos USIS)
LONGER TO
LIVE AND
MORE TO
LIVE FOR
The life expectancy of
this little Negro boy has
gone up from 47 years
in 1 920 to 60 today.
In the same period, the
white's life expectancy
has risen more slowly,
from 56 to 66 years.
With greatly improved
standard of living and
medical care, the gap
between the white man's
and the Negro's life span
is closing. The photo¬
graph, left, was taken
in 1937 and shows an old
Negro couple who were
slaves in the early
part of their childhood.
ON Monday, May 17, 1954, the Supreme
Court of the United States issued a his¬
toric decision which proclaimed that racial segre¬
gation in schools supported by public funds
was a violation of the American Constitution.
In the two decisions the Court handed down it
thus gave a dramatic demonstration of-its»power
to review the constitutionality of laws.
Under the system of government in existence
in the United States of America, power to go¬
vern is derived from the Federal Constitution,
drafted^ in 1787. Both federal and state laws,
as well as state constitutions, must be in accord
with the Federal Constitution.
In case of dispute as to the applicability of
portions of the Constitution, the United States
Supreme Court is the final arbiter. A law, or
a section of a law, found by that Court to be at
variance with the Constitution ceases to be en¬
forceable. In actual fact, the Supreme Court
finds very few laws, in whole or in part, to be
unconstitutional. But, since the decisions of
the Court, unless it subsequently reversen itself,
are final, .those decisions become binding on
all lesser courts, both federal and state.
The May 17 ruling affected public schools in
one-third of the 48 American states and also
public schools in the District of Columbia
(where the city of Washington is located), an
area governed under federal law.
Its guiding principle
As of May 1954 a total of 17 states and the
District of Columbia required that Negro
and white children attend public schools set
apart for each race. Four states provided that
segregation could be adopted by local option.
Of this group of states, one, Wyoming, never
exercized the option. In some 16 states segre¬
gation in public schools was prohibited by law.
In the remaining 11 states no specific legislation
on segregation existed. In the areas of segregated
schools are some 8.1 million white and some 2.5
million Negro pupils.
In the two decisions rendered on May 17, the
Court first announced its guiding principle in
-a consolidated decision involving public schools.
in four states. In the second decision, the Court
then applied this principle to public education
in the District of Columbia.
In the United States there is no ministry of
education and public education in the ¡states
is a function of state government. In the excep¬
tional case of the District of Columbia, which
is not a state, public education is handled
through a school board deriving its powers
from ¡acts of Congress. Hence, it was the first
decision, involving the powers of the states,
which attracted the bulk of attention.
From four states
The 'consolidated decision concerned cases
originating in the states of Kansas, South
Carolina, Virginia and Delaware. In each case,
according to the Court, "minors of the Negro
race, through their legal representatives, seek
the aid of the courts in ohtaining admission
to the public schools of their community on a
non-segregated basis. In each instance, they had
been denied admission to schools attended hy
white children under laws requiring or permitt¬
ing segregation according to race." Because a
common legal principle bound the cases, they
were considered together.
It was alleged by the lawyers for the Negro
pupils that segregation was unconstitutional, on
the ground that it deprived such children of the
equal protection of the laws under the Four¬
teenth Amendment one clause of which pro¬
hibits any state from denying "'to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of
the laws."
In the first case decided by the Supreme
Court construing the 14th Amendment, it was
held that the Amendment prohibited all etate-
imposed discriminations against the Negro race.
However, as seen in the previous article, in
1896, in its decision in the case of Plessy v.
Ferguson, involving not education but transpor¬
tation, the Court evolved the "separate but
equal" doctrine. Under this doctrine, equality
of treatment is accorded when the races are
provided substantially equal facilities, even
though these facilities be separate. Segregation
in railroad transportation, as provided for in
the Louisiana statute whose constitutionality
had been challenged, was thus upheld.
. (CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE)
17

UNESCO COURIER. N» 6. 1954
Tkeffuku
"EQUAL BUT SEPARATE
SIGNIFIES UNEQUAL" (Cont'd)
Between the time of the Plessy case and the 1954 deci¬
sion, the Court heard six cases involving the "separate but
equal" doctrine in the field of public education. In most
of the recent cases, all on the graduate school level, ine¬
quality was found in that specific benefits enjoyed by
white students were denied to Negro students of the same
educational qualifications. The questions as to whether
the Plessy doctrine was applicable to public education
was not at issue, merely the question of inequality of
facilities.
In the four cases about which the consolidated decision
was given on May 17, the facilities offered students of both
races were found to have been equalized or in the process
of being equalized. Hence, the problem faced by the Court
was the practice of segregation as such. In the words of
the Chief Justice, Mr. Earl Warren, speaking for the Court :
"We must look instead to the effect of segregation itself on
public education."
That the Court deliberated a great deal is apparent from
the record. The cases first reached the Court on appeal
in 1952. Arguments were made on December 9-10 of that
year, but the Court ordered reargument and heard the
18
THE NINE MEMBERS of the United States Supreme Court who made the unanimous decision of May 17. Left to right, seated :
Associate Justices Felix Frankfurter and Hugo Black; Chief Justice Earl Warren; and Associate Justices Stanley Reed and Wil¬
liam O. Douglas. Standing: Associate Justices Tom Clark, Robert, H. Jackson, Harold H. Burton and Sherman Minton.
cases again on December 7-8, 1953. Reargument was heard
in the spring of 1954 on certain questions propounded to
counsel by the Court.
In reaching its decision, the Court noted the overwhelm¬
ing importance of education as the foundation of good
citizenship, and concluded that education is the principal
instrument in preparing a child for later life. This being
so, if a state provides free education, it must be available
to all on equal terms. The Court then stated: "We come
then to the question presented : Does segregation of children
in the public schools on the basis of race, even though
the physical facilities and other 'tangible' factors may be
equal, deprive the children of the minority group of equal
educational opportunities." Answering its own question,
the Court unanimously declared: "We believe that it
does."
In support of this view,- the Court relied heavily upon
the findings of modern psychological knowledge, citing
various authorities. The Court accorded more weight to
modern scientific findings that it did to the historical cir¬
cumstances surrounding the adoption of the 14th Amend¬
ment, since, in Its view, the latter approach led to incon¬
clusive results.
The Court found it unneccessary to inquire as to whether
segregation was prohibited in state public schools on the
b||sis of the due process clause of the 14th Amendment.
But in its second decision, involving segregation in the
Dfctrict of Columbia, the. Court found that the due pro¬
cess clause of the 5th Amendment (an Amendment which
imposes restrictions upon the Federal Government) was
relevant. Referring to its earlier decision on state public
schools, the Court asserted:
"In view of. our decision that the Constitution prohibits
the states from maintaining racially segregated public
schools, it would be unthinkable that the same Constitu¬
tion would impose a lesser duty on the Federal Go¬
vernment. We hold that racial segregation in the public
schools of the District of Columbia is a denial of the due
process of law guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment to the
Constitution." As in the state case, the decision of the
Court was unanimous.
Clearly recognizing that the implementation of its deci¬
sions would create complexities, the Court requested the
assistance of all parties for further argument at its fall
term. The Attorneys-General of the states requiring or per¬
mitting segregation in the public schools were invited to
appear as amici curiae, as was the Attorney-General of the
United States. The Court particularly invited argument
as to its own equity powers, and also to the procedure to be
fallowed, in the formulating of any decrees.
The United States
Constitution contains
provisions calculated to
ensure the Supreme
Court's independence of
the President and Con¬
gress. The Justices are
appointed for life and
Congress cannot reduce
the pay of a Justice while
he is In office. However,
Congress has the right
to determine the num¬
ber of Justices and the
President the authority
to appoint them. The
Court's decisions are kept secreteven from the Presidentuntil
they have been read at a public hearing. "Opinion Day"when the
Court announces its verdictis always a Monday, the decision
having been reached
the previous Saturday,
when the Justices vote
on the case in reverse
order of seniorityfrom
the youngest back to the
Chief Justice. A special
branch oftheGovernment
Printing Office operates
in the basement of the
Supreme Court building
in order to minimize the
possibility of leaks in the
process of printing the
decisions. Inside the
Court building is a magni¬
ficent courtroom featuring twenty-four marble columns and
bad acoustics. There are suites for each Justice, conference
and robing rooms, a library and separate chambers for the
clerks, lawyers, marshals
r
'i
and the Attorney-Gene¬
ral of the United States.
The Justices have pri¬
vate dining facilities as
well as private eleva¬
tors. The chairs where
the nine black-robed
Justices sit behind their
high bench partly sym¬
bolize the independence
which each may assert,
being of assorted shapes
and sizes and chosen
personally (although all
are upholstered in black).
19


THE
THE following are the principal passages from
. the decision of the U.S. Supreme Court, on
racial segregation in state-supported primary
and secondary schools in the United States :
"...Minors of the Negro race, through their legal
representative, seek the aid of the courts in obtain¬
ing admission to the public schools of their com¬
munity on a nonsegregated basis. In each instance
they had been denied admission to schools attended
by white children under laws requiring or permitting
segregation according to race.
"This segregation was alleged to deprive the
plaintiffs of the equal protection of the laws under
the Fourteenth Amendment.
"In each of the cases other than the Delaware
case, a three-judge federal district court denied relief
to the plaintiffs on the so-called -'separate but equal'
doctrine announced by this court in Plessy v. Fer¬
guson.
"Under that doctrine, equality of treatment is
accorded when the races are provided substantially
equal facilities, even though these facilities be
separate.
"In the Delaware case,
the Supreme Court of De¬
laware adhered to that
doctrine, but ordered that
the plaintiffs be admitted
to the white schools be¬
cause of their superiority
to Negro schools. The
plaintiffs contend that
segregated public schools
are not 'equal' and cannot
be made 'equal', and that
hen^e, thev are deprived
of the equal protection of
the laws."
Examining the circum¬
stances surrounding - the
adoption of the 14th,
Amendment in 1868 and"
public education at the
time, the Court found
them inconclusive for re¬
solving the problem.
"In . the South, the
movement toward free common schools, supported
by general taxation, had not yet taken hold. Edu¬
cation of white children was largely in the hands
of private groups. Education of Negroes was
almost non-existent and practically all of the race
was. illiterate. In fact, any education of Negroes
was forbidden by law in some states. Today, in
contrast, many Negroes have achieved outstanding
success in the arts and sciences as well as in the
business and professional world... Even in the
North... compulsory school attendance was virtually
unknown.
"As a consequence, it is not surprising that there
should be so little in the history of the Fourteenth
Amendment relating to its intended effect on public
education.
"In the first cases in this Court construing the
Fourteenth Amendment, decided shortly after its
adoption, the Court interpreted it as proscribing all
state-imposed discriminations against the Negro
race.
"The doctrine of 'Separate but Equal' did not
make its appearance in this court until 1896 in the
case of Plessy v. Ferguson involving not education
but transportation.
"American courts have since laboured with the
doctrine for over half a century. In this Court,
there have been six cases involving the 'Separate
but Equal' doctrine in the field of public education...
"The validity of the doctrine itself was not chal¬
lenged. In most recent cases, all on the graduate
WORDS
OF A
MOMENTOUS
DECISION
school level, inequality was found in that specific
benefits enjoyed by white students were denied to
Negro students of the same educational qualifica¬
tions.
"In nine of these cases it was necessary to re¬
examine the doctrine to grant relief to the Negro
plaintiff. And in Sweatt v. Painter, the Court ex¬
pressly reserved decision on the question whether
Plessy v. Ferguson should be held in application in
public education.
"In the instant cases, that question is directly
presented. Here, unlike Sweatt v. Painter, there
are findings that the Negro and white schools in¬
volved have been equalized, or are being equalized,
with respect to buildings, curricula, qualifications
and salaries of teachers, and other 'tangible', factors.
"Our decision, therefore, cannot turn on merely a
comparison of these tangible factors... We must look
instead to the effect of segregation itself on public
education...
"We cannot turn the clock back to 1868, when the
Amendment was adopted, or even to 1896, when
Plessy v. Ferguson was written. We must consider
public education in the
light of its full develop-
- ment and its present place
in American life through¬
out the nation. Only in
this way can it be deter¬
mined if segregation in
public schools, deprives
these plaintiffs of the
equal protection of the
laws.
"Today education is
perhaps the most im¬
portant function of state
, and local governments.
Compulsory school at¬
tendance laws and the
great expenditures for
education both dem¬
onstrate our recognition
of the importance of
education to our de¬
mocratic society. It is
required in the perform¬
ance of our most basic public responsibilities, even
service in the armed forces. It is the very founda¬
tion of good citizenship.
"Today it is a principal instrument in awakening
the child to cultural values, in preparing him for
later professional training and in helping him to
adjust normally to his environment. In these days,
it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be
expected to succeed in life if he is denied the
opportunity of an education. Such an opportunitv,
where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a
right which must be made available to all on equal
terms.
"We come then to the question presented; does
segregation of children in public schools solely on
the basis of race, even though the physical facilities
and other 'tangible' factors may be equal, deprive
the children of the minority group of equal edu¬
cational opportunities ? We believe that it does.
"In Sweatt v. Painter, the Court in finding that a
segregated law school for Negroes could not provide
them equal educational opportunities, relied in large
part on those qualities which are incapable of objec¬
tive measurement but which make for greatness in
a law school.
In a second case (MCLauren v. Oklahoma State
Regents) the decision states: "the Court, in requiring
that a. Negro admitted to a white graduate school
be treated like all other students, again
resorted to intangible considerations: (Continued
'his ability to study, to engage in dis- on page 23)

UNESCO COURIER. N° 6. 1954
And the Doors
Shall Open
Today over 128,000 Negroes are attending colleges or universities in the U.S.A. More than half are students in
Negro institutions such as Fisk University at Nashville, Tennessee (inset) where whites were also admitted even before
the Supreme Court decision on segregation. In the North and West the typical practice is to admit Negroes to all
higher institutions. In the South, the battle against segregation in graduate and professional schools is practically won.
Even before segregation in public schools was outlawed, Negro children, like the boy above, were attending elemen¬
tary and secondary school classes in two Southern states (Delaware and Kansas), and in June, St. Louis, Missouri announced
that it will end bias in public high schools next February, and in all elementary schools by September 1955.
21

UNESCO COURIER. N» 6. 1954
THE WORDS OF A MOMENTOUS DECISION (Cont'd from
page 20)
eussions and exchange views with other students and
in general to learn his profession.'
"Such considerations apply with added force to
children in grade and high schools. To separate them
from others of similar age and qualifications solely
because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority
as to their status in the community that may affect their
hearts and minds in a way unlikely ever to be undone.
"The effect of this separation on their educational
opportunities was well stated by a finding in the Kansas
case by a court which nevertheless felt compelled to
rule against the Negro plaintiffs:
"Segregation of white and coloured children in public
schools has a detrimental effect upon the coloured
children. The impact is greater when it has the sanction
of the law; for the policy of separating the races is
usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the
Negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the
motivation of a child to learn. Segregation with the
sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to retard the
educational and mental development of Negro children
and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would
receive in a racially integrated schools system.'
"'We conclude that in the field of public education the
doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place. Separate
educational facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore,
we hold that the plaintiffs' and others similarly situated
for whom the actions, have been brought are, by reason
of the segregation complained of, deprived of the equal
protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth
Amendment..."

