A BOY IN TROUBLE
by Dr. J. R. Rees
Director, World Federation for Mental Health
IN many countries of the world
there is at present a wave of
concern about juvenile delin¬
quency. It has been on the increase,
although now the peak seems to have
been passed. There is little doubt,
however, that more cases of anti-social
behaviour and crime are . brought to
public notice now than in past years.
The explanation of this in part is
that more cases are reported now and
that the police of all countries are
more inclined to take notice of viola¬
tions of the law both by children and
young people.
In addition to this there have been
marked disturbances created by two
world wars and there always is a
rise of delinquency rates following a
war. The dislocation of the social Ufe
of many countries during the recent
war has certainly contributed to the
increase of delinquency. Children
have not had the same settled, secure
home life. Mothers have had to go out
to work, fathers have in many cases
been away for long periods in the fight¬
ing services, and this has created a
situation which was likely to result in
anti-social reactions among children.
The moods of anxiety and moral dis¬
approbation of delinquency always
stimulate the consideration of special
factors which are regarded as being
"the cause" of delinquency. Lessening
of the religious sense, lack of moral
teaching, the more permissive techni¬
ques of child upbringing and education,
and the effects of films, television and
comic strips, have all been blamed.
They may of course play some part in
the encouragement of anti-social be¬
haviour, and all should be kept in
mind, because something could be
done about them. Scientifically speak¬
ing, there is no clear evidence to
justify the statement that these are
causative factors to any large extent.
'Hit them hard' school
SAMUEL Butler, when he wrote
Erewhon, displayed extraordinary
vision in his fantasy that the
development of physical sickness was
something which should be punished,
and that anti-social behaviour necessity
ated medical treatment. Few people"
took this very seriously, but there was
in between the two world wars a cer¬
tain swing towards this point of view,
and an excessive tendency to claim
that delinquents could not help being
as they were, and that treatment
should always take the place of punish¬
ment. This swing of the pendulum, as
Dr. J. R. Rees is Director of the World Federation for
Mental Health and was formerly physician and medical
director of the Tavistock Clinic for Child Guidance,
London. He is the author of many books and papers on
psychological medicine, including The Health of the
Mind and Modern Practice in Psychological Medicine.
in all such cases, was not wise, and the
present attitude of criminologists, psy¬
chiatrists and psychologists is more
realistic and better balanced with
regard to both the causation and the
treatment of delinquency."
As always, there are three attitudes
towards those who disobey the rules
of the community. First, we can
dismiss them as being degenerates,
people whose genetic inheritance has
decreed that they shall be criminals,
who must therefore be excluded as
rapidly as possible from society. Sec¬
ondly, there is the very vocal school,
which is not only composed of the
elderly and the pompous, which says :
"Hit them hard. Give them the most
rigorous punishment that can be
devised." The third~~ attitude, least
emotional and best balanced, sees that
there can be no effect without a
cause; there is no child who is just
naughty, no adolescent who is just
delinquent, or adult who is just a
criminal.
No spiritual aspirin tablet
IF we are to protect society and help
the individual, then we must of
necessity understand something of
the causes and background which have
given rise to the particular conduct of
which society properly disapproves.
Diagnosis should precede treatment.
The doctoï who merely treats symp¬
toms without attempting to "un¬
derstand the underlying cause of the
condition is a quack or a charlatan.
The parent, the teacher or the magis¬
trate who treats disorders of social
behaviour without concerning himself
about the reasons for that behaviour
can also quite properly be called a
charlatan. There is no spiritual or
legal aspirin tablet which will cure
every disorder.
Much careful research is being made
into the fundamental causes of anti¬
social behaviour, and the U.N. Economic
and Social Council, Unesco and the
World Health Organization are making
their contribution to this exceedingly
important problem. There can, of
course, be factors of bad inheritance
which we must consider, but the gene¬
ticists have not produced as yet any
very convincing evidence that the ten¬
dency to crime is inherited, though
clearly many defects and limitations of
personality may be passed on. There
is no real conflict between the impor¬
tance of heredity and environment.
We should think always of nature and
nurture, for both play their part.
The problem of deUnquency is part
of the much wider problem of mental
and emotional ill-health, and over the
past thirty or forty years we have
become increasingly aware of many
factors of importance. We know, for
example, that the general management
YOUNG OFFENDER. Parents wait anxiously
at door of Juvenile Court in Italy while young
offender hears verdict. Although many coun¬
tries still apply Stone Age methods to punish
juvenile delinquents, enormous progress has
been made since the enlightened English jurist
of the 18th century, Sir William Blackstone,
could write: "Under seven years of age.. .an
infant cannot be guilty of felony.. .but at eight
years old he may be guilty of felony." (Unesco
Photos by D. Seymour.)
of small children from infancy
upwards is very important, that good
standards and ideals for life and
conduct must be shown to them by the
adults with whom they are in contact,
rather than given to them as mere
dogmatic statements. Children are es¬
sentially imitative. The child whose
parents spend time in reading the
more lurid crime and sex stories in the
press is obviously more likely to be
attracted by the "horror" comics than
he would otherwise be.
We know that every child needs
some rules laid down for it, or it will
feel insecure, and we know, too, that
every child needs to have sensible and
wise discipline, which must be main¬
tained. . Spoiling and indulgence is
exceedingly unfair to the child . We
know that the threat of a penalty to
be incurred by some particular act can
be very harmful if in fact the penalty
is never imposed. In the past, chil¬
dren used to be told that the devil or
the policeman would get them if they
did what was wrong. Nowadays they
are told that they will suffer some
22

.what can we do to help him ?
deprivation, of pocket money, or
sweets, or something else that they
value, if they are not good. But if
nothing happens children often distrust
their parents and feel thrown back on
their own resources to get what they
want for themselves just when they
want it.
These points of view imply better
education for those who have or are
going to have children, and if we are
patient a lot can be done, and it can
be done in the home which is the
right place. Let it never be thought
that the so-called scientific approach
to delinquency implies that every child
who is naughty or anti-social must be
referred to a doctor or to a clinic.
There can be no easy evasion of the
responsibility of parents, teachers or
others.
We are probably getting nearer to
truly causative factors when we recog¬
nize that in disciplining or admini¬
stering the proper form of punish¬
ment, however slight it may be, to a
child, or indeed to an adult who has
offended against the rules of society,
we should always make it clear that
we strongly, disapprove of the anti¬
social conduct, but that we do not
disapprove of the individual who has
made these mistakes; that we respect
and love him or her just as much as
ever. Punishment becomes meaning¬
ful in this way, it does not create
rebellion nor a sense of exclusion and
insecurity, as often occurs in the indi¬
vidual who is made to feel that he is
bad and outcast.
For many years physicians and
others who have tried to deal with
individual cases of delinquency have
said that the commonest cause of
stealing is a sense of being unloved.
Because this sounds- rather an unusual
statement, we must look into it a little
more closely.
The child in a broken home, or who
is immured in an old-fashioned type
of orphanage, may suffer from a
genuine lack of interest and love. He
may lack a sense of nearness and the
feeling that he matters to someone
and is respected. Equally, the child
who has had too much demonstration
of love and affection, who has been
unwisely indulged and become spoilt,
may, if he becomes demanding and
tiresome, which is quite natural, be
dealt with by irritated adults in too
strict and arbitrary a fashion, and he
will then have a great sense of in¬
security and considerable resentment.
This is the type of child who very
often decides that since he is no longer
loved or liked, he must "go it alone",
he must get what he wants for himself,
and certainly can disregard the teach¬
ing and the standards of those who
have let him down.
This is logical, and is the explana¬
tion of a good deal of delinquency in
its beginnings. Many things in the
process of our police system, courts
and reformatory institutions tend to
add to exactly these difficulties, and
consequently they have led to recidi¬
vism and to the development of an
anti-social Ufe.
In the past few years some very
significant research has been done in
a number of countries throughout the
world, of which the most valuable
23

A BOY IN TROUBLE
(cont'd; Forced to ' go it alone '
examples have been collected together
in a book called Mental Health and
Maternal Care. (1) These collected
facts make it clear that in a large
number of cases the child who is in
the first three years of its life deprived
of that love and security that. every
child needs, which comes primarily
from its mother or mother substitute,
is likely to develop a deep sense of
insecurity, and indeed, to suffer a
distortion of personality which can
never be fully corrected in later life.
Children who are deprived, whether
by a true lack of love, by the broken
home, or by enforced absence from
their mothers, have a tendency to grow
up as embittered individualists, unable
to love or to accept love and friend¬
ship from other people. Their feeling
of insecurity provides a persistent
difficulty throughout their lives which
makes them more liable to irrational
anxiety, and they may have an in¬
creased liability to physical ill-health.
Many of these children as they grow
up, looking for something to enhance
their status, and for companionship/
(1) By Dr. John Bowlby. - Published by the
World Health Organization.
drift into gangs or undesirable groups
which lead them to develop their
delinquent traits, and a good deal of
the juvenile crime of today occurs in
young people of this kind. There is a
high incidence of this type of privation
of love and security in the histories
of juvenile delinquents.
Clearly harsh punitive treatment of
children like this will give them an
increased sense of their "badness" and
their abnormaüty and add to - the
inferiority feeUngs, the sense of isola¬
tion and the general grudge against
society and life they already have.
The medicine most needed in the
world to-day, whether for individual
children who are difficult, for adults,
in the family or industry, and for
nations, is love," and then more lóve.
By love, one means interest, respect
for people and their rights which
implies no lack of firmness and no
sentimentality. There is far more
sentimentality and emotionaUsm dis¬
played often by those who punish
delinquents in the Courts or elsewhere
than one can find in the average
children's psychological clinic.
What, therefore, do we need at this
present time to deal with our young
delinquents ? Certainly we need to
give help and better instruction to
those who are going to have children,
to those who have them, and to those
who teach them. We need much
better training in the science of peno¬
logy and the understanding of these
cases for those who are going to be
children's _ magistrates or judges of
adult courts. Far too often people are
put into these positions because they
are skilled in the arguments of defence
or prosecution, but without any true
appreciation of the personalities of the
people with whom they have to deal.
Similarly, better instruction is needed
for the probation services, where these
exist, and for the police. Better pro¬
vision is needed. in most countries for
the observation and investigation of
children before any court action is
taken. We need on the preventive
side to have far greater encouragement
of parent-teacher associations in con¬
nection with schools, of youth organi¬
sations of all kinds, which provide
outlets for healthy occupation and
interest. We need far more continuing
serious research into the nature and
the handling of our problems. Lastly,
and most important, we need more
real respect for children and their
rights and more love of a wise,
continuing kind.
PROBATION is now the preferred method of treatment of juvenile offen¬
ders in the U.S. and Canada, according to a recent U. N. Survey on Juvenile
Delinquency in North America. But despite the many "model" training
schools and detention homes, the U. N. report adds that in many respects
many "even today have not progressed far beyond their early limitations as a
kind of futile 'cold storage' for troublesome youngsters." (USIS.)
