THEIR BUS STOPPED AT LAPLAND
By Paul Normand
THERE were twenty-seven of them,
twenty-seven Parisian boys who
three years ago came to an im¬
portant decision : "In 1953", they said,
"we're going to go to the North Cape in
Lapland." As a rule such resolutions
don't get Parisian boys any further than
the city limits or the grande banlieue.
But this time it was different. Not only
did the boys go off but they managed to
cover 7,000 miles during their summer
vacation and got to know a lot about
eight countries in a way that no geo¬
graphy book or documentary fllm could
'have shown them, and yet the oldest of
the group was hardly 15 and the
youngest only nine !
How did they do it ? It wasn't too
easy, but then it wasn't too difficult
either. They bought the chassis and
engine of an old truck, had a new body
built on it by a friendly country mecha¬
nic and helped him to fit it out and
then painted it themselves. But, first of
all, they were members of a French
youth movement called "L'Association
du Compagnonnage Français".
The "Companionship" movement is a
non-profit organization which seeks to
foster the idea of international under-"
standing and friendship by encouraging
groups of boys to visit foreign countries
where they can meet young people of
their own age. The organization leaves
much to the initiative of the boys and
works to develop a . team spirit by
encouraging members to take part in
projects ,as a group. All trips are
conceived as mobile classrooms.
Although the journey to the North
Cape beyond the Arctic Circle was led by
24
one of the Association's organizers, a Pa¬
ris schoolteacher, M. Pierre Tue, it was
the boys themselves who took charge of
all the preparations for the "caravan"
including transport, financing and out¬
fitting. M. Tue went along as driver,
guide, teacher and friend. .
Raising the money for the truck and
for the other travel expenses wasn't
easy and called for lots of ingenuity and
effort as it was meant to do. Some of
the boys sold mushrooms they had
picked in the country ; others sold their
association's newspaper. On May 1 they
all became flower vendors, selling lilies
of the valley which everyone in France
buys on May Day. In addition they
charged entrance fees for sports events
they organized. One of the highlights
of their fund-raising campaign was a
special programme of films produced
and acted by themselves.
The boys received some financial help
' from their parents and were also
eligible for the holiday camp group
allowance provided by the French
Government. But the main effort was
their own. They even managed to raise
enough money to help defray - the
expenses of ten of their comrades whose
parents could afford to pay nothing at
all.
It took two years to prepare for the
great Arctic trip. But in the meantime
the boys managed to - visit a few
countries closer at hand. One summer
they boarded an old motor bus and
toured Switzerland and Austria. During
the winter .they went off on long hikes.
Last Easter - they spent twelve (water¬
logged) days camping in. Normandy.
Finally all was ready for the Arctic
adventure. The great day came when
the bus they had helped repair and
equip pulled out of Paris and headed
north with Professor Tue at the wheel.
Twenty-seven" young travellers sang
lustily behind him. Each day brought
them 150 to 200 miles nearer their
destination. Each day classroom geo¬
graphy lessons came alive as they saw
the cities they had studied in school
and spoke with their inhabitants. At
the evening halt they pitched their
tents and cooked their meal. The next
morning they were off again on the
next stage of their trip to Lapland.
The "classroom on - wheels" was
equipped with everything needed for
lessons and for living. Benches were
fitted along each side of the coach and
between them was a folding table. It
had lockers to hold camping equipment
and personal belongings, a first-aid kit,
and bookshelves for the group's library.
Lessons, of course, were informal. Notes
were taken during the day, and at the
evening halt the boys exchanged their
impressions of the day's travel and
looked up facts about the places they
would see the following day. Then they
set down this information in their note¬
books, together with their day-to-day
accounts of thé journey. The artists
among them illustrated the notes with
sketches and drawings.
Most informal of all were the language
classes. Meetings with other young
people (also on holiday) in Germany
and Denmark gave the boys many
chances to practise their German and
English, and in Denmark they once had
to use Spanish to make themselves
understood. But with the young Finns
IT WAS A THRILL FOR THESE PARIS SCHOOL-

UNESCO COURIER- N" 1-1954
The French 'Companions' Youth Movement
The "Association du Compagnonnage Français" is an organization which seeks to
strengthen the ties between different peoples by creating permanent contacts between
children. The Association's 2,000 members come from Paris, Lyons, Bordeaux,
Reims and other large French cities, children being grouped in "caravans" of 24 "compa¬
nions" led by an adult. Everyone in the caravan has a job to do, taking care of such things
as finance, equipment, information or education. Several times monthly the caravans
make excursions into the countryside. In winter they visit the mountains and at Easter
hold camp ; to prepare and practise for a visit to another country in summer. In addition
to the physical traininghikes, camping, mountain excursions, ski-ingthe children are
required to make a good showing in class and are judged on their school reports. Cultural
development is aided by such activities as acting and choral singing. At least one quarter
of the cost of each outing or holiday must be raised by the companions themselves, the
parents or the Association helping with the remainder. Non-political and non-denomina¬
tional, the Association strives to bring about a thorough intermixing of children from every
section of the community and then to bring them in contact with children from other lands.
and Lapps they met towards the end of
their journey north, they had to resort
to sign language. But they managed all
right and even had some fun doing
so as boys would. For young boys can
achieve "international understanding"
in a host of ways swapping badges or
other souvenirs, or just playing a game
of ball in which everybody can join."
The trip though did make them see one
thing clearer than ever : how important
it is to know at least one other foreign
language.
The whole journey, to all the boys,
was an event, filled with duily surprises
and wonderment. Each had his own
story to tell his parents and friends
when he got back to Paris. Jean-Pierre
Beytout, a 13-year-old lad who wants to
be a chemist, told anyone who would
stop to listen how the reindeer and the
Laplanders live, about the great pine,
forests and the stretches of lonely steppe
he had seen.
The caravan's journalist and 14-year-
old man of letters, Jean-Jacques Jausse-
ly, described Lapland as "a combination
of the Far West with its log-cabin
villages, the Far North with its" lakes,
its mountains, its forests exploding with
colour, its Laplanders with their cone-
pointed bonnets, their heavy boots and
many-coloured costumes, their great
herds of semi-wild reindeer..."
"We met trappers, salmon fishers,
lumbermen and pioneer farmers living
in houses built of rough-hewn logs set
in forest clearings,1" he wrote. "We
often wondered if we were in Canada
or in the land of the Mohicans near one
of the American Great Lakes. And we
wouldn't have been a bit surprised if
one of Fenimore Cooper's Indians had
suddenly leaped out at us from the
undergrowth.".
The oldest boy in the" group was
Michel Clavelloux, a future engineer.
He has bagfuls of amusing stories to tell
about their adventures. With . a loud
guffaw, he explains, for example, how
his friend Jean-Pierre was the victim of,
his own gluttonous appetite. Gulping
down a huge mouthful of grated cheese
in a Stockholm restaurant he turned a
quick lobster-red and choked the
cheese was horse-radish ! .
He also tells the story about the
Finnish boy they met on a beach. He
liked the French so much and was so
overjoyed to meet a group of Parisian
boys that he rushed off to a shop with
his swimming trunks dripping wet,
crying "Francos ! ooh, Francos !" and
returned loaded with sweets.
The trip is over now but the memories
remain. And, in addition to the memo¬
ries each of them will cherish for years
to come, .they have all brought back
some souvenir : a Lapp hat, a reindeer
skin, reindeer antlers, or the alarm
clock that'rang at 10 o'clock every night
(in broad daylight) to remind them it
was time for bed. The most exciting
trophy of all though, is the huge wolf-
. skin a Laplander sold them.
Back in Paris now, there are new
plans a-brewing ... Canada ... the United
States ... the South American Andes ...
But Professor Tue is suggesting a
slightly less ambitious trip just a tour
around the entire Mediterranean coast¬
line by road. This would be a combined
study-tour and holiday for three months.
So while Jean-Pierre, Michel, and
Jean-Jacques are already pouring over
the map of North Africa, Professor Tue
is counting figures and adding up his
worries.
Because you see they haven't quite
finished paying for the motorcoach yet.
BOYS TO REACH THE ARCTIC CIRCLE AFTER THEY AND THEIR " MOBILE CLASSROOM " HAD CROSSED BY FERRY FROM DENMARK TO SWEDEN.
