CORONA PHOTOGRAPHY IS A HUNDRED YEARS OLD
Due to clouds the recent solar eclipse was only partially visible in many
countries, but for the first time in history a major effort was made to
observe and photograph an eclipse from the air (photo above). In
photo taken over James Bay, Canada, (top of page), a burst of light
flares out across the moon's rim. This brilliant "diamond ring" effect
shows the first peep of the sun's disk as it burst from behind the moon
after the eclipse. The striking photo (upper right) of the luminous
"corona" or crown of light with long streamers was taken in Khartoum,
Sudan, by Dr. W. Jaschek of the Vienna Observatory, during the eclipse
of 1952. First successful photograph of the corona, a daguerreotype,
(lower right) was taken at Koenigsberg, East Prussia, a hundred years
ago. (Photos copyright American Airlines-Hayden Planetarium Eclipse
Expedition, Deutsche Presse-Agentur).
-40

In the dark of the sun
THE eclipse of the sun on the thir¬
tieth of June was an interna¬
tional drama that was seen by
the largest audience of all time. Never
before has the shadow of the moon
crossed an area so large and so den¬
sely inhabited. Its path ran from
Nebraska in the western United States
to Jodhpur in India. It was at sunrise
in America, at sunset in India. Yet it
xwas seen almost simultaneously in
most of 'North America, all of Europe,
in northeastern Africa and a large part
of western Asia. In America its climax
was caught by a telescope at the Uni¬
versity of Minnesota and was broad¬
cast by television into many millions of
homes. Not until 2151 will an eclipse
again be visible to so large a fraction
of the human race.
Dramatic and mysteriously beautiful
it was. But it did
not arouse the panic
fears of centuries
ago when an eclipse
was at best a por¬
tent of disaster and
at worst an attack
on the sun god by a black dragon in
the sky. The beasts, demons and dei¬
ties that once peopled the heavens
have vanished under the keen eyes of
the telescope and the logic of science.
They have been replaced by less
childish and more inspiring concepts.
The world is now convinced that the
motions of the "heavenly bodies" are
mechanical and are subject to precise¬
ly the same inexorable laws as the
fall of an apple or the movement of a
clock. This recognition of natural law
is, indeed, one of the criteria of civili¬
zation. But that does not mean that
eclipses of the sun ' are commonplace
or that astronomers have lost interest
in them.
Every total eclipse, in which the face
of the sun is completely hidden by the
moon, is an opportunity to see and
photograph what the brilliance of the
sun's face usually forbids.
The great observatories of all nations
plan for years ahead to find a spot
where the length of totality is a
maximum, where the sky is most likely
to be clear, and that can be reached
with many tons of costly and sensitive
instruments. The teams of experts
with all their equipment often travel
many thousands of miles to the loca¬
tion, for the shadow almost never falls
on an established observatory.
The international drama
of the sun's total eclipse
T
HEN" the sequence of operations to
be done during the brief two or
three minutes of totality are
rehearsed on split-second timing
every moment must be well spent.
Often when the time comes the astro¬
nomers themselves see nothing of the
great show, being intent on their
instruments and especially on .the
cameras that provide the permanent
record. The results unless clouds get
in the wayjustify all the effort and
expense.
The eclipse of 1919 is an example.
But for it, atomic energy might still
by Gerald Wendt
be undiscovered. The story goes back
to 1905 when the young and unknown
Albert Einstein published his theory of
relativity. Few people understood it
because of its mathematical difficulty.
Fewer still thought much of it because
it seemed to contradict common sense.
It held that at high velocities, compar¬
able to that of light, ordinary stan¬
dards of distance, time and mass no
longer are valid. As a particle ap¬
proaches the velocity of light its mass
increases, said he, so that if it could
attain that velocity which it cannot
its mass would be infinite. Also he
claimed that theoretically matter can
be changed into energy and energy into
matter. Though
this is now done
every day in the
atomic piles and the
great cyclotrons (See
The Courier for De¬
cember, 1953), it was
then almost unthinkable and could
not be tested or proved.
But there was one minor prediction
of Einstein's that could be tested by
exact measurement. It was that light
rays passing through space could be
bent by the intense gravitational field
of a large mass like the sun. This too
was unthinkable according to older
theory because gravity acts only on
material objects and particles while
light was a vibration in the immaterial
"ether" that was supposed to fill
empty space. But if Einstein was
right the light from a distant star;
passing closely . by the sun, would be
curved a bit and would thus reach the
earth at a slightly different angle. So
the star would seem to have changed
its position in the sky. Such an effect
could be noticed only at the time of a
total eclipse of the .sun, when its great
light blacks out and the stars emerge
from behind it.
By 1919, at the
first total eclipse
after the close of
World War I, astro¬
nomers were ready
to make the test.
During the eclipse the star-field around
the hidden sun was photographed. The
star positions were then compared with
those of the same stars six months
later when they shone by night, with
the sun on the opposite side of the sky.
Careful measurements showed that
they had moved. Since the stars do not
jump about the sky, the rays of
starlight must have, been bent by the
sun. Einstein was right !
That eclipse, observed by a few
scientists on an island in the South
Pacific, unnoticed by governments
and the masses of mankind, was a
turning point of history. For if Ein¬
stein was right on this point he was
almost certainly right in his basic
conceptions of the universe. After
these eclipse measurements were
published, the scientific world began
to take Einstein seriously. One single
but solid fact overthrew the age-old
theories of the nature of matter and
energy, of light and the ether, of space
and gravity.
Unlike most mortals, the scientists
were ready, whether they liked it or
not, to change the ideas they had
always held, not only because of
Einstein's theory but because of what
the eclipse proved. Among the many
consequences was the study of very
high-velocity particles in the rays
from radium, which again confirmed
the theory of relativity. Then came
the new world of cyclotrons and atom-
smashers and, twenty years after that
eclipse, the direct conversion of matter
into energy which, in 1945 produced
the atomic bomb and now generates
useful industrial power from the
fission of uranium atoms.
N
Science's most productive
half hour in history
O one could foresee these conse¬
quences when astronomers pre¬
pared for the 1919 eclipse. No
one knows what any eclipse may reveal.
It is precisely because of this that each
eclipse is so important.
While no eclipse permits a study of
the actual surface of the sun, the
most striking revelation is always the
great luminous "corona", or crown of
light, which surrounds the hidden sun
on all sides and seems to stream
outward into space with a faint pearly
or greenish light. It may be seen
only during the moments of totality.
In the June eclipse it extended beyond
the sun for a distance more than twice
the diameter of the sun itself, almost
two million miles.
The cause of the corona is not
known, nor is its composition. Its
temperature is extremely high be¬
tween half a million and a million
degrees and thus much hotter than
the surface of the sun itself. The
corona does not show the lines of the
ordinary chemical elements in its spec¬
trum. This may be because at its high
temperature the
electrons have been
stripped from all the
atoms, leaving bare
protons and neu¬
trons and probably
also unattached
electrons. Matter in this state is not
known anywhere else.
Apparently proton or electron beams,
and perhaps cosmic rays, are ejected
from the corona into outer space, some
of them toward the earth. A large
proportion of the eclipse expeditions
from the great observatories devote
themselves to the study of the corona.
Closer to the sun there are also
brilliant spots of light. They are in
fact enormous flames that rise from
the sun's surface with explosive speed.
These jets are from five hundred miles
up to 100,000 miles in diameter, in
which an object the size of the earth,
only 8,000 miles in diameter, would be
completely lost. Within two to fifteen
minutes these ñames shoot up at super¬
sonic speed to heights of 10,000 miles
or more.
In order to study these solar flames
and to record them on motion pictures,
41

K cl i p s e
(Continued)
30, »'-to \oà^
A
,*^.-\d be**1'
C°tAapV
sb»°
out.
an "artificial eclipse" has been devised
in recent years, originally in France.
This is done with a coronograph, a
sort of telescope which covers the
sun's disk with a black plate but
permits study of the brilliant flames,
precisely as in a natural eclipse. " At
the High Altitude Observatory main¬
tained by Harvard University and the
University of Colorado on one of the
high peaks of the Colorado mountains,
motion pictures have been taken -
which show the luminous gas in
constant motion, sometimes slow,
sometimes fast.
Often knots of gas drop gracefully
down toward the surface at speeds of
many thousands of miles per hour.
Meanwhile other streamers whirl
upwards like tornadoes to a height of
100,000 miles, or narrow tongues of
gas shoot upwards at the rate of 100
miles a second. Occasionally, a great
streamer that has quietly arched up
from the surface across a distance of"
250,000 miles will explode; the bright
arch is lifted at" the centre then blown
far out into space. The flames seem
to be composed of hydrogen gas at
temperatures of 15,000 to 30,000
degrees C.
They are probably related to still
another luminous phenomenon that
is much fainter. This is the "zodiacal
light", a luminosity that is so faint,
that it cannot even be seen at the
time of the total eclipse because the
corona is almost as bright as moon¬
light. It ;an be seen and photograph¬
er1, however, at the time of the total
eclipse if the observation is made at
a point where the totally eclipsed sun
is beneath the horizon, either just
before sunrise or just after sunset.
When the earth itself thus blacks
out the corona, a long streamer of
light seems to extend from the sun
many millions of miles in the plane of
the sun's orbit. Tt gets its name from
the path of the sun across the sky,
called the zodiac. The cause of this
light is unknown but its study, done
in the total darkness at the precise
spot on the earth where the sun will
rise in total' eclipse, is one of the most
intriguing aspects of solar research.
There is one practical aspect of
eclipse research, namely the meas¬
urement of the size of the earth and
of the exact distance between' conti¬
nents that are separated by the sea.
The speed of the moon's shadow,
moving eastward at an average rate
of about 1,700 miles "per hour, is
exactly known. If then the exact
moment of the passage of the shadow
is measured at two distant points, a
simple calculation gives the exact
distance between those points, thus
between a place in Europe and one in
America. Indeed it permits calcu¬
lation of the exact size of the earth
itself. At the June 1954 eclipse ten
observing stations were established for
these measurements, reaching from
James Bay in Ontario, Canada, to
Bandar Shah in Iran, by way of
Labrador, Greenland, Iceland, the Faroe
Islands to Sweden. But at most of
these stations clouds interfered with
successful measurements.
The results of observations of the
June eclipse will not be known for
some time since the photographs will
need much careful expert study
before conclusions can be reached. It
was a disappointing show for most of
the expeditions because clouds inter¬
fered in Canada and in Sweden, where
most American and European observers
were stationed. Yet there will always
be another eclipse and the curiosity of
the astronomers is not likely ever to
be satisfied. All present knowledge
has been gained from a sum total of
only about 30 minutes of totality in
all the eclipses that have been observ¬
ed by modern instruments. It is the
most productive half-hour in the
history of science.
GERMANY: Professor Rolf Mueller, director of
the solar observatory atop the 6,000 feet Wen¬
delstein mountain in Bavaria, (above) studied
the eclipsed sun in a cloudless sky and describ¬
ed the results of his observations by radio to
the whole of Europe. Public interest was
intense, and throughout the eclipse zone people
craned their necks and like this group in Ger¬
many (right) watched the phenomenon through
dark glasses. (Photos copyright Deutsche Presse
Agentur).
42

UNESCO COURIER N°" 8-9 1954
THE UNITED STATES: To study the enormous flames which rise
from the sun's surface with explosive speed, scientists use a coronagraph,
a sort of telescope which covers the sun's disk "with a black plate, thereby
creating an "artificial eclipse" and allowing the flames to be photographed.
Photo (above left), showing a stupendous burst of hot gases from the sun's
surface, was taken with the aid of the coronagraph (above right), which is
J housed in the High Altitude Observatory in the Rocky Mountains of
Colorado, U.S.A. (photo, left). But there are still problems that can
only be solved by observation during a natural eclipse. (Photos copyright
High Altitude Observatory, University of Colorado).
SWEDEN: The photograph of the completely
obscured sun (below) taken at Joenkoeping, Sweden,
on June 30, 1954, was telegraphed to the world's
press immediately after the eclipse. Elsewhere in
Sweden, at Oskarsham, an American expedition set
up a 25-ton radio telescope (upper part of photo)
to receive and record possible radio signals during
the 1 52 seconds of the eclipse. Below it is the
horizontal camera with which the same expedition
photographed stars in vicinity of blacked-out sun
so as to measure the bending of light in the sun's
gravitational field. (Photos copyright United Press).
43
