UNESCO COURIER - N» 3 - 1954
by Pierre Schaefîer
SPECIALISTS in sound techniques, composers and film makers from many parts
of the world will meet in Cannes, in April, for a series of discussions on
"Music and Film", in conjunction with the International Film Festival, in
a ''Music and Film" Exhibition prepared by Unesco, a special place will be devot¬
ed to new sound techniques in music and in particular to "Musique Concrète"
(concrete music) a new form of sound creation in which composition and experi¬
ments are taking place in a number of countries, particularly France, Germany,
the United States and Canada. The first experiments which were to lead to
concrete music were begun in 1948 by a young French scientist, Pierre Schaeffer,
who now directs a French group experimenting with this new music.
(AH photos by Kicrosser, Paris)
RAW MATERIAL: Every¬
thing that can be heard Is
potential material. A drop of
water makes a sound akin to a
musical note. A spinning plate
creates a sound " phrase ".
PRESTIDIGITATOR: This instrument makes it possible to modify the form of tape-recorded sound by
changing the speeds, thus raising or lowering the pitch of the original sound and greatly altering its tone
quality. Even more radical changes can be brought about by reversing the tape in the machine.
ELECTRONIC music, music created by lines
drawn on film, concrete music these are three
new and astonishing kinds of musical creation
which are being explored today. And their muse
should perhaps be re-named "Tapesichore", for all
of them, despite their different processes and me¬
thods, rely on a basic material film which brings
them on common ground with the cinema.
Concrete ntusic, for example, uses magnetic tape,
which is similar to the sound track of a film, for
recording and recomposing its sounds. Its bars are
traced by the scissors of the cutter who splices the
different sections of tape. The sound itself is modi-
fled by phonogenic apparatus which by running the
tape at greater or lesser speed, can raise or lower
the pitch of the original sound and greatly alter its ,
tone quality.
Thus the tonality of the music comes not from nor¬
mal musical scales but from the whole universe of
sound. The composer choses "concrete" sounds,
those already existing in everyday life. From these
raw materials an infinite variety of other sounds
can be created so that identities are changed a bell
can become an oboe, a squeaking door is transform¬
ed into the sound of a violin, boogie-woogie into
African tam-tam music.
Composers of electronic music work differently..
They compose their sounds in the abstract, since
before the invention of the loud-speaker, these
THE SYMBOLIC EAR:*$haped
like a concha, the z anatomical
term for the outer ear* this instru¬
ment transmits concreta music
to the concert hallu audience.
SPLICING MUSIC:' Like an instrument maker
seeking the right tone, the composer experiments
with his sound material on tape recordings.
A LIBRARY OF SOUND: The sounds of every¬
day life have been captured, modified in a variety
of ways and now await the composer's choice.
sounds did not exist in the atmosphere, but were
confined to electronic circuits. Unlike composers of
concrete music, they make no use of pre-recorded
sound. Instead the cunningly contrived components
of this music are produced behind the glass of elec¬
tronic tubes.
Then, there is the work of that interesting figure,
the artist musician who "draws" sound, and, throw¬
ing harmony to the winds, jots down sound in its
own frequency, rhythm and approximate tone on
the sound track of a film. The aim of men like
Norman MacLaren, of Canada, eliminating at one
stroke the conservatoire and all its instruments, is
to blaze a sound track right over the film image.
"What a wealth of methods we have here, all of
them astonishingly prolific. And what a remark¬
able achievement all their different resources have
been aimed at the direct handling of sound colour.
Here, sound ceases to be a fleeting thing; it is print¬
ed permanently on magnetic tape, and like move¬
ment itself, miraculously fixed on film. It can be
speeded up, slowed down, superimposed, contrasted,
or its rhythm made irregular.
How should we regard all these new forms of mu¬
sical exploration? The answer lies in a remark made
by Professor Günther Bialas of the Detmold Higher
School of Music, during a heated debate broadcast
by Munich radio. Faced by a group of musicians who
could see nothing in all these novelties but formless
18 19


unusual experiments with
usual and unusual sounds
noise, artistic decadence or even perversion of taste, he declared:
"Who nowadays denies the infinite artistic possibilities of the
cinema? Well, just as the film at the beginning, before it had
acquired its own personal form of expression, was hardly more
than filmed theatre, so electronic music, which was confined at
first to the reproduction of existing sound forms, is only now,
with the research work of Pierre Schaeffer, Pierre Henry and
Doctor Meyer-Eppler, beginning to create an entirely hew
musical material."
I should explain how I personally came across this possibility
of creating new musical material. In 1948, at the Experimental
Studio of the Radiodiffusion Française, I was carrying out re¬
search on noises. The idea of a "Symphony uf noise" haunted
me, but I could not then see how to achieve it, and .the word
"symphony" at that stage did not seem to make any sense at
all. For nothing is more realistic, more anecdotal and less
musical than noise. Noise, the blind man's radar, calls things
by their name. It is directly associated' with objects one sees.
Its emotional value lies in the effective associations it arouses:
evening bells, birds at dawn, sirens in a port.
A symphony composed of such noises would take us into the
theatre rather than the concert hall. And yet the gulf between
a dramatic repertory of this kind and a piano keyboard or an
orchestral score, attracted me. How could I bridge it? As
often happens, I hit upon the solution by accident. It was to
abandon the complete noises, which were simply too expressive,
and keep only fragments of them, and then to modify these'
fragments by all sorts of acoustic methods. A mass of sound
objects thus came into being, quite unrecognizable, as remote
. from precise dramatic meaning as from musical structure.
Composition in reverse -
THESE "sound combinations", isolated crystals of sound, that
could be transformed, repeated, superimposed, became the
complex "notes" of a generalized music. They also formed
a language of then: own, but instead" of an alphabet of twelve
recognizable sounds, there emerged- what seemed like a profu¬
sion of Chinese characters. It was no good trying to make any
sense of it in familiar musical terms, without immediately gene¬
ralizing our ideas of notes, structure and musical form.
Thus the steps of composition took an opposite form to that
of the usual notation, followed by execution. We began by sam- .
pling the sound material, and then composed, by a series of
attempts, in the same way as a painter or a sculptor, who can
only work single-mindedly through his intuitions ofmatter and
TRIO IN TAPES : A magnetic tape recorder with multiple
tracks enables three- tapes, to be run simultaneously, thus
creating a counterpoint in individual sound materials whose
combined effects can then be recorded. This might very well
be called the "organ" of concrete music.
SOUND IN RELIEF : .The orchestra conductor's baton is
replaced by a magnetic coil which regulates the flow "in
relief" of sound from several ear-shaped loudspeakers. .
mass, and cannot assess the result until he has laid on his
colour or his clay. That was when the name "concrete music"
came to my mind.
The absolute parallel between concrete music and the cinema',
can easily be seen. Of course, a film director has an idea to work
on and an exact method of cutting at his disposal. ~ Indeed, if.
. he has not thought in terms of pictures, both as regards his
inspiration and the landmarks, and if he has not seen his film
beforehand, no scenario, and no production will save him. The
fllm exists beforehand in his mind, as it does in the images fixed
by the camera. A fllm is. therefore the" very opposite of an
abstraction ; it creates an absolutely specific world that of a
concrete language which borrows all its words from the real
object, all its syntax from -the continuity, and all its architec¬
ture from the sequences as a whole. .
Although these ideas are more or less accepted . nowadays,
many enquiring and cultured minds are, nevertheless, discon¬
certed by the special technique of concrete music, and by the
word itself. Our pursuit of sound upsets them ; our huge
sound-filing system exasperates them ; composition based on
cutting, instead of on a score in G, leaves them quite bewildered.
Unlike musicians who are conservative and easily . shocked,
artists of a plastic, dramatic or visual tradition and tempera¬
ment are very amenable to concrete music and approach it with
lively interest and a natural instinct. Painters are delighted
to discover formal equivalences, stage designers to find a sound
atmosphere discreetly and effectively in harmony with their
sets. What might have been no more than a sort of realistic
din, is adjusted, its tone is heightened.
Film makers were first
AS for the cinema, it might well be said that this is the sort
of music it has been dreaming of for years. Film makers
did not wait for us before producing noises in the sound
track that conveyed more than any cello could do. In A man
walks in the city, to mention only one example, a "sound loop"
accompanies the last sequence unforgettably. By prolonged
repetition, a succession of street noises, suggestive enough in
itself, is made into a "sound phrase". This phrase never loses
touch with reality, yet is detached from it, like- the theme of
a symphony.
In this way Orson Welles, Bunuel and many others have for
years successfully sketched 'out their own natural concrete mu¬
sic. Max de Haas, in Holland, Enrico Fulchignoni for "Leo¬
nardo da Vinci", Allegret for. special effects, Grémillon for a
poetic montage on a theme of Astrology, Jean Rough in order
to reconstruct hundreds of feet of sound with the help of a few
African fragmentsthese were the first film-makers to join our
team in its early stages.
Now, a technique, tested for nearly five years, offers every
gradation from pure dramatic realism to abstract, plastic sound.


From now on, concrete music makes it possible to incorporate
into the image its sound accompaniment, drawn, so to speak,
as Eve was from Adam, out of its own substance.
20
