«*»*
^OíJ¿¡J'-JSjI
I*« ¿i trr*»
28

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
REMOTE CONTROL devices are used for handling those radio-active
isotopes which emit dangerous radiation. Photos show how this is done
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S.A. from where isotopes are sent
to many parts of the world for use in industry, medicine and agriculture.
Devices for bottling and transferring radio-active solution shown here
are operated by personnel who are protected by two feet of concrete
shielding. Operation is observed by means of overhead mirrors and a
periscopic device fitted on the handling tongs. (Photos USIS).
As soon as atomic power begins
to be widely used by industry
throughout the world an impor¬
tant flow of by-products will come from
the atomic furnaces that provide this
power. And important and valuable
as is the energy to be obtained from
the atom, it is safe to say that these
by-products of the atomic furnaces
will be at least as valuable.
When an atom of uranium or thori¬
um undergoes fission it splits into
two or more smaller atoms. The velo¬
city of these fragments becomes useful
as heat but the new atoms remain
buried in the reactor core. They are
subjected there to a con¬
tinuing intense bombard¬
ment by neutrons. This
induces further nuclear
changes and in their final
form nearly all these
atoms are so charged with
energy that when they
are later separated from
the remaining uranium
they are intensely radio¬
active.
Similarly, almost any
other material inserted "
into the core of the
reactor, by means of a
special inlet tube, for
instance, is also so bombarded that it
emerges in a strongly radio-active form.
As has been explained in an earlier
article of this series, these new forms
of otherwise stable atoms are known as
isotopes and, when they are radio¬
active, as radio-isotopes. The core of
a reactor is an immensely powerful
device for manufacturing them.
The radio-activity consists of atomic
disintegrations which are small conti¬
nuing atom-by-atom explosions. The
energy or tension in the atom of a
radio-isotope is, in effect, relieved by
the ejection of an electron, or an alpha
particle and is accompanied by an
intense emission of very short ether vi¬
brations, called - gamma rays, which
resemble X-rays except that they are
usually much more penetrating than
any X-rays.
Isotopes of the various elements
differ in the rate at which they decay
and give off their energy. Some com¬
plete the process in a small fraction of
a second, others in minutes, hours,
days, years or even centuries. Obvious¬
ly those in which the process is rapid
give a very intense radiation while they
last. Those that require years or cen¬
turies to decay give relatively only
feeble radiations at any time.
There is thus an enormous variety
of isotopes. The total number known
at present is close to 1,300 of which
about 800 are radioactive and more than
150 are useful and stable enough to be
kept in stock on shelves for sale. Some
are used for the intensity or penetra¬
tion of their rays and others because
their rays are feeble. The type of ray
desired,for specific practical effects also
determines the choice of an isotope.
Furthermore, the isotopes are chemical
elements such as carbon, iron, phos¬
phorous and gold, and they may be
chosen for use because of their normal
chemical reactions.
Before the days of the atomic reactor
most radio-active materials were rela¬
tively weak. One of the strongest was
radium, long used in the treatment of
cancer. In those early days it was sold
in milligrammes, thousandths of a gram¬
me and cost approximately $100 per
milligramme. When the women of Ame¬
rica honoured Madame Curie toward
the end of her life, they presented her
with a whole gramme of radium at a
cost of more than $100,000.
All the purified radium in the world
amounts to less than 2,500 grammes
a little more than five pounds. Modern
reactors however produce radio-active
isotopes in quantities thousands of
times as powerful as radium. A quan
tity of radio-active cobalt that is equi¬
valent to 10 kilogrammes of radium
10,000 grammes or 10 million milli¬
grammes can now be purchased at a
reasonable price.
With such materials radiation effects
can be obtained that were hardly con¬
ceivable ten years ago. For instance,
the University of Michigan in the
U.S.A. has recently announced that
pork briefly exposed to the intense ra¬
diation from an isotope of cobalt can
be freed of the trichina parasites.
About 18 % of all pork is infected with
these dangerous worms. The way
trichinosis is avoided today is by cook¬
ing pork thoroughly.
For another example,
research men at Oregon
State College in the U.S.
have reported that pota¬
to e s similarly exposed
"are in perfect condition
after almost two years in
a bin under commercial
storage conditions." The
U.S. Army is now study¬
ing preservation of food
by means of radiation
from radio-isotopes with¬
out using refrigeration.
It is possible completely
to kill the bacteria, es¬
pecially in meats, but perhaps also in
fruits and vegetables, so that the food
will not spoil and can be exposed on
the shelf for many weeks without
deterioration.
Such uses of intense rays are closely
related to the radiation hazard in the
vicinity of an atomic reactor. These
are always enclosed within heavy wails
of lead and concrete to prevent expo¬
sure of the operators to tht rays. It
must be said that the reactor also
emits high-speed, very penetrating
neutrons but the radio-isotopes do not.
One of the most hazardous operations
in the world is the removal of the core
of an exhausted reactor and the dispo¬
sal of the enormously radio-active
waste products that have accumulated
in it. Special devices are used, such as
allowing the spent uranium rods to
fall directly from the reactor into a
large pool of water and into an under¬
water cart by which they are removed
for safe disposal. But that disposal is
29

itself one of the major problems of the
atomic industry, for the intense radio¬
activity may in this case last for deca¬
des and part for centuries.
The reactor wastes have been buried
in deep pits and they have been hauled
far out to sea sealed in great blocks of
concrete. Neither of these is satisfac¬
tory in the long run so that Dr. Ira M.
Freeman, of Rutgers University in the
. United States, has suggested that one
of the best uses to which a future
space-rocket can be put is to send a
container of radio-active waste far out
into space where it would continue in
an orbit around the earth or perhaps
around the sun for ever, gradually
exhausting its radio-activity. On the
other hand, if the demand for radio¬
isotopes in industry, agriculture and
medicine continues to grow the wastes
of the reactor would provide an ample
supply.
In spite of the radiation hazards,
men working with the atomic reactors
are very seldom harmed. In fact, the
published figures show that accidents
and injuries in the many large atomic
plants in America are decidedly less in
relation to the number of men em¬
ployed than in ordinary industry. This
is because the danger is understood
and is guarded against. Not only are
all dangerous operations conducted
behind thick walls by remote control,
but employees who may be exposed to
radiation wear special clothing and
all of them are constantly inspected by
photographic and electronic instru¬
ments for any traces of radio-active
contamination.
'Precisely the same source of danger
arises when the atomic bomb is ex¬
ploded, except that in that case the
radio-active atoms are very finely
blown throughout many cubic miles of
the thin stratosphere. There are many
millions of cubic miles of air above the
earth and the dispersion by the bomb
itself, by heat and by winds is so great
that the concentration of radio-active
material in the air is almost vanish-
ingly small. But it can be detected
by sensitive instruments. It is thus
A DRY BOX is used where the
handling of substances involves
risk of poisoning. The research
worker here is handling a radio¬
isotope with rubber gloves let
into the walls of the box.
Substances with toxic properties
are placed inside the dry box
through the doors of small
chamber at right. (Photo C.O.I.
Crown Copyright Reserved).
that the explosion of an atomic bomb
can be detected on the other side of
the earth.
There is no doubt, however, that the
slow accumulation of radio-active mate¬
rial from successive bombs and espe¬
cially from hydrogen bombs, which are
thousands of times as powerful as
uranium bombs, would eventually pro¬
duce concentrations of radio-active
materials in the air that would harm¬
fully affect all living things. In Sep¬
tember 1954, Dr. E. D. Adrian, President
of the British Association for the Ad¬
vancement of Science warned that "we
must face the possibility that repeated
atomic explosions will lead to a degree
of general radio-activity which no one
can tolerate or escape."
It is not now possible to estimate
whether this point will be reached
after the explosion of a hundred
atomic bombs or after a few thousand.
Experts agree that the two score of
bombs that have been exploded up to
now have done no harm. The one
exception was one hydrogen bomb ex-
30

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
Lasting fire from the atomic furnace
ploded over the Pacific which did
shower radio-active dust over a much
larger area than had been expected
and caused burns on 23 unfortunate
Japanese fishermen of whom one has
since died. Their boat, the "Fukuryu
Maru", was between 70 and 90 miles
from the centre of the explosion. Such
danger from the explosion itself, is,
however, enormously greater than from
the isotopes dispersed at great heights
and over a wide area.
Nevertheless the radiation hazard
needs more careful study and on a
motion of the Japanese delegation at
the Montevideo General Conference in
December, Unesco was authorized to
co-operate with the World Health Or¬
ganization (WHO) in studying protec¬
tion against the effects of radio-acti¬
vity on life in general.
The sterilization of meat and vege¬
tables by intense rays from powerful
isotopes, though technically possible, is
still too expensive. The use of isotopes
for sterilization will come first in the
case of more valuable materials such
as penicillin and other antibiotics.
These drugs are injected or used inter¬
nally and so must be completely free
of all bacteria or other infections, yet
they cannot usually be heated or boiled
to sterilize them. The vials containing
the drug can be briefly exposed to an
intense radiation equal to many kilo¬
grammes of radium and can thus be
safely and completely sterilized in the
cold.
Another use was recently demonstra¬
ted by Admiral Lewis Strauss, Chair¬
man of the U. S. Atomic Energy Com¬
mission, who carried with him a small
box weighing about 20 pounds, light
enough to be carried on a battlefield,
but which gives sufficiently intense
gamma radiation to equal that of a
WORKING
YOU ft« INTtHNG
ACTIVE AfttA
1^' W/ÍU«tíl '
OS .>** mi>'
I ¿4fl£(M*S O«
1" tlr ctf.w^n ,
STRINGENT PRECAUTIONS protect atomic
energy laboratory and plant workers against
ingestion of radio-active gas or dust. Eating
and smoking are forbidden in "active" areas.
Outdoor clothes are left in one locker and work
clothes in another. Here, a research worker
puts on overshoes before entering a laboratory.
(Photo N.F.B.).
powerful X-ray machine without using
any machinery or power supply. The
isotopic rays from the portable
container can be used as X-rays are to
detect flaws in metal and in machinery
or to make examinations of persons
injured in accidents, for instance.
Where no intense radiation is de¬
manded the isotopes are already cheap
enough to be in industrial use. Large
quantities are
available, for in¬
stance, to stimu¬
late the lumino¬
sity of fluores¬
cent materials,
hence to repla¬
ce expensive ra¬
dium in luminous
watch and clock
dials and on ad¬
vertising signs.
An isotope of
strontium isbeing
used by the U. S
Navy on many
thousands of self-
luminous markers
which are twice
as bright at night
as a sheet of whi¬
te paper in full
moonlight and
may be had in al¬
most any colour
except deep red.
Here the cristal¬
line material is
stimulated to lu¬
minosity by the
rays given off
by the strontium
which decreases
in strength at so
slow a rate that
the markers re-
m a i n lumi¬
nous for a score of years or more.
Another application is in the ordi¬
nary fluorescent tube. When isotopes
are mixed with the luminous material
they increase the conductivity of the
air in the tube so that it requires less
voltage to start the lamp and it starts
much more quickly. A similar use is
made of a tube of such materials weak¬
ly radio-active, where there is danger
of sparks from static electricity. The
faint rays make the air a sufficient
conductor of electricity so that static
does not accumulate.
A typical industrial use of the rays
from these radio-active materials is in
the automatic control of the produc¬
tion of thin sheets of paper or plastic,
or the metal for making tin cans. As
the sheet leaves the rollers which
squeeze it to the desired thickness, it
passes through' an instrument that
holds a small amount of radio-active
material under the sheet and holds a
detecting instrument such as a Geiger
counter, over the sheet. The rays
penetrate the sheet and are received
and detected on the other side.
But if the sheet for some reason
becomes either thinner or thicker than
is desired, the amount of radiation
received by the detecting instrument
instantly increases or decreases as a
result, because it is partly absorbed in
the sheet. Thus the instrument is a
constant and automatic inspector of
the thickness and it can easily be
SHORT-LIFE ISOTOPES which must be
employed within a few days following their acti¬
vation in an atomic pile are despatched by air.
Here a canister is being placed in the wing-tip of
a South Africa bound aircraft at London Air¬
port. (Photo C.O.I. Crown Copyright Reserved).
adjusted to regulate the rollers and
correct the error so as to produce a
sheet of uniform thickness.
A suggestion of things to come was
given by the Radio Corporation of
America in a recent demonstration of
a small electric battery which uses the
actual power of the electrons that are
continuously emitted from about half a
milligramme of radio-active strontium,
amplifies them in
a modern "trans¬
istor", and thus
achieves enough
power to work a
telegraph relay
or work a tele¬
phone transmit¬
ter. Thus the tiny
battery gives a
current of 5 mi¬
cro-amperes and
one fifth of a
volt. Small as it
is, it is the first
practicable con¬
version of atomic
energy directly
into electricity
without the use
of heat.
A well-known
use of the direct
rays from radio¬
isotopes is in me¬
dicine.
The use of the
powerful tissue-
destroying rays
from radium is
established in the
treatment of can¬
cers. They have
the same effect
as equally power¬
ful X-rays but a
cancer can often
be reached with a small pellet or tube
of radium that cannot well be reached
by X-ray tube. The new radio-isotopes
can be used in exactly the same way,
but with the advantage that the
amounts of radiation that can be
obtained from them are far larger than
in the case of radium and cost less. '
The commonest substitute for radium
is radio-cobalt. A small cylinder of
metallic cobalt gives gamma rays equal
to that of radium costing several
hundred thousand pounds sterling.
Such a piece of cobalt, weighing little
more than an ounce is enclosed in
heavy metal but an intense beam of
radiation is directed through a small
window at the cancerous growth.
In other forms, both radio-phos¬
phorus and radio-gold are very
conveniently used for this type of
treatment. For skin cancers, an
ordinary blotting paper is soaked with
radio-active phosphate solution and
when dry it is cut to the size and shape
of the tumour, then is strapped to the
tumour with adhesive. Radio-cobalt
can be drawn out into a fine wire or
cut into tiny beads which can be
placed within the cancerous growth.
And radio-gold can be formed into tiny
grains which are fired directly into the
cancer from a small "gun". In both
cases they remain in the cancer until
it is destroyed.
In another method of treatment, the
(Continued on page 35).
3I

Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1954
Geiger counters on the mosquito's trail
(Continued from page 31)
radio-isotope can be given internally
or can even be swallowed to find its
way into the blood stream. It is
absorbed from the blood by cancerous
tissue. This is one of the respects in
which cancer differs from ordinary
tissue: it does absorb the radio¬
isotope. Consequently, one disease, in
which the red blood cells are formed
in such profusion as to clog the blood
vessels, can be treated by radio-phos¬
phorus which sharply reduces the
production of red blood cells in the
body for a period of about a year.
Isotope's travels
In these cases, the powerful rays are
used directly. But there is an entire¬
ly different use of radio-isotopes
involving small quantities of isotopes
with very faint radiation, far too weak
to do any harm, indeed too weak to be
detected by anything but sensitive spe¬
cialized instruments. These are known
as tracer isotopes because they reveal
their presence by their faint radiation,
wherever they go, no matter through
what chemical reactions they are put,
and thus permit their detection at any
point of their travel or adventures.
By such means it is possible to follow
the course of chemical atoms through
the human body, for instance, and not
only to locate them physically but to
detect the chemical changes through
which they have gone. By far the
greatest use of radio-isotopes is in this
new technique of tracing the course of
mechanical action, of chemical reac¬
tions or biological processes.
Another example of the direct
industrial use of the radiations from
isotopes is the control of the flow of
oil through long pipe-lines. Such a line
can seldom be used for long periods to
deliver one single grade or variety of
oil. Instead, different oils are pumped
through, one after another. It is
important for the operators at the
receiving end to know when one grade
or one shipment is at an end and
another is to begin in the continuous
flow of oil from the pipe.
Radio-active piston ring
This is now done by mixing in a
at the boundary between one
small quantity of radio-active oil
batch and another as they are pumped
into the pipe. When that radio-active
oil reaches the receiving station,
perhaps hundreds of miles away, the
radiation counters immediately detect
its arrival so that valves can be adjust¬
ed to shift the flow from one tank into
another.
Another example from trie on
industry illustrates the use of isotopes
in research. The Shell Petroleum
Company in England now measures
friction and engine wear by exposing
a piston ring to bombardment by
neutrons until a small part of the iron
is converted to a radio-active isotope.
The ring is then fitted in an operating
engine. As it wears by friction the
debris goes into the crank case oil and
that oil is then pumped through a
sensitive detector of radiation. The
very small quantity of weakly radio
active iron is sufficient to be measur¬
ed and therefore to give an immediate
indication of the amount of wear on
the engine. This method of testing
avoids the long operation of the engine
and the troublesome analysis of the
oil for iron, and can show the effect
of different lubricants within minutes.
The California Research Corporation
reports that in similar researches a
programme of friction studies that
would have taken 60 years and cost a
million dollars was completed in this
way in four years at a cost of thirty-
five thousand dollars. Others have
employed this method to show that
high speed driving on the open road
causes only about one-third of the
in the fertilizer. Since it constantly
gives off a weak and harmless radiation
that can be detected by proper instru¬
ments, it is a very simple matter to
follow or trace what happens to the
phosphorus in the soil and the plant.
Important agricultural information
has thus been obtained. For instance,
Swedish investigators have found that
phosphate in a fertilizer is taken up
by the plant roots almost immediately
when it is spread on the soil; there is
no delay. American investigators have
discovered that pasture grasses can
take up phosphate that is spread over
their leaves and roots, so that old
pastures can be rejuvenated by phos¬
phate without the need for ploughing.
^^^ M
in
m, jL^^^^^B
m s ' tjú
I ~~"ÎTGL
^^
TESTING MATERIAL in a special
reactor at an atomic research
centre in the U.S.A. On left, cans
of meat are inserted through the
water canal leading to the reactor.
Tests will show how the meat and
containers have been affected by
radiation. On the right, techni¬
cians are using long-handled tongs
to remove an aluminium tube filled
with radio-cobalt. This will be ship¬
ped away for use in cancer therapy.
engine wear that is involved in city
driving. The end result of these
researches, however, is the reduction
of friction and the ' improvement of
lubrication.
Even mosquitoes can be traced by
radio-isotopes. Mosquito larvae that
swim in a very weak solution of radio-
' phosphorus remain radio-active all
through their lives and their presence
can be detected with Geiger counters.
The habits of mosquitoes are now
being studied by this method to learn
how long they live, how far they fly,
and what they feed on. It is expected
that similar treatment of birds may
give reliable information on bird habits
and especially on their migrations.
Another very practical application of
the tracer technique which has saved
a large amount of money for the
farmers is in the study of the action of
fertilizers.
For example, phosphate is a neces¬
sary plant food and is a component
of nearly all fertilizers. It is an easy
matter to produce the isotope of phos¬
phorus that is weakly radio-active and
to mix it with the normal phosphate
Even more interesting is the fact
that maize, sugar beets, tobacco and
cotton take up phosphate from the
fertilizer only during the early stage
of growth. Fertilizer spread on the
soil late in the season is of no value
to these crops. On the other hand,
potatoes take up phosphate from the
fertilizer in large quantities through¬
out their entire growing season.
Finally, it has been found that
phosphoric acid added to irrigation
water is just as effective as fertilizer
spread dry on the soil. All of these
results were obtained by measuring
the amount of radio-active phosphorus
detected in the growing plant. While
its quantity is small, like the black
sheep in a flock, it can reliably be used
for measuring the fate of all the
phosphorus.
vMany other tracer elements utilized
in this manner have given information
of value to the farmer. Radio-active
potassium, painted on a branch of a
dormant plum tree, in weather below
fieezing point was found to enter the
sap and move several feet both up and
- down the branch in spite of the fact
35

Body rebuilt every year
that^the sap is supposed to be motion¬
less in winter. On the other hand, in
summer the phosphorus moves all the
way to the roots within twenty-four
hours.
Another agricultural application of
this tracer technique with radio-iso¬
topes is in the study of insects and
fungi. Radio-iodine has been used to
study the spread of the oak wilt fungus,
through the roots and from the roots
of one oak to another. Insecticides
also can be tagged with radio-isotopes.
Thus it has been shown that plant
leaves absorb insecticides principally
on their under surface and do so only
during the day.
Such work has also emphasized the
difference between broad-leafed plants
and narrow-leafed grain and grasses in
their response to weed-killers. A broad-
leafed plant was found to absorb a
weed-killer sprayed upon it and within
two hours the entire plant is permeated
with it. On the other hand, the grasses
absorb very little weed-killer and
what is absorbed stays on the spot
without affecting the plant as a
whole.
One of the first results of the use
of "tracer" isotopes was the discovery
that all the tissues in the body are
in a constant process of replacement.
It is natural to think of the body as
a stable structure which uses food only
to maintain its heat and for replace¬
ment of worn parts. This is not so.
When fats, in which some of the
hydrogen atoms have been replaced
chemically by "heavy hydrogen" are
eaten, the new fat is deposited in the
fatty layers of the body while the older
fats, already in the body, are burned
for heat.
So, too, eating proteins which contain
"heavy nitrogen" results in the use of
the fresh protein for building body
tissues, muscles and blood cells, while
the proteins already present are
oxidized and excreted. Every part of
the- body is thus constantly being
rebuilt by a steady exchange of new
materials from food to replace the
established materials.
Every twelve months every human
PROTECTIVE TROLLEY is a device used at the
Saclay Atomic Energy Research Centre, near Paris,
10 remove "hot" (highly radio-active) materials from
the Centre's Atomic Pile. Running on rails alongside
GIANT HAND has been built in the United States to enable atomic engineers to carry
out operations in dangerously radiated chambers without exposing themselves to rays.
The "O-Man" (contraction of'"overhead manipulator") weighs I 5 tons and can lift 7,000 lb
loads. It combines enormous strength and gentle dexterity, for, among other feats, it
can rivet, weld, solder, hammer and use a knife. Co-ordinated by remote control levers,
its movement is controlled by an operator in a shielded adjoining room. (Life Photo)!
36
or animal body is completely rebuilt.
Even the bones are thus rebuilt and
the only exception is the iron, chiefly
in the red blood cells, which is not
rapidly replaced by new iron atoms in
the food. This process is a funda¬
mental to life, but would probably
never have been discovered without
the use of tracer isotopes.
Nature's secret process
The most promising investigation
of this sort is the study of the
process by which green plants
build their substance from the water
and carbon-dioxide of the air. . This
reaction is the fundamental one for all
life since all the green plants depend
upon it and all other plants and all
animals depend on the green plants.
It is apparently a simple reaction in
which the molecule of water and that
of carbon-dioxide are combined, lose
some oxygen, and form sugars, star¬
ches, cellulose, and more involved che¬
mical materials.
Nevertheless, no one knows how the
plant does it and man is unable to
duplicate the reaction. But the avail¬
ability of a faintly radio-active isotope
of carbon has already given much
information and may within the next
year or two explain the reaction
completely. This will not mean that
man can dispense with plants for food
production, but it may well mean that
the food production by plants can be
greatly improved once this reaction' is
understood.
The process involves the formation
of carbon-dioxide gas from carbon
which contains a small proportion of
the radio-active isotope of carbon.
The product is "heavy carbon-dioxide"
but is used by plants in the presence of
sunlight exactly as they use ordinary
carbon. The result is that the radio¬
active carbon is built into the materials
of the plant and its presence and
location in the plant can be detected
immediately.

Unesco Courier Nr 12. 1954
the reactor it can withdraw isotopes and other
materials which have been activated inside, through
the small square doors seen on left. Its heavy cov¬
ering protects operator from rays. (Photo C.E.A.).
LEAD BRICKS are sufficient protection for minor laboratory operations where only low radiation
strengths are involved. Research worker here is guided by reflection in the mirror. Safety
precautions in atomic laboratories are not intended to give I 00% protection against radio-active
radiations, but rather to ensure that any dose received does not exceed a safe level. (Photo USIS).
When the green leaves of certain
plants were thus exposed to radio¬
active carbon-dioxide for only one
minute, at least fifty separate com¬
pounds were found in the leaf, tagged
with radio-carbon. When the time of
exposure to sunlight was reduced to
two seconds, the leaf had already
manufactured two or three compounds
from the carbon-dioxide of the air.
It turns out that the first products
made by the plant are compounds of
phosphoglyceric acid which thus are
shown to be steps in the manufacture
of fruit, or grain, or sugar. After two
minutes of exposure, radio-carbon tests
showed that even proteins and fats
already contained the new carbon just
received from the atmosphere. The de¬
tailed investigations of these reactions
are now in process and the full mechan¬
ism of this basic plant reaction should
be understood very soon.
By studying the process in different
plants it is now known that the early
stages of the reaction are identical in
all plants. Only later does the process
diverge into the production of com¬
pounds that are characteristic of each
plant, such as aromas, colours, and
drugs. In the case of the green algae,
it has thus been possible to divert the
reaction among the algae so that either
a preponderance of sugar or of malic
acid can form early in the process.
$100 million saving
On this basis, the experiments have
now been continued to show that
the same algae which normally
contain about 50 % of protein can be so
altered as to produce about 75 % of fat
instead of protein. In fact, the protein
content can be varied all the way from
7 % to 88 % , while the fat content can
be changed from 1 % to 75 %. At the
same time, the carbon-dioxide can 'be
changed from 6 % to 38 %. This ob¬
viously opens enormous possibilities
for changing and increasing the food
supplies available both to animals and
to human beings.
These examples are only a few of the
many thousands of uses of radio-iso¬
topes in research, industry, agriculture
and medicine. The U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission estimates that the total
savings accomplished by the use of
isotopes in these various fields is
more than $ 100,000,000 a year. Mean¬
while, the sales of isotopes by the Com¬
mission amount to more than $ 500,000
a year. The European atomic reactors,
especially those at Windscale and Har¬
well in England, are producing radio¬
isotopes that are sent all over Europe.
Radio chemists at Amersham have
achieved results which are distinctive
and in some instances in advance of
the American so that air shipments of
isotopes across the Atlantic are now
considerable.
As more reactors are installed and
the use of atomic energy becomes gene¬
ral throughout the world the produc¬
tion of radio-isotopes will also increase
with a resulting reduction in their
price. One can be certain that the ato¬
mic age is only in its infancy and that
in their impact on history the benefi¬
cial peace-time uses of the atom will
far exceed their misuse in war.
CONCRETE SHIELD weighing 3,000 tons is built around this materials-testing reactor
in the U.S.A. Reactor, in the centre of a large room, is connected by a bridge to a nearby
balcony from where it is operated by remote control. Thanks to concrete shield men
around reactor and on upper platform are protected from radiation. (Photo USIS).
37
