It was not until the close of the 17th century that the ruins of Palmyra, forgotten and fallen
into decay, were rediscovered. In background stands Palmyra's ancient Arab castle.

The Land
of Countless Ruins
s,'TRIA is a corridor and a meeting place. From east to west and
north to south, it is traversed by two natural highways, one winding
through the valleys of the Euphrates and Orontes to link the East with
the Mediterranean world, and the other carrying the northern peoples
southwards to Africa. Through the ages the country has been occupied
for short or long periods by Mesopotamians, Egyptians, Hittites, Assy-
nans, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Crusaders and Ottomans.
In Syriaat Kadesh and the Yarmuksome of. the great clashes of
history have taken place. Out on the Syrian desert, I 50 miles northeast
of Damascus, stands Palmyra, the Tadmor of the Bible, said to have been
founded by Solomon. Before the Christian era, the city was a trading
post on the camel route between the East and the Mediterranean world.
But its real glory came after the Romans captured it in 130 A.D. and
made it the headquarters of a great colony and outpost against the
revival of a Persian empire. Under Odenathus, ruler of Palmyra, and
later his widow Zenobia, the city became virtually independent. Zeno¬
bia extended her domain until it reached from Egypt to Mesopotamia
and came Into conflict with Rome. Her armies were defeated by the
soldier-emperor Aurelian and Palmyra fell in 273. Zenobia was taken
away in chains but the Palmyrenes revolted. Aurelian returnedT
swiftly and destroyed the city. Thereafter the caravans took!
other routes and the magnificent ruins remained stark and empty j
under the desert skies or else slowly vanished under the sand.
15

-fr LAND OF RUINS (Cont'd.)
PALMYRA
THE Syrian desert is not uniformly
barren. There are enormous
stretches of steppeland, where
life is not impossible, or at least not
permanently so. The winter rains,
rare though they are, make the pas¬
tures green and fill the water-holes. The
wandering Bedouins manage to feed
" their flocks all the year round ; and
their camps are found here and there
in the desert solitudes. In some
places indeed, there is sedentary as
well as nomadic life ; near a well or
a spring a group of dwellings may be
built, palm trees grow up and crops
are cultivated.
The necessary conditions for the de¬
velopment of certain sites, when cir¬
cumstances are favourable, may thus
be found. At certain times in history,
irrigation work has been undertaken to
assist crop growing and reservoirs have
been dug to make permanent settle¬
ment possible. Trade has provided a
means of livelihood for a larger popula¬
tion than the products of the earth
would have sufficed to maintain. Mili¬
tary defence requirements have led to
the building of forts and castles, and
the necessary supplies for those who"
manned them have had to be found.
This accounts for the establishment
of the great desert routes, with their
chains of halting-places at the only
spots where the existence of natural or
artificial resources made life possible.
The natural route from the Persian
Gulf to the Mediterranean, via the Eu¬
phrates valley to Aleppo and Antioch,
was shortened by the short cut across
the desert which of necessity passed
through" Palmyra, either continuing
straight to the Horns Gap or turning
south towards Damascus and Palestine.
Settlements grew up, at each end of
the desert route or at oases along it,
or again at strategic points such as
river crossings or mountain gorges.
The ruins of Palmyra are striking
both for their size and their wonderful
state of preservation. From the~ regular
chessboard pattern of the streets, still
discernible inside the outer wall of the
town, rise rows of columns, sanctuary
precincts, porticos and steps of public
buildings. Round the city lie the vast
burial grounds, with their varying types
of burial vaults, tombs in the form of.
houses, hypogea, and sepulchral towers,
all of which, though violated from an¬
cient times onwards, still retain their
decorations and inscriptions as well as
most of the innumerable sculptures
they contained.
Whole structures still remain to their
full height : large sections of the main
colonnade are still upright and the en¬
tablature is still supported on the
pillars with their consoles ; the temple
of Baal, surrounded by its courtyard
wall and porticos is almost intact ; the
sepulchral towers in which the dead
mount guard along the pass leading
to Horns and Damascus stand out
square and sombre against the hill¬
side, flanking the route. Crowning the
mountain with its tours and redans
stands the Arab castle, one of the most
striking features of the landscape.
As far as the parts of the buildings
which lie below the surface are con¬
cerned, excavations have shown how
little they have suffered from the ra¬
vages of time, a fact accounted for
by the excellent condition of the sub¬
soil and the dryness of the climate.
The freshness of the paintings inside
the tombs provides an illustration.
Moreover, as the ancient city is almost
everywhere covered by a layer of earth
9 to 12 feet thick, even those monu¬
ments which are entirely concealed are
preserved to a considerable height.
Another reason is that the town ra¬
pidly fell into decay after its destruc¬
tion in 273 and never regained its for¬
mer importance ; buildings were seldom
converted to other uses and, . except
for a few that later served for military
purposes (such as the one now known
as Diocletian's camp, or the forecourt
of the temple of Baal, which was
transformed into an Arab fortress in
the twelfth century), the buildings
were never intentionally demolished or
their stones carried off.
The Syrian Directorate of Antiquities
has worked out an admirable and ex¬
tensive scheme for uncovering the en¬
tire ruins. The clearing of the agora
before the war, and that of the theatre,
16

UNESCO COURIER. N" 7. 1954
quite recently, have shown what spec¬
tacular and instructive results may
one day be gained from the scheme.
The work is proceeding steadily but the
task is immense.
The monumental arch, the temple of
Baal, the great colonnade and innumer¬
able tombs, towers and hypogea re¬
quired extensive restoration and con¬
solidation. The removal of the decora¬
tive sculpture of the Yarhai hypo-
geum and its reconstruction in the
Damascus Museum was a difficult
undertaking, successfully accomplished.
A bold plan was adopted to allow of
the uncovering of Baal's sanctuary.
The modern town, whose houses filled
the temple precincts, was removed and
rebuilt further north, beyond the boun¬
dary of the ancient city. Now, after
20 years, the whole population agrees
that the step was well justified, for the
new village, with its wide airy streets,
affords healthier and more convenient
living conditions ; this may serve as
an example. . *>
But Palmyra is not only a city ; it
is the natural centre of an .immense
region stretching from the Anti-Leba¬
non mountains to the Euphrates, a re¬
gion whose prospects and importance
are now beginning to be realized.
Along the desert routes which meet
and cross within it, and where they
reach the river, are other sites, mark¬
ing wayside centres which existed at
various times in history.
1 Courtyard colonnade of Temple of Baal,
Palmyra, which became an Arab fortress.
2 Two aerial views of -the striking ruins of
Palmyra, once a great trading centre.
r
V,fc-fcr-
I, 7 -*-,(_
ÍV-
r- <^^y-
T
17

* LAND OF RUINS (Cont'd.)
UNESCO COURIER. N" 7. 1954
B a a 1 b
Despite the Inroads of earthquakes, emperors and "collec¬
tors", the Roman temples of Baalbek in the Lebanon are
among the most grandiose of the monuments of antiquity
surviving today. The Byzantine rulers pulled down the
altars to build a church there ; the Arabs converted the
temples into a fortress ; and hardly more than a century
ago, Lamartine carted off a full camel load of their rich
treasures. The site was saved following a German archaeo-
oglcal expedition en 1900. The Lebanese Government
began the tough Job of consolidating, restoring and clearing
the ruins in 1934 and this was resumed at the end of the
last war. Unesco proposals for enhancing and easing
access to the ruins are now also belny considered. Below
are the six pillars of the Temple of Jupiter, the tallest
columns in the world. The substructure contains some
of the largest single blocks of stone ever cut, weighing at
least 1,000 tons. The largest block ' the world though is
In a near-by quarry still not completely cut away. It mea¬
sures 60 feet in length and 17 by 24 feet In cross-section.
Above right, ruins of the Arab mosque. Left, the
Temple of Bacchus, whose lofty portico and Interior deco¬
ration have been preserved almost Irjtáct, making It the
richest Corinthian building of the Roman world to come
down to us in present times.
Krak des
Chevaliers
The most striking monuments in the whole Syrian region
from the coast to the mountainous hinterland are the great
buildings raised by the Crusaders. They bear witness to
the colossal efforts made by the Western peoples over two
centuries to gain a foothold on this coast, as do the opposing
Arab citadels built along the valley of the river Orontes in
order to hold them In check. Most famous of all the Crusaders
castles Is the Krak des Chevaliers perched on its lonely vantage-point among the bare mountains, standing
guard over the great Horns gap. Its double line of fortifications, machicolations, underground passages
and great sloping glacis contrast not only with the architecture of the great hall and Its portico with their
cross-ribbed vaults, pillared doorways, mullloned windows and carved ornamentation but also with the aus-
terer architecture of the chapel. The surrender of the Knights Hospitallers to Beibars, and the fall of the
Krak in 1271, heralded the collapse of the Crusaders. In 1936 the Krak was restored and an entire village
built within the ramparts dislodged. But since then it has suffered considerable damage which meant re¬
building walls, repairing vaults and reconstructing a stairway. Unfortunately few people visit the Krak (less
than 120 a month) since it can be reached only by Jeep.
The Pillar -Hermit
of Qalat Seman
Few regions have so many ruins in so small
an area as does northern Syria. Of these,
Qalat Seman (St. Simeon Stylites) west of
Aleppo, has been termed "the greatest and
grandest Christian ruin in the East" (centre
photo). It grew up round the almost unbel¬
ievable figure of St Simeon, the world's first
pillar-hermit. At the age of 16 Simeon retired to a monastery. Because of his excessive austerities (he
once buried himself up to the chin in the monastery garden for an entire summer to discipline himself), he
was expelled and became a solitary hermit In the desert. In 423 A. D. he took up his abode atop a ten-foot
pillar. From this he graduated to higher and higher pillars finally mounting a 50-foot column where he re-
18
mained for 27 years, without ever descending, until his death. To prevent his falling off, he had an iron
collar round his neck attached to the stone by a chain, and a low railing built round the edge of his tiny
perch. It was so small that he could sit or kneel on It but not lie down. Meagre food rations were brought
to him daily by ladder. Twice daily he preached to the crowds below and prostrated himself over 1,000 times
a day in prayer. Thus he lived on from year to year, through the bitter winter cold of north Syria and the broil¬
ing summer heat, a miracle of endurance. His fame spread at once and. pilgrims flocked to Qalat Seman
the whole Christian world, even from remote Britain, to hear his wise counsel or In the hope of a mira¬
culous cure. After his death in 459, the existing huge church was built, centred around the saint's pillar ins¬
tead of the usual altar. (Photo left, shows ruins of central octagon and base of St Simion's pillar).
In the valley below there grew up a large pilgrim town (Deir Seman) with hostels, public baths, churches,
convents and private houses, the majestic ruins of which still remain. (Photo right, church of Deir Seman).

