WORLD HISTORY
Toning down its
' Western accent '
By Professor Marshall G. S. Hodgson, University of Chicago
DURING the past decade or so
there has been an increasing
awareness of a need for history
of a world scope. But what goes by
the name of "world history" is still
essentially Western history amplified
by a few unrelated chapters on other
parts of the world, notably India,
Ch*na and Japan. During the last
3,000 years there has been one zone,
the Eastern Hemisphere, in which
various lands of urbanized literate
civilization have been in commercial
and commonly in intellectual contact
with each other. Today at least 90%
of the world's population now traces
its history to some segment of this
zone of nations. A history of inter¬
regional developments among the
civilizations of the Eastern Hemi¬
sphere, developments transcending
cultural regions like Europe, the
Middle East, India or the Confucian
lands, will go far toward meeting our
needs for world history. These are
some of the points made by Professor
Marshall G.S. Hodgson, of the Univer¬
sity of Chicago, in an article which
appeared in Journal of World History
(Vol. In' 3) published by the Inter¬
national Commission for a History of
the Scientific and Cultural Develop¬
ment of Mankind, part of which is
-published below.
When we set out to give history
a world-wide perspective we
find our attempts being
paralysed by habitual distortions in
our ideas of mankind dating from
the days of Western world domi¬
nance. In Western thinking
and this thinking still dominates
too greatly other parts of the world
as well the West was the centre
of the world ; and the world at
large was to be regarded, historically
most especially, in the light of its
effect upon and contributions to the
modern West. Is not the world now
Westernized? we have justified our¬
selves; not noticing that (even if this
were true) there is a great difference
of historical structure and perspective
between even such a world and the
West itself.
All too often men of other regions
also have tacitly accepted the Western
criterion, trying to show the suprem¬
acy of their own region by showing
how much it helped to form or is
worthy to alter, the West. Such an
explicit orientation is now being
sloughed off; but it has left innumer¬
able traces in our thinking which do
not disappear so easily.
A peculiarly important example of
the results of this attitude is the
concept of "the Orient". The word
has meant many things; as used by
historians it has come to mean, if
taken " generally, all those urbanized
and literate countries of the Eastern
Hemisphere, whether south or east of
Europe, which were eventually sub¬
jected in various degrees to the West-
European expansion after 1500. There
is no internal point 'of unity among
these peoples, apart from their rela¬
tion to Europe, which they do not
share as much with Europe itself as
among one another; the term is
therefore a negative one, like "for¬
eign" ; it has meaning only in a com¬
mon contrast to the triumphant West.
Yet repeatedly it is taken to have
a substantive content. One hears not
only general remarks about the
"Oriental" character, bred of the
same ignorance in the West as similar
general remarks about "foreigners". -
One, hears mention of -"Oriental"
philosophy, or art, or even race.
Such mentions, in practice, usually
refer to some particular region, rather
than the formless conglomerate that
would result from an attempt to lump
the greater part of civilized man
together in a single cultural pattern.
But the more inclusive expectations
they foster are nevertheless often
taken seriously often even by
"Orientals" themselves; it is not rare
for a native of Egypt or some equally
Mediterranean country to take the
credit for the best lives of India on
the one hand and China or Japan on
the other over three thousand years,
as proof of "Oriental" superiority over
the materialistic modern West.
T
he root f'allacy is to take
"Orient" and "Occident" for
-"- two equal halves of the world.
A Mercator projection map of the
world, which frankly exaggerates
the Western countries in comparison
to more southerly lands like India,
may encourage this. (One wonders
how much less tenacious the concep¬
tion would be if mapmakers could
be persuaded to drop that mischie¬
vous projection altogether!) But
the new global maps, as well as the
briefest study of linguistic and histor¬
ical variation, will remind us that the
West is historically simply one among
several regions in the Eastern Hemi¬
sphere, each of the same order as
itself in size, populousness, and cul¬
tural wealth.
The elimination of catch-all
categories like "Orient" and the
very similar "Asia" will automatic¬
ally rid us of many absurdities in
daily conversation (at least in the
United States). For instance, that
one *or another gathering is truly
world-wide because it has members
from "all the continents" so many
from North America, so many from
South America, so many from Europe,
a couple from Africa, and even one
or two from "Asia".
Or the fatuous remark of a popular
"world" historian, that Europe pro¬
gressed and "Asia" did not, because
Europe's rivers flowed from the heart
of the continent out to the sea,
whereas "Asia" had no such rivers.
The Narbadda is roughly as long as
the Rhine, and the Ganges as the
Danube, and waters lands as diverse.
B
fm ut even in serious history such
II absurdities take their toll. It
-m^ is very hard to persuade a his¬
torian of "world literature" that it is
misleading to give a chapter to each
of the little literatures of Europe, and
then one chapter to that of "India"
as if he shared the supposition so
often found among the uninformed
that one should learn "'Indian" before

UNESCO COURIER. N" 7. 1954
going to live there. If it is worth¬
while treating world literature at all,
then Tamil and Bengali and Maratha
should have chapters as distinct from
Sanskrit as are the Italian and Ger¬
man from the Latin; if this should
show up a cultural poverty in Bengali
or Maratha, that would already be a
point gained.
But in any case, for the purposes of
comparison and of perspective, it
would reflect the position of India as
an understandably complex sub-con¬
tinent not as one incomprehensibly
vast "country" in "Asia" roughly
answering to Italy in the more com¬
prehensible Europe. Throughout the
serious work of scholars we find
"international" affairs in Europe
treated as matters of world import,
while relations between parts of
Africa or even between India and
China come under the head of
regional studies; a war among West¬
ern powers is a "world" war, while
one between China and Japan is
"localized"; a new language based on
all European tongues claims to be a
"world" language, while a threatened
alliance of Russia, China, and India
could be referred to as merely an
"Asian bloc".
\
I m more explicit cultivation of
/ interregional history can be
-*- vitally important to our his¬
torical understanding generally. For
a particular historical form of this
Westward distortion of our view of
mankind has tended to vitiate most of
our popular conceptions of general
history. The most significant error
Westerners have made lies not in
ascribing to themselves too much
glory or virtue in any particular com¬
parisons with other peoples. More
dangerous has been the West's prac¬
tice of reading the very structure of
history in a distorted fashion, for
this has been carried over uncon¬
sciously even by non-Westerners.
Judging all the world by its effect
on the West, Western history used to
set about tracing civilization from its
earliest times in Egypt and Babylon
only up to a point 'only so long as
these lands remained the nearest
direct antecedents of the modern
West. We ceased tracing civilization
in those countries almost as soon as -
Greece and Rome came to have a
literate history, concentrating on
each of them, in turn; ignoring each
time any further history in the lands
farther east (except when forced to
pay attention, by their role in a more
westerly story). So soon as north¬
western Europe came to have an in¬
dependent story, all lands east of the"
Adriatic dropped from sight, and the
very words we used suggested that
henceforth the West was the world.
" Something like this might have
been legitimate if done consciously;
but generally no recognition was
made that the focus of our vision had
been, shifted in the process. The
whole story commonly ran as if (as
Westerners have indeed actually
believed) civilization itself had been
moving steadily west. From this false
Impression of the story's continuity
arose a number of illusions, which
continue to have their effects after
the grosser aspects of the above
process have been abandoned.
V
W] IRST, it came to be supposed
I that after the early years the
more eastern nations had in
fact little significant history. This im¬
pression was early extended from
Egypt and Iraq to other lands; rein¬
forced by a number of accidents, in¬
cluding the habits of Indians and
Chinese of glorifying and exaggerat¬
ing the antiquity of their institu¬
tions. A variant of the same notion,
encouraged by the rapid rate of
change in the modern West, and by
illusions of distance, was that of the
static, changeless East.
Second, a different -and more
persistent illusion produced by the
pattern was that of a certain his¬
torical discontinuity recurrent de¬
generation, followed by a new start.
Not that such degeneration has never
in fact happened; but in the west¬
ward historical pattern the contrast
between one age and another was
confused and compounded with that
between places, as our attention
moved west.
This occurred especially when the
focus was shifted from the Mediter¬
ranean Roman Empire, in which
Rome was a western outpost from the
cultural and even economic point of
view, to Latin Christendom of the
Western Middle Ages, in which Rome
was a southeastern outpost on the
very edge of Greek 'and Muslim ter¬
ritory. A relative decline intervened
in the Imperial lands between the
age of the Antonines and that of
Justinian and the Hagia Sophia; the
shift of attention meanwhile from the
seaways of the Mediterranean to the
forests of Germany and Gaul mag¬
nified this decline into the fall of
the Roman Empire and the Dark Age
of civilization !
T
I he grosser misconceptions which
I have accompanied the West-
-m- ward pattern of history are now
less inclined to judge the fate of Greek
culture by its eclipse in Merovingian
Gaul. But the illusions which it
fostered were a strong influence
making possible the Nineteenth-
Century theories of history which
still tend to hold sway. The idea of
inevitable and < triumphant progress
probably owes something to the prac¬
tice of watching only those nations,
as civilization spread, which were
just taking on its' graces; a partly
borrowed progress always seems fast.
Those conceptions of history which
reduce it to stages or cycles owe far
more to these illusions. The famous
fall of the Roman Empire seems to be
the kernel from which such concep¬
tions have grown. Spengler decried a
Westcentred history, yet accepted the
limitations imposed by the Westward
pattern, allowing no history to
India or' China in the last two mil¬
lennia. Toynbee is anxious to recog¬
nize the continuing evolution of
the non-Western nations; yet
he seems to have used the "Fall
of Rome" as his starting point, and
hence involved himself in a system of
distinct societies, definitively rising
and falling, which naturally' bristles
with fundamental anomalies. Thus
the distortion has infected his work,
even though he guarded explicitly
against the illusion of the "static
East", as well as escaping the impos¬
ing list of those whose data suffers a
displacement in space which they
treat as if it were a change merely in
time.
Perhaps a more significant evidence
of the pervasive effect of the West¬
ward distortion in what we have
called world history, is its effect upon
so great a historical analysis as the
Marxist. Like others, the Marxists
have envisaged stages of evolution,
appearing in a predictable order.
Thus the slavery "stage" of Carolin-
gian Gaul.
Ü
l| ut the picture becomes awk-
I I wardly complicated if the
Syrian or Anatolian provinces
are focussed on, rather than
Gaul: for the Abbasid and Byzantine
societies represent alternative sequels
to the Roman. Accordingly, as the
historical vision of Victorian Europe
has widened, Marxism has been faced
with the need to patch up its theory,
and possibly to revise it thoroughly,
allowing for more varied elements in
and outcomes of the dialectical
process; it is my impression Marxists
have not -yet adequately met the
problem.
Some will have the impression that
in advocating an interregional his¬
tory of the Eastern Hemisphere, I am
advocating not world-oriented his-
tory, but just Oriental history- Not
quite: a history of '"Asia** without
Europe could conceivably resemaMe
a history of Western art or letters
without France. (Yet I "will
that just as a history of Earopa with¬
out France would better «Jessitc
the name of European history ttojm
one of France without Erarapa, so &
history of wittnaat tha West
could be more readily called a w
history, than the reversa),-
The point is that firtsix a tsxsrHd.-
historical point of rtep, what is ira-
portant is not European Mstary im
itself, however important that be for
us all; but its role to interregional
history This role has latterly been
momentous; but our very concentra¬
tion on internal Western history has
commonly obscured our view of the
West as one dynamic region among
others in the wider world.
25
