A Bth Century Globe-
Trotting Businessman
by José de Benito
On September '8, 1298, in Dalmatian waters not far from the
island of Curzola, a large Venetian squadron was routed by .
warships of the Genoese navy. Fortune had turned her
back on the "Serenissima", and all but twelve of her ships
were captured or sunk. Among the prisoners, was a Vene¬
tian nobleman called "II Milione".
His rank was of little avail to him on this occasion ; in the
struggle waged between the merchant Republics for control of
the Mediterranean waters the great commercial highway to the
riches of the East prisoners were held so that they might
later be exchanged should fortune luck desert a one-time victori¬
ous force. So, after the battle of Curzola, our distinguished
pi isóner found himself confined to a Genoese dungeon, in the
enforced companionship of a learned man from Pisa, a prisoner
from an earlier encounter between the fleets of Pisa and Genoa.
During the endless hours of imprisonment, the two men
exchanged ideas and confidences ; and while Rustichello of Pisa
listened in rapt attention, "Milione", whose life had included
twenty-five years of travel in the unknown lands of the Great
Khan, told his fellow prisoner about those exotic places, so often
on the lips of Italian merchants and seamen, but. about which
hardly any reliable information was to be had.
After hearing his companion's story, Rustichello, whose pen
flowed easily, and who was a good speaker and writer of French,
wrote a book in that language, entitled "The Book of Ser Marco
Polo, the Venetian, concerning the jkingdoms and marvels of the
East".
And so appeared the Book of Marco Polo, for that was Milione's
real name. This year the world will celebrate the seventh cente¬
nary of his birth a well-deserved honour, for that story,
written, like "Don Quixote", in a prison, started such a' wave of
curiosity that in a very short time copies and translations of
Rustichello's manuscript appeared in French, Italian, Venetian,
Catalan, Castilian, Irish and German.
It was thanks to the trustworthy and detailed accounts of Marco
Polo's travels that the cartographers of Charles V of France were
able to trace the map of Asia into their famous '"Catalan Atlas",
embodying in it a great deal of new information. But in addition
and this is of supreme importance in the history of civi¬
lization the news about the wealth of Asia and its trade in
spices was certainly a most powerful factor in inciting the Portu¬
guese to launch their great voyages of discovery, and in
encouraging Christopher Colombus to plan and carry out the
24

great adventure which was to lead to the opening up of a new
continent...
Thus, as Marco Polo's words flowed on between the four bare
walls of that Genoese prison, a new historical era was born. The
centre of world interest began to shift from the Mediterranean,
sailed by Greek and Phoenician vessels centuries before Christ,
to the Ocean, that "dark sea" of the ancients, which has now
become a bridge between the old peoples of Europe and the new
nations of the Americas.
. But who was Marco Polo? Born in Venice in 1254, he was the
son of Nicolo Polo, who, with his elder brother Marco and his
other brother Matteo, ran an important business at Constanti¬
nople with a branch at Soldaja (Crimea), from which they traded '
with the East. Marco Polo was barely seven when his father and
his uncle Matteo decided to make a business trip into the heart
of Asia. They set out from Soldaja in 1261," and their journey
lasted 8 years. In 1269, they returned bearing gifts from the
great Kublai Khan to the Sovereign Pontiff of Christianity, and a
request that the latter should send to China several masters of
the liberal arts who could also bring the religion of Christ to
Kublai's subjects. The Holy See was vacant at the time, owing
to the death of Clement IV, and it was not to be filled for three
years.
Marco, who was by now nearly fifteen, was thrilled by the
stories told by his father and his uncle Matteo and begged'to be
allowed to accompany them on their second journey to the East.
The brothers agreed, but as they were unwilling to set off again
for China without meeting: the Great Khatfs requests, they spent
two years in Venice, waiting for the election of a Pope and
making careful preparations for the new expedition.
In 1271, Teobaldo Visconti da Piacenza was at St. John Lateran
on a visit to the Holy Sites;
and at this juncture the Con¬
clave, as a way out of its dif¬
ficulties, elected him Pope.
This choice of one who,,
though of noble Italian ori¬
gin, was hut a simple Arch¬
deacon from Liège, came as
a shock to the whole of
Christendom. But while ma¬
ny dignitaries were still
plunged in stupor, the active
Polo brothers good business
men and well aware of the
value of time made their
way to St. John Lateran and
obtained from the new Pope
(Gregory X, later called by
the people "Gregory the
Blessed"), letters and presents
for Kublai Khan, who was a
descendant of Ghengiz Khan.
The Pope went so far as to
appoint two priests to accom-
' pany them; the priests, how¬
ever, were dismayed by the
possible perils of the venture
and judged it more prudent
to remain behind.
Everything was now in order; and in 1271 Marco, Nicolo and
Matteo Polo set out from the port of Lajazzo on the Eastern
Mediterranean. They were not to return until 25 years later
in 1296. Ramusio, one of Marco Polo's biographers, tells us that
on their return to Venice, where nobody remembered them after
such a long absence, the Polos gave a great banquet in their old
family mansion.. As soon as the guests were assembled in the
reception rooms, the travellers made their appearance to the
amazement of all present dressed in Tartar fashion, in clumsy
tunics of rough cloth. Shortly afterwards they retired, to reap- ,
pear in sumptuous silk tunics and dalmatics embroidered with
gold ; and before the sensation created had passed, they went
out once more and changed into yet far richer raiment.
To increase the effect of prosperity, the servants now wore
the luxurious garments which the travellers had cast off. Amidst
general expectation of yet more marvels, the three Polos tore
up the ragged clothes they had first worn, and took from them
the jewels and precious stones which they had sewn inside them
in order not to arouse the greed of people encountered on their
journey home..
After this resounding return the Polos were received every-,
where in Venetian society. They settled down in their house,
which people began to call the "Milione house" a double allu¬
sion to the "millions" owned by its proprietors and to Marco's
'second name, Emilio, the diminutive of which was "Emilione".
Marco himself entered Venetian political life, married, and was
elected a Member of the Grand Council.
As already mentioned, he was taken prisoner during the battle
of Curzola, and spent a considerable time in exile and enforced
A GREAT ADVENTURE beginsfor the young Marco Polo as he
sets offfrom Venice oñ hisjourney among the " kingdoms and marvels ofthe
East ". These old engravings showing the departure of Nicolo and Matteo
Polo, Marco'sfather and uncle, and Marco himself, are taken from the de
Mandeville "Livre des Merveilles ' ', now in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
UNESCO COURIER - N° 3 - 1954
rest a compensation, perhaps, for his 25 years of constant
activity. He died at an advanced age, in his own country.
Marco Polo's was by far the most extensive trip ever made up
to that time. Many would hesitate, even ¿day, before under¬
taking such a journey. Harsh climates, the risk of illness, and
the dangers of the road across huge and lonely steppes (including
the possibility of encounters with bands of desert robbers) would
make it, even now, an adventurous trip.
The tremendous effect which the story of these travels must
have produced on'the minds of contemporary readers, and indeed
on people living in the XlVth and XVth centuries can be ima¬
gined. _ . ;
Yet Marco Polo, with a modesty rare in adventurers, hardly puts
himself into the picture at all; his is a strictly objective and
realistic account of the countries he visited, or of those about
which, without having been there himself, - he had reliable
sources of information. The absence of the fictitious element
lack of fantasy invests his story with unique power and
authenticity, and makes it a monument of geographical and
commercial information.
In a time like his, when there was much commercial movement
and competition to open new routes for Venetian, Genoese,
Pisan, Catalan and Florentine trade his story was to pave the
way for every sort of project and ambition, to foster every
dream of adventure in mediaeval man.
The Belgian historian, J. Pirenne, summing up Marco Polo's
description of the Chinese economy, says: "In Northern China,
coal deposits (as yet unknown to the rest of the world) had
been discovered; Hang-Chow, the largest city of the universe
and China's most flourishing port, was "the anchorage for power¬
ful fleets, equipped by the Empire, which sailed as far as the In-
. dian Archipelago. In the com¬
mercial cities, business men
rich as kings were grouped
into corporations. Peking was
the centre of the silk trade in
the North; Chung-Tu was the
concentration point for all the
export trade to Central Asia;
Nanking and Su-Chow ma¬
nufactured cloth of gold;
Yang Chow was the rice mar¬
ket; Hang-Chow was the su¬
gar market and simultaneous¬
ly the most important centre
of international commerce;
Fu-Chow and Chin-Chew con¬
trolled the traffic in spices
and pearl's, as well as the im¬
ports from India. Navigation
was so intense that for
every one ship loaded with
pepper which sailed from In¬
dia to Alexandria, at least one
hundred anchored at Chin-
Chew.
This was the Mongol em¬
peror's time of greatest
splendour. The shades of
Ghengiz Khan, the conqueror
of Asia who had been so great a threat to Europe, still hung over
the Eastern world, with memories of the terrible massacres that
his hordes had perpetrated among the Chinese peoples accustomed
to the enlightened authority of the Sing dynasty. And Kublai
Khan had made good use of that terror so as to impose order in
all his vast dominions. How'else could the Polos have wandered
for 25 years over the remotest of areas without mishap?
Successive chapters of the Book of Marco Polo describe
Turkestan, Lesser and Greater Armenia (from Anatolia to the
Caucasus); the kingdoms of Mosul, Baghdad, Tauris and the
Khanate of Persia up to Ormuz; Mongolia, China, India and
Siberia; the seven thousand islands of Japan;' South East Asia, '
including Coehinchina and Annam; the islands of Java and
Sumatra (or Little Java), the Malay Peninsula and Ceylon;
Arabia, Abyssinia, the East African coast, and Madagascar; and
finally, Trebizond and Constantinople.
The opportunity of visiting many of these countries came to
Marco Polo when, as he was taking his leave to return to Venice,
Kublai Khan requested him to accompany a princess belonging
to his family and the Court, who was going to marry Argnun
Khan in Persia and whose cumbersome baggage forced her to
travel by sea.
Today, Italy is preparing to celebrate the seventh centenary
of the birth of this great traveller and narrator; and the world
will echo Italy's homage. Unesco is to share in the honouring of
a man who did much to encourage scientific investigation and
the love of travel, by publishing new translations, in English and
French, of "The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian, concerning
the kingdoms and marvels of the East".
UNESCO
ARCHIVES
25
