: v 'Vi'
i*
a tragedy
that might
have been
prevented
by Sir Cyril Burt
IN dealing with physical disorders it has become increas¬
ingly recognized that prevention, wherever possible, is
far better than cure. The same holds true of delin¬
quency and crime. To illustrate how urgently such mea¬
sures are needed, let me start with a single, case typical
of a vast number in which cure proved impossible, but pre¬
vention would probably have achieved success.
Frances, when I first saw her, was a' tall and attractive
girl of fifteen and a half, who might almost have sat as a
model for Greuze. With her long fair hair, flushed cheeks, .
and well-developed bust, she looked much older than her
age. She was born in a London slum a couple of years
before the outbreak of the war; and, when her father was
called up and her mother found work in a munitions factory,
Fanny (as her family called her) was evacuated with her
older brother and sister to a farm in Somerset.' Here she
ran wild, and by the age oí seven had become the terror
of the village children.
Returning to London at the end of the war, she proved
to be exceedingly backward in her lessons; but, apart from
a tendency to giggle, chatter, and occasionally weep, she
gave no serious trouble in the classroom. At the age of
eleven she was reported to the police for stealing money
from a confectioner's till, and referred by the magistrate
to a child guidance clinic. From the case-file it appears
that she had been regularly pilfering at home for three or
four years. The father was described as a rough and
drunker! dock labourer, constantly quarrelling with his wife,
whom he eventually deserted. The mother was an excitable
woman, who had freely consorted with other men while her
husband was overseas and was constantly in debt. 'Non-co¬
operative', was the social visitor's final remark.
After the change from country to town, Frances' own
'One of the world's foremost authorities on problems of juvenile delinquency. Sir
Cyril Burt, Is tmentus Professor of Psychology at the University of London and was
formerly Psychologist to the London County Council. He was the first psychologist to
be officially appointed by any education authority m the world. His many books
include The Young Delinquent (considered a classic in the field), The Backward Child
and The Subnormal Mind.
30
í>5rV - * S
it* -afS
V. -f.- * Jif'
fit
.v
y¿í'-.
. > -
v.
1 t-v
. V -
Arnim 1
MW
".4#P.; .
B$#i -*?:
k.-'t- '(-? -¿V-'-i
M&£'
health had steadily declined; and, with a few imaginary
touches of her own, she succeeded in presenting a pathetic
picture of weak and pretty innocence, neglected by her
parents and misled by bad companions. At first the attitude
of those who saw her was pity rather than reproof or punish¬
ment. Later more drastic measures were tried docking her
pocket money, corporal chatisement at home and at school,
daily sessions with a psychoanalyst, and ultimately removal
to a convalescent home, from which she absconded.
After leaving school, she was dismissed from one job after
another. At her last, she took a bundle of five-pound notes
from the _ cashier's desk, and vanished from sight. The
police found her three weeks later, living in a Liverpool
lodging-house with a Portuguese sailor; and "'Francesca", as
she now called herself, was brought back to London. She
was discovered to be suffering from venereal disease, and
was put on probation. When I saw her, I felt at once that
she was already a hopeless case. In spite of every effort
to reclaim her, she drifted about from place to place, de¬
teriorating physically and mentally. And a few months ago
she died of tuberculosis at the age of eighteen.
Frances' history, like that of most others who swell the
records of recidivists, shows clearly the converging influence -
of two main factors a difficult temperament and an
unfortunate environment. By "temperament" I mean the
child's inborn mental constitution. What is inborn can
obviously never be removed. < . One of the girl's school¬
mistresses had indeed declared that in her view the child
was morally defective and should be certified as such. But
to make use of wholesale measures of this kind would clearly
be impracticable.
Nevertheless, both teachers and doctors still frequently
cling to the old-fashioned notion that an habitual offender
must have been endowed at birth with an inherent criminal
nature, and that nothing can reform him. Today no psy¬
chologist subscribes to Lombroso's celebrated theory of il reo
nato, the criminal who is born and not made. Nor does
any moralist nowadays believe in the ancient philosophical
doctrine of an inheritable moral sense, common to all law-
abiding individuals, but lacking to a greater or lesser degree
in certain exceptional cases. Moral behaviour is the result,

Unesco Courier Nr 10. 1954
'-.'li "A *
. Y
IL >:«V\*
iJt
-./
Üi
ít-Jf» *3 ri
ääBv -fîT y 1
.- ? i" *.t « ": *
not of a single or simple innate faculty,
Dut comes from individual experience "
anü social training.
At the same time we are forced to
recognize that there are certain tem¬
peramental conditions which make it
far easier to- succumb to temptation.
Most juvenile delinquents like Frances,
exhibit from the earliest years a
marked emotional instability which
often runs through all the family.
Like the rest of us, they inherit certain
specific emotional impulses anger,
fear, sex, and so on; but, unlike the
calmer law-abiding citizen, they in¬
herit them with an excessive strength.
Sooner or later this highly-strung,
ill-balanced disposition is apt to give
way under continued strain, and the
child breaks down with neurotic
disorder or delinquent reactions fre¬
quently both.
Now, what is inborn is only a ten¬
dency; and it is by no means inevitable
that the tendency should be fulfilled.
Because a child inherits a liability to -
tuberculosis, we cannot assume that he
is fated to die of that disease. If the
potential neurotic or the potential
delinquent is detected at an early age,
and suitably protected and cared for,
the potentiality itself need never come
ro maturity.
Emotional characteristics are not the
only qualities that are partly de¬
termined at birth: our intellectual
abilities, both general and special, are
also conditioned by our inborn limit¬
ations. Differences in general intelli¬
gence can be readily measured by
standardized tests; and, since it is
31

(com'â)
An aceumulation
of many straws
essential to consider how far a child's behaviour is likely to
be guided by intelligent 'or rational motives, his capacities
should, be assessed at the earliest possible age.
Frances was tested at the age of eleven and found to
possess the mental age of an average child of nine. In
addition, owing to truancy and inattention, she was more
than four years behindhand in her reading and arithmetic.
Her bright manner thus concealed an innate incompetence;
and in after-life one of the chief reasons why she lost her
jobs was that she was really too stupid to perform her
work effectively.
Disrupted homes teach bad habits
Her lack of intelligence, however, was not so severe that
she could be formally certified as mentally deficient.
Yet, had she been tested as soon as she returned to
London, and transferred to a school or class for the educa¬
tionally subnormal, her whole history might have taken a
different turn. Unfortunately at that date no facilities existed
in her district. Among my own delinquent cases nearly 70 per
cent have been 'seriously retarded in their intellectual devel¬
opment; and it is from the ranks of these dull and backward
pupils that the majority of our future delinquents and
recidivists are eventually drawn^
Although we cannot alter a child's heredity, we can do
much to improve his environment. During early childhood
the conditions which chiefly affect his moral and emotional
development are those obtaining within his own home.
Thirty years ago poverty with its inevitable concomitants
hunger, overcrowding, and lack of space and facilities for
play generally figured as the most conspicuous charac¬
teristics of households in which juvenile crime was bred.
Today, as every social worker would agree, it is not so
much the material conditions as the moral and emotional
atmosphere that play the decisive part.
It is comparatively rare for a child who has been brought
up from infancy in the midst of a stable, intelligent, and
law-abiding family to embark on a criminal career. But
when, like Frances, the youngster is deprived of a mother's
tender care almost from birth, and when the home itself is
disrupted by divorce, separation, or mutual conflict, the
child has little or no chance to form steady habits of his
own or to acquire a respectful affection for those who
should control and watch over him.
But of all the causal factors that are observable in the
young delinquent's home, by far the commonest is inefficient
discipline. Discipline may be too lax, too severe, or (worst
of all) of the forcible-feeble type where the child is at one
moment scolded and slapped and at another coaxed and
cajoled.
Delay will be disastrous
Much could be done by educating parents particularly
the mothers of the next generation in the principles
of child management. Sometimes this will be out of
the question, and the child must be removed. But in every
case our motto should be, in the words of The Children's
Charter : "For every child a home, and that love and security
that a home should afford, and for those who need foster-
care the nearest substitute for a home of his own".
It is far easier to change the conditions in the school, or
to shift the child from a school where he has become
maladjusted to one more closely suited to his needs.
Moreover, the school offers the readiest link between the
supervising authority and the child's immediate relatives
and friends. With the English public school as our
traditional model, we have gradually come to recognize that
education must embrace the training of character as well
as the instruction of the intellect.
Transferred to a small class where every child can be
studied and taught along individual lines, with a flexible
32
THE PARENT AND CHILD. At a School for Parents opened in San
Francisco, California, to combat juvenile delinquency, parents whose chil¬
dren have committed serious crimes (above) hear court judge lecture
as part of mandatory weekly night course. Below, I S years old delinquent
submits to lie detector test. (USIS)
curriculum adapted to the needs of each, the dullard can
be supplied with wholesome interests and taught simple yet
useful forms of skill, his ill balanced temperament can be
adjusted and stabilized, and the restless and high-spirited
adventurer can be furnished with outlets for his natural
Impulses through the medium of games, sport, hobbies,
idancing, music, and the more elementary arts and crafts.
To fit the daily work to the capacities of each individual,
±he pupils must be systematically tested and observed; and
their school record cards should include, not only comments
on educational progress, but temperamental assessments,
notes on behaviour out of school as well as in, and full
details regarding the home background.
At the very first sign of irresponsible conduct, appropriate
steps must be taken before the actions become ingrained as
habits. When ordinary measures are likely to be of no
avail, the child should be promptly referred to the child
guidance clinic. Delay will be disastrous. In almost every
.instance, as the story of Frances herself so clearly shows,
there is seldom a single cause of crime : a multiplicity of
converging factors is nearly always at work.
It is not the last straw, but the accumulation of straws,
that breaks the camel's back; and every adverse or demo¬
ralizing influence must be detected and if possible removed.
Physical health may need attention; bad companions
separated; parents aided with prompt advice as each .little
emergency arises. Above all, the child himself must be
tactfully handled and helped.
In most cases, what will be required is not so much
treatment as moral training an education or
re-education of the child's own misguided impulses, with a
' view to building up better habits of self-restraint and
providing him with loftier ideals suited to his individual
abilities and needs.
