Racial
Crossroads
of the Pacific
by Harry L Shapiro
Race mixture has had a
field day in Hawaii.
Polynesians, aU kinds '
and degrees of Europeans
and Americans, Puerto Ri¬
cans, Chinese, Japanese, Ko¬
reans, Filipinos, not to men¬
tion smaller contingents of
other populations, have met
here and produced a bewil¬
dering array of hybrids. The
extraordinary fact about all
this extraordinary in the
light of conditions in many
other areas of race mixture
is the relative absence
¿j here of friction, prejudice or
Ü social rejection.
There is no colour bar in
Hawaii and no legal disability
based on race, although
contact between the same
races elsewhere has given rise to them. Why, one might ask,
has Hawaii become the seat of such an amicable arrangement?
The answer it seems to me, lies in the history of the Hawaiian
islands and in their relation to the imperialism of the Western
World.
When Captain Cook discovered the islands in 1778, he found
' them populous and administered by a strong feudal-like system.
He made no attempt to claim them for Britain: in fact he was
murdered by the natives and his expedition withdrew. 'By the
time Vancouver and subsequent expeditions reached Hawaii,
the islands had become consolidated or were rapidly becoming
so under the rule of Kamehameha I.
Thus, in the early nineteenth century, when European powers
were seizing every scrap of unclaimed territory to which they
had access, the Hawaiian islands were able to resist these ma¬
neuvres, since they were governed by a strong monarchical
government capable of maintaining its hegemony over the
islands. There was no political vacuum inviting imperial
Professor Harry L. Shapiro is Chairman of the Department of Anthropo¬
logy, American Museum of Natural History, New York. He is one of the
leading authorities in the United States on race 'mixture und the author of
the rolnine "Race Muture" just published by Unesco. {Pnce: $.¿j, 1/6, 75 fr.)
pom which the article on this pai/e is taken.
24
Photo New York Times
expansion. Of course, the balance of power in the Pacific played
a part in preserving Hawaiian independence, but where a strong
centralized native government was lacking, as in the Society
Islands, the Marquesas and in many other island archipelagos,
these succumbed to French or British control.
When, therefore, Americans and Europeans began settling in
the Hawaiian islands in the early years of the nineteenth
-century, drawn there by commerce, adventure or missionary
enterprise, they were legally foreigners whose advancement and
prosperity depended on the goodwill of the Hawaiians. To own
and hold land in that feudal society required permission and
special dispensation or possibly marriage with a daughter of a
chief. To pursue missionary work with any hope of success,
the Hawaiian chiefs and royal family had to be won over tact¬
fully and their acquiescence sued for with the respect exacted
by a ruling class.
From the very beginning of this contact with the 'Western
World, therefore, the Hawaiians were in the position of autho¬
rity. Never having been conquered, they remained the masters.
Their chiefs and kings continued to be persons endowed with
power and entitled to the respect and evidence of homage that ,
their traditions demanded. Such a situation created a pattern
of relationship to which the Americans ¡and Europeans had to
conform. And racial tolerance toward the Hawaiian had neces¬
sarily to become an accepted social and official pattern. -
Since the potential and actual wealth of the islands the
land remained in the hands of the native famiUes, intermar¬
riage was frequently 'an economic advantage that brought a
social position to the white man which he might not otherwise
easily achieve. Has children, therefore, would acquire status and
prestige in the beginning not so much from their white ancestry
as from the status and land
they inherited from their
native mothers. Enough of
such marriages took place to
entrench halfcastes firmly in
the upper social and econo¬
mic levels of the population.
With the native race en¬
joying social and economic
dominance, miscegenation
with it could not lead to the
social rejection of the -half-
caste since to do so would
also imply an intolerable re-

jection of the Ha¬
waiian as such. , -
' Moreover, the half-
caste had family
connexions With a
rising class7 of
Whites. Thus race
mixture in Hawaii
very early acquired
an - official ac¬
ceptance and, pub¬
licly at least, lpd
to no social seg¬
regation. This
pattern, was ex-,
tremely important
for the far more
numerous offspring
of mixed marriages on lower levels of Hawaiian society, as it
fixed the terms of social tolerance under which they existed.
Later, when Chinese and Japanese labourers for the plan¬
tations began to be imported in large numbers, they entered a
situation where racially at least, official tolerance was
the accepted mode. Social prejudice and economic resentment
against these newcomers did develop and at times became quite
acute, but it could not'degenerate into a crude, open, racial form
since that would have involved the Hawaiians and the part-
Hawaiians. The pattern of racial tolerance had to be -expended
to include all the various races that were joining and mingüng
with the Hawaiian population.
When, in 1900, the Hawaiian Kingdom came to an end and
the islands were annexed by mutual agreement to the United
States, 'the tradition of racial tolerance, established for over a
century, was firmly enough implanted in the HawaUan way of
life to withstand continental influences stemming from diffe¬
rent attitudes. This, at any rate, 'was true up.to World War II,
before the large-scale migration of mainland population . in
connexion with wartime activities took place. Some hints have
come through that the
sudden increase of
settlers conditioned to
another tradition has
to some extent affected
the situation described
above, but these may
merely be reflections
of difficulties from
re-adjustement rather
than indications of a
fundamental change.
While the picture
drawn here of con¬
ditions in Hawaii repre¬
sents an unusually
benign resolution of a
complex Tacial situa¬
tion, it should not
be taken to. imply that
race or race mixture
does not exist as a
factor at all in Ha¬
waiian life. That they
do is obvious from any
careful consideration of
that Ufe.
It must be remem¬
bered, first of all, that
the various racial
groups that entered the
islands as labour re¬
cruitments, came main¬
ly in fairly considerable
numbers. As such, they were settled on plantations where they
naturally tended to form cultural isolates, separated from
Hawaiian Ufe by its unfamiliarity. and by barriers of language.
Moreover, their own tendency was to reproduce in this alien
land the familiar elements of their own culture with all its va¬
lues. Later, as the members of these labour groups were able to
free themselves from plantation Work and to establish
themselves in such urban centres as Honolulu, they generally
settled in tight residential sections where they could continue to
enjoy the cultural security that . close association with one's
fellows gives.
Thus some continuity of racial and cultural identity was
maintained. For the most part it is a voluntary type of segre¬
gation which -has, however, tended to break down to a large
UNESCO COURIER . N» 2 - 1954
degree as acculturation and economic , prosperity permitted.
These racial and cultural entitles serve, as long as they persist,
to act as nuclei for their 'respective groups and to keep alive
some of the traditions brought to the islands. While they contin¬
ue to exist, they also keep alive a social centre that affects the
contacts of their group and their marital patterns.
That some cohesion still exists along these lines is evident
from the in-and-out mariage rates of these racial groups. It is
a fairly general pattern that the immigrants tend to marry
within their own group when partners are available. But, with
continued residence in HawaU, they aU show an increasing
inclination to marry outside the group. The rate with which
this occurs varies from group to group and depends, apparently,
on a number of factors too complicated to go into here.
The outmarriages, however, lare not random, but follow pat¬
terns distinct for each group. To some extent these outmar¬
riages are reflections of opportunity but also of a variety of
cultural and possibly racial attitudes. The striking thing,
however, is that each group reveals a stronger inclination to
marry half-caste Hawaiians than any others when they do
marry outside their own circle. Thus the Chinese are more
likely to marry mixed Chinese-Hawaiian, while the Whites show
an equally per¬
sistent trend to-
w a r d Caucasian-
Hawaiian mixed
bloods in prefer¬
ence to any other
group.
The mixed Ha¬
waiians, thus, by a
steady growth
through pri¬
mary crosses, ' by
intermarriage with
"pure" racial
groups and by their
own high natural
increase, are ex¬
panding at a more
rapid rate than
any other major
contingent of the
population. And
although it is unli¬
kely that all the
groups will be dis¬
solved into one ra¬
cially mixed popu¬
lation in the very
near future, the
present trends
suggest that the
mixed bloods are
destined to become
one of, if not the,
major group in
Hawaii.
"If race mixture enjoyed complete acceptance in the modern
world, its offsprings would ultimately be absorbed by the society
into which they were born and consequently no problem would
exist," says Professor Shapiro, in his study "Race . Mixture",
which has been published by Unesco in the series "The Race
Question in Modern Science". Such, however, is not the case,
and one of the world's racial problems arises from the fact that
mixed bloods very often form a special class and an unabsorbed
element in the populations where they exist. But there are
modern instances of racial mingling that has neither led to a
rigid social stratification nor to any significant friction, preju¬
dice or social rejection, in the article above, Professor. Shapiro,
has described an interesting case in point.
Drawings by Tambi Larsen token from " The Children '
other island territories in the Pacific.
a book on Hawaii .an
ARCHIVES
