HAIT
AND
The League of Nations at Geneva
though founded upon a sincere de¬
sire for peace, could not prevent the
destruction of peace. Born out of war, it
foundered in war. Bringing together
men of goodwill from every country and
race, it was yet unable to prevent private
egoism and partisan intolerance from
entering its counsels. Designed to
smooth off awkward corners, clear up
misunderstandings and establish a pro¬
visional code of law, but lacking the
means of implementing its decisions, it
went from one compromise to another,
undermined by unsated imperialism and
revivals of Caesarism which doomed
magnanimous resolutions and impas¬
sioned speeches to oblivion.
The United Nations Organization as
conceived and created at San Francisco
looking out over the Pacific with its
frightful memories of Hiroshima yet
undimmed is, like its predecessor, a
product of victory.
It should be recognized, however, that
United Nations is far better equipped
to deal with the problems that confront¬
ed the League at Geneva than ta settle
some of those of the new world.
What this new world exactly is has not
yet come to light. Yet it speaks through
different voices in all the languages of
Jean F. Brlerre is<one of Haiti's noted writers
and poets. For several years he has followed
closely the work of the United Nations and jiarti-
ciiluilij the Technical Assistance ¡iroyramme of
Ihr I iiitrd Rations in Haiti.
.the earth; Mrs. Vijaya Pandit, President
of the United Nations General Assembly,
knows it and supports its cause ; it uses
dialects which few can understand and
none can properly translate ; it is there,
alive and strong, despite barbed wire and
interdicts, taboos and disparagement.
The United Nations must take care not
to be surpassed by the clear and simple
aspirations often voiced from its plat¬
form by speakers who may lack the
international reputation of an - Eden,
Stassen, Churchill or Bidault, but who
brush aside prejudices and out-of-date
ideas and speak a new language, searing
as a flame, startling as a cry, announcing
a new future at our gates, a future that
may astound many but cannot be
questioned or ignored.
All the '"underprivileged" in the
world, whatever their" race, colour or
-culture, realize the undeniable truth of
Pearl Buck's statement which should
preface every history book that the
world possesses enough wheat, food and
agricultural resources in general to
prevent any man going hungry. The
United Nations knows it so well that in
the economic sphere it has its own
Technical Assistance organ a body of
people who are experts in all branches
of its activity, a "'brains trust" selected
from among specialists throughout the
world, who have a wide knowledge of
population, feeding and natural
resources problems and who know men's
reactions to drought and want, their
reactions in the presence of birth and
death.
THE UN
By Jean F. Brierre
In an address to the Haitian people,
delivered on 24 October 1953, the repre¬
sentative of the United Nations in Haiti
defined the rôle of Technical Assistance
as follows :
"In the economic and social field, the
rôle of the United Nations is to discover
how best to improve the standard of
living, establish greater justice for all
and promote a better use of natural
resources, so as to create the interna¬
tional atmosphere requisite for the
maintenance of peace and co-operation
among men."
This clear-cut statement, no longer is
a mere wish but a concrete policy. As
Mr. Seynès, France's representative at
the United Nations, authoritatively said,
"the programme of Technical Assis¬
tance... has done more than any other
programme to bring the message of the
United Nations not only to governments,
but to the whole world." For it is
obvious, even to the uninitiated, that in
political matters the peoples are surpris¬
ed to receive messages from the 'great
Federation of Nations which they cannot
understand because, amid the painful
realities of the moment, such messages
do not explain the exact meaning of the
battle which the United Nations is
assumed to be waging against man's
most terrible enemies.
Technical Assistance on the other
hand, which is financed by voluntary
contributions from member states,
implies respect for "the minimum obli¬
gation contracted by the States in
signing the San Francisco Charter.""
m
av:
*4>
W W&
12

UNESCO COURIER - N° 2 - 1954
»-
"For the first time in the history of the
world", Mr. Seynès points out,
struggle against poverty and hunger has
been recognized as an international
responsibility, and the Technical Assis¬
tance programme is the first attempt
effectively to discharge that responsibi¬
lity."
We no longer ask, today, what are the
real causes of poverty and hunger. We
simply affirm that the programme of
technical assistance for the nations of
the world is an immense step towards
an exact knowledge and an appropriate
solution of the great problems- of our
civilization. And in Haiti we have seen
it in action in many fields.
Marbial. A great deal has been written
about the Unesco pilot project in the
Marbial Valley. It has been denounced
,more often than defended in our country
where, in the past, experts have often
been regarded with legitimate suspicion.
Many people have asserted that Marbial
was a failure, without taking the trouble
to go and see it with their own eyes and
to discuss the question scientifically.
As the word "pilot project" indicates,
Marbial was an experiment. In a given
community one of the poorest and
most heavily afflicted by ignorance,
poverty and soil erosion it was planned
to establish contact with the people and
to help them to understand and solve
their problems.
A preliminary enquiry conducted by a
true friend of our people, Alfred Metraux,
and by Haitians of undisputed merit
such as Dr. Jeanne Sylvain, E. Berrouet
and Mrs. Jean Combaire, resulted in a
report of real scientific value entitled
"Making a living in the Marbial Valley "
which should have been widely circulat¬
ed, not only to give an idea of what has
been achieved in this region, but to
accustom the Haitian to taking thought
for his own people by revealing to him
this sombre, unknown figure of the
peasant who is too often victimized by
disease, poverty and ignorance.
When men who were yesterday ignor¬
ant and uneducated can today meet
and discuss their community problems ;
when one of them can direct the pro¬
ceedings at a co-operative meeting, as is
done anywhere in the world ; when a
whole community realizes and then
combats the dangers of erosion or of
microbes ; when it decides to build a
road and starts work on it in no lan¬
guage can that be called a failure, for
the people of Marbial have emerged
from the experience regenerated. Some
mistakes, admittedly, were made. A
pottery project was begun in an area
where there was no clay, and a firing
oven was bought without regard to the
local type of electric current. Yet
Marbial has provided a lesson. It has
supplied leaders for the locality and for
the rest of the territory.
Rural industries. Ours is a country
where refuse has never been utilized and
has served merely to pollute the air. At
the request of the Haitian Government,
a United Nations expert is now planning
the construction of a plant for the
conversion of refuse into manure. The
benefit that our agriculture would derive
from such a project is obvious.
The work done by Mr. Glen Lukens
These drawings were done by Alix Roy for a
special "Artisans Calendar" produced by the Audio-
Visual Unit of Haiti's Dept. of National Economy.
and Miss Laura Nadal, for the develop¬
ment of handcraft skills should be men¬
tioned. The former, a ceramics expert
whose high professional standards are
known to me personally, has trained
others to replace him, both at Lafond
and at Jacmel ; and many peasant
families are today using baked clay
utensils made by their children at the
Lukens School.
Miss Nadal, a wickerwork and weaving
expert, has, besides passing on her own
skilled techniques, stressed the market-
- ing problem and the importance of high
quality and standardized products. She
has made her pupils alive to the question
of gross cost and profit, and instructors
trained by her are now capable " of
calculating cost prices.
The development of industries based
on local fibres should infuse new blood
into the people's economic life.
Tanning. The skins prepared by the
Jacmel peasants are now among the best
in Haiti. Soaking, softening, milling,
unhairing, finishing and dressing have
all been taught scientifically. Some of
the most valuable work has been that
done by Mr. René Azémar. The ins¬
truction he gave with the aid of tools
and hides found locally, has produced
tangible results. It is to be hoped that
the services of those who have benefited
from this instruction will be employed
for the good of the community.
Reforestation. The acute problem
of erosion has been attacked with in¬
creasing success by M. Vinton Burns in
collaboration with the Department ot
(Continued on page 32)
13

Haiti and the U. N.
(Continued1 from page 13)
Agriculture. His knowledge of the Hai- .
tian and his respect for human values
have enabled him to talk with the pea¬
sants and convince them of the need,
not only for themselves but for their
children and their children's children,
to prevent the soil from disappearing
beneath their feet. It is obvious to aU
who travel about the country that im¬
portant work has been done, not only
by the State but through the voluntary
and clear sighted help given by indivi¬
dual people.
Fish breeding-. For some time now
fish breeding ponds have existed more
or less throughout the country. Some
are on private property, but everyone
who has the necessary means will soon
be able to take part in the fish breed¬
ing programme, if the experts' advice
about the nature of the land is followed.
Only salty land, unsuitable for cultiva¬
tion, is used for fish ponds. Specimens
of fish, sent to us from Africa and Israel,
have been able to adapt themselves to
local conditions. Living as we do on the
edge of an ocean abounding in fish, we
should' benefit from the advice of a
fishery expert, who could also assist us by
introducing new methods of curing.
' Again, we should consider introducing,
even as a school subject, practical pro¬
cesses for preserving meat, fruit and
food in general.
Whether on questions of grain storage
and methods of silo building, of estab-
Ushing a school for hotel keeping, of
technical training, stockbreeding, audio¬
visual education or statistics, there
are certain methods of approach which
must be observed. Everything must be
seen, discussed and considered on a
Haitian scale. Where a carpenter is to
be trained, it is unnecessary, for example,
for an apprentice to start by learning to
operate an electric saw, which he wiU
rarely have occasion to use. In building
a silo, there may in a given region be
reasons economy, transport, etc.
for using easily avaUable material. In
rural education, the teacher must be able
to chat with a man who is said to be
tricky, backward and superstitious but
whose conscience and dignity are very
much alive; whose mind is ready to show
appreciation, and his heart to give
affection.

