ARE WOMEN THE INFERIOR SEX?
No, declares a scientist,
Women are superior to men
by Ashley Montagu
I have spent a great part of my scientific and public life
bringing the facts of science to attest to the fact that no
people is in any significant way naturally superior to
another, and that such superiorities as any human group
exhibits as compared with another are acquired, and are
usually due to purely accidentally determined historical
causes. And yet, today, I have become identified with the
viewpoint, which I put forward as a scientific fact that one
group of humanity is naturally superior to the other, namely,
that women are naturally superior to menthe very opposite
of the view to which practically the whole of humanity has
subscribed, possibly from its very beginnings!
It has been obvious to practically everyone that by and
large men are in every way superior to women. Men are
stronger, more intelligent, less emotional, less flighty,
more creative, even the best cooks are men, and the most
successful designers of women's clothes are frequently men.
Has it not been the continuous experience of humanity that
men are superior to women? How is it possible even to ques¬
tion so age-old and time-honoured a fact?
As a scientist specializing in human naturell know very
well that what human beings often accept as â\fact may be
no more than a belief which has become so encrusted with
the moss of Time that neither its origin nor its true nature
is understood. The belief is a fact because everyone regards
it as so. As a scientist I am interested in discovering the
processes by which such a belief came to be accepted as a
fact, and to demonstrate whether the belief is true or false.
How the whole myth started
It is not difficult to understand how the belief in masculine
superiority came into being, but before we consider that,
let me say what the scientist understands by "natural",
and by "superiority". By "'natural" is to be understood what¬
ever is innate in one's biological constitution. By "'supe¬
riority" is to be understood the state of being adaptively
better or more efficient in some trait or quality than the
organism with which one is making the comparison.
Now, how did it come to be believed, and how is it that it
is so universally believed at the present time, that men are
naturally superior to women? The ähswer is simple: Men
are muscularly more powerful than women, women have
babies, women have to lead more sedentary lives than men,
because under primitive conditions, it is she who has to stay
at home and look after the young, while her husband travels
over the face of the land hunting for game.
This division of labour exists in all societies and exercise's a
powerful influence upon the socio-psychological development
of the sexes. The woman becomes parochial, the male
urbane. The woman's experience being largely limited to her
domestic functions she becomes a domesticated creature,
whereas her husband, as the hunter, learns a great deal
about the world in which he lives, he improves upon techni¬
ques of hunting, he devises new implements, he learns of
innumerable plants and animals, he enjoys large varieties of
experience which never fall to the lot of his wifein compari¬
son to her he knows and can do more about the world in
which they live than she will ever know or do not because
she is incapable of knowing and doing the same things (or
nearly so, for it is obvious that not being as muscularly
powerful as he is she will be unable to lift heavy animals or
Professor Ashley MONTAGU, or the United States has won especial note for his
work in race relations and he was a member of the two committees composed of
internationally-known scientists who drafted the Unesco statement on race based on
the most up-to-date scientific data. Professor Montagu's books include "On Being
Human', 'Man's Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy of Race", "An Introduction to
Physical Anthropology" and "The Natural Superiority of Women".
12
run as fast), but because she will not enjoy the necessary
opportunities to show what she can learn and do.
To the domesticated female the prowess of her male and
his superior knowledge and skill all bear testimony to the
accepted belief that men are naturally superior to women.
Once this belief is accepted and societies become more
complexly organized the male becomes more complexly
integrated into his position as the naturally superior
creature, and everyone learns to accept the inferiority
of the female as an established law of nature. But how
often have the laws of nature turned out to be nothing more
than the private and public prejudices of men!
Anyone can check the facts
The scientific fact is and a scientific fact is one that can
be verified by anyone who wishes to take the trouble to
do soi the scientific fact is that women are naturally
superior to men, and I would add that .we should all be
grateful that this is the fact, for in this fact lies the hope of
the world.
The most valuable trait that human beings can possess is
adaptability. This is the trait which enables human beings
to get along with their fellow human beings in such a way as
to contribute in a creative manner to the enlargement of
their potentialities for being warm, loving, co-operative
persons. Nature has endowed the female most abundantly
with all those potentialities which contribute to the develop¬
ment of this trait, and she has done so because it is the
female who must géstate the young, who must give birth to
and succour and nourish the young.
Unless the female is biologically endowed with this kind of
altruism the species would stand very little chance of sur¬
vival unless the male were so endowed, but he is not. The
male has to learn how to love; the female is biologically, by
nature, equipped to do so. Because she is the biologically
more valuable part of the species capital she has been
equipped by nature with the necessary superiorities which are
calculated to ensure the survival of the species. And this is
where we come to the proof of the natural superiority of the
female.
Beginning life as a double-X
The most important of the biological differences between
the sexes are those which determine the sexual differen¬
ces. These are the sex chromosomes. The sex chromo¬
somes are known as the X-and Y-chromosomes. X-and
Y-chromosomes are carried in the heads of the male sperma¬
tozoa. Whether the child is to be a male or a female depends
entirely upon whether it is a Y-or an X-chromosome which
fertilizes the maternal ovum. The female ova carry only
X-chromosomes. When a sperm carrying an X-chromosome
fertilizes an ovum, the resulting fertilized egg is XX, one X
from the male sperm and one X from the female ovum. Such
an XX egg always gives rise to a female. When a sperm
carrying a Y-chromosome fertilizes an ovum, the resulting
fertilized egg is XY, an X-chromosome from the ovum and a
Y-chromosome from the male sperm. Such an XY egg
always gives rise to a male.
The Y-chromosome is an incomplete chromosome, it is
much smaller than the X-chromosome and lacks many of its
properties and it is to these deficiencies that almost all of
the male's troubles and inferiorities as compared (Contd on
with the well-endowed double-X female can be ...
traced. P°ee 38'

ARE WOMEN THE INFERIOR SEX?
(Continued from page 12)
The female is constitutionally stronger than the male, and
what a good thing that this is so, for if men had to give birth
to babies the human race would long have ceased to exist!
Men are muscularly more powerful than women,, but they are
constitutionally weaker. Everywhere with the ^exception of
certain parts of India, where food and sanitation is depres-
singly bad the expectation of life is higher for females than
for males, and this holds true for the greater part of the
animal kingdom
Women are also healthier than men if by health one
means the capacity to deal with germs and illnesses, and they
are more resistant to most diseases and recover from them
more frequently than men.'
There are certain disorders and diseases from which
women suffer more frequently than men, such as gall-bladder
disorders and cancer of the organs serving the functions of
reproduction. Why women suffer more frequently from
disorders of the gall-bladder we do not know, but the repro¬
ductive system cancers we do understand, and it will not be
long before they are greatly reduced. But on the whole, men
suffer more frequently from cancer than women, and from
most other diseases, too.
Girls are mentally two
years ahead of boys
Women are also better shock absorbers than men. They
handle their emotions much more satisfactorily than
men, and are hence more resilient than men. Every¬
where during the last war it was shown that women under
the same siege and occupation, imprisonment and concen¬
tration camp conditions, withstood these conditions very
much better than men.
For every female stutterer there are five males. For every
female colour-blind person there are sixteen males. Bleeders
disease occurs almost exclusively in males. Almost anywhere,
in any country, for every female suicide there are three male
suicides. In almost all hereditary disorders males exceed
females.
Ah, yes, it may be remarked. But what about intelligence?
Intelligence is the mark of the ability to solve problems, to
make the best adjustment to the particular conditions one is
called upon to meet. It has long been known to intelligence-
testers and to school teachers, that on the average, boys are
not as bright as girls. Even baby girls seem to be brighter
than baby boys. Indeed, at five years of age, when most
children enter school in the United States, the girls are
mentally two years ahead of the boys, and what is more,
|AVA
Copyright. André Martin
BALI Copyright André Martin
retain this advantage throughout their school years. If at
college some girls do not do as well as boys, there are always
others that do as well and often better, and we may suspect
that many of the girls who don't do as well are trimming
their sails in order to enter another harbour than that of the
professions, namely, the harbour of marriage and the family.
For this is where the true genius of women lies.
I am convinced that women could achieve everything that
men have achieved in the arts and sciences did they but
apply themselves in the numbers and in the kind of encour¬
aging environments which men have enjoyed, but which
women have seldom enjoyed in anything like such numbers
as men. Women like Marie Curie, Liza Meitner, Gerty Cori,
and Dorothy Needham, not to mention many others, have
already shown what women can accomplish in the sciences
and but a pitifully small proportion of women have applied
themselves to the sciences. It is the same for every other
activity. Where women are afforded the opportunities they
show that they can do at least as well as men, and a good
deal of the time a great deal better!
They must teach men
how to be human
The intelligence that the world stands most in need of at
the present timeindeed, at any timeis the intelli¬
gence with which women are most abundantly equip¬
ped. It is the kind of intelligence which ensures and
conserves life and renders life more abundantly possible. Is
this the .kind of intelligence that men exhibit, or is it the
kind that women exhibit ?
It is to the advantage of everyone to afford women the
opportunities to realize their potentialities to the fullest.
Both men and women should learn to understand the full
significance of the fact that women are largely responsible
for caring for, and moulding the development of, the child.
To bring up a child is the most important task that one
human being can perform for another. Indeed, the future of
mankind may depend upon the manner in which this task is
carried out. This task is no "handicap". It is the greatest
privilege and responsibility ever placed upon the shoulders of
any human being. The manner in which it has been
performed has influenced the whole course of human destiny.
The hand that rocks the cradle is, indeed, the hand that rules
the world.
If the world is not as it should be it is principally the doing
of men who never gave women a chance to serve them in the
manner they are best equipped to do teaching men how to
love their fellow men. It is the function of women to teach
men how to be human.
The best way in which men can help themselves is to help
women realize themselves. In this way both sexes will come
for the first time fully into their own, and share complimen-
tarily with each other what each has creatively to contribute
to the making of a better and happier world.
38
