Images that do
more harm than
a thousand words
by
Gilbert Gadoffre
Symbols used by people for project¬
ing their own image abroad or
for representing foreign countries
to themselves usually have two things
in common a strong tendency to
persist once they take hold and a
faculty for crystallizing certain emo¬
tional reactions, such as hatred and
scorn, which it would be dangerous to
underrate.
The term "national images" covers
a whole set of images of different type
and origin superimposed one on the
other. First there are the earliest
images, which though limited in num¬
ber, occur in almost all the civilizations
in various forms. The Ceres-Bellona
combination, for example (goddesses
of fertility and of war) occurs in diffe¬
rent forms all over the ancient Italo-
Greek world, from Mesopotamia to
pre-Aryan India.
Then there are the national figures
such as Joan of Arc, William Tell and
Andreas Hofer whose character and
legends are based on or influenced by
the original images, and which have
finally become symbols in the life of
national communities.
There are also abstract symbols such
as Liberty (the first incarnation of
France's Marianne), Germania or Bri¬
tannia. Finally, symbolic images exist
such as the Marianne of the French
Third Republic, John Bull and Uncle
Sam. These come midway between
the abstract symbols on which they are
sometimes based (as in the case of
Marianne) and the stereotype-proper.
Borrowed from antiquity
Although these images can be
separated into the above categ¬
ories, the categories are by no
means watertight; each symbol merges
with those of preceding categories, of
which it frequently bears recognizable
traces. Such intermingling does indeed
occur; but it should not cause us to
forget that, as we move further away
from the prototype and the images be¬
come progressively more heterogeneous,
confusion more easily arises, and tran¬
sition from one category of images to
another becomes more difficult.
One point in this process of transition
from the three first categories of
images to the fourth still remains
obscure: how is it that primordial
images, of religious origin, and still
retaining much of their emotional
fascination, finally acquire an almost
burlesque character? Here again, no
answer can be given without analysis
of a specific case. We have to make
an excursion into political history.
We meet the first republican symbols
during the Great Revolution, i.e., at a
critical period, amongst grim men,
lacking both humour and self-criti¬
cism, and obsessed by all that recalled
Greco-Latin antiquity. The original
effigies were borrowed from Roman
coins reproducing, in stylized sil¬
houette, the statue of Liberty from the
temple of Jupiter on the Aventine hill,
with the classical attributes; the stola,
the spear and the Phrygian helmet.
Then, by a decree passed in 1792, to
the effect that the royal statues were
to be replaced by representations of
the figure of Liberty, the Convention
imparted an official character to this
symbol. The motive is clear: to replace
the paternal image of the sovereign by
a feminine image symbolizing both the
death of the authoritarian paternalism
of the monarchs, and the new affilia¬
tion . with the great democracies of
ancient times.'
Unlike the abstract symbols, the
symbolic images affect people emotion¬
ally in two distinct ways; they exercise
a strong fascination in their country,
but beyond the national frontier, the
same symbolic image rapidly deterior¬
ates into over-simplified and male¬
volent stereotypes.
As long as a symbolic image remains
in its country of origin, it retains some
links with the original images from
which it stems. In France the man in
the street knows nothing of the mythi¬
cal, historical or sociological origins of
20

Unesco Courier. N" 6. 1955
Marianne. In most cases he knows
that she represents the French Repub¬
lic, and not the French people, but
he has a vague feeling that behind the
conventional abstraction portrayed by
the political cartoonist there is a con¬
nexion between the lovely feminine
face of Marianne and the "fair
France" he has heard so much about
since his childhood, whose presence he
has actually felt and which undoubt¬
edly is something quite real in French
mentality.
In its turn this attitude is linked to
the very nature of French patriotism
which is not so much the collective
solidarity of a group of men who feel
themselves to be a single people as
the common love felt by different
people for a mother country and a way
of life.
A flighty scatterbrain
Once transplanted, Marianne loses
both her mythical aura and her
emotional overtones, retaining
merely her shell as depicted in French
cartoons and other drawings. Demo¬
cratic nations like to poke fun at
themselves and to criticize good-natur¬
edly but the symbolic figures used soon
take on undue importance and help to
change the image into a hostile stereo¬
type.
In Germany, John Bull becomes a
caddish, insolent ogrelike figure; in
Europe, Uncle Sam is seen as a dessi-
cated, heartless Shy lock; and for
France, the German Michel is regarded
as a sly double-crossing fool; in the
same way Marianne is all too easily
transformed into a flighty scatterbrain.
On careful examination such inter¬
pretations often prove to have a social
origin, in that the ruling classes can
project their particular obsessions and
phobias more easily on to foreigners
than on to their own compatriots. A
Dutch historian, Dr. de Vries, has
shown very clearly that, in the eyes of
the Frenchman of the grand siècle,
the stereotyped caricature of the
Dutchman in clogs was closely linked
with the social problems of Louis XIV's
contemporaries.
Though already ruined for more
than a century and economically un¬
productive, the French nobility still
occupied all the great posts, set the
tone of the country and thanks to
their power of persuasion, backed by
their prestige, imposed their own scale
of values. All the aristocratic quali¬
ties^ gallantry, generosity, elegance
were extolled, whereas the bourgeois
virtues of thriftiness, forethought and
a serious attitude towards business
and intellectual pursuits, were given
minor importance.
During the same period, there deve¬
loped in Holland a type of society bas
ed entirely on varying degrees of
wealth: the middle class, possessing
both power and wealth, had no diffi¬
culty in building a civilization uphold¬
ing the bourgeois values. The scorn
with which Frenchmen at that time
regarded the Dutch an attitude
expressed in the stereotype used is
essentially a projection, on the inter¬
national level, of a specifically French
class conflict.
This feeling of scorn arose from the
negation of bourgeois values "and the
affirmation of a set of aristocratic
values unknown to the Dutch people
who, as Louis XTV said, lived "on trade
and fish". It equally expressed the
then growing fear that the political
of the aristocratic caste
were about to collapse and that the
rich bourgeoisie would gradually seize
power with the help of royalty.
Less than 100 years later the picture
has succeeded in imposing its own
values: Monsieur Jourdain no longer
has to play at being a gentleman;
instead queens now play at being
shepherdesses and princesses admire
the furnishings and decorations of
bourgeois homes, and the pictures and
books extol virtues ridiculed only a
century before.
Thus the image of the Dutchman is
transformed: he becomes the model of
the worthy, resourceful citizen. Vol¬
taire sees in Amsterdam a paradise on
earth. Nothing, he writes, is sweeter
than the fortune you have made your¬
self.
This example of Franco-Dutch rela¬
tions throws some light on the nature
of certain transformations undergone
by Marianne. But to obtain precise
results would require country-by-coun¬
try enquiries and above all a careful
study of thousands of drawings and
cartoons. From the very limited mate¬
rial available it would seem that cer¬
tain sentiments and attitudes strongly
censured in Protestant, industrial and
bourgeois countries were often thrown
into the stereotype of Marianne. Thus,
anything in these countries which
seemed to threaten life based on the
glorification of hard work (such as the
idea that elegant living was superior
to work, the assertion of the right to
fantasy, opposition to sexual taboos)
was projected outwards on to a femi¬
nine figure displaying all the seductive
appeal of sin.
The confusion is further increased
because the various symbolic images
do not have the same meaning; and
any comparison between them is diffi¬
cult. John Bull represents a sovereign
people which is master of its own
destiny; Michel, the German, is not a
citizen but a subject: Marianne stands
for a political regime. But in the past
60 years journalists and caricaturists
have got into the habit of depicting
international debates as a kind of
puppet show in which the symbolic
figures have only one purposeto
represent their people.
An unwelcome marriage
The levelling down of these different
symbols has distorted both the
images themselves and the relat¬
ions between them. The simple art of
portraying Marianne and John Bull in
conversation introduces an ambiguous
note: the régime of one country cannot
be placed on the same footing as the
people of another country. And, since
it is always tempting to compare rela¬
tions between countries with relations
between individuals, it is very easy to
talk of friendship, hostility and mar¬
riage, even between puppets, particu¬
larly when there are differences of sex.
Several years ago, German news¬
papers favouring the Schumann plan
hailed the prospects of Franco-Ger¬
man reconciliation with headlines and
variations on the theme of the mar¬
riage of Michel and Marianne. The
German public took this as a token of
purely peaceful intention, but the
reaction of the French was entirely
different.
To the French the (Cont'd
feminine symbol of their on next
government was an -page)
21

More harm than
a thousand words
(Continued^
affirmation of virility and masculinity
which had liberated them from tyranny.
They refused to see France represent¬
ed by Marianne and could not admit
or conceive a marriage between Ma¬
rianne and Michel since, this seemed
to them adultery or a denial of their
virility. Their refusal to assume the
feminine role was strengthened by the
suspicion that they had before them
a partner who was trying to trick
them by taking the better share. Thus,
the introduction of national images
had the effect of distorting the friend¬
ly and conciliatory spirit in which the
plan was conceived, with the result
that problems were further confused,
and fresh tensions artificially created.
The harm such national images can
do when used in this way can hardly
be emphasized too strongly. Inevitably
deteriorating into stereotypes as soon
as they cross their own frontiers, they
breed misunderstanding, create deep-
rooted associations of ideas from early
childhood, caricature national temper¬
aments and nourish the spreading of
internal conflicts abroad.
In their own country of origin the
effect is almost equally deplorable; they
crystallize the most obsolete nationalist
prejudices with amazing potency. One
could be fooled. Because the demo¬
cracies introduce a certain note of lev¬
ity, as if to narrow the gap between
the symbols and their images and
allow a certain latitude for self-criti
cism and decorous mockery, it might
be imagined that the slightly burlesque
silhouette of Uncle Sam, Marianne and
John Bull are perfectly harmless.
But in these three cases the criticism
expressed within the countries is really
a kind of affectionate jibe at their own
faults which are merely seen as slight
shortcomings.
The sudden changes of public opi¬
nion, the scandalous instability of a
Parliament or a Ministry are easily
attributed to the light-hearted femi¬
nine flavour which gives Marianne all
her charm; the most cynical acts of na¬
tional egoism are admired as proofs of
the "strong character" of John Bull;
and as for Michel, in Germany, it is
taken for granted that he is eternally
exploited, always ridiculed, because he
is too goodhearted and too . credulous.
In this way, the worst faults of na¬
tions, those which in fact present the
greatest obstacles to international co¬
operation, receive compassionate abso¬
lution, supported and reinforced by
what passes as self-criticism. National
stereotypes thus lead to stagnation and
discord in every way. But can the
damage they cause at least be limited?
From kings to sportsmen
We must not forget that behind
these figures and the compar¬
isons made with others lies the
need sometimes felt by nations to assert
their own personality, and to show
themselves in a negative light against a
foreign background. This is a vital
factor which it would be dangerous to
underestimate. It should be noted,
however, that the image of a group is
not always identified with nationality:
'it has successfully advanced from the
tribe, through the city and the pro¬
vince before reaching the present stage.
It is perhaps not impossible to stimu¬
late this process of evolution, until the
image merges with certain universal
images which contain, yet transcend,
several other images.
But treaties, laws or political institu¬
tions could not by themselves acceler¬
ate such a movement unless certain
focal points of popular sentiment also
existed. In ancient Europe, where the
family constituted the basic unit it was
the monarchy (a sublimated image of
the family) which provided this focal
point, and in military states, the figure
of the King was replaced by that of the
Chief. In both cases, popular attach¬
ment to an individual was diverted to
the larger unit of which he was the
living representative.
With the disappearance of kings and
military chiefs, what new objects re¬
ceived the fund of emotion thus re¬
leased? To what extent have the
symbolic images in question inherited
the prestige formerly enjoyed by na¬
tional figures? How far have they
been robbed of their prestige by such
new objects of popular affection as film
stars, great sportsmen and heroes of
war or crime, all of whom are no longer
symbols of group-dignity, but of the
unfulfilled aspirations of the individ¬
ual?
These are questions to which no
reply can be given at present since no
studies have 'been made of the objects
of popular affection in the various
countries ; or of the genealogy of na¬
tional images; and of the projection
and exchange of images between one
country and another. Until it has been
done, certain factors of mass psycholo¬
gy will remain obscure ; the abrupt
switches of public opinion will remain
a mystery, and statesmen will continue
to be confounded, and their calcula¬
tions upset, by such phenomena as the
Hitlerian landslide in 1933.
The above text is an abridged version
of the study "French National Images
and the Problem of National Stereo¬
types" by Gilbert Gadoffre, originally
published in Unesco's "International
Social Science Bulletin," Vol. Ill, No. 3.
