New industry in Iraq
The sugar bowl hidden
in date palms
by
Georges Fradier
m ciENTiFic experiments carried out under the United Na-
KJ tions Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance
have paved the way for an important new industry in Iraq.
Iraq has been importing 80,000 tons of sugar a year; while,
for want of a market, thousands of tons of Iraqi dates were
allowed to rot. Then a Swiss expert sent by Unesco led the
way in experiments to manufacture" sugar from dates. As a
result, Iraq is on the way to saving $16,000,000 annually spent
for imported sugar.
As the result of the pioneer work of a Swiss scientist, sent
to Iraq by Unesco, the country will soon begin the manu¬
facture of sugar from dates, and some $16,000,000 annually
spent for imported sugar can be saved.
Photos Roger Viollec
For thousands of years, dates have grown in abundance in
Iraq and have constituted the principal food for the people
of the region and for desert dwellers generally in Asia and
Africa. Iraq, in fact possesses well over 150 varieties and pro¬
duces about 80 per cent of the world's dates. The dàte-palms
are cultivated as lovingly as hot-house flowers by farmers
who spare neither their wealth nor their labour. Sixty-five
million palms line the banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates
and sprawl out into handsome forests around Basrah.
Dates are the Bedouin's staff of life but, in Iraq, their
influence is not merely economic. Iraqi poets sing of the
date the way other poets under other skies write verses to
fields of wheat, to vineyards or to olive groves. Your true
connoisseur can distinguish 169 varieties of dates, some of
them bearing such charming names as ashqar, the blonde;
asabiil arus, the fingers of the fiancee; saadah, happiness or
ishaqi, the lovers.
In a "good year", Iraq may harvest as much as 400,000 tons
of the fruit. This should be a source of considerable wealth.
But in these "good years", date prices fall so low that distri¬
butors cannot even afford the luxury of moving the fruit to
market in Basrah you can often buy a ton of dates for 4
dinars ($11.20).
Despite progress in fruit preservation and in packing, which
has helped date producers to gain a foothold in certain
markets, they have been unable to solve what, at first sight,
seems to be a permanent case of overproduction.
This situation has been a constant source of worry to the
directors of Iraq's big fruit-producing company, the Date
Association. Recently it also began to worry /c
Dr. Herman Mohler, head of the Unesco team on next
of scientists sent to Baghdad in 1951 to help PaBe)

The sugar bowl hidden
in the date palms
(Continued)
Anyone who had visited Baghdad thirty years ago would have
some difficulty in recognizing it from a present-day description.
"A university at Baghdad ?" he might exclaim, "An engineering
school ? Physics laboratories ? Why, I remember Baghdad it
was an unhealthy town and not a very safe one." A visit today
would change his ideas. Within a few years, a modern city
with spacious avenues has replaced the swamps and the empty
lots he knew. Iraq is no longer an old land with three-quarters
of its territory lying wastëTbut a new countryand a rich one.
The efforts of the Government, aided by the U.N. Technical
Assistance Programme, have helped to give Iraq many new
looks. One of these is the sight of students working in the
physics laboratory of the Baghdad College of Science, under
Professor Hermann Mohler (above). Professor Mohler, a
Swiss expert sent by Unesco, initiated experiments to manu¬
facture sugar from dates pointing way for a new Iraqi industry.
Below, trunk of a date palm. (Photos Unesco and Viollet)
establish courses in natural science and to initiate research
on a university level at the school which is emerging as the
University of Baghdad.
Dr. Mohler learned that Iraq on the one hand was letting
thousands of tons of dates rot for want of a market and, on
the other hand, was importing more than 80,000 tons of sugar
a year, at a price ranging from $196 to $244 a ton. He knew
that the sugar content of the date is 81 per cent, although
it is true that this sugar is not the pure saccharose extracted
from the sugar cane or the sugar beet, but a compound of
glucose and fructose. Date syrup might be extremely nu¬
tritious but it seemed useless for any practical purposes, for
example in the manufacture of sweets, both from the stand¬
point of taste and the dark brown colour.
Still, a sugar content of 81 per cent no matter what kind
of sugar it was, looked impressive. Dr. Mohler was more
impressed than a layman would have been for, as former

Unesco Courier. Nr 5. 1955
| ^ü*1» »
"'«* -tl-,- ÄS Sixty-five million
date palms
Palm groves are a common sight
in many parts of the Middle East,
but they are exceptionally profuse
in Iraq. Here, 65 million palms
line the banks of the Tigris and
the Euphrates in thin ranks, sprawl¬
ing out in some places into hand¬
some forests. Iraq has a rich
variety of datesnearly 170 kinds.
(Photos Unesco and Viollet)
chief of Zurich's municipal laboratory, he was well aware of
Swiss research during the Second World War on the produc¬
tion of fruit sugar. A few experiments in the laboratory of
the school proved to his satisfaction that dates could be used
on an economically-sound basis to produce a white sugar
which no palate could distinguish from ordinary sugar.
This was heartening, but it wasn't enough. More conclu¬
sive experiments were required on an industrial scale.
Dr. Mohler knew that the refining equipment he needed to
carry them out existed in Switzerland. At his suggestion the
Date Association shipped to Zurich three tons of fruit and
a few weeks later, Swiss laboratories sent back one ton of
clear white sugar.
This new product was immediately distributed in Baghdad
to manufacturers of sweets and to pastry shops. Its tests
turned out to be a small-scale triumph: a few weeks later,
an official reception was held in the capital and its guests
were served cakes and sweets, all made out of "national
sugar".
Since then, a company has been founded by the Date
Association, the Agricultural Bank and the Iraqi Agricultural
Fund to put the dates-to-sugar process on a business basis.
Its first factory, now under construction, will be equipped to
produce 9,000 tons of sugar a year. Dr. Mohler believes this
factory will also be able to produce an inexpensive syrup
which will provide emergency food in a period of famine. As
for the by-products of the factory, the company's directors
have already announced that they will be used for animal
feed.
For the first time in history, it appears, Iraq will obtain the
full benefit of its most precious agricultural resource. As for
the technical assistance mission, it will have demonstrated
once again the value of scientific research to economic pro¬
gress.
II
