MILITANT SUFFRAGETTE speaks from the plinth atthe base of Nelson's
statue in Trafalgar Square, London (above), early in the First World
War. At this time, British suffragettes were not only demanding the
right to vote but also a share in the country's war effort (see posters

WOMEN
I N
POLITICS
by
Maurice Duverger
in rear). Suffragettes, like the one seated behind speaker, often carried
umbrellas. These were sometimes brought into play as " weapons "
in the clashes that occurred with the police. Below, a woman at
the polls in Australia, where women had the vote prior to 1914.
THERE are few modern countries which have not proclaimed
equality in the matter of political rights between men and
women nor failed to establish it in their constitutions, codes
and laws. But how far do the facts actually square with the law?
How much real equality in political matters goes with the legal
equality?
To find the answers to these questions, Unesco's Department of
Social Sciences carried out an investigation into the part played
by women in politics in four European countries. These countries
were chosen on the basis of fairly comparable economic development
and democratic beliefs, but at the same time on rather striking
differences in the social and political situations which led to the
granting of women's rights. They were:
Norway: where women were given the vote 50 years ago in the
course of gradual development towards full democracy ;
France: where women got the vote after the Second World War;
Yugoslavia: where a revolution in 1945 enabled women to obtain
full franchise ;
Germany: where, although women obtained political rights in
1919, normal development was interrupted by a period of totali¬
tarian government.
The results of the surveys were assembled by M. Maurice Duverger,
Professor of Political Science at the Universities of Paris and Bor¬
deaux, and published in the Unesco study "The Political Role of
Women". The situations revealed by the investigations and the
conclusions drawn from them by Professor Duverger form the basis
for the following article.
Between the part played by women in elections and the
part they play in political leadership a great difference
exists. A close look at women's political behaviour does
not confirm the classic democratic doctrine that government
reflects and represents the will of the people as expressed
at elections.
To judge by elections the proportion of women taking part
in political life is large, and differs little from that of men,
as regards either numbers or composition. There are gener¬
ally slightly more non-voters among women than among
men, and the woman's vote is generally slightly more conser¬
vative and more subject to religious influences. " But these
differences are small and apply only to a tiny fraction of
the female electorate. In certain exceptional circumstances,
these marginal differences may have a considerable influence
on the governmental majority and the trend of policy, but
they still remain marginal.
So far as government, in the broad sense of the term, is
concerned, the position is entirely different. Here the poli¬
tical role of women is extremely small and grows still smaller
as we approach the "'centre" of political leadership. There
are few women candidates at elections, fewer women mem¬
bers of parliament, still few(-r women ministers, and no
women heads of governments. (See diagram page 26.1
This progressive decline in women's influence as the higher
levels of leadership are reached is not only noticeable in the
structure of the State and its political organs, but is also
to be found in the government service, the political parties,
the trade unions, private businesses, etc. Nor do there seem
to be any signs of improvement. Although the difference in
the proportions of men and women non-voters sometimes
tends to lessen in certain countries, nothing similar can be
noted at the parliamentary and governmental levels. The
percentage of women members of parliament, for instance, is
hardly increasing. On the contrary, it tends to fall after the
first elections in which women have had the suffrage, and
to become stabilized at a very low level.
Though the part played by women in political
leadership is small it has a special qualitative (Cont'd on
bias. Here there is a fairly sharp difference in page 24.)
Copyright Roger Viollet
1 mat« '-V- cnmemruLTM . ^L
. :' ^c3JEBES®**'' m
«
1
^B; ^^IÉb
1
I
^ÊL j
V A
il m
1 ''
lit 1
^B 111
1 m
If ^m
^^^ ,^rm
21

WOMEN IN POLITICS (Cm-j from p. m
EVE'S INHIBITIONS
AND ANTI-FEMINISM *
IN BOTH SEXES
Dr. Marie Elisabeth Lüders, the oldest
member of the Federal German Bundestag,
opening the constituent assembly session
in the Bonn Parliament House on October 6
1953. Opposite p3ge, Mrs. Pankhurst,
leader of the suffragette movement in
England, being forcibly removed by a
London policeman following a suffragette
demonstration some forty years ago.
Copyright USIS
behaviour between the sexes. In party. leadership, in senior
administrative posts, in parliaments and in governments, the
few women included concentrate on specialized matters, such
as health, education, motherhood, family welfare, housing,
etc.. on all problems which are generally considered to be
of special interest to women.
It might be thought that this specialization is chiefly
characteristic of the first phase in women's participation in
political life, and that it will progressively diminish. But
facts contradict this optimistic conclusion. So far, there are
signs, on the contrary, of a very definite increase of this
tendency towards specialization.
Nothing demonstrates this trend more clearly than the
history of the parties of the Left and the extreme Left as
regards this problem. At the beginning of the century, they
were vehemently against any sex discrimination and attempt¬
ed to give women and men strict equality in political life.
Today, although they have not directly renounced their ori¬
ginal doctrine, they stress women's role as wives and mothers
and make their women leaders responsible for directing
activities for women as such, developing housewives leagues,
or mothers' associations, in preference to encouraging women
to join the parties themselves.
First to lose jobs in a slump
The feminism of 1954 is not the same as that of 1900.
In 1900, it refused to admit any distinction between
the sexes and treated both men and women as citizens.
But in 1954, it bases its doctrine on the differences between
the sexes and encourages women to enter political life for the
defence of interests which are considered to be their special
concern.
The small influence of women in the real leadership of
States i.e. in the elaboration and application of political
decisions, seems attributable, in the first instance, to male
opposition. This opposition was already vigorous with regard
to the suffrage. It is symptomatic that the right to vote has
seldom been granted to women by a parliamentary decision,
but has usually resulted from a revolution and the decision
of a provisional government which had not been elected.
In point of fact, this is true of three out of the four coun¬
tries investigated Germany, France and Yugoslavia. Only
in Norway was woman's suffrage introduced by the ordinary
democratic processes. Nevertheless, men's opposition gra¬
dually abated as the results of women's suffrage showed how
little it had changed the earlier situation. At the govern¬
mental level, on the other hand, this opposition is still ex¬
tremely strong, since a strong feeling of competition exists.
This seems to be a general tendency. As soon as there
is a serious threat of unemployment in a trade or profession
where the two sexes have previously been on an equal footing,
women are the first to suffer, either by being the first effected
by staff reductions or by discrimination in regard to wages,
or by simply finding it impossible to obtain employment. The
equality between men and women as regards gainful
employment, seldom perfect, deteriorates as. soon as compe¬
tition becomes keener.
Now, there has always been extremely keen competition
for political leadership. In the choice of a local party leader
from among the members, of a candidate for election among
the party leaders, or of a minister or a member of a parlia¬
mentary committee from among the members of parliament,
the rivalry is intense. To give a post to a woman is to
deprive a man of it and, in these circumstances, the posts
given to women are cut down to the minimum required for
propaganda purposes.
All the evidence collected on this point in the various coun¬
tries is in agreement. In the realm of politics, the "promo¬
tion of women" comes up against a barrier of male opposi¬
tion. The official statements made at the last congress of
the Yugoslav Communist League bear out the complaints
formulated by French and German women members of par¬
liament and of political parties.
But the free access of women to education and higher
education and their success in various careers makes it dif¬
ficult to maintain that they are by nature incapable of
managing public affairs efficiently. Besides, as has often been
observed, the results of men's management have not been
so brilliant in this field that the male sex can boast of its
proven capability. Although the old argument of woman's
mental incapacity is losing ground, it is being very success¬
fully replaced by a new form of justification which might
be called the functional theory.
In this, no attempt is made to maintain inequality bet¬
ween man and woman and the superiority of the former,
but the object is to establish a kind of division of labour,
24

Unesco Courier. Nr H. 1955
based on a difference of aptitudes. The slogan "woman's
place is in the home" is simply the extreme conservative form
of a subtler and less uncompromising line of reasoning. More
advanced exponents of the functional theory recognize the
right of women to work outside the home and to take a part
in civic and social life and in political affairs, but only on
condition that they confine their activities to problems of
motherhood, education, and the family to what might be
termed "'home policy". In this way they make the best of a
bad job, whilst at the same time limiting the damages.
However subtle their arguments in justification, men's
opposition to the participation of women in political life
would not have succeeded so well if it had come up against
vigorous resistance from women. But, in general, such resist¬
ance is weak and is conducted, in the main, by small isolat¬
ed minority groups which have no chance of securing results.
It must be acknowledged that the small influence of women
in State leadership is largely due to women's own inertia.
They don't want to be leaders
There can be no denying that women are less interested
in politics than men. In the IFOP (1) investigation
conducted in June 1953, less than two months after the
municipal elections, two out of three men (60 per cent) said
that they had been interested in the results for the whole
country, as against one woman out of three (34 per cent).
Roughly the same proportion (70 per cent of men and 35 per
cent of women) answered the following question in the affir¬
mative. "Do you ever discuss politics with people you know
well?". The answers to the next question "Do you ever
discuss politics with people you know little or not at all?" are
still more significant, for 30 per cent of the men answered
"yes" as against 10 per cent of the women. To the direct
question "Are you interested in politics" the answers were as
follows: Men. "Yes", 36 per cent; "slightly". 36 per cent;
"No", 28 per cent. Women. "Yes", 13 per cent; "slightly",
27 per cent; "No", 60 per cent.
As it was, this referred only to a vague general interest
in "politics" as a whole. When we come to consider active
participation in political life and the possibility of standing
as candidates, women's attitude is the same 46 per cent
of the women questioned by the IFOP thought that a woman
ought,not to stand for the municipal elections (the least poli¬
tical of all) but only 14 per cent expressed the same dis¬
approval in the case of a man candidate.
Not only do women show little desire to win a place in
political leadership, but the great majority of them accept
the system of justification invented by men to rationalize
their standing aside from it. Curiously, they sometimes
seem to be more uncompromising than men in this regard,
and more anti-feminist. Consider the following results of
the IFOP survey. The persons questioned were given a list
of activities ranging from the simple reading of political
news to standing for election or campaigning actively for a
political party. They were asked if there were any activities
on this list which seemed to them unsuitable for members
of their own or the opposite sex. The answers were as
follows:
Answer
For a person of
your own sex
For a person of
the opposite sex
Men Women Men Women
Yes, there are 	
No, there are not 	
%
16
78
6
%
76
16
8
%
64
26
10
%
15
76
9
The change in the attitude of the left-wing parties
towards women is probably linked with the realization of
this fundamental fact. When they championed the argu¬
ments of traditional feminism, of the absolute equality of
men and women, of their identical part in political life as
citizens, they were not followed by the female public any
more than by the male public. It is significant from this
point of view that the only mass movements which attract
women are para-political organizations such as the Union des
Femmes françaises and the Ligue Féminine d'Action Catho¬
lique, which have specifically "feminine" objects and specia
lized interests and which do not openly admit their political
connexions and their political interests.
It may be that the change in the policy of certain left-
wing parties in this field is purely a matter of tactics and
does not compromise their long-term strategy, which is
designed to establish real equality between the sexes; none
the less, the change is important in analysing the present
opinions of women with regard to their role in political life.
We still have to determine on what grounds these opinions
are based. Why do women agree to specialize in family,
household and educational matters, while admitting that
men can do anything? Why are not women feminists, or not
more so? There is a large measure of truth in the economic
explanation advanced by some people.
Women are intensely conscious of the wife's economic
dependence on the husband. To some extent, moreover, this
feeling develops simultaneously with the increase in the
number of women earning their own living. When very few
women had their own income, those who remained at home
felt that their position was natural and inevitable, in accord¬
ance with the natural order of things, unquestioned and
unquestionable. Today, some women are developing an
inferiority complex in this respect, often enough kept in
being by the husband ("I earn OUR living" is a typical retort
in family arguments).
In point of fact, the economic factor ought not to be consi¬
dered in isolation. Whether a woman has a career or not,
whether she earns her own living or not, she has a place in
a general social structure (in which economic factors, inci¬
dentally, play an essential part). It is in the general struc¬
ture of society, in the psychological and social environment,
that the fundamental explanation of women's behaviour
should probably be sought. The laws establishing the civic
equality of men and women are in advance of the customs of
society. In spite of thé far-reaching changes of the last
half-century, western civilizations are still based
on the pre-eminence of the man. (Cont'd on
If the majority of woman are little attracted next page)
Copyright Ringart
(1) French Institute of Public Opinion Research (Institut Français
d'Opinion Publique).
25

WOMEN IN POLITICS (Continued)
to political careers, it is because everything tends to turn
them away from them; if they allow politics to remain essen¬
tially a man's business, it is because everything conduces to
this belief, tradition, family life, education; religion and
literature. From birth, women are involved in a system which
tends to make them think of themselves as feminine.
Besides her specialization in the tasks of mother, wife and
housewife, her introverted attitude towards the home, that
closed world which should absorb all her energies and all her
dreams, a woman also has a feeling of dépendance on man.
This is perhaps the fundamental obstacle to her playing a full
part in political life. Under a democratic system, political
activity is essentially adult. It presupposes that anyone en¬
gaging in it takes full responsibility for his fate and does not
leave it to another to decide for him. It is diametrically
opposed to any form of paternalism in social relations. But,
while women have, legally, ceased to be minors, they still have
the mentality of minors in many fields and, particularly in
politics, they usually accept paternalism on the part of men.
The man husband, fiancé, lover or myth is the mediator
between them and the political world. "When things go
wrong, women blame their husbands, men blame the govern¬
ment" is a fairly apt summing up of this basic attitude.
The French reporter's analysis of sentimental women's
magazines (la presse du c shows up all its implications.
Faced with the same basic set of circumstances an inferior
social and economic position, leading to a sense of deprivation
POLITICAL ROLES OF MEN AND WOMEN
GOVERMENT _
PARLIAMENT ._
CANDIDATES
VOTERS
POPULATION .
WOMEN
MEN
and frustration and a feeling of belonging to a "proletariat",
young men tend to turn towards the revolutionary parties or
the trade unions, young women towards the expectation of a
rich and handsome "prince charming", who will deliver them
from the poverty and ugliness of their everyday world.
It is therefore useless to seek to give women a larger part in
political life by special reforms in this particular field. The
small part played by women in politics merely reflects and
results from the secondary place to which they are still
assigned by the customs and attitudes of our society and
which their education and training tend to make them accept
as the natural order of things. Purely political reforms are
effective here only so far as they tend gradually to modify
this situation, to counteract the effects of habit and tradition,
to help women to free themselves from them, and to awaken
them to a sense of their own independence.
From this point of view, woman's suffrage is probably a
most important reform; if its short-term political results are
small, its long-term educational value seems to be great. It
is probably still more important to fight against the deeply-
rooted belief in the natural inferiority of women, based on
physiological or psycho-physiological considerations a par¬
ticularly serious obstacle because women feel deeply the
special characteristics of their sex in this respect.
All the efforts of mankind are, in fact, directed to overcom¬
ing inequalities deriving from differences in natural condi¬
tions. From this point of view, those deriving from sex are
no more important than those resulting from climate, soil
composition or difficulties of communications. There is no
more an inferior sex than there are inferior races or inferior
classes. But there is a sex, and there are classes and races,
who have come to believe in their inferiority because they
have been persuaded of it in justification of their subordinate
position in society.
26
