
by Herbert Abraham
A FATHER BRINGS THE
U.N.'S TEN YEARS INTO
PERSPECTIVE FOR HIS
15 YEAR OLD DAUGHTER
UNATIONS
A TIME OF MOMENT-
AMOMENT OF SILENCE
JUNE 24, 1945: Fifty nations assemble
at San Francisco to sign the United
Nations Charter. Here, Senator Tom
Connally affixes his signature for the
U.S.A. as officials and Press look on.
OCTOBER 24, 1954: Delegates from
60 nations rise in General Assembly hall
at U.N. Headquarters, New York, for
moment of silence and prayer bafore
the sitting opens on United Nations Day.

Wa Iking into a
cinema after the
film has started
At fifteen, you are interested in a good deal that happens
much more than you were a couple of years ago.
You read the newspaper. You noticed that there was a
meeting at San Francisco to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the United Nations Charter. You know that top states¬
men from the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A., the U.K., and France have
met in Geneva. We have talked about the Geneva meeting
on peaceful uses of atomic energy.
It strikes me that one of the difficulties at your age in
reading the news is that it is like walking into a movie after
the film has been running for an hour. It is a big crowd
scene, and people are rushing over the landscape like mad,
but it is not quite clear who is going where and why.
It has happened to all of us. The human crowd scene has
been running continuously for six thousand years of
recorded history and heaven knows how many millenia
before, and each of us has had to figure out what it was all
about and then walk into the picture and play a scene.
In the movies, of course, you can sit through the next
showing until you came to the point where you say "this is
where I came in". But when you start taking an interest
in the social scene, you cannot go back to where you came in.
You were born into a world at war
In fact, it is easier to go further back to times long before
you came in. You study history: and what is history
except a way of extending your memory. Study history,
and you can "summon up remembrance of things past". But
the history we learn in school, even if it is called modern
history usually stops just before we appeared on the stage.
It is too recent, too controversial, to get into the textbooks.
Also, it comes at the end of the school year, when the
teacher is in a hurry.' History may have extended your
memory, but there is a blank spot those years just before
you were born and since you were born the times your
mother and I have been living through. I would like to fill
in that gap a little. For now, as you begin to look around
the world scene, now when the United Nations celebrates its
tenth anniversary, now when the talk is of the peaceful
use of nuclear energy now is a time to learn or to recall
these recent times past : now is a time to remember.
You made your entrance in 1940. You were born into a
world at war. The second world war had begun one year
before. German armies had overrun Poland. Russian
forces had occupied Eastern Poland and the small Baltic
states, and had fought against Finland. In those summer
months of 1940, fifteen years ago, German armies seized
Norway and Denmark, Belgium and Holland, overwhelmed
French and British troops.
You were five years old when the war ended. During one
third of your fifteen years, most of the people on the face
of the earth were concentrating their energies and their
resources on making war. Germany, Italy and Japan were
allied. They were known as the "Axis". In 1942, it seemed
that they were destined to rule the world. From Brittany
in the West a thousand miles into Russia in the East, from
the northern tip of Norway to Athens, the German armies
and air forces were supreme. Their submarines ranged the
oceans. On the other side of the globe, Japanese sway
extended far into Asia, through Burma and the lands of the
South, over the great islands of Indonesia, far West into the
Pacific Ocean. Across North Africa the struggle raged for
control of Egypt and the Middle East.
At this time, the countries which had been attacked by
the Axis, led by the U.S.A., and the U.K., and U.S.S.R., and
China declared that they would co-operate with one another
in conducting the war, and they spoke of themselves as the
United Nations.
By the spring of 1945, Russian and American and Western
European armies had forced their way into Germany, and
they had brought to German cities the storm of destruction
from the air which their own cities had previously experienc¬
ed. Italy had been occupied. The American navy was strik¬
ing ever nearer the home islands of Japan.
It was at that time, when their victory was assured, but
while the slaughter of war still continued, that the allied
countries those that had called themselves the United
Nations agreed at San Francisco to establish a permanent
organization : the United Nations.
Like you, the United Nations was born in a world at war.
Some people might think that I am putting too much
stress on war. But I have to tell the story the way I see it
and that means for me that I must start with the fact that
the United Nations started in a time of war. I do not see
any use in telling you about the past and closing my eyes
and your eyes to this basic fact. A good deal that has
happened in the last ten years does not make much sense
unless you remember that the United Nations began as an
association of the countries that were resisting the Axis
powers and that the Charter was drawn up by those
countries.
There is another reason why the story has to start with
war. Before you can think about the United Nations you
have to know something and think something about nations.
In the story of nations war has been a repeated and often a
dominating theme. You have got to start with and accept
that fact, in order to see not only why it is essential to
organize the nations for peace but also to understand why
it is a difficult thing to do. It is not enough to be
enthusiastic for world peace, or for something that you
vaguely know about called the United Nations. You have
got to have a solid realistic basis in knowledge and under¬
standing.
War, and the ruin and misery of war were what we had
been living through in those first five years of your life.
You will find this reflected in the opening words of the
Charter of the United Nations :
"We the peoples of the united nations determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
mankind..."
Now I would like you to think for a minute about what is
involved in trying to prevent war. One way of going about
it is to try to handle particular disputes and stop them from
growing into a war. You would try, so to speak, to stop
each particular war from happening. But obviously this is
not good enough. You would try also to go deeper and to
get at underlying causes of wars. You would try to make
it less and less likely that the kinds of disputes would arise
which result in wars.
Peace keeping is like crime prevention
You can see something like this if you think about problems
of preventing crimes. We need to have ways of
handling particular crimes and particular criminals.
We have a system of laws, and police, and law-courts, and
punishments. But at the same time we want to change the
conditions that produce crimes and criminals. To the best
of our knowledge about "the causes of crimes", we want
to act along various lines. If extreme poverty is one of the
causes which leads the people to crimes, we will see whether
we can alleviate poverty. If mental illness is one of the
causes, we will try to improve our way of caring for mentally
sick people. If bad schools and bad home life seem to be
a factor, we will think of ways of improving the conditions
under which children live.
The people who drew up the Charter of the (Cont'd on
United Nations thought along two main lines for page 9)

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1935
UNATIONS
USIS
YFS-NR SinCe l945 when rePresentatives of three of the "Big
I LU IIU F¡ve" nationsEden, Stettinius, and Molotov(photo left)
chatted amiably in San Francisco after signing of the U.N. Charter,
political differences have marked the U.N. scene. In 1945 people mistook
a statement of high purposes for the actual achievement. Those hopes
have since been tempered by a down-to-earth understanding that
differences do exist between nations but can be settled peacefully.
Above, Henry Cabot Lodge and Selwyn Lloyd of U.S.A. and U.K.
vote "Yes" at Security Council. Below, Vishinsky of U.S.S.R. votes
"No". Top, voting in Political Committee of General Assembly.

tajM^^ ^ ,,
	
I Wj ^W^^^SSr^^
Ski rol^^SrV ^C5>-¿*^_i3
1 .^f
W^» V *
*/wp TyaSvl" ' ff hTI f gl Ê 1
5f
Bv r^g ^Sw Cam - ij* Jkm. -
fe» C3jW^^ Z £¿ ' à, / **
CMbP
j^IMK j£Sr^' CIS
i^^m| ^v _ y^r
Fl *w
S^ Ik
IlIt /^] 1
1* >> -
^ ki
R^ 1 I
US1S UNATIONS
REBUILDING THE LAND
OF THE MORNING CALM
War and devastation came to the Land of the Morning Calm in 1950. Almost over¬
night, peaceful villages and towns of Korea with their bustling markets and riverside
washing places (above) became shattered, burning ruins. Civilian refugees, first in
thousands and later in millions, crowded the narrow roads (below, left) seeking safety
from the fighting. During the first winter, the U.N. Civil Assistance Command
had to feed, house and care for 2,000,000 refugees whose numbers eventually grew
to 5,000,000. When an armistice brought peace in July, 1953, Koreans with the
aid of the U.N. Korean Reconstruction Agency began reconstruction of their war-
shattered economy. UNKRA also helped to provide new schools and books for
children like the Korean farmer's little daughter (below, right).
UNATIONS

Dear Jenny
(Continued from page 6)
stopping wars. One line was
to stop particular wars from
occurring by handling each
dispute as it arose more
wisely and by having a system
for maintaining order and
security. The other main line
was to strike deeper at the causes of war, and to bring
about conditions under which it was easier for people to work
together co-operatively.
I want to explain later some of the arrangements that are
provided in the Charter.
But first let us extend our memory a bit more, and recall
some more facts about the nations which were now proposing
to be "United Nations". People like myself looked back from
1945 to the years before this six years' war of 1939-1945. We
looked back thirty years to another war, which once we had
called the World War, but now sadly called the First World
War. Our memories of that war and what had happened
since have coloured our ideas of what might possibly be done
to save future generations from the scourge of war. To his
memories, each added whatever knowledge and wisdom he
possessed, and each had his own view of the situation of the
human race. I give you here a few recollections. Take them
only as examples of things many of us remember, and which
were present in our minds ten years ago.
It was in Europe that the two world-wide wars had start¬
ed. Not barbarian tribes, not bandit chiefs, but nations
which prided themselves on being the centres of civilization,
launched these wars and dragged the rest of the world along.
(In the first war, Germany and what was then the Austrian-
Hungarian empire and Turkey fought against Russia, France,
England, Belgium, Italy, and other countries. In 1917 the
United States of America came into it!.
Threat of international anarchy
The First World War shocked millions of people. They
had honestly believed that the "advanced" nations of
Europe, inheritors of the Christian tradition and of
democratic ideals, were progressing toward permanent peace.
They were shocked too by what seemed the utter senselessness
of those countries going to war. These were countries that
lived by manufacture and by commerce with one another.
They had everything to gain by employing for peaceful pro¬
duction and trade their elaborate systems of credit, their
tremendous industries, their skill in harnessing the energy
. supplied by coal and electricity and oil.
With so much to lose by war, how did it come about that
these countries had brought this catastrophe on themselves
and the world? And could it be prevented from happening
again? Those were questions men asked themselves as they
waited for the interminable misery to end. And the ques¬
tions are still with us.
There was one consideration which gave some grain of
hope. These countries had in their various ways brought a
system of law and order inside their boundaries. Their
people, most of them certainly, wanted peace. There was
much intelligence and much skill in managing public affairs.
Was it not reasonable to suppose that they could solve the
problem of organizing affairs among themselves?
One of the influential ideas about the time the First World
War ended was the idea of "international anarchy". Anar¬
chy is simply "lack of government". International anarchy
is lack of government among different countries. The
phrase was used to describe the situation in which countries
found themselves, and many people thought it was the basic
reason why war had occurred.
During the last 400 years people of the West became fairly
well organized as separate nations, and some of them be¬
came extremely powerful and extended their rule over other
peoples. Especially in Africa and Asia.
Looking back over the experience of the centuries before,
thoughtful people felt that the nation states had got them¬
selves into a dilemma from which it was hard to escape. On
the other hand, they prized and clung to the idea of their
complete independence but this very independence could
lead to tragic results. An independent person makes his
own decisions, and we admire him for it, but if he makes his
own decisions without paying the least attention to what
other independent people are wanting or doing, and if he
insists that he and he alone will choose his own course of
action without caring in the least about its effects on any
one else, then he is headed for trouble. In fact, inside any
nation state, or inside any kind of group, we have found
ways of putting the brakes on completely independent action
of that kind.
But the nation states claimed for themselves and insisted
on -just that kind of disastrous complete independence of
action. And if any one challenged their claims, they were
ready with their armed forces to get their own way. Within
a nation state there was a system of law, of police, of law
courts, with all manner of arrangements for deciding what
rights an individual had and for protecting him in his rights.
But among the nation states there was no system of law, no
way of determining what the "rights" of a country were, no
way of protecting a country's rights except through its own
strength.
Nations were claiming rights one against another: it might
be over a piece of land they disputed with their neighbour, it
might be over some right of trading at the other end of the
earth, it might be over a right to rule some group of people
for reasons which seemed quite satisfactory to the ruler, or it
might be the right to bring about the freedom of people who
were ruled by another nation. And if any of these claims led
to a dispute with another country, there was no power out¬
side the two of them with authority to insist on a peaceful
settlement.
H
Six million voters backed the League
ere then was part of the problem. How could nations
remain independent and still avoid the disastrous
results of their own unlimited independence?
When the First World War ended, and the peace treaties
were made, the idea was strong that we must end the "'inter¬
national anarchy". Accordingly, an agreement was drawn up
(known as the "Covenant") by which the League of Nations
was established. President Wilson, of the USA, was one of
the statesmen who insisted most strongly on this. The League
had a general assembly, and a smaller executive committee
(the Council). The countries in the League agreed to submit
their disputes to the League, and use all possible ways of
coming to a peaceful agreement. If necessary, the Council
would make a decision. A country that defied the Council
and attacked of the other would be declared an "aggressor".
The Council would recommend action to be taken by the
other members of the League, to stop the aggressor. (We
called this "imposing sanctions").
You can imagine how hopeful people were that the League
would turn out successful. In the first ten years, it settled
quite a number of disputes. In 1935, there was a vote in
England that showed that six million out of the eight mil¬
lion who voted were willing to back the League even to the
extent of imposing "military sanctions", i.e. going to war
against an aggressor.
Yet the League failed. The second World War eventually
came. In the years 1930 to 1939, aggression did occur, and
the governments in the League did not get behind the League
to stop it. They could make excuses. Did you know that
the United States did not join the League? Other govern¬
ments could say, "We can't stop an aggressor if the USA
doesn't help". Or they could say, "We are peaceful, we have
reduced our armaments, we can't make war. _ Besides this
dispute won't really matter to our people".
When aggression seemed to pay
So aggression seemed to succeed, and to increase.
Yet, when we pass a verdict of "failure" on the League of
Nations, let us remember how near it came to success.
There was a moment in 1935 when a great country, Italy, was
declared an aggressor, and the membe.s of the Lesgue
seemed prepared to enforce sanctions. But the governments
finally drew back.
We remembered all this in 1945. We wondered if the USA
had joined, if USSR had joined earlier, if the League had
met one severe test successfully? Perhaps we could do better
next time.
The first World War came as a surprise and a shock. We
moved toward the second knowing that tragedy was in the
making.
In the Far East, Japan had become a modernized industrial
state. She had learned from the West not only science and
technology, but the idea that a great industrial power must
have colonies. And the idea was strong in Japan that the
Jaoanese had a rightor a dutyto govern other peoples.
From 1931 on, those Japanese who were determined to estab¬
lish a Japanese empire increasingly got control in Japan.
First in Manchuria, then later in China itself, Japanese ar¬
mies were on the march. The League declared
Japan an aggressor (1932) but the governments (Cont'd on
took no action whatever against her. next page)

Dear Jenny
(Continued)
Mussolini, the fascist dic¬
tator of Italy, joined tne
ranks of aggressors. He
picked on Abyssinia, one of
the few independent coun¬
tries in Africa. This was
in 1935. This was the time
when the League of Nations almost succeeded. But' in the
end Mussolini was left alone, and another "backward" people
lost its freedom.
Then it was on Hitler that the eyes of the civilized world
were fixed, in horror. The German people had set up a demo¬
cratic republic after the First World War. In spite of the
burden of reparations they had to pay, and the terrible infla¬
tion which had made their money worthless, and the bitter
resentments which (naturally enough) were felt against the
peace treaty, still it seemed in the nineteen twenties that
Germany would become a centre of humane and liberal and
democratic life.
Instead, in 1933, Hitler and his Nazi party came into power.
They exterminated liberalism and democracy. Opponents
were thrown into concentration camps. The Jewish people
were marked for persecution and for slaughter. The Ger¬
mans it was proclaimed, were a master race. The Nazi
empire would last a thousand years. And nothing, nobody,
would be allowed to stand in its way. Many people in other
countries could not believe this. They thought the stories of
concentration camps were exaggerated. They let Hitler
persuade them that each time he claimed some territory,
Germany had some kind of "right" or this was his last
demand and Hitler would settle down peacefully.
In 1938 he was allowed to take part of Czechoslovakia: it
was inhabited partly by Germans. But in March, 1939, he
took over all of Czechoslovakia. That was the climax of
efforts to "appease" Hitler. When he moved against Poland
on September 1, Britain and France declared war.
We remembered all this in 1945. Wilful, conscious aggres¬
sion does occur. We had seen it occur. The need seemed
all the greater to set up a strong system to deter and stop
aggressors.
We asked ourselves, what led Germany and Italy and Japan
into this course of military adventure and aggression. What
might lead other people along the same route? Four ideas
that seem to me to be very important are reflected in the
Charter of the United Nations.
End to economic throat-cutting
First of all, we looked back over the 30 years since the
first World War ended, and concluded that the terrible
economic collapse and the depression in the early
nineteen thirties was one of the causes of the failure of the
League of Nations. It was during this depression that Hitler
came into power in Germany. In this world where nations
claim to be so independent, they are terribly interdependent,
or dependent on one another, economically. A collapse of
business in one country reaches out and affects other count¬
ries. If nations could plan to work together on economic
problems they might better be able to hold off economic de¬
pressions. Instead of trying to cut each other's throats in
international trade, they might be able to increase interna¬
tional trade and increase one another's prosperity.
Secondly, as we looked around the world it was obvious that
from country to country people lived under very different
social and economic conditions. In a few favoured lands, the
resources of science and technology were used not only to
increase production and raise the standard of living but to
guard people against plagues and pest^ence, to give the chil¬
dren schooling, and to enrich their cultural life.
At the other end of the scale people were still the victims
of famine and diseases and ignorance as they have been for
centuries. Such a lack of balance is bound, it seems, to
produce strains and tensions, jealousies and fears, that
might result in war. Should not the countries of the world
co-operate in sharing the benefits of science and technology?
And would not this co-operation not only bring material
benefit but demonstrate and strengthen a new spirit of
international sympathy?
Thirdly, there was the fact known to all of us that many
peoples were ruled by foreign nations, and especially that
the nations of Western Europe ruled empires in Asia and
Africa. Equally well known was the fact that throughout
the world the yearning and demands for free independence
was growing. Here, historically, was one of the recurring
sources of conflict. Could not a fresh spirit be introduced
here too? It was not for this new international organization
to tell countries they must at once give up control of other
territories, but the nations could and did put into the
Charter the basic idea that in governing "'dependent"
peoples a nation had a duty to assist those people to develop
toward self-government.
Fourthly, you will remember that the Charter was written
by countries which were resisting the Axis powers. As they
asked themselves what steps had led the Axis powers to
make war, they recalled how during the past 20 years indi¬
vidual freedom had been reduced and destroyed in those
countries. The destruction of human rights inside a country,
they thought, was one of the basic steps by which its people
were moulded and prepared for war. They believed there¬
fore that it was essential to assert and maintain individual
freedom and that the countries that joined the United Na¬
tions ought to work together for this purpose.
Stay out of Europe's quarrels
These recollections of the years before 1945 would be quite
incomplete if I didn't speak a little about the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (which for convenience, we'll speak of simply as
Russia).
The U.S.A. had far and away the largest industries in the
world. In many fields of industry it produced as much as
the rest of the world put together. Since modern war uses
the same resources as peaceful production, the U.S.A. was
also the strongest military power at the end of the second
war.
After the first World War, many Americans, perhaps most
had had the feeling that they didn't want to get mixed up
in any more of "Europe's1" quarrels and the U.S.A. stayed out
of the League of Nations. This feeling was very strong right
down to 1939. But the U.S.A. did get involved again; and
the attack by Japan on Pearl Harbour finally brought them
into the war. Now, in 1945, few Americans believed that
they could go back to "isolation". They remembered such
things as I have been telling you. They believed they must
join in a new world organization.
Rivalling the U.S.A. in its strength was Russia. The re¬
volution in Russia nearly forty years ago (in 1917) had
brought into power the Communist party. They had set
about making Russia a great industrial power. It seemed
that they had succeeded, for they had fought their way back
against the invading Nazi armies. In spite of the terrible
destruction to their country in the years of invasion, their
capacity to recover seemed unlimited.
Now it is a simple historical fact that the Russian re¬
volution and the policies of the Communist party had
aroused the most violent feelings in the rest of the world.
There were those who believed that Russian communism
was the hope of the world: that only the acceptance of their
system could finally liberate the world from poverty and
war. And the Communists believed that the powerful non-
communist countries were looking for the opportunity to
destroy communism. At the other extreme, many people
believed that the Communists were bent on destroying capi¬
talism by revolution and war. One of the chief excuses
given by Fascists and Nazis for their policies was that they
were protecting their countries from communist revolutions.
One can find plenty of facts to justify all these mutual
fears.
A new factor the atom bomb
But in 1945, both U.S.A. and U.S.S.R. had been allies in the
war against the Axis. Both had come into the war as a
direct result of being attacked. Both wanted peace.
And if these two great countries would join in a new organi¬
zation to keep peace, and if both could be counted on never
to launch an aggressive war then peace might be assured.
Finally, there was the atom bomb. How could we fail to
remember that. It was only on August 6, 1945, that the
world learned that an atom bomb had been made: on that
day Hiroshima was , destroyed. Four days later a second
bomb destroyed Nagasaki. Within ten days Japan had laid
down her arms.
Here was a new fact. Men could lay waste whole cities at
a single blow. And the bomb had in fact been used.
The Charter of the United Nations had been completed
some weeks before the destruction of Hiroshima. The atomic
age and the United Nations were born together.
I think I'll stop here and go on with my story later.
10

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1955
BURLAP BAG FOR A PILLOW. This little girl gently stroking her grandfather's head symbolizes the plight of Palestine's Arab refugees. The
U.N. and many of its agencies have brought relief and shelter as well as schools to one million of these unfortunates since 1950.
UNATIONS
CLAY STATUETTES AND DEAD LOCUSTS illustrate work of two U.N. Agencies. Statuettes are among few home industries of El Salvador's
rural areas where International Labour Organization is now advising on labour and industrial problems. Dead locusts are harvest of Food and Agri¬
culture Organization's anti-locust campaign aimed at protecting Middle East crops against these marauders.

1945: Where
did we go
from there?
I have tried to give you an idea of some of the problems we
were conscious of when the Organization of the United
Nations was formed. And I have tried to do this in part
by recalling some of the events which we vividly remembered.
There we were, then, in 1945, and the leaders of the countries
which had called themselves the "United Nations"* united
in war against the Axis powers were assembled in San
Francisco to establish a permanent organization.
Their problem: how can countries go on being "indepen¬
dent" without getting into war with one another? Two main
lines of action were:
first: make some arrangements for settling disputes
peacefully as they arise, and at the same time, make arrange¬
ments to stop a country that starts a war;
second: make some arrangements for curing ahead of
time the conditions that might lead to disputes and war.
You might re-read these last few lines, and then read
these purposes of the U.N., which are stated in the Charter:
"1. to maintain international peace and security;
2. to develop friendly relations among nations based on
respect for the equal rights and self-determination of peo¬
ples;
3. to co-operate in solving international problems of an
economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in
promoting respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all; and
4. to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in
attaining these common ends."'
In the first purpose, the word "security" refers to what I
have called the first main line.
The second purpose is connected especially with the fact
that countries want to be "'independent" and to have their
independence recognized and accepted by other countries.
The third purpose relates to what I call the "second main
line".
Stop for a moment and consider the fourth purpose: "to
be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in attain¬
ing these common ends'". It answers a question which may
have occurred to you: why set up an- organization? I mean,
if countries want to co-operate and settle disputes peacefully,
or combine to stop an aggressor, and so on, can't they do it
easily enough?
Why organize? The reason for setting up an organization
is to make co-operation easier, habitual and systematic. In
our personal affairs, we don't go far in carrying out good
intentions without forming good habits and doing things
systematically. In any social groups including, of course,
such big social groups as nations we take it for granted
that we need systematic arrangements for getting things
done co-operatively. We certainly need to strengthen co¬
operation among countries by making it easier, more ha¬
bitual, more systematic. The tendencies to fly apart, to
work at cross purposes, to get into irreconcilable antagonism
are terribly strong. We need a centre or centres for
"'harmonizing our efforts".
Now I want to - explain some of the arrangements that
were made for carrying out the purposes of the U.N. First,
here are some general points, then arrangements about "se¬
curity", and then arrangements for international co-opera¬
tion in other matters.
The U.N. is an organization and its members are the inde¬
pendent countries which join it. As in most organizations
the members meet the expenses by paying annual contribu¬
tions. They hold an annual meeting which every member has
a right to attend. This is the General Assembly. The Assembly
may discuss any question or any matters within the scope of
the U.N. Remember, the U.N. is an organization of independent
countries, not a new kind of super-government. Consequently,
12

Unesco Courier. No 10. 1955
SUCCESS
STORIES
Two U.N. agencies the
United Nations Children's
Fund and the World
Health Organization
have scored outstanding
success since their creation
in I946and I948bysaving
millions of mothers and
children doomed to starva¬
tion and diseases like
malaria, yaws, TB and trac¬
homa. Here a Punjab mo¬
ther beckons smilingly to
her child at news that U.N.
team has reached village.
UNATIONS
the General Assembly cannot do some things that a legisla¬
ture does, such as pass laws or impose taxes. It can express
views of the members and can make recommendations to its
members, and decide what things the Organization itself
will do.
As to membership, you will recall that the U.N. started
with the countries that were fighting against the Axis. They
were the founding members. Membership is open to all
other "'peace-loving" states. Many of us thought in 1945
that all other countries would become members quite quickly,
but it has not worked out that way. The question of admit¬
ting new members has been mixed up with arguments on other
matters between some of the member countries, and some
UNATIONS
applications for membership have been rejected. Most
people would agree, I think, that the U.N. cannot be com¬
pletely effective unless all countries belong.
Another general point : The members of the U.N. make
quite a number of promises when they accept membership.
These promises are not written in the form "'we promise to
do so and so". They are implied promises. They appear in
such phrases as these: "All members shall give the United
Nations every assistance in any action it takes in accordance
with the present Charter."' When we join an organization
whose constitution contains statements like that, we virtually
promise to accept the obligations.
The arrangements for maintaining security (that is, for
settling disputes and stopping
aggression) are intelligible,
but not simple. The chief
responsibility for this part of
the work was given to a
committee called "The Security
Council". The Council consists
of 11 member countries. Six
of them are elected by the
General Assembly. The other
five are permanent members;
they are named in the Char¬
ter : China, France, U.S.S.R.,
United Kingdom and U.S.A.
This Council may investigate
any dispute, or even any si¬
tuation that might give rise to
dispute. It can recommend
methods for settling the dis¬
pute. It can decide that some
;ountry has committed an act
of aggression, and can then
call on the members to help
stop the aggression by cutting
off trade and similar proced¬
ures. If it thinks necessary, it
can decide to use force and
call on the member states to
supply the necessary armed
forces. The members of the-
U.N. promise to
carry out deci- (Cont'd on
sions of the Se- nejct page)
curity Council,
THREE WORLD
TROUBLE SPOTS
Three world trouble spots for
U.N. in past ten years: (I) In¬
donesia. By careful negotiation
U.N. avoided civil war in Dutch
East Indies and brought new
State of Indonesia into being
in 1 948. Left, newly indepen¬
dent citizens in Djakarta cry
"Merdeka" (freedom). (2) Pa¬
lestine. Despite armistice U.N.
has not achieved permanent
peace agreement. U.N. truce
commission officials discuss bor¬
der disorder, centre. (3) Gree¬
ce. U.N.'s diplomatic manceu-
vering helped end bloody civil
war in Greece and avoided
general war in Balkans. Far
left, U.N. Peace Observation
Commission was active on nor¬
thern Greek frontier until 1954.
13

Dear Jenny
(Continued)
even including the decision
that they shall contribute
from their armed forces to
stop aggression.
There are two points
about the Security Council
which many people have
found hard to undertand. First, there is the fact that
five countries are named as permanent members. The
second is this: at every point in its work, except questions
of procedure, "decisions shall be made by an affirmative
vote of seven members, including the concurring votes of
the permanent members". The phrase I have emphasized
means that any one of the permanent members can prevent
the Security Council from reaching a decision by voting
"no" (there are some exceptions to this, but I do not want
to confuse you with these). The power that a permanent
member has to stop a decision from being reached by saying
"no" is popularly called "the veto
power".
People have argued vehemently
whether these two points I have
mentioned permanent members and
"veto" power of permanent members
are strengths or weaknesses of the
Security Council (and therefore of the
U.N.). I shall try only to give you my
understanding of why they appear in
the Charter.
You must go back to 1945. There at
the table were representatives of the
countries which had poured out
their resources to resist aggression.
Measured in various ways their past
leadership, their present strength,
their future probable strength, the
strongest of these countries, it seemed,
were China, France, U.K., U.S.S.R.,
U.S.A. It would depend on these five
to carry the main burden should it
ever prove necessary again to resist
aggression. If they agreed, step by
step, up to the final terrible point even
of using armed forces, they could stop
any foreseeable aggression. But if
they disagreed, if one or more of these
great powers was unwilling to join in
a decision and consequently could not
be counted to help in the ultimate
emergency, then the prospect of
successful resistance to aggression was
slight indeed.
Rather than forcing the issue by a
majority vote against the will of one
of its permanent members, it would be
better to try again and find some
approach on which all would agree.
To put it quite briefly: A decision on
such important matters by a split vote
among the permanent members would
be as bad as and possibly worse than
no decision at all The responsibility
was placed on the five permanent
members to exert every possible effort
to find solutions in which all of them
concur.
I hope that what I have said will help you to understand
references to the Security Council and to the "veto", when
you read about them in the newspapers, and I hope you
will try to get much more information through your studies
before you make up your mind about the many difficult
problems involved.
A subsidiary point about the Security Council: I mentioned
above that some countries have applied for admission to
the U.N. but have been rejected. The Security Council has
been involved in this. New members are admitted by the
General Assembly, but the application goes first to the Se¬
curity Council, and a permanent member can "veto" it. This
use of the veto has annoyed many people.
The second main line of U.N.'s work, I said, is inter¬
national co-operation to improve conditions which may lead
to disputes. What is involved? Bad conditions in almost
every field of human activity can contribute to ill-feeling,
tension, hostility. There is no end to these social and econo¬
mic problems: poverty and disease and ignorance; poor
resources and badly used resources; poor soil and bad farm¬
ing; little industrial equipment and little skill in using it;
most of the people in the world live under these conditions.
They are socially and economically under-developed.
But that is only part of the problem. Countries can be
economically well developed, but have social and economic
troubles, as we all know: depressions, for example, or
quarrels between employers and employees. They make
trouble for one another sometimes by the very action they
take to ease trouble at home: through high tariffs on foreign
goods for example. How then can the United Nations help
to solve these problems? That is, how can we help one
another through this international organization?
The U.N. is not going into a country to build factories and
hospitals and schools. It has neither the money nor the
authority. Yet perhaps it can help.
Naturally, we start by appointing a committee ! We call it
the Economic and Social Council. And the Council sets up
more committees which we call Commissions. There are
Commissions on economic problems of different regions of
the worldfEurope, Asia, Latin America. There are
UNATIONS
WELDING INTERNATIONAL LINKS in a Dutch shipyard. Here Jugoslav workers, awarded
study fellowships by the International Labour Organization, help Dutch welders build the keel of a
tanker. One of the oldest specialized agencies, I.L.O. has brought government, labour, and employees
together to solve Industrial problems, raise standards of wages and working conditions.
Commissions on different subjects: the status of women,
human rights, narcotic drugs, social problems.
We reflect: our Economic and Social Council has an
enormous field of work, so have the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We do not want to over-load our
organization. Perhaps it would be better to set up some
separate organizations, each of which will look after a spe¬
cial set of problems. Health, for example. And Agriculture.
We reca'.l that the nations have already set up some
"specialized" organizations. We have long had the Universal
Postal Union which sees to it that letters can move easily
from country to country. And already, when we had the
League of Nations, we had set up the International Labour
Organization to promote better conditions for workers. Good:
we will have more of these specialized agencies.
Here are some of those we now have.
To promote better labour conditions and social justice:
International Labour Organization.
To promote better agriculture and food production:
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
14

To promote co-operation through education, science and
culture:
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Or¬
ganization.
To promote co-operation in international aviation:
' International Civil Aviation Organization.
To promote investment of capital so as to help economic
development:
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
To promote better health:
World Health Organization.
There is the Universal Postal Union, and there are others,
dealing with money problems, and radio, and weather (I
mean information and research about weather).
All these are usually referred to, rather familiarly, by their
initials, or one word in their name:
ILO, FAO, UNESCO, ICAO, BANK, UPU, FUND, ITU, WHO, WMO.
As a teacher, I wish the statesmen could have made all
these kinds of committees and agencies easier to learn.
Anyway, there is the United Nations Organization, turned
into a large family of organizations, with lots of small
children in the way of commissions, committees, boards, and
so forth. We have organized for action: what do we do?
Most of what the United Nations does sounds so dull that
I am almost afraid to tell you. Look at this, from a news¬
paper I read this very day:
The Proceedings in the U. N.
Sept. 12, 1955.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
United Nations Children's Fund, Executive Board
preliminary reports on joint project of
specialized agencies to improve nutrition in
underdeveloped areas.
Heard a report... Not much in that !
But look a bit further. United Nations Children's vFund
(or unicef) is something very special. You can contribute
to it, directly, yourself, and not merely through your govern¬
ment. When I was in Belgium last year I saw large signs
in the streets urging people to give to unicef. The money
is used to help children. all over the World, without regard
to race, creed, nationality or political belief. Let a govern¬
ment say, We have urgent need and unicef will help (if it
has enough money).
Reports are not exciting. But read this from an official
report:
"unicef provides equipment and supplies, primarily in
rural areas, for maternal and child welfare centres, children's
hospitals or wards, school health services, clinics, laboratories.
Assistance includes midwifery kits; scales, thermometers,
needles, syringes; transport; hospital equipment, drugs;
Unesco Courier. N" 10. 1955
serum, vaccines, common medicines, soap, disinfectants;
powdered milk, fish-liver oil capsules and other diet supple¬
ments; health education materials; dental training equip¬
ment... unicef provides dried skim and whole milk and fish-
liver oil capsules containing vitamins A and D, rice and
sugar, for supplementary diets to be furnished over a period
of years."
Fifty or sixty countries contributing and thousands of in¬
dividuals besides: sixty million children in seventy countries
saved from hunger or pain. There is perhaps something in
this idea of "harmonizing our efforts" and "co-operating to
solve social problems".
But back to that report on nutrition.
Here is something more about it also from this same day's
newspaper :
U.N. CHILD FUND TOLD OF NEW FOOD AIDS:
United Nations, N.Y.; Sept. 12 New protein
foods are becoming increasingly available to
benefit the malnourished children of the world,
the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fv.nd heard today.
The prospects for raising nutrition levels in
underdeveloped areas are brightening, the
twenty-six-nation board was told.
Preliminary reports on the project, in which
the children's fund is co-operating with the
World Health Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization, were submitted by
spokesmen for each.
Dr. King, an adviser to the Children's Fund,
mentioned the probability of "substantial pro¬
gress" by using high-quality protein foods such as
soybean, cotton seed, sesame seed, peanut and
palm nut products in Africa, Central and South
America, the Near East and India.
Still rather dull: Research. Proteins. Technical problems.
Spokesmen for Specialized Agencies.
Yes, but these spokesmen are talking about the possibility
that something will happen which has never happened be¬
fore a thousand million people may have enough to
eat. Perhaps one can forgive these research specialists paid
by who and fao and unicef for doing rather dull work. A
dozen men from a dozen countries studying how to use soy¬
beans or peanuts perhaps that too is not such a bad way
of harmonizing our efforts.
This then is part of what the U.N. and the other agencies
do: studies, reports.
A centre for harmonizing human efforts must also be a
centre of "intelligence": In time of war,
"intelligence" is an essential activity; it (Cont'd on
means gathering information and analyzing next page)
it and giving it to the people who need it.
ICY GEYSER shoots
skywards as trapped ice
patrol boats dynamite
huge icebergs to clear
blocked waterway off
Greenland. International
co-operation to ensure
safety at sea will come
under the Inter-Govern¬
mental Maritime Consul¬
tative Organization when
the Convention for this
organization has been
ratified by 2 1 states.
U.S. Coast Guard UNATIONS
SNOWY PEAKS of
Kashmir's mountainsform
mighty backdrop for
camp of U.N. observers
supervising cease fire
agreement, pending ple¬
biscite to decide whether
Kashmir shall become
part of India or Pakistan:
After I 948 fighting over
this question, U.N. me¬
diation commission per¬
suaded both countries
to agree to a cease-fire.
UNATIONS
15

Dear Jenny
(Continued)
In the war against ignorance,
and poverty and disease, we
need intelligence. Going
back to my newspaper, I
read that the tenth annual
meeting of the Board of
Governors of the World Bank
and the Monetary Fund opened in Istanbul yesterday.
It says: both institutions presented optimistic reports about
the world economy. About the world economy! the economic
systems of the whole world! Some people had done a lot
of intelligence work.
In the seemingly dull part of U.N.'s work, I would include
"conferences". To bring people from several countries
together and let them merely talk, that doesn't seem to
amount to much. True, a conference may be on so tech¬
nical a question that only experts can understand what is
being said. True, many a conference has no immediate
practical result that any one can see. There is no reason
why most of us should be particularly interested in a lot of
these conferences. But occasionally, all of us perceive that
a conference may be important. A conference may be a
sign that we yearned for, that the spirit of co-operation
lives and may prevail.
Enshrouded in secrecy and fear
That is how the Geneva conference on the peaceful use
of atomic energy appeared. For ten years we have
heard that nuclear energy may serve to enrich the life
of men. But so far as we could see, the governments that
were spending billions of dollars on developing the use of
nuclear energy were putting that money into bombs. The
destruction of man's life, not its enrichment, seemed to be
the most likely result. All was enshrouded in secrecy and
fear. And now, through the United Nations, they meet, they
talk, they exchange information, vague dreams of enrichment
of man's life take form and substance. Is this the turning
point? It is possible.
What, then, besides conferences and studies and reports?
Three things occur to me. They are: Declarations; Interna¬
tional agreements; and Technical Assistance.
By a Declaration, I mean here a statement on some im¬
portant matter that has been agreed to after careful study
by representatives of different countries. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is the best known example. It
was drawn up by the Commission on Human Rights, after
months of discussion, and it was "proclaimed" by the General
Assembly on December 10, 1948. It is a short document!
ALL CASTES AND CREEDS receive equal care and treatment at tuber¬
culosis centre, Patna, India one. of two set up by Government of India
with help from World Health Organization and U.N. Children's Fund.
As ¡n most of world, there is a shortage of health workers at Patna. Centre
trains doctors, health visitors, nurses, technicians, provides model T.B.
control service with latest laboratory and X-ray equipment.
UNATIONS
Thirty sections ("Articles") each of only one to four sen¬
tences.
Article 1 reads:
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and
should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood."
Article 2 begins:
"Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set
forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other
status..."
This is Article 9:
"No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile", and here is part of Article 26 :
"1. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall
be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages.
Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and
professional education shall be made generally available and
higher education . shall be equally accessible to all on the
basis of merit."
Why is this Declaration important, so important that De¬
cember 10 is celebrated in many countries as "Human Rights
UNATIONS
PETITIONS FROM THE PEOPLE of the Cameroons-some of the
I 9,000,000 around the world who live in Trust Territoriesare presented
to visiting U.N. Trusteeship Council Mission in palace courtyard of Fon
of Bikom, ruler of the Bamenda Province. Of eleven U.N. trust terri¬
tories, four have advanced far towards self-governmentin line with U.N.
Charter aim: autonomy for dependent peoples.
Day"? The main point, I think, is this: The Declaration sets
some standards for society, and the member countries of the
U.N. have said: "We accept these standards." If men are
subjected to torture, if they are denied fair hearing by im¬
partial tribunals, if they are persecuted for practising their
religion these are only examplea it is no longer an offence
against a few or against the people of one country only it
is an offence against mankind.
To proclaim a standard in itself guarantees no freedom,
restores no liberty, improves no social condition. To pro¬
claim a standard is indeed merely to say some words, and
the words may be ambiguous, and the words may be ignored
and they may be forgotten. Some of the words and phrases
of the Declaration are ambiguous; and no doubt much of it
will often be ignored by governments. But I do not think
these words will be forgotten. They have been spoken on
behalf of all mankind.
I turn next to international agreements. I mean agree¬
ments made by governments that they will follow a certain
course of action, and do whatever is necessary to carry it out.
A single example is an agreement drawn up by Unesco by
which countries undertake to eliminate customs duties on
16

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1955
UNATIONS
FIFTEEN JUDGES sit on the International Court of Justice, principal judicial organ of the U.N., at the Hague to consider disputes between states.
Matters on which It has delivered judgment include the violation of territorial waters, the granting of political asylum and the question of extra-territorial
rights. Court's eminent judges represent world's main legal systems and cultural patterns. Their decisions help strengthen international law.
books, periodicals, newspapers and many types of education¬
al, scientific and cultural materials, twenty countries have
accepted this agreement, and as a result such items are
easier to get and cheaper to buy.
Finally, there is "technical assistance". You know what
is meant by "underdeveloped countries". How can U.N. help
them to develop? Not, at present at least, by giving them
much money. Countries that are better developed have not
come to the point of contributing huge amounts it would
have to be some hundred millions of dollars, at least, I think
which U.N. can give or lend at very low rates of interest
for building schools, hospitals and things like that. For
some kinds of economic development countries can borrow
from the International Bank, of course, and from private
banking organizations. There are many other ways in
which particular countries are helping one another to de¬
velop, economically and socially. But U.N. and the other
agencies are given only a limited amount of money to put
into this kind of work: about twenty-five million dollars a
year (the figure varies from year to year).
It has been decided that the best use of this money is to
help countries get some of the well-trained people they need,
and give a little of the equipment they need. For example,
in health work, who may help a country set up a demonstra¬
tion project, and send a doctor, a sanitary engineer and a
nurse, and give some scholarships for training medical stud¬
ents and public health workers.
The experts from many countries, working in underdevelop¬
ed countries in every continent these are the living
examples of international co-operation to solve social and
economic problems. I read a piece in a Unesco publication
the other day that made the "technical assistance" and in¬
ternational co-operation real and vivid to me. It was a
letter, too. It was written by Mr. Weber, a Dutch expert.
He is working for fao in Uttar Pradesh, India, at the foot of
the Himalayas.
Scorched earth legacy from the past
Writing to a Dutch girl named Hanny, he said: "In
former days there was much fighting in this region
and the rival forces had a bad habit of setting fire
to each other's forests. The result was that the forests
gradually disappeared. The mountains were left bare, the
springs and wells dried up and without water the land
is barren. In the Spring, however, when the snows melt,
and also during the rainy season of June and July, heavy
torrents come rushing down from the mountains; the rivers
flood and the fertile topsoil is washed away. So the slopes
of the mountains are left bare except for cactuses and pine
trees on the rocky subsoil.
"This is the country in which the Paharis live and you
can well imagine that they are anything but rich. That is
why the Government of Uttar Pradesh the State in which
these mountain regions are situated thought it necessary
to help the population and asked for technical assistance
from the United Nations to aid in the many schemes they
have launched for afforestation, land reclamation, commu¬
nity development, etc. The U.N. Food and Agriculture Or¬
ganization sent me out here and now I am joining hands
with the Government and the people to improve their state
of affairs. But all I can do is to give some advice; it is up
to the Paharis to develop their own, country.
Things began moving in Ranikhet
In this way I came into contact with the school in
Ranikheta small town of 6,000 inhabitants. The
college has some 700 students. They are learning his¬
tory, literature and other interesting subjects, but they
badly want to study chemistry, biology and physics which
will give them the basic :knowledge to develop their country.
Funds for laboratories, however, were not available. So last
year I came back to Holland to tell you and my friends in
the Rotary Clubs what is going on in the Himalayas and to
ask for your help. And you did help ! The students of
Haarlem and the Rotarians collected almost 13,000 florins
(about $3,400 or 16,000 rupees) and Unesco sent the money
to us as Gift Coupons.
"Then things started moving in Ranikhet. On May 11, the
Netherlands Ambassador to India, Baron van Pallandt, came
over to Ranikhet to present the money to the Governor of
Uttar Pradesh.
"For the occasion, the school organized a magnificent
exhibition of Kumaon art, mostly connected with sacred
subjects. We also exhibited that pile of letters from the
Netherlands, together with postcards showing windmills and
tulip fields. Do you realize that the pupils here are so poor
that they cannot spare the money to buy a postage stamp?
I gave them ten rupees, so they'll soon be answering you.
"Now I still have to tell you what is being done with all
the money you collected. Unesco has promised to buy the'
apparatus at special discount and to forward it to India. This
means that every cent, every "kwartje" (quarter of a florin)
will be used for the purpose for which it was meant: to equip
the school's three new laboratories.
"Meanwhile, we have also collected some money here to
erect the laboratory buildings. It's an expensive business,
but volunteers from the Rotary Clubs are going to help the
students with the construction work and that will save money.
What is more, we are getting another 10,000 rupees from the
Indian Government to buy the building materials!bricks,
timber, nails, etc. Thus we shall achieve our aim, thanks to
Unesco, and thanks to the many people in Holland and India
who have helped us so generously."
17

1955 : Where
do we go
from here?
I have tried to tell you about some of the reasons why the
U.N. was established, and about the arrangements the
countries have made for working together through the
U.N. and related Agencies. I have omitted much. A post¬
script is needed. Where do we stand today?
There hasn't been any magical change. When we set up
an organization, we didn't give it a fairy's wand. A war is
one way the worst way of settling some disputes for a
time. The second world war settled the question whether
Hitler was to rule the world. But the roots of war and
how deep these roots are in us, we do not know are not
destroyed by a war.
Each war adds something to our legacy of hate and fear,
as well as to the immediate misery of living people. The
tensions that existed before it continue, in new forms,
sometimes, and sometimes in more violent forms. So, for
those who dreamed that all would be calm, and that the
United Nations had triumphed, these last ten years have
been a period of disillusionment.
I am not going to take you on a world tour of the points
where disputes have arisen in the last ten years. There are
so many disputed claims, so many old hates and fears, so
many smouldering tensions.
A new Republic was born
Some disputes have been placed before the United Nations,
and peaceful settlements have been reached. Take the
question of the Netherlands and Indonesia as an
example. You know (perhaps!) that the Netherlands (or
Holland) has for many years ruled islands in the Pacific.
(How easily a Westerner like myself says islands in "the
Pacific", as if we were speaking of a few coral reefs! It is
seventy million people we are speaking of). After the war,
the Indonesians sought their independence. There was
misunderstanding and fighting. The United Nations has
helped to bring about a peaceful arrangement, by which an
independent Republic of the United States of Indonesia was
established.
There are different views on the extent to which
difficulties arising between peoples who decide to be
independent and those who govern them are properly to be
examined and acted on by the United Nations. These
difficulties have been, and are, among the most troublesome
of our age. There is no doubt that in this case the United
Nations contributed greatly to a peaceful settlement."
I am bound to speak about what has been called the "cold
war". In these years we have seen the antagonism between
communist and non-communist countries embittered. Each
group has feared any settlement that might strengthen the
other. So no peace settlement dealing with Germany was
reached, and Germans remained divided. Only recently
was an agreement made about Austria. In China a civil
war has had the result that the communists are in power on
the mainland, and the old government is on the island of
Formosa. And this in turn intensified the fears of those
who feared the spread of communism.
Fears felt in communist countries were nourished by some
actions of Western countries: the fact, for example, that
they built bases for military aircraft and formed an
organization to defend one another (North Atlantic Treaty
Organization) .
From the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., came reports that the
construction of atom bombs and hydrogen bombs was
proceeding apace. This intensified the fears of everybody.
In 1950, North Korean forces invaded the Republic of Korea.
The Security Council decided that this was a clear case of
aggression. (The decision was not "vetoed"; U.S.S.R. at
that time was not sending its representative to the Council.)
Armed forces from some countries, but chiefly from U.S.A.,
were sent to Korea. Forces from Communist China later
helped the North Korean army. And the land of the Republic
of Korea was devastated by war. It lasted over three years
before a truce was reached.
The "cold war" and the Korean conflict have led some
people at some time to doubt whether the U.N. was much
use. The permanent members of the Security Council
obviously were not working in full harmony with one
another and what use was the rest of the work of the U.N.
if it could not maintain security?
I can't take this pessimistic view. It seems to be true
just as the Charter assumes that the U.N. cannot enforce
peace by making war against a great power. At least, that
is my conclusion. The enforcement would itself be a
catastrophic war. Therefore, we are in fact still left
depending on the ultimate willingness of the great powers
to refrain from pushing their disputes to the point of war.
The fact remains, however, that the great powers have not
pushed their disputes to the point of war. I don't know, any
more than anyone else, what considerations have influenced
the leading statesmen in various countries. Personally, I
think that at least one consideration is that they earnestly
want to avoid war. And the United Nations, with all the
arrangements I have spoken of, has made it easier to keep
open the doors for discussion and negotiation.
It is not very satisfactory, of course, to say that ultimately
world peace depends on the willingness of a few great
powers to settle their disputes peacefully. But this is the
situation we have to live with. The best we can do is to
make it as easy as possible to settle the disputes peacefully
and to make it less likely that disputes will arise or, if they
arise, that they will not become so bitter as to result in war.
And for that we need the U.N.
Our task, then, is to make settlements among
countries as well as we can, as peacefully as we can, and to
the best of our ability to advance human freedom and social
justice at the same time. It is an endless task, I suppose.
But this is the direction in which we must move and this
is the direction in which we are moving as we work in¬
creasingly together through the United Nations.
Cato had a moral for us
Looking at the work to be done from this point of view,
I stop asking myself: How far has the United Nations
succeeded? The United Nations is not a pupil to whom
I give good marks or bad marks. It is not the United Nations
that is on trial, it is all of us, all governments, all peoples,
ourselves. We can ask, have the members the countries and
their peoples worked together as they ought through the
United Nations? Well-informed people, and those ill-
informed will differ in their opinions people of different
countries will differ about one another!
For my part, when I consider how deeply rooted are the
tensions among people, how passionately and with what
conviction conflicting doctrines are held, I am astonished
rather that the principles and methods of the United
Nations have commanded as much support as they have.
The ideals and principles which are expressed in the
United Nations were not created by the United Nations: they
gave birth to this particular Organization, and I believe that
their strength in human affairs has been thereby increased.
It is late in the life of human society to begin organizing
internationally for world-wide co-operation. But I recall
the answer of eighty-year-old Cato when he was asked:
"Why are you beginning to learn Greek at the age of
eighty?" He replied: "At what other age can I begin?"
We have begun.
18
