WATER
everywhere Did you Know that...?
u
NIVERSALITY OF WATER. 	 Water
covers about five-sevenths of the
earths surface to an average depth of
three miles. The Polar regions of the
globe are covered with great ice caps
water in solid form. The atmosphere
contains enormous quantities of water
vapour often as much as 50,000 tons in
the air over a square mile of tha earth's
surface at summer temperature. All our
focd contains water, from about 60 % in
lean meat to as much as 95 % in watery
fruits. About 70 % of the human body is
water. Even the solid rocks of the earth's
crust hold water in chemical combination
with different mineral substances so much
of it, that most of the land areas of the
earth would be submerged, if this water
were suddenly returned to the ocean.
THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS : The
Palace of Minos, at Knossos, dat¬
ing from about 2,030 B.C., possessed a
system, of drainage, Nineveh had its
sewers more than 3,000 years ago and,
about 588 B.C., the Cloaca Maxima of
ancient Rome was built. Nevertheless,
in the modern world in general, sani¬
tation may be considered as having
originated within the last two hun¬
dred years and as having been de¬
veloped, uninfluenced by ancient
knowledge, mostly during the last
century.
In Finland a great problem is connec¬
ted with the wood-pulp industry.
An average-sized Finnish pulp-mill dis¬
charges waste comparable with that of a
city of one million population, demanding
expensive treatment in order to prevent
stream pollution.
In Denmark the National Public
Health Service, in collaboration
with the Danish dairy organizations,
has undertaken an examination of
water from 13.000 wells serving rural
communities. Action has also been
taken against the use of town sewage
for watering farm-land, since domes¬
tic sewage has been found to contain
eggs from the tapeworm.
Some facts about water in the Uni¬
ted States : More and more air
conditioning, for instance, is a factor in
our trend to comfortable living. But the
air conditioning system of a large building
may use 3,000,000 gallons of water a day
as much as a city of 25,000 people.
In industry today, water is the universal
raw material. We use pure water in
fabulous quantities :
24 gallons to produce a pound of paper;
up to 10 gallons to produce a can of vege¬
tables; 70 gallons to make a pound of
woollen cloth; 10 gallons of -water to pro¬
duce every gallon of petrol; 65,000 gallons
to produce a ton of highly-finished steel;
750 gallons of water to produce a ton of
dry cement.
But even as the need for more water
grows, the watersheds which nature fa¬
shioned to give us an ample supply are
being despoiled. Cut-over, burned over
land has bîen exposed to the gouge of the
rain, letting it cut off topsoil and run use¬
lessly away with a load of silt to clog dams
and reservoirs.
Because of silt deposits, it is estimated
one out of five of the nation's reservoirs
will be useless in less than 50 years.
Water supply is a big industry in the
United States of America. By weight of
material handled, it is seven times as big
as all other industries put together.
But vast thojgh today's Waterworks ins¬
tallations may be, they are not sufficient
for the years ahead.
The US PuWic Health Service reports
that almost 6,000 communities with no
waterworks need and could support such
facilities. To meet these needs, as well as
to provide for the normal expansion of
existing waterworks, will mean an estimat¬
ed 3,0j3 new treatment plants, 9,000 wells
and well-pumps, 8,000 storage tanks, and
more than 45,u00 miles of water-pipe.
In Prance in 1950, two thirds of
country-dwellers did not have piped
water in their homes. Of 37,000 ru¬
ral communes only 10,500 had a pub¬
lic service of potable water. Out
of 38,000 French communes, scarcely
1,000 had any system of sewerage
whatever, 300 had a reasonably good
drainage system and only 80 possessed
sewage treatment plants.
In Europe only one in four homes
have an indoor water supply and
even in most advanced countries running
water does not reach more than two thirds
of houses in rural areas. In urban areas in
most European countries indoor water sup¬
ply is found in 56 to 96 houses out of every
hundred.
Lucky Iceland. Iceland has plenty
of excellent drinking water (for its
sparse population of one person to the
square kilometre) from springs, rivers
and brooks and it is so pure, clear
and free from bacteria that no puri¬
fication is needed.
More than half the population
makes use of natural hot water, to¬
gether " with electricity from hydro¬
electric plants, for heating, lighting
and cooking.
The many swimming pools and
swimming halls use natural hot water
almost entirely and it is quite free
from bacteria. In most cases the
quantity is so great that no recircula¬
tion is used and the hot water flows
straight through.
If pure drinking water can be
provided to people and if human
excreta can be disposed of without it
contaminatmg the food and drink of man,
a solution would be found for half the ill-
health of people in the South-East Asia
Region. The countries in this region
comprise Afghanistan, Burma, Ceylon,
India, Indonesia, Nepal and Thailand.
Total population: nearly 500 million.
Buried treasure. "In the area
north of Enugu all the way to
Nsukka, water is available from a sin¬
gle stream during the dry season
which lasts for about six months.
People live up to about 30 miles .from
this stream and most of the popula¬
tion of about 200,000 store water in
the wet season for use during the dry
months. Pots of three to four gallons
capacity are used for storage and the
more well-to-do possess up to 300 such
pots sunk in the earth to keep the
water cool. In a survey about a mil¬
lion and a half of these pots were
counted." (From a report by a WHO
Public-Health Engineer on rural
conditions in Africa south of the
Sahara.)
Keeping salt out of the water is one
of the big problems in the Ne¬
therlands, much of which lies below sea
level. The fact that the Rhine contains
salt before it even enters the country is
causing some anxiety. In 50 years' time,
salt content of the great river has doubled,
and apparently continues to rise steadily.
Heavy industrialization, very high
density of population, a small
coastline and the absence of great riv¬
ers make for a serious pollution prob¬
lem in Belgium. Some rivers, for
example the Scheldt, are polluted be¬
fore they even enter the country.
Other rivers, the Lys, the Sambre, the
Meuse, are polluted for long stretches.
Sewage pollution of the coast, which
in the holiday season is packed with
people, is also an urgent problem. Re¬
search, the building of sewage treat¬
ment plants and the enforcement of
laws against pollution are being ener¬
getically pursued by the authorities.
Iv Denmark public opinion is strong
in condemning river polluticn. This
is partly due to the popularity of angling.
Increasing interest is being taken in this
sport and the angling clubs are very active
in drawmg attention to cases of pollution
and agitating for its removal.
In Sweden, there is a strong public
opinion that something must be
done about the pollution of rivers.
This is partly because of the recent
salmonella epidemic, on account of
which numerous bathing places were
closed. Though in Sweden, as else¬
where, it seems easier to prevent new
pollution than to deal with that which
has been long established, pollution of
rivers has been increasing. Of recent
years there has been progressive urba¬
nization of the country and sewage
treatment has not kept pace with this
development. Improvement, however,
may be expected.
B't etter living threatens water. 	
The higher tha standard of living,
the greater the danger of pollution. Im¬
proved hygiene means the rapid removal
of dirt and waste, which leads to pollution.
Greater material wealth mu't mean an
increase in manufacture, which leads to
pollution. Less drudgery means a greater
use of machines, which particularly
through the processing of food leads to
pollution. The more, we have advanced,
the more waste we have produced, and to
expect our lakes and rivers to cope with
the mess as they were often able to do in
the past, is today asking too much.
25

WATER (Cont'd;
SOURCE OF DANGER: For more than a hundred years people have
taken water from this well in the French Sudan, and with every pail of
water drawn the rope has cut more deeply into the beam. Thousands
of open wells all over Africa contain, unsafe water which undermines the
health of the population. In many villages the water supply causes
half the illness in the community. (WHO photo by Dr Holstein)
26
