CHINESE ARTISTS
2,000 YEARS AGO
Theypaintedwith
knife and brush
by Chou Ling
TWO thousand years ago the Chinese developed an
unusual form of art. They engraved paintings
directly on stone. From this ancient art another
evolved, called stone "rubbings" which achieved
exquisite, highly delicate results on paper and silk. Since
little of this art is known outside of China, Unesco has
prepared a travelling exhibition containing high-fidelity
reproductions of 20 of these stone paintings and rubbings
as well as 40 other masterpieces in colour of ancient
Chinese painting. Making the reproductions was such
exacting and delicate work that it took a Parisian publisher
(Editions Euros) eight years to complete the job. Works
originally painted on silk were reproduced on silk. The
originals were collected from museums the world over
including the Chinese Government Museum, Tokyo Mu¬
seum, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, the British Museum,
the Musée Guimet in Paris and the National Museum
in Stockholm. Twenty identical sets of Unesco's exhi¬
bition, entitled "Two Thousand Years of Chinese Painting",
are now beginning a world tour of Unesco member coun¬
tries. They will be displayed in art galleries, museums
and centres for youth and workers groups in rural and
urban areas. The UNESCO COURIER has asked Dr.
Chou Ling, art historian, critic and lecturer, who has
devoted the past 15 years to the colour reproduction of
Chinese paintings, to describe his country's stone gravings
and a few other aspects of ancient Chinese art.
EAGLE. CARVED STONE PAINTING OF THE HAN
Many are the paths that lead to
beauty. The Greeks, in the
time of Pericles, chose that of
sculpture and . found their
ideal artistic expression in the art of
stone-carving-. The Hindus, with
Iheir lofty sense of religion, preferred
the spiritual path and achieved their
closest approach to beauty through
mysticism. The Chinese, who tended
towards abstract thought, have from
their earliest times been charmed by
pictorial art.
This choice is no accident. Paint¬
ing, which is to some extent abstract,
lias an extraordinary power of sug¬
gestion and description. Form and
movement can be expressed in a few
firm, lively strokes. To depict the
three-dimensional world on a flat'
surface is no matter of accident
either it is merely one of those
human possibilities which the Chi¬
nese regard as a kind of discovery,
and the secret of which they long
kept to themselves.
TIGER AND LEOPARD. CARVED STONE RUBBINGS DATING FROM HAN PERIOD, DISCOVERED AT THE BEGINNING OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY.
22

Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1955
PERIOD (206 B.C-220 A.D.). PROCESSION OF CHARIOTS. A RUBBING NOW IN SZECHWAN PROVINCIAL MUSEUM.
The distant origins of Chinese
painting are known to us chiefly,
from written descriptions, for the
works themselves have perished.
The engraved bones, the prehistoric
pottery, and the decoration of the
bronze objects of the Chou period
-(400 B.C.) already reveal the existence
of considerable pictorial skill among
the Chinese; but in painting, the
most striking evidence is provided by
an important group of engraved
stones belonging to the Han period
(206 B.C. 220 A.D.).
These are tombstones or funerary
monuments, and the process is a
kind of engraved painting. They are
not bas-reliefs, as might be supposed;
they are reaf paintings, in which the
feeling for composition and the pic¬
torial sense are fully evident. Only
instead of using a brush, the Chinese
of that period preferred to engrave
^their compositions directly on the
stone with. a knife.
(Continued on page 2S)
.*" v \ » ' ' - " * C- '
? v ' mWESi
1 "*iv.v.v 'VvilB
HORSEMAN BETWEEN TWO TOWERS. FUNERARY RELIEF, HAN PERIOD, DISCOVERED 1920.
23

LAKESHORE IN WIN¬
TER. Painting on silk by
an unknown master typical
of the Sung dynasty (12th-
1 3th century) which pro¬
duced one of the greatest
landscape schools the world
has ever known. Artists
sought only essentials in
landscapes, discarding all
trivial and accidental effects.
This masterpiece, measuring
Ay2 feet by 3 % feet, is
now in the British Museum.
THE POET LI T'AI-PO.
A masterpiece of purity
by Liang K'ai, one of the
greatest artists of the Ch'an
school (a group of painters
who rebelled against the
academic school of their
time). Liang K'ai worked
around I 200, and launched
the fashion for monochrome
(wash-tints). Depicting the
poet, he makes no effort
at a set background but
concentrates on conjuring
up an inner atmosphere.
24

THEY PAINTED WITH
KNIFE AND BRUSH
(Continued)
Later on, a method of "pressing" was invented. in
China, making it possible to take a kind of rubbing of
these sculptural compositions and transfer them direct
onto paper. As a result, these engraved paintings
reached a wide public as the centuries went by and had
an undoubted influence on painting itself.
These engraved stones were particularly numerous
in three large districts the provinces of Chang-Tong.
Honan and Szechwan. They deal with a wide variety
of subjects, including scenes of domestic life, hunting,
palace life, battle, and entertainments (both popular and
ritual). Throughout the different regions and epochs,
they preserve a most remarkable similarity of style;
they are free and direct in expression, full of move¬
ment, and often convey a feeling of great liveliness.
The earliest actual paintings which have come down
to us date from the fourth century A.D. Reaching the
Tang period (018-907), we find in the towns along the
Western frontier, on the borders of Central Asia, a
precious store of frescoes which are still preserved in
certain Buddhist caves. These frescoes convey valuable
information to art historians, for they reveal the
influence of Indian and Persian painting. This was the
period immediately following the introduction of Bud¬
dhism into China, when certain monks made long
journeys from China to India or from India to Central
China, fostering, in their comings and goings, a wide
interchange of artistic knowledge between China and
the other countries of Asia.
Aller these transitional years, the Sung period (900-
1270), during which China established its aesthetic
criteria, began to work out its own laws of beauty. This
period produced many admirable pictorial works in
Chinese ink touched up with gouachemisty land¬
scapes, restrained and rapidly executed portraits, and
delicate, elegant, thought-provoking drawings. It was
at this juncture that Chinese painting- took the final
form which it retained for nearly a thousand years,
until modern times. It is notable for its lyricism,
naturalistic style and quality of line. It also reveals
a unique concept of painting, volume being rendered
solely by means of very firm outline, with no shadows
to destroy the- ethereal effect of the painted surface.
These characteristics of the great Sung period have
persisted, despite the various changes of style which
occurred during the Yuan period which succeeded it
(1276-1368)when China, under Mongol domination,
developed a keen interest in hunting scenes and the
beauty of horsesand the subsequent Ming period
(1308-1644), which saw a deliberate return to the strictly
Chinese manner and an attempt to recover the earlier
highly stylized and calligraphic form of beauty.
Not until fairly recently did Chinese art begin to be
known in other countries. From the eighteenth century
onwards, missionaries began to spread a knowledge of
it in Europe and America, and there was a vogue for
minor works of artengraved stones or embroideries,
decorated with fantastic beasts or flowers. Only at
the beginning of the present century did further
research lead to the discovery that Chinese art had more
subtle and more powerful aspects ; and today we
realize that, through all the stimulating variations of
its two-thousand-year history, it has preserved a unity
of style and an aesthetic aim which is peculiar to the
Chinese people.
RAIN. One of the simple but delightful little engraved
paintings found on the tombstones of ancient Chinese
notables, often depicting earthly life or a future one.
25
