THE CHANCE OF
A SQUARE MEAL
FAO : v food production up 30 °/o '
UNATIONS
EAR OF WHEAT with the motto fiat partis (let there be bread) is the
symbol of the FAO (the Food and Agriculture organization of the United
Nations) and underlines its role in helping to raise living standards,
improve nutrition and increase efficiency of farming, forestry and
fisheries. From Africa, with its primitive form of harvesting, above,
to Sweden, with its highly organized timber industry, right, FAO is
active with advice and aid. Photo, right, ¡s taken from Swedish film,
"Green Gold." Timber resources are indeed green gold. FAO has
reported that world's forests now measure 96 milliard cubic metres.
In 1946, despite wartime casualties,
the number of people to be fed in
the world had risen 10% but world
food production had declined by some
5%. In the early post-war years many
experts predicted mass starvation.
This world food problem of more to eat
for more people faced the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations when it came into existence ten
years ago, in October 1945. Now,
although the world population has risen
as much as 25%, FAO is able to report
in its "State of Food and Agriculture
1955 Review of a Decade" that the
increased rate of food production now
exceeds the upsurge in population
figures.
Because of the technical revolution
which has taken place in agriculture in
the past ten years there has been a
dramatic transformation from the
devastation and threat of famine in
the immediate post-war years to a sit¬
uation where agricultural surpluses in
some countries are once again caus¬
ing anxiety. The FAO report has some
astonishing things to tell about the
technical revolution which has taken
30
place. World use of commercial ferti¬
lizers has almost doubled since 1939;
the number of farm tractors has tripl¬
ed; development of water resources in
under-developed countries has increas¬
ed enormously.
In India, for example, around 5 mil¬
lion hectares of land have been brought
under irrigation in the space of four
years, and in China the rate of deve¬
lopment is about equal. Plant breed¬
ing and seed improvement have led to
increased crop yields and the scientific
use of newer and more potent pestici¬
des have resulted in the saving of
mirions of hectares of grain and root
crops.
Striking news of the results achiev¬
ed by the increasing application of
scientific methods to agriculture are
underlined in the FAO ten-year review.
In round figures the world is now pro¬
ducing 30% more wheat, meat and fats
than it did before the second world
war. Rice, milk and cotton production
has gone up by about 20%, and sugar by
as much as 51%. However, despite
these immense increases, and despite
the fact that there is now 2% more food
available per capita than before the
war and that world food production has
risen by 30% in ten years, there are
still today millions of people who do
not get a square meal.
Weaknesses today are not so much
on the side of production, but rather in
distribution and marketing. While some
countries are now piling up surplus
stocks of wheat, sugar and cotton, peo¬
ple in countries on the other side of the
world lack the self-same things. FAO
points out that the difficulties lying in
the path of equitable world distribution
are many, but four are of paramount
importance: failure of consumption to
keep pace with production with the
consequent emergence of surplus com¬
modity stocks; non-adjustment of agri¬
cultural production to shifting trends
of demand; stagnation of world trade
in agricultural products combined with
obstacles hindering their free movement
between countries, and the low level of
farm incomes in most countries.
Primarily for these reasons the need
for higher levels of production and
consumption in under-developed coun¬
tries is almost as great as ever. But

Unesco Courier. N" 10. 1955
UNATIONS
FAO stresses that further increases in
production can be justified only to the
extent that they can be matched by in¬
creases in consumption. Unless pur¬
chasing power is present food sales will
drop. In fact high post-war retail food
prices have tended to restrict food con¬
sumption levels.
Although FAO has, in its anniversary
report, emphasized the world food sit¬
uation, much important news in the
fields of forestry and fisheries is also
given. Annual world fish production
now exceeds 27 million tons, 20% up
on the pre-war output. Most of the
expansion is accounted for by increased
exploitation of established fisheries in
Europe, North America, Japan and the
U.S.S.R. But a completely new post¬
war development is the emergence of
South Africa, Peru, Angola and Chile
as significant fish producers and
exporters. Technological developments
such as the use of echo sounding equip¬
ment for locating schools of fish,
factory ships capable of processing at
sea, and larger and faster ships with
ranges of over 2,000 miles have all aided
in boosting fish production figures.
FAO has some interesting things to
say about the utilization of forest re¬
sources in the past ten years. It is
noteworthy that the world production
figure of roundwoods (logs, pulpwood
and pitprops) has gone up by about
15%, the greatest increase occurring
in the U.S.S.R. One of the most im¬
portant aspects of the timber industry
wood pulp production rose by about
85% between 1946 and 1954, and FAO
forecasts that this year will see new
advances over previous record levels.
In fact, the report asserts "the world
now possesses sufficient fibrous resour¬
ces and the necessary techniques to
sustain any conceivable future rise in
the world's pulp and paper needs".
Backing up this definite statement
FAO points to some astonishing wood
pulp production increases: North
America with 50% over the 1946
figure; U.S.S.R. double the pre-war
figure; Japan with a sevenfold increase
between 1946 and 1954. Significantly,
however, FAO remarks that Europe's
largest paper producer, the U.K.. de¬
pends almost entirely on imports of
wood pulp.
Alongside roundwood and pulp pro
duction there is also news of an in¬
crease in production of wood for in¬
dustrial purposes. FAO stresses that
since the war considerable progress
has been made in all fields of forest
exploitation, and in a more rational
utilization of forest resources. This,
FAO points out, has resulted in a lesser
proportion of the world's forest crop
being burnt as fuel, and a greater pro¬
portion being used industrially.
In its ten-year survey FAO has
shown that much progress has been
made in giving more people more to
eat. A partial success and solution of
the problem originally facing FAO in
1945 has been achieved the need for
food production to rise faster than the
growth in population. But, as FAO
admits, the parallel-prob'em of achiev¬
ing an equitable distribution of world
food supplies has not yet been solved.
Although FAO's first ten years have
seen more rapid and widespread ad¬
vances in the' technical methods of
agriculture, forests, and fisheries than
in any previous decade, much urgent
work still remains to be done before the
world's peoples are fully fed.
31
