In Bengal and Assam, New Year celebra¬
tions take place during the month of Bai¬
sakh which corresponds to the Western
month of April. The calendar followed in
these parts of India was introduced by
King Sakabda in the seventh century A.D.
On these pages are some of the varied
and picturesque spectacles which can be
seen during this New Year period. This
religious" festival is marked in towns and
villages by the mellahs, or fairs, at which
some of the scenes shown here were
photographed. (I) On the banks of the
Brahmaputra a fisherman mends his nets
ready for the first -New Year trip. (2)
Outside a small temple a priest, having
fed his goat and pigeons, awaits the arrival
of the faithful. (3) Two youthful dancers.
As girls are not allowed to dance in public,
boy on left is disguised in women's clothes.
(4) Flute, seller with his "tree" of wares
expects to make plenty of sales during the
celebrations when music and dancing are
the order of the day. (5) Clutching a kid
in his arms a boys stares fascinated at the
spectacle of a Sbdou, or holy man. (6)
The Sadou beats his tambourine and sings
of the beauties of New Year's Day. By-
foretelling that there will be no floods or
famine in the New Year, he hopes to
fill his collecting pail with rupees. (7)
Their bodies and heads painted blue and
red, and their horns silvered and gilded,
two sacred cows are led in a procession.
(8) Before an altar dedicated to different
Hindu Gods, the deer hunting dance is
performed. (9) Once a year the Boros,
people of Tibetan origin, leave their jungle
homes and travel sometimes as much as
50 miles on foot to buy goods at the vast
New Year mellahs. Here they can choose
from a variety of goods which are not
available in their villages. (10) From
early morning on New Year's Day, the
old women of the village summon up good
auguries for the coming year by making
strange calls and clapping their hands.
(II) Crowded streets on the days of the
fair need some traffic control. Here,
villagers have set up (as a joke) an effigy
of a Calcutta traffic policeman. (12) New
Year dolls, some of which represent Hindu
Gods, are made of glazed and painted clay.
( I 3) Peacock feather fans, plastic cups, oil
lamps and pictures of the Taj Mahal and
Indian films stars make up the stock-in-
trade of this itinerant merchant from
Calcutta. (14) A dance depicting the
sowing, harvesting, threshing and storing
of the grain. It is always performed at
the New Year in the belief that it will
bring good luck for the harvest in the
coming year.
All photos copyright Gabrieile Bertrand
18

The Unesco Courier. N1* 12. 1955
19
