Unesco Courier Nr 3-4 1955
Choracters from "Marionettes' by Pierre
Gauchat (Editions Rentsch, Zurich)
by Maurice Kurtz
Çr-T"* HEATRE not cnly gives us a lesson", exclaimed Dr. Wil-
I liam Beeby, New Zealand educator, "but it even
makes us pay fifteen shillings a seat for it." He ad¬
ded with a wry smile: "How do theatre folk get away with it?"
Puppets have their answer: for centuries now they have
been lecturing and moralizing, and been loved for it, thanks
to their innocent frames being so cleverly dipped into devil¬
ries and foibles of every kind of person from every clime.
The French dictum that "ridicule kills" might well serve as
the marionette's motto, since its stock in trade is just that:
to sell an audience laughter, mostly at itself, yet so deftly
performed that no one realizes the moral has been driven
home and the lesson learnt willy-nilly.
In fact, before we know it, there is no longer before us a
mere show-case, puppets clowning "just" for the sake of
entertainment. We now see a laboratory teeming with
absurd little guinea-pigs who attract their audience by
meaningful antics that puncture a host of human peccadilloes
including those of their masters and on-lookers who have
not yet donned a sanctimonious armour against fun and its
unnredictable consequences. For sooner or later the puppets
reach out and seize that unique opportunity to turn the
thousand eyes and ears of their audience back upon itself,
to hear its own thought-provoking rumblings above the din
of its own laughter.
And so once again the dressed-up dolls can make their stiff
clumsy bow, rake in the applause, and retain their somewhat
pompous title of Master Satirists.
How puppetry manages to perpetuate this feat through the
ages is an open secret, for all theatre people to use if they
can ! But can they all create the illusion that we are looking
through a strange keyhole, straight into another world full of
fascinating creatures who have few qualms and much
talent! in revealing the inhibited side of Man?
True, Sophocles and Euripides, who had their own vision of
Man as a marionette strung from Olympus, portrayed Life
and Earth has a playground for the gods of destiny.
True, Goethe turned to the puppet-like world of the theatre
because it seeks to unveil the secret of life, which is Living
itself. And in this way the author of Faust hoped to satisfy
Man's unquenchable thirst for self-realization, his need of
pleasure, beauty, emotion, excitement.
True, Somerset Maugham, like Aristotle, declares that "the
value of art is not beauty, but right action" which Luis de
Leon, a sixteenth-century Spanish poet defined as acting in
conformity with one's nature and business.
True, Jean-Paul Sartre and his French existentialist
cohorts are concerned less with the action of man as an
individual, and more with "the state of man in its entirety...
to present to modern man a portrait of himself, his problems,
his hopes and his struggles."
These and many other schools of thought have gripped the
theatre public's imagination for almost three thousand years.
Yet puppetry continues to sail across them all, because there
is no school, no philosophy or formula or style to compete
with the disarming simplicity and the naked truthfulness of
an irrepressible puppet that plucks at the gamut of emotions
inside the eternal child forever playacting within each of us.
Nor is it a small tribute to the magic of Theatre that a
lifeless Thing called Puppet can command the attention, the
affection and the loyalty of people everywhere sometimes
"at fifteen shillings a seat"!
17
