COVER PHOTO
The mystery of how the camel can go for so
long without water has now been solved by
a Unesco-sponsored research team in the Sa¬
hara Desert. Camel's weight is checked here
after beast was deprived of water for eight
days. For some startling findings on the camel
see page 28 (Photo copyright Schmidt-Nielsen)
The infinite variety of life is one of the most intriguing
topics for nature-lovers and for scientists whose lives
are devoted to understanding the world. Part of its
fascination is the amazing adjustment of plants and animals
to the various conditions of living. Through countless
generations of the slow process of mutation they have gradu¬
ally altered not only their habits but their anatomy and
physiology to fit them for life in the depths of the sea, the
jungle tree tops or even beneath the soil. Each species is
marvellously fitted to a specific type of environment, but
each is also unfitted for life in a different one.
There is only one species of animal that has the ability
to live anywhere on earth except under water: man. He
has adapted not so much by changing his nature in the
course of generations as merely by adapting the environment
to himself by inventing clothes for cold weather, shelter
against the storms, fire for making hard foods edible, and
tools to master the soil. Man has made almost every patch
of the earth somehow habitable.
Yet there are large areas that are almost deserted by man
and where only those men live whose wants are meagre and
who thrive on solitude. "'Terra deserta", the Romans called
these deserted areas whence the modern word "desert".
They need not be hot, for there are deserts in the Arctic
and on cold high plateaus. But a desert is always dry, its
vegetation is sparse, animals rare and men poor. In the
deserts, neither ancient nor modern science has accomplish¬
ed much improvement.
One practical definition of science is that it is the best
use of the human intelligence to improve the conditions
under which we live. Thus, the desert still is one of the
greatest challenges to mankind and to science. More than
one-fourth of the entire land area of the earth is almost
useless because it has too much sun, not enough rain. To
improve living conditions in the desert may require Improving
the climate or at least the weather, and both of these have
everywhere been beyond man's control.
Before science can act it must understand. It needs to
know the cause of dryness and the reasons for lack of rain;
it must understand the geological structure of rocks and
the types of soil and of sand in order to find underground
water. It must understand what means are used by desert
plants and animals to thrive and live so happily in austerity;
it must know the wind and the sun and know how to
harness them and use their energy to improve living
conditions. Furthermore, the problem is so vast that it
involves the lives of people of at least 37 nations. No single
nation can accomplish much but what one does can benefit
all. The problem of the arid lands is therefore an inter¬
national one, to be solved by the best use of the human
intelligence on a world scale. It has for this reason
demanded the attention of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization since it was first organ¬
ized.
Practical progress has been slow, but the growth of under¬
standing has not. Small successes in adjustment have
appeared, such as the use of dew for plant growth; applying
the lessons that the camel can teach; the prevention of the
spread of the desert through misuse of the marginal areas.
Further successes seem imminent such as the location of
underground water, the use of the wind for operating local
wells, the use of sunshine for cooking, and perhaps even the
production of fresh water from the sea for use in irrigation.
This is one of the liveliest of the scenes where science is now
at work.
Because so much of Unesco's efforts has gone into this
many-sided problem this issue of the Unesco Courier is a
review of the present status of the great campaign to make
the deserts habitable and to extend man's realm to the
farthest, driest and in many ways pleasantest regions of
this planet.
Gerald WENDT.
sd»CHl^
