Englishman's
'GADGET MINDED' is a description often applied by Englishmen to Ameri¬
cans. In Britain people go to films and read magazines, especially the adver¬
tisements, to see what the ingenious "Yankees" (for all Americans, even Texans,
are Yankees) are up to now. British people expect most American mechanical
gadgets, such as those above, to be newer and more ingenious than others.

close-up view
of the 'Yanks'
by D. W. Brogan
Progressive, conceited, generous, peace-loving, intelligent,
practical these were the six adjectives most frequently
used by people in Great Britain to describe Americans in
1 948, in a survey carried out by the British Institute of Public
Opinion as part of a Unesco-sponsored international enquiry
on "the conceptions which the people of one nation enter¬
tain of their own and other nations". The Unesco Courier
asked Professor D.W. Brogan,- well-known for his long
personal observations in the United States, to comment
on whether those characteristics apply equally today.
The picture or the image that one nation makes of another
necessarily recalls the distorting mirrors in a fun
house at best. It may, of course, be totally unlike
the involuntary sitter ; it may be a caricature so moved by
malice or so remote from factual knowledge that it casts a
great deal of light on the observer but none on the society
observed. Or the foreign viewpoint may have the penetrat¬
ing novelty of the innocent eye. Just as the child in Hans
Andersen's fable saw that the Emperor has no clothes, the
innocent observer may see a lot that the less innocent
observer misses.
I remember being struck by the convincing originality of
the portraits of officials in the East India Company in some
Indian paintings of the eighteenth century that I once saw
in a London exhibition. They were not, from a western
point of view, good portraits, but they not only told us a good
deal about the Indian view of the newcomers, they told us
a good deal about the newcomers that their fellow-coun¬
trymen would not have noticed. In the same way, the
drawings made by the early Japanese missions in the United
States not only illustrate Japanese art techniques or Japanese
reactions to what was then a novel technological world in
which Japanese had not begun to live, but they did and do
illustrate The United States of President Grant as well as
the Japan of the Meiji restoration.
No such freshness of vision can be expected from British
views of the United States or the American people. While
it is absurd to think of the United States as simply a
10

Unesco Courier. N" 6. 1955
THE BRITISH CONCEPT of the " American people " is influenced far more by the press, films and books than through the contacts people in Britain have
had with GIs, business friends or tourists. A British public opinion survey showed that opinions on Americans as individuals were strongly coloured by
personal associations with Americans, and that on the whole they were favourable. But once questions were related to the American " type ", personal
attributes became more blurred, generalizations became more sweeping and considerations of American national and international policy began to affect
the replies. American domestic affairs drew more contradictory replies than any other subject. Above, US farmers attending a political rally. (USIS photos)
"child" of Great Britain, it is equally absurd not to notice
the important and special bonds that exist between the two
societies, bonds which make understanding both easier and
more difficult. An old daguerrotype may be a good family
portrait. It may, on the other hand, be a misleading
reminder of what Uncle Alec looked like, if attention is
concentrated on his resemblance to Aunt Emma.
There is some truth in the epigram attributed to Oscar
Wilde "nothing divides us but the language", for an almost
common tongue is bound to be full of what the French call
"faux amis", words formally identical but, in fact, meaning
different things. And British criticism, or even appreciation,
of American ways often springs from misunderstandings bred
by words.
Then, common institutions, common cultural traditions
often mislead ; they are almost identical but not quite and
we expect them to be quite identical and feel betrayed when
they are not. Then there is a last link that both helps and
hinders. The number of people in Britain with first-hand
knowledge of the United States is very large. It was
discovered during the last war that 8 % of the population
of Great Britain had some knowledge of America at first
hand. There were, that is to say, very few families in which
there was no direct knowledge of the United States for, of
course, the 8 % did not cover the large number of people of
British birth, who had gone to the United States and stayed
there. The British unlike the French or the Indians, were
not mainly dependent on films, books, radio, the press, all
the mass media, for the knowledge they had of America.
On the whole, this was and is a good thing. But, some¬
times, the returned emigrant had returned simply because
he did not like, say Nashville, Tennessee, and saw and report¬
ed all America in terms of this unfortunate experience. On
the other hand, he might have returned with every intention
of exploiting the fact that he had been to the land of
wonders and, by his pride in his experience, build up resent¬
ment against the American society that allowed the boaster
to boast.
The adjectives most frequently used by the guinea pigs of
the British Institute of Public Opinion's poll illustrate the
special character of British reactions. And one special cha¬
racter can be illustrated by the fact that adjectives, one
friendly, one critical, even hostile, can be used to describe
America and American society by the same people.
Take, for example, the not obviously related characteristics
of being "progressive" and being "conceited". There is no
doubt that the first adjective is meant in a complimentary
sense, for few people in Britain are converts to the fashion¬
able pessimism that makes of "progress" an idol to be over¬
thrown. On the other hand, in no culture known to me, is
"conceit" considered a virtue or an asset. It is not only
offensive to others, it is crippling to the conceited person
who not only doesn't make friends or influ¬
ence people, but is rendered incapable of learn¬
ing. And Americans notoriously want to be
liked and to learn. Yet it is, I think, true
(Continued
on
next page)
II

An Englishman's
close-up view
oí the 'Yanks'
(Continued)
FRIENDLINESS is per¬
haps the most striking
American quality. At home
or abroad the American
is far more willing to
"strike up a friendship"
than the average European.
That friendship may not
go down to the roots of
his being, but it Is a plea¬
sant reality. (USIS photo)
that "progressive" and "conceited" are adjectives that a
great many people, not in the least moved by idealogical bias,
use of Americans and, this is important, have used for a
long time.
"Progressive" is an attribute that we, in Britain, willingly
allow to Americans. On the material plane, we expect
Americans to be ready to "try everything once". We expect
their attitude to be unlike that of the English academic rule:
"nothing should ever be done for the first time". People
go to films, go to shows, read magazines, especially the ad¬
vertising, to see what the ingenious Yankees are up to now.
(For, for us, all Americans, even Texans, are Yankees)
Owning American gadgets is a sign of beings "progressive"
yourself and it is a real blow, a "deception d'amour" when an
American gadget doesn't work (sometimes they don't) or
proves to be meaninglessly complicated to no visibly good end.
We expect most American mechanical things to be more
ingenious, newer, more "cunning" (in the English not the
American sense, for here we have a real "faux ami"). Ships
are an exception ; no true Briton, goes on an American ship
without a vague feeling (it may not even be vague), that he
is taking a serious if indefinable risk. And since, despite the
highbrows, Britain belongs to the gadget-minded western
world, "progressive" is here a word of praise. It is a "boost
not a knock".
But, and this is to be noted, it is often connected with
conceit. It is one thing to be full of ingenious ideas about
how to make two blades of grass grow where none grew
before or how to shave in the open at the top of Mount
Everest, and another to be continually telling people these
secrets of well being, people who may think there is enough
grass anyway, or that you can do without a shave on Mount
Everest, that five o'clock shadow is more than compensated
for by being on top and finding no Americans there.
This may be a churlish attitude but it is common enough.
There is a great mass of unreported folklore of which the
point is the discomfiture of a boasting American who be¬
lieves that New York is bigger than London, who does not
know that no American football field holds as many people
as Hampden Park, Glasgow, or who is simply outboasted by
a local wit with more taste for fancy than for fact.
The dislike of American "boasting" is often based on a
misunderstanding of the American temperament, the
American passion for optimistic figures, the American belief
that figures always prove something. Often they do ; some¬
times they don't. An American, making a plain and truthful
statement about his home town, may make the impression
of conceit on an Englishman who doesn't know the popula¬
tion of his home town or care whether it has grown faster
than its neighbours or not.
Traditionally, the American is always saying "I guess"
meaning he is affirming. To the Englishman he is merely
guessing, or boasting, for we don't distinguish enough
between boosting and boasting. And English or British
conceit, just because it does not take the American form,
resents the American form as is natural in a country which
does not even put its name on its postage stamps.
It may seem, at first sight, odd to link conceit with gene¬
rosity. But, alas, they are linked. This is partly due to
12

the disagreeable human trait which has found proverbial
expression in many languages. "Do a man a good turn and
he will never forgive you." This human trait has its
exemplars in Britain, and American "generosity" is often
sneered at. But it is also admired, if silently. Here the gene¬
rosity of the G.I. has helped a lot. This is not the gene¬
rosity of the G.I. paying too much, being an "easy mark",
but the G.I. subscribing to local charities, putting on a party
for the children, taking it as axiomatic that he has a duty
of generosity and kindness to his neighbours, even those in
a foreign land in which he is, as a general rule, an un¬
willing sojourner.
What is a little surprising is that no mention was made
of what I think, after many years of experience, is the most
striking American quality, friendliness. The American, at
home or. abroad, is far more willing to "strike up a friend¬
ship" than is any European known to me. That friendship
may not go down to the roots of his being but it is a reality
and a pleasant reality.
If the British have not noted it more, it may be because
they themselves, though a kindly people, are not, in this
sense, a friendly people. And few things would make British
and especially English life more agreeable than more of the
open American willingness to be friendly, even at a super¬
ficial level. American is, I think, the only language in which
the word "stranger" is not automatically a term of hostility
or at any rate of suspicion. "Howdy stranger" is the most
intrinsically American greeting I know.
That the Americans are a peace-loving people is true ;
that they are believed to be so by the mass of the British
people is a tribute to their good sense. It is also a tribute
to an American attitude to which I have already referred, to
the fact that the American soldier or airman, stationed
abroad, is so obviously homesick. "Home Sweet Home" is,
after all, an American song even if written by an American
who spent many years abroad and died in Tripoli.
The whole world has had proof of American skill in the
arts of war, but the deeply unmilitary attitude of the
Americans, as revealed in their exiled servicemen, offsets
any belief that because Americans are good at war, they like
war. Few indeed, if any, were the armies at the end of the
late war which had so few deserters, so few soldiers anxious
to stay away from home. The very boasting of American
Unesco Courier. N" 6. 1955
superiority revealed this homesickness felt by servicemen.
That the Americans are "intelligent" is a folk belief closely
connected with the belief that they are "progressive". But
it might be noted, that in English speech, "intelligent" like
"clever" is not a term of unmixed praise. It is often,
consciously or unconsciously, contrasted with being "wise"
and wisdom is perhaps a quality that the British find it har¬
der to notice in the Americans.
Here the belief, only partly true, that the Americans are
young members of the family, nephews if not sons, leads
to the adoption of a semi-parental attitude. Few fathers
spontaneously come to accept the fact that their sons are
now old enough to be let loose on the world and buried not
very deep in the British psyche is the belief that Americans
are not quite mature enough to be given the key of the door.
They are smart ; that is admitted ; but then being smart is
not a totally good thing the British think. (But it was the
Americans who opened the phrase, "smart Alec".)
Then the Americans are "practical". This can be both
praise and blame. Normally, it is praise ; it belongs to the
same group as "progressive". The Americans will find a way
to do things a new way, but in any case they won't sit down
and say "It can't be done" because it hasn't been done before
or because the old way of doing it is palpably impracticable.
That is the good side of American practicality. But it
would be dishonest not to point out that there is another
side to the attribution of "practicality" to Americans. It is
often used, more or less innocently, to suggest that the
Americans are only practical, only interested in material
things. This belief is, of course, reinforced by the American
habit of statistical terms. Thus Americans are wrongly
accused of caring for nothing but money when they are not
merely generous, but less money conscious than Europeans,
using money as a method of ranking, as a proof of achie¬
vement, not, as we are inclined to do, as an intrinsic good.
And because American reverence (which exists) is a rever¬
ence for traditions, historical achievements, social conven¬
tions that necessarily differ from ours, if only because
American history has been not only shorter but so much
happier than ours, we underestimate the degree to which
Americans are unpractical, passionate, sentimental, moralistic
in fact, for all their gadgets are human beings, not supermen
caring nothing for our standards, but in fact almost British!
4s ^ ^¿ x
ri
	a
SYMBOLS OF AMERICA fixed in the minds of people in Britain vary greatly. During a public opinion survey, replies to "What do you usually
think of first when you hear the word 'American'?" related in 50 per cent of cases to acquaintances, about 35 per cent to the U.S.A. as a world power,
and the remaining 15 per cent to various items of interest such as skyscrapers, automobiles, cowboys and Indians. Phrases used to describe Americans
ranged from "friendly", "generous" and "industrious" to "they mechanize everything" and "they boast and brag a lot." Above, left, service
station on a new American continental highway and, right, mealtime for crew of mechanized harvesting combine which travels from farm to farm.
13
