BETTER UNDERSTANDING THROUGH
FOREIGN LANGUAGES
ON SAFARI, a European is transported in a hammock. Nineteenth century carving from the Upper Congo. Figures
on these pages form part of exhibitions held recently in London and Leiden, Holland. They comprised sculptures of Euro¬
peans as depicted by artists in Africa, Asia and North America. Many reveal humorous comment on European attitudes
and general behaviour. (Photos W. Ohly, Berkeley Galleries, London, and Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde, Leiden, Holland.)
A nation may be likened to a real
person, with its own heredity and
traditions, all the complexities of
daily life, and racial and linguistic
"relations" sometimes scattered
throughout the world. The study of
its physiognomy and character is what
we understand by the term "study of
civilization".
This subject therefore covers part of
By Henri Kerst
the same field as the syllabuses for
which our history colleagues are res¬
ponsible. The past helps us to under¬
stand the present; it is often, indeed,
still present. What would Italy be
without the Roman world ? Or Spain
without Arab civilization? Or Germany
without the shades of the Hercynian
Forest ?
The personality of each country has
slowly developed through the centu¬
ries. Wars, often episodic and acci¬
dental in themselves, have marked
important stages and must be taken
into account. The United States of
America today owe much of what
they now are to the War of Indepen-
SHIP'S CAPTAIN of 1830's was carved in
shale, a black stone of cheesy softness, but which
hardens after use, by a Haida Indian of Queen
Charlotte Island, British Columbia, Canada.
14
THE MISSIONARY, a curiously moving
sculpture of a Livingstone-like missionary dres¬
sed in austere clothes, and reading his Bible.
Work in painted wood from the Belgian Congo.
COURTING COUPLE seen with a dispassion¬
ate eye by an artist from Yoruba in Nigeria.
These two painted wooden figures, eight and a
half inches high, probably date from the 1920V

dence and to the Civil War. Nor can
political evolution and the institutions
marking its successive stages be
neglected; the soul of Russia has
developed along a clearly marked line
from the time of the Czars to the
present-day regime.
Geography also explains many na¬
tional characteristics. Even without
reference to Hippolyte Taine's theories,
it is tempting to consider that climate
may have an effect on temperament,
that the Italian landscape seems
destined to be the home of the most
brilliant, schools of painting; that the
harshness of the Spanish mountains,
beneath a blazing sun, was bound to
produce a literature of action and
heroism, blended with passionate love;
that England, because of her position,
must eternally waver between German¬
ic austerity and the volatile charm of
France; and that France herself, as
Madame de Stael said, should be the
meeting-place of the literature- of
north and south.
The modern language teacher must
also be familiar with various current
activities, which are largely determin¬
ed by geographical factors. The char¬
acteristics of a country's economic
life explain its customs, the standards
of living of different social classes at
different times, its everyday habits,
and the blossoming, according to the
alternating seasons of tension and
confidence produced by the cycle of
struggle and success, of those flowers
of a richer life, science and religion,
literature and art. The cultural life
of a country depends on its physical
life.
Going beyond the facts of history
and geography, due account should be
taken of certain more elusive factors,
difficult to translate into statistics or
dates. I have in mind the influences
which seem to radiate naturally from
certain countries at a given time,
sometimes peaceful, as in the case of
Italy at the time of the Renaissance,
France under Louis XIV, or the United
States of America at the present day,
and sometimes taking the form of a
"racial dynamism" such as carried
Philip IPs' Spain to the North Sea and
the Pacific, nineteenth-century Eng
land all around the world and Ger¬
many in the last fifty years from one
end of Europe to the other.
To sum up, the traditional field of
history and geography is the objective
study of ' foreign countries, based on
documentary materials, from the stand¬
point of an observer looking on from
outside or above, a study for which
some degree of detachment and syste¬
matic synthesis is necessary. The
teacher responsible for the study of
civilization will aim at making a sub¬
jective study of a nation's history by
actual experience. He will delve into
its subconscious and seek to depict its
heart and soul. He will lay hold on
what is vital and present, what repre¬
sents the nation's potentialities and
nature as a group. We do not get to
know a person by reading his biogra¬
phy but by sharing his life.
We can see immediately where the
study of civilization comes in relation
to its two cousins, the study of lan¬
guage and the study of literature; its
place is of the utmost importance. It
DISTRICT OFFICER sitting at his desk and
dispensing justice, has been depicted with a parti¬
cularly aristocratic nose by a Yoruba artist and
wearing a collar and tie and prominent shirt cuffs.
THE CYCLIST pedalling along with purposeful
air. A modern wood carving touched with
colour, from the Yoruba. Shoes, bicycles and
books are things which impress the artists.
is unthinkable that the language
should be taught alone, in the "pure"
state, as it were. Language is a
scheme, a mould, whose substance is
either literature or civilization.
Now literature is "difficult" and can
hardly be used in the early years of
the study of a foreign language. Liter¬
ature also presupposes a knowledge of
the civilization if it is to be fully
understood and explained. How, for
instance, can Goethe be studied without
reference to that decisive turn in
human history between the eighteenth
and the nineteenth centuries? Shake¬
speare and the Elizabethan court,
Tolstoy and the Russia of the barins,
Dickens and the poverty of the lower
classes in England, provide other
examples.
A country's civilization includes cer¬
tain simple factors suitable for study
even by beginners. When we talk about
the "home", the "town" or the
"family", we are surely simply conjur¬
ing up for our pupils the English house
in the little town where we ourselves
once lived in a British family. Clothes,
QUEEN VICTORIA portr^yad with great
majesty and motherliness. A favourite subject
in West Africa. Beneath the skirts are high-
heeled bootsa mark of high social standing.
meals, motor drives or visits to the
theatre are all features of civilization,
parallel to, but different from our own
and those of our children, with which
an increasingly complex picture can
gradually be built up from the first
year of secondary schooling to the last.
This is of the utmost importance
from the educational point of view.
So far as these features resemble those
familiar to the pupils, they are bound
to seem "easy" to them and should be
of interest to the whole class. , Not all
minds, it must be admitted, can appre¬
ciate literature; it is the prerogative
of the more intelligentthe future
specialists. In its higher forms, such
as lyric poetry, relatively few are cap¬
able of truly "feeling" it. A country's
civilization, on the other hand, can
to some extent be understood by every¬
body.
This leads to a second important
consequence, this time psychological.
The difference between civilizations
will arouse curiosity and thus produce
a desire to know more about them,
which is seldom the case with a purely
literary text, the subject matter of
which is already complete in itself and
often above the standard of mental
development normally attained by
children.
More than ever in the modern world
"civilizations" must overstep political
boundaries. We affect and are affect¬
ed by the form of civilization found
among other peoples, even when they
are not our neighbours, so that this
study, which is calculated to interest
all pupils, will also be the most useful
to them, leaving them long after the
literature or the language have been
forgotten, for lack of the opportunity
of continuing their stud y a real,
practical knowledge of the foreign
country which may one day perhaps
be our ally or our enemy but, in any
case, must be our travelling companion
on this small planet.
This article is reprinted from "The Teaching of
Modern Languages", ¡ust published by Unesco (Price :
$ 1.75 ; 10/6 ; 500 fr.). It was originally published
In unabridged form by the French National Commission
for Unesco in "L'Enseinnement des langues vivantes et
la compréhension internationale", 1953. M. Kerst ¡s
Professor of English at the Lycée Henri-IV, Paris.
15
