LOS
UNESCOS'
©
Father José Salcedo first broadcast to his
parish in 1948 with a home-made transmitter.
Today he is the director of one of the world's
biggest programmes of adult education by radio.
In 1947, a slender young Catholic priest arrived in a
forgotten hamlet perched high in the Andes of Colombia
to take up his duties as assistant pastor of the Parish of
Sutatenza. Father José Joaquin Salcedo brought to his first
ministry a restless, driving urge to improve the lot of
Colombia's campesinos who scrape their livelihood from
incredible farms hugging dizzy mountain slopes. He also
brought his amateur radio transmitter.
At that time the village consisted of eighty souls, but it
was the largest community in a parish of 9,000 whose geo¬
graphy is typical of the Colombian Andes. Sutatenza Parish
grows coffee in its warm valleys and raises sheep on its bald,
chilly peaks. Some plots are so steep, local legend goes, that
farmers seed them by shotgun.
The mountaineers were leading a grim life. They farmed
their plots as their ancestors had always farmed them,
harnessing themselves to their plough on slopes too steep to
be worked by animals and the land was washing away
under their feet. They lived within windowless walls in
what Father Salcedo later was to call "anti-hygienic fort¬
resses." Only one peasant in three could read or write.
Alcoholism was common. There was no diversion but drink,
and as often as not Saturday night in a taberna ended in a
brawl with the principals finishing in the Guateque hospital
down in the bottom of the valley.
Father Salcedo believed there was no point in preaching
sermons against the tabernas; instead, he decided to compete
with them. In August of 1947 on the village square of
Sutatenza, he introduced them to the motion-picture screen.
The people of Sutatenza thought they were in another world;
long after the show ended, they huddled enchanted around
the projector to stare respectfully.
Father Salcedo had gained a foothold. To consolidate it,
he drew up plans for a permanent theatre. The village of
Sutatenza offered its help, but it was not enough and there
was no way of making a general appeal to the parish for
volunteer masons and carpenters... not until Father Salcedo,
who had built his first radio at the age of 13, decided to try
his amateur transmitter.
Thus, in May of 1948, Radio Sutatenza made its first
broadcast, which was picked up by only three receivers. The
priest asked campesinos to help him build the Sutatenza
theatre and promised to record the voice of every man who
aided him. Soon he was broadcasting the campesinos' own
voices back to their amazed families and sixty men a day
were coming to Sutatenza to work on the theatre, bringing
materials with them and money when they could.
With the theatre finished, Father Salcedo sought the help
of the campesinos in developing what was to become the
4ÍX
Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955

Radio
radio school. One day, the radio announced that farmers
could make their contributions in chickens. Father Salceno
received more than 800 and had to hire a truck to haul them
to market in Bogota. Money was also forthcoming, and by
1949, he was able to buy a 250-watt transmitter. There were
enough radios for fifteen schools and the priest started
broadcasting an educational programme once a week.
Now, after seven years, Father Salcedo's home-made
transmitter has been transformed into Acción Cultural
Popular, one of the world's biggest programmes of adult
education by radio.
Acción Cultural Popular now broadcasts its lessons six
hours a day to 200,000 pupils scattered over twelve of
Colombia's sixteen departments and overflowing into
neighbouring Venezuela and Ecuador. The radio schools are
served by 6,000 specially built receivers and 10,000 more are
on the way. Within the near future attendance at these
remarkable schools is expected to rise to 1,000,000.
The programmes still go on the air from Sutatenza, but
they are now carried by a 25-kilowatt transmitter, the most
powerful in all Colombia. The Colombian Government is
backing Acción Cultural Popular to the amount of $800,000
a year and Unesco is now participating through the United
Nations technical assistance programme.
Besides the studios and the transmitter in the transformed
village of Sutatenza, Acción Cultural Popular now occupies
most of the seventh floor of the biggest office building in
Bogota. From an office with a panoramic view of the
mountains of Guadelupe and Monserrate, Father Salcedo
continues to direct its work.
" I asked Father Salcedo how he could explain the pheno¬
menal growth of Acción Cultural Popular in so short a time.
"Any work which meets a basic need of the people must grow
in direct proportion . to this need", he replied. "Here, it is
the need of 7,000,000 people in a country of 12,000,000 for lite¬
racy and general culture. It is not surprising that the
number of pupils in the radio schools has risen to 200,000."
From the outset, he has had the support of the hierarchy
of the Church and of public opinion. "Some men in educa¬
tion have had reserves about our methods", Father Salcedo
explained, "but they have now come over to our side because
we are introducing scientifically-tested materials in the radio
school. It is exactly for this reason that we requested
technical assistance from Unesco to make our teaching
methods more scientific."
The receiving sets used in the radio schoolrooms are
marvels of simplicity battery-powered shortwave receivers
manufactured for Acción Cultural Popular by Dutch and
American companies. They can be tuned to only one sta¬
tion, Radio Sutatenza, a precaution taken to preserve the life
of their batteries. Still on the theory that culture should
not be given away for nothing, Acción Cultural Popular sells
a set and its batteries to a radio school at cost price, the
equivalent of $18. Each school, however, receives a free
supply of chalk, an eraser, textbooks and an alarm clock
so that pupils will know when to turn on their set.
These little 4-tube sets put in a hard day's work in the
radio schools, most of them nothing more than rooms set
aside in adobe homes. The house of the most educated
campesino in a hamlet is always chosen for this honour, and
its owner is given the title of Auxiliar Inmediato. It is this
"immediate auxiliary" who takes attendance, turns on the
radio when school begins, and writes lessons on the black¬
board according to instructions given him by the unseen
radio teacher. He is one of the key men in Acción Cultural
Popular, this remote-controlled teacher. The auxiliaries are
always the farmers with the most modern ideas in their
communities, and the distinction of leading the radio schools
lends them even greater influence as forces for bettering the
villages.
Programmes begin at ten minutes to six in the morning,
the only time that most men can spare from their fields.
Depending on the day of the week, the morning programme
of one hour and twenty-five minutes consists
of classes in reading and writing, hygiene, (Continued
history, religious instruction or civics, always on next page)
RADIO SCHOOL files into its "classroom" adobe walled hut of a Colombian farmerfor an early morning
lesson. Colombia's remarkable educational programme, Acción Cultural Popular, goes on the air at 6 a.m.,
the only time that busy farmers can spare from their fields, but repeats its lessons later in the day. Heads
bent over their notebooks, old and young work conscientiously. School is a serious business. (Unesco photos.)
18 19


Don Quixote of the Radio (Continued)
followed by a news broadcast. This programme is recorded
on tape and repeated at 3.50 p.m. for women and again at
5 p.m. for any men who might have missed the morning
class.
In the evening, Radio Sutatenza is on the air from 6.15 p.m.
to 9.p.m., but school is over. Then it offers music both
classical and popular news, variety shows, religious talks
and a half-hour's drama on the theme of history, science,
travel in Colombia or problems affecting farmers.
When I visited two members of Unesco's technical assis¬
tance mission in Colombia,
Brother Fulgencio and Bro¬
ther Idinael, both Brothers
of the Christian Schools, they
were working on posters to
be distributed to the several
thousand class-rooms which
now constitute the radio
school.
The studio itself suggests a
school, but one without
pupils. This is only normal,
for its classes are as far as
600 miles away. Even in the
adjoining parish of Tibirita,
the schools are not very
accessible except by jeep.
There is no easy guided tour
to a radio school.
At 4.30 on a drizzling
morning, Brother Idinael and
I were sharing a thermos of
coffee by candlelight in his
workroom. We had an hour's
jeep drive ahead of us to the
Gusvita Radio School, 13
miles away. We did not have
much time to linger over
breakfast, because school be¬
gan at ten minutes to six.
We arrived with a few
minutes to spare and left the
jeep on the road. I followed
Brother Idinael down a slip¬
pery path, scarcely wide
enough for two persons. We
saw an adobe farmhouse with
a radio antenna strung from
two rough-hewn poles next
to it and a basketball court
in an adjoining field (vir¬
tually every school has a
court; one has even asked
Radio Sutatenza how to go
about buying a generator so
that it can play night
games) . The sound of a bell
carried over our heads and
into the hills. As we drew
near, we could see a young
farmer earnestly striking a
one yard length of railway
rail hanging from a low
branch the school bell used in every one of Colombia's radio
schools and the most inexpensive one available.
Alfredo Segura was the auxiliar inmediato of the Gusvita
School. At 21, he is typical of the young generation of
Colombian farmers trained in the government's rural exten¬
sion courses. He was fiercely proud of the school; to make
room for the class, he and his family had all moved into the
other room of their house. The benches and the blackboard
were his own work. The young auxiliary was doing mis¬
sionary work himself to help his neighbours vaccinate their
cattle and spray their fields with fungicide.
We asked him if life had changed at all for nearby families
since the radio school opened in 1953. He smiled.
"Everyone likes it except the tabernas," he told us. "People
always used to live by themselves here, but now we get
together. We feel that we belong to a village. People go to
school now or play basketball. Before, everyone used to get
drunk, especially on Sundays."
SCHOOL BELL AT DAWN: "The sound of a bell carried over
our heads and into the hills. As we drew near, we could see a young
farmer earnestly striking a one-yard length of railway rail hanging
from a low branchthe school bell used in Colombia's radio schools."
By now, the class was beginning to arrive. There were no
tardy scholars. They filed into the house in silence, 22 in
all, and sat down at their benches; the children scattered
among the adults (children attend certain radio schools in
villages too far removed from any ordinary school).
Mr. Segura turned on the radio. After a short wait, it came
to life with a morning message from,Accion Cultural Popular.
Then the voice of a distant teacher filled the little room lit
by the half-light of the morning.
"Auxiliaries and pupils of the Radio Schools of Colombia,
please let us have your attention... We are now going to
open our reading class for ,
beginners... Auxiliary, clean
the blackboard and be ready
with your chalk and eraser...
Pupils, prepare your text¬
books, open your copybooks
at to-day's lesson... Auxiliary,
go over the lessons."
The voice stopped and, for
a moment, an interlude of
music came from the radio.
Then the voice returned to
the room:
"Pupils... open your copy¬
books... hold your pencils at
the correct angle... Now
write what I dictate to you...
Auxiliary, write the same on
the blackboard... Write... in
small letters... ca... Now
write... co... faster, a little
faster... now all write the
last one... cu..."
The music returned and
the voice told the auxiliary
to correct the work of the
pupils'. The lesson went on
for fifteen minutes. Then,
advanced pupils were asked
to open their books. The .
class speeded up, there were
fewer interludes, and it
concluded with a short his¬
tory lesson. This was follow¬
ed by a talk on agriculture
and then the morning classes
ended with the news.
The sight of this class
obeying an unseen teacher
was uncanny. Every time
the music began, every head
bent down over every desk.
Pupils worked conscien¬
tiously without a whisper or
a nudge. School was serious
business for these people.
Campesinos are now fami¬
liar with their radios, but
they do not take the radio
school for granted. I had
heard from Father Salcedo
about an early campaign to
better, housing conditions. While on the road to Tibirita
with Brother Idinael, I saw houses with whitewashed walls
and tiled roofs dotting the valley, and many of them had
windows.
The introduction of contour ploughing in the Andes has
been the goal of another radio campaign and the deadly
vertical furrows in the mountains, nothing more than
spillways for rain, are slowly beginning to disappear. At the
Rosales school near Sutatenza, Brother Idinael asked the
auxiliary if he had noticed any improvement since he began
his contour ploughing. He told us that he had only
begun this year, but he could already see a difference.. "Now,
when it rains, the land stays in one place."
It would take weeks to obtain a complete picture of the
results of the radio schools in Sutatenza Parish alone. The
isolation of the mountaineers madevit possible for Acción
Cultural Popular to win them over, but it also renders ridi¬
culous any attempt to keep track of the work through an
20

Unesco Courier. Nf 2. 1955
ordinary system of school inspection. In the Andes of
Colombia, Radio Sutatenza may be all that a campesino ever
hears of the rest of the world.'
But the campesinos learn to write and they write letters, to
Acción Cultural Popular. The letters pour in at the rate
of 150 a day and they are a useful key to the popularity of
various programmes. They also show how deeply the radio
school has penetrated the inaccessible world of the cam¬
pesino.
They write about everything. Some thank the school for
taking them out of their solitude or for weaning husbands
away from tabernas. And some ask practical, down-to-
earth questions: what's good for a bad grippe, how do you
cure a lame horse, how should a common-law couple go about
marrying, what can be done about a disobedient daughter,
how can children be educated if there is no school available,
how does a wife get money out of a stingy husband. Every
letter receives a reply, although Acción Cultural Popular does
not pretend to have a solution to every question.
Nor does anyone maintain that a radio set in an adobe
hut is a panacea for the campesinos' intellectual and moral
ills. After a few days in Sutatenza,"you are bound to hear
the story of how one of the parish's most conscientious
auxiliares inmediatos lost his temper one night on the
mountain and mauled a neighbour so badly that his victim
had to be hospitalized. The auxiliary was sentenced to serve
two years... and there is now a radio school at nearby
Guateque Prison.
There are only 90-odd miles separating the Tenza Valley
from what was once the almost-deserted village of Belencito
in the north of Boyaca. In those 90 miles, you pass from
an ox-cart agricultural economy to the newest steel mill in
Latin America. At Belencito, in the surrealistic shadows of
coke ovens, conveyor belts and a 270-foot high blast furnace,
Acción Cultural Popular is beginning another experiment in
radio education.
In 1945, Belencito was a wide place on a country road,
nothing more than a church and a few huts. That year,
geologists were prospecting 22 miles north of Belencito at
Paz de Rio in a narrow canyon of the Chicamocha River.
They discovered that the canyon was hemmed in on one side
by a wall of coal and on the other by a wall of iron ore. As
for the hills overlooking Belencito itself, they were brimm¬
ing with limestone. In other words, bringing together
the raw materials needed to charge a blast furnace and
produce iron required the sum total of 22 miles of trans¬
port. With this unique endowment,
Colombia is now becoming the fourth (Continued
Latin American country (the others are on next PaSe)

Don QuiXOte (Continued)
Standing
Room Only in
the village
theatre
ROCKET fired by Father Salcedo signals
the start of a play at his Cultural Theatre.
VILLAGERS of Sutatenza queue up to
see plays which educate and entertain
Brazil, Chile and Mexico) to join the ranks of the world's
producers of steel. The Empresa Siderúrgica de Paz de Rio,
scheduled to be in production by the end of 1954 will have
3,000 workers in the Belencito steel mill and 2,000 more in the
mines of Paz de Rio. The sun-baked hamlet of Belencito
still stands, but it is a museum piece inside the 4,000-acre
enclosure occupied by the plant.
The conversion of Colombian raw materials into iron and
steel is only half of the story of Belencito. Equally dramatic
has been the conversion of campesinos into steel workers.
When the mill goes into production, its labour force will be
almost entirely Colombian and recruited from the sleepy
farm villages surrounding it. Financed partially by the
Colombian Government, the plant has trained its own
workers. But its personnel problems will not end when
shifts go home for the day. Near Belencito, a worker's city
is going up for married men and their families. If the men
are to make the transition from the hoe to the rolling
mill, their wives must adapt themselves to an entirely new
sort of life that of an ordinary modern community.
To pave the way for this adaptation, the company has
enlisted the aid of Acción Cultural Popular which has
assigned to Belencito its former programme director, Father
Alejandro Rodriguez, the first collaborator of Father Salcedo
in the radio schools of Sutatenza. Father Rodriguez is a
year younger than the Director of Acción Cultural Popular,
an institution where youth decidedly has its say. At 32, he
presents the same fusion of philosopher, technician and
priest as his director and closest friend, although he bears
no physical resemblance whatsoever to him. Father Rodri¬
guez is tall and husky, and his deeply sun-burned face
contrasts with the near-ascetic pallor of Father Salcedo.
Both men, however, share a fascination for fast driving over
mountain roads a national pastime in Colombia. If it were
not for Father Rodriguez, Father Salcedo would be the
undisputed holder of the Sutatenza-Bogota record.
Father Rodriguez first went on the air in 1949 when Father
Salcedo was called away on a trip to the United States and,
VOLUNTARY HELP built the theatre in 1948 following an appeal broadcast by Father Salcedo. The priest
promised to record the voice of every man who aided him. Soon he was broadcasting the farmers' own voices
back to their families and 60 men a day were coming to work. There is always a "full house". (U.N. photos.)

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
i
LIMITED SEATING for only 500 people does not prevent as many as 700 from crowding theatre for film
shows or plays. Even after all seats are taken, latecomers still pack the entrance for a glimpse. (U.N. photos.)
even though he had had no radio experience, he took over
Radio Sutatenza successfully for a month. Then, in 1951, he
received a Unesco international fellowship to enable him to
study the use of the radio in adult education in Canada
where he worked under Dr. J.R. Kidd, Director of Adult
Education at Toronto. Dr. Kidd gave the priest a thorough
view of what Canada had been able to accomplish. For two
months, Father Rodriguez worked at Antigonish, Nova
Scotia, observing radio techniques in public service in a hard,
bleak country living on poor soil. Then, after visiting Laval
University in Quebec where he studied the organization of
credit co-operatives for farmers, Father Rodriguez spent
three months in Toronto watching the Farm Radio Forum
of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation in operation.
"Canada taught me a great deal about the orientation of
our radio schools in Colombia," Father Rodriguez told me.
"We want to be able to broadcast a Farm Radio Foprn
ourselves, but you have to assume a certain degree of edu¬
cation among your listeners before you can put on such a
programme. We have a long job of fundamental education
ahead of us; in the end, we hope to reach the point where
the Canadians are now. More than anything else, Canada
convinced me that we were on the right track."
Following his stay in Canada, Father Rodriguez travelled
to Spain, France and England, concentrating on the organi¬
zation of broadcasting and on its technical side. Then he
went back to his microphone in Sutatenza until early in 1954
when he left to direct Radio Belencito. , Father Rodriguez is
starting on a modest scale in the new mill town with a
1-kilowatt long-wave transmitter and 200 receivers. The
purpose of long-wave transmission is to enable owners of
private radios to hear school programmes. Radio Belencito
will fit into a new network of long-wave transmitters being
established by Acción Cultural Popular at seven widely
scattered points in Colombia.
Although Radio Belencito will retransmit certain basic
programmes of Radio Sutatenza, its objectives are not quite
the same. In Belencito, Father Rodriguez intends to use the
radio to help mould a colony of campesircos-turned-steel
workers into a living community. Besides its classes, Radio
Belencito will broadcast programmes for neighbourhood cen¬
tres in the steel town. The radio will serve the community
as theatre, orchestra and forum and, to supplement it, spare-
time teachers will be trained as neighbourhood leaders the
urban version of the auxiliar inmediato.
Radio Belencito also will produce a regular series of pro¬
grammes to tell the story of iron and steel. The purpose of
these shows is to give workers a clear idea of how their jobs
fit into the complex pattern of steel production.
"Fifty per cent of our workers are illiterate," an official of
the Belencito plant told me. "They learn quickly and their
mechanical aptitude is high, but we want them to understand
what they are doing and why they are doing it. This is
extremely important to them and to us. The Colombian
economy needs this steel mill and we want our workers to be
integrated into this new aspect of our economy."
23
