DREAMING
with eyes
wide open
by W. D. Wall
From its earliest beginnings, the cinema has been feared
as potentially the most universal and powerful means
of mass influence. It has only recently been replaced
as the bogey of the moralists and educators by the
latest form of popular entertainmenttelevision.
Much the same note of angry alarm was struck by hostile
critics of the drama in 17th-century England and else¬
where, and in the 19th century by those who disapproved
of illustrations m newspapers. Jeremy Collier slated the
dramatists of the Restoration in his "Short view of the
Profaneness and Immorality of the "English Stage" and
Wordsworth wrote an indignant sonnet on "the vile abuse
of pictured page" saying that "discourse once deem'd man's
noblest attribute" would die under its influence.
In spite of the indictments of the moralists, the general
public continues to regard the cinema primarily as a dis¬
traction just as it has accepted the theatre and the illus¬
trated newspaper.
The surprising thing is that relatively very little is known
in any objective or scientific way about the influence which
the cinema exerts or the daily lives of people. Yet this is a .
fascinating field of study which leads right to many of the
most important psycho) ^gical and social problems of modern
man and his society. Much has indeed been written and
said. on the economic, social and cultural influences which
appear to operate in the production of a particular film or
which govern the choice and handling of themes by sections
of the industry.
Many have speculated on the way the cinema makes
people more or less contented with their lot, acts as an
excitant to crime, influences the purchase of clothes, motor¬
cars or refrigerators. Apart from the work of a handful of
social scientists in Europe and North America, such pro¬
nouncements are relatively partisan, concerned with attack¬
ing or defending the cinema industry. Few have recognized
the cinema as probably neither good nor bad in itself, but as
at once a shaping force and a symptom of the age and
culture which have given birth to it.
For want of objective studies we cannot even answer _such
a simple question as "Is this a good film for children?"
In spite of great technical improvements, the progress of
the cinema as an aesthetic, educative and recreational
medium is at the mercy of trial and error. This may be
excellent when it is the product of genius; and when cir¬
cumstances as for example in the 17th-century drama, in
England or France permit the inspiration of the drama¬
tist to dominate his medium and to know his audience. In
modern film production, however, circumstances are entirely
different. A film is a collective phenomenon resulting from
Dr. W.D. Wall, psychologist and educator, has devoted many
years to research in Great Britain on the reactions to films of
children and adults. He is the author of " The Adolescent Child ",
and numerous studies and articles on this question.
an only partly controlled inter-play between producer,
author, cast and a multitude of technicians.
Moreover, the lack of continuity in the actual production,
the isolation of the film-making community from daily
contact with its audience an isolation which is as much
economic as geographical is likely to emphazise the ele¬
ments of collective fantasy and remoteness from daily
reality, without permitting an individual genius to dominate
and refine them into a work of art.
Another circumstance of fundamental importance, psy¬
chologically and socially, is that of all forms of expression,
the film is the one most capable of producing illusion and
the least dependent upon an active, imaginative effort in
the spectator. The fancies which for long have charmed or
terrified the imagination of mankindghosts, fairies, flying
spirits, giants,
witches, the ma¬
terialization and
the dematerial-
ization of "solid"
human beings,
magical transfor¬
mations of the
physical environ¬
ment can be
reproduced with
an actuality far
outstripping the
limitations of the
stage or of life
itself. Films make
the most dream¬
like events seem
real and can up¬
set all the phy¬
sical laws or laws
of consistency of
character which
actually operate
in the real and
everyday world.
Most of us unconsciously or subconsciously are haunted
by. "magical" wishes, fears and anxieties which rise to the
surface usually only in moments of fatigue or in dreams.
Much of the appeal of art is to these at best barely conscious
aspects of our emotional lives. At least some of the pleasures
of literature and of the theatre are those which arise from
the stimulation of fantasy and day-dreams. But the printed
page, the illustration, even the actors on a stage, are
sufficiently remote from actuality for us nearly always to be
aware of the gulf.
The darkened cinema, and the moving shadows cunningly
contrived may produce a situation akin to that between
sleeping and awaking. Thus the instinctive elements upon
20

Unesco Courier. Nr I. 1955
which our emotional life is deeply based such as fear, erotic
desire, self-assertion, aggressiveness and the like may be
directly stimulated without our realizing that what we are
seeing on the screen is not really true.
It is perhaps in this peculiar combination of the circum¬
stances of film production and of an almost direct appeal .
to mental activity below the level of consciousness, that
we have the central problem of the cinema and of its social
influence. It is one of the most difficult to investigate
directly, though attempts have been made by a series of
indirect approaches.
We know, for example, that cinema audiences' in England
and probably elsewhere in Europe are not a represen¬
tative cross section of the population: they are in fact a
psychologically more vulnerable group. Adolescents of both
sexes and young men and women-attend more frequently
than married couples ; the peak of attendance is between
the ages of 16 and' 19. It has therefore been argued that
the plots chosen and treated by producers are directed to
the needs and wishes of an audience which is not fully
mature.
It has, however, also been pointed out that the composition
of the audience might be changed if films stressed different
aspects of life. This might well be so, though it is not quite
as simple as it
seems since other
factors play a part
in cinema attendan¬
ce. We know that
attendance at the
cinema tends to
rise when people
are emotionally dis¬
turbed, as they
were during the
war ; maladjusted
and unhappy indi¬
viduals go more
frequently than the
average; and, among
English adolescents
at least, attendance
among the less in¬
telligent students is
higher than among
older and more able
groups.
More striking still
perhaps is the fact
that among children .
and adolescents over the age of ten roughly three-quarters
go to the cinema at least once a week, and about a quarter,
as much as twice to four or even six times weekly. Figures
for adult attendance are more difficult to obtain but it
seems probable that, of city and town dwellers, about half
go habitually once a' week ; and relatively few do not go
at all.
Such a level of attendance must mean that sooner or later
every film generally released in a country will be seen by
the majority of the young adult population. Such conti¬
nuous exposure, to a large number of films often without
any discrimination being exercised is worth examining.
Between 1945 and 1949, I personally carried out a series
of investigations on the psychological effects of the cinema
on children. In the course of one study, I had to see and
analyze some 30 films, in a 14-day period. My attention was
thus concentrated upon the plots and incidents of each film.
In spite of this! at the end of the period I could recall little
except isolated images and occasional incidents. I couldn't
remember the titles or even the stories. It may be that, for
the frequent filmgoer, the immediate distraction is all, and
nothing remains. The film passes like a dream.
That this is not wholly true is shown by a curious pheno¬
menon first pointed out by an investigation made with
educational films in the thirties. It was noticed that when
children wrote essays about what they had seen, their
descriptions were episodic and tied to particular striking
images ; there was more detail and less generalization or
logical continuity. The same kind of result occurred in writ
ings by adolescents in 1947 on "My favourite film." Certain
vivid incidents, appealing to such emotions as fear, self-
assertion, sex, sympathy for others, stood out, whilst the
plot may have been forgotten or misunderstood.
Yet in many subtle ways these general themes may rein- '
force or counteract the attitudes of the spectators. In the
writings of adolescents and even in those of adults there
is a strong tendency to identify oneself with the hero or
heroine or with one of the characters portrayed. Sometimes
the identification is with the star rather than with the part
played, or with the attributes like physical beauty, wealth,
ability to ride a horse, travel or with the sex role played
vis-à-vis another star. Such identification, especially among
the immature, may well lead to an acceptance of certain
implied moral values of a particular pattern of behaviour
and of attitudes towards others and to life in general.
' Analyzing the various plots and the values which films
portray may therefore give us an important clue to the way
the cinema industry may be shaping our communities.
Several such analysis were undertaken from the mid-
nineteen-thirties until the immediate post-war years. In
general the result is what might be expected. Films on city
life predominate and deal with people in a slightly higher
social or financial bracket than the one most audiences
belong to. Over half
the leading charac¬
ters are cast in roles
that are . egoistic
and, in some cases,
morally doubtful if
not frankly hostile
or contemptuous of
society. The love
themes which pre¬
dominate accentuate
physical attraction
ât the expense of
mutual understand¬
ing and friendship.
Very few films,
proportionately, deal
in any deep or pe¬
netrating way with
the great social,
moral or interna¬
tional problems of
our time or tend
to provoke serious
thought : and rare
indeed are those
which do not finally preach some rather banal philosophy
of contentment with things as they are.
One is however moved to ask whether the cinema is any
different in this respect from the stage or from the general
run of printed matter in this or any other age. All tend
to reflect popular thinking and popular values ; they also
tend to hold a slightly distorting mirror up to nature and
to emphasize some aspects at the expense of others, In the
case of the cinema, at least, the pertinent criticism is not
that it depraves and corrupts but that it does not edify.
Does the audience, however, merely accept passively the
values and attitudes that are presented on the screen ? As
far as adolescents are concerned and they are the most
impressionable group the answer is that they do not.
In a study of a dozen films of the usual types, I found that
boys and girls between thirteen and sixteen exercized con¬
siderable discrimination. Films like Odd Man Out, The Root
of all Evil, The Green Years and Razor's Edge were con¬
sidered by some two-thirds of nearly a thousand boys and
girls to be true to life a judgment with which in a gene¬
ral sense, one must concur.
Other films like Monsieur Beaucaire, Time of their lives,
Kid from Brooklyn, were enjoyed but not taken seriously
or considered true to life. Uncertainties arise over, .films
like The Magic Bow a romanticized and not very accurate
biography of Paganini. It seems to be true to say that when
adolescents and young adults are presented with situations
and circumstances which they can compare with their own
experience they do draw a distinction between the fantasy
(Continued on page 32.)
21

Dreaming with open eyes
(Continued from page 21)
world of the screen and the realities of their own lives.-
But when the realism of the screen bears upon something
beyond their experience, they either reject it entirely as
fantastic or untrue as is occasionally the case with pictures
of rather luxurious American lifeor their judgment is
uncertain.
We may also ask how far films arouse discontent and
longings which in the nature of things cannot usually be
satisfied. It is often alleged that, for adolescents at least,
the highly coloured world of the film makes life seem
wanting in excitement and makes them long for more
money. My personal findings show that rather less than
one-third of the group I studied felt that their own lives
were dull by comparison and only about one in twenty
acknowledged a longing for more money. Certain films,'
however, are an exception. The Outlaw (Jane Russell) a
western with a strongly erotic and sensual theme, made
half the boys and three-quarters of the girls who saw it
find their own lives dull ; and in other ways it appeared to
have a very powerful effect on their emotional life.
The principal effects, however, at least of the twelve films
I studied, all of which were at the time extremely popular,
seem to be laughter and a relatively enduring happiness and
satisfaction ; and the consensus of opinion of the adolescent
audience was that the forces of good win in the end.
Another way of estimating the possible influence of the
cinema is to study its impact on people's behaviour. Do
films influence the ways people talk and dress, the kind of
amusements they seek, the way women do their hair or use
cosmetics? Direct and indirect influences here are exceed¬
ingly difficult to disentangle.
Such scanty evidence as we have suggests that for
adolescents and particularly for girls, the cinema provides
a school of manners, deportment and style, which they
knowingly try to imitate. Nearly half a representative
group of boys admit that ways of talking, of amusing them¬
selves, hair style and techniques of approach to the opposite
sex, are the things they imitate most. On the whole more
girls than boys admit to being deeply influenced by the
cinema. Between two-thirds and four-fifths of the group
of adolescent girls studied in the course of personal investi¬
gations admitted to being influenced by the screen in making
up their faces, doing their hair and dressing themselves.
According to nearly six out of every ten of those questioned,
ways of talking and of dancing are imitated too. As with
MICROSCOPIC BODIES
KEY TO
PHOTOS
ON PAGES
30 AND 3 1
1. Aluminium (highly polished), magnified 23,000 times
2. Paraffin cristal, (during growth) magnified 34,000 tjmes
3. Sea plant (diatom), enlarged I 3,600 times
4. Cellulose (synthetic fibre), magnified I 2,000 times
5. Blood pigment (snail) enlarged 90,000 times
6. Sea plant (diatom) magnified 270 times
7. Varnish surface enlarged 21,000 times
Photo credits. I and 7, University of Paris ; 2, Glasgow University ; 3 and S, Max Planck.
Institute; 4, M. Besse; 6 and back cover, J.B. Le Poole.
the boys, one-third of girls admit that their "ways of making
love' are also modelled on what they see on the screen.
As youth grows out of adolescence into man and woman¬
hood, however, the cinema's influence is balanced by other
things ; reasonably happy and satisfied adults recognize
the gulf there is between the realities of their own lives
and the world of the screen." Nevertheless, some aspect of
a film "can affect an individual spectator more deeply even
than he may realize himself and the continual presentation
of slightly displaced values may have a cumulative effect.
Within certain limits, we tend to find in any film the
things we look for, be it consciously or otherwise ; and at
least some of the pleasure a film gives us comes from the
fact that it mirrors and excites our wishes and desires. If
this is so, then the cinema's influence upon us and upon
our lives will be limited to intensifying and shaping what is
already there, at least in a latent form. The spectator is
not in fact passive ; far from it. The fact, however, that
the film relies primarily upon the large projected image ;
that it takes place in a darkened auditorium; and that
rapid visual stimulation coupled with relaxed physical
comfort closely resembles the conditions which induce
hypnosis, probably means that its emotional appeal is more
primitive, direct and effective than that of any other
medium. Few films arouse conscious effort from the
.spectator. Hence even when a film or an incident in a film
is not understood, a subconscious meaning may well be
conveyed. One may even reject a film's message and yet
accept at least some of its meanings subconsciously.
It is in some of these senses that films may be held
responsible for juvenile delinquency or even adult crime.
Probably no one who is well-balanced emotionally has ever
been driven to crime by a film. On the other hand, persons
with delinquent tendencies springing from deep, emotional
and social maladjustments find immediate motives and the
means to crime in particular sequences of a film. Less
dramatically and probably more commonly, films may tend
to reinforce maladjusted tendencies in those who are already
unbalanced.
Enough has been said to indicate some at least of the
problems raised in the mind of a psychologist by the cinema
and the fact of almost universal attendance by children,
adolescents and adults alike. Mr. Everyman takes his flicks
as a harmless entertainment. They probably are for the
most part. Nevertheless, as well as giving entertainment,
they may be deeply shaping the society we live in; on the
other hand, they may merely be a reflexion of the way^it is
developing. The cinema industry could be a greater force
for good or for ill if more were known about the psychology
of the spectator and of the particular mechanism of his
response to the films he sees.
Here then is a vast field of research on which only the
merest and most superficial start has been made. The most
important questions are still untouched, and have been for
the past fifty years or so since the first public cinema halls
were opened.
32
