WATER:
LIFE SAVER
AND
DEADLY
an can live without clothes, without shelter and for some
time without food. Without water, he soon perishes.
The earliest settlements grew up around rivers,
springs, wells and other primitive sources of water.
Later, great civilizations and cultures were nurtured in the valleys of
famous riversthe Nile, the Euphrates, the Indus and the Ganges.
And as they grew always more and more water was needed. In
fact, it has been said that throughout history, "after the passion of
love, water rights have caused more trouble than anything else to
the human species."
As time went on, the search for water for survival was gradually
paralleled by an equally persistent quest for "pure" water. For thou¬
sands of years people increasingly demanded a more satisfactory
sort of water for drinking and other purposes.
"It is good to keep water in copper vessels, to expose it to sunlight,
and filter through charcoal" is a dictum not out of an engineer's
report in modern times. It goes back about 2,000 years and was
found in a collection of medical lore written in Sanscrit.
Another Sanscrit source of the same period gives more comprehen¬
sive and remarkably modern water purification suggestions: "Impure
water should be purified by being boiled over a fire, or being heated
in the sun, or by dipping a heated iron into it, or by filtration
through sand and coarse gravel and then allowed to cool."
Unfortunately sensible advice like this has often been ignored in
the past. As great civilizations flourished their growing populations
very often themselves poisoned the waters on which their lives
depended. Even a century ago cholera, typhoid, the dysenteries
and other diseases caused by polluted water still ravaged the peoples
of all the continents.
Since then, spectacular results have been achieved in protecting
people against the menace of the many water-borne diseases. But
no country in the world can afford to relax its vigilance concerning
water sources and supplies. Serious and widespread cholera and
typhoid epidemics were still occurring in Europe and America at the
end of the nineteenth century. As late as 1937, a momentary break¬
down in the water-purification system of Croydon, near London, let
loose a terrible epidemic of typhoid fever. In Marseilles in 1943
there were 639 cases of typhoid with 127 deaths.
In the immediate post-war years 250,000 cases of typhoid with
25,000 deaths were occurring annually in Europe. In Mexico it was
estimated that in 1948, 22 per cent of all deaths were caused by water-
borne diseases. Experts believe that in many Asian countries the
sickness rate could be halved by protecting water supplies and provid¬
ing proper facilities for the disposal of wastes.
So long as sanitation remains at a primitive level and water sup¬
plies continue to be dangerously polluted, there is little hope of
reducing the heavy loss of life that is brought about by water-borne
disease. Moreover, the continuing drain on the finances of the
underdeveloped countries resulting from the consumption of disease-
ridden water constitutes a major obstacle in the path of their progress
towards economic) and social betterment. The provision of supplies
of pure water adequate for their needs is a basic requirement of all
countries and one that demands the highest priority in planning for
the future welfare of their peoples.
A vast problem such as this calls for world action and a wider
understanding of the basic relationship between water resources,
health and civilization. This was why the World Health Organization
chose "Clean Water Means Better Health" as the theme for this year's
World Health Day on April 7. As such it served to emphasize who's
concern for wider sanitation programmes and underlined a problem
facing authorities in countries at all stages of health development.
But there are some people who view the prospect of millions more
people enjoying better health with some misgiving. Lower death
rates, they point out, mean more and more mouths to feed in a world
which already seems unable to adequately feed its present popula¬
tion. In the following article, Jean Manevy, of the World Health
Organization, outlines the basic facts of this problem of food,
people and health, and suggests how it may be solved in the future.
PLANNING FOR HEALTH in any community afflicted
by water-borne diseases involves detective -work to
discover the Incidence of sickness and the existence of
human carriers of diseases such as typhoid. Here, by the
light of an oil lamp, an Egyptian medical officer collects

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
data on enteric diseases in the village of Mit Hafa. He
has come at night so as to question the men who work
in the fields during the day. Bacteria and parasite studies
were made on every third person among 1,783 villagers.
Results were used in planning a new health campaign.
Jean V . Ma nev y
here do we go from here? In practically every country
throughout the world life expectancy is rising and the
death rate is dropping. The pessimists, though, are
wringing their hands in anguish over this and are fore¬
casting the blackest future for humanity.
"All this is very fine," they say, "but what are we going to do
with all these extra people? With all this better health there
will be fewer epidemics and people will live longer. How is our
planet going to support them when there are millions now who
haven't got enough to eat?"
Some pessimists have even gone so far as to label DDT the
"demographic curse" because it saves lives by destroying malaria-
carrying mosquitos.
The cry of danger has been heard many times before. Even
before the industrial revolution swept across Europe, economists
saw that an improvement in world health would bring about a
sharp increase in population and the pessimists predicted that the
world would soon starve to death.
On the other hand it is just as easy to be over-optimistic and
look at the problem through rose-coloured glasses. What are the
facts? And is man capable of really meeting one of the greatest
challenges he has ever faced?
Two hundred years ago, in 1750, the world's population stood at
700 million. By 1850 it had gone up to 1,000 million, and by 1950
reached the figure of 2,500 million people. Thus, in the last
century our planet's population has doubled. Present calculations
show that the world's population is increasing at the phenomenal
rate of 85,000 to 100,000 persons per day .
By 1980, if the present rate continues, there will be an additional
1,000,000,000 people in the world making a total of 3,500,000,000.
This means another increase of 51 per cent. Continent-wise the
increase would look something like this: Africa, 45 per cent; the
Americas, 61 per cent (32 per cent in North America and 96 per
cent in certain tropical regions of South America) ; (Cont'd on
Asia, 52 per cent; Europe 31 per cent; Oceania, ^ page)
30 per cent.
lean V. MANEVY, French journalist and writer, is a member of the Division of Public Information, World
Health Organization. The opinions he expresses in his article do not necessarily represent those of the
World Health Organization.
19

Good health
(Continued)
The estimated annual death rate in the whole world varies
from 22 to 25 per 1,000 persons. In the most highly econo¬
mically developed regions it falls as low as 6 per 1,000 while
in the least developed regions it soars as high as 30 per 1,000.
Death rates vary within countries according to social groups.
They are highest among the poorest classes and lowest among
the top income groups.
Between the years, 1000 and 1855, no fewer than 450 famines
occurred in Western Europe alone, causing sharp increases
in the death rate. Along with famines, great epidemics of
plague, cholera, smallpox and typhus have until the recent
past wiped out large numbers of persons. Plague alone
claimed 10,000,000 victims during the Byzantine period and
25,000,000 (a quarter of Europe's population) in the 14th cen¬
tury. Smallpox and typhoid were responsible for from 10 to
20 per cent of all deaths in the 18th and 19th centuries
(40 000 deaths in Prussia yearly at the start of the 19th cen¬
tury). Typhus, a dreaded result of wars and famines, was
particularly deadly to children and adolescents.
Living conditions in the towns were often worse than in the
country. In Stockholm, in the middle of the 18th century,
the average length of life was 14 years for men and 18 for
women, while in the whole of Sweden the averages at the
same period were 33 and 36. In the United States in the
1850's, half of the five-year old children in the countryside
could hope to live to 65, those in the small towns to the age
of 56, and those in the large towns to the age of 41.
The struggle to bring down the death rate really began
about 1850 when important social and economic changes
were taking place. Between 1840 and 1940
the average length of life in Europe rose
steadily from 39 years to 63 years for men,
and from 42 to 66 for women. Since then
the upward movement has continued.
This does not mean that the progress of
science and medicine has succeeded in
lengthening the span of human life. Taken
as an individual, a man of the 20th century
does not live any longer than one who, two
centuries earlier, was lucky enough to
escape illness until an advanced age. But,
In the 20th century, an infinitely larger pro¬
portion of men and women reach old age.
It is the reduction of the death rate among
children, and especially among infants, that
has had a decisive effect on the extension
of the human life span.
Better knowledge of hygiene and increases
in incomes have both affected the infant death rate. For
example, in the United States during the 1920's the rate
among the poorest classes was 170 per 1,000 births while among
the richer classes it was only 50 per 1,000 births.
For a long time, while over-population was linked with
bad housing conditions, the rate was higher in the towns
than in the country. Nowadays, however, this situation has
reversed. Wars, accompanied by serious food restrictions,
quickly cause rises in the infant mortality rate. The example
of Leningrad is especially dramatic : before the war, the
rate varied between 140 and 150 per 1,000 births ; during the
siege of 1942, it shot up to 748 per 1,000.
Recently the rate has decreased in a most spectacular
manner in the highly developed countries. In some it has
fallen to the record low figure of 20 per 1,000 births,
whereas at the start of the 20th century more than 30 out
of every 100 infants died in their first year. There is a
startling similarity between the health situation today in
the underdeveloped countries and those that prevailed 150
or 200 years ago in the countries now considered developed.
Infant mortality still reaches 500 per 1,000 births. The
average length of life is little longer than 30 years. Epi¬
demics still sporadically take their terrible toll. Tropical
countries have even more of their share of illnesses :
sleeping sickness, yellow fever, yaws and many others.
Experts agree, however, that the death rate caused by such
illnesses can also be reduced by improved living conditions.
Important and successful steps have already been taken
to force down the death rate in large areas of the world :
great vaccination campaigns, a struggle against malaria on
the international scale, quarantine measures to control
epidemics, and the vigorous co-operative lr ,.
activities carried out by the governments of ,Cont ,,°.n
the countries concerned. -page 2i)

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
21

Good health
(Continued)
IN PERILOUS WATERS-The moderniza¬
tion of agriculture* the growth of indus«
try and the rapid expansion of cities have
ail increased the threat- of contamination
to water supplies. (WHO photo, left).
Rivers and canals in some countries are
often the-home of the snail that harbours
the bilharzia parasite. Boys swimming
in the irrigation canal (centre) run every
chance of catching the intestinal and
Madder disease caused , by this parasite.
Governments are attacking the problem
on two fronts; through education in hygiene
and by mass injections against bilharzia.
(Unesco Photos taken in Egypt)
Nevertheless, the infant death rate in these countries is still
from 40 to 50 per cent of the general mortality. Thus, a
decisive factor in the campaign depends ultimately on
substantial improvements in economic conditions.
The birth of a child is considered a happy event in every
class of society in every country of the world. Within the
family, it means that there will be someone to go on living
in the home, that the soil will be tilled, that the care of
parents in their old age will be assured.
To the nation, it means that the people have a future,
that the homeland will be defended, and that the economy
will have the manpower it needs to expand. Everywhere on
earth, children and young people symbolize vigour and
prosperity.
In the under-developed countries, the birth rate is infini¬
tely higher than that in other countries, but so is the death
rate. Though one out of every two children dies before his
first birthday, this does not check the natural growth of the
population. But when the total population of these countries
rises through high birth and death rates, it does so waste-
fully because such a growth of population means a high
proportion of dependent persons.
It has been calculated that each new child represents an
economic deficit until he is 15 years old. From then on, the
work done by the adolescent each year pays back the cost
of his maintenance during a previous year. At 30 years,
the "capital" invested in the child ,is paid back by the young
man After 30, the grown man represents economic credit
22
"active capital" capable not only of taking care of
himself, but also of a dependent person. But in the under¬
developed countries, infant mortality alone accounts for
from 40 to 50 per cent of the total death rate, and the
average expectancy of life scarcely exceeds 30 years.
The demographic situation in the largest part of the world
today can be summed up as follows. The efforts of medical
science have almost everywhere reduced the general death
rate, but the infant death rate has not diminished in the
same proportions. The lowered death rate and the mainte¬
nance of the birth rate at a high level has speeded up
population growth, but the development of young, healthy,
productive generations has not been accelerated. If the
death rate can be lowered for all ages, there is a chance that
the proportion of children surviving until the period of their
productivity will increase. And this will also mean an
increased return on the investment in their upbringing.
The situation can be compared to that of a young married
couple with limited resources who, expecting a baby, get
quintuplets. If the couple does not get outside help and
if it has no chance of increasing its income, the result will
be disastrous ; the children will starve. But, if by some
miracle, the quintuplets can reach an age at which they
can earn money, the family will be saved, and may even
become prosperous.
Today overpopulation is no longer a problem for individual
nations ; it is one of the most important international ques¬
tions. That is why the United Nations recently convened a
congress of leading population experts from all over the

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
world in Rome. They included specialists of the World
Health Organization, whose activities have greatly contribut¬
ed to reducing the death rate ; of the Food and Agricultural
Organization, and Unesco.
Three major theses were presented at the World Popula¬
tion Congress.
First, that "in order to build a family in a rational
manner" man should use various birth control methods.
Second that mechanical or chemical methods of birth
control would be contrary to the laws of nature, but that
man, as a superior being, should be able to master his
instincts and to decide for himself the size of his family,
adapting himself to the economic conditions which he faces.
Finally, there was the view that the growth of population
is not a problem which can be solved by birth control, but
by a better division of consumer goods and resources.
Nevertheless, the supporters of the three different view¬
points seemed to agree on one thing that the generation
which discovered the secrets of the atom should be able to
find a constructive answer to the oft asked question : will
the vast number of human beings who are being saved today
by the progress of medical science be condemned to die of
hunger tomorrow?
Every night, more than half the people on earth go to bed
hungry. Some 1,400 million men and women in Asia have
only enough food to keep them alive. The situation as nu¬
trition experts see it is that each of these people has less
than the 2,400 calories which are considered the daily mini
mum requirement to maintain life. Immense numbers of
people in Africa, Latin America and Europe have only a
trifle more than that minimum. The people of some
countries of Europe, North America and Oceania have rations
equal to or more than the 2,800 calories which the
specialists consider every human being should have daily.
Growth of the population will make the situation even
worse unless better means are found to increase the produc¬
tion of consumer goods and to improve their distribution.
At a time when some regions are threatened by famine,
other parts of the world face the problem of disposing of
surplus stocks of cereals, and of reducing planted acreage.
The earth has far from reached its maximum capacity of
production. Some people believe production can be increas¬
ed from 40 to 50 per cent. Others are convinced that if all
the farmers of the world adopted the best methods now
known, food production could be doubled without adding to
the present acreage.
In the United States, for example, the 1952-1953 crop was
double the annual crops during the 1934-1938 period. The
yield per acre increased by 70 per cent while the planted
area increased by only 20 per cent. However, increases in
the yield of land will not suffice to feed mankind if during
coming years the birth rate continues to be high, if more
lives are saved by science, and if the life span is lengthened
even more.
At present the sea furnishes only about one /cont'd on
percent of mankind's food, although it covers l 24)
some 'three quarters of the surface of the v s '
23

FRIEND AND FOE. Man has always settled near water, but fishermen such as these on the River Niger in the French Sudan live closest to It. It Is their
friend and their foe, It provides their livelihood and may also destroy them. Millions still fail to understand the link between polluted water and disease.
globe. Improvement in fishing methods could bring vast ad¬
ditional quantities of food out of the sea.
About one fifth of the earth's surface is unproductive be¬
cause of its cold climate. But the earth's temperature is
now tending to rise ; the ice is receding toward the poles.
Every year new soil, varying from a few dozen yards to
several miles, is being reclaimed for planting.
The arid zones can also be used if they can be supplied
with water (by dams and irrigation canals) ; if the water
can be kept from evaporating (by reservoirs or vegetation);
if sub-surface water can be extracted and used ; if sea
water can be de-salted (although such foods as cucumbers,
carrots, corn, cabbage can be grown in soil irrigated by salt
water). Some plants, such as the eucalyptus, grow perfectly
in the desert and provide shade and fuel. The extension
of desert areas can be checked by controlling the foraging
of certain animals; goats, rabbits and various birds destroy
the vegetation and permit the advance of the sands.
In the absence of electric and other power, the bringing
of water into arid zones presents serious problems. Yet,
studies are under way to solve them, for instance, by the
use of solar and wind energy.
Considerable progress has been made to increase the yield
of various crops. But new discoveries open far broader pers¬
pectives. For example, by adding a tiny dose of certain
antibiotics to the food of cattle and fowl, their rate of
growth is increased rapidly. Pigs fatten three times as
quickly, hens lay a larger number of eggs. A pig raised with
aureomycine reaches the weight of 43 kilos in a period of
time during which it would normally reach only 30 kilos.
Hybridization or cross-breeding of plants also can increase
the yield of acreage. In the United States, for example, new
hybrids of corn have led to a 25 per cent increase in produc¬
tion, to an additional profit of $700,000,000, and to an annual
increase of about 5,000 million pounds of meat, that is, about
40 pounds of meat more for each person.
In addition to increasing the area and the yield of planted
ground, steps must be taken to protect the soil against the
rains (which, every year, wash millions of tons of good earth
toward the sea) ; against drought (which, in the absence of
irrigation systems, can transform fertile earth into dust, as
for example, the immense Tigris desert area which was once
able to feed 30,000,000 human beings) ; against insects and
parasites which every year destroy at least 10 per cent of the
world's food crop (an amount which could nourish the whole
population of Africa or North America).
Moreover, there are possibilities beyond those which have
been stated briefly here by which man can feed everyone
on earth : there are the new perspectives opened since the
beginning of the atomic era.
The people of the world will have the chance for stu¬
pendous improvements in their food and way of life when
atomic energy is fully used for peaceful, industrial purposes.
The possibilities in this field seem limitless. Dr. Powell, of
Bristol University, Nobel Prize winner, declared recently :
"Used for production, the power of five hydrogen bombs
could furnish a quantity of energy equal to that now produc¬
ed by the work of all Britain's miners during one year.''
24
