Unesco, copyright reserved
SOCIETY - EXPLODING
by Alfred Métraux
Outward appearances often
give travellers a false impres¬
sion that women in primitive
societies are nothing but drud¬
ges and inferior beings. A
closer look at the true meaning
of certain customs shows that
Inequality between men and
women Is not nearly as great
as it appears. Top photo, Indian
woman from the Amazon ; left,
dancer on the Gold Coast.
30

Unesco Courier. N' 11. 1955
Are women in "primitive" societies the drudges and
inferior beings often described by writers of the last
century? Many people still think, they are, for the
picture drawn by so many travellers, of the native woman
bent under the weight of a heavy burden, clutching a child
to her breast, while her husband walks lightheartedly ahead,
bow in hand, has become accepted as the symbol of the
degradation of women in "savage" communities.
It is also true that for some time an entirely opposite idea
has persisted concerning a primitive matriarchy. Many
historians assumed its existence, traces of which could be
found among "savage" tribes, and great efforts were made
to seek facts which would point to a phase in human
development when women ruled over men.
Such ideas as these are apt to distort our judgment just
when the so-called "primitive" peoples have ceased to belong
to a distant world and are beginning to play a direct part in
our own civilization. If we are to help them adapt
themselves to this change we should not add to a somewhat
condescending pity for their unperfected techniques, a
disdain for customs we simply do not understand. Of course,
innumerable studies have been written about this vast
subject, and all I can hope to do here is to clear up a few
points about which there are the most mistaken ideas.
Before conclusions can be drawn about the status of women
in any particular community it must be considered against
each different aspect of the culture. Even in a civilization
like our own where equality of the sexes is often given legal
recognition and where, economically and socially, women are
playing an increasingly important role, there are some insti¬
tutions in which they are given only a subordinate and
insignificant place.
Female shock troops
sent heads flying
In religion, for instance, a sphere in which women are
noted for their piety and zeal, the priesthood is barred to
them, and with it the entire ecclesiastical hierarchy.
The idea of a woman as a bishop or a Chief Rabbi seems
slightly comic, if not sacrilegious and shocking.
That women should be handicapped in this respect might
well surprise members of other civilizations where it is
precisely women who are chosen as mediators between men
and the spirit world. It is their privilege to receive revela¬
tions, and to invoke the spirits, to appease their wrath or
obtain their favours. Men, even those most highly placed in
the social hierarchy, listen to them and ask their advice on
everything relating to the supernatural.
This is particularly the case among tribes practising
Shamanism, where women monopolize religious life, and are
thought to be specially gifted for maintaining regular contact
with spirits. Amongst the Araucanian Indians in Chile, a
once great and virile tribe, men who felt drawn towards
magic or the priesthood dressed as women and tried to look
like them in every way. In North America, the ceremonial
life of the famous Iroquois tribe of New York State was very
largely controlled by its women.
It is a sad reflection on our own times that women have
been so associated with military life. Generally speaking, and
despite legends about the Amazons, most "primitive" peoples
considered women unfit for warfare, though the story of the
women's regiments of Dahomey, in Africa, throws doubt on
the physical and physiological reasons usually given to justi¬
fy the exclusion of women from fighting. The Dahomey
Dr. Alfred METRAUX was only 27 when he made his first expedition, an archaeo¬
logical study in Latin America. Since then, his career as a practising anthropologist
has taken him oyer most of Latin America and the South Sea Islands. He has
conducted several missions for Unesco and as a member of Unesco's staff is associated
with its campaign against racial discrimination. Swiss born. Dr. Metraux is
now a citizen of the United States. He has written numerous studies on tribes of
South America and the Pacific.
shock troops were made up entirely of young women, who, in
theory, passed for the ruler's wives. During battles or sieges,
they were held in reserve until the chief warrior decided that
the moment had come to snatch a decisive victory by throw¬
ing his best troops into the fray. The women hurled
themselves upon the enemy, brandishing enormous scimitars
with which they sent heads flying in all directions. To these
formidable Amazons fell the task of defending the indepen¬
dence of Behanzin's Kingdom when Dahomey was conquered
by French troops some fifty years ago.
Power-wielding matrons
of the Iroquois tribe
The worst mistakes that have been made in assessing the
true status of "primitive woman" have generally been
caused by confusion between legal status and actual
status. By placing the emphasis solely on the authority of
the husband, and in particular on such customs as the pur¬
chase of wives, a very grim picture can be painted of the life
of women in "savage" communities. But when we take a
closer look at the behaviour of both sexes and discover the
true meaning of certain customs, we soon realize that the
inequality between men and women is not early as great as
it looks. In fact according to the angle from which we con¬
sider the problem, disadvantages are counterbalanced by
privileges that are often of great importance.
The famous American ethnographer and sociologist,
Dr. Robert H. Lowie was not merely indulging in a witty
paradox when he wrote, in his treatise on primitive sociology :
"George Eliot and Madame Récamier, in spite of their social
influence, did not even remotely approach the legal position
of the average Iroquois matron". He could not have chosen
a better example, for there are few communities in which
women wielded such power as did the matrons of this Red
Indian tribe. They had no place in the council of the tribe
nor in the council of the great Iroquois League, but they
nominated their members. Political authority rested on their
choice and they had the additional power of deposing chiefs
whom they deemed unequal to their task.
The role of women in political affairs brings us back to
the problem of matriarchy. The existence of a social order
where women ruled over men has been relegated to the realm
of mythology. With the exception of the Iroquois, and a very
few other tribes, it is only by accident that women have
wielded political power.
Unsatisfactory husbands are
turned out of the hut
The idea of primitive matriarchy arises out of a confusion
between matrilineal descent and female rule. The fact
that a person belpngs to his mother's clan, inherits
from his maternal uncle and looks upon the members of his
father's clan as strangers, does not mean that women enjoy
a privileged position. In a great many "primitive" commun¬
ities, the husband is obliged by custom to live at his wife's
home; but although this state of affairs may be advantageous
to the wife, it does not imply any superiority of the female
sex, though of course the woman who stays with her family
does not run the risk of being ill-treated by her husband,
since any injustice or brutality on his part would soon bring
upon him the wrath of the whole household.
Amongst the Pueblo Indians in the south-west United
States, the women own the family hut, and can drive out
husbands who no longer please them. It is not ,,-,---,,-' ,r
surprising that the men are ill at ease JConl'd on .
and often return to their native village, where 'ZVUll-
r
31

SUPPORTED
IN SORROW
Women walking in pairs with
linked arms are .mourners at a
funeral south of Lake Chad in
French Equatorial Africa. It is
customary for women relatives
to walk in the funeral proces¬
sion, each supported by another
woman from a different family.
Copyright Robert Jaulin
they can count on the affection and trust of their relations.
Some anthropologists have tried to correlate the economy
of a given community with the status of its women. Indeed,
amongst a number of so-called "primitive" peoples, soil culti¬
vation is left entirely to the women. In the Amazon region,
for instance, the men simply clear the land, and all the rest
of the agricultural labour is provided by the women. It is
they who plant, harvest and carry the crops. As basic food
supplies depend on agriculture, it is reasonable to suppose
that women occupy a strong position in the life of the tribe.
Conversely in communities which depend for their livelihood
on hunting and fishing, the status of women might be
expected to show their dependence on the men. Once again,
however, facts disprove theory.
In some communities of nomad hunters, the sexes have
more or less equal rights, whereas in other groups, woman
occupies a decidedly inferior position, even though she is the
chief provider of food. From these examples, therefore, it
cannot be said that economic development necessarily pro-
32
duces any change in the status of women. There does, how¬
ever, appear to be a close connexion between the raising of
livestock and the relegation of women to a position of
inferiority.
The subordination of women and the very minor role they
were given outside the home in early European and Asiatic
communities is ascribed to the influence of the nomad
herdsmen. Is there a cause and effect relationship between
stock-raising a masculine activityand female inferiority?
Some people have thought so, but anthropologists see in this
relationship the effect of a historical accident, and cite the
case of pastoral tribes like the Hottentots, who do not treat
women as inferior beings.
The argument most often used to demonstrate the infer¬
iority of "primitive" woman, is that in many communities
particularly in Africawomen are bought by their future
husbands. Much has been written both to protest against
this custom, and to defend it and explain its significance.
The purchase of women in East Africa, for example the

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 1955
î
looola as it is called generally takes the form of the delivery
to the girl's family of so many head of cattle. To acquire
enough head of cattle to be able to marry is the main concern
of the young men of many tribes. It is not a mere commer¬
cial transaction, but something much more complicated. In
the first place, the handing over of the cattle gives official
sanction to the marriage; it is the equivalent of a marriage
contract in societies like our own, and the woman for whom
no cattle had changed hands would not feel that her marriage
was valid.
The young man's family, on the other hand, is not purchas¬
ing the woman herself, but a proprietary right over her issue.
If no "'payment" had been made, the children of the marriage
would belong to the wife's family. The cattle therefore
represent a form of marriage settlement paid by the husband
to his future bride's parents, to be administered by them on
her behalf and that of her children. Sometimes if the wife
dies childless, the cattle must be returned to the husband.
In short, in the transaction wrongly known as bride-purchase,
the legal aspect is more important than the economic. It is
not a "business deal", but a solemn act giving legal sanction
to the marriage and ensuring the legitimacy of the offspring.
In attempting to clarify these points, I have merely tried to
render justice to peoples commonly called "'primitive" or
"inferior". In spite of our enormous technical progress, we
ourselves find it difficult to throw off customs inherited from
our Indo-European forefathers those nomad herdsmen who
showed so little indulgence towards the other sex. The
attainment of rights for women often does no .more than
introduce into our civilization a state of affairs in fact and
in law, which has existed for centuries and even for thousands
of years amongst peoples we are too often apt to despise.
33
