Closer to heaven
than to earth
The vast rock piles of the Meteora tower above the vil¬
lage of Kastrani on the edge of the Thessaly plain (above).
This stone forest of giant pinnacles was chosen by mediev¬
al ascetics as a place of retreat from the world. The
monks who first climbed these rocks felt they were much
closer to heaven than to earth, as did the Stylites, the
famous ascetics of the East who spent their whole lives
perched on the columns of ancient temples. On the
Meteora, the monks built hermitages, churches and,
later, great monasteries, some of which are still occupied
today. Monastery of St. Stephen (right) stands perched
on the cliff-edge and dominates the town of Kalabaka,
which, eight centuries ago was called Staghi, a contraction
of three Greek words meaning "home of the saints".
In the far distance glitter the snow-covered peaks of
the Pindus mountains. Ancient engraving (opposite
page) depicts religious buildings on the Meteora during
most flourishing period of monastic life. (Meletzis photos.)

THE METEORA
Rock pinnacles 'hung in the air'
by Professor George Sotiriou
Member, Athens Academy and Director, Byzantine Museum
IN many places where men are striving to preserve and restore the ancient sites and monu¬
ments which form part of the world's cultural heritage, Unesco helps to organize and
support their work. In particular it has encouraged efforts to make cultural treasures
easily accessible to visitors from other lands. The need for new roads along which visi¬
tors could easily travel to the ancient sites was emphasized by Unesco missions which studied
the problems of restoring and enhancing the ancient monuments of Syria and Lebanon in
1953. A recent achievement in this respect is now reported from Greece where a fine new
road today leads to the Meteora, the fantastic rock formations on the edge of the plain of
Thessaly. Below, Professor George Sotiriou describes the strange land of the Meteora and
the medieval monasteries which crown their pinnacles.
In the north-west corner of the plain
of Thessaly, some eight hours
journey by road, north of Athens,
stands one of the strangest sights in
the world: the Meteora, a group of
gigantic black rocks rising up in the
sky like vast pillars or massive ruins.
The early inhabitants of the region
gave these rocks the name of "meteora"
("hung in the air") because they seem
to be suspended in space, each separate
from the others, at the entrance to a
mountain-girt valley leading into the
heart of the Pindus range.
Some geologists maintain that in very
ancient times Thessaly was a lake and
the Meteora were part of its rocky
banks. Great earthquakes split these
rocks apart, while on the eastern rim
of the Thessalonian plain an enormous
fault brought into being the lovely vale
of Tempe and the two great mountains
Olympus and Ossa. The waters of this
lake formed the river Peneus which
flows through Tempe into the gulf of
Salonika.
Nowadays it is easy to climb these
rocks and visit the great monasteries
built there centuries ago. Only a few
years ago the ascent still had to be
made in nets, which the monks hauled
up on pulleys from above, as depicted in
certain old prints. In earlier times,
sectional wooden ladders were used,
hooked into the rock, and naturally
enough the ascent was not without
danger. Today, however, visitors can
climb up safely by way of spiral stair¬
cases hewn into the rock. A recently
made road now leads almost to the foot
of the rock stairs.
It is quite understandable that me¬
diaeval ascetics should have chosen the
Meteora as a place of retreat from the
world. The monks who first clambered
up these rocks no doubt
felt that they were much » _ IT".
closer to Heaven than to
earth, as did the Stylites,
on next
page)

THE METEORA
(Continued)
Nowadays it is possible to reach the Meteora monasteries by climb¬
ing spiral staircases hewn Into the rock. Eighteenth century engrav¬
ing (right) shows the hazardous means of ascent to the Varlaam monas¬
tery by sectional wooden ladders hooked into the smooth surface
of the rocks. Materials and food were hauled up In baskets. Even
a few years ago, visitors to some of the monasteries were still pulled
up in nets which the monks raised by cords and pulleys. Below,
the Varlaam monastery as visitors see ¡t today. On opposite page,
the Hermitage of St. Nicholas. What look like huge birds' nests
on the cliff face are monks' cells, supported by slender wooden poles.
Insets in text on these pages are a series of saints' heads reproduced
from the frescoes in the little monastery of Ipapanti.
the famous ascetics of the East, who
spent their lives perched on temple col¬
umns. A small basket attached to a
length of rope, in which the pious
would place morsels of food, was the
hermit's only link with the outer world.
The first monk of the Meteora was
known by the name of "Ho tou Stylou",
that is to say "he of
the column", because
the cave which was his
hermitage lay beneath
a rock shaped like a
pillar.
It is probable that
ascetics and monks
sought refuge in the
caves of the Meteora at
a very early period, but
the first historical ref¬
erence to the mon¬
asteries of the Met¬
eora appears in an
edict of the Byzantine
Emperor, Manuel Comnenus, dated 1143,
which speaks of the foundation of the
Sketis at Staghi. This was the name of
the little town, now called Kalabaka,
which lies at the foot of the rocks.
"Staghi" is derived from the contrac¬
tion of three Greek words "eis tous
aghious", meaning f'home of the
saints", and it is clear that, there, the
saints were the monks.
Gradually several hermitages were
founded; then, on the Doupiani rock a
church was built. Every Sunday all
the ascetics gathered there for the
celebration of Mass and thus a sort of
monastic community came into being.
However, it was only during the 14th
century that the great monasteries
were founded, and from these emerged
many eminent figures
who played an im¬
portant role in the or¬
ganization of monastic
life on the Meteora.
Mention should be
made of the Cénobite
Athanassios, who was
honoured as a saint
after his death, and
King John Doukas Pa-
leologus, who became a
monk under the name
of "Joasaph". Atha¬
nassios founded the
monastery of the
Transfiguration which is still the most
important and is known as the "Me-
teoron" or "Great Meteor". In it are
the tomb of Athanassios and the
portrait of Joasaph.
At the same period several other
monasteries were founded: St. SJephen,
Varlaam, Holy Trinity, the little mon¬
astery of the Ipapanti (Visitation), and
that of Ayia Rosani. There are also
several small monasteries in inacces¬
sible spots on the site of former
hermitages. Some of these are now in
ruins.
Only five of these monasteries can
now be visited: the Great Meteor,
Varlaam, Holy Trinity, St. Stephen and
Ayia Rosani. They are all built in the
usual form of Eastern monasteries.
The entrance consists of a large
courtyard, in the middle of which
stands the main church the Katho-
likon with the chapels, the sacristy,
the refectory and occasional guest¬
rooms. Surrounding the courtyard are
the monks' cells.
A deep peace reigns. Several cen¬
turies seem to have dropped away, and
yet the past is not dead. The monks
with their mediaeval look complete the
illusion. In silence they go to and fro

Unesco Courier. N' 5 1955
about the tasks assigned to them,
faithful guardians of an age-old tra¬
dition.
The monastery of St. Stephen is the
best preserved of those that remain
today. The view from here across the
Tempe Valley to the Pindus mountains
is magnificent, and many travellers
make short stays at the monastery,
before crossing the mountains which
separate Thessaly from Epirus.
Inside the Katholikon, another world
is revealed to the visitor's astonished
gaze the world of Christ and the
Saints as they appeared to the imagi¬
nation of those monks who, from the
14th to the 19th century covered the
inside walls of the church with frescoes
of scenes from the Holy Writ. As parts
of these frescoes fell into disrepair, they
were restored by the monks, so as to
preserve the unity of the whole. Pre¬
cise rules laid down in which part of
the church certain holy personages
were to be depicted. Thus the central
dome was reserved for Christ the Sav¬
iour, the "Pancrator", who reigned over
all. The Blessed Virgin
is depicted in the altar
apse, and the rest of
the walls are almost
entirely covered with
scenes from the life of
Christ and the Virgin.
The ante-naves of
the monastery chur¬
ches are full of frescoes
depicting the lives of
the saints their mar¬
tyrdoms and the mir¬
acles they performed.
Painted in vivid co¬
lours, with a realism
that is moving in its simplicity, these
frescoes serve as a continual reminder
that the path of holiness is a hard one.
The frescoes in the ante-nave of the
Varlaam church are remarkable. They
date from 1566 and are the work of the
painter Frangos Katalanos. The mar¬
tyrdom of various saints is depicted
with an extraordinarily life-like vigour.
On the north wall, the priest Sisoes
contemplates with horror the skeleton
of Alexander the Great, lying at his
feet. The inscription reads: "Sisoes,
renowned among ascetics, on seeing the
exhumed body of that great and glo¬
rious King of the Greeks, Alexander,
shudders at the thought of how glory
decays with passing time ; sadness
comes over him and he laments: "Oh
Death! Alas! who can escape thee?"
On the east wall
appears a vast fresco of
the Last Judgment.
Thus the monks al¬
ways had before their
eyes three ideas: ine¬
vitable Death; Paradise
awaiting the faithful;
Hell, the fate of sin¬
ners.
Hours can be spent
in the contemplation of
these memorials to the
life' and work of many
simple and devout
Christians who have
passed from this world with their
hearts and minds entirely given up to
an ideal which they steadily sought to
preserve and also to hand on to future
generations.
Asceticism was the ideal of the monks
who made their homes on the hard
rocks of the Meteora.
From the heights, they contemplated
the vanity of human life far below
them in the valley, while the blue sky,
filled with the chanting of Vespers,
inspired them with mystic joy.

THE METEORA
(Continued)
Stories from the lives of the saintstheir
martyrdoms and the miracles they performed
are painted in some of the monastery churches
with a realism that is moving in its simplicity.
Among the most remarkable frescoes are those
at Varlaam, from which the painting of
St. George in military habit (above) is taken.
They date from I 566 and are the work of the
painter Frangos Katalanos. Right typical high-
perched monastery of the Meteora.
SIC TRANSIT
GLORIA MUNDI
Sisoes, a famous
priest of ancient ti¬
mes stands before the
tomb of Alexander
the Great and con¬
templates the mighty
conqueror's remains
with sadness detail
from a fresco at Var-
laam. Inscription
reads: "Sisoes, renow¬
ned among the asce¬
tics, on seeing the
exhumed body of the
great and glorious
King of the Greeks,
Alexander, shudders
at the thought of how
glory decays with
passing time; sadness
overcomes him and
he laments: "Oh
death ! Alas ! who
can escape thee ?"
