As an anthropologist sees it
JUNGLE INDIAN
WITH AN
AXE TO GRIND
by Alfred Metraux
T7
I ' our centuries ago the hunger
J- for gold and the promise of
great riches helped to speed fleets of
galleons to the conquest and coloniz¬
ation of the New World and lured ad¬
venturers on astounding expeditions.
Today, a strange counterpart of this
age-old lust for gold can be found in
the "Iron Hunt" of primitive tribes. The
thirst for iron is so strong that it gov¬
erns all dealings between the tribes
and white men who hold this "'precious"
metal.
It is difficult to realize what iron
means in the lives of primitive peoples
unless We stop to think of the way men
lived and worked in the distant Stone
Age. And yet in New Guinea and
Brazil there are still many tribes which
use the same tools as did our ancestors
of prehistoric times.
These tribes farm the tropical jungle
soil by scraping its thin layer of humus.
Every two or three years a tribe has
to hack a new clearing out of the jun¬
gle to make room for the grains and
tubers on which its life depends. It is
not easy to clear a jungle with a stone
axe which pounds and tears much more
than it actually cuts. Long, hard days
are needed for the job.
A simple iron hatchet can do the
same work with almost magical speed.
The man who owns such a marvellous
instrument saves his strength and no
longer needs to worry about the rains
coming before his crops are sown. The
entire rhythm of his farming is affect¬
ed. He can clear as much land as he
pleases. His crops will be more abund¬
ant, famine will no longer haunt his
door, and fewer children will die. His
tribe, grown bigger and stronger, will be
held in respect by its neighbours, and
thus threats to its existence will be re¬
moved. An Indian can visualize this
chain of cause and effect as he tries a
steel axe on a tree trunk for the first
time. .
In the plains of the Amazon basin the
fame of the '"precious metal" spreads
among the tribes long before the white
man ever makes an appearance. Tiny
bits of iron passed from hand to hand
have gone right into the very heart of
the South American continent. When
agents of Brazil's Indian Protection
Service made their first contacts with
hostile tribes in Central Brazil, they
i
28

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
were astounded to find the tribesmen
using steel tools they had acquired by
barter or as war booty. For the past
four centuries, attacks by tribesmen on
white men have often had no other
motive than the desire for iron. Official
reports of such attacks nearly always
reveal that the tribesmen carried off all
objects made of iron, but left those
made of other materials untouched.
Stone Age twilight
T3E primitive man who discovers
the use of iron soon finds himself
under a tyranny from which he
cannot escape : once he is familiar
with metal he can no longer return to
his Stone Age. For iron, many a tribe
has sacrificed its freedom and even
Its existence.
When the Jesuits peacefully subdued
hundreds of thousands of Indians, the
only arm they used was the lure of iron.
The promise of a steady supply of axes
and knives was enough to persuade a
belligerent people to accept the author¬
ity of the "black robes". And many
tribes have waged merciless war on
each other simply to capture the slaves
they needed to barter for metal tools.
Even today, the Indian Protection Ser¬
vice in Brazil wins over hostile tribes
by placing hatchets, scissors and ma¬
chetes in their area.
A report on Brazil's Indian assimil¬
ation policy written for Unesco by Dr.
Darcy Ribeiro of the Indian Protection
Service (See Unesco Courier, n° 8/9,
1954) tells of some of the dramatic
moments marking the twilight of the
Stone Age. We are inclined to forget
that the Stone Age which began thous¬
ands of years ago has survived down to
the Atomic Age, and is now finally
disappearing.
A clean-cut trail
Some of these stories suggest how
our own ancestors must have felt
when traders from the East
brought them their first metal axes.
Here is a story told to an Indian
Protection Service Agent by the
Xokleng Indians of Southern Brazil, a
few years after their pacification :
One day, as some of the tribe's war¬
riors were moving through the jungle,
they came across a trail quite different
from the one they themselves were
making by painfully twisting and
breaking the branches in their way. On
both sides of this trail, branches lay on
the ground, cut off cleanly by some
unknown instrument. The Indians,
puzzled by this mystery, decided to
follow the strange trail.
A little further on, they found
something that surprised them even
more. A huge tree had been chopped
down and its stump showed a clean,
flat surface. Now they felt both fear
and astonishment, but they continued
on the trail. Soon they found some¬
thing else mysterious : foot-prints
which had certainly not been made by
any animal they had ever come across.
Night was falling as they stealthily
came to a clearing where a white "hut"
stood. Around the "hut" were strange
human beings with white skins, unlike
any men they had ever seen. The In¬
dians, a warlike tribe, decided to attack
at dawn, but their impatience and curi¬
osity got the better of them. Before
dawn came they had massacred all the
white men. Groping through the tent
they began to hunt for the cutting
of finding more of those strange beings
who possessed the cutting instruments.
But the Indians who had taken the
axes did not keep them for very long.
Other tribes ambushed them, seized
their iron weapons and left them dead
or wounded. In the months and the
years that followed, more whites were
massacred, but many Indians were
killed by the little thunderclaps that
the whites held in their hands. Not
only was war waged on the whites, but
the lust for iron led to incessant tribal
wars among the Indians. When the
Indian Protection Service left a heap of
iron objects near the Parintintins one
tools whose powers they had admired.
They collected the axes and imme¬
diately began to try them out.
The next morning, they undressed
the bodies of their victims to examine
them more closely and then crushed
their skulls to prevent them from com¬
ing back to life. Then, ignoring any
other booty in the "hut", they left with
their knives and hatchets. On the way
home, they kept on trying out the
hatchets.
They couldn't believe their eyes : the
instruments cut wood without any
effort at all. Now that they owned
them, they would become the masters
of the jungle. Back in their own vil¬
lage, the warriors told the story of their
discovery and their victory. More bands
set out along the same path in the hope
day to lure them, the Indians simulated
an attack to make themselves believe
that they had won them by conquest.
In the end tribes no longer sought
iron and steel because of their useful¬
ness. Their possession became a matter
of prestige. When the Chikrin Indians
were pacified, they were willing to obey
the law in exchange for scissors. And
they kept on demanding them until
they now own more scissors per head
than any other community in the
world.
This is the first of a series of articles on
anthropological questions by Alfred Metraux,
noted social anthropologist. In our next issue
Dr Metraux will describe how a steel axe
changed the lives of an Australian aboriginal
community.
29
