SHAKES versus
By
James Douglas
A
I I/though the fact is not generally known, the last play
completed by the late George Bernard Shaw was a puppet
play. Intriguingly entitled "'Shakes versus Shav", it was
given its first performance at the Shaw Malvern Festival
in 1949 only 15 months before the world lost one of its
greatest modern dramatists. In the preface to the play GBS
noted, "This in all actuarial probability is my last play and
the climax of my eminence, such as it is."
Written in blank verse, a medium which GBS described as
being "easy and expeditious", it only runs for ten minutes.
The preface, which is cast in the inimitable GBS mould,
contains some stimulating views on the art of puppetry.
"I have learnt part of my craft," he says, "as conductor of
rehearsals (producer, they call it) from puppets. Their
unvarying intensity of facial expression, impossible for living
actors, keeps the imagination of the spectators continuously
stimulated.
"When one of them is speaking or tumbling and the rest
left aside, these, though in full view, are invisible, as they
should be. Living actors have to learn that they too must
not move a muscle nor change their expression, instead of, as
beginners mostly do, playing to them and robbing them of the
audience's undivided attention.
"Puppets have also a fascination of their own, because
there is nothing wonderful in a living actor moving and
28
speaking, but that woodenheaded dolls should do so is a
marvel that never palls.
"And they can survive treatment that would kill live actors.
When I first saw them in my boyhood nothing delighted me
more than when all the puppets went up in a balloon and
presently dropped from the skies with an appalling crash.
"'Nowadays the development of stagecraft into filmerait
may destroy the idiosyncratic puppet charm. Televised
puppets could enjoy the scenic backgrounds of the cinema.
Sound recording could enable the puppet master to give all
his attention to the strings he is manipulating, the dialogue
being spoken by first-rate speakers as in the theatre.
"The old puppet master spoke all the parts himself in
accents which he differentiated by Punch-and-Judy squeaks
and the like. I can imagine puppets simulating living per¬
formers so perfectly that the spectators will be completely
illuded. The result will be the death of puppetry; for it
would lose its charm with its magic. So let reformers beware."
Happily what GBS feared has not come to pass. Puppet
plays on television entertain and fascinate young and old
alike. The magic and charm has not been lost as witness
the tremendous popularity of puppets when televised in
Britain and other countries. The children of Britain, and
their parents, clamoured for more.

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4 1955
BLOW BY BLOW
DESCRIPTION
As "'Shakes versus Shav"
opens, Shakespeare
appears first on the
scene, and decries the Mal¬
vern Festival as a "presump¬
tuous mockery" of his own
festival at Stratford.
His castigation of the
caitiff Shav, the "fiend from
Ireland," is interrupted by
Shaw's own entrance. "Who
art thou that rearest a fore¬
head almost rivalling mine ?"
Shakespeare demands. "Nay"
counters Shav, "who art thou,
that knowest not these
features pictured throughout
the globe? Who should I be,
but GBS?"
Tempers quickly rise and
they fight it out with the
result that each knocks the
other down in turn. But
Shaw, by reason of his
greater youth "Younger you
are by full three hundred
years" knocks down Shakes¬
peare for a count of ten.
Shakespeare then carries
the battle forward with
words. They resume their
argument in quieter mood.
"Couldst write Macbeth?"
asks Shakespeare. "No need,"
says Shaw, "'He has been
bettered," and he calls up
Scott's Rob Roy. Both char¬
acters appear and fight a
duel. Rob Roy decapitates
Macbeth and the latter, head¬
less, remarks "I will return
to Stratford: the hotels are
cheaper there."
Shakespeare, however, is
not satisfied with this display
of virtuosity and quotes a line
from Macbeth "'worth", he
says, "a thousand of your
piffling plays." Shaw res¬
ponds by quoting some heavy
cockney rhymes by Adam
Lindsay Gordon on the same
subject. Shakespeare is
amused but returns to attack
Shaw again and challenges
him to produce anything to
match Hamlet and King Lear.
Shaw replies with an imag¬
ined extract from Heart¬
break House, but Shakespeare
accuses him of plagiarism.
Shaw then proceeds to
plagiarize Shakespeare in a
subtly twisted fashion "To¬
morrow and tomorrow and
tomorrow we puppets shall
replay our scene. Meanwhile,
immortal William dead and
turned to clay may stop a
hole to keep the wind away."
Shakespeare protests,
"Peace, jealous Bard" says
Shaw, "we are both mortal,
for a moment suffer my
glimmering light "to shine."
A light appears. "'Out, out,
brief candle" says Shakes¬
peare. He puffs it out, and
the puppet plays ends. (Pho¬
tos Black Star-Illustrated.)
29
