Fabulous record
of ancient Peru ON LOOKING
INTO A MOCHICAN URN
by
Jorge Carrera Andrade
All tfie photos of ancient Peru¬
vian Art on the following pages
and on page 36 are published by
of Nathan Cummings.
T
he little Peruvian
port of Trujillo lies
perched on a shal¬
low cliff beside the
valley where the Moche
river cuts its way
through to the sea. Be¬
hind the town the baked
brown landscape is dot¬
ted with yuca, bean and
pumpkin plantations. Away
in the far distance, cooler to
the eye, the Andean peaks
loom in the sky, their snow-
covered summits glittering.
Here, in the Central Andean
river valleys of the Moche,
the Chicama, the Viru and
the Santa, for a period of
more than five hundred years
at the dawn of the Christian
era the Mochican civilization
grew, flourished and was
finally almost obliterated.
Little remains today except
the stories and history por¬
trayed by the Mochican cera¬
mists on the jugs and vases
which they have left behind.
Ceramics was the dominant
craft of the Mochicas, and in
this they made a greater
advance than was to be
found anywhere else in South
America during that epoch.
The achievements of this
civilization are those of a
people having ample leisure
to develop highly specialized
skills, and at the same time
enjoying security from both
strife and external
aggression. Food was abund¬
ant and the valleys were rich
in raw materials such as fine
quality clays and easily work¬
ed copper, gold and silver
ores. But little is known of
the political, social and reli¬
gious institutions which gave
Mochican society its stability.
Fortunately their realistic ce¬
ramic art, supported by other
archaeological evidence, off¬
ers the most complete pictor¬
ial document left to us by
any prehistoric
American civi- (Continued
lization. on next
The degree of
artistic perfection
page)
WINGED WARRIOR on stirrup-spout vessel. Figure is painted in red on a
cream-yellow backgroundtwo colours most commonly used by the Mochican potters.
siVeS*:*1**"-^'"' I
27

ON LOOKING INTO
A MOCHICAN URN
(continued)
achieved by these master potters
and the practical character of the
Mochican pitchers, jugs, carafes
and vases are astonishing. The
craftsmen modelled everything
which captured their imagination
men and animals, birds, fruits,
vegetables and the humblest
objects of everyday life.
The genius which lay in the
hands of the Mochican ceramists
created a fascinating panorama of
art in which there are many scenes
representing the life led by this
ancient people. Describing some of
these varied works, Alan R. Sawyer, of the Art Institute of
Chicago, has written : "We meet dignified leaders, stalwart
soldiers and humble craftsmen, blind men, cripples and men
ravaged by disease. We can watch heavily-laden llamas and
see balsa rafts propelled across rippling waters. A frog stares
out of heavy-lidded eyes. An owl sits holding a wriggling
field mouse in his beak, a king-fisher alights holding a
freshly-caught fish, and a small sparrow searches for his
food among the corn stalks. We can see a doctor tending
his patient and a mother caring for her child."
Unquestionably the result is a fascinating record of the
craftsman's real and imagined world,' and also of the whole
civilization which flourished at that time.
The Mochicas devoted themselves to agriculture, the build¬
ing of aqueducts and the plastic arts. But prior to their
advent, more than two thousand
years ago, an even older civilization,
the Cupisnique, flourished in the
same river valleys. It produced
earthern vessels with horizontal,
stirrup-shaped handles mounted
over the neck. This Cupisnique
pottery was made from rough clay
with orange colouring and adorned
with religious symbols such as the
cat: the supreme deity. Then came
the Salinar civilization which in¬
troduced ceramic painting. Blood-
red and cioud-white colouring
together with animal motifs lent
an element of drama and realism to these primitive
ceramics. The Salinar school represented a technical
advance in the working of clay and baking in open kilns.
Evidence of this can be seen today in the Archaeological
Museum at Chiclin where the results of the excavations
made in 1941 by Larco Hoyle in the Upper Chicama valley
are on view.
The early Mochican ceramics show naturally enough a
strong Salinar influence but up to the year 600 A.D. the
Mochican craftsmen developed and improved their work.
Their imaginative paintings went beyond material things and
illustrated their ideas of a spiritual world and an after life.
This creative thought was radically transformed about the
year 600 when the whole existence of the Mochicas was at
first threatened and eventually engulfed by the Tiahuanaco
people who swarmed out of the southern highlands where
the borders of Peru and Chile now meet.
The arts, agriculture and the pursuits of peace fell into
decay and gave place to military pursuits. The ceramic
motifs lost their naturalness and became even more abstract
in character. The objects protrayed were stylized in cold
intellectual attitudes. The Tiahuanacos, who finally overran
the whole of .the Moche country,
brought with them a massive, geo¬
metrical type of pottery which today
would be called cubist.
The standards set by the Mochi¬
cas did not disappear. After three
centuries they flowered once again
in the ceramics of the Gran Chimu.
The Chimu civilization with its
twenty river valley
settlements, its tremen- (Cont'd on
dous brick wall and page 30).
28

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
^y 41
BP*BB BbJ aVJ
i. y* yj
J||mJp <
!rtà.
IK. f
»S jÉj
iSSfejP^ i "^pt.: \ ' '^BPW^ jNb\ J
~^5bbJ 1
1 r m
F ¿sTfll
&AJsBBbI Sb&, :
I
' 1k J BB
B* .-<****' J
^B
Bjfc. -' ' a** ^äl
'BP vSí B
jí^ B
BB&:
Bkk. v -v>.
^VbP^p
3JB
. :Al¿i Y"
SL ' .. mfl
à& YA" A ' " '- .A ' .Y:
Er^/J ÊKÊ'm-
r w ' /jBJt r-\ \ ^bb
Bl
PI
mf
CHARACTER 1
CLAY: With skill
fingers Mochican cet
mists captured the d
ferent physical typ
and characters of the
fellows, from t
kneeling warrior (tc
right) holding his w
N
ed
if-
es
sir
he
P.
ar
id
; I /
S*': club, and the negro
p-^bV V: 4 - » figure (top, Jeft) to
the tatooed beggar
(bottom, left) being
attacked by a puma.
^rBjBpm
^Bf *^ SP
' ' - am |
'
^¿y *" ' *B^B BFfl
F -~jfl i^^H b\^
,« 4 H
.. 1
a :'
1
wBfe.- .^Banlr ^BÊa-M
^IflBBBk M-i ^k iflfl|
^
a#
Af ^
çfif 1
'\¿rJp ni
BOTTLE shaped in form of a
humorously rotund man. Exam¬
ple of domestic pottery styles.
^^*'¡,
29

¡ÄXJ!»'
PORTRAIT VESSELS with handle
spouts often depicted the features
of a dead personthe Mochican
equivalent of a "death mask"and
were placed in tombs for use during
the "journey to the next world."
CHALICE shaped like a fox's head
is combined with a rattle in handle.



ON LOOKING INTO
A MOCHICAN URN
(continued^
strong-points designed for defending the forty mile-long
southern frontier and its awe-inspiring capital of Chan
Chan, succumbed in its turn to the military power of the
Incas in the second half of the fifteenth century.
The multiform pitchers and other vessels characteristic of
the Chimu period, and the coloured ceramic work of the
Tiahuanaco era were replaced by the larger jars and vases of
the Incas. For a hundred and fifty years the Incas extended
and consolidated their empire. Under their benevolent
despotism local cultures continued to flourish and high
technical artistic standards were maintained. In 1532 the
impact of western civilization brought native Andean culture
to an abrupt end.
Throughout this disturbed period of history art reached its
highest expression in the work of the Mochican potters.
Their work challenges comparison in quality of line drawing
with the pottery of classical Greece, and in ceramic sculpture
with the tomb figures of ancient China. The large number
of Mochican pieces which have come down to us suggests
that their pottery was an art' prac¬
tised by almost an entire people.
The Mochican funeral ceramics
portrayed every scene and episode
of human existence in order that
the dead man should remember, in
after life, his own activities on
earth. Tombs have yielded hundreds
of vessels of every form, adorned
with human figures performing the
most menial duties of everyday life,
each in its way a record of history.
30
It is in this manner that the story
of Mochican civilization has been
brought to life.
Each vessel in this chronicle . of
clay represents a scene which en¬
ables us to follow the life of a
Mochica from birth to death. One
vase-may portray a house, another
a family, while a third may show
people eating, sleeping, making love
attending a funeral.
Life then was one of abundance.
The humbler people are shown as
fishermen or farmers while the
warrior-nobles are depicted pur¬
suing the deer and the most extra¬
ordinary birds whose savoury
flesh later bedecked the banqueting tables. The
paintings of religious scenes are characterized by a wealth
of ornaments, bells, rattles and trumpets, together
with a variety of costumes, coats of mail and plumed helmets.
Crowds climb the winding path to the temple on the hill
and there prostrate themselves before Ai-Apec, the god in
jaguar form, lord of the animal kingdom and the defender of
the people.
No facts or details have been forgotten by the craftsman,
and his work is executed with the scrupulousness of the true
historian. The customs, beliefs and social structure of the
Mochican people are displayed here for all to see. Their pre¬
dilection for ancestor worship and their belief that death
was a voyage to another unknown world, are clearly shown.
Legends, such as The Flood, are seen to have been in common
circulation.
The Mochicans traded with neighbouring* countries and
sailed the seas in rafts made from balsa wood. They had a
postal system where the couriers carried sacks of painted
beans on which were inscribed messages. Medical treatment
was given and surgical operations performed. Lawbreakers
were severely dealt with, being stoned, or killed by being

Unesco Courier. Nr 2. 1955
ANIMISTIC ART of the
Mochicans revealed their
skill in capturing the forms
and expressions of birds and
animals of the Andean region.
Two vessels shown here,
Toucan (below) and a deer
head with human body (right)
are from Chimbóte Valley.
CHALICE for religious ce¬
remonies shaped like a man
wearing a long garment: rare
item of Mochican pottery.
thrown from a rock. Apart from their pottery the Mochicans
worked in wood, copper, bone and other materials. As can be
seen in their ruins the temples were adorned with multi¬
coloured murals. They were also skilled weavers.
Certain rounded vessels found in Mochican tombs show
signs that some "revolving" movement was used in their
production and this supports the belief that the lathe, and
possibly the wheel might have been used by this people to
round off blocks of clay. In any case there is no mystery about
the methods of modelling used by the Mochican potters.
Having extracted the finest quality clay from the river banks
the craftsman would shape and model his figure, drawing on
his imagination or from life. The model would then be baked
and covered with a fresh coating of clay so as to form a
mould divided into two parts from which the vessels in
their final form would be shaped. Afterwards the potter
added the base, the handle and the neck. Then, with a bone
spatula a heritage from- the Cupisnique civilization he
would smooth the surface and paint it red.
Subsequently the model was exposed to the air, and then
fired in an open kiln to ensure the maximum degree of oxi¬
disation. It was this treatment which gave the characteristic
yellowish hue to all Mochican pottery. Finally, the article
was re-polished to give it added lustre and was then ready
for use.
Often the vessels found in tombs portrayed the dead man
in lifelike relief, revealing profound
anatomical knowledge" and psycho¬
logical penetration on the part of
the craftsman. The myriad forms
used in the Mochican ceramics show
that their pottery was an imagina¬
tive art. The potters were not only
marvellous portrayers of animals
witness their life-like frogs, their
comic birds, their powerful stags'
heads or their formidable - sea
monsters but they were also think¬
ers and poets.
The symbol of wings was used
to give the idea of speed ; the '
demon of drink would be used to
Af^^rA portray rapture ; erotic scenes
would convey the ideas of fertility
^m and death. Messengers and cour-"
iers were shown as humming
birds in flight ; an old woman
became a hallucinating owl, and a
motionless owl an idiot. Phantom-
pfl like fauna weaved in the depths
of the sea. Woman, as a mother,
was shown standing between a
newly-born infant and a skeleton. From the mountain to the
snail, from the whale to the mollusc the entire Mochica world
has been brought to life through its ceramic art.
The art of the Mochicas can still be seen today in the Na¬
than Cummings Collection of Ancient Peruvian Art, part of
which has recently been on exhibition at the Art Institute
of Chicago. Some 200 selected items were exhibited the first
public showing of the collection anywhere in the world. This
collection, comprising some 1,500 objects, including pottery
and articles in gold, silver, bronze, stone, wood, bone and
other materials, is one of the most important groupings of
ancient Peruvian art outside Peru. Its exceptionally large
and representative group of Mochican ceramics is outstand¬
ing, and presents a vivid record of the evolution of this re¬
markable civilization.
Unfortunately, the peoples of ancient Peru did not possess
a system of writing or a calendar with which to record their
history. The Spanish chroniclers showed only a limited
interest in preserving the oral traditions which had survived.
Consequently the story of the Mochicas and other early An¬
dean cultures were all but lost in the looting of graves which
took place after the fall of the Incas. Modern archaeologists
are still today confronted with many unsolved problems.
Laborious work has yielded some of the story of the Mochicas
but there is still much more hidden which remains to be
uncovered in the future.
31

