Sanaran Art
TRIANGLES & CIRCLES
by Jean Gabus
Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
f all the nomads that wander
over the sands of the Sahara there
are none poorer than the Nemadi.
They possess no tents and most of
the time their camp is nothing more
than a hole in the sand or the shelter
afforded by a small bush. In order to
placate the treacherous shifting sand
dunes the Nemadi give them affect¬
ionate names. One they will call
Nebket Naada, "the Round Dune, its
sand so soft for the night is a gazelle's
robe"; another, Elnwurich, the Forest
(there are scarcely three thorny bushes
and a few tufts of alfa grass but their
enthusiasm is so great over so much
shade and miraculous freshness that
they add: "Our camels will be as cool
as at the wells!"). A third dune they
will call Haz ould el Routh, a Fat Pas¬
ture though it needs the eye of a
starving camel or of a poet to spy the
rare tufts of scrub buried here and
there beneath the sands.
When water is nowhere to be found
and the camels collapse on the Nemadi
hunting grounds, the women trace a
clover-shaped cross in the sand. This
is the "Terejanna" or bird of paradise
which will intercede with the Prophet
on behalf of the luckless hunters.
And when a potter from the Azaouak
of the Hoggar region anxiously watches
In jewellery, pot¬
tery, weaving and
other crafts, ma¬
gic and symbolism
form an essential
part of the deco¬
rative art of the
Saharan peoples.
Photos copyright by
Jean Gabus.
over the baking of her .pitchers and
pots (a whole week's work) and endeav¬
ours to reduce the strength of the flame
with balls of millet or to shore up the
cunning structure of camel droppings
with green twigs, she too quickly draws
in the sand the sign of the "'good eye".
These patterns in the sand, which
are an appeal to the gods and spirits
and to which are attributed powerful
magical qualities, are basic elements of
Saharan decorative art.
In the Sahara, art finds itself
between two poles Islam and the great
desert. It would seem that it could be
no more than a form of expression
imported from the Orient, an art of
illuminators or of rugmakers applied to
leather, wood and metal.
In most cases this is (Cont'd on
what it undoubtedly is a page 36)
Between 1942 and 1953. Jean Gabus, director of the
Ethnographic Museum at Neuchatel, Switzerland, made
eight expeditions to the Sahaia, from Mauritania in
French West Africa to the Fezzan, Libya. Dr. Gabus
is the author of "Au Sahara'', of which the first
volume, "Les Hommes et leurs Outils" (Men and
Implements) has already appeared. Two other
volumes "Les Arts et les Biioux" (Arts and Jewels)
and "Les Techniques et le Mobilier" (Crafts and
Furniture) are in preparation. Photographs by
Jean Gabus published in this issue (most of them
taken from "Les Hommes et leurs Outils" published
by Editions de la Baconnière S.A.. Boudry-Neuchàtel)
are copyright. Drawinas by Hans Erni on pages 34
and 35, also copyright, are from "Initiation au
Désert" by Jean Gabus, published by Editions Rouge
S.A., Lausanne, Switzerland.
33

SAHARAN ART
Sporting with a Zebu
34

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
SWISS ARTIST HANS ERNI SKETCHES DESERT LIFE
.'¡.Ai,
A Zebu's whitened bones
Blacksmiths at work Song in the desert
ALL DRAWINGS COPYRIGHT
3S

SAHARAN
ART (Cont'd)
FEAR OF THE ' EVIL EYE
"minor art" which as André Malraux
said "does not express man's spirit."
Yet amid the jigsaw of its geometri¬
cal patterns and despite the limitations
of a conventionalized style almost
devoid of feeling, the personal, indivi¬
dual character of Saharan art is ever-
present. The people of the Sahara
tell us their story through their artists,
the Tuareg "Enhaden" and the Moorish
"Mâlemin".
They tell us of their wells, their
flocks and gazelles, of their houses
practically devoid of furniture, of God,
of the "Peoples of the Empty Spaces',
the "Sons of the Devil", the evil eye,
scorpions and vipers, thirst and the
sand-blown winds.
Saharan art might
be little more than an
art of fear if it did not
also reveal man's
positive stand face to
face with the Universe,
and express his subdual
of superior, hostile
forces through rites
and symbolic decora¬
tions which are as
moving as prayers
written with threads
of wool on a carpet or
engraved by chisel on
copper or silver.
Viewed in this light
the art of these shield
decorators is nearer to
conquest than to sub¬
mission. The nomad
ends by believing that
the wind, the tracks
and the wells can be
tamed, that agreement
can be reached with
the gazelles, the ostri¬
ches, the bustards and
the guinea-fowl. He
feels freed from some
of his fears, and
master of the desert
and his own destiny.
All marabouts (holy
men) are well acquaint¬
ed with the magic
attributed to numbers
and letters. Each letter
has a sacred meaning
and letters are used to
compose Koranic amu¬
lets and talismans. As
Jean Marques-Rivière has written,
"Islamic tradition, like the Talmud,
teaches that the letters of the
alphabet are the essence of things,
related to the celestial spheres, the
signs of the Zodiac and the four ele¬
ments." Thus we find the Saharan
people, and particularly the Moors,
using letters as sacred decorative motifs
in sheepskin rugs, jugs, wooden bowls,
jewellery and even on the doors and
walls of houses.
Numbers are used to inscribe the
name of Allah on rings, pectoral pla¬
ques, pendants and bits of paper placed
in special leather bags. The number
five is considered particularly sacred.
It represents the famous hand of
Fathma as well as the five sacred
personages (Mohammed, Ali, Fatima,
Hassan and Hussain). It also symbo¬
lizes Providence and the epitome of
Law and Religion. Because of this it
recurs not only in jewellery but in
practically every form of ornamenta¬
tion.
Berber crosses and certain leather
bags (tassoufra) show the multiple use
of the number five in decoration as
pearls of silver, as dots in the centre of
a pattern, as cruciform motifs, as five-
pointed stars and as two crosses of
St. Andrew transformed into an eight-
pointed star.
Fear of the evil eye is extremely
common among the nomad tribes of
the desert and particularly so among
the Berbers. To ward off its evil
Routes taken by Jean Gabus during the expeditions he made between I 942 and
1953 are shown on this map, together with the names of several tribes and
places he refers to in his article. This map, taken from his book " Au Sahara,
Les Hommes et leurs Outils ", (Men and Implements) is copyright.
influence, the triangle (a form of styliz¬
ed eye) is one of the protective symbols
used. It appears, for example, in the
form of heavy pectoral pendants worn
in southern Morocco, the Sudan and
other regions of the desert. The
Tuaregs, who have carried the art of
making camel saddles to the height of
perfection, adorn their saddle bags to
an amazing extent ' with leather tri¬
angles. They also put a cluster of
leather triangles, painted in green, on
the tassels and fringes which hang
from the saddles themselves.
Against the powers of the evil eye
there also stands the "good eye". A
mirror, a piece of glass, shining jewel¬
lery or stones anything in fact that
glitters will do the trick. All of these
substances figure frequently in the de¬
corative motifs of Saharan art. But
belief in the magical powers of the
"good eye" is so powerful and so much
part and parcel of everyday life that it
often takes a more utilitarian character
than mere artistic expression.
A circle inscribed with a line or a
circle with a dot in the middle is often
drawn rapidly in the sand to answer a
specific need. This we have already
seen in the two examples cited at the
beginning of this article.
A star drawn on the palm of the
hand by Nemadi women on the eve of
a long voyage is another way of pro¬
tecting oneself against the evil eye.
Then of course there are many Koranic
talismans, known as "kitaba" amongst
the Tuaregs, which are
little bags of leather
or silver containing
verses of the Koran,
one or several names
of God, magic symbols
and letters of the
Arabic alphabet, num¬
bers, the names of
days of the week, of
planets and various
signs representing the
eye.
There are many
other ways of warding
off the evil eye. The
Peuls and Mozambites
tattoo inscriptions on
their bodies, while on
the occasion of certain
feasts Tuareg girls
paste little green
triangles on the paint
covering their faces.
We should not as¬
sume, however that,
because magic pervades
Saharan art, this
prevents the artists
from being realists or
even trivial. Thus two
matmakers, Aicha and
Lalia, who were sitting
- shivering in front of
their tent one icy
morning in the Sahara,
clamoured for "hot
tea to warm our
bones" at seven a.m.;
then for "three more
glasses with plenty of
	 sugar" at 11 a.m., wail¬
ing "our backs ache
and if we don't regain
some strength the brush will drop from
our fingers." At three in the afternoon
they asked for more tea, this time the
five Moorish glasses, "'because it is too
hot!"
But their old, half-withered hands
wove strips of leather into the mats
with designs expressing "'the young
girl's laughter" and "the wings of the
turtle dove" guaranteeing that "this
will bring happiness to the house."
Then there was Meimouna in the
camp of Ould Oumer, Emir of Trarza.
Though the symbolic motifs she was
painting on a "faro" (sheepskin carpet)
were meant to ensure prosperity in her
master's house, she seemed in no way
awed by the magic part of her art.
She spat, blew her nose with her fin¬
gers, told a bawdy joke or
two and all the while (Cont ° °n
added up in her mind the poge 40)
36

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
37

SAHARAN ART (Continued)
'FORGOTTEN OF GOD'
In the middle of the Sahara live the Tuareg
tribesmen, a Berber people whose name,
given to them by the Arabs, means "Forgotten
of God". The Tuaregs however call them¬
selves Imohar or nobles. Mounted on swift
mehari (white thorough-bred speed camels)
Tuareg warriors can cover unbelievable dist¬
ances even during the hottest season.
Though Moslems, their womenfolk are not
veiled ; instead the men usually are, so as
to protect their faces from the sun and desert
winds. Above right, a Tuareg nobleman
from the Hoggar region in the south Algerian
territories. Above left, a young Tuareg girl.
Note huge earrings worn. Cross of Agades
tipped with green triangles is painted on face
for festive occasions and dances. The trian¬
gle helps to ward off the "evil eye". Right, a
camel-mounted Tuareg brandishes his enor¬
mous shield, called "arar". This famous
shield is made from the skin of a whole oryx,
a type of gazelle or antelope. Despite the
fact that it is heavy and cumbersome the
Tuareg takes the greatest pride in his shield.
He uses it not only as a weapon but also as a
wind and sand break by propping it against
his camel's cross-pommelled saddle. The
kind of St. Andrew's cross with projections on
upper part of the shield is supposed to possess
magical qualities and ward off evil spirits.
Photos (1) copyright J. Gabus. (2) copyright G. Tairraz
taken from " Le Grand Désert " by R. Frison-Roche and
G. Tairraz published by Arthaud, Paris. (3) L. Zöhrer.
38

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
39

Niger : Large silver pendant from Hoggar Mauritania : Wooden pendant inlaid with silver Mauritania : A Trarza cross
Niger : Woman wearing an Agades cross. Everything that glittersmirrors, glass, shining jewellery
and stoneshelps to ward off the " evil eye". These objects often figure in the decorative motifs.
Among the nomads of the Niger calabashes are
often the only household belongings. They are
decorated with poker-work designs, chiselled or
painted. All photos copyright jean Gabus.
SAHARAN ART (cont^
number of yards of blue guinea cloth,
the handfuls of sugar and tea and the
measures of millet which the work
would bring her.
I vividly remember my visit to Oua-
lata in Mauritania. It was once a
flourishing cross roads city for
caravans from Morocco, Senegal and
French Sudan, and the seat of a
famous medersa (Moslem university).
Today two-thirds of the town is in
ruins. But here and there one spies a
white door decorated with amazing
motifs in ochre, yellow and blue on a
red background. The mystical meaning
of the designs is now lost except to a
few old women who can still explain
and even paint them.
One of these women was piously
explaining to me the mysterious details
of three motifs, "Mother of Hips",
"Sacred Stone of Ablutions" and
"Lamps of Everlasting Life" whose
theme is essentially sexual. Despite
40

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
Mauritania : Silver signet ring from Boutilimit
Chest maker at Mederdra. Everywhere in the
Sahara artisans work into their wood the sym¬
bols of happiness and of fear, which strangers
simply see as triangles, circles and curves.
^^*» -"
At Oualata, in Mauritania, a potter using his finger as a brush, decorates a house with an ochre coloured
paint made from red clay, gum and water. Designs flanking doorway each comprise the same symbolic
patterns. In the centre is the " Sacred Stone of Ablutions " surrounded by " The Chain " which protects
the house, and around this are the four " Lamps of Everlasting Life" symbols with a sexual meaning.
the seriousness of her explanations, the
slightest trifle, like a shepherd passing
by with a calabash of milk, or the cry
of a meat vendor, was enough to make
her stop abruptly and blurt out: "My
stomach comes first. It is more
important to get some food into it
every day than to put paint on walls."
But triviality on the part of an artist
in the Sahara is the mark of a caste
which is both feared and despised, as
well as the mark of close acquaintance¬
ship with a craft which is half magic.
But it is also true that one spoken
word too many may arouse the spirits
and result in reprisals. The artists
believe in the preventive powers
of their symbols even when they cannot
explain them.
Tuareg decorations adhere closely to
the fundamental symbols found in
Moorish patterns. The Tuaregs seek
protection from the evil eye and
believe in the curative and preventive
powers of copper and cornelian and
in the malefic influence of iron. They
believe in infernal creatures inhabiting
the Empty Spaces, the Night and the
Dunes, against whom they protect
themselves by means of rites, amulets
and symbolic decorations.
They admit all this but do not ask
themselves too many questions. These
are the myth-realities of everyday life,
the constant small reminders that the
winds, the earth, the trees and other
substances have changing moods
which can be countered by merely
taking simple precautions like eating,
drinking and sleeping. Through their
art they thus reveal the symbiosis or
communion with nature which the
anthropologist Radclifle-Brown speaks
about. Their religion and the magic
which is part of it are deeply embedded
in their lives.
To get some idea of the many
factors that must be taken into account
in making even a simple instrument,
let us take a look at a dagger made at
Iforas, a frontier zone between the
Tuareg country and Mauritania.
First there is the foreign origin of
the iron, then the magical properties
of the materials used, and then the
symbolism of the decoration. But the
dagger also tells us the story of the
frontier which separates the Moors
from the Tuaregsi two distinct ethnic
and linguistic groups and two different
cultures living almost side by side in
the Sahara.
The blade was a diamond-shaped
French bayonet sold by a Senegalese
rifleman stationed at one of the
desert outposts. The handle was
Moorish in shape but in Mauritania it
would be considered of Moroccan
inspiration. The ornaments inlaid In
the wood were also based on Moorish
techniques of jewellery making: little
pieces of silver skilfully worked with the
point of a needle into twin "waous"
(a U with two tiny curls at the tips)
from which a host of varied composi¬
tions can be made. There was a cross
(often found in Tuareg decorations)
but it was quite nidi- ' /c ,.
mentary, probably because <^ont °°n
no traditional handicraft i>°ffe '
41

SAHARAN ART
centre was nearby. It was inlaid with
copper, as "protection against wounds",
as well as silver for "the Lord's
benediction."
The hilt was studded with typical
copper projections to guard against
the evil influence of iron, and chiselled
with Tuareg designs like the "'devil's
eyebrows" found on pins and clasps.
But it had two additional floral
patterns of Arab origin. The subtlety
of workmanship pointed to a Moorish
origin. Finally, a small cross inscribed
in a circle and isolated from the other
decorations protected the weapon and
its owner from the evil eye.
' I love Touantine '
Now a curious weapon of this kind
(curious because of the bayonet
form) deserved a signature. And
it had one. It was engraved by the
blacksmith who made it a man named
Habaia ag Mohammed, who belonged
to a Moorish group which had migrated
to the Tuareg country 70 years before
and which was now in the process of
assimilation. But since he was proud
of his origin, the blacksmith engraved
his name on the dagger and in Moorish
fashion tacked on a whole string of his
ancestors.
When a Tuareg tribesman later
bought the dagger he too decided to
immortalize it with a name. And here
we find one of the great differences
between the Moors and the Tuaregs.
When an escort of Moorish goumiers
accompanies you on the road, their
conversation turns to their ancestors,
to God and their salaries; the Tuareg
composes poems for the girl he loves.
"My beauty with the blue-painted
temples, my beauty with the white
teeth... I have only the night to
accompany the torment of being
without you." And he is quite ready
to make a hundred and fifty mile
detour to serenade her with his poem
and the strains of a violin.
It was in this spirit of gallantry, and
of the camel race, of the mad dash in
the saddle of a fleet-footed thorough¬
bred mehari, just to win a perfumed
scarf, that Babou ag Gaba dedicated
his new-bought dagger to a woman.
His inscription read simply: "I love
Touantine".
A knowledge of the Saharan lan¬
guages, Tifinagh and Hassanya, has
revealed what otherwise might have
remained unsuspected. In addition to
their purely traditional role in decora¬
tion, the geometrical pattern wrought
on leather, wood and metal sometimes
contains intimate personal messages
by the artists. Here, for instance, is a
short poem by a shoemaker from
Mederdra in Mauritania. In the centre
of the decoration of his rice bag the
shoemaker had, in an explosion of
pride, inscribed the following lines:
All men of evil heart will covet you.
64

(Continued from page 41)
Those I shall not even answer.
For good men would not dare to ask
[for you.
In another instance, when all the
ornaments such as "devil's eyebrows",
stars, lizards and suns had been
removed from a finely stitched bag
made in Tamesnar, in the Tuareg
country, the entire bag was found to
.be a message of love. It read:
May the stars accompany you and
[guide your steps.
May the wisdom of the sages be with
[you.
May the Peoples of the Empty Spaces
[retreat from your path.
On a fringe was written this short
note of anxious love:
She named Takouani senas many
[greetings to Mertar.
Only the good Lord knows how to look
[into the eyes of Mertar.
Other artists sign a "tassoufra" or
cushion as a painter signs his canvas:
"'This is by me, Amadi."
How misleading an obsession with
geometrical surfaces and the austerity
of their lines can be I realized fully
when a young girl, Fathimaton,
explained to me: "These are flowers;
I saw them on the major's curtains...
Here is Limguenfé, the servant girl.
You can see, she is on her knees,
spinning wool!"
I had been unaware of all the signs
in this language of Saharan nomadic
art. I had translated them poorly and
said, "'those are triangles, those are
circles and the others there are more
curves." But those triangles just
barely recognizable because they were
smaller than the others were the
flowers on department store cretonnes.
And those curves and the twin volu¬
minous spirals were Limguenfé. The
servant girl knew it and recognized
herself. Ignoring all the other designs,
she touched "her portrait" cautiously
and announced with pride "That's
me".
Scorpions, vipers and stars
If one the criteria of art is the
expression of human drama in its
many forms, then the people of the
Sahara desert would certainly seem to
offer us an authentic art. Malraux
answered the question "'What is art?"
with this prudent formula: "That by
which form becomes style."
To this definition I might perhaps
add those fears and joys which Saharan
craftsmen discreetly express with their
scorpions and vipers, their stars and
suns, with their faithhowever naive
in their own art and which they ack¬
nowledge in their written messages and
through their signatures. We shall
then find a close contact I was
going to write between the artists of
their world and our own, but shall
simply say between men.
Mat makers of Mauritania use alfa and other grasses often strengthened by thin strips
of leather which are painted after the plaiting is complete. In this detail the curved channels
represent flowing water. (All photos on this page copyright Jean Gabus)
To decorate a calabash, craftsmen use a sharp
knife and a piercing tool to thread thin strips
of tamarisk tree bark (coiled in bowl).
Palanquins, placed on camels to transport
women and children, are decorated at Hoggar
with silver and copper inlays.
Each of the motifs woven into this Mozabite rug has a specific symbolic meaning.
Reading from left to right and from bottom to top: a small table, candles in sticks,
combs, a scorpion, a finger (called the finger of Tunis) and a key.
65
