THE HAND THAT ROCKS
THE CRADLE...
by Lucienne Nobiet
Traditional ideas die hard. Eight men out of ten, if
asked the not-so-simple question "Does your wife
work?" rarely hesitate to reply: "'My wife? She doesn't
do anything... She stays at home."
Most men take it pretty much for granted that the ordinary
housewife has the luck to lead a privileged life of ease, with
plenty of free time on her hands during the day. He is
blissfully unaware of how much time really goes into the
care of the home, cooking
meals and looking after
children.
Just recently social re¬
search experts in the U.S.A.,
Gt. Britain, Belgium and
France added up. what they
thought was the real value
of work done by house¬
wives. First of all they
found that the wife who
"doesn't do anything" pro¬
vides the country with more
than a bit of all it's money.
The experts use the term
"quite a considerable part
of its national income".
They also found out that
the figures for the four
countries were all much
about the same, and if the
four sets of figures were
put together the stay-at-
home wives were handling
and administering some
60 % of all the money in
the country. So it looks
after all as if the mother
in the home is, perhaps,
just as much a financial
wizard as any Wall Street
tycoon.
The French survey, carried out by the National Institute
of Demographic Studies, got some interesting facts to show
that a woman's work is never done. They found that the
average French housewife in the large towns, such as Paris,
Lyons and Marseilles, works a 70-hour week. They took
this figure and put it against the total number of households
in France (13 million). The surprising result was that
housewives were found to work some four thousand million
hours more than all the other kinds of workers in the
country, both men and women. This means that looking
after French homes and children takes quite a bit more time
that the whole of French business, industry, agriculture and
administration. Here once again the figures for the U.S.A.,
the U.K. and Belgium were much the same.
These facts and figures are not, perhaps, so surprising if
we take a look at some of the replies given by French
housewives in another survey carried out by the International
Association of Women Doctors, aimed at determining the
extent to which housewives overwork. Most wives with
children to look after put in between 10 and 14 hours work a
day, and only those with grown-up families said that they
did less than 8 hours a day.
Asked whether they had a complete day's break in their
working week, most replied '"No" or "Rarely", while some
admitted to a half-day on Sunday. As for holidays the
majority said that they never had any real holidays as
34
more often than not they had to carry on with their normal
household chores in conditions which were sometimes worse
than in their own homes. One mother with six children gave
the shocking reply that her only holidays consisted of the
eleven-day periods when she was bearing her children.
All-in-all the surveys revealed that about three-quarters of
housewives do not have a proper holiday. Some of the
reasons given by French housewives for the causes of fatigue
and illness were: looking
after children; noise; lack
of time for rest and sleep;
monotony of work; solitude.
Going with these is the
sense of inferiority with
regard to their work which
is not appreciated in the
way it should be.
But this sense of inferio¬
rity is now on the way to
being overcome, and Go¬
vernments in the U.K.,
Ireland and Western Ger¬
many, to take only three
examples, have now re¬
cognized that women's
work in the home is
just as important as any
other kind of "professional"
work, and "without it, the
nation could not survive."
Particularly important is
the mother's role in the
training and education of
her children. Here, her
guidance and help are
practically irreplaceable.
To take the words of the
French enquiry "Every child
needs the warm affection
of its mother, or of
someone capable of replacing her permanently. If that need
is not met, the psychological injury inflicted will have deep
repercussions in later life."
But, if the real Worth of woman's Iwork in the home is now
being appreciated, little attention has been given to her
status as a housewife. She has been called "'irreplaceable",
but up to now she has not had a chance to benefit from the
tremendous improvement in labour conditions. Not for her
the five-day-week, holidays with pay and retirement on '
pension. In official eyes she still counts for little.
Can anything be done about this? Certainly the first
thing which comes to mind is the need for more domestic
help. Although it is true that this is fast disappearing in
most countries of the world, nevertheless some positive steps
could be taken along other lines.
For example, the French Association of Women Doctors has
suggested that laundry services could be improved, the
number of mothers-aid workers increased, family holiday
centres established and domestic science courses made more
easily available..
Here are some concrete proposals which could help in giving
the housewife greater liberty, and more time to devote herself
to outside interests, and to the training and education of her
children.
Copyright Suzanne Szasz
