ft,c$
FIREMEN'S REVIEW is time-honoured feature of
Tokyo New Year celebrations. Above, firemen
carry symbolic standards at parade in Imperial Palace
Plaza. Right, highlight of review: an amazing acro¬
batic display by firemen of the Tokyo brigade.

Lobsters for
a long life;
seaweed for
a happy one
by Shigeo Kimura
The celebration of O-STio-Gaiswthe Japanese New Year
Festival' has both a moral and mythological sig¬
nificance. Morally, it is an expression of determina¬
tion for a.new life in the coming year. Mythologically, it is
a complicated form of offering to Toski-Kami, or the God
of the Year, who supposedly grants blessings and protection
from misfortunes throughout the year.
The customs which are observed are many and varied.
Some of them are of Chinese origin and others are based
on age-old Japanese traditions. They differ according to
the.localities where they are observed, but the principal ones
are almost universal throughout the nation.
The New Year season lasts for one month beginning on
January 1, as the special name of the first month Q-Sho-
Gatsu means. However, the festivities take place only on
the first seven days, of which the first two or three are
regarded as the most important. During this period the
whole nation gives itself up to the enjoyment of festivities
in a traditional manner.
The Imperial Household, symbol of the Japanese people,
offers prayers for further benevolence of its ancestral deities,
the Government suspends its administrative activities, and
factories, shops and offices are all closed. In short, the
whole country is in a state of festive relaxation during the
holidays.
Although the hustle and bustle of modern life tend to
destroy some of the traditional distinctive features of Japa¬
nese New Year celebrations, nevertheless many still follow
their age-old pattern.
The last day of the year is called Omisoka. It is New
Year's Eve. It is, in a sense, a day of purification. We
Japanese, eager to welcome the New Year in a happy and
22
reverent mood, clean our houses and purify ourselves.
Late at night we eat a few bowlfuls of Soba or Japanese
noodles, which are long and slender and are believed to
possess magical qualities which will ensure longevity. We
then sit by' the fireside or around the hearth resting and
talking until just before midnight. A few minutes before
twelve the temple bells throughout the country start ringing.
The bells are rung 108 times to drive away 108 evils. Re¬
sounding on the wintry air, the bells toll the knell for the
parting year.
Respectful hand-claps
greet the morning sun
We decorate our houses with special devices. Outside
decorations include the Kadomatsu and Shimekazari.
"Kadomatsu", meaning the gate pine, is usually set
up on both sides of the front entrance. It consists of pine-
branches, plum-twigs and bamboo-poles bundled into the
shape of a stock. Often two tall bamboo-fronds are used as
substitutes. We believe these plants to be symbols of good
omen, and because of their hardiness, to denote longevity.
Shimekazari is a straw rope decorated with a kind of orange,
called Daidai, and fern leaves. It is usually hung above the
front door. The word Daidai has the same pronunciation as
the words meaning "'from generation to generation", while
the fern leaves with their multiplicity of fronds suggest
expanding prosperity.
For interior decoration we have Osonae which is placed on
a little stand of plain wood in the alcove. On it
are a pair of Mochi or rice-cakes and several (Cont'd on
other things of good omen. Among these is page 24)

The Unesco Courier. Nr 12. 1955
THE 'KAGAM I MOCHI' (I) is something without
which no Japanese New Year celebration would be
complete. Round rice cakes are arranged with symbols
of good luck a lobster (meaning longevity) an orange,
pieces of fern and kelp and paper festoons. (2) Tradi¬
tional game with I 00 poem cards is played by young
women in decorative kimonos. (3) Shime-kazari or
"sacred rope" is hung above front door to bring good
luck. (4) Toso (sweet rice wine) is offered to New
Year guests in small cups (right) along with delicacies
kept in a nest of boxes. (5) Pounding rice to make
the traditional mochi or rice cakes.
Photos Japanese Tourist Association and
japan Overseas Publicity Association
mWmW*^' 1 ^1
il ff
r jü
*SáW
4
23

LOBSTERS
IN JAPAN
(Continued1)
sometimes included a lobster. Since the
lobster's back is bent, this' symbol expresses
the wish that one may enjoy a very long
life until one's back is bent until it re¬
sembles that of a lobster.
At bréale of day we get up and go to a
nearby stream or well for Wakamizu, or the first water of
the year. With this we wash ourselves. This water is
believed to have the power of preserving health throughout
the year. We then exchange New Year greetings with our
family and offer prayers at the family altar. At breakfast
we sit down together in a circle, clad in our best clothes with
the grownups in formal dress and young ones in colourful
kimonos. It is also customary for adults to go out into the
garden and pay respect to the morning sun by clapping their
hands.
The first feast of the New Year is very special. We first
of all take, in the order of family seniority, a thimbleful of
Toso, sweet saké spiced
with fragrant herbs, which
is believed to promote
health. Then follow vari¬
ous sumptuous dishes. Zoni
comes first. It is a kind of
soup which is as indispen¬
sable for the New Year
celebrations as rice is on
any other day of the year.
The chief ingredient is
Mochi or ricecakes, cut in
rectangular pieces and boil¬
ed with different kinds of
vegetables.
Mochi signifies fullness,
abundance and plenty, and
is said to give warmth to
our bodies. Other foods
which accompany the Zoni
include carp, famous for its
energy and determination
to surmount obstacles; black
beans, symbolic of robust
health; chestnuts for suc¬
cess and dried sea-weed,
Kombu, which is synony¬
mous with another Japanese
word for happiness. The
yellow petals of a variety of
chrysanthemum (eaten as a
salad) are frequently used
to enrich the colour scheme
of the table, the prepara¬
tion of this meal and in
fact of all Japanese meals
being made with a special
concern for colour.
SMILING KITE-FLIERS show off
kite-flying is a serious hobby for old
colourful kites shown here is a gift
Before or after the first
meal we visit, usually with our family, the nearest shrines
and temples to seek divine bliss for the year. This visit is
called Hatsu-mode which means literally first pilgrimage.
The Shishi-mai dancers lions
with grotesque, red faces
In the morning or afternoon we make a round of visits to
our friends, carrying a large stock visiting cards.
Merchants and shopkeepers usually bring with them a
bundle of new towels with their names inscribed on them.
These are courtesy visits; an expression of gratitude for
patronage during the past year, the towels serving as visiting
cards.
On New Year's Day we are visited by a troupe of Shishi-
mai dancers, a feature of this festive season. The dancers
wear a big mask, the Shishi, or a conventionalized lion with
a grotesque red face. They perform a gay dance to the
accompaniment of a drum and a flute. Young people are
particularly fond of this comic dance and often follow the
dancers out into the streets. But the smaller children often
find the lion mask something of a frightening nightmare.
Hyakunin Isshu hundred
poems from a hundred people
OiBANE or Battledore and Shuttlecock is an outdoor game
particularly favoured by young girls. When they miss
a stroke they sometimes have to undergo the penalty
of having their faces smeared with ink. The battledores
which they use are artistically decorated with all kinds of
woven silk figures and flowers.
Boys enjoy kite-flying Tako-agé in the streets and fields.
The kites designed in gay colours make an amazing pattern
as they rise into the sky.
In the evening we have
a Katu.ta - tori party a
poem card ' game. The
game is played with a set
of two hundred cards, nam¬
ed in Japanese Hyakunin
Isshu, literally a hundred
poems from a hundred
people. It is an anthology
of a hundred Waka or 31-
syllable odes composed by
historically celebrated poets
and poetesses. Half the
cards, each containing the
whole poem and usually the
author's portrait are used
for reading. The other
half, each containing only
the last two lines of the
poem, are used for playing.
All the participants hunch
forward over the playing
cards arranged on the Ta-
tami or straw mat, exchang¬
ing quick glances so as to
pick up the card correspond¬
ing to the poem which is
being read aloud. There
are only a few sets of cards
of this kind, of which the
most popular is that col¬
lected by Fujiwara Teika,
a 13th century nobleman.
Of the many public festi¬
vities still extant in Japan,
Dezomeshiki or the Fire¬
men's First Parade is per¬
haps the most celebrated.
It is held in Tokyo and
some other of the principal Japanese cities, with the partici¬
pation of firemen dressed in ancient uniforms.
The exhibitions given by the firemen are particularly in¬
teresting, being one of the special features of the capital
since the Edo Period. The acrobatic performances on the
tops of the ladders were initiated in those days to show the
agility of Edo firemen when confronted with danger. Even
after the Restoration of 1868, the feats were performed in
the same traditional spirit as before and thrilling man
vres in the air still continued for the enjoyment of Tokyo
citizens.
Due to the changed conditions of the capital, however, the
old system of fire brigades became obsolete and its reorga¬
nization was imperative to cope with modern requirements.
Thus the new system, installed in 1939, brought an end for
a time to the time-honoured exhibition. Recently to the peo¬
ple's delight, the old custom was revived.
Matsunouchi, or the days of the gate pine, which comprise
the first week of the New Year, ends on January 7. On the
preceding night we gather up all the decorations and burn
them for exorcising purposes. The New Year festivities gra¬
dually die away and everything goes back to normal.
Japanese Tourist Association
their New Year presents. In Japan,
and young alike and a tako one of the
Japanese boys welcome at New Year.
24
