MASTERPIECES
YOU CAN
NOW BUY
by Jean Leymarie
Curator, Grenoble Museum, France.
Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
Pablo PICASSO. Harlequin on
Horseback. Reproduction: Raymond
and Raymond Galleries, New York,
S IS.
Claude MONET. The Studio-
Boat. Reproduction : Kröller-Müller
Foundation, Otterlo, Netherlands,
12.50 fl.
TT
I I nesco is systematically building
V	J up archives of colour reproduc¬
tions of paintings. Copies of all the
reproductions at present available are
collected and kept at the secretariat's
headquarters in Paris and, from these,
selections are made for the regular
production of a descriptive catalogue in
two volumes, one dealing with paintings
prior to 1860 and the other with mo¬
dern painting subsequent to that date,
which, with the appearance of Manet,
really marks the decisive break in tra¬
dition.
The second volume is the more popu¬
lar, for public taste is more sponta¬
neously inclined towards contemporary
art. The latest edition (Catalogue of
Colour Reproductions of Paintings, 1860
to 1955) is the third since 1949. The
previous edition, which came out in
April 1952, contained 563 items repre¬
senting 114 different artists. Since
then, 481 new productions have been
submitted to the selection committee,
which has chosen 282 for inclusion in
the latest volume an addition which
has made it possible, after reconsider¬
ing the whole list, -to omit 44 which
were really too small or not
of a very high quality and (Cont'd on
which had previously been next page)
21

MASTERPIECES
YOU CAN BUY
(Continued)
Best colour reproductions available today
James ENSOR
Carnival. Re¬
production: New
York Graphic So¬
ciety, Greenwich,
Connecticut,
U.S.A., S I 2.
accepted, provisionally, because nothing better was available.
In making their selection, the experts appointed by the
International Council of Museums are guided by three main
criteria*the fidelity of the reproduction, the significance of
the artist, and the importance of the original painting
among which a compromise of some kind has often to be
made. The purpose of these catalogues, however, apart from
encouraging the distribution of the best available reproduc¬
tions, is also to secure a steady improvement in their quality
and to co-ordinate their production.
The welcome these catalogues have received from teachers,
students and art lovers of all kinds is sufficient proof of their
usefulness. But they are perhaps most valuable to art pub¬
lishers themselves, because they indicate both the trend of
taste and the gaps that have to be filled. The latest volume,
for instance, includes a further thirty-six artists and among
these are numbered such important names as Soutine, Ensor,
Macke and Villon.
Other artists, hitherto insufficiently represented, are now
better served, both as regards the quality of the original and
the fidelity of the reproduction. In this way, each new edi¬
tion of the catalogue marks an appreciable advance on the
previous edition and represents a closer approximation to
the ideal catalogue in which the only thing that mattered
would be the choice of the artists and their works. If a
catalogue such as this could be developed to its limits, we
should have the "imaginary museum" of Malraux in which
each one of us hangs his own selection of pictures.
The universal popularity of colour reproduction means,
therefore, that it must be given a responsible place in our
artistic culture. Although too many attempts at reproduction
are disappointing or meretricious, it would be foolish to
condemn the principle or to deny its importance. It is more to
the purpose to assess from time to time what has been achiev¬
ed on the credit side, and this is what Unesco is trying to do.
Improvements in technique, competition between publishers
Maurice de
VLAMINCK. -
Cottage in Flan¬
ders. Reproduc¬
tion: New York
Graphic Society,
Greenwich, Con¬
necticut, U.S.A.
310.
Felice CAS O RA-
Tl. The Two
Sisters. Reproduc¬
tion: Istituto Geo¬
gráfico de Agos-
tini, Novara, Ita¬
ly, 4,500 lire.
mm*
1 M 1
r f\&J -J
\\V|
Hfefefc
22

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
Lyonel FEININGER. -
The Church of the Minorites.
Reproduction: Farm Journal,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
U.S.A. SI.
Giorgio de CHIRICO.
The Antique Era. Reproduc¬
tion: New York Graphic
Society, Greenwich, Con¬
necticut, U.S.A. S 5.
and, above all, the higher standards demanded by the pu¬
blic, as they become more and more familiar with museums
and exhibitions, are bound to result in constant improve¬
ment.
Some of the reproductions seem already to be of sufficient
merit to win the approval of the artists themselves, who are
ready to sign them as a token not only of the technical fide¬
lity of the reproduction, but also of its skill in recapturing the
very spirit of the original. Spiritual affinity of this kind
between the original and the reproduction cannot be achiev¬
ed automatically, as is commonly believed, by purely mecha¬
nical means. It calls for the hand of a skilful craftsman
constantly improving on his work by reference to the original,
and himself enough of an artist to experience the vision of
another as though it were his own, and sufficiently patient
and self-effacing to refrain from putting his own personal
stamp on the finished work. This accounts for the rela¬
tively high cost of such outstandingly good reproductions,
made by the pochoir process, and for the fact that there are
so few of them.
The classic methods of large-scale reproduction can, how¬
ever, give very good results if we are more fully aware
of their limitations and their possibilities. The exact
reproduction of colour cannot in itself recapture the special
atmosphere of a painting, which is due to the quality of its
lighting and of the materials used and to its own inherent
magic. Even though his style remains fundamentally the
same, every artist changes his manner, and this difference
of tone must be rendered by appropriate means.
To take a very simple example, while the precision and
directness of letterpress may reproduce the firm accents of
the early Monet, the velvety softness of offset will perhaps
give a better rendering of the modulation of a late work like
the Nymphéas, and the sonority of photogravure come clo¬
ser to the vibrant quality of the Argenteuil period. It is up
to the publishers to discover, as one critic recently put it, "the
process of colour reproduction best suited to a particular
work of art", and to unify and combine harmoniously the
successive renderings of photographer, engraver and printer.
The choice of inks and paper also plays a very subtle part.
The successes achieved carry on the tradition of fine crafts¬
manship in the service of art.
Modern paintings, with their pure, unequivocal colours
and simple texture are easier subjects for reproduction than
are old paintings, many of which are overlaid with varnishes
and shrouded in intermediate greys and browns which are
extremely difficult to render. In the last hundred years,
painting has turned resolutely to colour. There is no doubt
that black-and-white photography, however perfect it may
be, can no longer give us the essence of an Impressionist or
Fauvist painting, and still less of an abstract painting.
Colour reproductions help not only to spread a know¬
ledge of modern art but also to" make it better understood
and to assist its development. By freeing us from the
traditional prejudices of subject and form, which have been
given spurious credit by line-engraving and monochrome
photography, they help us to a better appreciation, in
painting, of the old chromatic harmony cultivated by certain
masters and certain schools and so long belittled for the
sake of an exclusive concentration on line, composition,
relief, and other values often having nothing to do with
painting pure and simple. The development of colour
reproduction ' also accounts for the present renaissance of
such powerful forms of art as stained glass and mosaic
work, and of forms so rich in influence as miniature paint¬
ing. We are returning to a civilization full of colour.
One comment already made deserves repetition. The
artists reproduced in colour are not academic painters but
the great creative geniuses of our time. The list of
distinguished names in this catalogue is striking evidence
both of the enlightened judgment of the experts and of
the spontaneous preferences of the public. In
spite of those who disparage modern art, and (Cont'd on
notwithstanding the thousands of artists now page 2 6)
23

MASTERPIECES
YOU CAN BUY
(Continued)
Marc CHAGALL. -
The Artist and his Model.
Reproduction: The Pallas
Gallery Ltd., London,
£ I2.2.6d.
Auguste RE
NOIR. Nude
in the Sun. Re¬
production: Kuns-
tanstalt Max Jaffé,
Vienna, S I 0.
Jean LURÇAT.
The Big Cloud.
Reproduction :
The Twin Edi¬
tions, Greenwich,
Connecticut,
U.S.A. S I 5.
24

Unesco Courier. N" 7. 1955
Joan MIRO. Mural
No. I. Reproduction: Es¬
ther Gentle Reproduc¬
tions, New York, S5.
Georges ROUAULT. -
Pierrot Junior. Repro¬
duction : Editions M. La-
courière, Paris, 27.000frs
Paul KLEE. Picture
Album. Reproduction :
The Twin Editions,
p-. < \ ,* .1 Greenwich, Connecticut,
1*»:' W-K U.S.A. S I 5.
Chaim SOUTINE. -
Portrait of a Boy. Repro¬
duction: New York Gra¬
phic Society, Greenwich,
Connecticut, U.S.A. S I 0.
25

Masterpieces you eau buy
WORKS OF ART IN SCHOOLS
FACTORIES AND HOMES
(Continued from page 23)
working, there is general agreement on a small and signifi¬
cant selection of modern masters. The reproductions dis¬
carded are generally laid aside because of their own defects,
and seldom because of shortcomings in the original, for aca¬
demic artists, even if they enjoy very powerful backing, rarely
find publishing firms willing to take the risk of reproducing
their work in colour.
There are now enough good colour reproductions available
for Unesco to contemplate organizing travelling exhibitions
in the near future to illustrate a given period, country, or
artist, or a particular theme. There is no need to dwell
on the educational value of collections of this kind since,
with masterpieces scattered all over the world, as they are
today, it is hardly possible to arrange comparable exhibi¬
tions of the originals, even in the most favoured centres.
By means of colour reproductions, the highest expressions
of art can be brought, in a form approximating very closely
to the original, into schools and factories, and to remote
communities or isolated homes where people do not yet enjoy
direct access to museums, exhibitions or private collections.
For connoisseurs, art-lovers and artists, these repro¬
ductions now provide the kind of introduction and training
once given by the engravings which had such a vogue both
north and south of the Alps from the late- fifteenth century
onwards, or by the countless copies of miniatures that
circulated both in the Orient and in the West throughout
the Middle Ages. Every age creates, out of reproductions,
its own fill of "imaginary museums", while, alongside, spring
up the ever new and ever unpredictable original masterpieces
of the creative artist.
CATALOGUE DE REPRODUCTIONS
EN COULEURS DE PEINTURES
I860 A 1955
CATALOGUE
OF COLOUR REPRODUCTIONS
OF PAINTINGS I860 TO 1955
CATALOGO DE REPRODUCCIONES
w EN COLOR DE PINTURAS
I860 A 1955
UNESCO PARIS
The " Catalogue of Colour Reproductions of Paint¬
ings I 860 to I 955 ", whose cover is reproduc¬
ed above, can be obtained from booksellers and
from Unesco National Distributors listed on page
34, price: S 3.50 ; I 6/-; 800 Fr. fr. A new and
revised edition of Unesco's companion volume
on old masters"Catalogue of Colour Reproduc¬
tions of Paintings Prior to I860" will be avail¬
able this year. Readers who wish to buy repro¬
ductions from another country can overcome
currency difficulties with "Unesco Coupons".
Information on how to obtain and use these
coupons can be obtained from the Unesco
Coupon Office, 19, Avenue Kléber, Paris (16*).
Karl HOFER. Girls Playin-
Cards. Reproduction : V e r I a (
F. Bruckmann, KG, Munich
Germany, DM50.
Rufino TAMAYO. Mandolins
and Pineapples. Reproduction: New
York Graphic Society, Greenwich,
Connecticut, U.S.A. S I 5.
26
