KING OF OCEAN GAME Is the tunny, (also called the "tuna") unique among the important food fishes of the world because it is a truly oceanic fish,
living, spawning and dying on the high seas. Scientists know little about tunny and their migratory habits, but what they do know suggests that here is
a group which may comprise ultimately the most important food fishery in the world, for they are distributed in commercially important quantities over
a greater area of the oceans than any other group of food fishes. Above, French tunny fishermen at work in the Bay of Biscay. Below, A giant tunny
being hauled aboard by Nova Scotia fishermen. Tunny fishing is a new, thriving industry in Eastern Canada. (Photos Black Star-Rapho and Acme)
12

AND THE SEA
The mystery of the sea:
"To me the sea is a continual miracle
the fishes that swim the rocks the
motion of the waves the ships with
men in them. What stranger miracles
are there?"
The challenge of the sea:
"Faithful to no race after the manner
of the kindly earth, receiving no
impress from valour and toil and self-
sacrifice, recognizing no finality of
dominion, the sea has never adopted
the cause of its masters like the land."
The men of the sea:
"The fishers shall mourn, and all
they that cast angle into the brooks
shall lament, and they that spread nets
upon the waters shall languish."
These words by Walt Whitman,
Joseph Conrad, and the prophet
Isaiah express the three aspects
of man's relationship with the sea that
surrounds him; our relative ignorance
of its character arid resources; our
difficulties in trying to exploit it for our
benefit; and the penalties we may have
to pay if we exploit it recklessly,
without thought or understanding.
These are the matters which concern¬
ed a recent international conference
called by the United Nations.
All over the world and right through
the year the conference table is in
action. Any problem which crosses an
international border may come to it.
These issues and the decisions which
are made affect and shape our lives.
Sometimes that may sound like a
pretty extravagant claim even though
it's perfectly true in every case if we
bother to trace the line from the
conference table to our own front door.
On this occasion, however, there's no
difficulty. This recent meeting was
held in Rome at the headquarters of
the United Nations Food and Agri¬
culture Organization (FAO).
Its subject is stated in rather formi¬
dable words: "An International Tech¬
nical Conference on the Conservation
of the Living Resources of the Sea." In
other words, a number of experts from
different countries got together to try
and make sure that we can continue to
get that fine fresh flounder for dinner
any time we feel like it. Which would
suggest that perhaps the fish in the sea
aren't as plentiful as we imagine or
at least that we're consuming them at
such a rate that a dangerous shortage
lies ahead.
In a sense that's the way it is. For
instance a British fisherman recently
told a U.N. reporter : "I've been work¬
ing on a British trawler in the North
Sea ever since I was a boy. I can re¬
member, just after the first world war,
we used to take an average of over 30
cwt of fish every day. These days we
think we're doing well if we take in an
average of 13 cwt. And that, mind you,
despite the fact that our fishing me¬
thods are better today."
Despite the fact? It is, perhaps,
more accurate to say because of the
fact. Dr. D.B. Finn, Director of the
Fisheries Division at FAO, describes
some recent developments in fishing
technique and relates them to the
matter of marine resources:
"Throughout early literature there
are many references to the inexhaust¬
ible bounty of the sea," he says. "And
indeed this opinion was shared by some
of the early naturalists. Nowadays
things are different. We can traverse
in a few days stretches of ocean that
formerly took us months and this
makes distant fishing grounds much
more accessible. We have' taken sub¬
marine-detecting devices and turned
them into fish-finding apparatus.
There is hardly a modern fishing vessel
afloat that does not have an echo-
sounding device for locating fish. We
now have the floating trawl, the Danish
seine, and immense nets that a few
years ago would have been impossible
to handle and experiments are under
way with an electrical method of flsh-
SEAFOOD ESSAY on dietary value offish is this
.Chilian schoolgirl's contribution to Government-
FAO eat-more-fish campaign. (U.N. photo).
ing which would even eliminate a hook
or a net.
"All this has led to an increase in
production. The most recent, and
more accurate, estimates of FAO in¬
dicate that it was about 27 million
metric tons in 1953. However, while it
is estimated that the sea could, overall,
produce more than it does there are
nevertheless places in it where the re¬
turn of fish caught no longer pays for
the effort put into fishing. And so it
is brought home that the resources of
the sea are not inexhaustible in the
economic sense. While it might be im¬
possible for man by his fishing effort
ever to exterminate fish he can, by
over-fishing, so reduce the take that it
no longer pays."
So what should be our approach to
the problem? Obviously we're not
going to abandon our very effective
modern techniques and return to the
idyllic methods of Isaac Walton who,
despite the title of his famous book,
was really a very incomplete angler.
Millions of people in the world need
more protein in their diet and they
HEAVY LADEN with a record catch of
sprats, a fishing boat ties up alongside the jetty
at Concarneau, Britanny. (Keystone photo.)
could get it from fish if we could
assure a continuing, cheap, and abund¬
ant supply.
One man who knows from spectacul¬
ar personal experience how valuable
the sea is as a source of food is Dr.
Alain Bombard of France. In 1952,
Bombard lived for weeks off raw fish,
the tiny living organisms called plank¬
ton, and even the salt water itself,
when he sailed in his open rubber raft
"The Heretic" all the way from Monaco
in the Mediterranean to Barbados in
the West Indies.
Speaking on a United Nations radio
programme a short time ago, Bombard
said: "The problem for me was can
you survive at sea with only the pro¬
ducts of the sea. And the results prove
that the sea can give you to drink and
to eat, and also a supply of vitamins."
Dr. Bombard's epic voyage made him
an expert layman as it were, on the
subject of fishing and marine resources,
and from what he says it may be ne¬
cessary to change the present pattern
of fishing, under which we still have to
hunt for fish. We may have to adopt
a pattern under which fish are deliber¬
ately and scientifically cultivated.
Bombard said: "At present fishing is
empirical but now we must go about
SEA HARVEST, glistening and wriggling,
is hauled aboard a deep sea trawler. Captain
opens the mouth of the big net. (USIS photo.)
13

SCIENCE AND THE SEA
(Continued)
it scientifically. Fishermen are just
like prehistoric men and animals
merely searching. We must cultivate
fish just as we breed cows, horses and
ducks. But the big difficulty is to
change the habits of men because fish
culture will kill the fisherman. You
must explain to him 'you must be now
no more a fisherman like a hunter in
prehistorical time but also a cultivator
a farmer.' That's difficult the most
difficult, I think. The scientists un¬
derstand well but the fisherman... my
goodness!"
But even if large-scale fish cultiva¬
tion is accepted as an ultimate objective
a lot of research will be necessary be¬
fore it can become a practical un¬
dertaking. And the same applies even
to the much more likely matter of
conserving the naturally developed
stocks of fish in the sea. At present we
simply lack sufficient knowledge of the
sea and its resources.
Tracking the tunny
Dr. Finn puts it like this: "Unfor¬
tunately there is far too little
knowledge among the fishery
biologists and scientists to make the
answer easy or in some cases even
possible. Great strides are being taken
in the development of this knowledge
by some countries. In others relatively
little attention is being paid to it. But
the fact that a specific fisheries refer¬
ence was given to FAO by its member
nations the first time in history that a
world-wide body has received such a
reference is a sign that more and
more attention is being paid to the
subject."
But what are some of the specific
lines of research that must be followed?
The migration habits of fish is one. We
know a lot about the migrations of
some species but in the case of the
tunny (or "tuna"), for instance, which
is perhaps the richest sea food of all,
the known facts are few.
One of the technical papers present¬
ed by Unesco at the Rome conference
was by the British hydrographer John
B. Tait. "The temperature of the sea,"
Dr. Tait says, "exerts marked and often
decisive influence on all fishes through¬
out their lives. It undoubtedly go¬
verns spawning and it has an effect on
the development and growth of larval
and baby fishes. Salinity the salt-
content of the sea is another influence.
It can affect not only the fish them¬
selves but the various marine organisms
on which they feed.
TV in the depths
r-j-t hen there are the currents of the
I sea both horizontal and vertical.
A They control the distribution of
temperature and other physical pro¬
perties of the sea on which all marine
life depends. They control the dis¬
persal of fish eggs and of the youngest
fishes before they are able to swim
under their own power. And there is
the bottom of the sea itself its struc- ,
ture and topography. Different species
of fish favour mud' bottoms, sandy
bottoms, and gravel bottoms. Because
14
of the technical difficulties involved in
observing fish near the .bottom we
have, in the past, been severely han¬
dicapped. But now, with the deve¬
lopment of under-water photography
and television, there is promise of great
progress in this aspect of marine in¬
vestigation."
Dr. Finn summarizes these and all
the other considerations in this subject
like this : "All these problems have
their technical and scientific side. It is
a matter first of trying to measure the
continuous forces which reduce a popul¬
ation of fish and then to contrast these
with the other continuous forces that
build up a population of fish."
One technical conference, of course,
is not going to find the answers to all
the problems. But there have already
been several conferences recently in¬
ternational organizations like the Pa¬
cific Science Congress and the Indo-
Pacific Fisheries Council have called
attention to the research that is still
needed, and especially to studies that
will increase the world's food supply
and there will be many more. And
between conferences all the time
practical research will continue to be
done by individual' scientists and
scientific organizations in many lands.
To help in this work the Natural
Sciences Department of Unesco has
now organized an Advisory Committee
on Marine Sciences and Mr. J.A. Mus-
sard, head of Unesco's Division of
Scientific Research, has described its
functions as follows: "One aim is to
establish a bridge between the different
disciplines involved in océanographie
research. The phenomena of the oceans
are of a physical character, also of a
chemical character, and there are
other disciplines like meteorology which
are also involved. And we think that
FRENCH FISHERMEN cleaning a sea bass.
These fish can grow to more than six feet in
length. Their livers are a rich source of
vitamins. (Office des Pêches Maritimes photo.)
some interesting results could be
achieved if the research which is being
carried through separately in these va¬
rious disciplines is co-ordinated.
"The second aim is to mobilize
science to find through scientific means
the solution of practical problems
which are being faced by the fisheries.
And the third aim of this programme
is to establish also a bridge between the
under-developed countries, which rely
very much on fisheries, but do not have
the scientific equipment to develop this
kind of research, and institutions in the
scientifically advanced countries which
could aid these underdeveloped lands."
.*-r¿
ICELAND IS SURROUNDED by some of the richest fishing grounds in the world. Photograph
shows salted cod, which has been cut and gutted aboard trawlers, drying in sun. (USIS photo)

Unesco Courier. N' S. 1955
A LARGE BARRACUDA caught on lines trail¬
ed by a cargo and passenger-carrying schooner
plying among the Grenadine Islands in the Carib¬
bean Sea. (Central Office of Information photo)
LOWERING A GIANT RAY Into an aquarium tank. These immense fish can weigh as much as
1,500 lbs. and have a span of up to 10 feet or more. Expert fishermen are employed to catch them
for aquariums. Contrary to general belief, the safest place to grab a sting ray is by the tail tipthe
stinger is near the root of the tail. If its tail, is held the ray cannot use its stinger. (USIS photo)
The Advisory Committee on Marine
Sciences, which held a preparatory
meeting in Rome early in May, will co¬
ordinate a co-operative, long term in¬
ternational research programme now
being prepared under Unesco's auspices.
This programme will include activities
such as the mapping of the ocean
bottom, study of the soils and sedi¬
ments there, analysis of the ocean
depths and waters in many areas,
knowledge of the temperature varia¬
tions and ocean currents, special cha¬
racteristics of the shallow waters in
bays and near rivers, the changes with
the seasons and with the weather.
Also to be studied are the conditions
governing plant growth, the types of
animal life at various locations, depths
and temperatures, the diseases and pa¬
rasites of plant and animal life, and
especially the methods for increasing
the resources of edible fish in accessible
areas and those nearest the great cen¬
tres of population.
Thus, when the Advisory Committee
meets for the first time in Tokyo next
October, its members are expected to
include specialists in physical and che¬
mical oceanography, marine biology,
geology, submarine topography and
maritime meteorology as well as in the
different kinds of oceans: arctic, ant¬
arctic, tropical and temperate seas, etc.
There is also a legal aspect of marine
conservation. In fact, the conference
on the conservation of marine resources
held in Rome stemmed from the need of
tho United Nations International Law
Commission for technical information
to help it in its work of codifying the
law of the high seas and of territorial
waters. Fishing rights have always
been a rather complicated legal matter
and history records numerous disputes
between countries over where and
where not their respective fishing fleets
may cast their nets.
THE PORPOISE is a friendly creature. Here at an oceanarium on the southern Californian coast
one of them is fed by hand. It appears to need no lessons in " showmanship " (Black Star photo)
Close to anarchy
One of the Law Commission's pro¬
posals is that an International
Fisheries authority should be es¬
tablished within the framework of the
United Nations. In its report to the
last General Assembly of the UN . the
Commission said: "The task of this
proposed authority would be to set up,
at the request of any interested state,
systems regulating fisheries in any.
given area of the high seas for the
purpose of protecting the fishing
resources of that area against waste
or extermination. There is an urgent
necessity for international legislation
on the conservation issue. This is
significant of the present state of opi¬
nion, and of the widely felt need for
the removal of what is considered by
many to be a condition approaching
anarchy.
So the prospects are hopeful both
for the survival of fish in the sea and
for all of us who like to have some on
our plate now and again. As Dr. D.B.
Finn has summed up the situation: "It
is quite within man's technical ability
to arrive at a state where he has suffi¬
cient knowledge to treat the sea as he
does his farm land. Then, instead of
hunting the wild stocks of the sea in a
random fashion, he will be able to ma¬
nage his take of the crop so that he
may achieve its full abundance."
15
