The film today
a world picture by James Douglas
Faced 'with ever-inci easing competition from the tele¬
vision screen, films have not yet suffered the
decline which many people forecast a few years
ago. By the use of new techniques, such as cine¬
mascope and by a greater concentration on the pro¬
duction of realistic documentary featurestwo .good
examples are "The Wages of Fear" and "On the Water¬
frontthe world film industry has managed success¬
fully to attract the same millions who have frequented
the cinema in the past.
However, in the field of feature film
production and distribution there
have been some significant changes.
Taking a world view it is abundantly
clear that the U.S.A. still continues to
dominate the motion picture field.
There are few countries today which
do not draw the bulk of the feature
films shown on their screens from
Hollywood. Generally speaking, it
would be true to say that most film
importing countries' in the world
obtain between 50 and 60 % of all
feature films shown in their cinemas
from the U.S.A. The impact on the
minds of millions of people produced
by what Hollywood thinks of history,
art and everyday life remains an
enormously important fact today.
Despite the U.S. predominance there has been, never¬
theless, a noticeable trend towards what might be term¬
ed a decentralization of the film production industry. In
the last few years Asia has come very much to the fore,
and in 1953 Japan produced no less than 302 feature films
some 00 less than the U.S.A. itself, thus jumping
ahead of India which until 1952 was the world's second
largest producer.
The Indian film industry, which is one of the largest
in the world, turned out 259 features in the same year.
Both Japanese and Indian features are now being shown
in European cinemas. One can visit a cinema in Greece,"
for example, and see a Japanese film spoken in Japanese
and carrying Greek sub-titles an unheard of thing a few
years ago. In the Far East the demand for films in Chi¬
nese has remained high, and to cater for this demand the
Hong-Kong film industry has, almost overnight, become
one of the world's largest.
In one three-month period in 1953 the seven film pro¬
duction companies in Hong-Kong made no less than 50
feature films. The year's total came to just over 200.
It cannot be said that Europe has lagged behind in the
production effort, and if the U.S. films shot in European
countries are taken into account (many have been made
in the past three years) Europe is found to be providing
a large proportion of the total world film production.
Italy, France, the United Kingdom and the Federal Repub-
THE " BIG EIGHT » OF
FEATURE FILM
PRODUCTION IN 1953
U.S.A.
Japan
"India
Hong Kong
Italy
U.K.
France
Germany Federal Republ
360
302
259
200
150*
138
111*
c 101
* Including co-productions
JAMES DOUGLAS has spent the past 20 years of his life in Infor¬
mation and news services, as editor, writer and journalist. He has
worked with the BBC, the British Foreign Office and the United
Nations. Certain facts and figures in this article will appear later
this year in a revised edition of Unesco's study "World Commu¬
nications-Press, Radio, Film, Television" which Is now being
prepared.
lie of Germany are the main producing countries but
interesting developments have also taken place in Norway,
Spain, the U.S.S.R., Greece and Turkey.
The Soviet Union has adopted the somewhat revolu¬
tionary step of bringing the entire Soviet .feature film
production output to the television screen. All films made
in the U.S.S.R. are automatically shown on T.V. With
a total of some 700,000 television receivers this may not
have a great effect at the moment, but with the rapid
growth of television the policy- may
have some important long-term con¬
sequences.
In Greece and Turkey there has
been a considerable upsurge in film
production, and the Greek quota has
more than doubled in the past two
years. Turkish studios ,put out some
100 features in 1954. In both coun¬
tries the popularity of the locally-
produced film has tended to diminish
the box office returns on foreign
features : Turkish and Greek cine¬
mas usually play to capacity audi¬
ences when domestic films are being
shown. NoAvay, a country which
until 1953 had made only a very
small number of films, turned out 12
new feature films in 1954. The Nor¬
wegian Government is lending a cer¬
tain amount of assistance to the local film producers and
this also applies in Spain where 44 features were produced
in 1953. Most of these were exported for exhibition in
Latin America.
Apart from films designed for entertainment, newsreels
are now being increasingly produced in Europe. Coun¬
tries such as Hungary, Finland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria,
Switzerland and Yugoslavia all produce their own
newsreels and the erstwhile monopoly of the U.S., French
and British newsreels has declined.
In Latin America there has been little change in film¬
making. Argentina and Mexico still remain the only two
countries turning out large numbers of feature films,
although Brazil has been producing a number of docu¬
mentaries and shorts. Argentina produced 39 features in
1953 and Mexico 99 in 1952. Both countries export most
of their output to the other republics in Central and South
America. One Mexican production, screened during
1954, drew larger audiences than any foreign film shown
in Mexican cinemas a surprising fact when one consi¬
ders the easy availability of U.S. films.
If we turn from film production to film exhibition it
can be a matter of little argument that cinemas generally
have improved, particularly so as regards seating, con¬
struction and visibility. This is pronouncedly the case in
Latin America. Guayaquil may not be a town well-
known to the average person it is in fact Ecuador's chief
port and industrial centre but it is of some interest to
note that a new cinema has just been opened there with
every modern facility and seats for 2,500 people. In
Venezuela 11 new cinemas were opened in 1954, and
owing to the big increase in popularity of European films
(Continued on page 14)
12

The film today (Continued)
a Venezuelan cinema- combine will be purchasing 80
European feature films for exhibition in .local cinemas.
In North America the United States has the immense
total of 17,000 permanent cinemas, 4,000 of these are
"drive-ins" where your seat is your motor car. No fewer
than ten million people can be seated at one time in all
U.S. cinemas a staggering figure. However, despite
these large totals some shrinkage has taken place, and
due primarily to increasing competition from TV, some
0,000 cinemas have closed down since 1940. .
On the other side of the 49th parallel 10 million more
Canadians are going to the cinema than was the case four
years ago. Whether this trend will continue in Canada,
where television has spread across the country from east
to west, it is difficult to say. Although Canada imports,
large numbers of U.S. features it also provides the best
overseas market for British films.
In Asia the increase in the number of cinemas has
also been remarkable. Japan has 3,750, India 2,000 and
countries such as Indonesia, Burma and the Philippines
have also shown marked increases. Perhaps, however,
the growth in cinema attendance has been most noti¬
ceable in the smaller territories where only a few years
ago permanent cinemas were a rarity. The Fiji Islands
with 30 cinemas and Guam with 10 are cases in point.
In common With the growth in the number of cinemas. .
in the smaller countries and territories goes the tremen¬
dous increase in the number of films imported. Trinidad
and Puerto Rico, to take two 'examples, both import some
2,000 feature films annually : an amazingly high figure
in relation to the population figures. Another case in
point is Singapore where the cinema attendance rate is
one of the world's highest. Singapore imports upwards
of 700 films annually.
Australia and New Zealand have also seen increases in
cinemas and attendances. By reason of the large influx
of European migrants into the two countries the demand
for the exhibition of European films has enlarged, with
the result that, in a limited manner, there is a new and
active competition to U.S. dominance.
The pattern of film attendance in European countries
has remained relatively stable with the exception of the
U.S.S.R. where latest reports speak of some 31,000 cine¬
mas of all types, with an annual attendance at an.
astronomical 2,000 million. A certain decline in atten¬
dance has been noted in Scandinavia, the Low Countries
and the U.K. In the latter country it is perhaps signi¬
ficant that the number of private cinema owners has
steadily diminished with the result that the great majority
of all U.K-. cinemas are controlled by the large cinema
circuits. Two large groups between them control over
one thousand cinemas.
The question of group cinema control and the conse¬
quent lack of independent choice in the exhibition of films
leads to another important aspect of the film industry :
the realm of the documentary and educational film.
The true documentary film was first conceived in Bri¬
tain in the early thirties by a brilliant group of people
working under Sir Stephen Tallents and John Grierson.
Since that time documentaries have spread throughout
the world and today few film-producing countries do not
make a quota of these films. With spread in production
there has also been a vast increase in exhibition. Britain
could, with justice, still be regarded as the main docu¬
mentary producer but the U.S.Av, Denmark, Canada,
France, the U.S.S.R., Poland and Czechoslovakia also turn
out large numbers. An interesting case is that of Canada
where the documentaries produced by the Canadian Na¬
tional Film Board are dubbed in five different languages
and exported throughout the world.
By means of the mobile film units, educational and
documentary films reach their audiences in the depths of
the jungle and the middle of the desert. In the. Belgian
Congo, Mozambique, the Cameroons and the Sahara the
mobile cinemas find their way into the smallest villages
(Continued on page 33)
GEORGE DEMENY, a long associate of Marey was interested in
phonetics and thought the deaf could learn to talk through photos of
speech. He developed the Phonoscope in 1891 decomposing the
movements of speech. (Photo shows him saying "Vive la France.")
It was a modified version of Marey's camera and a dozen other instru¬
ments. Concerned more with education than cinema technique, he
patented it without realizing its importance. He later developed
another camera which eliminated the jerks and tears of the film.
EARLY PANORAMIC SCREENS. The two strange-looking con¬
traptions shown here are early attempts at large screen projection.
The Cyclorama (above) by a Chicagoan named Chase was tried out
unsuccessfully in 1894 with a 150-foot circular screen. Mechanism
was on circular platform. The Cineorama (below) a multiple camera
device developed by a Frenchman Grimoin-Sanson two years later had
three performances before it was stopped as a fire hazard at the 1900
Paris Exhibition. Visitors were invited for an imaginary balloon flight
and a real balloon was attached to the platform where several hundred
spectators were grouped in centre of 300-foot circular screen. The
inventor, ruined by the police decision, abandoned the cinema forever
14

The fililí today (Continued from page 14)
and bring the film to millions every year. What is true
for Africa is also true for Asia and the Americas. China,
for example, has 1,200 teams touring the villages in the
interior of the country and giving educational film shows
before audiences. which may vary from a hundred or so
to a thousand. Afghanistan has just purchased three of
these mobile cinemas which carry out similar tasks in the
remote mountain villages.
In the last few years the educational film has become
an accepted part of the school curriculum in most coun¬
tries. In thousands of schools in Europe, Asia and the
Americas the film is an. integral part of the weekly work
in the classroom. Let us take one example which is in
its way typical of hundreds of others. The Latin Ame¬
rican Republic of. Peru has, since 1947, distributed. 150.
10 mm sound projectors to Peruvian primary and secon¬
dary schools throughout the country. In 1953 the number
of schools performances given amounted to 018 and the
number of pupils who attended to 128,000. There can be
little doubt that the effect of a new educational medium
on these 128,000 Peruvian scholars has been considerable.
From entertainment to education the world of the film'
has many facets. As the industry continues to progress
it must at the same time submit to change. These chan¬
ges are seen today in the shift in production emphasis
from the U.S.A. to Asia and Europe ; the evolution of new
techniques in the U.S.A. itself and the practically unli¬
mited spread of entertainment and educational films
throughout every part of the globe. The final challenge
of television may still lie in the future, but in the mean¬
time entertainment for the majority of the world's popu¬
lation means in simple terms "a visit to the flicks".
33
