A major
Unesco problem
ONE QUARTER OF THE EARTH
IS ARID
by James Swarbrick
One of the purposes of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization is to
improve the living conditions of man¬
kind through scientific research. Very
soon after Unesco was organized this
high purpose came down to earth as
the fact was faced that more than one
quarter of the land area of the earth
is able to support but a thin population
at a very low standard of living because
it lacks sufficient water.
The arid zone sweeps across the map
from the Atlantic across the Sahara in
North Africa into Arabia, Pakistan and
on across the great Gobi in China.
Another band runs north and south
close to the Pacific Coast almost from
Alaska to the tip of South America,
with only a wet gap in Central Ame¬
rica. A large part of South Africa is
arid, as is all but the eastern rim of
Australia. In all of them the problems
are similar if not the same.
They were, in fact, under attack in
many lands, but independently and
separately. Unesco's first action was a
survey of research already in progress
which resulted in a directory of almost
100 research institutions, devoted at
least partly to aridity, in 23 countries
and this did not include the Soviet
nations which were not then members
of Unesco. The survey also showed
that most of the research was
concentrated in those countries that
were arid only in part, like the United
States, and thus had enough wealth
from their rich areas to support
research. The wholly arid countries,
which needed it most, could not afford
it. Clearly joint international action,
which would focus many special
sciences on the problem, offered the
only solution and, if successful, would
benefit the arid lands everywhere.
Hidden waters
What Unesco attempts to achieve
through its arid zone programme
is to stimulate an awareness in
all countries of the aridity problem, to
foster research directed towards its
solution, and to spread the knowledge
needed to apply the results of research
to common use. The work is conducted
under the guidance of an "Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research",
with nine members who come from dif¬
ferent countries and who are experts
James SWARBRICK is in charge of Unesco's Arid Lands
Programme and is secretary of the Unesco Advisory
Committee on Arid Zone Research. A specialist in
chemistry, he was formerly a science officer with the
British Council.
in the different sciences involved. The
Committee sessions are attended by
representatives of the United Nations,
of the Specialized Agencies that have
arid zone interests, (such as the Food
and Agriculture Organization, the
World Health Organization and the
World Meteorological Organization)
and of some international organizations
of scientists and engineers, such as
the International Union of Geography
and the World Power Conference.
One great- problem common to all
arid areas is the lack of water. This
may be absolute, because no rain or
very little rain falls, or it may be rela¬
tive, because what rain does fall is not
available to support a utilizable vege¬
tation. So in some arid areas the
problem is to find water supplies, and
in others the population must be pro¬
tected against drought, and planned
use made of what water there is.
When rain falls on the ground, some
of it remains in the upper levels of the
soil and either is used by plants or is
evaporated. Some of the rain, however,
sinks into the earth, where it may be
drained away by streams and rivers, or
it may remain underground, travelling
very slowly through permeable rocks.
If these rocks can be reached from the
surface by boring, then the water can
be lifted by pumps and used for drink¬
ing purposes and for irrigating the
soil; or, if the water-bearing rock is
between two impermeable strata, the
water will gush out as an artesian well.
Rainfall in arid areas, though defi¬
cient, often results in floods which
cause erosion, since the water loosens
and carries away with it the upper soil
later. Thus not only is the water
wasted but the land is impoverished.-
The damming of rivers and the building
of reservoirs to impound flood water
are thus imperative. At the present
time India leads the world in irrigation
from rivers, but the planned develop¬
ment of river resources advances wher¬
ever rivers flow through arid areas.
Evaporation from the surface of
impounded water can represent a seri¬
ous loss in arid areas. The construc¬
tion of deeper reservoirs with less
surface is one way of reducing the loss.
A more radical solution is to allow the
water to seep underground through
specially prepared percolation beds and
store it there to be pumped up as
required.
If an economic method could be
devised whereby the salts could be
removed from sea-water and from salty
underground water which is all too
frequently found, perhaps the greatest

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
Unesco has just completed a
special film entitled " Beni-
Abbes Science in the De¬
sert " which shows the
work of a desert research
station in the south Alge¬
rian desert. This film will
be available in October.
Here nomad caravan sets
off on dusty desert journey.
ç?^^*
-"**.,. '*-&*
'*,"'mi iSSfc*';
**%,', ,-"á ¿*
'
single step would have been taken
towards desert reclamation. Unesco is
now giving this problem special atten¬
tion. The map of the world's deserts
(page 8) shows that many of them
lie along the coasts, especially the west¬
ern coasts of the continental land
masses. The coastal deserts of Chile
and Peru are extreme examples. With
the sea in sight, water has to be
brought by pipe line or even by railway
tank cars from the other side of the
Andes. But so far no process has been
discovered to remove that salt from sea
water at a cost that permits the large-
scale utilization of fresh water. An¬
other possibility of increasing water
supply is to provoke rainfall artificially.
In recent years much research has been
devoted to it, with considerable
success but with no certain method
yet established. (See page 51.)
A problem secondary only to that of
water supplies in arid areas is the
provision of energy. It is needed for
pumping water, for domestic and farm
use, for industry, for the exploitation
of mineral wealth. It is needed above
all to remove the pressure that exists
in all arid areas to cut down trees and
shrubs for fuel. People whose imme¬
diate need is firewood do not take
willingly to conservation.
The prevention of the spread of
deserts is at least as important as the
reclamation of areas which have been
deserts for thousands of years. Land
on the fringes of deserts is in a very
delicate equilibrium, and unless great
care is exercised in using it, and especi¬
ally in cultivating it, this equilibrium
will be upset and the desert will
inexorably march on.
Dew-fed plants
The methods of preventing erosion
are now well known. They include
contour ploughing, the setting up
of wind breaks, the prevention of floods,
and above all scientific knowledge of
what a given area can and cannot
produce. Unfortunately these methods
are not always applied.
It is Unesco's purpose to guide and
correlate the many researches in all
these fields that are under way in a
score of countries and to make sure
that advances in knowledge in any
field and in any country are shared by
other research men throughout the
world. The Advisory Committee on
Arid Zones Research meets twice a year
for a detailed discussion of research
progress. Once a year one of the
topics is stressed as a subject of a
general symposium to which scientists
of the world are invited. The next
symposium will be held in Australia in
October 1955 and will be devoted to the
study of climate. In previous years the
meetings have been devoted to hydro¬
logy (the study of water supply) at An¬
kara in Turkey in 1952, on plant ecology
at Montpellier in France in 1953 and on
wind and solar energy at New Delhi,
India in 1954.
The Committee also authorizes a
number of general projects such as the
drawing of accurate maps of conditions
in arid lands. Funds are also allocated
for special research projects such as the
one on the physiology of the camel
(reported on page 28) and the study of
the role of dew in providing moisture
for plant growth, made by Prof. S. Duv-
devani of the Hebrew University in Je¬
rusalem. Prof. Duvdevani found that
certain plants can draw water from
dew through their leaves into the roots
and even into the soil for storage.
The Unesco Arid Zone Committee
also supports international meetings
that are sponsored locally. For in¬
stance, in the spring of 1955 the
Committee met with and assisted the
American Association for the Advance¬
ment of Science in the programme of
its International Arid Lands Meetings
at Albuquerque and Socorro, New
Mexico. This , series of meetings was
attended by nearly 500 scientists from
28 countries and by a large number of
farmers and business men from the
arid area of the southwestern United
States. In November of 1955 Unesco
will collaborate in a world meeting on
Applied Solar Energy at Phoenix,
Arizona, USA.
In addition, other departments of
Unesco are active in promoting the
interests of arid lands. The Exchange
of Persons Service annually awards a
number of fellowships to enable persons
from the arid lands to travel abroad
for training in new techniques and for
an exchange of information and expe¬
rience. So also the Technical Assis¬
tance Department of Unesco is able to
respond to requests from its member
states for assistance in projects of arid
zone development.
Thus a geophysical institute has been
established in Pakistan and a hydro-
geological institute in Turkey. A Unes¬
co mission is working in Mexico to
establish a research institute on atmos¬
pheric physics and hydrology with a
view to increasing the rainfall and
better control of the waters that fall.
Peru has asked for assistance in estab¬
lishing an institute for research in
Peruvian desert conditions. Other ex¬
perts have been sent to the Desert
Research Institute at Heliopolis in
Egypt to assist in extending its work,
and a survey of wind energy has been
carried out in Israel.
Deserts of stone
The residents of large cities are often
unconcerned about the desert and
do not realize that the cities are
themselves deserts of stone where no
food is given and water is spent largely
in sanitation. But to the people of one
fourth of the earth the lack of water
and the many related topics that have
been mentioned are basic to life itself.
While active research is in progress
much could be done if the media of
public education and information were
used to encourage the residents of dry
lands to apply the best of present
knowledge to their own farms and
communities and thus to advance the
conquest of the desert.
UnescoVGeneral Staff"
in the battle against the
desert the nine-man
Unesco Advisory Com¬
mittee on Arid Zone Re¬
search. Front row (L to
R) Dr. Georges Aubert,
soil scientist, France ;
Dr. B.T. Dickson, plant
pathology and plant in¬
troductions, Australia;
Mr. J. Swarbrick, Unes¬
co ; Back row (L to R) ;
Dr. Gilbert F. White,
geographer, U. S. A. ;
Prof. H. O'R. Sternberg,
geographer, Brazil ; Prof.
R. E. G. Pichi-Sermolli,
botanist and plant ecolo-
gist, Italy ; Dr. Soubbi
Mazloum, hydrologist,
Syria ; Dr. Herbert Gree¬
ne, soil scientist, United
Kingdom ; Mr. S.N. Naq-
vi, meteorologist, Pakis¬
tan. (Unesco photo.)
