New Year cards down the ages
Medieval New Year greetings cards drawn
by nuns behind convent walls are a
far cry from most modern card designs,
but thoughts and wishes are still the same.
(1) During the past five years, the Uni¬
ted Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has
seen the annual sale of its greetings cards
rise from I 30,000 to three millions. Drawn
and donated between 1950 and 1954 by
artists like Raoul Dufy and Henri Matisse,
and for 1955 by Antonio Frazcati and
Edy Legrand, greetings cards have enabled
UNICEF to help children in many lands.
(2) "A good year and good health" are the
wishes of Savignac, a French artist in his
personal "weight lifter" card. (3) Medi¬
eval woodcut: The infant Jesus brings
gifts in the New Year ship. (4) Scissors in
hand, this little journalist brings wishes
from a Swiss newspaper clipping service.
(5) Concertina card by two American
artists spells out Peace. (See next page)
UNICEF
V»"9 èt^^-t)S^titci<yc%tv^\tÇjivfj
1 Graphis " Zurich
bE k-

New Year cards
by Françoise Christiaen
(Cont'd)
The earliest New Year cards come
from the convents of medieval
Europe. There tne nuns De6<*<-i ><o
send New Year greetings to their fami¬
lies, living in the world outside. They
were very personal cards, hand painted,
the product of hours of patient work,
and always religious in inspiration. At
that time the Church celebrated
Christ's birthday and the New Year on
one and the same day, December 25, so
the cards would often picture the
Christ-child born to bring joy into the
coming year.
Sometimes the Child was begging to
be admitted to the hearts of men, some¬
times he came as the bearer of small
gifts which the nuns included with
their cards. As her New Year's message
one nun wrote: "I send my dear father
a little honeycomb with lavender, a
blood-letting bandage and a painted
Christ with his happy New Year".
Sometimes the gift was gingerbread,
sometimes a small box supposedly
containing a "salve of patience".
A nun might design a Christmas
rose and add a text: "He who desires
this rose must also suffer the thorns",
or she might draw a New Year clock
and enclose the wish that "all the
hours of trouble in the coming year
may end in the noon of joy".
New Year cards did not stay behind
convent walls for long. Soon the nuns'
greeting cards were being widely copied
throughout . the medieval world. Dur¬
ing the Reformation, New Year cards
lost some of their following but they
re-emerged in the 18th century larger,
more secular and more popular than
before. An Italian card of the period
pictures a Utopian world. Streams
flow with milk and honey, dinner tables
abound with every type of delicacy,
precious stones and magnificent clothes
lie at hand. There is everything that
one could desire in the New Year. Only
the prison seems at first to strike a
discordant note, but it is intended for
the man who tries to work in the per¬
fect Utopian New Year world.
A Viennese card of a century later
shows a harassed burgher of the city
surrounded by a crowd of well-wishers.*
It turns out that the well-wishers are
also , creditors, presenting the burgher
with bills as well as the season's greet¬
ings. As he receives the good wishes
the burgher is forced to dip into his
purse and pay his debts. His New Year
is thoroughly miserable.
Working men in the 19th century
began to send New Year cards that
advertised their various professions. A
news vendor might add the news of
war and peace, tell of a disaster at
home or abroad; include the weather
forecast and other informative tit bits.
School children began to use the New
Year card to show off their newly ac¬
quired skill in writing.
Some cards of the period resembled
valentines with love boughs, bouquets
of flowers, possibly a young couple and
a romantic poem. Like the valentine
these New Year greetings were sent
anonymously. Not all the 19th century
cards were so tender. A German card
shows a group of middle aged women
ignoring an immaculately dressed
dandy who represents the New Year.
The women are determined to remain
unaware of the dandy's existence and
their own advancing age.
England claims to have produced the
first true Christmas card. It was
designed in 1843 by John C. Horsley and
reads: "A Merry Christmas and Happy
New Year to You". The card shows a
family gathered round their Christmas
table, glasses raised as if to toast the
season. Though some people criticized
this first Christmas card, suspecting it
of "encouraging drunkenness", it start¬
ed a new fashion and brought an end
to the supremacy of the New Year
Card.
But this does not mean the medieval
tradition is lost. In many countries
the New Year is still the occasion
when gifts and greetings are exchang¬
ed.
And even where Christmas Day and
Christmas greeting cards are accorded
first importance no true, self-respect¬
ing Christmas card will ignore its
older more venerable, ancestor and
omit a New Year wish.
