ON THE MARCH
Mrs. ALVA MYRDAL, recently ap¬
pointed Swedish Minister to India,
Burma and Ceylon, is a leading authority
on women's rights. Born in Uppsala,
she founded, and for twelve years direct¬
ed, the Swedish Training College for
Pre-School Teachers. She joined the
Secretariat of the United Nations in
1949 as Principal Director of the
Department of Social Affairs. For the
past four years Mrs. Myrdal has been
Director of the Department of Social
Sciences in Unesco. Mrs Myrdal is the
author of several important sociological
works. Her most recent book, " Wo¬
men's Two Lives", written with Viola
Klein, will be published next year.
UNESCO
On a visit to Japan a few years ago a Tokyo newspaper
asked me to compare Japanese women with those of
my own country Sweden. I remember answering
that the main difference was that the women of Japan
were advancing at a much more rapid pace. So rapid in
fact that it was hard to foresee how the new Japanese
Woman would ultimately shape her own future.
Japan has been telescoping into the short space of a few
years changes that have been going on in the West for
a century or more. Before 1945 Japanese women had no
civil rights. They could not vote or own property ; their
husbands were often chosen for them by others, and they
could not seek divorce whatever the circumstances. Tra¬
ditionally their role was one of complete inferiority to men.
'A DOG, A WOMAN, A WALNUT TREE, the more you beat them the better they be, ran
the old adage which men supported with laws establishing the inequality of the sexes. After a long
struggle, women in many lands have won the right to equality in all fields of human endeavour.
By 1950 some 15 million women had registered at the
noils. In January 1953 Japanese women's organizations
totalled almost seven million members. And today many
women are entering new careers in industry, commerce, the
government and diplomatic service and the liberal profes¬
sions.
Ours is an age of rapid, drastic changes. Almost no¬
where can we still find the calm and tranquility of the past
when life continued unmodified for generation after genera¬
tion. Everywhere today there is stirring and movement, if
not unrest. Even in those countries where women seem,
outwardly at least, to be an immobile, voiceless mass, the
influences working upon them and the images entering
their minds are new and different. And these must be
having some effect and must be causing
some stir or agitation.
But is this ferment of new ideas a
creative, positive thing, or is it no more
than a form of restlessness? Is it being
organized and directed into some kind of
pattern which we can recognize as pro¬
gress? Or is it just leading to disorgani¬
zation! disintegrating the world of
women without giving them a better life
in return?
Whatever our opinion may be about
what is occurring today, one thing seems
clear to me: It is impossible for any so¬
ciety today to call itself advanced or to
embark on the road to technological
advancement and at the same time con¬
tinue to maintain women in their old
inferior roles.
That a tremendous change is taking
place in the role of women all over the
world would hardly seem like big news
to a Westerner. Apart from interna¬
tionally-known figures like Mrs. Eleanor
Roosevelt, Mrs. Pandit and some famous
writers and scientists, the modern type
of woman is taken pretty much for grant¬
ed in the West. Since the early "eman¬
cipation" period of the 1900's when the
"blue stocking" was greeted with a smirk
£ *Mr**JU~ fimtoj*

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 1955
or a lifted eyebrow, the West has travelled a long way. Today
the successful career woman, the top executive, the woman
Member of Parliament, the woman lawyer, doctor or scientist
is no longer a novelty. She is accepted in a matter-of-fact
way and treated like any other colleague.
To me this fact is so important that I would put it at the
top of the list of major contemporary achievements in what
we commonly call the Western world. But it also applies to
countries in Eastern Europe, and to a lesser extent, to others
in Asia such as India where the Minister of Health, Rajku-
mari Amrit Kaur, for example, is judged not as a woman but
on the quality of her work as an official.
Although women have practically achieved equal rights
with men in the advanced countries, there are still quite a
number of "buts" and "ifs" to be taken into account. Ne¬
vertheless there can be little doubt that
the inequalities that still persist, parti¬
cularly those affecting women's civic and
economic rights, will be largely eliminat¬
ed in time.
It will take much longer though to
change public opinion. People cling to
old ideas even after these have ceased to
correspond to the facts for many years.
This explains why public opinion polls on
women, including the replies given by
women themselves, are so disheartening.
Thoughtless repetitions of old, time-worn
opinions ("A woman's place is in the
home!" "A woman shouldn't continue to
work after having children") figure pro¬
minently beside the more considered
views of those who check their "opinions"
with another compartment in their brain
which has accepted women's role in
employment as well as in the home.
Dangerous old idea
This is particularly dangerous in that
it perpetuates the idea that mother¬
hood and full partnership in eco¬
nomic and civic life are completely
irreconcilable when the facts prove they
are not. The present lifespan of women
in the industrialized countries now
averages more than 70 years. This
means that a girl who marries between
20 and 25 can look forward to some
50 more years of life. This leaves her
time both for a period of motherhood
(usually though not necessarily some¬
what shorter now than in grandmother's
time since she has fewer children), and
for a period of employment and com¬
munity activity (no shorter than for men
and unmarried women in grandfather's
time).
But let us glance at other parts of the
world. The problems and the prospects
are not the same, but the signs of pro¬
gress are just as marked. From my
personal observations abroad on behalf
of Unesco and from the studies which
Unesco itself has instigated, I have ga¬
thered deep impressions of the rapid
progress being made in respect of
women's rights in countries where mo¬
dernization and industrialization are in
full swing. Japan, which I have already
mentioned, Pakistan and the Arab
World are cases in point.
While in these countries neither the
prolongation of life nor the general level
of education have as yet brought all women to a new
phase of development, a new type of woman is visibly
and forcibly emerging. Relatively small in number, groups
of these women today form a nucleus of female
leadership. They have already enjoyed secondary schooling
and many even a university education. They are now receiv¬
ing training for participation in community and other civic
activities on a volunteer basis. Although this, of course, has
definite shortcomings in comparison with work in officially
recognized positions, it has given women more of an
opportunity than most men have to learn businesslike me¬
thods and efficiency in organization. Their reliability and
honesty will make them definite political assets to their coun¬
tries, once they become fully accepted.
Although their present rate of progress Is as spectacular as
that of their sisters in the more developed countries, their
problems are not the same. They still have to be fully in¬
tegrated into their national society. However, they seem to
have been able to find a key to the combination of mo¬
therhood and a socially active life. It is a remarkable fact
indeed that most of these women leaders are married and
mothers of children, unlike the leaders of the "suffragette"
movements earlier in the century in western Europe.
Their principal problem is the need to share their own ad¬
vances with other women in the poorer strata of society, who
outnumber them enormously. This problem was examined
this year in the Lebanon at a conference of 40 women leaders
from five Arab countries.
Their most immediate practical concern was how to reach
Lund Hansen, Copyright Rapho
DENMARK'S 'MOTHER-OF-NINE' MINISTER. Mrs Lis Groes, Denmark's Minister of Commerce
is not the first Danish woman cabinet minister, but she is the first to combine the job of caring for a
family of nine children and disposing of affairs of state. There is not much time to relax during
her working day which often starts at seven and ends late at night. Above, Mrs Groes strolls in her
garden with the children. Below, she takes afternoon coffee her husband and the family.
the women of the villages for joint work, so as to make their
needs serve as a guide for social reforms, bringing education
to them and opening employment opportunties at all levels in
the economy.
Another problem, which is as yet perhaps not sufficiently
sensed by women in countries where economic development is
going forward with rapid strides, is the need to avoid making
the transition from old to new in such a precipitate way that
national cultural characteristics and values are lost. It is
not merely sufficient to borrow a number of new patterns
from countries which have already '"arrived."
The "westernization" of women's dress, home (Cont'd on
furnishings and decoration is one example. Each page 8)

M^ilÄ^:
N.Y. Scace Commission Against Discrimination
BUS DRIVER (U.S.A.)
Copyright Paul Almasy
HORSE TRAINER (France)
Copyright CO.!. London
ARMY DRIVER (Great Britain)
British Embassy, Paris
ARMY BAND LEADER (Great Britain)
USIS
RAILWAY WORKER (U.S.A.)
Copyright Paul Almasy
ART STUDENT (Japan)
Cartier Bresson, Copyright Magnum
BUS CONDUCTOR (Great Britain)
Copyright Paul Almasy
RADIO ANNOUNCER (Andorra)

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 1955
Copyright Louise de Bea
ARCHITECT (France)
David Seymour, Copyright Magnum
BALLET MISTRESS (Italy)
Copyright Paul Almasy
DENTIST (Norway)
Jean Marquis, Copyright Magnum
POLICEWOMAN (Hungary)
USIS
FACTORY WORKER (U.S.A.)
Copyright Paul Almasy
LAWYER (France)
1
N^ll
1 ¡t Jk
T
Y
I ^'WL jsájk
\JÊ
Kryn Taconis, Copyright Magnum
THEATRE PRODUCER (Italy)
Homer Page, Copyright Magnum
AIR HOSTESS (Mexico)

WOMEN ON THE MARCH
(Continued from page S)
culture has its own sense for colours, forms and textures, as
well as for their harmonization with each other. This sense
has been conditioned by long training, together with a
wealth of remaining environmental impulses. It is hardly to
be expected that a woman trained and conditioned in one
particular culture can utilize things from an alien culture
and do so with the mastery which spells perfection. The East
cannot compete with the West in tailored suits and mahogany
furniture, nor can the women in the West expect to compete
with her Indian sister in wearing a sari. The world just now
requires all the cultural assets which it has, and what it does
not need is the pauperization of these assets in the name of
uniformity.
Both the United Nations and Unesco have been active for
many years in efforts to promote respect for Women's Rights
throughout the world.
When the United Nations was created in 1945 it proclaimed
in its Charter "'faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women". Since then the U.N. has been in¬
strumental in ensuring that tens and tens of millions of
women throughout the world were granted an elementary
right which had been denied them before, participation in
the civic affairs of their country.
As early as 1946, the United Nations set up its Commission
on the Status of Women which it charged with the monu¬
mental task oí surveying the political, economic, civil,
10,000,000 U.S. WORKING
WIVES TAKE HOME PAY CHECKS
In most countries nursing has long been a traditional woman's occupation
though it only became an exacting profession requiring long training and
special qualifications less than a century ago. The American nurses, right,
are however a relatively minor group of the " women at work " in their
country where over 20,000,000 are employed in the various branches of
the nation's economy. That nearly half9,250,000are wives is explained
by the fact that people are getting married much younger and husbands do
not always earn enough to buy the automobiles, food freezers, television
sets and other things by which modern standards of living in the U.S.A.
are set. The future of U.S. women who want to work seems rosy. The
U.S. Secretary of Labour recently declared: "The demand for women's ser¬
vices will continue to grow. They will be asked to fill new jobsjobs
they have had little opportunity of filling until today."
usis

social and educational status of women in all countries. The
basic feature of its work and the one which has been marked
witn the most forthright success has been its campaign to
gain universal recognition of women's right to vote and enjoy
political rights on an equal footing with men. In December
1952, an International Convention on the Political Rights of
Women was opened for signature (40 countries have now sign¬
ed) ; the Convention entered into force in July 1954, 22 count¬
ries now having ratified it.
The U.N. is continuing its work on a two-fold plan: firstly, ,
through a painstaking survey of present legal provisions in
order to draw attention to the many flaws and loopholes in
the protection of women's rights. Secondly, through a
progress report made public each year with the backing of
the General Assembly to act as a kind of public opinion
group" on recalcitrant states.
In field after field this international clarification of the
issues has taken place, resulting in a whole series of infor¬
mative reports which present the real situation today on a
married woman's right to her own nationality, on the right
to own property in her own name, to her right (surprisingly
often trampled under foot) to custody over her own children.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) has dealt with
the problems of equal pay for equal work, working conditions
for women and opportunities for vocational education.
As for Unesco itself, it has devoted its efforts to trying to
improve the status of women by drawing attention to the
progress or lack of progress achieved in woman's access to
education, and by undertaking special investigations into the
complex factors which either hinder or favour woman's
progress.
In addition to general statistical surveys and
reports on educational opportunities for women ' °" on
made yearly in collaboration with the Interna- next page)

WOMEN ON THE
MARCH (Cont'd)
Lost homes and lost husbands
tional Bureau of Education in Geneva, Unesco has investi¬
gated the educational opportunities of women in three widely
differing countries, Chile, India, and Yugoslavia (published
as "Women and Education").
Of considerable importance are the series of investigations
now being made into the deep-seated social taboos which
work against a more speedy acceptance of the true equality
of women and hence against the full utilization of "woman
power" by particular countries. Unesco has helped to orga¬
nize comparative studies on such matters as the trials and
tribulations of women's participation in the political life of
Europe (see page 21); of the inherent traditional obstacles
to woman's access to education in Japan, Mexico, and Pakis¬
tan; of the active part played by women in local communities
in Southern Asia.
Many of these studies have as yet not been published, but
all of them contain challenging and often entertaining in¬
formation. As Professor Maurice Duverger, author of
Unesco's "The Political Role of Women" which has just been
published writes: "There is no more an inferior sex than
there are inferior races or inferior classes. But there is a
have been expected to react in this way and have not been
drawn into the process of change and development.
Let us take the story of Jinja in the Uganda. Here, the
installation of a giant electric power station at Owen Falls
on the Nile sparked a process of extremely rapid industriali¬
zation. Elements of the time-worn methods of agriculture
were cleared from the town and a seething new life began to
stir. There was plenty of work, but for every seven men
employed there was only one woman. For these men work
meant abandoning their home life for barrack-like construc¬
tions with western-type collective services and sanitation.
Revolt against male authority
Mrs. Rhona Sofer, in her report on this question to the
UNEsco-sponsored symposium at the World Population
Conference in Rome last year described households in
Bukesa the most urbanized centre, as having no adult
females and only 4% with childrenone child each. "The
IN EVERY FIELDFROM
WELDING TO SCULPTURE
More than 2,080,000 women are
employed in scientific, cultural or
teaching institutions of the Soviet
Union. About 77,000 are doing scien¬
tific work. There are more than a
million women teachers in primary
and secondary schools. Women tech¬
nicians and engineers number more
than half a million. Women play an
important role in politics: 348 are
deputies in the U.S.S.R. Supreme
Soviet. Russian women doing widely
different jobs are (from left to right)
Lyda Pyshkina, electric welder at the ;
Black Sea port of Odessa; Raïssa
Sataïeva, head of a Ukrainian
hospital (left), Vera Solista, hospital
matron ; and Ekaterina Belachova,
renowned Soviet sculptor, working
on a bust of Alexander Pushkin.
Official Soviet Photos.
sex, and there are classes and races who have come to believe
in their inferiority because they have been persuaded of it in
justification of their subordinate position in society."
The close relation between economic change and women's
"emancipation" (which has been the main theme of this
article) makes it quite important to discover women's role in
the very earliest stages of economic development. Astonish¬
ingly little knowledge exists on this subject; and it would
almost seem as if previous economic studies of industrializ¬
ation had had a blind spot as far as women were concerned.
Unesco has, therefore, just begun an extensive field study on
the emergence of the first leaders among women in West
Africa. This may help to throw light on some of the para¬
mount problems.
Do they hinder social change ?
For example, do women tend to slow down the processes
of social change? Do they, like the old people, remain
in the safety and security of the village when their
adventurous menfolk go elsewhere to seek new employment?
Is it the women who refuse to give up the old and proven
ways of housekeeping, agriculture and medicine rather than
accept improvements? Are they the ones who cultivate
superstitions and fear the light of fact and reason?
To a certain extent women have come to represent the
status quo, and to act as deterrents to change because they
urban wife," she added, "finds herself without the functions
that gave her status in the traditional system", and is unable
to guide her children into the new mode of living. Most
Africans in Jinja today find that their early indoctrination
and social training have not equipped them to deal with the '
pattern of living with which they are now confronted.
So, the result of economic advancement is an urban life in
a collectively-organized male society where the men are or
consider themselves bachelors, while the women are either
left behind or are in revolt against the traditions of paterna¬
lism. Once they come to town, women strongly resist their
husbands' desire to make them subordinate with the result
that, as Rhona Sofer reports, "the area has many disaffected
women who have left their husbands". Thus, backwardness
and disorganization appear to be the only alternatives open '
to women in this particular transition period.
At the same conference, however, a very different story
was told by Mrs. Yonina Talmon-Garber about Israeli
collective farm communities. There it is quite frequent that
women even women from African territories return from
Work to their homes and their children with new techniques
and ideas because they are given independent jobs. Similar
experiences to those recorded in Israel have been reported
by anthropologists and sociologists about specific situations
in Africa where care has been taken to provide women with
meaningful tasks and varied social contacts.
Evidence from social scientists, although only sporadic as
10

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 1955
yet, does indicate therefore that women could fill the role of
true innovators and agents for introducing change. They
have the opportunity of bringing new ways of doing things,
with which go new lines of thought, directly to the place
where it is of most importance the home. Here, where the
influence extends throughout all members of the household
the mother is strategically placed for inducing social changes.
Unesco has, hitherto, in its work for fundamental educa¬
tion, and in more formal schooling work, proceeded on the
hypothesis of "no distinction between the sexes". Per se
this a laudable objective. But the social scientists are now
wondering whether it might not pay to blueprint a new kind
of development programme, with greater effect and advantage
to all, which would be channelled much more directly through
women.
It would mean equating new reforms to the actual pattern
of day-to-day life, to the demands of consumption, to
people's needs, and then letting it grow from these funda¬
mental factors until it encompasses the entire economic life.
The transformation of the social economy would then come
about as a result of changes in the household economy, and
not, as nearly always is the case, by increasing productivity
and leaving the lives of human beings to adapt as best they
can.
Of course, women are adaptable and will adjust themselves
according to de¬
mands. They can
ensure that the
introduction from
outside the home
of new conditions
and a new way
of life does not
cause too much
harm to the in¬
dividual human
beings. But there
are many signs
now that they
would wish to
give form and
substance them¬
selves to new
ways of life, and
not merely play a
passive role; they
would rather be
partners in the
great process
which is now re¬
shaping human
society; they are
ready to march
forward and en¬
sure that pro¬
gress is really
progress and not
simply change.
It is questions
such as these
which will one
day find a place on the agendas of meetings of the U.N. and
the Specialized Agencies. To take some examples : How
can technical assistance be utilized so as to bring women's
as yet largely dormant capacities into play for raising the
people's living standards? How can fundamental education
programmes be initiated so that the "multiplier effect" of
women as educational agents can be mobilized, and used as
the main proponents in order to reach into those parts of
cultural life as yet untouched by formal schools?
They want full partnership
When this day comes it will be understood throughout
the world, as it does not appear to be fully under¬
stood yet, that the acknowledgment of women's claim
to Human Rights is not just a question of giving benefits to
women, although these do mean much more symbolically to
women as they can thus feel the emotional security of having
their full worth as human beings recognized.
It is not only a question of making a reality of those egali¬
tarian principles, which all democracies must honour if they
are to justify the title of democracy. The real issue is some¬
thing much more fundamental: the participation of women
as full partners in the economic, social and cultural life of a
nation. When this is achieved, and women can play their
role to the full, the results in terms of well-being for the
peoples of the world will be immense.
From The Four Corners
GROWING LABOUR FORCE :
In the U.S.A. there are now over a million more
women than men in the age group from 20 to 75
and over (with the exception of the 55 to 59).
Women also have lower mortality rates and their life
expectancy is longer.
American women today are marrying younger,
having their children earlier, and bearing more se¬
cond, third and fourth children than in the 1920's.
Approximately one out of every three women in
the U.S.A. is employed outside her home. The total
figure runs to about 20 million. Some 50% of
these are married, and this figure marks an advance
of 20% since 1940.
RULERS OF THE ROOST:
Among, the Tchambuli tribes of New Guinea the
women completely dominate the men. They go
off to work each day and leave their menfolk at
home to play the flute, decorate themselves with
flowers and plan some amusement to entertain the
women when they return tired and hungry after a
day's work making nets and catching fish. The
Tchambuli women are affectionately scornful of
their men, whom they regard as rather frivolous,
emotional creatures, given to quarrelling and endless
chatter.
WOMEN ARMY DOCTORS :
Women doctors are now joining the Pakistan
Army Medical Corps as regular commissioned offi¬
cers. Pakistani women have also shown a keen
interest in civil defence, and have volunteered in
large numbers for basic general training. Centres
have been set up in Karachi for training women.
FIRST TRIBAL DEPUTY
In a white flower-embroidered tunic, with gold
earings and necklaces worked like lace by tribal
craftsmen, Aurora Montiel, addresses the Venezue¬
lan National Assembly in her tribal language. Re¬
presenting her tribe, the Uranis, she is the first
Indian woman to sit as a Deputy.
JILLS OF ALL TRADES:
What jobs do European woman do? If we take
France, as an example, we find the following statis¬
tics: there are more than 800 taxi drivers, 18 train
drivers, 4 000 pharmacists, 860 lawyers, 12 surgeons,
300 policewomen, 7 airport controllers, 320 drivers of
heavy goods vehicles and 2 400 doctors.
MODERN BREADWINNERS
In more than four million U.S. families, or one
out of every ten, a woman carries the main respon¬
sibility both for financial support and for family
planning.
In 1910 12,2 % of the total number of women em¬
ployed in the U.S.A. were engaged on newspaper and
magazine work. Today this figure has nearly tri¬
pled (32 %). This is by far the highest percentage
gain for any of the professions.
II
