THE UNFORGETTABLE
'WHITE GAP' DAY
One of the most important days in the life of
Swedish girl students is "White Cap" Day. It
is on this day that they will know whether, as a
result of their examinations, they are to be
"capped " or not. For weeks the young students
have undergone searching written and oral
examinations. And' in Sweden not only have
the students to pass the examinations, but they
are also marked for points on their school
records. The universities demand a minimum
number of points before they will admit candi¬
dates. In fact the Koralinum, the most impor¬
tant medical faculty in Sweden, demands such a
high percentage that only the most outstanding
are accepted.
But at last the long weeks of work are over, and
now the great question is "Who will be capped ?"
The answer will only be known on the Day of
the White Cap. Around four o'clock in the
afternoon parents, brothers, sisters and friends
gather in the school quadrangle to congratulate
the young college students. This first success is
celebrated in holiday mood. The groups of
well-wishers have brought flowers, presents and
balloons. They arrive in cars, hand-carts,
donkey-carts, and with them come the musi¬
cians who enliven things with popular songs.
As the hands of the clock near five, tension
mounts. Spies report supposed successes and
failures. Finally the doors are opened and the
girls appear in a long file. They sing, and call
out and wave to their parents and friends in
the crowd. As the song finishes the girls rush
headlong to greet their parents and tell them
the news. But they are immediately surrounded
by their colleagues who hoist them on their
shoulders and place the white caps on their
heads. Their parents embrace them, garland
them with flowers and give them balloons.
Accompanied by music from improvised bands
the girls are escorted to their cars, carriages and
carts, and the groups set out for their homes.
Once there they will sing and dance until late
into the night. This day of the white cap is one
never to be forgotten.
I. In columns the girls await the moment when
they can show themselves in the school quadran¬
gle. A thousand-strong crowd of parents and
friends is outside.
2.' Before coming down to the quadrangle the
girls make a brief appearance on the balcony.
3. A cortege under way complete with band and
donkey-cart.
4. Garlanded with flowers and carrying her
balloons a young student is serenaded in un¬
conventional fashion.
5. Chaired by somewhat over-enthusiastic
friends this girl looks as if she may lose her
cap sooner than she thought.
6. An unorthodox means of transport in
Stockholm's busy streets. This charming Swed¬
ish girl has been provided with an all-
weather carriage.
7. No carriages are needed for Kerstin, only
the willing shoulders of her student friends.
(Photos copyright Almasy)
©
16

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 19Í5
17

CAP AND GOWN (Cont'd)
..ifi M>
0?¡
if»
if *^H ***3 ^^r Mas
m m
i^f^
If^i» ~*-$iy*i^^B nil
/a /¿ fit
^y ^^j
5%
SWEDEN'S SCHOOLS FOR
GRACE AND BEAUTY
Sweden is known the world over for its gymnasts,
and it is from the I 9th century "Swedish drill"
that most modern systems of physical education
have been developed. For Swedish girls physi¬
cal education is an important part of their
general schooling. They learn how to walk
gracefully, how to keep their bodies supple and
how to give every movement of the body grace
and beauty. Throughout the Scandinavian coun¬
tries there are innumerable physical education
courses of this type, but no two have exactly
the same programme. Each course is led by either
a man or woman professor of physical education,
who guides the course along his or her own
personal lines. Here, Professor Ernst Idla
instructs a group of Swedish girl students. His
school of physical education is so successful that
it receives invitations each year to give exhibi¬
tions in countries throughout Europe and the
Americas. The balloon exercises, shown here,
are a speciality of Prof. Idla. They are of parti¬
cular importance in developing suppleness and
grace of movement.
(Photos copyright Almasy)
18

Unesco Courier. Nr 11. 1955
