THE BIRTH
AND END...
...OF AN ERA
Unless otherwise indicated, all photos in
this issue on the origins of the cinema
are published with the kind co-operation
of the Cinémathèque Française, Paris.
These two pictures mark the beginning
and the end of a great era 33 years in
the history of the cinema. Above, a
scene from the first film ever seen by a
public audience, "La Sortie de l'Usine"
(Leaving the Factory) projected by the
Lumière Brothers in Paris in 1895.'
Left, the end of the silent film days is
sounded in 1927 by AI Johson in the
first talking picture, "The Jazz Singer".

Unesco Courier. NM. 1955
I
f it weren't for the fact that a strip of film is quicker than
the .eye the retina, to be exact the cinema would
not even exist.
Hollywood and Elstree and the two-gun cowboy hero and
the most stupendous epic ever made and the Saturday nights
of hundreds of millions around the world all depend on the
retina's ability to hold an image for a scant tenth of a
second after it has vanished.
During that tenth of a second, you actually see what isn't
there any more. If the vanishing images flash in front
of your eye quickly enough, they merge together in a stream
of movement. And the retina is unable to tell the dif¬
ference between a movement broken down into a series
of still pictures and the actual movement itself.
Ever since antiquity, men have known about this retina
time lag. In the 17th Century, the magic lantern . made its
bow along with a host of gadgets intended to create
an illusion of movement. But they seemed destined to
remain as parlour toys. Even the invention of photography
did not change matters at first because the pioneers of the
camera, after all, were trying to break down or stop
movement, not to create it.
Then, a long ' step forward was made when, in 1877,
an English photographer in California, Eadweard Muybridge,
rigged a set of cameras side by side next to a race track
.and was able to take a series of 24 pictures breaking down
the movements of a galloping horse. Then a French
scientist, Etienne Marey, built a camera capable of taking
Jacques GUÉRI F, former foreign desk editor of the French daily
" Le Monde ", is now a member of the press staff of Unesco."
several photos a second to help him study birds in flight.
Photography had now proved capable of recording move¬
ments which the .human eye could not catch. At the same
time experimenters were able to show that the eye could
be fooled by pictures flashing before it at a speed of from
six to forty images a second. Now the problem was to
take that many pictures in so short a time. As long as
photographers were limited to glass plates, it seemed in¬
soluble. Then along came the invention of celluloid roll
film, in 1889. Things happened quickly after that.
Although there is still much dispute over which of the
many film inventors first succeeded in showing his pictures
on a screen, both Thomas Edison and the Lumière Brothers
(Louis and Auguste) share the glory of having made the
"cinematograph" a reality. (The world itself was coined
by the Franchman Leon Bouly in 1893 when he patented
a moving picture machine under this name. Other in¬
ventors achieved success with astounding simultaneity:
C. Francis Jenkins and Thomas Armat in the United States,
Robert Paul and William Friese-Greeh in England, Le Prince,
in France.)
Edison began his basic work on moving photographs in
1887. . Two years later, on October 6, 1889, he gave the
first demonstration of the Edison Kinetoscope. His moving
picture films, though they lasted less than a minute, ushered
in the era of cinema production. Their eyes glued to the
viewers of the peepshow Kinetoscope (photo page 15)
spectators were able to glimpse a favourite vaudeville artist
or penetrate the secrets of an opium den or even relive
the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots.
(Continued on next page)

FOHGOTTEX SHADOWS (Continued)
For several years the Kinetoscope was a popular novelty
but it did not project an image on a screen. In 1895 Louis
Lumière and his brother Auguste, sons of a French manu¬
facturer of photographic supplies, patented the "cinéma¬
tographe" machine for taking and projecting motion
pictures. On December 28 of the same year, the first time
in history, a true audience 120 persons jammed into the
Grand Café on Paris' Boulevard des Capucines was able
to watch a moving film pictured on a screen. The film in
question was only a small documentary' shot by Lumière
showing factory workers going out to lunch. The same
programme presented the home life of his family complete
down to the goldfish bowl and a train entering a station.
The critics hailed them as "a slice of real life".
Destiny decided that the Grand Café audience of 1895
included a certain Georges Méliès, a music-hall magician
who had been baffling audiences for over eight years with
his sleight-of-hand. He saw ' immediately that this was
more than a new scientific marvel ; to him it was a new
kind of magic, and he determined to make films himself.
One day he accidentally discovered double exposure cinema¬
tography and realized at once that he could use it to create
any visual illusion on the screen. ..and that films could be
turned into a new entertainment medium and a new art.
In October 1896, two years after Edison had' completed
the first film studio, the Black Maria, Méliès began
construction of his own studio in the suburbs of Paris. Even
a producer of 1955 would recognize it with its stages, flood¬
lights and a movable cabin for shooting. There Méliès was
able to invent many of the tricks of the trade which film¬
makers still use today dissolves, shooting against a black
background to bring out relief, and the use of one actor to
play two or even more roles. Like Edison and others before
him, he also dabbled in talkies, trying to find a way of
synchronizing a phonograph with his silent films.
Méliès alone shot some 450 films between 1896 and 1914.
The film industry had come into the world and it proved a
lusty infant. In 1902, a theatre built specifically for film
shows opened in Los Angeles, California, and it was followed
by thousands in the United States and Europe. Even in
those early days, films were already printed by the hundreds
and distributed throughout the world.
And the public loved it... but it .constantly clamoured for
improvements. Audiences flocked to the films which offered
something new and different. The Herculean task of the
inventor had only begun. The public was fed first sound,
then colour and now relief and cinemascope and the public
is still waiting for something new again.
THE MYSTERY
MACHINE was the
name given to magic
lantern by pedlar show¬
men of 18th century.
It was usually simply a
wooden box with an
opening through which
people were able to
see images projected
on a transparent screen
by a lantern. Mounted
on wheels, the box
was a source of amuse¬
ment and wonder at
town and village fairs.
In this eternal chase after new techniques, hundreds fell
ruined by the wayside but thousands of others continued on
to wealth and fame. The spectators watched and revelled
in the struggle which had only one rule : sooner or later,
the new had to win over the old.
The film industry had to adapt itself to the struggle by
constantly experimenting and making use of the new dis¬
coveries. The result is that the history of this art is a long
tale of adventure where unexpected victories are followed
by startling defeats and where the only certainty is change.
It was round about 1914 that technical improvements and
art really met on the screen. Charlie Chaplin began making
his early films, astonishing in their wealth of sentiment and
generosity and always true to the mark in their. social satire.
But the momentous year for motion pictures was 1915
for it witnessed the production of a film D.W. Griffith's
"Birth of a Nation" which marked' the founding of the-
modern film. Despite its racial intolerance, it was and still
remains a masterpiece of cinematographic art. It is con¬
sidered one of the three most famous of all films the other
two being Carl Meyer's "The Cabinet of Dr Caligari" (Ger-

Unesco Courier. W 1. 1955
Pre-M©vie Toys
In 65 B.C. the Roman poet Lucretius
discovered what is called persistance of
visionthe ability of the retina to hold
an Image for a fraction of a second after
it has vanished. Scientists in later times
proved Its existence experimentally, but
it was not until the early 1820's in England,
that it began to be closely studied, par¬
ticularly in relation to the possibility of
making pictures " move " Dr Peter Mark
Roget now remembered as the author of
the " Thesaurus of English Words and
Phrases " was one of the first pioneers In
this field. His paper "Persistence of vi¬
sion with regard to movement " publi¬
shed In 1824 laid a foundation for all
further work.
The following year Dr. W.H. Fitton and
Dr. John Alrdas Paris invented a paper
toy called the.Thaumatrope which made
use of the Idea of persistence of vision.
This consisted of a circular card with
strings fastened to two opposite sides
(upper photos). On one side was drawn
a picture of a bird on s perch and on the
other a cage. Whirling the card about
gave the impression that the bird was
inside the cage.
In 1833, a Belgian, Dr. Joseph Plateau,
invented the Phenakitoscope (photo,
lower left). It consisted of a disk of card¬
board pierced at Its circumference by
small holes, with painted figures on Its
Inside surface. When the disk was turn¬
ed in front of a mirror, a glance
through one of the holes revealed the
illusion of the figures In motion.
Other variations of such devices were
developed but all remained little more
than Interesting toys, and no real progress
towards the cinema was made until
photography was in common use.
One of the oldest optical spectacles
Shadow Theatres came from China
and was known in Europe during the
Middle Ages. It gained a new lease of
life towards the end of the 19th century.
Operators of the shadow theatres then
worked only with their hands and a few
simple accessories. For the projection
of the shadows they used the magic
lantern. The most noted of. them at
this time was the conjuror, Trewey.
(Photo, lower right.)
many, 1919) and Sergei Eisenstein's "Potemkin" (Russia,
1925).
By the 1920's, films had become a staple necessity like
bread or newspapers and rapidly became standardized into
types. There were the grandiose spectacle films, melo-
1 dramas, comedies, westerns, crime and racketeering pictures.
But the same period also saw the rise of new pioneers in
different countries who sought to turn the art of the cinema
into new channels of aesthetics and expression : René Clair,
in France ("Entracte"), Louis Bunuel of Spain ("Un Chien
Andalou"), V. I. Pudovkin in Russia ("Mother"), and Carl
Dreyer in Denmark ("The Passion of Joan of Arc").
Dreyer's film, produced in 1928, marks one of the last
authentic products of the silent era. The silent film had
brought an image of life to the screen ; the talkies gave this
image a voice. Its coming swept like a broad broom, revo¬
lutionizing the whole film industry. Even Charlie Chaplin,
whose pantomime for long stood as a passionate challenge
to the spoken word, admitted defeat in 1936 with his film
appropriately entitled "Modern Times."
The new era of the talking picture broke on the world on
the evening of October 6, 1927 with Warner Brothers "The
Jazz Singer" starring Al Jolson. A year before, though, a
silent film "Don Juan" had been produced with a syn
chronized musical score, and Fox had launched the Movie¬
tone Newsreel in May 1927 using a sound track. It was not
until 1941, however, that talking films reached a landmark
comparable, to Griffith's work in the silent medium. It came
with Orson Welles' "Citizen Kane".
As it developed, the sound film became not only a richer
medium of entertainment but the voice of many causes.
With more or less happy results it assumed a role as
pamphlet, sermon, textbook and political propaganda voice.
The camera, when it took sides, could be middleclass or
proletarian, socialist or anarchist, exalting or satirical.
Pacificism ("Maedchen in Uniform"); criticism of standard¬
ized mechanization ("A nous la Liberté", "Modern Times");
the sufferings of the disinherited ("Grapes of Wrath",
"Beggar's Opera", "Bicycle Thieves"); maladjusted rebels
("Pepe le Moko"); national or revolutionary epics ("Peter
the Great", "The Peasants") : such were the themes which
inspired directors and brought many stars to fame.
In little over 50 years the film has carved out a unique
place for itself as a work of art and a medium of entertain¬
ment, produced not by a lone creator but by a collective
group who number in the hundreds and thousands. Of all
the art forms it is undoubtedly the one that reaches the
largest audience in history.

Unesco Courier. N' I. 1955
I
I
Emile Reyiiand :
the Walt Disney
of 1892
In the first years of this century, prize-winning
schoolchildren were often rewarded with a toy
which once delighted grown-ups too: the Zoe-
trope. It was a device which looked like a
saucepan mounted on a short pedestal with
regularly spaced slots cut In the sides. Inside
was a paper band with images which broke
down the various stages of an object or person
in motion. When the "saucepan" was spun
round by hand a peep through the slots created
the illusion of movement. The Zoetrope was
thought up in 1834 by a mathematician from
Bristol, England, William Horner, and it was a
great improvement on Plateau's magic disks.
(Photo from the film "Naissance du Cinéma".)
Plateau's device also inspired a German inventor,
Ottomar Anschütz, in 1889, to build his Elec¬
trical Tachyscope, which was one of the great
attractions of the Chicago World's Fair in 1893.
The Tachyscope was an iron wheel worked by
hand which used the flash of an electric tube to
immobilize in appearance a moving image. The
discovery of the value of the flash, which is one
of the fundamental bases of the modern motion
picture projector, was originally made by Sir
Charles Wheatstone of England.
About the same time, a Frenchman, Emile Rey-
naud, became the first moving picture showman
of modern times with his "Theatre Optique" in
Paris. (Photo taken from the film "Naissance
du Cinema") This was the first popular motion
picture theatre but hand-drawn instead of
photographed pictures were used. The draw¬
ings were on celluloid bands whose performances
lasted up to 15 minutes. Between 1892 and
1900, some 500,000 spectators saw Reynaud's
shows (12,800 of them) in the Musée Grevin.
One of the reels was used twice daily for sixty-
two months. Reynaud was an impresario who
stood between the shadow plays and panto¬
mimes of the ancients and the modern cinema.
A POSTER FOR REYNAUD'S THEATRE.
REYNAUD'S OPTICAL THEATRE (1892). MODERN RECONSTITUTION, LEFT; OLD DRAWING, ABOVE.

FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Cont'd)
A century
of clicks
A FAR CRY from the reporter-photographers of 1 874 (shown
above) whose "portable" equipment included a tent, folding table,
chemicals and a massive camera, is the modern amateur photo¬
grapher armed with a pocket-sized apparatus featuring fast lenses,
multiple dials and a host of trick attachments. Photography, once
described as the most typical art of the 20th century, has grown
from the achievements of many men in many countries. Its real
beginnings were in France in the early I 800's when Joseph Nicéphore
Niepce produced on glass an image formed by a camera obscura.
Modern photography, however, began with the "daguerreotype",
produced by Louis Daguerre, a French artist working with Niepce.
It was so successful that a French cartoon soon complained that
half of mankind had become "daguerreocrazed" while the rest was
"daguerreomazed". Everything on sight was caughtfrom Victor
Hugo's hand to the sedate family group. But until well on into the
1 9th century equipment was cumbersome and methods were
complicated. To take his famous American civil war pictures in
the I860's, photographer Matthew Brady required a lumbering
vehicle, nicknamed by soldiers the "What is it waggon".- (Photo
taken from the film "Naissance du Cinéma".)
HAT TRICK CAMERA was one of the novelties that delighted the
growing legion of amateur photographers in 1885. Drawings of
that time suggest the seriousness with which these keen picture
snappers went to work. Despite the handicaps of the early days,
a group of distinguished and devoted amateurs persisted at their
hobby. Among them was the Oxford mathematician Charles
Dodgson (who, as Lewis Carroll, wrote "Alice in Wonderland"),
novelists Charles Kingsley and Samuel Butler, and U.S. Justice, Oliver
Wendell Holmes, who called the camera "a mirror with a memory".
10

1 Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1955
A ^25,000 bet
on a horse
A $25,000 bet on a horse at a racetrack was
responsible for a major event- in the history of
the cinema's beginnings. It led to the first
successful attempt at breaking down- motion
by direct photography. Leland Stanford, rich,
one-time governor of California, made the bet
in 1872 during a dispute as to whether or not
all the legs of a horse running at a full gallop are
off the ground simultaneously. Horsemen were
never entirely satisfied with the way artists had
muybridge painted or drawn horses in motion with their
four legs spread out in a large arch and actually . touching the ground.
He called in an English photographer, Eadweard Muybridge to get pho¬
tographic proof to settle the dispute. Muybridge began work with a
single camera at first but his results were not entirely conclusive.
About 1870 Etienne Marey the great French cinema pioneer had
determined how a horse runs with a recording device attached to its
foot. Drawings made showed that a galloping horse supported itself
on one hoof, then on three, then on two, then on one. But he had
no photographic proof of his findings.
When these drawings reached California some years later, Stanford
could hardly believe them. In 1877 Muybridge and an engineer, John D.
Isaacs, set upa battery of 24 cameras beside a specially re-built racetrack
on Stanford's ranch. From the lens shutters a wire thread was stret¬
ched across the track. As the horse raced by, it broke the thread,
tripping the shutter of each camera in turn. Muybridge thus obtained
the first series of photographs showing a horse in full gallop (photos
top centre).
Marey was delighted to hear of the results of Muybridge's work and
was the first to synthesize motion from the photographs by mounting
them so that the action could be reconstructed. Marey, one of the
first great physiologists, gave a strong impetus to the photographing
and projection of motion pictures through his desire to learn more
about movement, the movement of lifeanimals, birds and men. Muy¬
bridge had photographed his subject on a
white background so that one exposure des¬
troyed the sensitivity of the plate. Using a jet black
background Marey foundthattheonly impression
made at each exposure was the impression of the
model, the rest remaining, black. This enabled
him to take several photographs on the same
plate without any difficulty His famous "Man
in White" (photo bottom left) was taken this
way. Photograph below shows a man's walk as
it was analysed by Marey, in 1882.
II

Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1955
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Cont'd)
1 É'
O^*
^ *â
Inspired by a photographic revolver (heavier than
a small cannon) Invented by the Norwegian as¬
tronomer Jules Janssen in 1874, Marey devised
his photographic rifle (far left), the world's first
portable motion picture camera. Pressure on
the trigger exposed a series of sensitive plates
in the breech of the rifle and made them rotate.
In this way Marey photographed gulls in motion
(above). Marey also built a zoetrope of his own
(left) in which he replaced the pictures usually
used in this apparatus by models of a gull in
successive stages of flight. When rotated it gave
a perfect illusion of a flight of gulls following each
other round and round in a closed circle.
WltäS8äa&Umm?
,_ , ^|f''*fc''*^ffr**M ii i f-*^*^*^^r*^-* ~-**&m)mm&. . i ,** ^¡¿¡
13

Unesco Courier. NM. 1955
FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Cont'd)
WORLD'S FIRST FILM STUDIO, known as "Black Maria" because it was painted black inside and out, was
built by Thomas Edison in 1 894. It had revolving base on which it was turned towards sunlight. In this studio
Edison made hundreds of brief films for his Kinetoscope, the first successful moving picture machine marketed
(below). Picture strip shows professional strong man Eugene Sandow displaying muscles for the camera.
The peepshow sensation
on Broadway
Edison came to the motion picture
through his" Talking Phonograph. He
was looking for a device that would
combine the voices of the phonograph
with the sight and movement of a picture.
Late in 1887 Edison started work on
what was to become his Kinetograph
camera and Kinetoscope peepshow film
device. The world premiere took place
on April 14, 1894 at a Kinetoscope
Parlor opened on Broadway in New
York City. The Kinetoscopes were a great success. S 120 was taken
in the first night. The original show of films was a kind of "double
feature" in that the spectator was charged 25 cents to see the second
line of five Kinetoscopes. The films included "Fred Ott's Sneeze" (see
front cover). This was one of the most significant days in cinema
history for it brought the motion picture to the public for the first
time and from Edison's Kinetoscope and his Kinetograph modern .
motion picture devices evolved. Edison was aided in his experiments
by William Laurie Dickson. At first the "Wizard of West Orange"
used coated glass plates and later celluloid for taking pictures.' Then j
in Eastman's flexible film roll he found an ¡deal material. Edison was ;
the first to perforate the two sides of each picture or frame to keep them j
passing evenly through the camera and his perforated film is still used today, j
Edison's first camera was a power-driven machine as heavy as a piano. |
With it he turned out short films, fifty feet of which provided aí
I 3-second show. The Kinetoscope immediately became a world sensa¬
tion. But Cdison at first only developed and exploited his device as a
peep-show machine. Not until April 1896 did he project hjs first
film on a screen publicly. The projector used was developed by a;
Virginian, Thomas Armat, and manufactured by the Edison Company,
which called it the Vitascope. Other inventors patented different projec-
tion machines and for many years a bitter patent war raged betwean
Edison and the rival companies which had by developed by this time.
15

FORGOTTEN SHADOWS (Cont'd)
Th screen s
world premiere :
receipts 33 francs
"At the time when Edison's Kinetoscope began
to arouse public curiosity," wrote Auguste
Lumière in his memoirs, "my brother and I
thought how interesting it would be if we could
project . moving scenes on a screen." The
Lumière brothers, owners of a photographic
materials factory in Lyons, began experimenting
with the idea. In February 1 895, they obtained
a patent on their camera-projector device, the
"Cinématographe Lumière." Ten months later,
on December 28, they gave their first public
projection (admission one franc) in the basement
of the Grand Café in Paris. Only a few dozen
curious people paid to watch the films on the
first day and the receipts amounted to only
33 francs. But word of the spectacle soon
spread through Paris and within a few weeks
the Lumière films were playing to a standing-
room-only audience averaging 2,000 admissions
a day. "The show left us dumbfounded, struck
with amazement," one early spectator wrote.
"At the end of the performance though there
was wild enthusiasm." Thus at last the motion
picture screen was revealed to a large public.
The hesitant steps of the past were now to
become a firm stride as the motion picture
developed In many lands into a great industry.
Photos show Louis and Auguste Lumière, one. of
the Grand Café posters, shots from two of
the early films that they made "A Train
Arrives at Ciotat Station" and "Baby's Meal."
16

A page is turned
GAG KING of early comedy producers In the U.S. was
Mack Sennett who sometimes appeared in his own films. In
"Murphy's I.O.U." he here plays the part of a waiter.
In the first two decades of the twentieth
century many new cinema pioneers took
over the development of the film from
those who had discovered how to make
moving pictures, and began a great era of
search and endeavour.
In France the work of George Méliès
permanently enriched the technique and
scope of filmmaking by introducing it to
fancy and to fantasy and by forcing it to
tell a story. Méliès was the first to create
visual illusions on the screen, and in 1900
he made the first series of fairy tale subjects
which embodied a rich succession of trans¬
formations, tricks, fantasies and illusions.
His most famous picture "A Trip to the
Moon" was made in 1902 and his last "big"
film "The Conquest of the Pole" in 1912.
During this period, a flexible form of narra¬
tive film was shaping in America, In whose
development one man, David Wark Griffith,
stands out above all others. In 1915 his civil
war epic "The Birth of a Nation" established
him as the foremost U.S. producer. Still
more important, the film induced millions of
people to take the cinema seriously. Another
American producer, Mack Sennett, became
the master of film comedy. His use of gags,
slapstick and unexpected situations revealed
rich sources of humour.
Thus, after its primitive, hesitant begin¬
nings, the cinema industry quickly expanded
and its enormous entertainment possibilities
and popular appeal were firmly established. CINEMA "TRICKS "WERE FIRST DEVISED AND
INTOLERANCE
a 1916 superpro¬
duction by David
Wark Griffith. Its :
settings and crowd
scenes have since
been models for
all "super" films.
18

Unesco Courier. Nr 1. 1955
) USED ON A LARGE SCALE BY GEORGES MELIES OF FRANCE IN SUCH FILMS AS "JOURNEY INTO THE IMPOSSIBLE" (ABOVE) MADE IN 1901.
I
CAB1RIA, an am¬
bitious film made
by the Italian pro¬
ducer Pastrone,
included the first
panoramic .shots
taken with camera
on wheels (1913)
APOCALYPTIC
HORSE and astral
carriage dream¬
like devices used
by George Melles,
an early exponent
of theatrical fanta¬
sy in film-making.
19
