U.N. - FROM A TO Z
A frank appraisal
A ATOMS: Since Hiroshima and
Nagasaki in 1945, atomic energy has
been linked mostly with the atomic
bomb. But the atom also holds prom¬
ise of boundless benefits for man¬
kind. U. N. has failed to obtain agreement on international
control of atomic energy and on problem of prohibiting
nuclear weapons; this made it difficult to encourage peaceful
use of atomic energy. But in August 1955, U.N. conference
on atoms-for-peace convened scientists from 75 countries
and "demonstrated without doubt" the feasibility of "gen¬
erating electricity by atomic energy." Meeting has been
hailed as having "succeeded beyond all hopes and expecta¬
tions."
AVIATION: Making air travel safe, helping designers
plan better planes, getting international agreement on sig¬
nals and ways of directing air traffic and supervising a
chain of 10 weather ships across the North Atlantic I.C.A.O.
(The U. N. International Civil Aviation Organization) is at
work on these problems. Now has four air agreements in
operation, gives technical assistance on air matters to some
30 countries and co-ordinates regional operating procedures
for air and ground crews.
J BANK: Development loans to
_J countries in Latin America, Europe
and Asia made by U.N. International
Bank number some 450 involving more
than 2,200 million dollars. Loans
used for expansion of electric power facilities, improving
transport systems and import of modern agricultural ma¬
chinery. Bank still hampered, however, by lack of converti¬
bility of some national currencies.
BERLIN:So-called Berlin blockade in 1948 led to dan¬
gerous international situation. U.N. Security Council unable
to take action by reason of use of veto (see Security Council) .
Agreement on lifting blockade made in May 1949 by U.N.
delegates representing France, U.S.S.R., U.K. and U.S.A.
Original contact and discussions took place in U.N. Head¬
quarters.
BURMA: Complaint to U.N. by Burma regarding presence
of "Kuomintang" troops led to action by U.N. General Assem¬
bly in 1953. By October 1954 nearly 7,000 had been evacuated.
c CHARTER:U.N. Charter signed by
representatives of 50 countries in San
Francisco on June 26 1945. This guide
to action for a better world in
direct line of descent from Mag¬
na Carta signed at Runnymede on the Thames, 750 years
before. Tenth anniversary celebrations of Charter signing
held in San Francisco this year. After ten years in force
Charter can be revised, but no definite proposals yet made.
CHILDREN:There are 900 million children in the world
and two-thirds, or 600 million, live in poverty, lack food,
26
clothing and shelter. In nine years UNICEF (U.N. Chil-
drens Fund) has brought aid to millions of these children.
This year more than 32 million children and nursing mothers
in 90 countries and territories are benefiting from UNICEF's
mass health and feeding programmes, 15 million children
are being vaccinated against TB, 8,700,000 children and
mothers are being protected against malaria, 2 million being
treated for yaws, bejel or syphilis and 2,700,000 being fed in
36 different countries.
COLLECTIVE SECURITY. U. N. Charter provides for
armed forces of Member States to be put at disposal of Secu¬
rity Council for peace enforcement. Owing to Big Power
differences agreements never negotiated. Collective action
was taken, however, by Security Council on Korean question
(see Korea).
CRIME: First congress on prevention of crime and treat¬
ment of offenders convened by U.N. in Geneva, August 1955.
Five hundred delegates at international conference laid down
set of standard minimum rules for treatment of prisoners
and prepared way for studies on prevention of juvenile de¬
linquency.
D DEPENDENT PEOPLES:Future of
Libya, Eritrea and Somaliland all
formerly under Italian rule resolved
by U.N. General Assembly after Big
Power failure to reach agreement.
Libya now independent, Eritrea federated with Ethiopia and
Somaliland soon to be independent. Nineteen million people
living in Trust Territories throughout world benefit from
right to send petitions to U.N. Trusteeship Council and from
visits paid by U.N. Trusteeship missions to territories. Pro¬
posals for bettering well-being of these peoples made by
missions to Trusteeship Council. Many proposals already
adopted by Administering Authorities.
DISARMAMENT:Disarmament Commission of U.N. at
work since 1951 trying to find acceptable formula. Little
success so far achieved, but five-power sub-committee after
meetings in London and New York has now narrowed differ¬
ences at current session. Distinct possibility of some measure
of success being achieved.
DISEASE:In 1945 WHO (World Health Organization) was
operating 20 different anti-malaria campaigns throughout
world. Results achieved show practical eradication of ma¬
laria in certain countries. WHO also conducting intensive
campaigns against communicable diseases such as TB, ve¬
nereal infections, polio and yaws with striking results:
Greece with 2 million malaria cases in 1942 only had 50,000
in 1949 after WHO campaign; 100,000 people in Haiti formerly
suffering from yaws now at work again thanks to WHO-
aided anti-yaws measures.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
I y U.N.'s Regional Economic Commiss
ions for Europe, Latin America and
Asia provide possibilities for countries
in the various regions to enlarge
trade, break bottlenecks in production and co-operate econo¬
mically for mutual advantage. Practical results illustrated
by field investigation of major Asian rivers to prepare flood
control measures; European East-West trade negotiations in

Unesco Courier. N" 10. 1955
1953 result in many new trade agreements, often for
substantially increased amounts of goods; experts meeting
in Bogota in 1952 investigated possibilities of developing iron
and steel industries in Latin America seven countries have
iron and steel industry or else are in position to establish
one. Economic development on world scale planned and co¬
ordinated through U.N. Economic and Social Council. U.N.
technical assistance programme for economic development
spans the globe (see under Technical Assistance).
EDUCATION:Two-thirds of world's population lives in
ignorance and in the poverty, ill-health and low standards
which ignorance breeds. Unesco has launched world-wide
campaign against illiteracy, set up network of associated
fundamental education centres. Regional centres now oper¬
ate in Mexico and Egypt. Technical Training courses spon¬
sored or operated in every continent of world. Unesco also
active in raising school leaving age, adult education and
has broad programme for international understanding.
many maternal and child welfare centres operating in
countries where before none existed; assistance in 1954 to
17 nursing schools; direct aid projects for helping physically-
handicapped adults and children in Eastern Europe and
Asia; between 1947 and 1954 award of 4,500 fellowships for
health training work.
HUMAN RIGHTS: Need for international guarantee for
individual human rights recognized in Universal Declaration
adopted by U.N. General Assembly in 1948. U.N. Assembly
called on all member states to "cause it to be disseminated,
displayed, read and expounded principally in schools and
other educational institutions, without distinction based on
the political status of countries and territories." Universal
application has not yet come about. Two human rights co¬
venants laid out in treaty form, i.e. binding on Governments,
drafted by U.N. Human Rights Commission. Little progress
has been made in their adoption.
T7
FOOD: World population is in¬
creasing at about the rate of one per
cent a year which means that 80,000
additional persons have to be fed,
clothed and housed each day of the
year. Increase in the world's food production is urgent.
With advice and help of FAO (Food and Agriculture Or¬
ganization of U.N.) Europe's maize yield increased by a value
of 25 million dollars in five years. Work now in progress on
hybridizing and testing rice seed in Asia under auspices of
International Rice Commission may yield even more fruitful
results. FAO, in common with U.N., now celebrating tenth
anniversary, has issued two world food surveys aimed at
increasing and improving world food supplies. Expert
missions are sent to advise on crop rotation, breeding better
crop strains and other problems vital to food needs of par¬
ticular country. FAO helps underdeveloped countries with
expert advice through U.N. technical assistance programme.
By end 1953, 165 projects had been completed, more than 300
experts from 54 countries were at work in 55 others.
P
GENERAL ASSEMBLY:The U.N.
V. J Assembly first met in London in 1945.
Made up of all member states of the
world organization. Significant dec¬
isions taken by Assembly in¬
clude: partition of Palestine in November 1947; Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in December 1948; first resolu¬
tion on technical assistance for economic development taken
adopted in 1948 ; international co-operation in developing
peaceful uses of atomic energy unanimously adopted in 1954.
GREECE: Greek complaint of aid and assistance given to
Greek guerrillas by neighbouring countries to the north caus¬
ed explosive situation in Balkans. U.N. General Assembly
despatched special committee to investigate frontier incidents
and aid in mediation. Presence of U.N. committee and
observers in frontier areas led to lessening of tension. In
1954 Greece requested recall of remaining observer group in
view of improved situation on northern borders.
I INDIA: (See under Kashmir).
INDONESIA:Hostilities between
Dutch and Indonesion forces brought
to U.N. Security Council in 1947.
Council set up committee of good
offices. Under U.N. committee auspices truce agreement
was signed in 1948. Renewed hostilities broke out at the
end of 1948. Council then recommended establishment of
independent state of Indonesia. Discussions between Dutch
and Indonesians commenced under U.N. committee auspices
in 1949. Later in year full agreement was reached at round
table conference. In September 1950 Indonesia became
member of U.N.
INFORMATION: Increase in scope and quality of press,
radio and film services throughout the world; international
agreements facilitating exchange of books, films and scien¬
tific data, supply of material for press, radio and film design¬
ed to promote international understanding are among free¬
dom of information problems tackled by Unesco (U.N. Edu¬
cational Scientific and Cultural Organization) in course of
past eight years. Positive results show adherence of 12
countries to agreement on exchange of visual and auditory
materials, and 20 countries to the agreement on the importa¬
tion of educational, scientific and cultural materials.
IRAN: In 1946 Iran complained to U.N. Security Council
of U.S.S.R. interference in her internal affairs. Council took
up question and asked for information on progress of nego¬
tiations between two parties. Iran later reported withdrawal
of Soviet forces.
INTERNATIONAL LAW:U.N. Commission on Interna¬
tional Law at work on tricky problems such as territorial
limits and continental shelf. Importance of decisions on
these matters can effect whaling, salvage and national sover¬
eignty over undersea lands.
ITALIAN COLONIES, Libya, Eritrea and Somaliland (see
under dependent peoples).
TT
HEALTH:In 1954, after sixth year
of work, WHO (World Health Or¬
ganization) had participated in 329
major health projects involving 75
different countries. Two-thirds of
world's population still live in "under-developed" areas where
life expectation is only 30 years against 63 years in more
"developed" countries. Positive results of WHO work show
JUVENILE DELINQUENCY: (see
under Crime).
JUSTICE:U.N.'s International
Court of Justice sits at The Hague.
Court decisions have been
taken on the sinking of a British warship in the
Corfu Channel, rights of asylum; disputed fish-
(Cont'd on
next page)
17

U.N. - FROM A TO Z (Continued)
ing rights off the Norwegian coast; Iran's oil and the sove¬
reignty of a small group of islands in the Channel between
England and France. Court is available for consultation by
all U.N. members states, and all other countries subject to
certain provisions.
KKA S H M I R:Indian complaint
brought to U.N. Security Council in
1948 charged that hostile tribes from,
outside the State were receiving aid
from Pakistan. Council set up a
commission which was successful in persuading India and
Pakistan to order a cease fire. Kashmir situation remained
disturbed and U.N. Truce Observation mission with military'
observers still remains in Kashmir to prevent friction between
two sides and supervise cease fire agreement.
U.N. was not successful in arranging for Kashmir plebiscite.
No agreement has yet been reached between India and Paki¬
stan on terms under which plebiscite should be held.
KOREA: Here, for first time in history, collective military
action recommended by an international organization was
successful in hurling back an aggressor and, eventually,
bringing peace to a war-stricken country. Invasion of South
Korea by military forces from North Korea on June 25 1950
was brought to U.N. Security Council. Collective action was
recommended with immediate goal of throwing back aggres¬
sors and ultimately to bring the aggression to an end and to
restore peace and security in area. Eventually armed forces
of 16 U.N. member states, and of Republic of Korea, fighting
under U.N. flag successful in achieving their aim. Toll in
lives and money heavy, particularly for major participating
nation U.S.A.
Long range U.N. purpose in Korea remains: political unifi¬
cation and independence of country achieved through peace¬
ful means. Meanwhile U.N. still has two agencies operating
in Korea. Constructive rehabilitation work done by U.N.
Korean Reconstruction Agency includes: installation of
55,400 spindles in Korean cotton mills by end 1954; 4 million
dollars worth of industrial machinery and materials have
reached Korea to date: three heavy-duty briquetting presses
supplied to alleviate fuel shortage; construction materials
procured for rebuilding Samchok cement plantonly one in
country. In health field UNKRA provides Republic with
fully-equipped and staffed training centre for Korean doctors
and nurses at Taegufamous place-name during the fighting
in Korea, and has also established rehabilitation centre for
physically-handicapped at Tongnae.
T
L A B O U R:ILO (International
Labour Organization), through con¬
ferences consisting of government
representatives, employers and work¬
ers, fights for better labour condi¬
tions. Positive action already taken by ILO during its 36
years history on all aspects of labour relations; particularly
significant results in regard holidays with pay, eight hour
day, protection of wages and freedom of association. Good
living conditions on board ship now enjoyed by seamen
throughout world directly stems from convention adopted
by ILO conference in 1946. This laid down specific measures
to improve standards of accommodation for merchant
seamen.
M METEOROLOGY:At set times
during day and night weathermen
throughout the world take met record¬
ings and spark vast international
chain reaction involving round-the
clock broadcasting, complex telex and teleprinter systems,
codes, charts and all the technical apparatus making up a
modern met service. World co-operation on met information
fostered and sponsored by WMO (World Meteorological Or¬
ganization of U.N.). Technical committees of WMO lay
down standards for weather recording instruments, and
standardized codes and charts. Result: weathermen all send
in reports in agreed international form. WMO also issuing
international cloud atlas containing photos of all types of
clouds observed from poles to tropics.
MIGRATION:Large movements of populations came
about by reason of Second World War. Displaced and re¬
fugees numbered millions. General Assembly of U.N. brought
into existence IRO (International Refugee Organization) in
1946. Agency in- four years life resettled more than one
million displaced persons and refugees, repatriated some
73,000 to their homelands, and gave other forms of assistance
to more than 1,600,000. However, U.N. not successful in li- '
quidating refugee question with result that further refugee
bureau had to be established following dissolution of IRO (see
under refugees).
MINORITIES: U.N. sub-commission at work on problems
related to protection and discrimination against minorities.
Recommendations made on fundamental freedoms in line
with U.N. Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
N NARCOTIC S:International
control to limit official import, export
and manufacture of narcotic drugs
for medical and scientific uses super¬
vised by U.N. body. U.N. Narcotics
Drugs commission has also worked out treaty to control dis¬
tribution and production of new synthetic drugs. Controls
also introduced on cultivation of opium. U.N. body keeps
vigilant watch on course of illicit traffic in drugs, and on
national measures to curb it. Narcotic drugs are, neverthe¬
less, indispensable to modern médecine, and used in this way
bring great benefit to mankind.
P PAKISTAN: (see under Kashmir).
.LIBYA: (see under dependent peoples).
PALESTINE:State of Israel crea¬
ted by resolution of U.N. General
Assembly adopted in November 1947.
Tension between Arab countries and
new State led to U.N. action, and Mediator was appointed
by Security Council. First U.N. mediatorCount Folke Ber-
nadotte of Swedenassassinated. Work by successor result¬
ed in general armistice agreement between Israel and Arab
States signed during 1949. Despite U.N. work in Palestine
tension has not lessened and strained relations still hold
between two sides. At present U.N. has Truce Observation
Commission on spot with large staff of military observers,
but U.N. influence has not avoided border clashes and bomb
outrages leading to loss of life on both sides of dangerous
frontier between Israel and Egypt. Conciliation Commission
set up by U.N. General Assembly in 1948 has achieved no
positive results so far.
POSTAL SERVICES:Mail can travel between countries,
across oceans and pass national frontiers by reason of little-
known document called Universal Postal Convention. Regu-
28

Unesco Courier. N° 10. 1955
lations of this Convention carried out by U.N. Universal
Postal Union. U.P.U. is responsible for settling postal
accounts between member countries practically speaking all
countries in the world and co-ordinating postal informa¬
tion for international publication. Next world postal congress
of 94 member countries will be held in Ottawa, 1957.
PRISONS: (see under crime).
PRISONERS-OF-WAR:U.N. General Assembly in 1950 and
in 1953 appealed to all Governments holding second world
war prisoners to give them unrestricted opportunity of repa¬
triation. Special U.N. body sought full information concern¬
ing prisoners still detained, and rendered assistance in facili¬
tating repatriation. Positive results achieved by this body
showed that by September 1954 number of repatriations
exceeded 40,000.
P
rV REFUGEES:Following dissolution
_1_ X. of IRO (see under Migration) U. N.
General Assembly appointed a U. N.
High Commissioner for Refugees.
Enormous task facing this new
office was to provide international protection for some two
million refugees. High Commissioner successful in finding
solutions of number of refugee problems: noteworthy ins¬
tance plight of European refugees still remaining in Shanghai
following closure of IRO. In 1953 3,321 re-settled, and in
1954 re-settlement rate running at 500 a quarter. Work
accomplished in co-operation with Inter-Governmental Com¬
mittee for European Migration, a non-U.N. body although
co-operating actively with U.N. agencies on refugee and mi¬
gration problems.
Particular aspect of refugee problem caused by Palestine
conflict in 1948, resulting in exile for nearly one million
Palestinian Arabs. UNRWA (U.N. Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees) , body set up by U. N. General Assem¬
bly now provides rations, health care, education, welfare and
supplementary services for 900,000 Arab refugees. Agency, in
co-operation with local governments, has initiated number of
works projects providing refugee employment. U.N. still not
successful in solving Palestine refugee problem but progress
being made.
ROAD SIGNS: Standard road signs and signals on Eu¬
ropean roads, and network of arteries for international road
traffic now being put into operation following work carried
out by technical committee of U.N. Economic Commission for
Europe. Roads on this international network already being
built or reconstructed to conform to agreed standards for
speed and safety.
c
SECURITY COUNCIL:U. N. body
primarily responsible for maintain-
ance of international peace and secur¬
ity. Success of Council's work largely
negatived by Big Power disagree¬
ment. "Abuse" of so-called veto power substantive matters
to be decided by affirmative vote of seven members, including
concurring votes of permanent members resulted in lack of
definite action on number of important questions.
SCIENCE: International scientific co-operation (see
under Atoms).
SYRIA AND LEBANON:Complaint brought to Security
Council early in 1946 by Governments of Syria and Lebanon
protesting against continued presence of British and French
troops on their territories. Despite use of veto precluding
adoption of resolution Britain and France took action on
majority view and all forces were withdrawn, to satisfaction
of Syria and Lebanon, later same year.
T
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:
World-wide plan for giving expert
technical assistance to aid economic
development in u n d e r-developed
countries. Expanded programme, in
which U.N. and Specialised Agencies act together, adopted by
U.N. General Assembly in 1949. Results of programme show
unparalleled exchange of knowledge and skills: in 1954 1,584
experts from 63 different countries were at work in practic¬
ally all less developed areas in the world. New type of world
workshop has provided help on development of water
resources, land reclamation, irrigation, consumer problems to
countries such as Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Gold Coast, Greece,
Iran, Iraq, Syria, Tanganyika, Yugoslavia. Malaria control
measures have been integrated in national health services of
Afghanistan, Ceylon, India and Thailand as a result of
technical assistance and advice. FAO has advised India and
Ceylon on fishing boat mechanization. Experts supplied by
WMO are establishing up-to-date meteorological services in
Nicaragua, Jordan, the Yemen and Afghanistan. Unesco has
sent social scientists to Haiti and Ceylon, set up fundamental
education centres in Mexico for the Latin American countries
and in Egypt for the Arab States. To date more than 4,500
experts from 70 different nationalities have been provided.
More than 100 countries have received technical aid in one
form or other. U.N. technical assistance can be written
down as a successful cooperative process still in active form.
TRADE AND TARIFFS:Havana Charter on International
Trade, including establishment of an International Trade
Organization indefinitely postponed. But the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a treaty now put
into operation on a provisional basis by more than 35 count¬
ries, embodies much of the commercial policy section of the
Havana Charter. Number of post-war tariff conferences
have resulted in the protection of 58,000 tariff rates, cover¬
ing large part of world's trade. Countries adhering to
GATT share more than 80% of world trade.
TRUST TERRITORIES: (see under Dependent Peoples).
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL:U. N. body responsible for
examination of reports submitted by Administering Powers
on Trust Territories. Council also accepts petitions from
inhabitants of Trust Territories and examines them in
consultation with Administering Authority. Council bases
its actions on International Trusteeship System which lays
down principles for the advancement of dependent peoples.
TT
U.N. MEMBERSHIP:World organ-
V- J ization now has 60 members, but due
to use of veto power in Security Coun¬
cil membership is still not univ¬
ersal. Fourteen applications for
membership have been vetoed to date in Council. Other
applications have been rejected by lack of sufficient majority.
Question of Chinese representation has plagued U.N. for past
few years. Decision on this difficult question has been regu¬
larly postponed.
W WOMEN:U.N. body on Status of
Women at work for betterment of
position of women in world of today.
Important decisions taken by Com¬
mission on questions such as:
equality of opportunity, voting rights,- and equal pay.
29
