E,ducation is recognized as the key
to the improvement in women's status.
It opens the door for women to new
professions and a new place in society.
Since 1946 Unesco has given special
emphasis to the problem of increasing
educational opportunities for women.
It has brought together educational
leaders from many countries to study
this problem. An Arab States Con¬
ference on free and compulsory edu¬
cation in 1954 and a Pan-Pacific
Women's Conference held in Manila
this year both gave the "access of
women to education" their chief
attention.
Unesco has investigated why pro¬
gress has been hindered in certain
countries. It has surveyed the reasons
why girls and boys do not get an equal
chance to go to school. It has issued
comprehensive reports on education
problems, such as: "Access of Women
to Education", "Women and Education
(India, Yugoslavia and Chile)" and
"Education of Women for Citizenship".
It has made country-wide surveys;
established fundamental education
training centres in the Middle East
and Latin America and sent experts
all over the world to help train women
teachers.
The facts and figures which follow
are taken from various Unesco reports
and studies on women's education.
ILLITERACY
I lliteracy throughout the world is
declining for both sexes, but it is de¬
clining more rapidly for men than for
women.
In only nine countries Bermuda,
Canada, Cuba, Hawaii, Jamaica, Span¬
ish Morocco, Sweden, the U.S.A. and
the Windward Islands is the illiteracy
rate lower for women than for men.
Female illiteracy usually runs much
higher, particularly in Asia, the Near
and Middle East and some parts of
Latin America. In countries of South-
East Asia female illiteracy averages
71 % as against 44 % for men. In Latin
America the figures are : 38.8 % for
men and 48.2 % for women.
About 30 % of the total population
of the world lives in countries where
female illiteracy in 1952 exceeded 50 %.
Only between 5 % and 10 % of the
world's population lives in countries
where female illiteracy is low.
In Europe literacy is usually much
higher, and in six European countries
Belgium, Finland, France, Italy,
Spain and Sweden the average illi¬
teracy rate for women is 13.4 %. The
average for men is only 3.8 % lower.
COMPULSORY
PRIMARY SCHOOLING
I N all countries where primary
schools are open to boys and girls there
are laws which oblige both sexes to
attend these schools for a specified
number of years, which differs from
country to country. Canada has eight
years of compulsory schooling for boys
and girls, Denmark has seven, Finland
has eight, France, the Netherlands and
Switzerland all have eight, the U.K.
has ten and the U.S.A. eight to 12.
Ochool registers of the following
countries show that 100 % of all the
girls between the ages of five and
fourteen go to school: Canada, the
U.S.A., Belgium, France, German Fede¬
ral Republic, Netherlands, U.K., Aus¬
tralia, New Zealand and Japan. In
most of them there are more women
teachers than men in the primary
schools. Examples are: U.S.A. 88 %
in 1951; Belgium 56 % in 1950; France
64 % in 1951; England and Wales 72 %
in 1951 and New Zealand 55 % in the
same year.
W:here there is compulsory educa¬
tion for girls, a Unesco report reveals
that this has a direct bearing on
family life. In such countries as Den¬
mark, the U.K., Sweden, the U.S.A.,
Australia and New Zealand the mor¬
tality rates per thousand live births are
at their lowest. But in other countries
where few girls go to school infant
mortality rates are very high from
115 to 200 or more per thousand births.
A lthough in Asia co-educational
primary schools are not the rule cer¬
tain countries, such as Burma, Ceylon,

Report card
on equal
education
the Philippines and Thailand, have
adopted the mixed primary school sys¬
tem. All these countries have shown,
according to the findings of a Unesco
study, an increase in the number of
girls going to school. In Burma there
was a 10 % rise in 12 years, Ceylon
showed an 8 % increase in 20 years,
and the Philippines and Thailand have
similar figures. The proportion of
women teachers in these schools in
Ceylon is 45 % (1952), Thailand 21 %
(1951), and the Philippines 61 % (1948).
In an investigation on the best me¬
thods to increase the numbers of girls
at school, Unesco has shown that
social aid measures yield practical
results. The provision of school meals,
clothing facilities, free distribution of
school materials and free board and
lodging have been introduced by many
countries to encourage girls to attend
school. Social workers are now being
employed by many schools to deal with
outside factors which affect school
attendance. As a result flexible school
schedules, whereby hours of work,
vacation periods, and weekly holidays
have been adjusted to suit local condi¬
tions, have been adopted. Other
measures include : curriculum revision;
improvement of the training and status
of teachers ; closer links between
parents and teachers and publicity
campaigns.
SECONDARY AND
VOCATIONAL SCHOOLING
E UROPE and North America have the
largest proportion of girls in secondary
schools, according to a Unesco report
on the present position of free and
compulsory education. Girls and boys
have an equal chance of secondary
schooling in 14 European and 12 North
and Central American countries. No
European country has an enrolment
figure of less than 30 % for girls in
secondary schools.
kj everal Latin American countries,
where primary schools are open to
girls and boys, now give opportunities
for girls in secondary and vocational
schools. Among these are the Domini¬
can Republic, Panama, Chile and Col¬
ombia all of which have roughly
comparable figures. These work out at
between approximately 40 % and 50 %
of girls enrolled in secondary and vo¬
cational schools.
A,. recent Unesco report shows that
more and more countries are trying to
throw open their secondary schools
equally to girls and boys, and at the
same time to make part of the com¬
pulsory period of education for girls on
the secondary level. Some countries,
notably Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland, the U.K. and the U.S.A.,
have attained equality at the secon¬
dary level for girls and boys. But, says
the Unesco report, in places where
there are six years or less of compul¬
sory schooling for girls, and the law is
imperfectly enforced, as in some Asian,
Latin American and African countries,
the proportion of girls in secondary
schools is low.
WOMEN TEACHERS
W,here women teachers outnumber
men in the primary schools the per¬
centage of girls attending schools in¬
creases from year to year. This im¬
portant point is brought out in a
Unesco report on women teachers and
teacher training. In countries such as
Argentina, Chile, Mexico the U.S.A.,
France, Sweden, the U.K. the Philip¬
pines and New Zealand where the per¬
centage of women teachers is equal to
or greater than that of men, there are
as many girls as boys in the primary
schools. However, in countries where
there are few women teachers such as
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Egypt
and Turkey, the number of girls in
primary schools is low.
20
