One whale equals
seventeen elephants
MIGRATING
MAMMOTHS
SCIENTISTS PLAY TAG
WITH ANTARCTIC WHALES
by Paul Budker
Assistant Director, National Museum of Natural History, Paris.
As shown above the giant blue whale, the largest animal the
world has ever known, is equal to 3 dinosaurs, 17 elephants,
133 oxen. (Courtesy "Progress", the Unilever magazine)
SEI WHALE MEASURING UP TO 56 FT.
SPERM WHALE MEASURING UP TO 65 FT.
Crossing the waters of the southern latitudes during the
month of October the surface of the long ocean swells
will be broken here and there by the sudden appear¬
ance of giant black humps shooting clouds of spray high
into the air. These humps betray the presence of vast
underseas hulks of hundred ton whales. At this time of the
year the whales are on the move southwards to their summer
feeding grounds in the Antarctic seas. This whale migra¬
tion occurs regularly every year, and to enable scientists to
study the fascinating story of the whale's life many of these
ocean mammals which pass by will carry, embedded in the
flesh below their immense dorsal fins, a thin steel cylinder
engraved with essential scientific data concerning their first
contact with man.
This amazing story of scientific detection is only today
revealing the surprising history of the controlled mass
movement of whales, to and fro, from the tropics to the
poles : a continuous rhythm which has, without doubt, been
carried on in the same way for centuries past. However, it
is only since the beginning of the present century that
precise facts have come to light on this previously unknown
pilgrimage across the oceans of the world.
HUMPBACK WHALE MEASURING UP TO 65 FT.
FIN WHALE MEASURING UP TO 90 FT.
BLUE WHALE MEASURING UP TO 100 FT.
Summer dining room
Early in January the whales have arrived in their
summer sea pastures and the whaling season opens.
In whaling parlance Antarctica comprises the entire
area from the South Pole northwards as far as latitude 40
south. It is here in this vast expanse of ice and ocean,
among some of the most inhospitable waters in the world,
that the whalers hunt and pursue their prey. Each year at
precisely the same time the fleets arrive on the edge of the
ice floes, and each year the vast schools of whales keep an
exact rendezvous with their killers. In some ways it is a
tragic story of man's inhumanity to an inoffensive denizen of
the ocean depths.
What is the impulse which drives the whales southwards
year after year? They come down to the Polar Seas for a
specific purpose. As the pack ice retreats southwards with
the coming of warmer weather, the ice floes break up and
the temperature of the water rises above freezing point to
about 35 degrees Fahrenheit. For the Antarctic wastes these
are summer conditions and a tiny shrimplike creature (Eu-
phausia superba), popularly known as krill thrives in them.
These minute organisms move along in million-strong masses.
The krill might well be described as the whalebone whale's
bonne bouche and every summer hundreds of tons are
consumed, or rather sifted through the whalebone tilters of
the Blue and some other species which do not possess teeth.
(Continued on next page.)
21

M I G R AT I N G
MAMMOTHS
(Continued)
The Antarctic in the summer season serves as a vast dining
room for the whale schools. When the whales arrive from
the northern tropical waters they are "lean" and hungry, but
after a diet of krill they fatten out and put on a few tons in
weight in preparation for the long journey before them.
In March and April, when the weather in the Antarctic
begins to grow cold and the autumn gales start to sweep across
the ice pack the whales begin to turn their noses to the north
and head for the tropic seas. This is their honeymoon
period and they move into the" balmy equatorial waters to
mate. From April until October the whalebone whales are to
be found cruising usually in couples in the tropical waters.
The vast schools have been dispersed and there is enough
evidence to show that they practise a type of seasonal mono¬
gamy. Not only is their mating carefully organized but
tropical whaling stations have established that throughout
this period the whales do not consume any food at all.
Numbers of whales, mainly of the Humpback variety, have
been examined and their stomachs have been found to be
quite empty. It is generally supposed that the whales live
throughout this mating period on the reserves which they
have accumulated during their long feast of krill in the
waters of the Antarctic.
As the month of October approaches a new impulse makes
itself felt, and the whales gather together, and, driven by an
internal rhythm which governs their wandering life, once
again begin their southerly peregrination towards the Polar
Seas. On their next journey northwards to the tropics the
mother whales will give birth to the infants which were
conceived in the same warm waters 11 months before. The
full cycle will have been completed.
Bachelors on the prowl
That is the story of the migration of the whalebone
whales, but the ivory toothed sperm whales have a very
different saga. These sperm whales maintain their
permanent headquarters in the tropics where they lead a
somewhat dissolute existence. Notoriously polygamous, each
male usually cruises in company with a harem of females
while on the outskirts of the group prowl the marauding
bachelors.
Few sperm whales make the long journey down to the
south, and those that do are usually solitary males who have
been ousted by their younger and more vigorous rivals, or
else hermit-like types who decide to forgo the pleasures and
vanities of the balmy equatorial waters and seek consolation
in a sterner life in the glacial waters of the south.
To garner the data which was essential for any study on
the migration of whales it was obviously of the first impor¬
tance to establish some system of checking or control. While
it was easy enough to ring or mark birds and small fish, such
a procedure with a hundred-ton whale posed a very different
problem. To catch a whale without injuring it, to fix a
mark and then to give the animal its liberty again was
patently an enterprise fraught with the greatest complexity
and danger. However, the problem was eventually solved
and the method now used has yielded the most fascinating
results.
The mark used on whales consists of a thin steel cylinder
slightly under a foot in length. Engraved on it are indica¬
tions giving the time and the plaee where the whale was
marked. The steel cylinder is fired at the whale from a
special calibre gun which is effective for the purposes of
penetration up to a distance of 50 yards. The projectile has
to be aimed so that the steel bullet will lodge in the muscular
masses lying under the layers of blubber in the area of the
whale's dorsal fin. Here, the cylinder becomes embedded and
will stay in place for years without harming the whale.
Cases have occurred where whales have been captured with
22
marks on them which have been placed between 15 and 19
years earlier.
In case it may be thought that this process might cause the
whale suffering, or give rise to infection, the biologists work¬
ing on the Enern in 1953, under the direction of Professor
Johan Ruud, the Director of Oslo Whale Institute, were
particularly careful to smear the outside of the cylinders used
for marking with penicillin.
The marks are recovered from the carcasses of the whales
during the normal course of whaling operations. Sometimes
the mark is seen when the dead whale is dragged aboard
the factory ship ready for flensing, and sometimes it is not
discovered until the carcass is in the processing chambers
after the meat has been treated. It is obviously preferable if
the mark is found when the whale is on the flensing deck
as this permits exact identification. In order to aid in
discovery some marks have nylon threads attached to them
which serve to catch the eye of the flensers.
Creatures of regular habits
Modern methods of whale marking started in the
1932/33 whaling season and since that time they
have been continued every year. Between 1932 and
1938 a total of 5,350 whalebone whales and sperm whales
were marked, principally in the Antarctic. In 1950 the
William Scoresby, oceanic research vessel of the British
Discovery Committee, took part in marking operations, and
in the course of a whaling cruise in 1953 the whale catcher
Enern with Professor Ruud and other scientific colleagues
aboard, concentrated on perfecting the marking process.
Although the information has only recently been firmly
established it is now well known that whales are not scatter¬
ed indiscriminately throughout the Antarctic. They tend to
concentrate in distinct zones which have been numbered
from 1 to 6. Here they return regularly after each northerly
migration. According to each particular species this regular¬
ity of appearance is more or less constant and can now be
considered as a general rule governed by certain exceptions.
The whale marking system has provided the biologist with
information of the utmost importance on the age and growth
of whales in addition to data on their migratory habits.
Dr. N. A. Mackintosh of the British National Institute of
Oceanography has observed that whale marking has proved
beyond any possible doubt the existence of a regular whale
migration between the Antarctic and the tropical seas. It
has also shown that after each migration the whales return
to their same zones. An interestingv piece of whale history
has been recorded by S. G. BrowrïN He relates that a whale
marked in 1938 was captured in 1954 less than one degree of
longitude away from the exact spot where it was marked
sixteen years before.
Nations on the watch
Of the various types of whales the Humpbacks are
apparently the most regular in their migratory habits,
since none have ever been captured outside the
marking zones. Rorquals and Blue whales also show a
remarkable degree of regularity each year in their return to
the Polar Seas.
Whale marking can be of considerable value to the whaling
industry and all countries interested in these problems have
expressed the desire to intensify marking operations under
the auspices of the British National Institute of Oceano¬
graphy. The work already carried out by the Enern was
accomplished with the aid of whaling companies from Nor¬
way, the Netherlands, South Africa and the United Kingdom.
In addition Australia, Japan, New Zealand and the USSR
also conduct whale marking. France has a research vessel,
the Orsom I, stationed at Madagascar which has the equip¬
ment necessary for this work, and a laboratory at Pointe
Noire in French Equatorial Africa will soon be in possession
of similar equipment. Thus it can be seen that close inter¬
national co-operation already exists for studying the migra¬
tory habits of the whale. Such co-operation can only lead in
the future to the most fruitful results.
