THESE ARE THE EGYPTIAN FELLAHINA WORD THAT TO THE WORLD SUGGESTS HUMILITY AND POVERTY, BUT IN FACT MEANS SIMPLY " FARMERS

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
by Georges Fradier
Here, the earth has no respite. No sooner is the harvest
gathered than the fields are ploughed and, at the same
time, sown; year in year out, each acre yields cereals,
then fodder, and then cotton. It is the land where the fields
are ever green the Nile delta, which for 5,000 years has
produced the finest crops in the world.
Nor have the peasants any easier lot. Regularly, at the
appointed hour, they must irrigate the fields : the water
must be pumped, directed into a complex network of cuts,
and distributed; every inch of ground must be flooded for
just the necessary length of time; the channels must be filled
up and then opened again. The men never part from their
fas, the proverbial hoe so often depicted by
the Pharaonic painters in their frescoes ;
it is an all-purpose tool, almost the only
tool they have.
All day long they dig, weed, cart compost,
clean the canals and, waist-deep in water,
work the Archimedean screws, or toil at the
ancient swing-plough which has no wheel
or mould-board, or work on their knees in
the rich mud that they seem almost to be
modelling into a fetish. Men of the earth
indeed, they are wedded to the soil. They
are the fellahin a word that to the world
suggests humility and poverty, but in fact
means simply "farmers".
The women, too, work in the fields ; they
look after the poultry, cows and black
water-buffaloes ; they mould the slabs of
cow-dung, the only form of fuel ; they go
to market to sell eggs, fowls and vegetables,
all packed into big bundles that they carry
on their heads ; and as travellers say, they
walk like goddesses, head erect, until they
die. They prepare the evening meal and
make bread, but cooking is the least of their
burdens. The children, boys and girls
alike, also have their set tasks ; at the age
of 10 they are already experienced workers.
Little importance is attached to villages
and houses. Land is far too dear for the
people to be able to build comfortably on it. Only the mosque
and the church are relatively spacious. The little dried-mud
houses, huddled together, have two or three dark rooms
shared by people and animals alike. They are furnished with
a marriage chest, a few bowls, and perhaps a mat or two
nothing more. In winter, the occupants sleep on the clay
stove.
In this province, known as Menufia, there are more than
740 inhabitants to the square kilometre. The town of Menuf,
45 miles distant from Cairo, has over 60,000 inhabitants, but
is smaller than the Park of Versailles. "Little villages" here
may have five or ten thousand inhabitants ; the fellahin do
not take up much space.
From a distance these villages are a beautiful sight, nestling
on the banks of a canal or pool, or in the fields under giant
palms and eucalyptuses. The little houses, too, which line
the smelly, unbearably dusty alley-ways, are often pleasingly
built ; and some visitors admire the rough frescoes re
presenting a train, the sea, a steamer, or famous monuments
which pilgrims returning from Jerusalem or Mecca paint
on the front of their homes. Many of these houses are
indeed more attractive than the square cement buildings of
the capital ; yet the visitor wonders now anyone could
possibly live in them.
The fact remains that people do liveand die in these
dwellings with their mud floors. For the fellahin, the earth
is never dirty it is the earth. Likewise, for them, the water
is never impure ; it is the sacred, life-giving water of the
Nile ; if it were too clean and too well-filtered, many people
would think it lifeless and useless.
But life is perhaps not long in these
surroundings ; few old folk are about in the
villages ; that toothless, wrinkled, spent
old woman in the street may not have seen
60. All the same, the fellahin are rightly
renowned for their strength and toughness,
their muscular arms and broad shoulders
as are the girls for their supple sturdiness.
There has been no degeneration in the race,
it is said, since the epoch of the Pyramids.
It might be said that their faces, too, are
still as handsome ; but trachoma has too
often overlaid their deep-set brown or black
eyes with a whitish stain, or the eyelids are
covered with pus. Whether of native stock
or Arab origin, the Egyptians have always
lived frugally ; but today they are stalked
by hunger. Of all the crops they grow
they only keep some wheat or maize for
making bread, some beans for making soup,
and a few vegetables to eat raw. They
work the same soil as their forbears, with
the same tools, though their crops are worth
more because of the cotton thousands of
acres, cared for like "gardens". But land
seems harder and harder to come by.
For this is the vital fact : Seven or eight
million men are working on the land in
Egypt, and at least three million of them
own the land they work. But most of them
own less than a feddan (some one and a quarter acres), while
the country's population has doubled in 40 years, the area of
land under cultivation has only increased by one quarter.
These tireless workers, these sturdy fellahin, are all sick
men. Ninety-two per cent of them suffer from bilharziasis',
a disease caused by a microscopic worm which is peculiar to
swampy land or irrigation channels. The worm breeds in
the snails which abound in the irrigation cuts where men
work, children bathe and women draw drinking-water. It
penetrates the skin of human beings and circulates through
the body, lodging in the intestines or bladder and eating
them away. A vicious circle is set up : the infection leaves
the body with the excrement, which goes into the irrigation
canals, where the snails are waiting. And so on. Ninety-
two per cent !
And besides endemic diseases there are other scourges. Of
cholera there have been only sporadic outbursts since the
1948 epidemic, but the threat is ever present. Malaria seems

Fellahin : 'nothing good
comes from city folk'
Feluccas on the Nile
The Great Nile3,900 miles long from Lake
Victoria to the Mediterraneanis Egypt's
commercial highway and its source of life.
The yearly flood of the Nile has for centuries
been the secret of Egypt's fertility. The heavy
April rains in the basin of the White Nile in
Central Africa start the first flood and the May
rains in Ethiopia give the real flood of rlcn
muddy water that fertilizes as well as Irrigates.
The great dam at Aswan stores up the surplus
flood and releases It later on, to water the Nile
Valley all the year round. (Unesco photos)
now to be under control, as a result of the introduction of
DDT as a prophylactic. (The last epidemic, in 1946, is
thought to have cost a million lives.) Tuberculosis, however,
is rife ; the Ministry of Health records 55,000 deaths from it
every year, which means that some 500,000 people must be
suffering from the disease, in its active or arrested form, and
that the annual death-rate from it is about 200 per 100,000
inhabitants. In France the corresponding figure is 42, in
Denmark eight.
It should be added that in Egypt, as in many Middle
Eastern countries, infantile mortality amounts to over 65
per cent in the first five years. Trachoma afflicts about half
the population, or even more, for the primary stage often
escapes diagnosis. Sufferers will not consult the doctor for
"mere conjunctivitis".
But when such economic conditions are combined with lack
of hygiene and over-population, it is not easy to find solutions
which go to the root of the trouble. We cannot in this
instance say "the Government need only do so and so" ;
Egypt's official social services are exemplary in their scope
and good sense.
But what can in fact be done, not to bring about miraculous
reforms, but simply to help these people to lead lives that are
less hard and less narrow? And, after that, how can they be
brought to share in the economic, technical, political and
cultural exchanges which are the currency of modern civili¬
zation? How can we turn this inarticulate people into a
body of citizens enjoying full rights? These are the questions
facing the hundred members of the Sirs-el-Layyan funda¬
mental education centre today.
Sirs-el-Layyan, in the Menufia district, is a large straggling
village where, in 1952, the Egyptian Government and Unesco,
with the help of other United Nations Specialized Agencies,
opened a training-centre for the men and women who will be
in charge of fundamental education in the Arab countries.
It is thus not an institution working for merely local progress
and the benefit of the Egyptian fellahin alone. Candidates
come to it from nine countries Egypt, Iraq, Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Palestine (Arab
refugees), Saudi-Arabia, Syria and Yemen.
They are there to prepare themselves for the tasks awaiting
them when they return to their homeland. But around Sirs-
el-Layyan each member of the centre sees, basically, the
same kind of peasant society that he has known in his own
country. It is a form of society found with, of course, many
variations throughout the Arab world. The Egyptian delta
is, however, a particularly valuable field for experiment
because of the density of its population. Within a radius of
a few miles a hamlet, a small town and five or six villages
may be studied at the same time some of them quite
flourishing, others completely poverty-stricken; some entirely
Muslim, others with a Christian minority; some peopled by
small farmers, others by day-labourers and workmen who
own no land.
It was, moreover, in this district that the Egyptian Gov¬
ernment a few years ago embarked on an educational and
social service scheme which was to lead to a nation-wide
enterprise for social and economic progress. The "social
centres" found in several villages comprise dispensaries,
maternity clinics and assembly rooms. Evening classes for
illiterates have been started, health campaigns organized,
and agricultural information offices opened; playgrounds
have been provided for children, as well as garden plots for
them to tend. Thus with the help of trained staff, and
thanks to tried methods, as well as experiments (sometimes
successful, sometimes a failure, but always providing a
valuable lesson), the centre's work is greatly facilitated.
At all events, even though the surrounding villages are
primarily the centre's "laboratories", the trainees know that
their daily work must contribute to the people's welfare. If
they fail here, what will they do later? The solutions they
will have to apply then must be worked out now, on the spot.
Picture a team of 10 or 12 trainees of every nationality
represented at the centre. In front of them is a village,
which is to be their village for the next two years. They
rent a house there, and at first visit it for one day a week
(later they will live in it permanently) ; they are really face
to face with the village, and for weeks will be looked upon as
strangers, intruders, embarrassing and embarrassed.
They are not young students; their average age is 30.
Some are university graduates, while others have already

Unesco Cotirier. Nr 3-4. 1955
started their careers as teachers, social workers, agricultural
engineers, or nurses; there are specialists in adult education,
in anti-epidemic work, or in education by visual aids. But
at first they lose their self-confidence, and walk about like
shy visitors.
The village with which they have to contend is an
amorphous mass of men and women whose first instinct is to
reject, to mistrust. The fellahin generally expect nothing
good from the ladies and gentlemen of the towns. For centu¬
ries the city's only interest in them has been to send them
masters, tax-collectors and police. It takes days and weeks
of mutual observation, patient explanations and experience
of working with others, before the students are accepted and
their role understood. They have come to help the village a
little. But what can be done without money? They are not
going to build, or put in drinking-water, or dig a new irriga¬
tion canal, or distribute presents. And besides, what are
their qualifications?
"We simply want to help you help yourselves." It is a good
formula; but no amount of talking will make it understand¬
able to the peasants, who have little faith in novelties and
automatically run away from the idea of any new scheme.
The trainees look through their list (which they think they
know by heart) of the needs of every village in the delta,
needs that are doubtless those of every village in the East:
economic reform, agriculture, hygiene, education. But where
are they to begin, and how? Which men and women would
it be best to approach first?
The trainees soon discover the ganglia, the nervous system
as it were, of the mass. They identify the village "notables"
peasants more prosperous or better educated than the rest,
influential and respected priests or religious teachers, or
young people with a taste for progress and action. The Sirs-
el-Layyan centre has now been operating for two years. If
its efforts in the villages selected had to be described in a
single sentence, it could be said that in every instance the
trainees had achieved something unheard of: they have
created true communities. Using a variety of tactics, they
are gradually bringing into being an organized village life, by
giving self-realization to groups of men with a civic
conscience, potential "leaders" in a system which, based on
service, is the nucleus of a local democracy.
Of course, to start a sewing-school or a dispensary and
attract women and children to it, it "was enough" to gain the
confidence of the village; it seemed quite a simple matter.
But such confidence is not easily gained quite the contrary.
It is not the custom for women to go out at will except when
going to work, or for them to meet apart from their families;
they are afraid of ridicule, and normally do not dare to
venture into a quarter other than their own; and as for girls,
they are expected to remain shut up at home from the
beginning of puberty until marriage.
These customs and conventions seemed immutable. Yet
the young women trainees of the centre do not merely visit
homes; because their own hostel is practically sacrosanct,
they can, and regularly do, receive children, girls and married
women there. The hostel at Deberki, for instance, is built on
exactly the same lines as the rest of the village, mud walls,
three rooms and a cattleshed under a single roof, a small
closed court and a rickety staircase giving on to the roof-
terrace. In other aspects, however, the difference leaps to
the eye: the whole hostel is spotless and almost comfortable,
and all at the price of no more than a little work, the aim
being to show the villages by example that they too, without
dipping into their pockets, can live in healthier and
pleasanter houses. The lesson has driven itself home, and
several families have built themselves well-ventilated, white¬
washed living-rooms, which are swept every morning.
Again, it was probably only necessary to win the trust of a
few to persuade people that a "family" kitchen garden was
possible and profitable. A few square metres set aside for
vegetables and fruits to be eaten in the household and not
marketed can have an influence on the children's diet out of
all proportion to the expenses involved. Nor is Egypt the
only country where we find peasant children wasting away
for lack of vitamins.
However, the Sirs-el-Layyan centre by no means confines
itself to such undertakings as these, where success depends
upon calling forth a friendly feeling that might prove very
ephemeral. In the same village of Deberki which, lying at
the far end of the irrigation system, has the least fertile

The 'Blind River' where
girls steer the boats
farmlands of the region, 150 peasants have combined to form
a co-operative, contributing from their scanty resources at
rates ranging from 50 piastres for the poorest to £E5 for the
richest; and they have bought a tractor. Now these people
are cautious and suspicious in the extreme; they are usually
terrified by the idea of the slightest form of "investment" :
being firmly convinced that money should be used only to buy
land. To get them embarked on something as audacious as
this, more than mere friendly advice was needed.
The centre's trainees had,' in fact, to unearth in the village
qualities of organization and initiative whose existence the
villagers themselves had never suspected. The trainees did
not form the co-operative; they merely helped it into being.
They certainly argued, and most persuasively, the virtues of
pooled work and explained the operation of combines on a
share basis, but they never postulated the need of a tractor.
The village actually possessed potential leaders whose
abilities were not being used; and it is these who now form
the board of the co-operative, with its chairman, treasurer,
secretary and so forth men of all ages, meeting ceremo¬
niously to discuss the crops to be sown, the maintenance
of tractor and tools and the liquidation of the debt incurred
in their purchase. They are men who, for the first time in
their lives, feel that they are managing their future, running
their own affairs and deliberating about them publicly,
instead of merely suffering in silence and submitting to fate.
It may seem strange that, in writing about fundamental
education, we have not yet spoken of actual teaching. It is
generally admitted nowadays that "it is not enough to learn
how to read" and that, in a peasant community, inability to
write is merely one problem among many. Astonishment,
however, is sometimes felt that educational work does not
begin in a classroom; evening classes are an old institution,
and history now records many well-known "literacy
campaigns."
The trainees of Sirs-el-Layyan would reply that education
can begin anywhere, as they prove in all sorts of ways in a
group gathered round a tractor, in connexion with a health
campaign, or on an open-air stage. The main thing, they
would always tell you, is that people should want to learn.
Once that desire is expressed, no teaching, no form of edu¬
cation is really difficult. Evening courses are, generally
speaking, an outcome rather than a starting-point. Once
such courses have begun, at the request of the future pupils,
education is already on the right road.
At Qalatta, the reading-classes would not have attracted
many pupils had the trainees appeared at the outset in the
guise of school-teachers. Qalatta is a charming village; it
has plenty of trees, and lies on the bank of an ancient canal,
wide as a river the "blind river", as it is called, where white
birds glide and little girls steer the boats.
For all its beauty of setting, however, Qalatta is one of the
most neglected villages of the region. Land here is even
scarcer and more broken up than in. the neighbouring areas;
on the plan, the farms look like a sprinkling of tiny -gardens.
The people of Qalatta, moreover, are famed for their feuds
which are forever dividing man from man and setting
districts, streets and families at odds. Possibly this is
already a thing of the past, but at all events the village, two
years ago, had an atmosphere charged with suspicion and

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
ANCIENT WHEEL turned by yoked oxen Is still used to pump water for irrigation in the Nile Delta. Irrigation systems are age-old and farming tools
are of the most primitive kind, but the skill and labour of the fellahin have made this land one of the most productive in the world. (Unesco photo).
seemed doomed to chronic anarchy, mingled with apathy and
dejection.
Yet it was at Qalatta, one evening in February 1954, that
hundreds of peasants could be seen, queueing up in orderly
fashion in front of the trainees' house. Adolescents, respec¬
table citizens, grey-bearded grandfathers all were illiterates
waiting to enrol for the evening classes which were being
organized at the village's request. One by one, they sat
down before the table where the "literacy expert", Mr. Rushdi
Khatir, examined them and entered them for the appropriate
class. Some of them in fact knew nothing at all; others
could sign their names; a third group could still display the
elementary knowledge acquired, in the past, during a few
months at school.
The last-comers waited patiently in the moonlight at the
roadside, in the garden, or on the terrace overlooking the
water. It was past midnight by the time the enrolment was
completed; and there was an air of mystery about the scene,
as if the occasion had been a meeting of conspirators or a
gathering of volunteers. The fellahin may indeed have felt
that they were taking an adventurous or, at any rate,
important step in submitting their names for this initiation
into the mysterious world of books.
In order to achieve this result, the students had worked
with unfailing tact for over a year to put an end to the feuds
which, hitherto, had defeated every good intention. No
reforms could be effected in Qalatta before a spirit of
comradeship and mutual trust had been re-created among
the people and the value of co-operation demonstrated to
them. The first step was to set up a club to be operated,
almost at once, by the villagers themselves.
During Ramadan the new club increased the number of its
social evenings, calling for this purpose on all the talent of
the village. Next a dispensary was organized, with two
"attendants" trained by the students. The club was thrown
open to the young people, who formed a special "cultural
activities" section; and the officers, with the trainees' help,
are now organizing a small public library.
The club, in effect, acts as a municipal council; on
complaints from the village, last year, that there was a
shortage of water for irrigation, it sent a delegation,
accompanied by two trainees, to the Water Department. And
when the engineer explained that the shortage was due to
neglect of the canals in the Qalatta area, it was once again
the club, at its regular meetings and at the mosque on
Fridays, which campaigned for a general labour service. The
canals were duly cleaned and, the following season, the water
supply was so plentiful that irrigation was ensured with
unexpected ease. Co-operation had proved its worth.
Today the people of Qalatta, like those of Deberki and other
villages, are learning to read and write. Twice or three times
a week they go to the club or the village school and pore
patiently over their spelling primers or plough through their
first books; the methods and books they use are prepared for
them by the experts at Sirs-el-Layyan, and are thoroughly
up to date. That they make this effort at the close of a long
day's work shows that they want to make it and know what
they want. For them, elementary education is not an end in
itself; in the old days, they still regarded it as an unnecessary
luxury, or perhaps as a means of becoming a police constable.
Now they see that it can bring them definite advantages.
One man wants to read so that he shall know the Koran
better; another, so that he can examine his bills and tax
forms. The majority want to have access to the practical
knowledge provided by the pamphlets and books already
displayed in their meeting-rooms manuals on agriculture,
co-operative farming or odd-jobbing, and illustrated
pamphlets on hygiene, cattle diseases or cotton pests. This
mine of valuable information is there, within reach; and
each peasant feels that he will be able to take full advantage
of it just as soon as he has completed the course he is
conscientiously following.
"Everything hangs together", said one of the trainees.
"When we set out to raise the standard of living a little, each
step leads to another . . . but then the result depends on a
third factor, which was not reckoned with." What goes by
the name of poverty, in the villages, is not a superficial

A TIMELESS FEATURE of the Middle East scene is a shepherd and his flock on their way to
new pastures. In addition to rearing sheep for their meat and wool, farmers in the district of
Menufiasite of the Sirs-el-Layyan Centreuse ewe's milk to make a cheese which is reputed
throughout Egypt. Local producers have now received certificates of quality from the Centre.
condition arising from a single simple cause which can be
dealt with at one stroke. It is due to a whole tangle of
causes, almost impossible to root out one by one.
Hundreds of children fall victims to an epidemic. Why?
Because the mothers have no notion of hygiene? Probably
because there were no schools for them, and there are still
all too few for their daughters. 3ut there are other reasons
too: polluted water (and who is going to pay for a public
water-system?) and, above all, insanitary housing. Homes
are insanitary because the fellahin have only the vaguest
notions of what a proper, healthy house is. We must teach
them, if we can. But whether they are taught or not, the
fact remains that the fellahin lack the wherewithal to build
better houses.
This argument seems decisive; in fact it is not entirely
valid. In these villages and towns, every street, every square
looks the same as it has looked for centuries past yet no
house is more than 20 years old. Everything built falls to
pieces after 20 years, and the fellahin rebuild it at great
expense. What happens is that the foundations rot away;
if the brick foundations could be reinforced, every fellah
would have at least one less house to build in his lifetime, and
could thus enlarge and improve his home without spending
more than he does at present. An expert from Yugoslavia is
investigating this question at Sirs-el-Layyan, and has reason¬
able hopes of being able to introduce a cheap type of concrete
which would revolutionize peasant housing.
The same expert is co-operating with the trainees to
produce a new stove a simple clay model designed to be
much more effective and economical than the traditional
type. This may seem a trivial matter; but if their stoves
consumed less fuel, the latter could be supplied exclusively
from wood, branches and twigs, and straw. The cattle-dung
could then be used as manure. The invention of a good
stove may, one day, spare them this vast expenditure of
time and labour.
One fellah admitted as much, when he smilingly said:
"'It's better to save your strength when you haven't enough
to eat." It is shameful that such skilled and hardworking
farmers should have to feed themselves and their families so
badly. Apart from raw vegetables, the fellahin eat practically
nothing but bread, beans and a little cheese. If they raise
poultry, they do so for sale, and they themselves only eat
eggs on special occasions: "They cost too much," a fellah
will tell you.
It is, in fact, these slender profits that enable them occa¬
sionally to buy a few clothes or tools, or even to save a little
money to buy another water-buffalo or donkey to replace a
beast that has died. What then remains from all their work?
People will quote an old proverb: "The fellah is like a needle,
which dresses other people but itself remains naked."
But once the peasants can succeed in organizing a sound
co-operative, escaping from the money-lender's clutches,
selling their corn or cotton crop at a proper price, obtaining
good seed at the right time, and combining for the purpose
of major irrigation, ploughing and harvesting work, they are
freed from a host of daily cares.
The conclusions of the women trainees are the same as
those of their colleagues who are concerned with farming or
rural planning. "Import progress ready-made from outside?
Useless, ridiculous. Even the finest examples of progress
would leave the community indifferent people would not
even look at them. You might as well give a refrigerator to
a fellah who has nothing to put in it and has never set eyes
on an electric lamp. No; true progress takes place in the
mind, it comes from within."
Unesco has recently published a booklet entitled "Sirs-el-Layyan" which
describes the work of the fundamental education, training centre for men
and women teachers in the Arab slates. 'llus publication can be obtained
from Unesco national distributors listed on page 66, price : $ 0.25 ; 1/6 ;
75 Fr francs.
10
