Energy from the sun:
THE DESERTS
GREATEST
RESOURCE
by Gerald Wendt
The source of all life on earth is sunshine. When water
is available green leaves use the energy of the sun to
manufacture both foods and fuel. Each year the sun
thus produces many hundreds of millions of tons of starch,
sugar and, less directly, fats and proteins for human food.
It makes no less than 10,000 million tons of wood each year.
In past ages it has provided the many thousands of millions
of tons of vegetation that are now underground in the form
of coal. For lack of water, this does not happen in arid
lands. The challenge persists, however, at least to utilize this
great resource of the deserts as energy to replace fuel, if not
to make food.
The amount of available energy in the form of sunshine is
colossal many times larger than can ever be used. The
sunshine that falls in a day on 100 square meters of flat
surface (an area 32.8 feet on a side, about as large as the
roof of a small house) is equivalent to 558 kilowatt hours of
Press Information Bureau, Gove of India.
electricity, to 146 pounds of soft coal, or 14 gallons of gasoline.
If this could be used for power with an efficiency of only five
percent, the sunshine on so small an area would provide
28 kilowatt hours or 38 horse power hours of work per day.
The urge to find a way for using this energy is irresistible.
Sunshine may eventually be used on a large scale for the
operation of factories. That day is far off, but the imme¬
diate need in the arid lands is for small power units for
pumping water from wells and underground streams.
At the Unesco symposium.' on the utilization of solar energy
which was held in New Delhi, India, in October 1954, Dr. Far-
rington Daniels of the University of Wisconsin, U.S.A., made
this point in these words : "Let us be content with solar
machines that have a conversion into useful work of only
me to five percent of the sun's radiation thai
falls on them but let us insist on a simple low- (Cont'd on
cost engine that does not need complicated page 22)
COOKING BY
SUN POWER
Simple devices for putting the sun's
energy to work in the kitchen are
now being successfully developed
in several countries. In the Middle
East, a simple, compact solar cooker
has been designed and perfected by a
Lebanese, Dr. Tarcici. An Egyptian,
firm expects to manufacture about
18,000 a year. Photos on opposite
page show Dr. Tarcici demons¬
trating his solar stove. In India a
simple solar cooker developed by
the National Physical Laboratory,
New Delhi, is being manufactured
on a large scale. It consists of a
concave metallic plate which focuses
the sun's rays on an iron ring. Photo,
left, shows it being used in conjunc¬
tion with a pressure cooker with
which it can cook vegetables in
ten to fifteen minutes. Sun's heat
from reflecting surface will bring
water to boiling point in 20 to
30 minutes. Thanks to solar
cookers sparse vegetation and ani¬
mal dungat present used in many
countries as fuel will be saved for
the protection and improvement of
the land.
20

Unesco Courier. Nr £-9. 1955
Winslow, American University, Beirut.
mmw
^
* » j§>tF
< H
13tsd
JÜ
ifj^k\ fi! 1 £
u »>
1 r¿\Mn
/>¿l
fc"""Ai
JE
21

STEAM FROM
GIANT RUSSIAN
MIRRORS
The Soviet Union with almost one million square miles of
arid land has devoted years of research to developing practical
means of putting the sun's energy to work. Recently the
U.S.S.R. made the startling announcement that it had deve¬
loped an apparatus capable of producing steam by solar
energy. Photo above right, shows one of these reflectors, a
giant curved mirror over 30 feet in diameter whose heat
energy can produce steam. These heaters can operate can¬
neries and refrigeration plants as well as distil fresh water
from sea water. Recently a solar engine was developed for
industry which produces 33,000 tons of steam per year.
Russian technicians have found that distillation plants power¬
ed by solar energy provide the cheapest method of purifying
water for livestock grazing in remote desert pastures. Photo
below right shows interior of solar energy plant. Photo
adjoining page shows metal being soldered by solar energy at
Tashkent Experimental Laboratory. (Official Soviet photos)
repairs." A useful engine should cost
no more than a horse, bullock or camel
and should have a work-life at least as
long as the animal's. It would free for
human nutrition the land now used to
feed the animal. In India it would save
fertilizer the cow-dung now used for
desert areas it would reduce the cutting
thus preventing the spread of desert
THE DESERT'S
G RE AT E ST
RESO URCE
(Continued)
for much-needed
domestic fuel. In
of shrubs for fuel
conditions.
Even cloudy weather does not necessarily destroy the
effectiveness of solar engines, according to Dr. A. E. H.
Bleksley of the University of Witwatersrand (South Africa).
He reported at New Delhi on measurements made during the
past forty years of the amount of solar radiation at different
locations and in different climates. He told the symposium,
"Except in the relatively rare cases of a sky completely
covered with a dark cloud layer, the presence of diffuse
radiation serves largely to compensate for the loss of direct
radiation due to thin or scattered clouds or to considerable
quantities of dust in the atmosphere".
While there is ample energy in sunlight, the chief difficulty
in making use of it is that it is spread so thinly. Nowhere on
earth is the direct heat of the sun sufficiently intense to boil
water. The highest temperature on record is 136.4° F. (At'
Aziziya, Libya, in 1922) but water boils at 212° F. For this
reason sunshine from a larger area must be gathered and
concentrated into a small area to attain the necessary tem¬
perature, as small boys focus sunshine with a lens that they
call á "burning glass". This is effective but involves the
mechanical difficulty of moving the mirrors about with the
change in the position of the sun during the day.
Nevertheless by such means a simple device was developed
for home use by the National Physical Laboratory at New
Delhi in India. It consists of a metallic plate curved into
a concave shape and supported on a stand so that thß sun's
rays are reflected upward from the polished metallic surface
ind are thus concentrated on an iron ring at the focus, or
centre of curvature. When a pot of water or of rice is set
on the ring it absorbs the sun's heat from about one square
yard of surface and is heated to the boiling point in 20 to
30 minutes. This solar cooker is to be manufactured on a
large scale and should be effective in avoiding the use of
scarce fuel, particularly in the many arid regions. It serves
well for cooking and is of value in saving both sparse vege¬
tation, and fertilizer for protection and improvement of the
land instead of using them a fuel.
But to obtain sufficient energy to operate a pump, long
cylindrical mirrors are more useful. At the focus of such
mirrors a glass tube filled with water serves as a boiler. By
various modifications of mirror systems it has been possible
to generate three or four kilowatts of the energy as steam
which can be harnessed to an electric generator, there turned
into electricity to operate a motor and thus a pump.
Sun makes 12,000 tons of ice a year
At the same symposium, there was a striking report by
Professor V. A. Baum, head of the Heliotechnical Labo¬
ratory at the G. M. Krzhizhanovsky Power Institute at
Tashkent in the Soviet Union. He said that Soviet scientists
have succeeded in developing curved-mirror (paraboloid)
reflectors ten meters in diameter which produce 100 pounds
of steam per hour at a pressure of 100 pounds per square
inch. Such heaters have been used for the operation of
canneries, for distilling water, operating refrigerators, and
for heating the laboratory.
Similar heaters have also been developed to make fresh
water from salt water. A practical still of this type produces
250 gallons of distilled water per day and uses only 4 pounds
of steam per gallon. This proves to be the cheapest method
of providing water for livestock grazing in the Kara Kur
desert. A still of this type has been used to make 75,000 tons
of distilled water and 12,000 tons of ice a year.
11

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
One of the great handicaps of solar energy is its disconti¬
nuous operation. There is no way to make sun shine during
the night, nor on days of dense clouds. The pumping of
water for irrigation is not seriously handicapped but the
generation of electricity for home and village lighting in the
evening, which is an important function of a possible solar
engine, obviously requires the storage of power.
In a discussion submitted to the United Nations Confer¬
ence on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, Dr. Farrington
Daniels made the following suggestions on the storage prob¬
lem : One obvious solution is to pump water to a reservoir
at a higher level and allow it to fall back at night to operate
a water turbine and dynamo. For many years a mine in
New Mexico (U.S.A.) was lighted day and night by electric
lights operated by a dynamo and solar engine. A parabolic
mirror focussed sunlight onto a boiler which ran a steam
engine and pumped water into a 5,000 gallon tank 20 feet
above the ground. One can imagine that if solar power
should become important those communities would be
favored, which have a high plateau nearby for easy con¬
struction of a water reservoir to store hydro-electric power.
Abandoned mines with a water turbine at the bottom might
be used also, the water being pumped up during the day and
allowed to flow back during the night. Diving bells with
deep chambers in the ocean to be pumped out during the
day, might be used by coastal cities.
Electrical storage batteries would also serve the purpose
and in principle they are ideal. The lead storage battery
has been developed for automobiles to a high state of per¬
fection. It is too expensive and requires too much attention
for general use in non-industrialized areas. But for use
with solar engines, says Dr. Daniels, the storage battery need
not be strong, rugged and of small size. It does not have
to give a high amperage and it does not have to be instantly
and completely reversible. Ignoring these requirements of
our present lead storage batteries, it may well be that new
chemical systems and new types of electrodes can be devel¬
oped. For general use, the cost should be no more than
one-tenth that of present lead storage batteries.
There are thus a number of approaches to the problem
of power in the desert. They are important because small
local sources of power would not only be useful in cooking
and in lighting remote communities but would also permit
the use of arable land to grow human food in place of the
vegetation that is now required to feed the animals that
are the present sources of power. This alone would accom¬
plish a considerable increase in the food production in arid
lands. Where underground water is available such local
power resources would of course be primarily valuable in
permitting irrigation and thereby further increasing food
production.
House warming by ' heat traps '
There are however, other uses to which the sun can be
put, namely, the heating of houses and of water for
domestic use. In many desert countries the temperature
is very hot by day and yet uncomfortably cold at night. In
such locations house heating requires the absorption of the
sun's energy by day and its storage for use by night. Since
this use does not require the generation of steam or a high
temperature the collection of sunshine is a much easier
matter. It is done quite simply by using a "heat trap", an
insulated box exposed to the sunshine on the roof. It is
blackened on the inside to absorb heat and is covered with
a piece of glass or a thin sheet of transparent plastic. The
cover allows visible sunlight to pass into the box where the
short visible light waves are transformed into the much
longer waves of heat radiation. This does not pass through
the glass or plastic and the box becomes quite hot. The hot
air from this box is then led to a storage bin which is
filled with crushed rock or gravel. This is heated by the
air and retains the heat. By night, cool air passes through
the storage bin and, warmed by absorbing the
heat from the rocks or gravel, in turn warms (Cont'd on
the house. next page)
23

MULTI-MIRROR solar heater is one of many devices being developed at India's National Physical Laboratory. Battery of cheap, flat glass mirrors (left)
concentrates sun's heat. Each mirror is fixed on its own small mounting (right). All mirrors can be tilted as a group by a single automatic control to
reflect rays into single focus. Heater is designed to provide power for small steam engines or electric motors. (PIB-Government of India photos)
Water heating for domestic uses, including the washing
of clothes, is done similarly, the water in a storage tank
being gradually heated by the hot air from the heat trap
on the roof. For example in the Russian village of Firusa
near Asshabad, a solar heat collector with a surface of
900 square feet provided 10.5 tons of hot water in 24 hours
at a medium temperature of 120° F.
One other possibility is available for future use. In April
1954 the Bell Telephone Laboratory announced a solar battery
able to transform sunlight directly into electrical energy
without the use of heat. It employs two thin wafers of very
pure silicon in contact with each other. This highly purified
silicon now costs $380 per pound. Although the wafers are
thin the cost of such a battery is very high and it is used as
yet only to produce electrical power for amplifier stations on
rural telephone lines. Yet it is remarkably effective. The
current is about 25 milliamperes per square centimetre or
2.5 amperes per square metre at a voltage of 0.3 volts. This
indicates a high efficiency in the utilization of sunshine, up
to 8 % being common and it has reached eleven per cent.
The promise of this direct method of generating electricity
from the sun therefore depends only on the possibility of
manufacturing silicon, which in its common form is a cheap
metal, in high purity at a low price.
It is apparent from this survey that utilization of sunshine
for heat and for power has been neglected in the past, partly
because the researches have been done in highly industria¬
lized countries where ample coal is available, and where
sunshine can hardly compete. Present attention to the
needs of arid lands where coal and other fuels are either
costly or lacking, has revealed many promising possibilities
and it is now legitimate to anticipate that practical means
of using the sun will gradually become available to desert
peoples and that sunshine will become a valuable resource
that can be converted into food, fuel and power to improve
tl>e standard of living.
Dr. GERALD WENDT. American science writer and author, was former head of
the Division of Teaching and Dissemination in Unesco's Deoartment of Natural
Sciences. Formerly professor of chemistry at the University of Chicago and Dean
at the Pennsylvania State College, he has devoted many years to interpreting science
and its social consequences to the public. At the recent Geneva Conference on
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, Dr. Wendt was science consultant for the
U.N. Radio.
KEEPING COOL with the
help of solar energy is
now a scientific possibility
with this sun-powered steam-
producing apparatus being
tested at the National Phy¬
sical Laboratory, New Delhi,
India. Machines which make
use of solar energy to work
air-conditioning or refriger¬
ation plants, to cook food
and to provide cheap indus¬
trial power are being devel¬
oped at this centre. (PIB-
Government of India photo)
24
