Unesco Courier. N' 1. 1955
The motion picture industry start¬
ed on its world career as an
entertainment medium with the
presentation of topical events or
what we would today call the newsreel.
The chief aim of the earliest produ¬
cers like Edison, Lumière, Pathe and
Gaumont was in fact to give their
audiences films taken from life, from
everyday events in the street, in .
railway stations and wherever there
was movement or activity.
Thus Lumiere's first films, showing
the arrival of a train and workmen
leaving the factory, were in a sense
newsreel subjects. The first real
newsreel was made by the Lumière
brothers even before they gave their
first public showing in Paris. The
Cinématographe was to be shown at
the Congress of the National Union of
French Photographic Societies in
June of 1895. There the Lumières
created a veritable sensation when
they filmed the delegates arriving for
the opening meeting on June 10, de¬
veloped the film and showed it on a
screen before the conference ended on
June 12.
From this point on it was only a
short step to the regular filming of
topical events, and . film producers
were not slow to take it. On January
5, 1896, the Lumière brothers engaged
an Algerian photographer, Felix Mes-
guich, who was to become the world's
first film reporter. For years he trav¬
elled all over Europe and the rest of .
the world. Other producers followed :
the -Pathe brothers and Léon Gaumont
in France, Oskar Messter in Germany,
Edison and later his rivals the Bio-



The Newsreel
Cameraman
of Yesterday
graph and Vitagraph companies in the
United States.
By 1897 Biograph and Lumière had
both filmed the Jubilee of Queen
Victoria ; Tilden and Rector in the
U.S.A. the Corbett-Fitzsimmons boxing
match; Pathé the Czar's arrival in
Paris ; and Gaumont the arrival of
the French President. Edwin S. Por¬
ter, the pioneer of the story film and
motion picture editing, was equally
busy at this period with newsreel
shorts (President McKinley's Inaugura¬
tion, McKinley's Funeral Procession,
etc.).
Georges Méliès, the genius who de¬
veloped the film as entertainment, was
also interested in current happenings
but only in order to "reconstruct"
such notable events as the coronation
of Edward VII in 1902. Early film
makers were often compelled to re-
enact news events since the camera in
those days was 'not" admitted every¬
where as it is today.
Thus when the Spanish-American
war broke out in 1898, cameramen
tried to get to the front in Cuba but
were turned back by the military au¬
thorities. Edison, Biograph and others
reconstructed the battle scenes them¬
selves. The most sensational re-
enactment, however, was the accom¬
plishment of Edward H. Amet after the.
Spanish fleet was destroyed. Working
from photographs, he built a plaster
copy of Santiago Bay in the garden of
his villa. Here (not in his bathtub as
is generally supposed) he. placed small,
but exact functioning replicas of the
Spanish and American armadas and
filmed the battle in all its detail. The
completed film had such tremendous
success that the Madrid Government
even bought a copy for its military
archives. This same Amet again
created a sensation by staging on
waste ground in Brooklyn realistic
battle scenes from the Boer War
which broke out almost immediately
after the Spanish-American war.
An important event for the future
of motion picture photography came
with the introduction of artificial
lighting. Newsreel producers were
responsible for it. On November 3,
1899, the Jeffries-Sharkey boxing
match was held at -the Coney Island
Club in Brooklyn, The Biograph
company obtained the exclusive film
rights for this event and installed a
battery of 400 arc lamps in the hall.
(They gave off such heat that at the
end of each of the 35 rounds the
boxers had to seek cover under a pa¬
rasol!) Rival Vitagraph technicians
though were hidden in the audience
and as the fight began they cranked
their film by the light of the lamps,
protecting themselves with "shock
troops". Both films were great
successes financially but the Biograph
attained a record for the longest film
made in the 19th century (5,575 feet).
In the early days of the cinema, the
news was not presented as it is today
in -journal form. Until about 1907,
cinema programmes were made up of
comic, dramatic or news shorts. At
first their maximum length . was 65
feet but gradually increased. (A five-
minute film needs a minimum of 4,800
images.) The exhibition of films was
mostly in the hands of travelling
showmen; films were not rented as
they are now but sold to exhibitors
who screened the prints until they
were worn out.
The birth of the .first newsreel
journals coincided with two revolu¬
tionary changes in the industry. One
was the change-over from travelling
shows to permanent halls where,
since the audience remained largely
the same, the programme had to be
renewed frequently. The other change¬
over was from outright sale to film-
renting. This occurred sometime
around 1905 in the United States, and
around 1907 in France. Also in 1907
Charles Pathé created his Journal. He
was followed in 1908 by Léon Gau¬
mont and the Société Eclair. In 1909
the Pathé brothers went to London
and pioneered newsreels there with
Pathé Gazette.
The modern newsreel was born. It
remained as a branch of film produc¬
tion and kept growing steadily, first
with the advent of "talkies" and now
with television.
17
