p a k ist a n and
u nesco Research
PROBING
NATURE'S
ARID LAND
MYSTERIES
by Dr. H. I. S. Thirlaway
What strikes a traveller going north from Karachi on
the southern coast of West Pakistan to Lahore up
in the Punjab or wandering over the Baluchistan
plateau, is the vastness of the barren land that stretches
with little variation as far as the eye can reach. The oases
inside this desert zone are the irrigated and cultivated patches
of land on both sides of the rivers, the canals which flow
from the rivers, and the isolated orchards which thrive on
water from underground springs or brought to them by
karezes (man-made underground channels), from a meagre
reservoir hidden many miles away in the bleak hills. But
many a farmer who has no access to water either from
spring or reservoir, tills his land, dumps any manure he can
get, then waits for the merciful heavens to pour down.
This is the arid and semi arid land of West Pakistan, a
zone with an area of nearly 250,000 square miles, covering
Baluchistan, Sind and the major portion of the Punjab.
The total annual rainfall does not normally exceed five inches
in Baluchistan and is less than ten inches elsewhere in the
country excepting the extreme northern portions where the
rainfall is nearly fifty inches in the year.
The development of the arid lands in Pakistan, and for
that matter anywhere else in the world, entails scientific
research and application on many problems including the
procurement of more water either from the sky above or the
ground below, the conservation of the available water, and
its economical use for the growth of plants. The utilization
of the huge quantity of energy from the sun's rays beating
down on these lands is another problem of great importance.
In some of the schemes designed to develop the productive
capacity of the arid zone of West Pakistan, the national
Meteorological Service is immediately involved. The two
most obvious problems of interest to the meteorologist are
the Increase of natural rain by artificial means and the
utilization of solar energy, though his services are
appreciated when given in co-operation with other research
Dr. H.I.S. Thirlaway, British seismologist, is a member of the Geology Department
of the University of Sydney. Since 1951 he has been working in Pakistan with
a (/nesco team of scientists which is co-operating with Pakistan in harnessing the
country's natural resources, both above and below ground. He has been particu¬
larly associated with the development of Pakistan's Geophysical Observatory at
Quetta.
48

Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
SHEPHERDS
GUIDE THE
SCIENTIST
The size of a raindrop, a subterranean dynamite explo¬
sion, and the measurement of water flow and of the
sun's energy don't seem to have much in common. But
for scientists working in Pakistan's Geophysical Obser¬
vatory at Quetta they are raw materials from which
solutions to Pakistan's arid zone problems will be found.
Since 1951, a Unesco Geophysical Mission has been
operating in Pakistan under the U.N. Expanded Techni¬
cal Assistance Programme. It has co-operated with
Pakistani scientists in harnessing the country's natural
resources, both above and below ground. Photos
show some aspects of the research in which they
collaborated. Left, experimenting with a home-made
solar cooker-clay paraboloid inside a packing case,
covered with pieces of cigarette tinfoils. Successful
cookers are already available at a price. Experts
showed villagers how to make their own cheaply. Cen¬
tre, studies were made of minimum water requirements
for plant growth. Here, Pakistani scientist checks
temperature radiation thermometer. Right, Pakistani
shepherds became invaluable guides to Unesco geo-
physicist co-operating with Pakistani scientists in
magnetism surveys which will lay foundation for future
intensive prospection of mineral resources.
Karl Wienart
The Pakistan Meteorological Service has established at
Quetta, with technical assistance from trNEsco, a geophysical
observatory which is already equipped for research in prob¬
lems not only of artificial rain, water economy of desert
plants and use of solar energy but also in arid zone hydrology
with special reference to underground water resources.
The Meteorological Department was keenly interested in
finding whether artificial increase of rain over the arid areas
was feasible and if so whether it was economical to launch
on a long scale and long term project.
Dr. Fournier d'Albe, the unesco expert from France who
worked with the department for nearly three years, set about
this problem in a methodical manner. He first established
five stations in Karachi, Hyderabad, Lahore, Peshawar and
Quetta for taking regular bi-weekly samples of the air near
the ground. These samples were analyzed at the Quetta
Geophysical Observatory and inferences were drawn about
the natural concentration of hygroscopic particles.
Of all the aspects of cloud formation and rain, there is
only one that man can hope to modify. Changing the dimen¬
sions of a cloud or increasing its water capacity is beyond
human power at present. But if all the water in the cloud
does not fall down as rain, just because the cloud lacks
suitably big water droplets, this defect can be remedied. The
cloud can be charged with particles hygroscopic in nature,
which will form big droplets about fourhundredths of a
millimeter in diameter which will grow at the expense of
the minute smaller droplets in the cloud to raindrop size of
about a millimeter in diameter. This is the principle behind
seeding the clouds with hygroscopic particles.
One has to know first, however, whether any deficiency or
lack of big hygroscopic particles actually exists. The results
of Dr. Fournier's analysis of the hygroscopic particle content
of the air of West Pakistan brought out the futility of any
scheme to increase rain over Sind, the southern province of
West Pakistan. Here there are already too many of the
hygroscopic nuclei present, and the causes for scanty rainfall
are to be accounted for by shallow cloud formations. But
the field looked promising in the central and northern
Punjab where the lack of nuclei coincides with formations
of cumuliform clouds the type which readily use up the
supply of material used for aiding big drop formation.
The experiments were conducted, one in Mardan in July
1953 and the other over the central Punjab in the monsoon
of 1954. The Mardan experiments brought out the inade¬
quacy of ground seeding with sprayers of salt solution but
indicated clearly that the seeding of the atmosphere from
the ground with the most readily available hygroscopic
substance namely common salt, was not quite ineffective.
A new technique was devised at Quetta by Dr. Fournier and
the team of young Pakistani scientists to seed the atmosphere
directly with salt particles of the required size.
Careful calculations showed that if a salt particle sent up
from the ground has any chance of reaching the cloud base,
it should weigh between one thousandth and one hundredth
of a microgram. Salt had to be ground to this size if any
use was to be made of it. Also salt, being hygroscopic, had
to be kept dry during its preparation into powder and up
to the time of its leaving the generator at the ground. For
this reason, the grinding of salt was done at Quetta where
the humidity of the atmosphere was very low at the time of
preparation. The ordinary grinders for domestic use in
Pakistan were found to be ideal instruments for powdering
the salt lumps to particles of the required size. Empty
kerosene tins were purchased, the seeding material was
packed in them, and the tins sealed against outside air.
The technique of salt dispersal was designed with a view
to cheapness, effectiveness and the availability of all
materials in the country itself. The final set-up turned out
to be very satisfactory. An ordinary silversmith's blower was
fitted to the top of the tin containing the salt particles
through a bent inlet tube carrying a gauze basket containing
burning charcoal. Another outlet tube was fitted to the tin
and air was forced in at high pressure by means of the
blower. The air stream that rushed out of the tin, was warm,
thanks to the hot charcoal, and carried with it the salt
particles. The heat given to the outgoing air was meant
to give the particles an initial lift before they are carried
up by the turbulent eddies in the atmosphere near the
ground. A series of tests showed that by this method, one
tin full of salt particles could be sent up in less
than three quarters of an hour. This meant (Cont d on
dispersal of nearly one thousand million particles next page)
49

PAKISTAN-UNESCO
RESEARCH (Cont'd) Shock-waves track underground water
per second ! The whole mechanism only cost 75 Pakistani
rupees, or about £8 sterling.
On the roof of the Meteorological Office in Lahore and the
High School building in Jauharabad in the Thai area about
200 miles west northwest of Lahore, the blower mechanism
for seeding with salt particles was in operation from early
morning till sunset on days when the wind blew from an
easterly direction. The Lahore station was in charge of
Mr. A.M.A. Lateef and the Jauharabad station under Mr. S. I.
Rasool, both young and enthusiastic scientists who worked
under Dr. Fournier from the early days of his mission in
Pakistan. Seeding was done at Lahore and Jauharabad on
39 days during the two months' period of the trials.
The increased rainfall in the seeded areas has induced
optimistic views about the efficacy of this new technique.
Statistical evaluation of the results has borne out that there
was a significant increase in the rainfall over the seeded
areas when checked with the rainfall of the previous forty
years over the seeded and adjoining areas. Considering that
not more than 5,000 Pakistani rupees were spent for the
whole project, including allowances to the staff and purchase
of equipment and materials, the method appears indigenously
suitable and further proposed tests to confirm the 1954 results
for the same period in 1955, should help in evolving a general
scheme for artificial rainmaking on a routine basis for the
arid areas of Punjab.
The long stretch of land flanked by hills, beginning from
Mästung in the state of Kalat and extending southward to
about 30 miles past Mästung, is a valley where barren fields
and green orchards alternate every few miles. The orchards
round Mästung grow on water fed into them from deep-
seated underground springs. The fields to the south are at
the mercy of the seasonal rains.
Explosions from dawn till dusk
Early in February 1955, the seismology section of the
Observatory under my direction, took their instruments
to this valley and with the co-operation of the Geolo¬
gical Survey of Pakistan, determined the thickness of the
gravel layers which store water.
This typical upland valley zone about 25 miles long by
six miles wide south of Mästung, was chosen for the work
at the suggestion of M. Chleq of the tjntaa, who was operating
a pilot project in the area, and the work was financed by
the Baluchistan States Union.
Excellent co-operation and team spirit between the
Observatory headed by Mr. Moiduddin Ahmed and the Geolo¬
gical Survey headed by Mr. Mannan Khan, and the super¬
vision and assistance which M. Chleq and I were able to give
resulted in a thorough searching for the knowledge that
could lead to Pakistan's most precious mineral water.
The method employed is called by seismologists "refraction
shooting". It consists in recording, at a central station, the
time taken for the shock waves produced by a series of
dynamite explosions at a distance of 100 yards to a mile,
to reach the special detectors buried a foot beneath the
surface. The further the explosions from the detectors, the
deeper the layers which transmit the shock waves. For
example at distances up to 1,000 feet between the explosions
and the detectors, the shock waves were transmitted by the
water table about 50 feet below the surface of the valley.
The time taken for the shock waves to reach the detectors
can be measured in thousandths of a second since the instant
of the explosion is recorded by the breaking of an electric
cable wrapped round the dynamite. The depth of the water
table is calculated from the time intervals so measured.
Similarly at distances between 1,000 and 5,000 feet the
shock waves received on the recorder were found to have
been transmitted along a rocky layer between 400 feet and
600 feet below the surface. From the geological conditions
seen at the surface, this deep layer can be regarded as the
"floor" of the valley and the thickness of the material lying
on this floor gave a measure of the amount of water bearing
gravels available for tapping by tube wells.
Day after day, for nearly four weeks, regular explosions
from dawn to dusk broke the age-old silence of the valley.
It was wintertime and only a few watchmen were left in
the mud villages clustered round the sides of the valley
where drinking water flows out from limestone rocks. The
poor folk in these villages, who cannot afford warm clothing,
50
had migrated to the warmer plains. The few who remained
tilled the dry fields, hoping for the seasonal rains in February
and March to begin germination.
With tube wells to tap the known resources of deep under¬
ground water, irrigation will be possible for the first time
in this valley, the population will grow in numbers and
wealth, and for the first time, they will be able to afford the
warm clothes and fires which will remove the need for the
wasteful unproductive annual migration.
It was to this object that the seismologists contributed
their quota of information as at sunset every evening they
stored their equipment in tents, lit their lamps and settled
down to a welcome pot of tea to the accompaniment of the
rhythmic drone of the portable generators charging batteries
ready for the next day's "shooting".
How thirsty is a fruit tree?
Four weeks of investigation throughout the length of the
valley enabled contours of the underground structure to
be drawn accurately and thus helped to site tube wells
in the most productive places. The seismologists and their
bangs gave way to the drillers and their rigs.
When water is found and developed by irrigation engineers,
the work of the scientists would seem to be at an end. All
that remains is for the farmer to grow his produce. But all
over the world the tendency is to use too much water in
irrigated areas. Rights to such a precious commodity are
jealously guarded.
How much water does a fruit tree need? The scientist must
come back again to give the answer. At Quetta Observatory
there are 100 fruit trees of 20 different kinds, and of 5
varieties each. To each tree a measured amount of water
is given, a great deal to some, very little to others. Each
day the growth and condition of each tree is measured and
compared. The trees are now three years old. By the time
they are 10 years old we will be able to answer much more
accurately than ever before, the question "how much water
does a fruit tree need ?" The answer will help to conserve
the available water resources, and to use them more effi¬
ciently and economically.
Before the establishment of the Geophysical Observatory
at Quetta, no regular quantitative measurements were being
taken in Pakistan of the solar radiation energy reaching
the surface of the earth. The atmospheric physics section
set up by Dr. Fournier and his Pakistani counterparts at
Quetta, began measuring the solar energy over Quetta by
means of standard meters. The observations began in
October 1952 and are being continued. These constitute an
incomparable set of values due to the large percentage of
clear sky days at Quetta permitting observations on an
average of 330 days in the year. Preliminary analysis of the
collected data has been done by Mr. Shafi Ahmed, who is
now specializing in this branch. These data provide the
basic material required for any serious move to utilize the
sun's energy.
A fabric woven from many threads
A type of solar cooker, both cheap and easy to make out
of local materials, has been designed by Mr. A.M.A.
Lateef. The soft clay found at the foot of the hills
around Quetta was moulded to form a paraboloid inside an
ordinary wooden packing case and pieces of polished tin were
fixed to the surface. The cooking material is kept at the
focal point of the paraboloid by either being suspended from
a stand or attached to a straight rod fixed at the centre of
the paraboloid. Certain modifications to suit the local
domestic use are being made and the cooker is being tested
this summer. Successful solar cookers are available for a
price. Our aim is to show the villagers that they can make
their own, just as they can make their own houses.
The size of a raindrop, an explosion of dynamite, the
measurement of water flow, and the sun's energy, do not
seem to have much in common. Yet a group of people at
Quetta, working under the same roof, are trying to weave
one fabric from these threads, trying to find the key to the
fascinating problem Nature has set mankind in the
apparently arid and energy deficient areas of the world.
