SUDAN : a land
changing faster
than the people
TENANT FARMERS of the Sudan are now part of one of the world's great agricultural projectsthe
Sudan Government's Gezireh Scheme which has brought them prosperity by using the waters of
the Blue Nile to irrigate farmlands. But old traditions of work and life still block new ideas.
Farmers welcome progress, but are slow to accept changes in their own daily lives. (Unesco photos)
There is something excessively ord¬
erly about cotton. Field after
field of it; every plant exactly
the same height and at exactly the
same stage of development. As I drove
through it the other morning at dawn
the fields were all deserted except for
the grey herons along the irrigation
channels and the flashing scarlet and
blue bee-eaters. They almost succeed¬
ed in making the scene look untidy.
Fallow, cotton, maize; a pattern end¬
lessly repeated over the five million
acres of the Sudan Government's
Gezireh scheme.
Order is the keynote of the whole
scheme; control of the waters of the
Blue Nile at the Sennar dam; control
of the waters as they flow through
channels of decreasing size until they
gush into the cotton fields; control
again of the tenants and their times
of planting and cultivating and har¬
vesting. The scheme is much too
important for the economic life of the
country, and water is far too precious,
for anything to be left to chance.
The Board can control the water; it
can control what is planted and it can
control when it is planted, but the
tenants of the scheme are another
matter. People do not change fun¬
damentally in one generation (the
scheme has been running for thirty
years) even when the circumstances of
their lives have altered completely.
Just as the water has been guided into
the channels now the minds 'of the
	 by 	
Alexander Sha w
Unesco Technical Assistance Specialist
people must be guided into new ways
of thinking.
The first years of the scheme were
naturally devoted to making it an
economic success and the peasants
were used as pawns in carrying out
this objective. But now there is money
and time, and a Social Development
department has been set up. With this
department the Ministry of Education
co-operates by sending a team of Adult
Education Officers to work in the area.
I, and the men whom I am training,
are working to provide the team with
Visual Aids mainly film strips. so
that they can use them in their talks
in the villages.
When you talk to the villagers they
sit and nod their heads and say:
"Certainly, that is true." They thank
you for coming and give you fizzy
drinks. And then they forget every¬
thing that you have said, possibly
almost before you have gone. But if
you show them pictures at the same
time they say: "That must be true
because we can see it." And they
discuss the pictures and argue and re¬
member what it was all about.
A film strip was shown about the
daily life of a French small-holder and
his family. The Adult Education
Officer was able to talk about a man
who did his own work (which the Gezi¬
reh tenants on the whole don't do)
without offending his audience who are
apt to be rather sensitive.
However, next evening íContínue<í
we showed them a strip on page 25)
about the Gezireh, and
23

MEN OF THE SUDAN who once tended their flocks wherever there was pasture and grew crops when the rains came have been tenant farmers for a
generation thanks to the Nile irrigation scheme. Though successful cultivators, they are still inclined to rely too much on their leaders to wait to be told
what to do. Their womenfolk, as yet, play little or no part in everyday life and affairs. If the young Sudanese girl (above) had been a year or two older no
photograph could have been taken. Women soon respond when someone takes the lead, but there are few emancipated women as leaders. (Unesco photos)
24

Unesco Courier. N° 6. 1955
It's a man's world in the Sudan c°^
talked to them directly about working
themselves and they were extremely
offended. "I have been a tenant for
twenty-five years", said one, "and no
one has ever insulted me before by
suggesting that I should do the work
myself." Because of this we intend to
show them strips about their own lives.
We already have evidence that the
results will be dramatic.
"Thus the villagers of Abdul Hafiz are
going to help us make a film strip
which will be used all over the Gezireh.
It is one of a programme of twenty-
five that we have planned with the
Government and local authorities.
The village looks very pretty from
across the canal. Trees are reflected
in the water, brightly clad women from
West Africa are cleaning the grain
which they have taken out from its
store in the ground, and a herd of post¬
card conscious camels are single-filing
against the early sun. A villager has
just had a bath in the canal and his
white nightgown-like garment is flut¬
tering in the cool breeze. A group of
villagers all men of coursaare
waiting for .us. (We hide our surprise
that they should be ready in a land
where time is usually kept in its place)
Even the. truck is there from the
nearby market town. Peace be upon
you, God preserve you, welcome, how
are you? This is an Arab world and
the formalities are important. These
villagers are some of the half million
people who live on the scheme and it
is for them that the Government has
asked the help of Unesco Technical
Assistance.
Village film actors
All the villagers like being photo¬
graphed and once we have per¬
suaded them not to puff out their
chests and look the camera straight in
the lens, all goes well. Shots are taken
for the first scene of "Safeguard Your'
.Future", a strip about a scheme which
sets out to make the tenants into farm¬
ers instead of people who just do what
they are told. They are to be encour¬
aged to make themselves reasonably
self-supporting so that if cotton prices
fall they will survive the bad times.
Having waited for a few hundred
goats to cross, held up a troop of camels
and allowed the dust to subside we
move on to the offices of the Alternat¬
ive Husbandry scheme and start on
our carefully prepared schedule. We
will do this and that in a certain or¬
der will we? The tenants take
charge. They want to see everything
and in their own way.
. They break away from us and rush
about asking questions and arguing.
We get photographs as best we can,
occasionally getting lost in the prob¬
lem of whether lentils should be
picked and dried or threshed after
drying on the plant itself. But the sun
is rising high and one way or another
we have all the pictures we need. Still
the tenants are looking at the baler,
asking questions about profits or
looking at the milk yield. Breakfast
saves us, with some wonderful coffee.
It takes rather a time because it must
be roasted on charcoal in a wooden
platter just before it is served. 'Only
women can make it and this ,is the
first time in the day that even the
idea of -a woman has appeared.
Women in the Sudan are very remote
from everyday life when it is not con¬
cerned with children and food. Al¬
though, in the towns, you may see a few
white-draped figures, the village
women do not go out very much. Nei¬
ther do they eat with the men. In
fact they are expected to follow a line
of speak when you are spoken to, come
when I call. This is. a delicate matter
as it is connected with all kinds of
everyday things.
It is difficult, for example, for a
mother to take her child to a clinic
because she cannot go alone and the
husband says "tomorrow". She and
the children have to eat what is left
over after the men and if, as is very
common, there have been guests they
may only get bread; since she never
hears about anything she appears apa¬
thetic. There is no incentive to change
and indeed it would be difficult for her
to achieve it even if she did consider it.
Custom and tradition are strong and
the old women rule supreme. However,
they will respond as soon as someone
takes the lead: they were delighted to
help in the making of four film strips
and worked far harder than the men.
Unfortunately there are practically no
emancipated women in the country to
lead their sisters gently. The men
know that change must come. As one
old chaikh (headman) said "I know
that my family ought to eat with me,
they would get better food but it would
be impossible."
Omdah asks the questions
We talk to the omdah (chief). He
is a shrewd, successful man,
the sort of man all the tenants
would like to be. Until recently he
could not read or write but that
has not stopped him taking full
advantage of the Alternative Hus¬
bandry Scheme and its free advice. He
is of course a tenant of the Gezireh
Scheme but he runs a good dairy herd,
a fruit orchard and is always trying
out* new crops.
We ask him a lot of questions about
the changes he has seen and what
he thinks of them. (We do not ask
these questions of the ordinary villagers
ours is a stratified society and at
the moment only the top counts, the
others will wait for a lead from the
omdahs and the chaikhs.) We ask him
what he thinks about the village
councils, the rural councils, how his
village has changed. After two or three
such questions he stops us. What is
Unesco, what does it do, what is
United Nations, how does it affect the
Sudan? We explain as best we can to
someone who still thinks of the Sudan
as a place called the Gezireh with some
other areas tacked on.
Apparently satisfied he allows us
to continue. He finds his people greatly
changed. Once upon a time he told
them to do something and they did it.
Now they want to know why. He does
not seem to resent this; changing times
have brought him success and perhaps
because of this he is tolerant. But he
feels that teaching must be slow.
Like many other success- (Continued
ful men he is inclined on neJtt
to look up on the peo-
pie as a bit silly. But his v '
25

SUDAN (continued)
comments are a useful corrective to
any ideas we may have of immediate
change. Slow and steady is his
motto. He feels that the rest of
the Sudan is rather remote but realizes
that all must stand together. Although
of course he thinks that the Gezireh
must stand in the lead.
He refuses to be drawn on the subject
of women. Since we know him well we
ask him how a country can really pro¬
gress while women occupy such an
inferior position. This is an important
question as the country faces a crisis.
There are so few teachers and social
workers and they are so hemmed about
with restrictions that it is very diffi¬
cult to make any progress at all. There
are of course practically no women
doctors, officials, or nurses or typists
or in fact any women doing the
jobs which are essential.
Between two worlds
Before we leave the village, almost
deserted in the intense heat, we
call in at a village council meeting
and discuss the disease of bilharzia
with the tenants. It is possible that
there will be no one there; it is hot,
perhaps someone has died, the headman
may have wanted to go to town. The
tenants swing between two worlds.
They have certain advantages; some
economic security and a comparatively
high income; plenty of space in which
to live so that the villages are not hud¬
dled and can be replanned; the possi¬
bilities of greater economic expansion
when the Roseires dam is built; more
social services than is normal.
On the other hand they are pulled
back by traditions and customs that
once did service, but now with changed
conditions are no longer of such value.
The women have but little idea of
looking after their children, and
dysentries and eye diseases are com¬
mon.
The men want everything to change
except their own daily lives, but they
are not yet ready to work for the chan¬
ges they desire. Through their tenants'
union they press for a bigger share
than their present forty per cent of
the revenue (forty to the Government
and twenty to the Board) without
wondering whether more money for
simply supervising under supervision is
justifiable or even sensible. They live
in a dream world of progress in the
shape of hospitals and schools and
clean water and other services but all
these things must be given to them.
Not a backward people
Fundamental education has rather a
strange job in a peculiar situation.
Here are no backward poverty
stricken people asking for help but the
people of an established society with a
certain economic level who need, per¬
haps in spite of themselves, to change
if they are not to be a hindrance to the
progress of their country. And in this
change they must be guided and
encouraged. It is not so very long ago
that they tended their flocks wherever
there was pasture and grew their crops
when the rains came or when they
could use the river for irrigation. Now
they find themselves part of one of the
world's great agricultural schemes
with all that such schemes entail of
progress and upheaval and they think
that everything can change except
their own private lives.
