by
Kbushwant
Singh
CANDLE-LIT
DIYVALI EVE
For those Hindus who
follow the Vikrama cal¬
endar, Diwali night is
both a festival of lights
and a New Year cele¬
bration. Here, several
Hindu women in exqui¬
site saris light the candles
in front of their house.
Far right, a building in
New Delhi brillantly illu¬
minated for Diwali night.

Land of many calendars
Gove, ol India Information Service.
India is not only a land of many races, religions, languages
and cultures but also one of many calendars. Practically
every linguistic and religious group has one of its own
and some have different ones for different purposes. If it
hadn't been for the official recognition of the Roman Calen¬
dar, the various methods of calculation in use would have
made the celebration of national days, festivals, anniversaries
and birthdays completely chaotic.
Since there are more than a dozen calendars in use, there
are more than a dozen New Year Days, some based on the
movements of the sun, some on those of the moon, and yet
others (the majority) on a combination of the two. So, the
matter of sending a New Year's greeting card to Indian
friends %is not as simple an affair as it is in Europe or the
United States. Fortunately the practice of sending New Year
cards is not very common and those who do send them, time
them for January, as in the Christian world. In recent years
the custom of sending greetings cards has also been extended
to the first Baisakh (April) and Diwali, (early November).
If we were to start with the Punjab in the North we would
find three independent systems of reckoning apart of course,
from the official one (January). The one used for determin¬
ing religious festivals is known as the Kali Era and according
to this we are already in the 51st century. The New Year is
precisely calculated to have begun "at midnight on the
Thursday corresponding to February 17-18, 3102 B.C. Old
Style". The only other purpose for which the Kali Era has
been used is writing poetry. Each letter of the alphabet has
numerical value, and poets indicate the date of an event they
are describing by using the precise number of appropriate
letters in their verse.
The most popular system in use in the whole of Northern
India (except Bengal) is the Vikrami Era. It started with
the coronation of King Vikramaditya, a monarch about whom
historians know little, but whose accession is generally consi¬
dered to have taken place two thousand and fourteen years
ago. This system, like the Kali, is both lunar and solar.
The New Year according to this calendar varies with the pur¬
pose one has in mind. If it is simply to determine a date,
the first month is the first day of the month of Chaitra
which will be some time in February. If it is to balance
accounts, then the year begins in the month of Kartika to
be precise, on Diwali, the day of the festival of the lamps.
If you happen to be a Sikh, then the matter is even more
confused. The very orthodox compute their dates from the
birthday of the founder of the Sikh religion, Nanak (1469-
1539), and call the era Nanákshahi. Most however, accept
the Vikrami calendar except that they do not take Chaitra as
the first month of the year, as do the Hindus, but the follow¬
ing month, Baisakh.
Sired by a mystic serpent king
Rivalling the popularity of the Vikrami calendar in the
North is the Saka calendar used in Central and South
India. According to this calendar 1956 A.D. will only
be 1879. The interesting thing about the Saka is its mythical
origin. It is said to commence from the day when King
Salivahan ascended the throne of the kingdom of Ujjain.
According to legend, his predecessor on the throne, Soma-
krant, had been promised immunity by the gods from all
save one who was older than his mother. King Somakrant
was led to his doom by his own anxiety to find a man who
answered this description. Salivahan, born of a virgin of
his own age, and sired by a mystic serpent king,
killed Somakrant and seized his kingdom. (Cont'd on
Apart from these three calendars there are a page 20)
17

INDIA
(Continued
from p. 17)
number of other important systems of time
reckoning known to the Hindu social system.
These are the Bengali San used in Bengal,
the Magi San used in Assam, the Sapta-
Rishi Kala used in Kashmir and the
Kollum used in Malabar.
Outside Hindu society there are other religious minorities
who have their own calendars and their own New Year days.
The most important group 35 million Moslems use the
lunar system starting with the Hegira, the flight of the Pro¬
phet Mohammed from Mecca to Medina. Since the lunar
month is shorter than the solar, the Moslem New Year's day
falls at different times of the year.
The Christians, second largest minority community num¬
bering over eight million, use the Roman calendar. They
celebrate it in much the same way as Christians elsewhere
exchanging greetings cards and wishing each other hap¬
piness. The smallest of all India's religious minorities, the
Parsees, who number less than half-a-million, start their
calendar with the accession of Yezdajrid to the Persian
throne in 632 A.D. Their New Year's day is the first day of
Farvirdin which corresponds to September 5.
Along with this conglomeration of calendars and commu¬
nities goes a vast variety of celebrations differing with each
sect in every part of the country. The only thing all these
festivities have in common is that New Year's day itself does
not have as much significance as the mythical or historical
events associated with it.
For six million Sikhs, New Year's day is really holy. On
the morning of the first of Baisakh (also New Year's day for
othe.r peoples in certain paits of India) the last of their ten
Gurus, (holy men), Gobind Singh (1666-1708), assembled
several thousands of his followers and asked for the heads of
five for sacrifice. One after another these men were led inside
a tent. The Guru emerged each time, his sword dripping
blood, and asked for the next victim. Actually the ceremony
was conducted only to test the faith of his disciples, for
inside the tent the only victims were goats he had killed.
He baptised these five men and made them swear to live
the lives of soldiers.
Lamps are lit for the spirits,
meteors rise from the ground
On every first Baisakh, Sikh temples and homes have a
special religious ceremony. In the afternoon their
sacred book, the Granth, is taken out on a gaily
decorated carriage guarded by five men with drawn swords
in memory of the first converts.
What April 1 is to the business world in some Western
European countries namely, the start of the new finan¬
cial year so Diwali is to the Indian merchant community.
Although it is only a matter of closing one set of account
books and starting new ones, it is done with great ceremony.
Houses are whitewashed and the appropriate gods worship¬
ped with the new account books lying at their feet. Presents
are sent to relations and friends. At night the houses are
lit with oil lamps and candles ; hence the name Diwali, the
cluster of lights.
Diwali has many origins ascribed to it. The most popular
explanation is that on this day the god Rama, a reincarna¬
tion of Vishnu, returned home after his victory over the
demon King of Ceylon who had abducted his wife, Sita.
Amongst the Maharthas of Central India, Diwali is the occa¬
sion for the worship of the god King Bali who was maliciously
overthrown by Vishnu. In Bengal lamps are lit and carried
on long poles to light the way of departed spirits to their
ultimate destination.
The common factor in all the celebrations is the use of
illuminations and fireworks. Anyone travelling by air on
Diwali night would see as many lights beneath him as in the
heavens above and many more meteors shooting upwards.
The philosophers believe that Diwali symbolises the triumph
of light over darkness, of truth over falsehood. What better
wish could one make on a New Year's day th¡j.n affirm one's
faith in the ultimate triumph of good over evil?
20
