Puppets, source of
literary inspiration
by Jacques Chesnais
After more than a quarter of a century of struggle and
innovation as one of France's most famous theatrical
producers, Gaston Baty whose name is linked with
those of Louis Jouvet, Sacha Pitoeff and Charles Dullin in
the period between the two world wars startled the world
by announcing his withdrawal from the legitimate stage to-
set up a puppet theatre.
Gaston Baty had not suddenly gone mad nor was his
decision a wild spur-of-the-moment flight of fancy. Baty
had come to realize that puppetry was a new form of art
which, though sometimes primitive in technique, opened vast
potentialities for creative expression Impossible to achieve in
the legitimate theatre.
In the history of modern art, a break occurred between
figurative art which produced naturalism and abstract art
which exploded on the world with surrealism. This eruption
was to place puppetry which had always been the theatre
of the people on a new level as a true art form.
Baty was following in the footsteps of many great men of
letters and artists of the past who have found a deep source
of inspiration in puppetry.
Almost all of the great writers of antiquity mention
puppets. Even before they became a great means of
expression puppets embodied a whole philosophy of their
own. This did not escape the great Cervantes when he
devoted a chapter of his "Don Quixote" to "the braying
adventures and the droll one of the puppet master." Cer¬
vantes perceived that the marionette could portray the true
image of Man as reflected in his caricature and could give
credulity to the poetic folly of his hero and his combination
of idealism and plain logic.
In his description of Master Pedro and one of the popular
road puppet theatres of his time Cervantes blends reality
with fantasy. The whole chapter is imbued with a profound
sense of humanity. "In all earnestness, gentlemen," says
Don Quixote after he has slashed at all the puppets to save
a doll-damsel in distress, knocking some over, beheading
others, crippling this one and mangling that one, "I can
assure you that everything that took place here seemed to
me very real indeed, and Melisandra, Don Gaiteros, Marsilio
and Charlemagne were all their flesh-and-blood selves."
The same episode inspired the modern Spanish composer
Manuel de Falla to write a musical score entitled "Master
Pedro's Puppet Show". De Falla also worked with Federico
Garcia Lorca, who has been called the "poet of the puppets",
in productions of several puppet plays.
Ben Jonson, the English dramatist, writing at almost the
same period as Cervantes, used puppets in his "Bartholomew
Fair" one of the great London fairs of his time to
stigmatize fanaticism and intolerance. The puppets, serving
as accessory but vitally important characters, helped to tell
a highly dramatic and human story.
'Shakespeare of the Far East'
Since the 12th century, puppets have been part and
parcel of Japanese drama and even were the basis of the
theatre in Japan. They inspired more than 100 plays
during the 17th century from the pen of Japan's greatest
dramatist, Chikamatsu Monzaemon. Born in 1653, Chika-
matsu first lived the life of a Knight Errant until he settled in
Osaka and began to write plays for the Joruri puppet stage.
Chikamatsu has been called the "Shakespeare of the Far
East."
In the West, puppetry has still to reach the great heights
attained in Japan. Asian cultures are particularly suited to
the conventions and symbolism which evolved in puppetry
where every movement of the face or limbs of the dolls is
part of a veritable language of gestures.
Nevertheless Western puppets have played important roles.
On several occasions the miniature theatres have served as
a place of refuge for oppressed or victimized dramatists. In
18th century France, for example, the -legitimate theatres
held a virtual monopoly of dramatic productions and pre¬
vented competition from independent groups. A number of
56
Parisian dramatists had resort to the puppet theatres of their
time to maintain their right to self-expression.
Among the many men who have found deep inspiration in
puppet shows is the great German poet Goethe. The legend
of Dr. Faustus had been a frequent and popular theme of
marionette theatres in Germany as early as the 16th century.
During the Romantic period of Goethe's time it struck a
particularly sympathetic chord and like all his con¬
temporaries, Goethe found himself captivated by the puppet
play. He was to transform this elementary tale of
necromancy and mysticism into a theme that is today
immortal. From the conflict naively expressed in the puppet
drama, Goethe was to draw out a series of problems of
universal impact and produce his greatest play.
The same period saw another great German dramatist,
Heinrich von Kleist, complete a tiny essay entiled "The
Puppet Theatre." Though small in size it was considerable
in importance. Here for the first time, marionettes inspired
a text in which the technique of puppetry was the basis
for deep reflexions of a psychological nature and the basis
of an admirable comparative study between the moving
marionette and the human dancer.
Rendez-vous of sophisticates
Puppet shows had always been manifestations of folk art.
In technique and repertory they were mainly traditional
and handed down from generation to generation. That
they could also provide fashionable, sophisticated entertain¬
ment was amply demonstrated in the private and semi-pri¬
vate performances in France during the mid-19th century.
With her son Maurice, the novelist George Sand built the
Theatre des Amis first at Nohant and then in Paris. The
puppet theatre, with its satirical plays, soon became the ren¬
dez-vous of all fashionable people in Paris, and George Sand
a champion of the cause of puppetry.
Other authors and poets of the time were also inspired to
write passages on marionettes which are now considered
famous. (Théophile Gautier, Gerard de Nerval, Charles No¬
dier and Louis Duranty are four outstanding names.) But
it was not until the closing years of the 19th century that a
real revival took place. Puppets were then "discovered" as
an artistic medium and writers and artists accorded them a
serious respect they had not enjoyed before.
The year 1887 saw the birth of the now internationally
famous "Black Cat" cabaret in Montmartre where successful
poets, musicians and painters gathered to produce artistic
shadow shows. It was followed by the "Little Theatre"
which gave performances of Cervantes, Aristophanes and
Shakespeare with stately rod puppets and revealed the great
marionette poet Maurice Bouchor.
Puppets have continued to hold a great attraction for
writers ever since. Maeterlink, the Belgian poet-dramatist,
wrote some of his earliest plays for the puppet stage, though
he later abandoned the little wooden actors. Collodi's
"Pinocchio" has become a classic; Bernard Shaw wrote
"Shakes v. Shav" (see page 28) ; Bizet paid his tribute in "The
Funeral March of a Marionette" and Paul Claudel wrote a
puppet farce "The Bear and the Moon." Alfred Jarry's
satirical play, "Ubu Roi" greatly influenced the surrealist
movement in literature. The list of authors Is almost endless.
The puppet revival in our own time has gained momentum
among playwrights and producers. Gordon Craig in his
essay "On the Art of the Theatre" sees the future of the
theatre in the creation of a super-marionette who is the
"complete actor." To Craig puppets are a serious matter
and he restores them to their rightful place as an integral
part of dramatic art.
Today a new road is open to puppetry. Alongside the
puppet theatre as a cultural medium on the one hand, and
as an educational vehicle for children on the other, a new
poetic form of marionette theatre has been born. Where the
living actor cannot pretend to reach, the puppet, unshackled
by human laws or limitations and symbol of dreams and
fantasy, attains heights only the imagination can follow.

Unesco Courier. Nr 3-4. 1955
120 hours to carve
and clothe a puppet
Jacques Chesnais (above) manages to convey his own
passion for the world of marionettes in the miniature
size plays he stages with his large family of "wooden
actors", all of whom he designs and makes in his work¬
shop. It takes 60 hours to carve a puppet, says
Chesnais, and 60 more hours to make the clothes.
A wig costs 3,000 francs (£3) and the entire puppet
adds up to 50,000 francs (£50). Thus, the kings
and queens and fairy tale characters hanging side
by side in their dormitory at the Comédie des Champs-
Elysées Theatre, In Pans, add up to a tidy fortune.
Jacques Chesnais, one of France's leading marionette
artists, is the author of a recent history of world
puppetry. (Photos USIS and A.T.P. Museum, Paris.)
57
