Cavalea
India's history
by
T s. Satyan
fe*
TROUPE ARRIVES
in village carrying
its equipment (left).
Right, artists unpack
their articles. All
members of house¬
hold join in produc¬
ing plays. Profession
is handed down from
generation to gener¬
ation. (Photo Fea¬
ture, Govt of India
Information Bureau.)
STAGE IS SET for puppet show in North Indian village. Simple and easily put up, it consists of a few bamboo poles and some well-tailored curtains.
Drum-beater sits at left and supplies music which synchronizes with movements of dolls. The puppet master can be glimpsed behind the curtain.
etA. .
»5^"«?£aíejg¿"rr^- - *~s»*e	
33

INDIAN CAVALCADE (continued;
TEN-HEADED KING. In ancient Indian epic, the "Ramayana",
Hindu God Sri Rama slays ten-headed King Ravana of Lanka. Gandhi
often referred to the reign of Rama as India's Golden Age.
BACKSTAGE WIREPULLERS. South Indian puppet players
dexterously manipulate dolls while others (also shown below) wait
their cue. Players have own interpretation of Hindu mythology. à
34

Unesco Courier. N' 3-4. 1955
Scenes from
a Mogul Court
The scene may be anywhere in Delhi
or in the State of Rajasthan,
northern India. Hidden behind a
colourful curtain, a puppet player begins
to manipulate his gorgeously robed and
decorated marionettes. The melody of
his songs, the beat of the drum quickly
reach the ears of passers-by. Very soon
an inquisitive crowd is gathered before
the small '"theatre". The farmer come
to town for his week-end purchases, the
schoolmaster, the office clerks hurrying
past, and the group of young boys
running home after school all are
drawn together by the tunes. A hundred
pairs of eyes are focussed on the beauti¬
ful dolls which now begin to dance and
play, weep and shout.
The cavalcade of Indian history com¬
mences. The court-dancer, wearing a
crimson costume interwoven with gold
and silver thread, swings across the stage
while Akbar, the Great Mogul, watches
her in profound admiration. The spec¬
tators laugh as the two court jesters,
Birbal and Todarmal, the one reputed
for his wit the other for his wisdom,
affectionately hug each other in greeting.
They share the tribulations of Laila and
her lover Majnu India's Romeo and Ju¬
liet.
There is a striking difference between,
these puppet plays (or putliwallas as they
are called) of northern India and those
of the southern part of the Indian sub¬
continent. The northern Indian puppet
artist presents true stories and episodes
in the great pageant of Mogul history
which reached its peak with Akbar during
the 16th century.
The characters vividly portray the lives
of prince and peasant and the manner
in which they lived, dressed and behaved
during the Mogul period. The southern
puppeteer specializes in dramatizations
of mythological stories drawn from the
two Hindu epics, the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata. By watching South In¬
dian puppet shows, the peasant audien¬
ces have learned the moral stature of
epic heroes like Rama and Dharmaraya.
Scenes like these have been enter¬
taining village folk in India for genera¬
tions untold. There was a time when
the puppeteer could rely for his income
on the purses of villagers either at the
weekly bazaar or during the frequent
melas, or festive gatherings. But today
things have changed considerably. The
Indian peasants have been captured by
the spell of the cinema and the ancient
folk art is beginning to lose its powerful
hold on the people.
Modern Indian educators feel that
these puppet plays can be used to spread
education. The puppet player who edu¬
cates the ordinary people by describing
Mogul history, they say, can also be
taught to show stories of modern India.
This idea is now being given serious
thought in India, and if a successful
scheme can be worked out, education
would then go side by side with popular
entertainment in rural India.
_;'.'
* *i
AA
KING'S JESTERS. In courtyard of Mogul
King Aktar's palace, the two clowns of the court,
Birbal and Todarmal, embrace (left) in the tradi¬
tional Mogul greeting. Later in the puppet play,
combat scenes (above) depict a number of elephants
for defence. These histrionic incidents are spectacu¬
larly displayed by the puppet players cf India. They
keep interest of spectators and reduce mono¬
tony of watching a single spectacle lasting many hours.
"ROMEO AND JULIET". Popular tales are inter¬
mixed with historical stories to achieve variety of
effects. Here are two scenes from Laila and Majnu,
the Indian counterpart of Shakespeare's "Romeo
and Juliet". Right, Laila is seen during first meeting
with Majnu. They love each other greatly, but as
is the rule, the course of true love never did run
smooth. Below, poor Majnu, bitten by a snake, rests
on lap of his sweetheart who constantly fans him. ^^ÀÎJr
35
