TAKE A DEEP BREATHl I The camel's unique ability to go without drinking water is the result of half a dozen extraordinary gifts that are not shared by
any other animal. While he cannot store water as such, he conserves every drop of water in his body tissues. The camel never pants, never breathes
with mouth open even in the hottest Sanaran weather and perspires so little, because it can regulate its body temperature, that its skin always feels
completely dry. Here Prof. Schmidt-Nielsen uses a special apparatus to measure oxygen consumption on one of his experimental subjects.
28

Copyright Schmidt-Nielsen'
THIRSTY CAMELS are the exception rather than the rule. After being
deprived of drinking water for two months, two camels at the Béni Abbês
research centre showed no interest in water when it was offered. They had
obtained enough from the winter desert vegetation. In summer a camel
was kept without water for eight days during which time it lost 100 kilo¬
grams in weight. When given water it drank 103 liters in ten minutes,
thus restoring the lost 1 00 kilograms. Experiments showed that camels
only drink enough to restore normal water content of their bodies.
Photo Zohrer

THE CAMEL
Facts and Fables
by Bodil and Knut Schmidt-Nielsen
Up until a few months ago, the camel was one of the
great riddles of nature. No one knew how the "ship
of the desert" could survive hard work in the blazing
heat and go for so long without a drop of water. It was
once believed that the camel stored water in its hump and
more commonly that it drank huge quantities of water which
it stored in one of its several stomachs. The mystery of
the camel has now been solved as the result of a pains¬
taking investigation carried out in the North Sahara under
the auspices of the Unesco Advisory Committee on Arid
Zone Research. Working in a region where the temperature
often reached 140 degrees Fahrenheit, a research team led
by Prof. Knut Schmidt-Nielsen of Duke University, U.S.A.,
put the camel through its paces and came up with some
startling findings. In the article published below, specially
written for the Unesco Courier and copyrighted, Professor
Schmidt-Nielsen and his wife describe their experiments
and the results they achieved.
The exceptional abilities of a camel as well as his unusual
appearance have for centuries attracted the attention
of travellers, naturalists, and zoologists. Legends and
fables have been intermingled with factual information,
amazing stories have been told, and it has been difficult to
know whether such accounts represented truth or tale.
The camel is of great value in many desert areas where it
is often the most important domestic animal. Not only is it
the principal beast of burden, but it gives milk and its wool
is used for clothing and tents. In spite of the advancements
in technological culture it is likely that the camel will keep
its present role in the desert economy for long periods to
come. Some factual information on this remarkable animal
is much needed.
Legend has it that the camel can cross the most scorching
desert without water or food. There is no doubt that the
camel has very unusual abilities in this direction, and the
popular appeal of tales of desert adventure has created a
great deal of interest in the endurance of this animal.
It is remarkable to learn how little scientific information
is available about an animal on which people depend for
their livelihood over vast geographical areas. Until recently,
many common questions could not be answered by science,
such as: How long can a camel go without water? How is
it that the camel can get along without water under such
difficult conditions? Does the camel have a store of water
in its body? What is the function of the camel's hump? etc.
A better understanding of the camel and its functions
would be of importance in evaluating the future of arid
lands and programmes for agricultural improvements.
Knowing more about the characteristics that enable the
camel to get along in the desert will perhaps also contribute
to the evaluation of characteristics that make other animals,
such as sheep and cattle, tolerant to an arid climate. It was
therefore natural that Unesco, among other institutions,
supported an expedition on which scientists from Duke Uni¬
versity attempted to find answers to many of the unsolved
problems about the camel. The group consisted of scientists,
the two authors of this article and our excellent collabora¬
tors, Dr. T.R. Houpt from the University of Penn- /cont'd on
sylvania, and the Danish physician Dr. S.A. Jar-
num. Our field studies were carried out in the next PaSe)
KNUT and BODIL SCHMIDT-NIELSEN are a husband and wife team of
zoologists who collaborate In investigating the physiology of desert mammals.
Knut Schmidt-Nielsen, a Norwegian, studied in Copenhagen under August
Krogh, Hobel laureate in physiology and medicine, and married his mentor's
daughter. Husband and wife came to the United States in 7946 and are now
at Duke University. In 1 954, under a Unesco grant, they worked at Béni
Abbès research station, Algeria, making Intensive heat studies on the heat
tolerance and water storing capacities of the camel.
29

Copyright Unesco Courier
Algerian Sahara in 1953-54, with headquarters at the French
research station, Centre de Recherches Sahariennes. Our
work was greatly facilitated by the support and help we
received from the Director of the Centre, Dr. Menchikoff,
and from local French authorities, represented by Capitaine
Lepage at Béni Abbès.
How long can a camel go without water ?
If one asked the question : "How long can a man live
without water?" the answer would depend on the circum¬
stances. In the desert in the summer, it might be one or
two days. But it might be a longer time, perhaps a week, in
a cool climate. Furthermore, if the man had some succulent
food such as melons he could manage for a longer time. In
fact, he might do perfectly well without any drinking water
if he had an adequate supply of juicy fruits such as apples,
oranges, tomatoes and melons.
The same thing goes for the camel; how long it can live
without drinking depends on external conditions. The
answer will depend on factors such as the amount of food and
its water content, how much load the camel carries, how far
it has to travel, the temperature, and also the breed of the
camel, and its condition. It is therefore impossible to say
that any camel can endure abstinence from water for a
certain number of days.
There are two kinds of camel, one-humped and two-
humped. Those we worked with at Béni Abbès were one-
humped camels or dromedaries. The two-humped, or bac-
trian camel belongs to the desert and high plateaus of cen¬
tral Asia, while the one-humped camel is found in the hot
deserts of Arabia and North Africa.
Observing camels in the Sahara Desert, we soon found that
those that were grazing in the winter
were usually not watered at all. This
is not surprising because if it rains the
vegetation in the desert contains a
considerable amount of water. We
examined a number of such camels
that were brought to Béni Abbès to be
butchered. They had been without
drinking water for one or two months,
and one might think that these camels
would be very thirsty, but this was not
the case. If they were offered water
they showed no interest in it whatso¬
ever. However, the winter rains are
very irregular, and in dry winters when
the usual growth of new vegetation is
absent the camels would undoubtedly
have to be watered.
To And out how much water a camel
needs we would have to give them some
dry food instead of the ordinary
pasture. We therefore fed them dry
hay and dry dates. The dates that are
given to camels differ from the sweet,
soft dates eaten by humans, and are
dry, hard and not as sweet. We kept
a camel on this dry feed for several
prolonged periods, the longest being
sixteen days in January. After this,
the camel was rather thirsty but in no
way in serious condition. The conclu¬
sion was that the camel can easily be
without drinking water for more than two weeks in the
winter, even when the feed is dry.
The camel continues to use water during such periods of
water deprivation. Like all mammals, it must use water for
the formation of urine, and water evaporates from the lungs
when it breathes. In the camel the continued loss was
indicated by a decrease of body weight corresponding to the
amount of water used. It continued to eat, and had water
been available it would have maintained its usual body
weight. At the end of the sixteen-day period it drank an
amount corresponding to the expenditure, bringing the body
weight back to normal.
This experiment did not tell us how much depletion of the
body water the camel can withstand. We could have conti¬
nued the experiment to find out, but there were other
pressing problems and we decided to wait until the summer.
Then the rate of water loss would be much higher, and the
camel would become seriously dehydrated in a much shorter
time.
In late June we kept a camel without water for eight days,
and it had then lost 100 kg in weight, the original weight
being 450 kg. It was at this time in a rather serious condi¬
tion from lack of water, and when allowed to drink consum¬
ed 103 litres of water in ten minutes. This experiment shows
that camels can tolerate losing about a quarter of their body
weight in water, and that they can drink it back in a few
minutes.
Another camel that had been subjected to more experi¬
mentation on this ocasión was without water from June 5
to June 22, a total of seventeen days. Both of these
animals were in rather poor condition and had lost their
appetite towards the end of the period. They looked thin
and emaciated. The abdomen was drawn in against the
30

vertebral column, the muscles were shrunken, the legs were
scrawny and appeared even longer than usual. They would
not have been fit for heavy work or long distance travel in
this condition.
These two camels had been exposed to the hot desert wind
and sun but they had not been worked. Judging from this
experiment it seems likely that even the best camels could
not be used for desert travel without water for much beyond
a week in the summer. However, this depends on so many
factors that extensive investigation under various conditions
would be necessary before definite rules could be given.
Still, it can be stated that the length of time the camel
can live without water far exceeds that of other mammals,
including man. Under similar conditions it is likely that
man would be seriously debilitated and in very poor condi¬
tion after one day's travel in the desert and would probably
die of thirst during the second day.
Unesco Courier. Nr 8-9. 1955
but this is characteristic of all ruminants. However, to
make sure that water was not stored we analyzed the fluid
from the stomachs of a dozen animals. First of all, the fluid
is a rather foul smelling, unappetizing, green fluid with little
similarity to drinking water.
Chemical analysis reveals that it has great similarity to
digestive fluids, and its salt content is closer to that of blood
rather than to water. Furthermore, the so-called "'water
sacs" usually contained masticated food and not much fluid.
We thus found no scientific support of the fable of water
storage.
Although fluid that is found in the camel's stomach is
rather unappetizing it could very well be used for drinking
in an emergency. The tale of the Arab who saves his life
by killing his camel in order to drink the water in its stomach
may be true, and the mistake is made in the implication that
the fluid found is stored water.
Does it really store water?
Many travellers have suggested
that the tolerance of the camel
to lack of water is explained by
a storage of water in the stomach or
other parts of the body. In support
of this view one will often And related
the well-known tale of the Arab who is
out of water in the desert and will kill
his camel as a last resort and drink the
water he finds in its stomach.
It is easy to understand how the idea
of water storage could arise. Before a
longj journey in the desert one would
of cburse water the camels. If they
had been without water for a few days
previously they would consume large
quantities of water, and to the uncri¬
tical observer this might look as if the
saméis were taking in huge quantities
of water in anticipation of the coming
needs. However, as mentioned above, _^
we observed that camels would drink
a quantity of water corresponding to
that which had been lost in the period
of water deprivation, but they would drink no more water
than needed to make up for that lost. We observed no
instance in which a camel drank an excess of water that
could be regarded as storage.
The belief that the camel stores water is widespread, and
has been supported by the fact that the structure of the
stomach is rather unusual. The camel is a ruminant, and
like the cow and sheep it has a stomach that is divided into
several parts or compartments. The first and largest part
is the rumen, which contains the coarsely masticated
fodder.
This rumen has certain sacs in its walls which are not
found in other ruminants, an interesting fact which has
been linked with the legend of water storage. However, the
volume of these little pouches which have been called
"Water sacs" is so small (5 to 7 litres) that they could not
possibly store water in the quantities necessary to meet the
needs of such a large animal.
The rumen of camels does contain large quantities of fluid,
A grain of truth in the hump story
Some people have stated that the camel's hump contains
the camel's water reservoir. However, the camel's
hump is practically exclusively fat and is an energy sto¬
rage just as the fat of other animals. It is a curious fact
that the fat of several animals that live in hot climates is
found in one location rather than distributed over the body.
The Indian or Zebu cattle have a hump over the shoulders,
and the fattailed sheep carries the fat in a tremendously
enlarged tail. To the Arabs the camel's hump is a prized
delicacy, and when camels are butchered the hump often
gets a higher price than the meat. Although it is quite clear
that the hump does not contain water, there is a grain of
truth in the belief that the camel gets water from the hump.
Whenever organic material is burned, water is farmed in the
process. Most people will have noticed that if
a pot of cold water is placed over a fire, water (Cont'd on
condenses on the outside of" the pot. This is next page)
31

THE CAMEL
(Continued)
IT LOSES 100 KILOS.
IN 8 DAYS DRINKS 10 0 LITRES
IN 10 MINUTES
water which is formed by oxidation of hydrogen present in
the fuel. In the same way, water is formed when fat is
oxidized in the animal's body. However oxygen is required
for the oxidation, and the air that is pulled into the lungs is
exhaled again, saturated with water vapour.
The amount of water lost this way depends upon tempera¬
ture and humidity, but usually water is lost by evaporation
from the lungs of the camel about as rapidly as it is formed.
Therefore, the fat of the hump does not mean a large extra
storage of water, as was once suggested. However, in
another desert animal, the kangaroo rat, the entire water
economy depends on water formed by oxidation of food.
The camel's body temperature
Most warm-blooded animals maintain a constant body
temperature of around 37 to 40 °C. When man is
exposed to the hot desert environment his body tem¬
perature does not increase, although the air temperature
may be considerably higher than his own body temperature.
Any inanimate object placed in the same surroundings would
heat upTjust as the rocks on the desert surface, which may
reach 60 "C or higher. Man avoids a rise in temperature in
these surroundings by evaporation of water, which appears
on the body surface as sweat.
The camel also regulates its body temperature and keeps it
from rising beyond a dangerous level by sweating. However,
the camel is able to utilize certain variations in the body
temperature to save on the amount of water necessary to
keep cool. Instead of keeping the body temperature
constant as the heat of the day comes on, the camel permits
its body temperature to increase slowly until a maximum of
almost 41°C has been reached. During this period of tem¬
perature increase the camel does not lose much water, while
a man maintaining a constant lower body temperature
would have to evaporate water continually.
It is clear that the' camel would benefit even more if he
could start on the morning of a hot day with a body tempera¬
ture lower than usual. In this way it would take longer
for him to heat up to the critical point where he must start
sweating to avoid further rise and death. This is just what
the camel does, during the cool night he gives off heat so
that his morning temperature may be as low as 34°C.
The body temperature of the camel thus regularly varies
more than ,6°C. Under similar conditions the daily tem¬
perature variations in man are around 1°C.
The human body normally contains about 1/3 solid matter
and 2/3 of water. Only a small fraction of this water can
be lost before serious symptoms occur. The organism reacts
with a craving for water which, if unrelieved, rapidly passes
into discomfort, uneasiness and irritation. These symptoms
are rapidly relieved by drinking water or other fluids.
If the dehydration continues and the water loss exceeds
about 5% of the body weight, the symptoms become more
serious. There is disturbance of the bodily functions, the
salivation becomes scant and the mouth is dry. The tongue
sticks to the mouth, and the inspired air penetrates
unbearably hot into the lungs. The voice becomes cracked
and the senses distorted. The movements become ill-
controlled, and judgment and morale is impaired. The stage
that has been vividly described as "cotton-mouth" occurs
when 6 to 8% of the body weight has been lost.
The symptoms of a water deficit of more than 10% of the
body weight are known mostly from reports of men who have
been lost in the desert, and those are of necessity rather
unprecise. There is delirium, deafness, insensitivity to pain
from bruises and wounds, and no blood or exudate appears
in cuts in the skin. There is an inability to swallow at about
12% water deficit, after which a man is probably unable to
recover without assistance. In the final stages of dehydra¬
tion there is no recovery; the agony is relieved only by a
merciful unconsciousness.
If the heat is not excessive, life may perhaps last until
there is 20% water loss. In the desert heat, however, a mai}
will die at 10 to 12% water loss. This has been explained by
the American physiologist Adolph as "'explosive heat death",
because death comes suddenly, associated with a rapid tem¬
perature increase.
The explosive heat rise is due to the fact that the blood
becomes thicker and more viscous as water is lost. It takes
more work to pump the thick blood, the load on the heart
increases, and as dehydration proceeds further, a point is
reached at which the heart cannot keep up with the increas¬
ed strain. The circulation then slows down, the metabolic
heat is not carried away, and at this point the temperature
of the body rapidly increases and death follows in a short
time.
Defence against explosive heat death
In view of this knowledge it was curious to find that the
camel could tolerate losing as much as 30 % of its body
weight during water deprivation in the hot desert. To
the trained physiologist this seems rather incredible, and
we were interested in the physiological peculiarities that
enabled the camel to escape explosive heat rise.
If it were possible for the camel to maintain its usual blood
volume during dehydration and not give up water from the
blood, the normal circulation could be maintained. The
blood volume can be measured by injecting a non-poisonous
dye into the blood stream and see how diluted this dye
becomes when it is evenly distributed in the blood fluid, a
procedure which is completely harmless. In a camel that
had lost 50 litres of water during water deprivation (20%
weight loss) the reduction in blood volume was less than
1 litre. The rest of the water had therefore been taken from
the tissues and tissue fluids. This places the camel in a
much better position than other mammals, in which the
thickening of the blood is the main cause of the explosive
heat death.
Although the camel needs less water than ICont-d on
other mammals, he has to drink if the feed does l ¿3.
not contain much water. v s '
Photo J. Dragesco and F. Petter. Photo Scientific American
DESERT ANIMALS THAT NEVER NEED WATER. U. S. KANGAROO RAT (RIGHT): AND AFRICAN JERBOA CAN LIVE FOR MONTHS ON DRY SEEDS.
32

THE CAMEL
(Continued from page 32)
However, there are many wild animals in the desert that
seem to live so far from any free water that one must assume
that they never drink. The desert gazelles, for example, are
found far from water holes, and they must subsist on the
water obtained from the sparse vegetation upon which they
browse. The carnivorous animals, such as the desert fox,
obtain a considerable amount of water with the blood and
tissue fluids of their prey. Some small rodents eat juicy
plant material and cacti, but other very interesting animals
eat only dry food.
Among those living on dry food are the jerboas of the Old
World deserts, and the kangaroo rats of the American
deserts. These rodents are rather similar in appearance and
habits, although they are not closely related. They can be
trapped easily and when they are kept in captivity it is
unnecessary to give them drinking water. In fact they will
not drink even if water is offered to them. They can live
for months and months eating only dry plant material and
dry seeds such as they do in their native deserts. They do
not lose weight nor does the water content of their body
decrease; in other words, they have no storage of water to
tide them over long periods of water deprivation.
These animals contain as much water as other mammals ;
about 2/3 of their body is water. They lose water vapour
from the lungs when they breathe, and their kidneys use
water to produce urine. There is constant water loss from
the body ; where does the water come from ?
In experiments with these animals we found that the
jerboas as well as the kangaroo rats depend almost entirely
on the water that is formed in their bodies by the oxidation
of their food. Such oxidation water is formed in the meta¬
bolism of all animals, and there is no secret mechanism for
chemical manufacture of water ; the amount of water
depends only on the composition of the food.
Life without drinking
As in the automobile engine, where water is formed dur¬
ing combustion, neither more nor less appears than
corresponds to the amount of hydrogen chemically
bound in the fuel. The ability of the desert rats to get along
on this very limited water supply is due to their water saving
mechanisms. They lose only half as much water by evapo¬
ration as an ordinary rat. They form very little, but highly
concentrated, urine, and they lose a minimum amount of
water with the faeces.
It is possible to induce kangaroo rats to drink if they are
given food that causes the formation of relatively large
quantities of waste products without yielding sufficient
water for their elimination. This is the case with any dry
food containing a high proportion of protein, which in meta¬
bolism yields quantities of urea that must be excreted by
the kidney.
We gave some kangaroo rats dry soy beans which contain
40 % of protein, and they would then drink water when it
was offered to them. This led us to try to determine whe¬
ther the kangaroo rats could drink sea water. Other animals
cannot tolerate drinking sea water because the organism
cannot handle the large extra amount of salt. Indeed, if
a man who is stranded without fresh water tries to drink
sea water, he is worse off than if he does not drink at all.
We offered kangaroo rats sea water to drink with the soy
beans and it turned out that they not only maintained their
weight but even gained on this rather severe diet. Of
course, in his natural desert habitat the kangaroo rat does
not have much use for drinking sea water, but it shows that
he can get along on sea water as well as without any water.
In most countries where the cow is of importance in agri¬
cultural production there are research centres and experi¬
mental stations and farms that deal with problems of scien¬
tific and economic importance. This is not so with the
camel, although to millions of people over vast areas this
animal is of major importance as a beast of burden as well
as for production of meat, milk, leather, and wool.
We have often been asked about the practical value of our
research on desert animals. Although our primary objective
is to increase the amount of basic scientific knowledge in a
fascinating field, it is easy to understand that such know¬
ledge is essential to the evaluation of the practical problems
that arise in connexion with, for example, the agricultural
nlanning and management of arid land.
(This article Is copyright and may not be reproduced without prior
permission.)
