TALES F THE PAST
Folklore and comedy flourish
on Czech stage and screen
OLD CZECH FOLK TALES were woven into a puppet film of great artistry by Jlri Trnka, who brought to the screen some of his country's best-loved
legends such as "The war between men and women" (top of page) and other stories of Czech peasant life. (Czech State Film Photos.)
60

Unesco Courier. N' 3-4. 1955
EARLY SLAV PEOPLES, WHO SETTLED ON CZECH SOIL, WERE DEPICTED BY JIRI TRNKA IN HIS FILM "OLD CZECH LEGENDS.
In few countries are puppets held in such warm affection
as in Czechoslovakia. Today they are almost a national
institution3,000 amateur groups operate regularly in
schools, co-operatives and cultural centres, and puppet thea¬
tres are to be found in practically every town in Czecho¬
slovakia.
Long before the dream of the Czechs to possess a national
theatre was realized, the puppet stage was, in fact, the peo¬
ple's national theatre. Puppets have always been deeply
rooted in Czech history and even participated in the long
struggle for national freedom. When the Habsburgs tried to
stifle Czech nationalism, travelling puppet theatres helped
to keep it alive. In the First World War they sparked popu¬
lar resistance movements. Josef Skupa, today an interna¬
tional figure and a Czech State artist, used the voice of his
mocking little Kasparek half brother to Punch, Guignol
and Pulcinellato rouse the people of Pilsen against the
Austro-Hungarian monarchy.
During the last war, Skupa's marionettes again spoke out
for freedom through his now internationally famous cha¬
racters, Spejbl, the vain, narrow-minded father, and Hurvi-
nek, his young scamp of a son, cheeky, argumentative and
full of mischief. Spejbl and Hurvinek were soon locked up
in a cupboard at Gestapo headquarters in Pilsen, and Skupa
found himself in a prison cell at Dresden. But other coura¬
geous marionettists like Jan Malik took his place and their
secret performances were seen by hundreds of people".
In 1948, a law placed puppetry on a level with all other
branches of drama. Today Czechoslovakia has ten profession¬
al marionette art theatres and even a Chair of Puppetry in
the Prague Academy of Musical Arts. In schools and colleges
the puppet show is widely used as a means of developing
self-expression, arts and crafts and as -an effective way of
teaching different subjects.
Since 1946, Czechoslovakia has received international
acclaim for its work in the new field of film puppetry. Films
by Hermina Tyrlova, Karel Zerman and especially Jiri Trnka
have won leading awards at the Festivals of Venice, Cannes,
Brussels, Edinburgh and elsewhere. Jiri Trnka, a former
student of Josef Skupa, produced three full-length puppet
films between 1947 and 1951. In Spalicek (The Czech Year)
his puppets brought to the screen six merry peasant festi¬
vals. His "The Emperor and the Nightingale" was based on
Hans Anderson's fairy tale and in "'Prince Bayaya" he
recounted one of his country's best-known folk tales.
Hermina Tyrlova scored a great success with "The Toys'
Revolt", an echo of Nazi occupation days, in which she used
both living actors and puppets, as did Karel Zerman, in his
"Christmas Dream."
Drawing on the rich ancient traditions of the Czech
puppet theatres, these masters have succeeded in developing
a new art form in today's popular medium of entertainment
the cinema.
61
