HUNTING
THE WHALE
Unesco Courier. Nr 5. 1955
by David Gunston
Whales have been hunted for
something like ten centuries
but only within living memory
has there been a scientifically or¬
ganized whaling industry. The whale
has been aptly described as a
mammal with an unfortunate eco¬
nomic background. The larger spe¬
cies are extremely valuable, and as
they are free and wild they are not
subject to any form of international
control. Thus they became the goal of
quick profit seekers. Only recently was
effective protection introduced, but not
before unbridled exploitation had led to
serious depletion of world whale stocks.
The history of the whale since about
1600 has been a tragic story and species
after species have been completely
wiped out. First the whalers caught
their quarry from the shore, then off¬
shore, and finally throughout the
oceans of the world, often thousands of
miles from their home base. Only a
hundred years ago whales were being
caught off the Scottish coast and in the
North Atlantic. Hull on the east coast
of England was once a busy whaling
port. But gradually whales diminished
in the off-shore waters and towards the
end of the nineteenth century it looked
as if this type of whaling was coming
to an end after a brief heyday.
New lease of life
In 1904 the Norwegian whaling
captain, Abraham Larsen, gave the
industry a new lease of life, and in
consequence the hunted whales a much
smaller chance of survival. He opened
up new whaling grounds in the icy
waters bordering on the South Polar
land mass. By the use of modern ships
and new techniques he hoped to have
an endless supply of whales for the
taking, but the blue and fin whales
which he found were only the remnants
of a one time enormous world whale
population.
Antarctic whaling was largely pio¬
neered by the Norwegians but other
nations soon joined the whale hunt.
However, in 1912 when the world's whal¬
ing fleet had 141 factory ships, no fewer
than 37 sailed under the Norwegian
flag.
In the years prior to the first world
war, and in the years following the
war, whale hunting in the Antarctic
was unrestricted and an international
free-for-all prevailed. The economic
crisis of 1930-31 had its effect on the
whaling industry as the whaling fleet's
18
record catch coincided with falling
prices and heavy losses were incurred.
More serious than this, however, were
the grave inroads made on world
stocks by unrestricted whale hunting.
Cosmetics and hormones
At the commencement of the second
world war in 1939 the world whale
population reached its lowest ebb.
Even so, the remaining whale popula¬
tion is still a valuable economic res¬
ource and the industry which turns
whales into food and raw materials
can ill be spared. This knowledge has
not, nevertheless, prevented the hunt¬
ing and killing of all species of oil-
bearing whales with the result that
they have been driven, if not to the
verge of extinction, then at least to a
dangerous economic level. Only three
or four species now survive in any
numbers.
The main targets today among the
remaining species are the enormous
blue whale. equal in weight to 17 ele¬
phants and the largest animal the
world has ever known the slightly
smaller fin whales and an occasional
sperm whale. Although oil remains the
principal object of whaling there has
been a great increase in the number of
by-products and these account to a
large extent for the mammoth size of a
modern floating factory which costs in
round figures about three million
pounds sterling (approximately nine
million dollars).
In the world to-day there is an
urgent need for fats, especially edible
ones, and this situation is likely to re¬
main for a long time to come. Prior to
the 1939-1945 war whales provided
about 3 % of the world's edible oil pro¬
duction. Though this figure has now
risen to about 10 % it is still only a
marginal source of supply and is liable
to be superseded in the future by vege¬
table oils, and possibly by synthetic
products.
Whale oil is at present used in mak¬
ing margarine, cooking fat, cosmetics,
lubricating oils, soap and many other
products. At a price of around ninety
pounds sterling (approximately 270
dollars) a ton it is assured of a ready
market. Whales also provide valuable
by-products such as hormones, insulin,
meat and bone meals, fertilisers, poultry
and stock feed, vitamin extracts and
whalebone for brush making.
In recent -years there has been a
(Continued on page 20)
CAPTURED WHALE carrying a marker harpoon with the house
flag of the ship and two small oil lamps. (Keystone photo)
STRANDED on a beach in Long Island (USA) a whalebone whale reveals his enormous mouth. Whalebone, or baleen whales, are named
for the flexible baleen or series of thin plates to scoop up food which hang in parallel rows on either side of the mouth (Keystone photo)
hoto«)
19


HUNTING THE
WHALE (Cont'd) Vanishing Quarry
growing demand for whale meat. Pre¬
viously hundreds of thousands of tons
of meat, after the oil had been extract¬
ed, were thrown back into the sea as
useless. In fact whale meat has the
highest protein content (85 %) of any
edible meat and provides a staple food
for the whalers themselves and other
peoples such as the Eskimos and the
Japanese. Attempts were made to po¬
pularize whale meat on the British
market but these did not meet with
much success and in common with
another fish, the snoek, whale steak be¬
came rather a music hall joke. Recent
research has improved methods of
preserving and processing whale meat
and it may yet prove to be of import¬
ance in the industry.
To gain a good idea of the present
status of the whale fishing industry it
is necessary to trace some of its recent
history. With the opening-up of new
fishing grounds in the Antarctic, the
increasing scope for development and
the perfection of the open sea whaling
technique, the industry was a highly
profitable one until about 1930. The
old-fashioned methods of hunting from
shore bases in South Georgia and the
Falkland Islands were dropped and the
factory ship, which processed whales
far from land, and acted as a parent
vessel for small tuglike catchers, came
into its own. South Africa became the
jumping-off point for. the whaling
fleets, and today tankers from South
Africa feed the fleets thus enabling
them to stay at sea for several months.
But the ocean could not be expected
to go on yielding liquid gold for ever.
Too many countries were sending
whaling fleets to the Antarctic and the
mad scramble for returns which ensued
soon had its effects. Attempts were
made by Norway and Britain to keep the
total annual catch within reasonable
limits, but these were not successful.
Further new whaling fleets appeared in
the fishing grounds with the result
that more and more ships were catch¬
ing fewer and fewer whales.
In the 1930-31 (season some 40,000
whales were killed for an oil yield of
564,000 tons. By the 1938-39 season the
size of the whaling fleet had more than
doubled but the yield was only 13 %
higher : 46,000 whales were killed for a
return of only about 550,000 tons of oil.
Following the outbreak of war in 1939
the whales were left to themselves. But
nature was not to be hurried, and the
long ravaging which had taken place
since 1904 had by no means been made
A RUSSIAN
whale catcher
bringing her haul
of whales back to
the factory ship.
This Russian whal¬
ing fleet, during
one Antarctic
season caught a
total of no fewer
than3,092whales.
(Keystone photo).
20
up when the whalers returned in 1945
to resume their work. As most of the
British and Norwegian factory ships
had been sunk during the war it was not
until the 1947-48 season that a fully-
equipped whaling fleet once again set
out from Europe. Weather conditions
were good during that season and
31,000 whales were taken for a yield of
302,000 tons of oil. Since that time
catches have been high and oil produc¬
tion good.
In efforts to restrict the annual
slaughter of whales International Con¬
ventions designed to fix a maximum
annual target were signed in 1944 and
1946 by those countries interested in the
whaling industry. These conventions
imposed a total limit of 16,000 "blue
whale units" for the entire Antarctic
whaling fleet in one season. The blue
whale is used internationally as the
standard measurement of whale
catches. One "blue whale unit" is
equivalent to one blue whale, two fin
whales, two and a half humpback
whales or six sei whales.
Industry's last chance
The maximum catch figure is con¬
trolled on the whaling grounds by
means of a floating headquarters.
Here the day-by-day catches are to¬
talled and announcements are given
regarding the closing of the season
when reports indicate that the limit of
16,000 is in sight. Despite this inter¬
national whaling agreement there are
many people who believe that the
maximum catch is still far too high to
allow for the future safety of the
whales.
The great cost of building and
equipping a whaling fleet today has
tended to limit the number of new
countries sending whaling ships into
the Antarctic. At present Japan, Nor¬
way, the Netherlands, South Africa, the
U.K. and the USSR send independent
fleets to the far south for four or five
months of the year. An International
Whaling Commission has been es¬
tablished and agreement has been
reached on many technical points.
All measures of international control
are of the utmost value and the guid¬
ing principle of such control must be
to restrict the annual catch to the ap¬
proximate surplus of nature. This is
not, of course, easy to judge and in the
absence of precise knowledge safety
would appear to be the best policy.
The potential value of the world
whale population is now universally re¬
cognized ; all that remains is a realiza¬
tion of the need for care in its hand¬
ling. Certainly one lesson cannot be
forgotten : in every area with the
exception of the Antarctic, whales have
vanished through lack of foresight in
not controlling the numbers of whales
killed. The industry and the world
cannot afford to let it happen again,
for this would be the last time.
