 ( ;  ; f, ;,,}, , ;, :,, ;, (,. ; :  ;, :, :'" :,", > J, : :
' :,'' ; {< f <t'1 ?  :  :' ? å\
by Ritchie Calder
Os a recent visit to UNESCO's Paris headquarters, I
made a sentimental journey through the back
streets which we, as delegates to the First General
Conference of UNESCO, ten years ago, had used as a short-
cut from our hotel to the Avenue Kleber. I did not
recognise them. I remembered them as much more
romantic. Now, they were just ordinary, with the paving
stones hard underfoot.
Then I realised that it was not the streets but I who
had changed. In 1946, we paced those pavements in the
company O'f our dreams, talking of all the aspirations that
we were trying to write into the programme of UNESCO.
And all the other delegates, from all the other countries,
. rom all over the world, were likewise walking and talking
and projecting their dreams of what UNESCO should do.
The result was a profession of faith but scarcely a pro-
gramme of action. For we wished on to the infant orga-
nisation every rose-tinted reverie ar. d high-minded hope
and we made life difficult for UNESCO. Yet we were well-
meaning. Remember that we were at the end O'f a
ruthless war which had threatened to destroy our civili-
zation, which had distorted the minds of men with
hatreds and blinded them to the beauties of our common
heritage. Then, exultantly, we saw'''Mankind's Second
Chance."Out of the ruins we came as bearers of embar-
rassing gifts to the cradle of this offspring of the United
Nations ideal.
When, at the end of that conference, some of us woke
up to what we had done (and left undone), I said,"We
have made UNESCO the gift of the entire empyrean, of all
the stars of the firmament, when all that it needed was a
few navigational stars by which to chart its course."
GOVERNMENTS, more realistic than most of their dele-gates, put a price on the dreams we peddled, and it
was not high. But even if it had been ten, or a
hundred times as much, UNESCO still could not have given
substance to our ambitions. Our difficulties were manifest
in the language we had perforce to use : UNESCO, as an
intergovernmental agency, could not have power to execute
and was not given adequate resources to simplement ; so we
had to resort to words like initiate ; stimulate ; facilitate or
investigate.
One example springs to mind : A proposal that UNESCO,
to counteract misleading propaganda and to spread
truth,, culture and understanding, should have its
own world-wide radio network, with its own stations and
its own programmes, penetrating everywhere. Apart
from political difficulties, the broadcasting realists esti-
mated that the project would cost $1, 000, 000, 000 and that
it would take years to build a listening audience. So the
best we could do was to stimulate existing networks with
any facilities which UNESCO might provide and investigate
the radio needs of various countries.
It was the same in other spheres as well. We had
written into the Charter :"Since wars begin in the minds
of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed."And we meant it. But there
were 2, 500 million minds in the world. More than half
the population could not read nor write and more than
half the children of school-age had no schools to which
to go. Over 200 countries and territories had different
educational systems-some good, some indifferent and
some barely existing. In the mood in which we were in
in 1946, we would have liked to have given a tutor to
every child !
As one of those"Olympians"of 1946, I came down to
12
earth sooner than most. I shared the chastening experi-
ence of the second conference in Mexico City, when we
started pruning our ambitions and forming a more realis-
tic plan of action. But I did not suffer the disillusion-
ment which comes to dreamers because in the intervening
years, I had the opportunities of an independent observer
o'f seeing the realities of the practical work which UNESCO
can do. I have seen its work in the deserts, in the jungle,
and in the lands which had been forgotten. I have seen
it at work among the common people, just as I have seen
its value to the uncommon people-the educationists, the
scientists, the thinkers and the aesthetes.
TOUR aspirations, in more commonplace attire, have
had to"work for their living"but, from my salutary
experience, I have found the quiet work of devoted
people in the field more rewarding than the resounding
phrases of the conference room.
For instance, ten years ago"fundamental education"
was an unfamiliar concept. We talked about"creating
the climate of literacy"-making an illiterate adult world
sympathetic to the education of the young. A noble
object, but how ?
Today,"fundamental education"promoted by UNESCO
is a working practice. The object, and the example, of
centres like Chao Choeng Sao, in Thailand, and Sirs-el-
Layyan, in the Nile Delta, is to spread"fundamental edu-
cation". And they do. People, even though they are
illiterate, are taught the benefits of knowledge. Men and
women are taught how to till their fields better ; how to
care for the health of themselves and their children ; how
to look after their homes and so'forth.
In learning, they improve their conditions and their
knowledge. Then they want their children to know more
and want schools for them. And they want schools for
themselves and the elements of adult education. The
experience of this sort of thing derives out of the people
and their circumstances-like the singing teacher of
CREFAL, the Fundamental Education Training Centre'for
Latin America, who goes around the villages with her
guitar, singing her instructions in lively, rousing fashion.
Governments have turned to UNEsco not only for experts
to help set up schools, introduce technical and adult
education, and provide radio-teaching for people remote
from schools, but, as in the case of Yugoslavia, for help
in reorganising the educational systems of six republics.
os the first time in the history of mankind-because
UNESCO exists-the picture of the needs of education,
the geography of ignorance, has at last been drawn,
exchange not only of personnel but of experience is
constantly taking place and the'''plan of action"can be
implemented. Principles we discussed in 1946 are be-
ing put into practice.
The"S"of UNESCO stands for"Science". Even ten years
ago we were eminently practical about the"S". The
"Commonwealth of Science", the indispensible exchange
of scientific knowledge, existed before the war in the form
of the international congresses of the many disciplines o'f
science. The machinery of exchanges had, of course,
ceased with hostilities but UNESCO was able to provide
funds--'- :"lubricating oil, not even fuel oil"-which restored
the functions of the congresses and helped to create
international scientific bodies, where needed.

Again there was CERN, the European Centre for Nuclear
Research at Geneva. This is costing 200, 000, 000 Swiss
francs-'far more than Unesco could provide. But UNESCO
inspired it, and twelve governments agreed to co-operate
and finance this vital enterprise which will give them-
and the world-the benefit of the"know-why"of the
atomic nucleus, repository of the energy which can be
turned to peaceful uses.
There is the Arid Zone Project. I confess to a personal
"stake"in this because five years ago, at UNESCO's request,
I did a reconnaissance of the problems of desert research
in a tour of the deserts of North A'frica and the Middle
East. But, since then, I have seen UNESCO's work on
desert hydrology, plant ecology, human and animal eco-
logy, wind and solar energy and climatology. A lot of
"-ology", some may say, but it is the information amassed
from experience and research all over the world which
will enable deserts to be wisely developed and produce
sustenance for the world's multiplying population.
And here is one dream which is coming true. I thought
I was dreaming when a French scientist with whom I vas
trudging knee-deep in burning sand in the Sahara said,
"Monsieur Calder, we are walking on water !" Either I
was dreaming or he was suffering from the cafard that
madness which overtakes those who are too long exposed
UNESCO
to the desert. That I was not dreaming and that he was
not mad is confirmed by the reports to UNESCO.
Under our feet was a great fresh-water reservoir, the
nodular sandstone layer of the Albienne Nappe of which
subsequent reports said :"It is now known that in a broad
belt running north and south under the Sahara, it is
possible for artesian wells to be sunk. We can create
man-made oases wherever there is a sufficient area of
cultivable land in the vast dead valleys... And so it shall
be that we will bring life to a howling desert..."
And the desert shall blossom as the rose... A dream
that will become a reality, to be added to many other
achievements of UNEsco, the more significant perhaps
because they are unsung. The help to restore the war-
ravaged schools, museums and libraries ; the conventions
to protect the ancient monuments which are the heritage
of all mankind ; the convention on copyright ; the World
Survey of Education ; the cultural and scientific history of
mankind ; the constant exchange of peoples to learn and
to teach and the manifold activities which are lighting
lamps of understanding throughout the world.
Out of those dreams of 1946 a plan of action has
emerged. From that firmament of stars, UNESCO has
found the stars by which to steer and it will be judged not
by our past hopes but by its future achievements.
13
The Uncsco Courir
