WORLD
PRESS
COMMENTARY
OUR recent issue which asked the question " Are
Women Inferior Beings? " and answered it with
scientist Ashley Montagu's conclusions "No, they
are naturally superior to men!" has touched off a little
hornet's nest in the world's press. As readers will recall
the Unesco Courier reported that the latest scientific evi¬
dence shows that women are naturally superior to men,
that they live longer, are healthier, are better "shock
absorbers" than men, and are more intelligent than men.
The issue (November 1955; U.S. edition January 1956)
surveyed women'sprogress in different countries over the
past sixty years and revealed that there were only fifteen
countries left where women still do not have the right
to vote (1). Since the publication of this number, a new
electoral law has been published in Egypt under which
women will have the right to vote for the first time. Men
over 21 must vote, but women need not do so. The same
issue exploded some false notions about women in primi¬
tive societies, and published the findings of a four-coun¬
try survey which showed that "the woman who does
nothing all day long but stay at home... works a 70-hour
week." Many newspaper and magazine clippings have
reached us giving factual reports or comment on
this issue. Below are a few from different countries.
'LIFE OF THE INSECTS'
'L'Express', Paris
Under an eight-column banner, "A
unesco Inquiry : Women are still not
free!", the Paris daily "L'Express" of
Nov. 25, devotes its entire two-page centre
spread to a detailed report of the infor¬
mation published by the Unesco Courier.
It begins with this introduction:
"Unesco has gone ahead and just
carried out a considerable piece of work
to establish a balance sheet of 'the
progress made by women in recent years
in their struggle for equality with men'.
The truth is that the world has never
been so preoccupied with women as in
the past ten years. Economists, demo¬
graphers, biologists reduce them to equa¬
tions and transform them into statistics
as if all the women in the universe had
been rounded up in an immense zoo and
the technicians given a free hand to
study this animal suddenly turned rum¬
bustious.
" ' And you, professor, what do you
think?'
" 'Mmm... Well, frankly, doctor, it
seems to me that...'
"And the women are successively in¬
formed that they are found superior, or
inferior, or equalbut always in terms
of the same invariable yardstick, i.e. the
male.
"Unesco's effort does not quite shake
off the atmosphere of a 'Study of the
(I) Afghanistan, Cambodia, Egypt, Ethiopia. Iran,
Iraq, Jordan, Laos, Libya, Liechtenstein, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, Yemen.
Life of the Insects'. Painstaking ento¬
mologists, acting with the kindest of
intentions towards these insects have
piled up observations and figures to make
it possible to measure the march forward
of the women of the world in achieving
the principles affirmed by the U.N.
Charter: 'Free and equal in dignity and
rights... without distinction of any kind
such as race, colour or sex.'
"Free and equal in dignity... There's
something that will take a good deal more
effort. But, alas, since you have to start
with the rights so that dignity can follow
afterwards, here are a few of the results
gathered and recorded by Unesco's
investigators."
GOOD-BYE ILLUSIONS
'Le Matin', Antwerp
"Unesco (has just) exploded a big
bomb", declares the Antwerp daily "Le
Matin". "After months of strenuous effort,
and with the aid of Professor Ashley Mon¬
tagu, it has come out with some surpris¬
ing news: women have made consider¬
able progress in recent years.
"Alas! not every truth, however scien¬
tific, should be shouted from the house¬
tops, and our Professor would have been
wiser to reflect on this before relegating
all his fellow men to an inferior place.
But as the harm has already been done
we must take up the cudgels in our own
defence.
"Fellow men ! Here we are then, the mi¬
nus Habens of humanity, the protozoa of
the race, the invertebrates of society. We
needed Unesco to make us realize it, and
a professor to discover that woman is
stronger than her mate, that she handles
her emotions more satisfactorily than a
man, and that if she wished she could
do almost anything.
"No more and no less. Good-bye then
to our masculine illusions. Power will
change its sex and women will be in com¬
mand. But before we abdicate let us face
the fact that we are responsible for a
thousand calamities. If things are go¬
ing badly in the world, it is because of
us, because we have never given women
the chance to teach us how to love one
another. Unesco has said it and I shud¬
der especially when I see my concierge
thrash her husband."
WORLD A BETTER PLACE
' Gazette de Lausanne '
The "Gazette de Lausanne" in Swit¬
zerland quotes large extracts from
Professor Ashley Montagu's article, and
remarks: "Here is something which, curi¬
ously enough, links up in certain ways
with an opinion expressed in these col¬
umns some time ago. Doctor X, a Lau¬
sanne psychiatrist, had put forward the
view that women drivers cause less acci¬
dents than men. This statement caused
an outcry in the Paris press. But evi-
dence has since shown this to be quite
true. Let us therefore render justice to
women and place our confidence in them.
There is every reason to
hope th-*-!*. the world will be (Cont'd on
a better place." next page)
3I

'^Courier (Continued)
.
¡
Hi WOMEN
IIHIIII
BEINGS ?
m cm«!«
iium u
-itiiiiii
s**
^
- <f lím! ici
-I»lit11
-riii hm
m
t il
i
UNESCO IS RIGHT
' Caffaro', Genoa
"Caffaro" of Genoa, after taking up the
arguments as to why women are superior,
says: "The Unesco Courier is right". It
adds that as the Italian population is
composed of 23,969,000 women as against
22,769,000 men, a Commission composed of
leaders from the largest women's organi¬
zations in Italy, both religious and poli¬
tical, met in Rome recently, and decided
to launch an intensive campaign to give
women a much greater representation in
the administrative and legislative network
for the next elections."
SHOULD RULE MANKIND
' Neue Post ', Bonn
In Germany, the Bonn "Neue Post"
opens its article by stating "A United
Nations Organization has affirmed that
women are more intelligent than men.
Half the world, in other words all the
human males, will be astonished to learn
that according to scientific data women
are more intelligent, more resistant and
more healthy than men.
"To reach this astonishing conclusion
has needed years of work, the accuracy
of whose results cannot be doubted.
Behind this statement is Unesco with all
the weight of its authority. When one
considers the results of this enquiry, one
wonders why the world is not ruled by
women. Women should be able, not only
because of their charm and affection, but
also because of their intelligence and the
biological means with which nature has
endowed them, to take charge of the
destinies of the world."
A SCIENTIFIC ISSUE
Italian press
The "Gazetta del Popólo" of Turin, the
"Piccolo" of Trieste and the "Mattino" of
Naples, all remark that Unesco "has
carried the feminist and anti-feminist
arguments from the literary to the scien¬
tific debating floor." They point out that
eminent economists, biologists, politicians,
psychologists and other specialists of
various nationalities took part in the
enquiry. The Milan newspaper, "Gazetta
del Popólo", reprints several articles from
the Unesco Courier under the headline
"Revolutionary Conclusions from a
Unesco survey".
STARTLING STATISTICS
' Daily Express ', London
The London "Daily Express", has a
provocative short piece by one of its
leading columnists, William Hickey, who
dismisses Professor Ashley Montagu,
Unesco and women's superiority in quick
order. Under the headline "The Natural
Superiority of Women?... Huh! A cool
look at some startling statistics", this is
what he has to say:
"This is not the time when one should
be in a temper. Not a time when one
should be angry." (The column appeared
on December 23.) "But I am in a temper.
I am angry. And the cause is Unesco's
report on women by an American social
scientist, Professor Ashley Montagu.
"He is the author of a book called 'The
Natural Superiority of Women'. And his
report for the U.N. Organization which
we all support through taxes is enough
to make any man angry and any woman
flattered.
"He says that if men had to bear the
pain of childbirth the human race would
have been extinct long ago. Oh, what
profundity! Oh, what wisdom! And I
say that if women had to earn the rent,
and the housekeeping, and the insurance,
and the coal bill... well, civilization would
never have begun!
"The professor is also quoted as saying
that the housewives of the world work
46,000,000 hours while the rest of the
active population of the world work only
42,000,000 hours. I don't know how he
arrived at these figures. The professor's
final conclusion is that 'the hand that
rocks the cradle should also rule the
world.'
"And I say to the professor... jolly good.
How right you are. The hand that rocks
the cradle... or nurses the child in the
watches of the night... is generally a male
hand. Isn't it?"
FUTILE DIATRIBE
' Courrier ', Geneva
In the editorial columns of the Geneva
"Courrier", René Leyraz writes: "I have
never read anything quite so futile, apart
from the antifeminist diatribes setting out
to prove the definite congenital superiority
of man over woman.
"Science has a broad back.
"Here, in any case, the question of
'feminism' is raised badly and stupidly.
"Naturally the stubborn champions of
masculine superiority will lash out hotly
at such pretensions. Tney will line up
arguments which are just as convincing...
or just as silly. They will undoubtedly
defend their chromosomes. Why not ?
"We already have wars between nations,
between races, and between classes. Now
the charming Ashley Montagu, under
Unesco's auspices, wants to launch us into
a war between the sexes! That is exactly
what we needed. As if it was not already
difficult enough to get Adam and Eve
to live together; as if there were not
already enough family troubles, divorces
and separations?
"Masculine superiority and feminine
superiority are two equally dangerous
myths. As for the first, woman's 'pro¬
motion' seems to me to have been
conclusively proved. Thousands of things
which men thought the "weaker sex"
incapable of doing have, in our own times,
been brillantly accomplished by women.
The woman of today follows man to the
heart of the jungle or to the summits
of the Himalayas without flinching or
fainting and without making a fuss.
"I do not believe, moreover that we
are able to produce a valid argument from
the differences between the sexes against
women's voting rights. Complementing
each other the two sexes can and should
usefully give their advice on community
matters. In those countries where
women's voting rights have been recogniz¬
ed there have certainly not been any
social or political catastrophies. In fact
the list of countries which join with
Switzerland in its obstinate refusal to
grant women the right to vote is some¬
what" humiliating for us.
"We can drop our attitude of masculine
superiority, but at the same time we
would ask our womenfolk not to fall into
the equally silly trap of feminine supe¬
riority. Rather let each sex play its full
role in the natural and providential order
of things.'
LET'S BE GOOD LOSERS
' La Croix ', Paris
Under the headline "Woman is 'natu¬
rally' superior to man", the Paris daily
"La Croix" commends the arguments put
forward by Professor Ashley Montagu.
One of its women writers, declares:
"Let us all be good losers. If it is true
that we are 'naturally' stronger than men,
we should be thankful for it for the sake
of the future of the human race. But
let us remind ourselves that we have so
much need of each other that it is of
little importance whether one or the other
is 'naturally' the stronger, as long as this
strength serves a useful purpose: biologi¬
cal strength for the woman to give life
and develop it; muscular strength for the
man to help his wife, and a 'super¬
natural' strength for both, so that a
helping hand is there in times of need."
PUT MEN IN THE SHADE
' News Chronicle ', London
The London "News Chronicle" headlines
its story: "Women! You put men in the
shade brainier, stronger, healthier..." The
article continues with an analysis of
facts from the Unesco Courier, noting
particularly that only in politics are
women lagging, behind the men.
OH, FOR NEW GUINEA
Two quotes from extreme ends of
Europe "Aftontidningen" of Stockholm:
"Oh, for New Guinea where the women
work and men decorate themselves with
garlands"; "El Alcazar" (Madrid). "And
to think that there are hundreds of
women sighing for a man who will libe¬
rate them from six hours in an office so
they can work fourteen in a house."
32
