UNESCO
THE SACRED BULL OF SIVA, a huge animal figure carved in solid rock on the top of Chamundi Hill, overlooking the
city of Mysore. It dates from the I 7th century when Mysore was becoming one of the most powerful states in southern India.

THROUGH WESTERN GLASSES

Govt, of India.
DANCE OF CREATION is executed by famed Indian dancer, Ram
Gopal, whose costume and gestures depict Siva, God of the Dance.

ASIAN HISTORY
THROUGH WESTERN GLASSES
Superficial, out of focus,
fragmentary, distorted
by Ronald Fenton
A United States ambassador, newly-returned to his
country from his post in India, was talking to his
son about the American school he would soon join.
"I'll bet," he said, "'that the world history you will study
begins in Egypt and Mesopotamia, moves on to Greece by
way of Crete, takes you through Rome and finally ends
.up. with England and France."
"'But that isn't world history," protested his son, "That
leaves out three fourths of the world." "Unhappily," says
Chester Bowles, the ambassador who tells this story, "I
won the bet."
What turned out to be true of an American school
applies equally to schools in other western countries where
textbooks are still bounded by what one educator terms
Exactly to what extent the vast conti¬
nent of Asia is given the "'cold shoulder" or is shown in
false perspective has now been revealed by an enquiry
into history textbooks made by some 25 Western countries
at Unesco's suggestion (1).
During the past year investigators in each country
(1) Ileports were submitted by National Commissions for Unesco,
not all neing officially endorsed cither by governments or by the
National Commissions themselves.
THE OTA OTA, a dance In slow rhythm based on the movements of men
engaged In a duel is performed by menfolk in a Malayan village. Women and
looked over history books with a series of specific ques¬
tions in mind. These were :
Is the space given to Asian countries (or some of them)
reasonable, given the subject and scope of the book?
What are the standards of historical accuracy? Are facts
given about the main features of Asian culture and the
great figures of Asian history? Does the book help to an
understanding of cultural values and the point of view of
the Asian peoples? Is the impression given that Asia is
important only as an incidental factor in Western (Euro¬
pean) development ?
From the reports which have now come in from
eighteen countries, the answers to these questions add up,
broadly speaking, to this: the image of Asia as present¬
ed to school children is badly out of focus in nearly all
countries and, as one report puts it, is "'superficial, epi¬
sodic, incomplete and impersonal." Aspects of cultural, re¬
ligious and intellectual life are commonly neglected and
even if a few great Asian figures are mentioned, they are
never convincingly presented.
The survey is marked by a spirit of frank self-criticism
which has turned the spotlight on the shortcomings of
textbooks in regard to Asia. A few countries appear to be
reasonably satisfied that they give quite sufficient cover¬
age to Asiatic material, while others find it adequate
considering the aim and scope of their school courses.
But the majority admit with few reserves that there are
serious gaps or distortions in their treatment of the most
important civilizations and peoples of Asia.
"Very great and often quite unjustified gaps appear in
all history textbooks." reports Italy (2). "Certain authors
limit Indian history to the period of British rule. In some
books, Chinese history begins in 1895 with the Sino-Japa-
nese Peace Treaty of Shimonoseki, as if the life of the
Chinese people had been of little interest until that time.
(2) Like Caesar with Gaul, the Italian report divides Asia into
three parts: (1) Mediterranean or semi-Mediterranean regions with the
Assyrians, Hittites, Arabs and Turks. (2) The Northern regions now
linked to Russian history. (3) India and the Far East. The Italian
enquiry deals only with the third category.
8

The Unesco Courier. March 1956
COI. London. UNESCO
children are gathered here to watch these tra¬
ditional dances and games during village festival.
CLASSICAL DRAMA maintains its popularity in Japan. Most important of all are the Kabuki plays,
a combination of acting, singing and dancing with costumes and stage settings of fabulous colours.
Compared with the history of Japan, that of China is
rushed over hurriedly and its contemporary history is not
properly explained, nor are the reasons for the present
evolution dealt with thoroughly."
Similar criticisms come from Germany: "Some attempt
is made to treat the early history of the South, South-
East and Eastern civilizations. In general, books are si¬
lent about cultures other than those of the north of India
and China. During the modern era the most important
place is given to Japan. There is a great variation in the
treatment of China. Some books consider it as an object
of the foreign struggle for power, others stress the
Revolution of 1911 and the national evolution of the inter-
war period. Facts about India are limited almost exclu¬
sively to a few general references to India's position and
importance within the British Empire. In the books
examined, the whole of the South East Asian region is
almost entirely neglected."
The report summing up the situation in France recog¬
nizes that in primary schools history teaching Is center¬
ed on the history oí Europe and particularly Western Eur¬
ope. "The place and importance alloted to events and
civilizations outside Europe is proportional to the rela¬
tionship that they have (apparently, at least) with the
history of Western Europe. As regards Asian countries,
the further away they are geographically from Western
Europe the rarer the references become."
Sweden speaks of "'serious gaps," particularly in the
spread of Mohammedanism towards the East, Hinduism
and its historical background, and Russia's development
as a Great Asian Power. Referring to the spread of Mo¬
hammedanism Sweden admits that "Not only is no in¬
formation given on how and when this expansion occur¬
red, it is not even mentioned. The current controversies
in India therefore lack all background and are introduced
incoherently. The fact that the population of Indonesia
has been Mohammedan since the 16th century is not
mentioned at all. Nowhere is an account given of the part
Mohammedanism has played in the foundation of states
both in the past and the present, nor of present-day Islam
in North Africa, Pakistan and the Near East. It will, un
fortunately, not be saying too much if it is maintained
that most Swedish pupils leave school without having
clear ideas of the varied literature, art and world of ideas
of Persia, India, Indonesia and China."
A limited survey in England and Wales focuses on the
treatment of India and China in history textbooks used
by children in the 11 to 16 age bracket. "In general," it
says, it would seem that the amount of space and the
general significance accorded to China and India are ge¬
nerally adequate considering the aims and scope of the
syllabuses and the limited time available for historical
study. This adequacy, however, is not true of all books,
especially as regards many so-called World Histories, as,
for example in their sections dealing with Ancient Times.
Asia, apart from the Middle East, is rarely gi¬
ven due space and significance, the aim being (Cont'd on
to give a background to European culture, next page)
Eric Schwab-UNESCO.
' CELESTIAL
HELMETS'
and silken brocade
costumes are worn
by young dancers
in one of Bang¬
kok's 400 temples.

ASIA (Continued)
"Some books by
their titles purport
to deal with the
whole Modern
World, when in fact the Western world- is meant. Apart
from misleading titles, some books are perhaps providing
a rather simplified view in suggesting that our culture
and that of what is called Western civilization has its
roots only in the Middle East and the Mediterranean
world.
"Tn the books which cover Ancient history there is fre¬
quent omission of the early periods of Asiatic history
when India and China developed their own civilizations
and in the books
dealing with later
periods internal
developments in
these regions are
rarely mentioned
apart from inci¬
dental references
in connexion with
commercial, or mi¬
litary or colonial
contacts; while re¬
cent twentieth cen¬
tury developments
are rarely given
more than cursory
attention.
"There are com¬
monly references,
for example, to Da¬
rius and Alexan¬
der, to Marco Polo
and later voyagers,
and then no fur-
t h e r references,
until Western im¬
pact upon what
are presented as
decadent or disor¬
derly states of
later times is no¬
ted. It is not un¬
common in the
better books to find some reference to Buddha, Asoka,
and Confucius, and of our British and European debt to
early civilizations, including the Indian and Chinese, in
certain respects. One book notes that China 'had a settled
religion and culture many centuries before Christian
times', and refers to the patronage by Jenghiz Khan of
scientists and writers."
A report from Poland estimates that between 0,3 % and
6 % of textbook contents are devoted to the history and
cultural development of China, India and the Arabian
peninsular. "We realize", says the report, "that the space
alloted to the rich and ancient civilizations of the Asian
peoples is still too small, and we are at present studying
means of assigning more importance to this subject in
the curriculum, without overtaxing the pupils."
It is admitted by most of the countries surveyed that
Asian history is seen almost exclusively from the European
point of view. The Italian report goes even, further, stat-
IPyiif 11 r HI ' -jiy i^tmmmtmWm^mm
^L^F^Sifl,W W MM Hl m^^m^mW^^
tf íriuKMrJr
p'T<mJI
Govt, of India.
HAVA MAHAL, The Palace of the Winds
at Udaipur, northern India, is one of many
still surviving Rajput palaces and forts.
Werner Bibchof, Magnum.
KYOTO TEMPLE. There are well over
3,000 temples and shrines in what was
formerly the ancient capital of Japan.
ing "textbooks ge¬
nerally present
Asia as one of the
areas where the
enterprise and vi¬
gour of European
nations have been
most widely exer¬
cized. Only in text¬
books on contem¬
porary history do
we find any treat¬
ment of Asian
countries which is
not linked to Euro¬
pean expansion,
but even here the
approach is deci¬
dedly European."
This lack of pers¬
pective is also
mentioned in the
British report
which says that
India and China normally come into the picture only as
incidental factors in European or national development
and in relation to the extension of Western influence.
But in addition to glaring omissions and haphazard
treatment there is a dangerous tendency to see certain
people of Asia in terms of sweeping generalizations and
time-worn clichés.
Britain, however, reports that while "little positive con¬
tribution is in fact being made towards the understanding
of Asiatic peoples by the contents of most history text¬
books in common use, on the other hand, except for a few
prejudiced phrases or distorted references in a number of
books mostly published a considerable time ago, little is
done to harm reasonable relationships, " adding that this
is so only because so little relevance to the problem is
in fact being
covered at all.
Dealing with the
same question, the
Italian survey finds
that while text¬
book writers can¬
not be accused of
bias or social pre¬
judice the picture
given -of Asian
countries is based
on common clichés
which, even if they
can often be justi¬
fied, could well
stand revision or
at least more
subtle explanation.
These are some of
the examples
found in Italian
Morin-UNEsco. textbooks:
BABYLONIAN RUINS with animal
motif bas-reliefs on crumbling brick walls.
Hedda Hammer, Pekin.
«TEMPLE OF HEAVEN'. Classical Chinese architecture aims to
harmonize buildings with the landscape rather than to dominate it.
10
India : on the con-
trast between
pomp and pov¬
erty.
"Probably no country is poorer or richer than India."
"The population is mainly rural, poverty-stricken and
wretched, and is exploited by the nabobs."
China : on inertia and immobility.
"The Chinese Empire, immobile in its outmoded
.political and social structure, steadfastly refused to
modernize and open its doors to European trade."
"China, after reaching a high level of civilization in
the past, remained sunk in the torpor of its secular
inertia."
Japan :
The cliché on Japan (the most admired of Asiatic
countries in Italian history books) is that of "'the
pupil who surpasses the teacher", the teacher ob¬
viously being Europe. "In little more than 20 years
the Nippon Empire succeeded in creating
a completely modern society, fully equipped (Cont'd on
in the economic and social spheres. page 12)

THE CLOSED BOOK
As a result of a suggestion from Unesco that Western countries

set up committees to survey their history textbooks and see what
information their pupils are getting about Asia, the Belgian Federa¬
tion of History Teachers carried out three special studies. Below,
we publish their main conclusions which show crisply and frankly a
situation that is unfortunately typical of most Western countries
today. The findings do not necessarily express the views of the Bel¬
gian Government or the Belgian National Commission for Unesco.
Antiquity, as we get to know
it from our school text¬
books, is essentially Medi¬
terranean, and mainly Greek and
Roman. The existence of the
early Chinese civilizations, or of
the 1,500 years of Hindu evolu¬
tion before the birth of Christ
in short, the part played by Asia
in ancient times is completely
neglected. Alexander's expedi¬
tion is usually the sole excursion
that, metaphorically speaking,
we permit ourselves into the East.
Our view of the Middle Ages is
also systematically centred on
Europe. A few brief allusions to
Marco Polo and to adventurous
voyages in Asiatic seas are all
that we can rely upon to present
to youthful minds the existence of
a vast reservoir of human beings
and unknown civilizations on the
other side of the world. Our
Modern History is our modern
history ; Asia plays but a small
role in it. Generally speaking, it
is quite forgotten. If mention is
sometimes made of South East
Asia, it is to speak of the Portu¬
guese and Dutch Establishments;
if India is referred to, it is to
honour the memory of men such
as Suffren or Dupleix.
Only with contemporary history
does Asia really take shape be¬
fore us ; all our textbooks in
current use deal more or less
fully with that Continent. But
we should say at once that they
do not usually do so in a syste¬
matic or thorough manner, such
as would suffice to teach young
people about the ways of life, the
economies, the social structures
and the spiritual, intellectual or
moral outlook of the Asian peo¬
ples. After reading the princi¬
pal textbooks is use, we can make
the following observations:
The history of the Asiatic peo¬
ples is nearly always approached
from the standpoint of European
policy and interests. The facts
related under the heading "'Euro¬
pean Expansion in Asia" are
solely those which serve to
explain the military or economic
exploits of European countries.
The history of Asia is not only
superficial, but incomplete. Al¬
though Japan a first-class pow¬
er at the end of the 19th century
is fairly well known, China is
less known and India more ne¬
glected still, while Malaya, Korea,
Mongolia, Burma and the Nether¬
lands East Indies are omitted
from the picture altogether.
The human side of history is
left out of account. The school
manuals tell us, perhaps, about
the East India Company and the
Indian Mutiny; but the Japanese,
the Asiatic of whatever race,
continues to remain a closed
book. The ways of life, the so¬
cial structures, the aspirations of
these peoples remain veiled from
us; we learn nothing of their
standard of living, their level of
education, the meaning of their
religions, or their internal ad¬
ministration. The colonial and
imperialist tradition of nineteen¬
th-century Europe is palpable in
these pages; it is, therefore, not
as citizens of the world that we
discover the Continent of Asia.
A certain number of the text¬
books in use do not pursue their
subject beyond the year 1914. A
special study is sometimes devot¬
ed to Japan, but the rest of Asia
is left in obscurity.
The following general picture
may therefore be drawn:
1. The whole aspect of Human
History, so far as Ancient Times
and the Middle Ages are concern¬
ed, is liable to be falsified by
almost complete ignorance of the
principal centres of the civiliza¬
tion of Asia.
2. Contemporary Asiatic his¬
tory is so presented as to encour¬
age an approach to current
Eastern problems with the men¬
tality, almost, of a person living
at the end of the 19th century.
3. We know too little of the
inner life of these peoples, and of
their economic circumstances.
4. Only the great political issues
of concern to Europe are studied;
nothing without a European
context exists.
5. It might be desirable that
every Asian country should be
given a place in our Contempor¬
ary History, and that we should
be briefly documented on the so¬
cial, moral, intellectual, spiritual,
economic and artistic evolution of
the great Asiatic centres, past
and present.
6. In view of the current
reawakening of Asia, it is more
than ever important that our
school textbooks should deal with
the history of that Continent and
its development since 1918. It
would be desirable for them to
include a treatment of topical
problems a delicate matter,
which the popular press is so
ready to serve up to young minds
that are uninstructed or inexper¬
ienced in these questions.
In conclusion:
From the majority of textbooks
in use, it is apparent that, despite
their authors' evident attempts at
objectivity, little space is devot¬
ed to Asian countries in these
books; Asian history is seen al¬
most exclusively from the Euro¬
pean standpoint ; these peoples
remain little known, since their
dealings with other countries
teach us nothing about them;
our view of Asia remains frag¬
mentary and biased, and though
"modern" Europe may be fami¬
liar to us, Asia is certainly not.
1 1

ASIA (Continued) Europeanization' equals
Thus it managed to rival the most advanced nations
of the West."
"With amazing speed, the Japanese people accepted
European civilization, or rather, superimposed on its
ancient ways the products of Western mechanized
civilization."
As has already been noted, most Western history text¬
books tend to judge Asian people according to a completely
Occidental code. The following paragraph from the re¬
port based on Italian textbooks could apply to almost all
Western nations : The ability to adapt to European ideas
and techniques is considered a mark of merit. Proof of
the intelligence and educability of a people is sometimes
seen in the skill with which it "Europeanizes" itself. . A
country which has adopted a political structure on Euro-
Dean lines is considered to be really "civilized". Some¬
times the impression is given that European expansion
can never be regarded as anything else but a good thing.
Patronizing, pitying, attitudes
Prior to Unesco's international investigation, the first
and probably the most meticulous attempt to disco¬
ver what schoolchildren have been taught about Asia
and the Far East was made in the United States just ten
years ago. This study led to a number of general conclu¬
sions which are worth recalling today:
The wide variations in Asiatic cultures are often
submerged in uniform generalities. The great
personages of Asian history are virtually ignored.
The treatment of Asia in most textbooks is so epi
sodic and references are so light and scattered
that pupils are not likely to assemble them in
any coherent pattern.
Backwardness in industrial development is too
often left to mean backwardness in every aspect
of development.
Stereotyped phrases are commonly used, e.g.
"backward peoples of the Orient" ; "'natives" ;
"uncivilized" ; "white man's burden".
In U.S. history there is rarely a single, relatively
full account of American relations
with Asia ; the material is scatter¬
ed and unintegrated.
Asia's place in contemporary
affairs receives insufficient atten¬
tion.
In general, the 1946 study of Asia
in American textbooks found that
few statements directly engender¬
ed objectionable attitudes in the
minds of young readers. But stu¬
dents saw the culture, civilization and
standards of living of the peoples of
the East only through the Western
eyeglasses of a highly industrialized
civilization. This often created in
boys and girls a feeling of superiority
and a patronizing, pitying attitude.
A new report, submitted to Unesco
by the U.S. Office of Education in
January of this year, paints some¬
thing of a brighter picture and finds
the general situation "encourag¬
ing". Appraising what has happen¬
ed in the past decade, it notes in¬
creasing attention to Asian coun¬
tries in study courses, and a general
awareness of the need for more
teaching about Asia in teachers'
discussion groups and publications.
Talks with textbook authors and a
look at the textbooks themselves
show that progress has been made
in certain directions. Statements
that are derogatory to Asians, stereo¬
types which were commonly used,
expressions such as "'barbarian",
"uncivilized", "backward people"
have largely disappeared from textbooks. Editors and
publishers are trying to stress the similarities between
Asian and Western peoples rather than the differences.
Much perplexity seems to exist however as to where the
study of Asia should start, whether recent history should
be stressed, or the Golden Age, or the earlier origins of
Asian peoples and cultures. On the other hand, many
history teachers still feel very strongly that European
history should receive the greatest emphasis since it
serves as a background for understanding American civi¬
lization. If Islamic history is given new treatment it is
often because it is seen as the chapter in Asian history
which most touches the history of Europe.
The U.S. report concludes on a half-pessimistic, half-
optimistic note. "Changes come slowly and pressures for
the status quo are strong", it admits, "'yet some action
and change can be detected."
The difficulties all Western nations are encountering
in their sincere attempts to improve the treatment aï
Asia in their textbooks are as varied as their teaching
syllabuses are different. The geographical situation of a
country, its historical position and relationships, its views
as to the nature, scope and purpose of education generally
and of history teaching in particular, are all important
factors that cannot be lightly brushed aside. Yet despite
these great differences, each nation, in its own way, can
do much to promote a better understanding of Asia in the
classroom. The surveys in fact make a number of
suggestions which textbook authors might consider when
revising their books or preparing new ones.
The French report goes much further and raises a
fundamental question. Referring to history teaching in
primary schools where, it says, "the place given to Asia
is extremely reduced in every respect", it explains that
this situation reflects the present syllabus requirements
and asks whether a complete reorganization of history
teaching at this level should not be undertaken. like
the Belgian, Swedish and German reports it calls for the
inclusion of more civilizations and regions of Asia in the
teaching syllabus regardless of whether they have had
special contacts with the West. At present each Western
nation seems to concentrate on a specific region, e. g.
UNESCO.
ANCIENT ISFAHAN was once a capital city in the ancient kingdom of Persia. Two thousand
years ago before Its decline the Persian Empire stretched from the Indus River In the east to the
Aegean Sea In the West. Arts and sciences flourished again In later times under the Arabian caliphs.
12

The Unesco Courier. March 1956
Great Britain on India, France on Islam and the Arab
world, Greece on Byzantium and the Near East, Hungary
on China, etc.
Some countries, like Belgium, Germany and the U.S.A.,
suggest that more place be given to recent developments
and to 20th century aspirations and movements in Asia
as part of the background of our complex and inter¬
connected world which future citizens need to understand.
O
Great Asians are neglected
THER specific suggestions for changed textbook treat¬
ment include:
More great figures in Asian history and culture
should be included, perhaps at the expense of colonial
heroes such as Clive in India. (Italian, British, Ameri¬
can reports). The Italian report notes: "History books
hardly pause to mention the great men of Asia. Those
most usually named are conquerors while poets, writers
and thinkers are neglected."
The great Asian civilizations should be presented as
integral wholes along with the life and cultural traditions
of peoples both before and after colonial conquest.
Asians should not be presented as living in static commu¬
nities, unable to develop without the inspiration of West¬
ern contact. Accounts should be given of the real levels
of independent civilization achieved without Western
influence as well as the specific contributions of Asia to
human progress.
Asian history should not be judged exclusively
through Western eyes but should be viewed in the same
spirit as that in which historians are prepared to view
Western developments, i.e. sympathetically but critically,
with proper regard for sources and in proper perspective.
(Italy, Germany, Britain).
When past conflicts and controversial questions are
treated they should be presented fairly and with balance.
Some countries suggest that more than one view should
be given of a controversial issue (U.S.A., Britain), others
that a "correct interpretation" be given (Poland).
Parallels with Western development should not be
overlooked (Italy, Poland), although points of variation
are more revealing. Some suggested topics : migrations
of peoples and imperial conquests within Asia ; feudalism
in its various forms in Asia ; nationalist movements ;
early industrialism in Asian countries; population prob-
i \c .
Morin-UNFSCO.
RIVERS ARE ROADS In Burma, where they form the main lines of communication between the
mountain barriers. Traditionally a land of Buddhist teaching and art, Burma is dotted with pagodas,
each village pagoda being also a local school where the children are taught by Buddhist priests.
PEOPLE OF CEYLON, even the most hu.nble, are still proud of the
ancient civilization which once flourished on their island. In the north,
the ruins of great palaces and temples tell the story of past glories.
lems; social struggles; struggles against nature and
disease.
It was widely pointed out that to obtain worthwhile
results greater use should be made of supplementary
materials more and better wallmaps and charts, back¬
ground books, anthologies and booklists in conjunction
with improved textbooks. Many countries feel that not
enough use is being made of materials such as trans¬
lations of classical and contemporary Asian literature,
pictures of art, sculpture and architecture, illustrations of
living conditions and cultural activities, nor are enough
schools benefitting from the facilities, offered by libraries,
museums and art galleries as well as
by the mass media teaching aids like
films, film-strips, radio and television.
It is obvious that textbooks and
school courses cannot be modified
with a flick of the wrist. The pro¬
blem cannot be solved by simply
adding masses of facts for which
there would be no room either in
school curricula or textbooks. In
many countries improvements, realis¬
tically speaking, can be hoped for
only in terms of a broader awareness,
a wider outlook and a balanced atti¬
tude toward Asia on the part of the
teacher, made possible through his
continued studies and his use of bet¬
ter and more plentiful supplementary
material.
In May of this year, teachers and
historians from Western countries will
be meeting at Unesco's headquar¬
ters in Paris to study these and other
suggestions in the light of all the sur¬
veys made and their own experience.
They will have to consider what basic
facts and ideas are really important
for an understanding of the Asian
people and how these can best be
presented in the classroom.
Their work will form a basis for
future exchanges between Western
and Eastern educators, and will be a
stepping stone to a second Unesco
study in which, this time, Asian
countries will be asked to take a look
at the picture their textbooks present
of Western countries.
