The Unesco Courter. April 1956
KILLERS OF THE They once C0||Pere[i wl10le armies
INSECT WORLD Science now has them on the run
In the history we learned at school battles were won by
the brilliant tactics of generals, marshals and admir¬
als and sometimes by the special interposition of
Providence. Today, however, we have come to recognize
that generals were often relatively unimportant.
In many cases, the real victor is shown to have been
epidemic disease. Among the most important of these
diseases is louse typhus which has decided the course of
many battles and campaigns. In 1632 for example, Gus-
tavus Adolphus and Wallenstein prepared for battle near
Nuremburg, but before the slaughter could begin both
armies had to flee before the ravages of typhus.
There does not seem to be very much doubt that Napo¬
leon's worst enemy was General Disease, among whose
ablest henchmen was the louse. When Napoleon prepar¬
ed for his advance into Russia in 1812 he mobilized about
half a million men. In June of that
year typhus began to appear and by
July, after Ostrowa, there were
80,000 ill.
When the retreat from Moscow
began there were less than 100,000
troops fit for service. Another 80,000
sick were left at Smolensk in Novem¬
ber and when Vilna was reached in
December the army had dwindled
down to 20,000 men.
It is not necessary to dwell on the
horrors the sick had to endure in
Vilna. By the end of June 1813 only
3,000 remained alive !
During the course of, and after, the
by Dr. B. de Meillon
South African Institute of Medical
Research, Johannesburg
WHO - Marc Riboud
CHANCE OF SURVIVAL for these Iranian children is only fifty per-cent half the babies born
in their village die in infancy or childhood. Many deathsboth infant and adultare caused by
insect-borne diseases in this part of Iran. (See next page for a story on how the people of
Farimaneh in Iran, fought back against insects that bring sickness and death to their village.)
first world war millions of people
died from typhus, many more indeed
than were killed by bullets.
Ten years before his Russian cam¬
paign, Napoleon had been severely
defeated by the mosquito. In 1801
when his brilliant Italian campaign
was at an end and he had defeated
the Austrians and concluded the
treaty of Marengo, he decided to
occupy the island of Haiti and from
there strengthen the forces in Loui¬
siana on the mainland of America.
He therefore despatched Leclerc
with 30,000 troops for this purpose.
Haiti was at this time ruled by that
tragic figure Toussaint Louverture
who, ironically enough, had shortly
before helped the French drive the
English out of the island.
Toussaint, with his ill-trained and
badly equipped army, decided to
defend his homeland. For the Haiti¬
ans the situation appeared hopeless,
especially when Toussaint was cap¬
tured. But when all seemed lost, a
little black and white mosquito, car¬
rying yellow fever, began to take a
hand in affairs and by 1803 Leclerc
had lost 23,000 of his troops. He was
forced to evacuate the island, and
the Republic was saved. (See the
UNESCO courier, N° -2, 1954.)
In 1885, de Lesseps, the
creator of Suez, set out to - (Cont'd on
cut the two Americas in page 7)

KILLER
INSECTS
(Contd) THEY MOULDED THE DESTINY OF NATIONS
half. The expedition was a failure largely because of the
ravages of yellow fever, and de Lesseps, who had once
been hailed as the greatest conqueror of nature and who
had received honours from kings, governments and scien¬
tific bodies, returned to France a broken man and died in
comparative poverty.
A few years later the Americans began to work on the
Panama canal and they too nearly had to abandon the
project because by 1905 yellow fever was again taking a
great toll.
It was at this juncture that a U.S. Army surgeon, Gene¬
ral Gorgas, took charge of the health of the expedition.
By 1914, when the canal was completed, the death rate
was lower than that of any American city or state.
Such is the impression that this disease made on the
minds of men that it has inspired at least one well known
legend, that of the "Flying
Dutchman", which is
thought to refer to a ship
stricken with yellow fever
and refused entry into port,
and one equally well-known
poem, Coleridge's "The An¬
cient Mariner". When this
sole survivor tells the wed¬
ding guest:
/ looked upon the rotting
[sea
and drew my eyes away;
I looked upon the rotting
[deck,
and there the dead men
[lay...
he is probably describing
an epidemic on board ship
in the calms of the Carib¬
bean Sea.
In Africa today the popu¬
lation is estimated to be
135 millions... yet it has
been calculated that there
is room for nearly 2.000
millions. Why is it that
this vast continent is at
present only carrying 7%
of the possible total?
There are many answers
to this question but the
chief among them is un¬
doubtedly an insect-borne
disease, and of the numer¬
ous diseases of Africa none
has played a greater part
in the past than sleeping sickness of man and nagana of
cattle, both carried by tsetse flies.
It seems highly probable that Africa earned its name
of "The Dark Continent" because of the tsetse fly. Early
Arab and Portuguese travellers were considerably hamper¬
ed and disaster often overtook them. Indeed the
gradual withdrawal of the Arabs from the interior to the
Eastern coastal belt was certainly due to the tsetse fly.
Up to the year 1880 human sleeping sickness was
almost completely confined to West Africa and known
under a variety of names. Many Negro slaves imported
into places as far apart as the West Indies and Marti¬
nique were known to suffer from a kind of lethargy and
melancholy. This was attributed to homesickness and
the afflicted person was supposed to be dreaming of his
homeland.
Early historians remark with interest that even the
whip could not awaken them from their dreams. Longfel¬
low in his "Slave's Dream" written in 1842, most probably
describes a case of sleeping sickness:
Bes'de the ungathered rice he lay
His sickle in his hand;
His breast was bare, his matted hair
Was buried in the sand.
He did not feel the driver's whip;
Nor the burning heat of day...
CARLOS
CHAGAS
AND THE
CONE-
NOSED
BUGS
Copyright J. Pinto
Some 45 years ago, Carlos Chagas, a Brazilian scientist, made
medical history by the method he used to discover a disease
which now bears his name: "Chagas disease", a fever which can
cause severe and often fatal damage to the heart. Chagas achieved
the still unequalled distinction of having found the cause of a disease
before the disease itself. In 1909 while doing anti-malaria work in
Brazil, Chagas became interested in the large and voracious blood¬
sucking bugs with cone-shaped noses which infested local mud huts.
Laboratory tests showed these bugs were carrying microbes similar
to the African trypanosomes which cause sleeping sickness. Chagas
next found that these microbes could cause disease In laboratory
animals. Returning to the place where the bugs had been found,
Chagas discovered a cat with similar microbes in its blood and then,
in the same house, a young girl suffering from fever. He clinched
his important discovery by finding the ¡microbes in her blood also.
Since 1880 sleeping sickness has spread east over most
of central Africa as far as the Great Lakes and south
into Portuguese East Africa and Bechuanaland.
Increased travel and the gradual opening up of the
continent has undoubtedly played a large part in aiding
the distribution of the disease. Stanley (of "Dr. Living¬
stone, I presume" fame) is regarded with great suspicion
in this respect. In 1887 he started off on an expedition
to rescue Eduard Schnitzer, better known by the romantic
name of Emin Pasha, and Stanley's porters from the
Lower Congo are said to have brought the disease to the
Great Lakes where it was previously unknown.
Among all the diseases to which man is subject malaria
is without doubt one of the most important. If you take a
map of the world and draw a line along 60 degrees north
latitude, and one along 30 degrees south latitude you will
have a wide belt in which
malaria occurs. Some areas
in this belt are free from
the disease, but on the
whole it is fairly evenly
spread between these two
lines of latitude.
Within this vast area
millions of people die from
malaria, many more suffer
from the weakening effects
of the disease, countless
hours of work are lost and
the direct and indirect
influence on production
would stagger the imagina¬
tion if it could be calculat¬
ed with any certainty.
Through malaria civiliza¬
tions have been wiped out,
successful colonization
prevented, and large tracts
of fertile land have been
depopulated.
Bubonic plague, trans¬
mitted from rat to man by
fleas, has also done much
to decimate populations
and it is said that the
great pandemic, known as
the "Black Death" which
started in the 14th century
and raged for four hun¬
dred years, killed twenty-
five minion people in Eu¬
rope alone. (See page 15.)
There are, of course,
many other insect-borne diseases than those I have
mentioned, such as filariasis, relapsing fevers, leishma¬
niasis, rickettsial fevers, virus diseases and so on which,
though perhaps less spectacular, have nevertheless pro¬
duced their quotas of death and illness. Many of them
still present problems of great importance today.
The reader may well ask what has been done about all
this? Many of these diseases are now under partial or
complete control in many countries. How has this been
achieved? What is the overall technique which has led
in many cases to success and will it be applicable in the
future?
The vector-borne diseases depend for their existence on
three things, namely, 1. the host, e. g. man, and often in
addition some other animal, 2. the parasite, e. g. Plasmo¬
dium, 3. the vector (or carrier of the parasite) e.g. the
Anopneles mosquito. Break this chain anywhere and
the disease ceases to reach man. In the early days em¬
phasis was laid on the host or the parasite. This was
largely due to lack of knowledge of the vector.
Man on the other hand was readily available. He was,
and still is drug conscious. At a word he will open his
mouth and swallow a pill! Mass application of drugs,
however, presents great administrative difficulties and
has rarely been entirely successful on its own. Ir
Also really effective drugs exist for only a few ' * on
diseases and they are generally costly. next page)

KILLER
I NSE CTS
(Cont'd) CLUES FROM SCIENCE'S 'ROGUES' GALLERY'
With the coming of the 20th century and the great
discoveries of pioneers like Manson, Ross, Grassi, Nicolle
and Reed, emphasis became focused on the disease
carriers themselves and their study was intensified
through the years, resulting In marked and often pheno¬
menal success in disease control. How has this been
achieved?
The first problem in the study of any creature is its
identity. Things must be identifiable before we can study
them, write about them and exchange views about them.
The naming and identification of the insect vectors has
in this way played a very significant role and lies at the
very foundation of the study of their habits and ecology.
Case of mistaken identity
Discoveries relating to the . identity of a certain
carrier of malaria, namely, Anopheles gambiae in
Africa, enabled malariologists to recognize the
species and its potential dangers when it was accidentally
introduced into South America.
The species having been identified it was a simple
matter to read all that was known about it, to carry out
further work and finally to single it out and strike at its
weakest point.
In the early days of malaria control in South Africa a
puzzling situation was discovered. The vectors of mal¬
aria had been identified as Anopheles gambiae and
Anopheles funestus. Furthermore it was found that
they were largely house-frequenting and preferred biting
man to any other animal.
The method and site of attack on them appeared
obvious, namely, with insecticides in human habitations.
However, further work showed that large numbers of
funestus could be captured in holes in the ground, under
stones, in crevices in river banks, under vegetation etc.
Further, they were also found in areas where malaria
occured only sporadically or not at all. What was to be
done with this huge insect population, how were they to
be controlled, was it a practical proposition, could it be
financed and above all was it necessary?
The problem, however, was quite easily and neatly
solved when it was discovered that these out-of-door
customers were not funestus at all but another species
which was not a disease carrier but which resembled
funestus so closely in the adult stage that they were to
all appearances identical. Discovery of their larval an-J
egg stages provided the key because they were different
and easily recognizable. The correct naming of carriers
is the basis of an understanding of the whole problem
of insect-borne diseases.
Once a carrier is properly labelled and can be recog¬
nized under all circumstances the next procedure is to
find out all about it. What are its requirements,' how
does it live, why is it a carrier, and so on?
Exterminated by air attack
Answers to these questions are of vital importance
as they often yield the answers to control. It is
rare for one single line of attack to emerge from
such studies. Usually many vulnerable points are revealed
and it is then a matter of expediency, costs, local condi¬
tions and so on as to which methods are applied.
A method which is successful or promising in one area
may be a relative failure in another because local condi¬
tions are not applicable. In Zululand, for instance, the
tsetse fly Glossina pallidipes was exterminated largely by
aerial spraying of insecticide. The area was compara¬
tively small, there was little likelihood of reinfestation,
the cost was high but economically worth it. The method
is obviously only applicable under these conditions and
cannot be applied indiscriminately all over Africa.
It is in this search for knowledge about the economy,
habits and requirements of the carriers of disease that
much work still remains to be done. Nowhere is this
better illustrated than in the control of mosquitoes. At
least twice in the history of malaria control a feeling
has been apparent that the problem was solved.
Firstly, when the carriers were found to be Anophelines
the answer appeared to be simple: destroy them and the
disease will disappear. It did not take long to discover
that this was not so easy. The second occasion arose
when the modern insecticides like DDT became avail¬
able. But instead of putting an end to work on the
carriers this insect ki.ler has served as a great stimulus to
research and in many instances revealed how ignorant we
are in many ways of disease carrier biology.
It is fairly safe to say that more research is being done
today than ever before because of the gaps that have
been revealed in our knowledge through studying the
effects of DDT. The emphasis today, of course, is still
on the residual insecticides and their names are on
everyone's lips.
Biologists, however, have not forgotten that many eco¬
logical 'factors, including the habits of man, have to
combine in a particular manner before the complicated
series of events wh'ch lead to successful transmission and
maintenance of a. vector-borne disease, takes place.
Sometimes it is cheaper and easier in many cases to
bring about a change in these nice.y balanced events. In
many cases it is definitely desirable. Teaching people
to use soap and water and to keep themselves clean is
obviously a better method of controlling louse-borne
typhus than continual use of DDT. Again, teaching peo¬
ple to water their cattle at places that have been made
safe from the tsetse fly is obviously a neater and cheap¬
er method of preventing sleeping sickness than large-
scale aerial spraying or bush and forest clearing.
Might set the clock back
In certain parts of tropical America the insects which
carry malaria have been found to breed exclusively
in certain plants which live on forest trees. Success¬
ful control has been achieved by deforestation and
subsequent use of the land for agricultural purposes.
Where slopes are too steep for vegetable growing, use¬
ful timber is grown which can be cut easily before the
mosquito-haunted plants establish themselves. Further
research, this time on the ecology of the plants them¬
selves, may show that they will grow only on certain
trees. It may be possible to rea-fforest with trees that
the plants don't like.
Such methods which may be called ecological or bio¬
logical, are often so simple and obvious it is hard to
believe that they are the result of many years of pains¬
taking research. The future of the control of insect-
carriers of disease has never appeared to be brighter than
at present but there is no reason for complacency. Fur¬
ther research is urgently required and must be main¬
tained at a high level.
Modern insecticides have tremendous advantages and
have proved a great blessing to mankind but if they tend
to halt further biological and ecological research, of which
there is already evidence in some countries, they might
easily set the clock back.
The living organism is not a machine but a resilient,
pliable and variable entity. It has survived aeo^s of
time because of this and is not easy to put aside or destroy.
Resistance to the residual insecticides (see page 29) is
being reported more frequently as time passes, their long-
term effects on man himself are not properly known and
their manufacture is costly and a drain on our resources.
The aim in the future, in my view, should be to find
ways of controlling insect-carriers by ecological methods.
They will prove to be the cheapest, the most lasting and
in the long run the most effective.
