A n ew pastime for Parisians
BROWSING IN THE
METRO MUSEUM
Unesco - A. Vorontzoff
Probably the last place in the world anyone might recommend
for browsing through treasures of art or history is the
Paris Metro especially the bustling Opera station. And
yet, all during the month of August, Metro travellers turned
their backs on the underground trains roaring by their trains
to spend a few minutes among the cave paintings of the Perigord
or conch-shell collections from the South Seas.
This underground exposition which brought a cross-section of
more than 100 French museums into 23 showcases in the Opera
station of the Metro was part of the International Campaign for
Museums which has been launched on a world-wide basis with
Unesco's sponsorship.
The idea took root a few months previously when the Paris
Metro system offered its showcases in the Opera for one month
to a Paris science museum, the Palais de la Découverte. M. An¬
dré Léveillé, Director of the Museum, suggested that the show¬
cases be used in connexion with the international museums
campaign and the Metro authorities agreed.
So at the beginning of August, museums went into the Metro.
The exhibition was intended to draw the attention of hurried
travellers for a few minutes in between trains... but it went a
great deal further.
On almost any afternoon in August, the Opera station was
visited by the same species of easy-going browser who enjoys
spending an afternoon in the Louvre or wandering along the
book-stalls on the banks of the Seine.
A business man in his late fifties admitted that he had made a
special trip to the Opera station to see the exposition. "'I noticed
it a few days ago from my train, so I decided to take the
afternoon off and see it in a leisurely way," he told the reporter.
He explained that he was interested mainly in natural history
and he was brimming with suggestions for museums. "'I'd like
to see a museum show us the bird life around our cities so that
we could identify it," he said. "When we Parisians go to the
country and see birds, we don't know what they are... all we're
familiar with are sparrows and pigeons."
Nearby, a wizened little man with a huge cardboard box
strapped to his back was peering intently at a beautiful ivory
vase from a Dieppe museum. "I love old objects," he said
to a reporter. "But I'm afraid I don't have any time to talk
to you... I can't let more than two trains go by."
One woman visitor had been particularly impressed by her
discovery of a letter signed by George Sand, part of the exhibit
devoted to museums in the centre of France. She was taking
plenty of time to go round the showcases. She had read about
the exhibition in the newspapers and she had made a special
subway trip to the Opera station to see it.
The exhibition itself offered something for just about every
Metro user. Its first three showcases formed a pocket science
museum, exhibiting locomotive models, a gay-
plumed toucan, marine life, and mineral speci¬
mens. One of the mineral exhibits was a sample
of Montmartre gypsum, quarried only a few hun¬
dred yards away from its underground showcase.
Cont'd
next page

Unesco photos - A. Vorontzoff.
METRO MUSEUM (Continued)
Then, for the 35-franc price of a Metro
ticket, the exhibition took travellers on a
tour of the museums of France. Cham¬
pagne had ancient champagne bottles, of
course, while Alsace displayed a section of
Griinwald's famed Issenheim altarpiece
from Colmar.
Wooden ships and iron men sailed into
the Opera station in the Brittany show¬
case with a few souvenirs of Surcouf, the
French privateer, and an old flintlock.
In a showcase devoted to ethnography,
a sarcophagus from Oceania stood along¬
side the mask of a Congo witch-doctor and
a delicate lapanese print. Renoir and
Picasso were represented in the Provence
exhibit which centred on a photograph of
the sun beating down on the old Roman
arena at Aries. In front of this showcase,
there even seemed to be a hint of lavender
and scrub pines in the tired Metro air.
The Perigord region was represented
by objects from the Stone Age discovered
in its caves. And the Loire Valley stayed
in character with a silver "'tastevin" (the
cup used for wine tasting) and one of the
old books of learning ridiculed so
sublimely by Rabelais.
Metro users lingered over the exhibition
and came away enthusiastic. A white-
haired lady said she thought the display
should be made a permanent one. One
of the most avid admirers was the
plainclothes policemen assigned to keep
watch over the objects displayed (their
estimated worth is more than 10,000,000
francs$28,000 or £10,000).
"Take that conch-shell in the natural
history window", he told a reporter. "I'm
interested in zoology, so I took its name
yesterday and, when I got home last night
at midnight, I looked it up. I never
thought I'd be able to go to a museum
on this job."
