The Unesco Courier
D
R ACC, 00]0""",.., the time bill come when dis-
crimination based on these three will be abolished,
together with fear and contempt. At present, however, the
world goes about its business with some men still refusing to
admit that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity
and in rights.
Nevertheless, there are no longer many countries where
women are treated as perpetual slaves-almost as beasts of
burden. It is more and more rare to find statutes declaring
them legal minors and the inferiors of men. But it is equally
rare to find countries where women and men of equal talent
have the same rights and the same opportunities. It is a
fact, however, that since the United Nations and its Specia-
lized Agencies began to exert influence upon governments,
the number of countries where women have the right to vote
has risen from 36 to 72. There are now only 13 countries
which continue to reserve this right for the"stronger sex".
In several other countries, women must be able to write or
show a primary school diploma before going to the polls.
Now one fact is certain : out of every 100 illiterates, 70 or
80 of them are bound to be women. Emancipation must
follow and not precede progress in education. In this field,
UNESCO has worked constantly for the past ten years with
the International Bureau of Education and the International
Labour Organisation. UNESCO has studied the slow erosion
of prejudices and the slow social and psychological evolution
which is paving the way for women to gain full access to
their rights. UNESCO studies have investigated the participa-
tion of women in the political life of both communities and
nations and they have also measured the true influence of
women in economic and cultural life.
Nevertheless, the problem of education has remained the
most urgent. No one has yet contested this statement often
repeated in books published on this question by UNESCO :
"The number of girls receiving an education in a given country
is in direct proportion to the degree of cultural and political
development which that country has attained."
This does not merely mean that we should deplore the
backwardness of nations where girls hardly have the right to
learn to read-if they can find a school. In Europe, for
example, or in the United States, the question takes another
new form. Here, girls have the right to all forms of
education, or nearly all. But they remain in a mi-
nority as soon as a higher level is reached : the percentage
of women among university students rarely exceeds 35 per
cent. This means that the countries proclaiming themselves
as"highly advanced"can still make progress in their"cultu-
ral and political development". UNESCO's goal is not merely
non-discrimination between the sexes or a legal equality
which should be part and parcel of any civilized nation, but
the participation of women in all fields of human endeavour
as"full partners".
c. o, 1. Crown Copyright Reserved
LABORATORY
ASSISTANT
handles radio-active
isotopes with rub-
ber gloves let into
the walls of a"dry
box"at a British
research institute.
This is used when
handling toxic sub-
stances which are
placed in box
through the small
chamberon its right.
31
