14
GREEN TRAGEDY. Naine years ouf continuos warfare in Greece
fond te country with 380, 000 orphans (nearly one-eighth of
lits children) ad 7, 625 oust ouf 10, 000 schools destroyer or badly
damage. Suffering between 1944 ad 1949 wus perhaps even
greater tan rit ha ben dring te previous fouir years. Over
700, 000 Greens ha tao bye evaq. latex (somme ouf hem bey sera,
aboie) froc te war-torn northern province. Governments
and national and international voluntary organizations came
forward with ait, ad Unesco, concentrating on educational
reconstruction, launched appels :"te refuges children need
schools, teachers, ad equipment."In 1947, scientific equip-
muent ad educational material worth :- ; 300, 000 wus suent to
Greece. Schools ère rebuilt ad equipped with Unesco's
ait ad with te fundus rit received froc mamy countries.

I'J years ago, on Novem-
ben 4, ils. t (), the agrce-
T mcnt founding a United
'i at ion s Educational,
M Scientific and Cultural
Organization was rat died
hv 20 states and came
into force. Scholars,
philosophers and artists
greeted this event with a warmth never
before displayed in connexion with an
official body."I have faith in our
UNESCO", said Leon Blum,"because 1
have faith in peace and humanity".
The poet Archibald MacLeish declared :
"This will prove a great and powerful
instrument for the broadest possible
purpose, the purpose of the common
understanding of man for peace."
Born as bombs fell
y T NESCO was begotten by war, andborn during a war. Beneath the
bombs falling on London, the edu-
cation ministers of the Allied countries
dreamt of a world organization devoted
to co-operation and reason. In 1945,
they stated :"Since wars begin in the
minds of men, it is in the minds of men
that the defences of peace must be con-
structed."They then went on to affirm
that"the wide diffusion of culture and
the education of humanity for justice
and liberty and peace are indispensable
to the dignity of man and constitute a
sacred duty which all the nations must
fulfil in a spirit of mutual assistance
and concern". This was their con-
clusion :"The peace must therefore be
founded, if it is not to fail, upon the
intellectual and moral solidarity of
mankind."
Ruins and ration-books
A T that moment, the concentrationcamps in Europe had ot yet dis-
gorged all their surviving inmates,
and starving children still roamed the
streets. In Asia, the silence of death
hung over Hiroshima since August 6,
1945, over Nagasaki since August 8.
The war was over but the peoples were
emerging from it slowly, still inhaling
the cinders of destruction.
In battered London, the ministers
wrote :"The purpose of the Organization
is to contribute to peace and security by
promoting collaboration among the
nations through education, science and
culture in order to further universal
respect for justice, for the rule of law
and for the human rights and funda-
mental freedoms, without distinction ouf
race, sex, language or religion."
Hence in t946, the Organisation was
in being, recogni/. aCCDIl1Illodatcd with
its own budget and secrctaiiat : its ser-
vices in thc cause of international eduea-
tiona !, scientific and cultural coiiabora-
tion were expected. At first, unhappi-
11'little Cl1lllld be achieved. It was an
area ot ruins. ot emergency measures and
of ration-books for a good two-thirds of
the world. Frontiers remained seaied,
or else the nations locked themsclves
into tight power blocs inaccessible from
the outside. In the circumstances,
material considerations took first placé.
Furthermore, the resources of the
fledgling UNESCO seemed tiny when
measured against its world-wide ambi-
tions and in relation to the universal
chaos. Its budget was derided as"less
than the sum spent every year to clean
New York City's subway system". Could
this institution really claim to advance
"the mutual understanding and know-
ledge of nations ?" Was this the ideal
The Unesco Cour rcr
moment to talk of poputar cducatiun,
the spreading otcutture and to promise
heip in"the advancement and diffusion
of knowledge"') Not a few wei !-
meaningsouts preferred to picture the
future in terms of decline and tenor,
and to visualize the Apucalypse.
No rose-coloured future
M EANWHILF, those. who were respon-sable for the first of UNESCO's
tasks also explained calmly that
they were working for the future. No
doubt this was neither a rosy nor a par-
ticularly easy prospect, but rewarding in
effort and potentiel. In other words,
these pioneers beHeved in progress. It is
a faith that allows poor resources and
enormous tasks to be lucidly faced.
At the very outset, in the autumn of
1946, the first Director-General of
UNESCO, Julian Huxley,
defined the Organiza-Cont'd
tion's mission by referen-on
ce to this faith, which at next page
UNATIOI'. iS
KOREAN EXODUS from battle areas in 1950 and 1951 uprooted millions of men, women
children, and created vast emergency food, shelter and relief problems. Since then, the people of
Korea and the peoples of the United Nations have embarked on long-range reconstruction pro-
gramme under direction of UNKRA (U. N. Korean Reconstruction Agency). Restoration of edu-
cational facilities lost during war-33°, of primary schools, 60% of classrooms, 80% of books and
equipment-ranks high in reconstruction programme. Unesco missions surveyed and outlined the
enormous needs and prepared five-year educational rehabilitation plan. Unesco sought"first aid"
for 100 of neediest Korean primary schools by means of its Gift Coupon Scheme, through which
chi ! dren ah over the world helped to provide schools and equipment for Korean youngsters. Today,
Korean schools receive a steady stream of textbooks from the new National Textbook Printing
Plant built at Yong Dong Po through combined efforts of UNKRA, Unesco and the Republic of
Korea Government. This modern plant is geared to produce 30 billion textbooks a year.
i5

FACING THE
HAVOC
(Continued)
out minds are like
parched earth'
once excludes easy downheartedness and
false hope :"not a myth but a doctrine
of progress", as he put it.
Critics tried to class the Organization
as a more or less technical body tied to
particular political policies or ideologies.
Huxley rose to this challenge, too.
The goal was to be the evolution of
humanity ; Unesco would make its influ-
ence felt in every field of tea-
ching and intellectual endea-
vour, its utility based precisely
upon its universality."Mean-
while", said Huxley,"any-
thing that can be done to in-
crease the interpenetration of
traditions and their fruitful
union in a common pool will
help, and is itself assuredly
a prerequisite of full progress.
In this light, the work of
UNESCO appears as an essen-
tial intervention at a parti-
cular stage during man's
evolution."
In point of fact, such in-
fluence began by being ten-
tative because the general
trend of events seemed to
indicate at least a slight re-
cession in the tide of human
progress. Twelve nations had
gutted universities, pilfered
libraries, ruined schools and
sacked laboratories to show
as evidence of"cultural dif-
fusion". In order to diffuse
something, one needs a cer-
tain number of props ; books,
for example.
In the first place, therefore,
UNESCO had to undertake the
job of reconstruction, of
make-do and of salvaging.
Appeals for help went out,
donations were pooled and distributed.
From Canada came books for the Orient,
from Great Britain microfilm equipment.
from the United States tons of school
material. Laboratory apparatus was sent
to China, Greece, the Philippines, Poland
and Czechoslovakia. Everything possi-
ble was done, but by 1949, certain things
still appeared to be irreplaceable.
Schools and books had been hard hit
by the war : some belligerents had, indeed,
16
marked them down for destruc-
tion. These words by Stephen Vincent
Benet used to be repeated in 1949 :
"When they burned the books, that was
the beginning, but we didn't know it
until later."The catalogue of loss
was full enough : libraries razed in
Manila, Caen, Louvain, Milan, London,
Shanghai : 537 Czech libraries pillaged
minds are like parched earth."In the
parcels, preserved foods hegan to give
way to scientific works : in one year.
over $1. 000, 000 worth of books were
sent out to help many countries.
Graduaify. UNESCO began to arrange
its reconstruction work along lines that
would allow for more general partici-
SMASHED LABORATORtES and burned-out universities were left
to mark the trail of war's red-hot rake across Europe and Asia. One
of Unesco's first activities therefore was to join in the tremendous job
of salvage and reconstruction. It dug out facts on the most urgent needs
of schools and universities and created its own emergency aid fund
(later replaced by the Unesco Gift Coupon Scheme). Photo shows
equipment in electro-technical department of Vienna's Institute of
Technology-one of institutes aided by Unesco's Scientific Reconstruc-
tion Programme. Here, dummy telegraph pole holds sample insulator
being tested for use on power lines throughout Austria to eliminate
radio static. Large spheres are part of 750, 000 volt transformer.
from the attic to the cellars ; not a single
Polish book left in Poland.
By signing an agreement with a body
which had hitherto concentrated exclu-
sively on distributing millions of food
parcels, UNESCO drew attention to the
fact that intellectual and physical famine
go hand in hand. The president of
the Meiji Gakuin College in Tokyo
wrote back :"We have been cut off from
the rest of the world so long that our
By the time that the needs of
war-ravaged countries seemed
to have become slightly less
urgent, still-required aid began
to come from more humble
sources : the pockets of
schoolchildren. who used
their savings to purchase
"Gift Coupons". Thanks to
such anonymous generosity
thousands of douars coJlected
in 18"donor"countries a)-
lowed schools in 46 states or
territories to buy looks os
apparatus. But the Important
thing, said the organizers. IS
to establish friendiy links.
Can u then be said thaï.
after the first two or three
years, reconstruction became
superfluous ? Nos <tll. for des-
truction had not ceased.
In Greece, nine years ül
continuous fighting ! ett thou-
sands of school buildings in
ruins. Unesco launched re-
peated appeals :"Refugee chil-
dren from the northern Greek
provinces lack schools, tea-
chers and educational mat-
eriaL."In Palestine, there
were eight or nine hundred
thousand refugees and later
over 1, 000, 000. The proh-
lem of displaced persons
appeared again, and called
for even more radical mea-
sures than before. LJNRWA (United Nu.
tions Relief and \Xl arks Agency) supplied
flood, clothes and shelter ; it continues to
function, thus keeping alive an entire
community.
These 900, 000 men, women and child-
ren, however, must live and not merely
exist. They must find
means of subsistence, but Cont'd
also an aim in life. For on
. h'l'page/8
refugees w 1 mg away a
\.. ; >  sea

rh, lIll" ('I ( (illlll !
BATTERED BOOKS and empty shelves
from Manila to Milan and from Louvain to
Shanghai revealed war losses of libraries
both from the effects of bombs and shells and
through the depredations of men. In Czecho-
slovakia, 537 libraries were completely
pillaged ; in Poland, not a single Polish book
remained. Unesco helped to restock the
ravaged shelves. In co-operation with other
organizations it arranged the distribution of
more than  1, 000, 000 worth of books in a
single year. In France, where total library
iosseswereestimatedatmorethans6. 000. 000
bomb-damaged library of the small Normandy
town of Valognes (above, left and right)
symbolized the plight of thousands throughout
the ! d. Vaiognes was saved through an
appeal by Unesco to the ! nternationa ! Work
Camp movement. In 1950, 3S Danish and
Swedish students (left) spent a summer
ho ! iday cleaning and repairing its books.
ncluding 16th and 17th century treasures.
17

FACING THE
HAVOC
(Continued)
H u ma n ity/5'c u Itu ra
Red Cross'
forccd c\ile in camps. sahation alwavs
hes in hope, which means that it lies
with their children, who personify hopc.
Since 1949. 300 schools have been
opened and equipped within camps in
Syria, the Lebanon. Jordan and the Gaza
region of Egypt. Over 100, 000 pupils
attend these and UNRWA is spending
more than $7 million on them this year.
Unesco has assumed technical responsa-
hi) ity for this educational mission ; spe-
cialist advisers in teacher training, tech-
nical education, handicrafts, domestic
economy and fundamental education
have been sent out. It is another of
those emergency measures which have
become so chronic that one must, a) as.
resign oneself to their continuation.
Whatever overaH solution statesmen
may contemplate, there remains an
urgent, daily problem : over 100. 000
childrcn have the right to work for their
UNESC : O-E :'c S : : h'/\"lh
OVER 5. 000 CHURCHES AND
HISTORIC BUILDINGS were
destroyed or damaged in Europe
during World War II. Thousands
more need the protective care and
skills of chemists. engineers and
archaeologists. Often the countries
with the most historic treasures
have the fewest technicians trained
in conservation work. In 1954,
representatives of 50 countries,
meeting at The Hague, adopted an
international convention prepared
by Unesco for the protection of
cultural property in time of war.
This"cultural Red Cross"conven-
tion came into force in August
t956. Fortheflrsttime. historica !
buildings, museums and libraries
where young peop ! e (Nke this
group in the Nationai Museum,
Amsterdam, right) find civiliza-
tion's roots and heritage, will receive
the same protection traditionally
granted in time of war to hospitals.
own future. like others who are nut
growing up in camps. They stand,
perhaps, for all the children in the world
for rhum this right is still a pipe-dream.
There will soon be nearly enough
schoois. but there is still a shortage of
reaHy we) !-quahtied teachers. This year,
teacher training coHeges wit ! open, and
help must continue.
25, 000 gutted schools
T7 ORE A, next-if onlv it could be the
1."-. end of a depressing list ! The dev-
astated Republic of Korea also
cried out for U. N. he) p. I. ast year, over
$120 mi) hon were stilt needed to rehuiìd
and repair factories, power stations,
roads, farms, hospitals. Twenty-five
thousand schools were gutted during the
war. Together with the U. N. Korean
Reconstruction Agency, C'\ESCO again
braced Useh tor the task ot reconstruc-
tion, which can never he a purely mate-
rial one. It is hclping currenllv to run a
training centre tor rura ! teachers and
has supptied equipment to schools.
Above all, it was instrumenta in found-
ing a printing press in Seoul which is
henceforth to supp) y the 30 million text-
books which arc annually required for
primary instruction in Korea.
Since only a historical sketch is bcing
attempted here, these selected instances
of reconstruction work must suffice.
There'Nould be no need to continue if
war were. in fact, the only agent of
destruction. Rut every ruin is not the
result of war. Ì\len must have a motive
in order to burn hooks, schools or even
works of art. But works of art are
a) so exposed to other dangers.
Paintings. statues, temples, cathedrals,
the whole heritage of mankind is
18

The Unesco Courier
UNESCO
SIX-SECOND QUAKE killed or injured 300 people and
destroyed 3, 000 dwellings in Cuzco, Peru, on May 21, 1950. Cuzco
is three cities-Inca, Spanish Colonial, and modern. Among the
important monuments which suffered damage was the ! 7th-century
Church of Mercy (above). A Unesco mission spent three months
in Cuzco, drew up a plan for preserving and restoring the damaged
monuments within a wider plan of city reconstruction. Unesco has
answered many appeals for advice on restoration problems.
UNATIONS
ONE MILLION ARAB REFUGEES from Palestine are still living
in camps in Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and in the area of Gaza.
Since 1949, Unesco and UNRWA (U. N. Relief and Works Agency)
have opened over 300 schools for about 100, 000 of the refugee
children who live in the tent and hut camps. Unesco has given aid
in teacher training, technical and handicraft training, home econo-
mics and fundamental education. The operation came into being
as an emergency measure... but the emergency is not yet over.
threatened : to keep them intact requires
the restoratory and conservational ser-
vices of permanent agencies. Not that
UNESCO can become the world-wide
guardian of those innumerable treasures
which the various countries cannot
themselves defend against the inroads
of climate and indifference.
The groups of experts which have
been sent here and there in answer to
emergency calls may be compared to
doctors summoned for consultation.
They have attended to the altar-piece
of the Mystic Lamb in Ghent, the da
Vincis in Paris, precious and fragile
paintings on wood in Lisbon, the Cuzco
remains in Peru which the earthquake
of May 21 1950 had half destroyed, to
the Roman mosaics in Israel, and in
Syria and the Lebanon, to cities at once
medieval and modern trying to reconcile
expansion with historic prestige.
In Yugoslavia, the experts set out to
preserve one of Macedonia's most im-
portant religious buildings. The arches
and chiefly the frescoes of Saint Sophia
of Ochrida, a thousand-year-old church
which had been made into a mosque in
1466, were threatened for centuries : for
once it was possible to do something
about repairing the ravages of time.
A threatening spectre
BRUT it cannot be denied that the spec-tre of war continues to haunt those
who have been entrusted with the
care of monuments, paintings or manu-
cripts for posterity-all those objects
without which civilization would soon
have neither roots nor history. In 1952.
UNESCO drafted the text of an inter-
national agreement for the protection of
cultural property in the event of armed
conflict.
Adopted two years later at The Hague
during an inter-governmental conference,
and signed by 50 states, this agreement
was ratified by five governments in May
1956 : three months later, it came offi-
cially into force. Thus humanity has,
in the words of Georges Rouault,
acquired a"cultural Red Cross". For
the first time, it will become possible to
extend to historic buildings, museums,
libraries, protection similar to that
normally given everywhere in wartime
to hospitals and ambulances.
Such a convention clearly marks the
general trend of so many efforts ex-
pended for reconstruction and protec-
tion. In 1954, THE UNESCO COURIER
summed it up as"a tribute paid by poli-
tical power to the rights of art and the
mind".
19
