Radio-isotopes now answer the question:
HOW FAR DOES A FLY FLY ?
by Dale W. Jenkins
National Research Council, USA
If babies or young children in any country were being blinded or killed by human
enemies no effort would be spared to put the enemy out of action. Yet flies, which
do exactly these things, are treated merely as a nuisance and not as a deadly menace
capable of transmitting dysentery, diarrhoea, severe eye inflammations, typhoid
fever, cholera and many other diseases. Little progress is, in fact, being made in the
control of diseases caused by flies in most of the world. One reason is that too much
faith has been placed in insecticides while the real basis of fly controlsanitation-
has been neglected. Today, with radio-isotope "tracers" we have a new weapon to
fight insects which bring disease. In the article below, Dale W. Jenkins, one of the
delegates to the Geneva Conference on Atoms for Peace, describes the new fields
opened today by "tagging" insects to follow their activities more easily.
Nuclear energy has provided a valuable new tool
has permitted real progress in studying dif¬
ficult entomological problems. The exact part
played by insects in the dissemination of certain diseases
is still obscure, and use of radio-isotopes provides a means
of clarifying some of these relationships. Labelling of
medically-important insects with radio-isotopes was ini¬
tiated in 1949 by the author and others. Since that
time extensive studies have been carried out, using this
technique on a variety of insects.
Radio-isotope tagging is an effi¬
cient method since it permits positive
marking and identification of large
numbers of insects with a minimum
of labour and cost. For example it is
of importance, if control methods are
to be efficient and effective, to know
how far such insects usually travel
("dispersal range" is the technical
term), since this helps us to under¬
stand their role in spreading an epi¬
demic.
Various species of mosquitoes have
been labelled by growing the larvae
in radio-active solutions of phospho¬
rus 32, Strontium 89, and thorium,
and releasing the radio-active '"mark¬
ed" adults in large numbers. The
dispersal of 10 species of tropical and
arctic mosquitoes has been studied by
various investigators who have found
dispersal ranges of from 1 to 34 km.
The yellow fever mosquito in Nigeria
was found to disperse up to 1.2 km.
Dispersal and flight range (the
maximum distance which can be
travelled) of houseflies have been
subjects of study for a long time and a variety of marking
techniques have been used. Most of these studies showed
effective dispersal of 2 km or less. A number of studies
of dispersal of the housefly have been carried out using
phosphorus 32 and effective dispersal ranges were found
to be 1.6 to 13.6 km with maximum dispersal up to 32 km.
Dispersal studies have also been carried out using radio¬
active blowflies, screw-worm flies, eyegnats, blackflies,
and cockroaches.
Radio-isotope tagging has also helped to find out the
total number of one kind of insect there is in a given
area, how long certain disease-carrying insects live, and
how many offspring they have .
Studies of the disease-carrying role of insects, using
radio-isotope marking during epidemic outbreaks, have
not been made, but several preliminary experiments of
this type have been carried out. In a city in the Crimea,
houseflies were studied in their relation to carrying
diseases from outdoor privies. Radio-active flies were
collected in traps in kitchens in houses 30 metres from
the outdoor privy. In Texas, radio-active fruit flies were
found by the US Public Health Service in houses 320 me-
28
tres away from privies containing phosphorus 32 baits.
A large number of fruit flies which were found in houses
had at one time or another frequented privies. These
results should be borne in mind in relation to outbreaks
of dysentery and poliomyelitis.
Another very promising and fertile but unexplored
field awaits investigators using radio-isotopes in studying
disease transmission by insect carriers. If the organisms
which produce a given disease can be
tagged, many experiments are possible
in tracing them through the insect
carrier and determining the sites and
numbers of disease organisms which
are disseminated.
A large number of disease-produc¬
ing organisms have been labelled
with various radio-isotopes. These
include bacteria causing plague and
tuberculosis, dysentery, influenza and
other viruses, trypanosome sleeping
sickness, malaria, and also a variety
of nematode (thread-like) worms.
Use of radio-isotopes offers a
technique for studying medically-im¬
portant insects from the point of
view of their ability to carry disease,
their feeding habits, and the dissemi¬
nation and numbers of organisms, or
size of infective dose of organisms
that they can introduce.
The habits, life histories, and
disease-spreading role of many impor¬
tant body parasites living on animals
are not fully known. Ticks, mites,
lice and other medically important
parasites of this kind have not been
made radio-active and this is a most hopeful field of
investigation. Use of this technique should provide
needed information on the length of time such parasites
remain attached to their hosts under natural conditions,
whether they change to other hosts, where they are
located while unattached, longevity, dispersal, and popu¬
lation size. Tagging of the parasites is simple since the
creature on which they live can be made radio-active as
desired.
White rats and rabbits, for instance, were injected with
phosphorus 32 so that mosquitoes would take up 1,000
c p m (Geiger counts per minute) of this isotope per blood
meal. Similar results were obtained by other workers.
Phosphorus 32 has been used to find out just how much
blood fleas and mosquitoes take up at a "meal".
Control of insect disease carriers provides a constant
challenge, since almost every effort by human beings
results in a counter-move by the insects. The widespread
use of newer residual insecticides has resulted in the
development of resistance, which requires use of greater
quantities of more effective new insecticides.
Radio-isotopes provide a tool for furthering basic

The Unesco Courier. April 1956
THE POISONER IN
YOUR HOME. Of all
the world's insects, the
one most intimately asso¬
ciated ' with man is the
common house fly which
shares his home. Because
of Its capacity to spread
disease and Its ready appe¬
tite for both filthy and
clean foods and its
unpleasant habit of moving
back and forth between
them It is, in fact, one of
man's deadliest enemies.
Modern insecticides were
thought to be weapons
which could control If not
completely eradicate the
fly. (Photo, opposite page
shows flies killed by ten
milligrams of DDT In six to
eight hours). But health
authorities now report
that flies are rapidly deve¬
loping a resistance to insec¬
ticides to a degree that
makes them Ineffective as
a single means of control.
WHO
research on control of disease-carrying insects and disease
organisms. More than thirty different insecticides have
been radio-actively labelled. Radio-isotopes have already
been of great use in studying the site of entry, mode and
site of physiological action, and generally what happens,
to an insecticide when it gets inside an insect. Radio¬
isotopes have also been used in studying the resistance
to insecticides of certain insects.
Assessments of the area covered by airplane sprays of
insecticides and other materials have been made by the
author using radio-active gold. This technique has
several advantages over dye tracers in assessing the
results of airplane spraying of insecticides. These are,
greater accuracy, shorter time for assessment, fewer staff
required, and ability to measure depositions on vegetation
and uneven surfaces. This technique should be utilized
in assessing the efficiency of generators of insecticide fog
and smoke and other methods of insecticide dispersal.
Radiation from certain radio-isotopes and X-rays is
also proving valuable in controlling or killing insect
disease-carriers, disease organisms, and parasites. Large
stores of highly radio-active reactor wastes may be made
available in the future which have great potential value
for this purpose. Eradication of the screw-worm flies
was accomplished in Curacao- and is being planned in the
south-eastern United States. Many papers have appeared
on X-irradiation of fruit flies and other insects.
Radio-isotope radiation offers a possible means of
killing or arresting development of disease organisms in
the animal host body due perhaps to the large uptake of
metabolically active elements by these organisms. Inges¬
tion of phosphorus 32 by mosquitoes arrested development
of malaria parasites during the oocyst stage.
Red blood corpuscles carrying malaria parasites were
shown to take up more phosporus 32 than normal cells,
probably due to a more active rate of metabolism. Two
varieties of radio-iron have also been used in studying
malaria. Three species of trypanosome protozoans caus¬
ing sleeping sickness became non-infective or were killed
when treated with radiation from radium and X-ray.
Numerous studies using radio-isotopes have been carried
out in attempts to control or reduce infections due to a
variety of bacterial and viral diseases, and this field holds
great promise.
Super race of insects
developing
Asuper race of insects resistant to all types of insecticides
is developing in many countries, a World Health Orga¬
nization report now reveals. Thirty two countries have
reported insect resistance to DDT and other new Insecticides,
and approximately 35 species of insects are already involved.
A number of these insects spread some of the world's most
dangerous epidemic diseases.
Various types of malaria-bearing mosquitoes show immunity
to DDT in some areas of Greece, Lebanon, Indonesia, Saudi
Arabia, Panama, and Mississipi (USA). Body lice spreading
typhus can no longer be controlled by DDT In Korea, and five
other countries report that satisfactory control is becoming
difficult. Fleas which are responsible for plague are manifesting
resistance in certain parts of South America.
Worse still, there has recently come from Trinidad information
that a strain of mosquito which spreads yellow fever has shown
itself to be extremely resistant to DDT. (Trinidad had an out¬
break of yellow fever 2 1 months ago.) As to flies their destruc¬
tion with DDT and other chemicals is no longer possible in almost
all countries where these materials have been used In recent
years. Resistance of cockroaches and bedbugs is also well estab¬
lished in many countries.
"Should the degree of resistance in insects transmitting diseases
such as malaria, yellow fever, plague and typhus reach the point
where control by the available insecticides is no longer possible,
disastrous results from a health viewpoint will Inevitably occur
in many parts of the world", WHO director M.G.Candau recently
Informed a World Health assembly In Geneva.
Although new insecticides are available they are too few and
too limited In efficiency to have a significant effect on events.
An extraordinary fact is that no scientist today can yet say
with certainty "what causes death when insects are exposed
to insecticides" and what the biochemical and physiological
bases of resistance really are. A survey of the research on resis¬
tance is at present being carried out by WHO.
29
