Knowledge blocked at the frontier
VIOLINS TAXED BY THE KILOGRAM
ART RATED AS 'VEGETABLE FIBRE'
Copyright Roger Viollet
by Philip L. Soljak
News item : Albert Burri, the controversial Italian artist,
became even more controversial. When a U.S. customs in¬
spector examined one of his works a collage of canvas and
other fabrics sewn and stuck together and stretched on a
frame he accepted the buyer's evaluation of $ 450, but balked
at calling it a work of art, which left it free of tax. Under
customs law he ruled it a "manufacture of vegetable fibres",
which carries a 20 per cent tax. The proud owners, Mr. and
Mrs. Donald Peters of New York, paid the 590 fee and
promptly filed an appeal. "It isn't a matter of the money",
explained Mrs. Peters firmly, "it's those archaic laws. They've
got to be changed some time and this is the only way to do
it." ("Newsweek", New York),
The world press frequently reports similar incidents showing
how complex and illogical trade restrictions bar the in¬
ternational flow of works of art, books, films and other
sources of knowledge.
At one busy North American port, it took an art dealer
many hours to convince customs officials that three posters
by the French painter, Henri Matisse, were "art" and not
subject to import duty. The officials claimed that the posters
were "packing material" and therefore taxable.
At another port, a piece of abstract sculpture, done in brass
by the Rumanian artist Brancusi, was classified as "block
matter" and duty was charged for industrial metal.
In Europe, the French producer of scientific films, Jean
Painlevé, became so embroiled in customs formalities while
travelling to an international conference that he left his films
in disgust at the frontier and gave his lecture at the conference
without them. Across the English Channel, Sir Stanley Unwin,
as president of the International Publishers Association, pro¬
tested that books were being taxed abroad by the kilo, like
bags of potatoes, instead of being treated as "the noblest of
man's works."
Unesco, which is permanently committed to "promote the
free flow of ideas by word and image", is waging an extensive
campaign to abolish trade restrictions on educational, scientific
and cultural materials. Every week it receives protests from
people in various countries who find it expensive, difficult or
even impossible to obtain these articles from abroad, or send
them to other lands because of the restrictions now in force.
A librarian who had arranged to show a i
Unesco film about books recently wrote saying (Cont'd on
he was reluctantly returning the film "because ,next page)
the duty (measured by the foot !) is quite I
25

BLOCKED AT THE FRONTIER (Continued)
Books worth
their weight...
in potatoes
exorbitant." A bookseller who had ordered books from
another country complained that "although the books cost
the equivalent of only 40 cents each, the export licence per
copy is $2.00 just five times the price of the book !" A
teacher enquired whether she could obtain wall charts for
her school without paying duty. "We have great difficulty in
importing visual aids", she added "and our customs officials
don't seem to know if wall charts should be taxed or not."
A common problem is that even when exemption is granted
under a country's tariff laws, it may not be adequately applied
in practice. Protests made to Unesco on these and other
grounds are listed on page 29.
The taxation of knowledge goes back for centuries and has
often been associated with "protection" or "privilege". In the
early days of printing, rulers of States granted certain printer-
booksellers the monopoly to print or publish. Others who
produced books were fined, imprisoned or executed and their
books destroyed.
In 17th century England, these restrictions evoked the
celebrated attack by John Milton in his Areopagitica : "Truth
and understanding", Milton declared "are not such wares as
to be monopolized and traded in by tickets, and statutes and
standards. We must not think to make a staple commodity
of all the knowledge in the land, to mark and license it like
our broadcloth, and our wool packs." Milton's appeal was
later re-echoed by Voltaire and also by Benjamin Franklin.
With the development of the popular press during the 18th
century, the licensing system was replaced or strengthened
by heavy taxes on publications. Designed to stifle political
criticism, these taxes curbed the circulation of the cheaper
newspapers and pamphlets which were read by the common
people. Many liberal thinkers, including John Wilkes in
England and Mirabeau in France, opposed these restrictions.
In the 19th century, the battle was renewed by William
Cobbett and Charles Dickens in England, and by Victor Hugo
and Félécité de Lamennais in France. Gradually, throughout
western Europe, the hated "newspaper taxes" were swept
away. There was also a move to free the exchange of ideas
between countries, and a number of governments reduced
import duties on books, printed music, maps and paintings.
The first World War brought this liberal, free trade period
to an end. Many countries increased their tariff and licensing
restrictions and educational articles were taxed indiscriminately
with "ships and shoes and sealing-wax" and other products.
The economic depression of the 1930's and the second World
War brought more rigid tariff, quota and exchange controls.
Frequently the object of these restrictions was to "protect"
a local publishing or equipment industry from foreign
competition. In most cases, however, the cost of collecting
the taxes exceeded the revenue obtained. Their actual result
was to "protect" the minds of people from the ideas and
attainments of their neighbours in other lands.
Following its establishment in 1946, unesco launched a
26
campaign to end these restrictions, and before long was receiv¬
ing the support of a growing number of countries. Its first
action was to draft an international agreement which, as
described later, exempts a wide range of educational, scien¬
tific and cultural materials from import duties. At the same
time, unesco made a world-wide survey of tariff and trade
regulations affecting the international flow of information
materials. This report, published as a manual entitled "Trade
Barriers to Knowledge", is designed to help publishers, libra¬
rians, educators, scientists, film exhibitors and others obtain
these articles from abroad, or send them to other countries.
Trade Barriers brings many startling facts to light. The
current edition (1) shows, for example, that of 92 major
countries throughout the world, eleven (12 per cent) levy
import duties on books, newspapers and magazines; 28 (30 per
cent) charge duties on paintings and sculpture; and 51 (56 per
cent) similarly tax scientific instruments. Newsprint, sound
recordings and radio sets are even more widely taxed. Duties
are imposed on newsprint by 59 (64 per cent) of the coun¬
tries; on recordings, by 62 (68 per cent) ; and on radio sets
by 91 (88 per cent). The most widespread obstacle, however,
(1) "Trade Barriers to Knowledge" (Echanges culturels et barrières éco¬
nomiques : Unesco, Paris; 364 pp.; Î5.00; 25/-.; 1,250 frs.

The Unesco Courier
is the restriction of imports through exchange controls and
licensing; 64 countries (over 70 per cent) limit trade in educa¬
tional materials in this way.
The restrictions themselves are complex, onerous and at
times illogical. Following are some examples, listed accord¬
ing to the main groups of materials with which "Trade
Barriers" deals.
Books and other publications. Denmark charges a duty
of $0.09 a kilogram on children's books in Danish, but
exempts books in other languages. Ethiopia levies a 9 per
cent duty on all books. Martinique charges a 12 per cent
"sea" duty on books bound in leather, but exempts others.
Guatemala exempts most publications from duty but on the
other hand levies a consular fee, an import tax, a toll tax and
a consignment tax together representing 20 per cent of the
value. India, Pakistan and Thailand exempt current news¬
papers, but impose duties on old ones. Indonesia levies a
100 per cent import charge on newspapers and tourist posters,
and 33 per cent on manuscripts.
In Ireland, religious books pay a 30 per cent duty, but
other books are free. Italy charges a 13 per cent duty on
books bound in leather and 18 per cent on illustrated volumes.
Luxembourg and the Netherlands impose a 20 per cent duty
on children's picture books and the Netherlands also charges
15 per cent on illustrated magazines. In Norway, children's
picture books pay a duty of $0.34 a kg. if the pictures are in
one colour, and a duty of $1.12 if the pictures are in two or
more colours as also do coloured tourist posters.
On books, newspapers and magazines, Panama levies an 8
per cent consular fee, plus a tax of $0.02 per package, and
stamp duty. Paraguay charges a similar consular fee on
publications. The USA levies a 7 1/2 per cent duty on
children's books and a 5 per cent duty on books in English.
This latter duty was established over 50 years ago to "protect"
an infant publishing industry which has now become one of
the largest in the world. Italy, Mexico, Norway and Portugal
also tax imported books in their national languages.
Works of art. In Australia, an Australian artist who has
lived abroad over 7 years pays a $5 duty if he returns with his
own painting. On non-Australian paintings the duty is bet¬
ween $5 and $6, and on statues between 12 and 32 per cent.
Austria and Czechoslovakia levy varying duties on stone
statues weighing over 5 kg., Angola charges a 32 per cent duty
on paintings and 27 per cent on sculpture. India's duties on
works of art are 25 per cent, Iran's 50 per cent, Iraq's 33 per
cent, Jordan's 30 per cent, New Zealand's 45 per cent and
the Sudan's 25 per cent.
Burma charges 25 per cent and Pakistan 60 per cent on
works of art, unless imported for public exhibit. Canada's
and Portugal's duties on foreign works of art range from 15
to 30 per cent. China (Formosa) levies a flat 40 per cent,
Ecuador 75 per cent, Morocco 12 per cent and Costa Rica
10 per cent. Czechoslovakia and Denmark exempt canvases,
but charge a separate duty on the frames. Indonesia levies a
30 per cent duty on works of art, plus a "luxury" import
charge of 300 per cent. Ireland charges 100 per cent on
statues in stone, and 75 per cent on those in plaster of Paris.
Japan levies a 50 per cent duty on ivory statues, and Liberia
charges 25 per cent on wooden ones.
Norway imposes a duty of $0.28 per kg. on pictures in
wooden frames. Panama charges 15 per cent on paintings,
and Paraguay 48 per cent, plus consular and other fees.
Peru's duty on paintings is $1.00 a kg. plus 14 per cent, and
Venezuela's $0.30 a kg. plus 15 per cent. Venezuela also
has a charge of $0.60 a kg. on metal statues.
Educational films and newsreels. Many countries fail to
grant any concessions to these films. Angola levies a general
import duty of 30 per cent; Austria, $32.16 per 100 kg.; the
Belgian Congo, 25 per cent; Bulgaria, $160 per 100 kg.;
Burma, $0.03 a foot; China (Formosa), 80 per cent; Czecho¬
slovakia, $139 per 100 kg.; Denmark, $4.33 per kg.; the
Dominican Republic, 15 per cent; Ethiopia, $0.30 per 100
metres plus 9 per cent; Guadeloupe and Martinique,
cent; French West Africa, 20 per cent.
12 per
In the German Federal Republic, the rate is 24 per cent
(copyable film); India, $0.05 a foot; Iran, 50 per cent; Italy,
$0.06 a metre (35 mm. film); Japan, 30 per cent; Korea
(South), 40 per cent; Luxembourg, $0.03 a metre; Morocco,
12 to 20 per cent; Mozambique, 23 per cent; the Netherlands,
$0.03 a metre; New Zealand, 45 per cent; Norway, $1.12 a
kg.; Paraguay, 15 per cent plus 8 per cent consular fee; Peru,
$2 a kg. plus 14 per cent; Portugal, $2.76 a kg.; Saudi Arabia,
30 per cent; Syria, $14 a kg.; French Togoland, 10 per cent;
the USSR, 100 per cent; Venezuela, $0.78 a kg.
Educational recordings. Few countries make any attempt
to discriminate between educational and "entertainment"
sound recordings, and only Hong Kong, Mexico, Singapore
and South Africa grant complete exemption. Countries
levying the highest general rates are Angola, 35 per cent;
Austria, $80 per 100 kg.; Bulgaria, $48 per 100 kg.; Burma,
40 per cent; China (Formosa), 100 per cent; Costa Rica, $0.53
a kg.; Czechoslovakia, $0.42 a kg.; Ecuador, $2 a kg.; Gua¬
temala, $0.75 a kg.; India, 50 per cent; Iran, 40 per cent;
Ireland, $0.11 a record; Mexico, $0.95 a kg.; Portugal, $3.32
a kg.; Saudi Arabia, 35 per cent; USSR, $12.50 a kg.
Music. Twenty countries impose duties on printed music,
and over 90 on musical instruments. On music, French West
Africa and the USA charge 5 per cent, Panama 8 per cent,
Ethiopia 9 per cent, Canada and Costa Rica 10 per cent,
French Equatorial Africa and Guadeloupe 12 per cent, French
Cameroons and Paraguay 20 per cent, Indonesia 33 per cent.
On each kg. Bulgaria levies a duty of $0.16; El Salvador,
$0.72 plus 8 per cent import tax; Iran, $1.00; Peru, $0.06
plus 14 per cent tax; Venezuela, $0.06. South Africa charges
10 per cent on manuscripts.
Duties on instruments are levied variously by weight, value
or type of article concerned. For example, Bulgaria charges
$16 a kg. for hurdy-gurdies, but double that for harps;
Mexico's stiftest duty is on mouth organs and street organs
($3 a kg.); Spain charges $1 a kg. on hurdy-gurdies and a
general duty of $300 or more on pianos. The USA's duty
on violins is 40 per cent, Finland's $1.47 a kg., and Guate¬
mala's $1.00 a kg. Norway charges $0.84 on a zither, Swit¬
zerland $0.16 a kg. on ocarinas and Sweden $0.68 a kg. on
accordions. Australia levies a general duty of I
17-47 per cent on instruments; China (Formosa) (Cont'd on
40 per cent; Cuba and Sierra Leone 50 per cent; next page)
Egypt 53 per cent; Ethiopia 34 per cent; France I
27

BLOCKED
AT THE
FRONTIER
(Continued)
15-40 per cent; Italy 12-21 per cent; India 50 per cent; Indo¬
nesia, Sudan and Liberia 30 per cent ; Iraq, Ireland and the
United Kingdom 33 per cent ; Israel 50 per cent ; Korea 40 peí
cent and Pakistan 60 per cent.
Scientific instruments are essential to social progress and,
in the case of the less developed countries, are needed parti¬
cularly in raising their health, agricultural and industrial stan¬
dards. Yet over 70 countries levy duties on these articles.
Angola charges 3-28 per cent; Australia 17 per cent; Burma,
Canada, Ethiopia, German Federal Republic, Iraq, Mozam¬
bique, French Togoland and Libya, 10 per cent; Morocco,
Guadeloupe and Martinique, 12 per cent; Denmark, Portugal
and Colombia 7 per cent; China (Formosa), French West
Africa, Lebanon, Paraguay, Puerto Rico, Saudi Arabia and
Syria, 15 per cent; Luxembourg and the Netherlands, 10-15
per cent; Panama 10-20 per cent; Japan and New Zealand
20 per cent; Jordan 21-34 per cent; Korea 10-40 per cent:
USA 20-40 per cent; Sudan 25 per cent; Ireland 30 per cent;
and Iran 30-75 per cent. Austria, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Finland,
Guatemala, Peru and Venezuela tax instruments by the kg.,
the highest rates being Ecuador's ($3.35 a kg.) and Guate¬
mala's ($0.15-$3 a kg.)
Maps, charts and models are obviously essential to a know-
»atru.*
V / / / | W v^vfv
"What ? Pay duty > Then you have it."
ledge of the world around us. However, although good quali¬
ty maps and charts are produced by relatively few countries,
some 30 countries levy duties on those from abroad.
Australia charges 17 per cent; Ethiopia 9 per cent; French
Togoland and French West Africa 20 per cent; French Guiana
and Guadeloupe 5-7 per cent; Indonesia 33 per cent; Ireland
15-50 per cent (in bulk); Italy 13 per cent; Lebanon 25 per
cent; Morocco 12-20 per cent; Panama 8 per cent; Paraguay
23-34 per cent; Peru 12 per cent. Bulgaria charges $1.60 a
kg. plus 5 per cent; the Dominican Republic $1.50; Portugal
$0.14; and Norway $0.28 if maps are glued; others are exempt.
Materials for the handicapped. It is hard to believe that
a country would charge duties on articles needed by the blind,
the partially sighted and the deaf. Yet over 50 countries tax
one or more of these groups of materials.
Duties on all three groups are levied by French Equatorial
Africa, French West Africa, German Federal Republic, Indo¬
nesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Lebanon, Panama, Sudan, and French
Togoland. On braille writers, duties are charged by Angola,
Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Repub¬
lic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, India, Mexico, Mozambique, Portugal
and Spanish Morocco. Hearing aids are taxed by Algeria.
Australia, Burma, Cambodia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Morocco, Guadeloupe,
Martinique, Greece, India, Italy, Laos, Libya, Pakistan, Para¬
guay, Philippines, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Venezuela.
Highlighting this maze of restrictions on the flow of know¬
ledge, "Trade Barriers" has evoked widespread interest in the
world press. Sir Stanley Unwin, who has particularly
championed the cause of books over many years, wrote of
the handbook: "It is a sad reflection upon the age in which
we live that it should require a large and closely set volume
merely to summarize all the many artificial barriers which
obstruct the free flow of information from one country to
another... Let us hope that the energy to sweep away these
'Trade Barriers to Knowledge' will not be lacking."
Governments have, in fact, shown an increasing willingness
to support unesco's efforts to this end. In 1949, the 34 nations
which are the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) helped unesco to draft an
international convention (The Agreement on the Importation
of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials).
Countries joining this agreement grant duty-free exemption
to books, newspapers, periodicals, music scores, works of art,
maps and charts. Also exempt are newsreels, educational
films, recordings, models, scientific instruments and articles
for the blind if for approved institutions or organizations.
In addition, internal taxes on imported articles may not
exceed those charged on domestic products, and import fees
28

must be limited in amount to the cost of the services rendered.
Under another provision, governments agree to grant import
licences and foreign exchange for books and other publications
needed by public libraries. They also undertake to simplify
their import procedures, to ease the customs clearance of
educational, scientific and cultural materials, and continue
their efforts to promote the free flow of these articles.
The unesco agreement entered into force in May 1952
and is now being applied by 22 countries, embracing over
450 million people. These countries are Belgium, Cambodia,
Ceylon, Cuba, Egypt, Finland, France, Greece, Haiti, Israel,
Laos, Monaco, Pakistan, the Philippines, El Salvador, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom, Viet-Nam
and Yugoslavia. The United Kingdom has also extended the
convention to almost all of its overseas territories, so that mil¬
lions of British subjects abroad are now sharing the benefits
of the agreement equally with those at home. Twelve
countries have signed but not yet ratified it (1).
Urging the United States to join the Agreement, the "New
York Times" commented: "It is hardly likely that placing on
the free list any such items on which tariffs are now collected
would result in dire consequences for this country... This is
one field in which it might be easy to beat the protectionists.
In the first place, the United States is a book exporting
country, and in the second place the tariff we do impose on
books is low and has little economic significance anyway...
Approval of the pact on free importation of educational,
scientific or cultural materials would give a psychological
boost to the whole movement for freer cultural exchange
among the nations." These points might well be considered
by other countries which have not yet joined the agreement.
The convention has received support from the UN Economic
and Social Council and the Council of Europe, which have
urged governments to adhere to it. It has also been endorsed
The Unesco Courier
by over 20 international associations, including the World
Federation of United Nations Associations, the League of
Red Cross Societies, the International Publishers Association
and the International Federation of Newspaper Publishers
(F1EJ). Most of these associations have asked their national
member associations to urge the governments of their countries
to join the agreement. These appeals indicate that perhaps
the most effective way of reducing taxes on knowledge would
be to secure universal adoption of the unesco convention.
Meanwhile, unesco has sought directly to encourage inter¬
national negotiation for the reduction of tariffs on information
materials. Early in 1956 it requested the Contracting Parties
to the GATT that they consider removing duties on these
articles at their tariff negotiating conference in Geneva. In
response, the conference noted that the 26 participating
countries were urged to "eliminate or reduce barriers to the
free flow in international trade" in the items covered by the
unesco agreement.
The conference ended in May with 14 nations agreeing
to grant reductions. The U.S.A. is cutting tariffs on maps
and charts ; Chile and Sweden, on films ; Belgium, German
Federal Republic, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, on
sound recordings ; German Federal Republic, Norway, Sweden
and the United Kingdom on radio receivers or parts ; Japan
on television receivers ; Sweden, the United Kingdom and the
U.S.A. on certain musical instruments ; Australia, Canada,
France, Italy, Sweden and the U.S.A. on various scientific
instruments ; Canada on newsprint ; and the United Kingdom
on printing paper. These concessions mark new gains in
Unesco's campaign to make articles of knowledge more fully
available 'to the world's peoples.
(1) Afghanistan, Bolivia, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Iran, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand.
