Thailand

ve MEDITAT S.BuRDHA cast in
bronze af Ayudhya, fo ogi
(1350 to 1767) the capital of Thailand,
where ae | of Buddhist
sculpture : ie irk” ~
fhe Jato style w the Srowii
ofthe Buddha's head with ah igh conical
mass formed by two, three or more Ly
surmounted by the traditional lotus-bud.

46

Images of Buddha
outnumber
the people
Thailand has been called the land of Buddhist images and
its capital Bangkok, is perhaps one of the most im¬
pressive Buddhist cities of all the world. For more than
1,300 years Thai artists have been making images of the
Buddha, ranging in size from tiny miniatures to huge giants.
Carved from many materials stone, plaster, terra cotta,
wood, crystal or jade, silver or gold and, most characteristic
of all, bronze images of Buddha today far outnumber the
inhabitants of Thailand.
Thailand's wealth of monuments has come chiefly from the
devotion of its kings who built magnificent resting places for
their own ashes. The great "wats", as they are known, also
serve as monasteries, schools and hospitals as well as places of
Buddhist worship.
Early Buddhist art drew its inspiration from that of ancient
India, Cambodia and China, while developing its own original
styles. The countryside of northern and central Thailand is
studded with large numbers of temples and monuments such
as those at the ancient cities of Ayudhya, Chiengmai, Sukho-
thai and Lopburi.
Bangkok itself offers a glittering spectacle of Buddhist
sculpture and architecture yet the capital is no more than two
centuries old. For when two hundred years ago King Rama I,
the first monarch of modern Siam (now Thailand) set up his
new capital in Bangkok, it was but a tiny village. Today its
skyline is enhanced by the roofs and spires of 400 temples and
its streets are thronged with yellow-robed priests.
The elaborate roofs and spires of
Bangkok's temples and palaces (all of
them built since 1782) reveal the
richness of detail which marks Thai
Buddhist architecture. The sanctuaries
are built largely of wood with elabor¬
ately carved gables. A distinctive
feature of these modern buildings are
the projecting "Ox-horns" on the
gables. (One of these can be seen
between the spires on the right of
photo above). These " ox-horns "
are actually stylized representations of
nagas, the ancient Indian water spirit
in serpent form. Left, a modern pag¬
oda at Srimahathrat, near Bangkok.
Copyright "Missi"
47
