THE NANSEN SAGA
For the second time in its history, the Nobel Peace Prize
has been awarded to an organization working on behalf
of refugees the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner for
Refugees. The previous occasion was in 1938 when the award
was made to the Nansen International Office for Refugees,
named after the famous Norwegian explorer, Fridtjof Nansen,
himself a Nobel Peace Prize winner in 1922. The following
article tells something of Nansen's life as an explorer and of the
great humanitarian work he did for the world's refugees.
In the year 1882, a 21-year old Norwegian completed his
studies at Christiania University and set out on a
sealer to collect zoological specimens in the Arctic.
This was the first of many later and greater voyages un¬
dertaken by Fridtjof Nansen whose name was to become
famous both in the field of Arctic exploration and in
refugee work during and after the First World War.
Nansen made an amazing Arctic journey in 1888 when
he was only 27 years old. He set out to cross island of
*«a
!P*
34P-
Norwegian Embassy, Paris
DIFFICULT PROGRESS. To travel 500 yards by sledge demanded
an enormous effort from Nansen and his colleagues. Pictured here is
Nansen's base camp in I 894, about 300 miles short of the North Pole.
Fridtjof Nansen, a name famous not
only for voyages of Arctic exploration
but inseparably associated with the
Nansen Passport. This gave offi¬
cial status to thousands of refugees.
Copyright Eneret Wiese - Oslo
Greenland on skis
though many authori¬
ties had declared this
achievement impos¬
sible. He left with a
party of four and
succeeded in making
the crossing from east
to west.
During this trip an¬
other far more ambit¬
ious plan was germin¬
ating in his mind an
expedition to the
North Pole. At that
time no man had
reached the Pole and
Nansen had his own
very particular ideas
on how this should be
attempted. He believed that the currents of the Arctic Sea
would carry a ship north from Siberia across the Pole and
then south to Greenland. This was no idle dream as
Nansen had examined driftwood on the coast of Green¬
land, which he was certain had come from Siberia.
Nansen interested the Norwegian Government in his
plans and a special type of vessel was built capable of
withstanding the terrible pressure of the grinding ice
floes. She was named the Fram (Forward) and on a
June day in 1893 she lay alongside the quays of Chris¬
tiania which were crowded with thousands of people who
had come to wish Nansen luck in his attempt.
By September the Fram was frozen in the ice pack and
just as Nansen had predicted she drifted northwards until
March 1895. Then, nearly two years after their departure
from Norway at a latitude of 85° 5' north, Nansen and one
of his colleagues Lt. Johansen took their sledges out for a
final bid to reach the Pole. By April 7 1895 they were
within 272 miles of the Pole 184 miles farther north than
any man had ever been before. But ice conditions forced
them to turn back and they made their way to Franz
Josef Land where they passed the winter. In 1896 Nansen
arrived back in Norway, and the Fram reached port
shortly afterwards.
This dramatic voyage made Nansen a famous figure
both in Norway and abroad. He was honoured by many
European countries and he lectured in Europe and in the
United States. In 1905 he played a leading part in the


negotiations which led to the peaceful separation of
Norway from Sweden. His efforts in the field of diplo¬
macy were rewarded by his appointment as Norway's
first Minister to Great Britain. He held this post until
1908 when he was appointed Professor of Oceanography at
the University of Christiania.
Nansen however, was not content to rest in the peace
and calm of University life and between 1910 and 1914
he made a number of scientific voyages of discovery in
the North Atlantic. This work was suddenly interrupted
by the outbreak of the First World War. Norway remain¬
ed neutral' but Nansen busied himself with relief work and
thus started a new chapter in his career which was to lead
to the Nobel Peace Prize award in 1922.
In the latter part of the war Nansen set up an office
to help the thousands of Russian refugees in Asia Minor.
Later he was in charge of the repatriation of German and
Russian prisoners-of-war and in the years immediately
following the war he became internationally-known for
his relief work in famine-stricken Russia. This work won
for Nansen the Peace Prize award.
Following the First World War Europe faced a refugee
problem of a magnitude such as had never been seen
before. Nansen took the initiative in attacking this
problem and with the approval of the Council of the
newly-created League of Nations a conference attended
by delegates of 48 Red Cross Societies and 12 governments
was held. This led to the setting up of the High Commis¬
sion for Refugees with Nansen at its head, and the new
office immediately set out to provide an identity certificate
for the thousands of Russian and Armenian refugees.
The Nansen Passport, as it was known, gave these stateless
refugees an officially-recognized existence.
Nansen continued his work for refugees and also
represented his country at the League of Nations. In 1925
he conducted the negotiations which resulted in the entry
of Germany into the League. But although Nansen was
deeply involved with the work of the League his taste of
adventure was still very much alive, and just before his
death in 1930 he was planning a Zeppelin flight over the
Arctic regions.
In the same year (1930) it was decided to set up the
Nansen International Office t for Refugees. This office
did much valuable work and i'n 1938, the year that it was
closed, it received the Nobel Peace Prize for the direction
of relief activities. Thus ended one period of great
humanitarian work for the world's refugees, the chief
architect of which had been Fridtjof Nansen.
FAST IN THE
ICEPACK. The
famous Fram with
Nansen in front
sitting on his ice
yacht before leav¬
ing base Polhavet
I during his great
Arctic voyage of
18 93-1896.
Norwegian Embassy,
Paris
