3 Works of
rt at the doctor's
Some of the most important but less well-known
of museum activities go on in "hospitals" where
works of art are cared for and restored and In
laboratories where new scientific treatments are
continually being devised and improved. These
hospitals and laboratories have their specialists for
all kinds of works of artpaintings, sculpture, draw¬
ings, ceramics, engravings, mosaics and for different
materials used by artistscanvas, marble, wood,
stone, bronze, textiles. To make a diagnosis of a
"sick" masterpiece, and decide on Its treatment,
experts need to know a great deal about it, from its
origin and history down to materials and methods
used by its author. Photos here were taken at one
of world's best equipped centres for the care of
works of art, the Central Laboratory for Belgian
Museums, Brussels. (I) "Surgeons" at work on
series of sculptures in wood. Specialist working in
foreground is removing overcoatings of paint which
cover original colouring of Roman sculpture of Christ
from church at Gretz-Doiceau, near Louvain. In rear
of workshop (on left in photo) is an electric immersion
tank. (3) Close-up of tank showing a painted wooden
statue undergoing treatment in a mixture of heated
wax, resin and paraffin to preserve it and to destroy
infesting parasites. (2) Special workshop for care
and restoration of paintings. Distinguished "invalids"
shown In photo Include: Memling's "The Mystic Mar¬
riage of St. Catherine" (far left) ; Thierry Bouts' "The
Judgment of Othon" (one part on trestles and the
rest upright behind); and a work by Rembrandt (on
easel in rear). One of most delicate and arduous
restorations undertaken in this laboratory, which
Is directed by M. Paul Coremans, was on "The Adora-
18
tion of the Lamb", the famous triptych from the
Cathedral at Ghent. This operation, in which Unesco
was associated, lasted for two years. Works of art
from museums in all parts of Belgium come to the
Central Laboratory, and churches and private collec¬
tors in Belgium and other countries make use of its
services. Another of the world's Important restora¬
tion laboratories is the Istituto Centrale del Restauro
in Rome which Unesco selected as the site for the
International Centre for the Study and Preservation
and Restoration of Cultural Property. The world's first
restoration centre was set up by the Berlin Museum
in I 898 and the one In the British Museum in 1919.
Copyright Laboratory of Belgian Museums and Presse Univers
BVi'íl'l Km ^Q
i w 3Sr
m!û% mm
fr *
¥ /km'

The Unesco Courier
^
i
X-RAYS PROBE
A RUST CRUST
Merovingian buckle unearthed at Namur, Belgium, in
1908 was so deeply encrusted with rust (far left) that
any possibility of cleaning it successfully seemed out
of the question. It remained in this state until last
year when It was sent to the Central Laboratory of
Belgian Museums, Brussels, where an X-ray photo
(centre) revealed the true state of the iron base and
silver decoration under the rust crust, thus showing
restoration was possible. Left, buckle after cleaning.
Copyright Central Laboratory of Belgian Museums, Brussels
19

OUT OF BOUNDS TO VISITORS (Continued)
Modern restoration techniques
rejuvenate Leonardo's 'Last Supper'
The restoration of a fresco painted many centuries ago and
since then exposed to the attacks of time, damp and dust
is a delicate operation requiring long and careful work by
experts. One of the best-known restoration services is that of
the Uffizi Gallery, Florence, Italy, where specialists (right)
are shown at work on a fresco painted in the church of the
ancient hill town of Cortona, Italy, by Fra Angélico, the Domi¬
nican priest who died In Rome just over 500 years ago. Never,
however, has the restoration of a major work of art aroused so
many passions or produced so much controversy as that of
Leonardo da Vinci's the "Last Supper" (far right) which he painted
on the wall in the little refectory of Milan's Santa Maria delle
Grazie in 1497. Even in Leonardo's own lifetime the wall
began to show patches of dampness and, thereafter, down the
centuries, critics, artists, scientists and restorers studied the
problem but never reached complete agreement either on the
techniques used by Leonardo, or on what was causing the damage
or again on which restoration method should be employed. Well-
meaning restorers "bandaged" the cracks with plaster and
retouched the masterpiece. At least six other artists overlaid
Leonardo's work. By 1908 it was shown beyond doubt that
the "Last Supper" was a distemper work and that the damage
was simply being caused by the dampness. A heating system
installed behind the wall eventually eliminated the mildew, and
the colours once more adhered firmly to the plaster. In 1943,
a bomb fell on the refectory and though the mural remained
intact under sandbags protecting the north wall, it was left like
this for two years. When the sandbags were removed a
crust of white mold covered the painting, even a touch dented
the surface and there seemed to be no way of removing the
mildew without flaking off the picture as well. Italian restorers
then injected quantities of a new shellac which was colourless,
waxless and impervious to moisture and within a year the mould
had dried up and the painting remained. After this, a brilliant
restorer, Mauro Pellicioli, went to work with a surgeon's scalpel
and a fine brush for three years and gradually removed the paint
of former restorers to lay bare the areas where Leonardo's
original paint still remained. In places where restoration paint¬
work was covering bare plaster it was left. Today restored to
an approximation of its original purity, the "Last Supper" Is
again revealed as the marvel of light, form and movement that
must have amazed the contemporaries of Leonardo da Vinci-
Uffizi Art Gallery, Florence and Pinacoteca di Brera, Milan
20

The Unesco Courier
Secrets of Rembrandt
and Mozart revealed
Using special instruments and scientific
techniques museum experts nowa¬
days "look inside" paintings to dis¬
cover and record things which cannot be
seen with the naked eye or through a
magnifying glass. As a preparation for
restoration or to help determine a paint¬
ing's authenticity, X-rays and ultra-violet
rays are widely used. Earlier this year,
for example, the first complete X-ray
photograph was made of one of Rem¬
brandt's great works, "Julius Civilis Giving
Oath to the Batavians" and was displayed
alongside the work itself at a Rembrandt
anniversary exhibition organized by the
Stockholm National Museum. The work
portrays a group of men taking an oath
on their swords, and experts have long
been puzzled by the outline of an "owner¬
less" sword in the picture. It was hoped
that the X-ray photograph (far left) would
reveal the missing owner of the sword.
Instead of showing a hidden figure the
radiograph brought to light a second
sword, thus adding another mystery to
the painting. Specialists at the Louvre
Museum, Paris, use similar methods, have
developed other special techniques. Photos
(left), show portrait of Mozart at the
Louvre under X-ray examination which
revealed painter's signature and other
hitherto unknown facts. One Louvre tech¬
nique of great assistance to archaeologists
consists of coating illegible inscriptions
with phosphorescent powder and afterwards
photographing them by ultra-violet rays.
Copyright Stockholm National Museum and Louise de Béa, Paris
21
