THERE IS ONLY ON
AND HIS NAME IS
Thu first cry of a newborn baby in Chicago or
Zamboango, in Amsterdam or Rangoon, has
the same pitch and key, each saying, "I am!
I have come through ! I belong ! I am a member
of the Family."
Many the babies and grownups here from
photographs made in sixty-eight nations round
our planet Earth. You travel and see what
the camera saw. The wonder of human mind,
heart, wit and instinct, is here. You might
catch yourself saying, "I'm not a stranger
here."
People! flung wide and far, born into toil,
struggle, blood and dreams, among lovers,
eaters, drinkers, workers, loafers, fighters,
players, gamblers. Here are ironworkers,
bridgemen, musicians, sandhogs, miners, build¬
ers of huts and skyscrapers, jungle hunters,
landlords and the landless, the loved and the
unloved, the lonely and abandoned, the brutal
and the compassionate one big family hugging
close to the ball of Earth for its life and being.
Here or there you may witness a startling
harmony where you say, "This will be haunt¬
ing me a long time with a loveliness I hope to
understand better."
In a seething of saints and sinners, winners
or losers, in a womb of superstition, faith,
genius, crime, sacrifice, here is the People, the
one and only source of armies, navies, work-
gangs, the living flowing breath of the history
of nations, ever lighted by the reality or illu¬
sion of hope. Hope is a sustaining human
gift.
Everywhere is love and love-making, wed¬
dings and babies from generation to generation
keeping the Family of Man alive and continu¬
ing. Everywhere the sun, moon and stars,
the climates and weathers, have meanings for
people. Though meanings vary, we are alike
in all countries and tribes in trying to read what
sky, land and sea say to us. Alike and ever alike we
are on all continents in the need of love, food, cloth¬
ing, work, speech, worship, sleep, games, dancing,
fun. From tropics to arctics humanity lives with
these needs so alike, so inexorably alike.
Hands here, hands gnarled as thorntree roots and
others soft as faded rose leaves. Hands reaching,
praying and groping, hands holding tools, torches,
brooms, fishnets, hands doubled in fists of flaring
20
anger, hands moving in caress of beloved faces. The
hands and feet of children playing ring-around-a-
rosy countries and languages different but the little
ones alike in playing the same game.
'Flow, flow, flow, the current of life is
Fifth Avenue New York, Andreas Feininger, Life
Here are set forth babies arriving, suckling, grow¬
ing into youths restless and questioning. Then as
grownups they seek and hope. They mate, toil, fish,
quarrel, sing, fight, pray, on all parallels and meri¬
dians having likeness. The earliest man, ages ago,
had tools, weapons, cattle, as seen in his cave draw¬
ings. And like him the latest man of our day has his
tools, weapons, cattle. The earliest man struggled
through inexpressibly dark chaos of hunger, fear, vio¬
lence, sex. A long journey it has been from that

E MAN IN THE WORLD
£^ L L l^\ E N by Cari Sandbur9
early Family of Man to the one of today which has
become a still more prodigious spectacle.
If the human face is "the masterpiece of God" it is
here then in a thousand fateful registrations. Often
ever onward...' kobodaishi
U.S.A., Jerry Cooke, Life
..I am alone with the beating of my heart...'
lui CHI
the faces speak what words can never say. Some tell
of eternity and others only the latest tattlings. Child
faces of blossom smiles or mouths of hunger are
followed by homely faces of majesty carved and worn
by love, prayer and hope, along with others light and
carefree as thistledown in a late summer wind. Faces
having land and sea on them, faces honest as the
morning sun flooding a clean kitchen with light, faces
crooked and lost and wondering where to go this
afternoon or tomorrow morning. Faces in crowds,
laughing and windblown leaf faces, profiles in an
instant of agony, mouths in a dumbshow mockery
lacking speech, faces of music in gay song or a twist
of pain, a hate ready to kill, or calm and ready-for-
death faces. Some of them arc worth a long
look now and deep contemplation later. Faces
betokening a serene blue sky or faces dark with
storm winds and lashing night rain. And faces
beyond forgetting, written over with faiths in
men and dreams of man surpassing himself.
An alphabet here and a multiplication table of
living breathing human faces.
In the times to come as the past there will be
generations taking hold as though loneliness
and the genuis of struggle has always dwelt
in the hearts of pioneers. To the question,
"What will the story be of the Family of Man
across the near or far future?" some would
reply, "For the answers read if you can the
strange and baffling eyes of youth."
There is only one man in the world
and his name is All Men.
There is only one woman in the world
and her name is All Women.
There is only one child in the world
and the child's name is All Children.
A camera testament, a drama of the grand
canyon of humanity, an epic woven of fun,
mystery and holiness here is the Family of
Man !
Peru, Robert Frank
Carl Sandburg, famed American poet and winner of
the Pulitzer Prize for poetry in 1951, wrote the above
text as a prologue to "The Family of Man" exhibition.
Text copyright by the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
21
