OBESITY: A SLOW FORM OF SUICIDE
by Gerald Wendt
Thin people are much more numerous than 'fat
ones. Undernourishment is still a world prob¬
lem ; overeating is not at least not yet. But
conditions are changing. The U.N. Food and Agri¬
culture Organization has reported a marked increase
in the world's food production in recent years.
As the prosperity of the underdeveloped lands im¬
proves, life will be easier, sedentary occupations will
increase, and many people will attain that "mark of
wellbeing", an ample girth. The jolly fat man has
always been a popular figure. Less admired, but more
envied are the well-fed businessman, the rotund
potentate, the successful politician. In the Western
world especially, they have long been symbols not
only of wealth but of health.
It is true that undernourishment and malnutrition
are the real penalty of poverty. They bring on many
serious diseases, such as tuberculosis, which thrive on
weak and wasted bodies. It is also true that 'tubercu¬
losis is only one-fifth as common among overweight
people as among those of normal weight. Further¬
more, the suicide rate is much less among fat folk.
Nevertheless, being too fat and heavy is itself a slow
form of suicide, for the death rate is far higher
among fat people than among lean. They are four
times as likely to die of diabetes and their death rate
from inflammation of the kidneys, or Bright's disease
(chronic nephritis), apoplexy (cerebral hemorrhage)
and heart failure (coronary disease), is about twice
the normal. Accurate life insurance statistics in the
United States show that with as little as 10 percent
overweight the mortality raté is 20 percent higher
at 20 percent overweight it is more than 40 percent
higher ; and at 25 percent the mortality rate is nearly
75 percent higher than normal.
Medieval 'central-heating'big meals
Put in another way, and less accurately ; out of
ten lean men at the age of 30, eight will reach
the age of 60, five will reach 70 and three will
survive to the age of 80. But if the ten men are fat
at the age of 30, only six will reach 60, three will
reach 70 and one may reach 80.
What is the cause of overweight ? The answer is
simple : eating too much. Every ounce of weight has
entered through the mouth. Overeating is, quite sim¬
ply, putting more fuel into the mouth than the body
uses for energy. The excess food above the energy
need is inevitably stored as fat. The body has no
means of rejecting the excess once it has entered
the mouth. If overweight is to be avoided it must be
done before that pointby good sense.
This is neither as simple nor as easy as it sounds.
There is first the question of how much food is too
much. This differs for different people because it
depends on how much food is needed for energy pro¬
duction. It is easier to overeat in the tropics than
in a cold climate because in cold weather much food
is burned just to keep the body warm. The meals of
medieval days in Europe were enormous because the
houses were always cold. Everywhere meals should
be lighter in summer than in winter for this reason.
People who move from cool countries to hot ones
easily grow fat unless they reduce their food intake.
Even more important is the amount of work done.
Hard physical labour requires energy, which can be
obtained only from food. A labourer in the fields or
in industry may eat twice or even three times as
much as an office worker without growing fat. But
when he grows too old for work, his weight increases
rapidly unless he also changes his eating habits.
In the cities the young athlete can eat well but
when he stops his exercise he should reduce his diet
too, since from the body's point of view exercise is
work. For this reason the man or woman who does
no manual work and yet has an appetite for good
eating should maintain a schedule of physical exer¬
cise to counteract and use up the excessive food. In
one sense this is automatic because the heavy person
gets exercise just by carrying and propelling the
excess weight. One who weighs 200 pounds does twice
as much work in climbing a flight of stairs or a hill,
for instance, as one who weighs only 100 pounds.
This sets some limitation on the ultimate gain in
weight. But it is usually wiser and healthier to take
pleasant exercise at a normal weight than to do the
enforced labour of carrying 100 pounds of unne¬
cessary weight wherever one goes. This is only the
first penalty of overeating. It is followed by a se¬
vere strain on the heart and often by heart failure.
Pregnant women 'eat for two'
There is thus no absolute answer to the question
of how much food is too much. It depends on
the activity of the person. But whenever one's
body weight rises above normal there is no escaping
the verdict that one is eating too much. For in¬
stance, pregnant women often eat far more than they
need to in the thought that they must feed the de¬
veloping infant too. This is true but it is balanced
by the fact that the pregnant woman usually greatly
reduces her work or exercise. Thus she gains far
more weight than is accounted for by the infant. As
always, such gain in weight indicates overeating.
There remains the question as to why people
overeat. More is involved than just good sense and
more than just hunger too. It is a matter of conti¬
nuing appetite after hunger is satisfied. Dr. Jean
Mayer of the School of Public Health at Harvard
University (USA) and the son of a famous French
physiologist has recently discussed several causes.
Neurotics need to nibble
One cause is certainly hereditary, for there are
many strains of domestic animals which are bred
and grown because their appetite is never satis¬
fied and they grow fat. Another cause is the result of
an injury of some sort. Overeating results in some ani¬
mals upon the removal of two small centres in the
mid-brain. A certain type of tumour in the pituitary
gland also causes obesity in mice. Both hormonal
treatments and castration are known to cause obesity.
But in human beings it is more often psychic
injury. A sudden insecuritylor the removal of a
long-standing insecurity may be connected with the
beginning or the ending of overeating. To forget
their troubles some neurotics are as addicted to eating
as others are to alcohol. Often the nibbling of sweets
between meals is due to nervous tension.
But the major cause is environmental or social.
The availability of ample food after years of priva¬
tion is a strong psychological temptation, especially
when it is prominently displayed and advertised.
Finally, there is the esteem in which overweight per¬
sons are held in many lands on the outmoded and
false idea that fat is a mark of health and success
in life. Not so, say the scientists and the physicians,
obesity is a major malady of civilization.
21
