STATE OF EMERGENCY
AN EASIER LIFE for coun¬
trywomen was the subject
of one of the "State of
Emergency" programmes.
Yet a survey among tele-
clubs showed that more
women than men are oppos¬
ed to modernization. Left,
Roger Louis, tele-club orga¬
nizer turned producer who
arranged the programmes.
The evening of January 7, 1954, marks an important
date for a group of small French villages some
60 miles from Paris. On that evening farmers, rural
workers and local officials were crowded together in their
town halls and schools to "have a look at the television".
They were there for the opening of a new television series
called "State of Emergency" which had been prepared for
their tele-clubs by the Radiodiffusion-Télévision Fran-
. çaise and Unesco. The series was a unique experiment
which had as its goal the introduction of mechanization
on farms, and modernization of living conditions in
villages.
The joint project grew out of a Unesco decision to
produce a series of educational programmes aimed at
rural populations, to evaluate the results and to publicize
them for the benefit of governments, educators and tele¬
vision producers throughout the world who are trying to
find the best ways of using television for adult education
in rural areas.
Why did Unesco choose a group of French villages for
its experiment? Firstly because the conditions there
seemed to offer an ideal "testing bench". It is no mere
chance that tele-club associations had sprung up mainly
in the country where the need for new kinds of entertain¬
ment has become more pressing as countryfolk have
become more- aware of the greater amenities of town life.
Secondly because the economic and cultural conditions
of the little villages to the east of Paris reflect a way of
life that 'is roughly the same in many other countries.
Isolation, material handicaps and financial and social
problems, all too common in Europe and elsewhere, are
barriers to a badly needed modernization.
Thus the lessons and conclusions drawn from a pilot
project conducted in France through the tele-clubs would,
with some adjustments, very probably serve as a guide
for the introduction of television into the country areas
of many of Unesco's member states, and at the same
time would be of help to other countries embarking on
similar educational experiments.
The chief difficulty in planning the telecasts was to
find a subject that would interest both the wine-grower
and the farmer, the labourer and the engineer, the village
family and city television audiences, for there is only one
television network in France. Finally, it was decided that
the series should demonstrate the vital problems con¬
fronting French agriculture and the need to introduce
modern methods for their solution.
All the problems would be presented in a framework
of "true life stories" and in nearly all the programmes
their main lines would be explained through the experi¬
ences of living people. In many cases farmers came to
the studio. Viewers, for example, were introduced to
M. Lecomte whose son had joined the army and left him,
at an advanced age, to work his farm alone.
A small farmer and an industrialist discuss-
ing credit, revealed both sides of the question. (Com d on
Whether the subject was the re-allocation of next page)

MASCULINE TASTES strongly fa¬
vour films and variety programmes.
EXPERTS PANEL presided over by TV producer Roger Louis, took part in some programmes. Panel
included manufacturers, big and small farmers, labourers and others interested in rural problems.
UNESCO-Cassirer UNESCO-Cassirer
land, co-operative activities,
the flow of young people to
the towns, or women's life
in the country, it was always
the tale of personal expe¬
rience which made the
greatest impression.
Roger Louis, who planned
the programmes, went out
to study rural problems on
the spot. In three districts
Tardenois, Brie and Cham¬
pagne^ he talked to the local people and asked them :
"What isn't going right in your part of the world?" The
men and women he questioned represented a wide range
of occupations, age-groups, financial and social positions
and cultural levels. He spoke to teachers and parish
priests, veterinary surgeons and doctors, shopkeepers and
managers of co-operatives. Taking to the big farmers,
farm labourers and small farmers, he tried to pin down
the main features o'f rural difficulties.
As the districts concerned were so poverty-stricken, it
was decided that the programmes should deal above all
with the problem of the poorest farms the most numer¬
ous and should be aimed particularly at the small
farmers, explaining to them the need for modernization
and showing how improvements could be made despite
difficulties such as the splitting up of land among many
owners.
The telecasts aimed to show that such efforts were
practicable, providing that modernization of equipment
went hand-in-hand with the use of agricultural credit,
the re-allocation of rural property, increased co-operation
and better conditions for women and young people. To
emphasize the gravity of the problem for small farmers
10
and for the nation as a whole, the series was called
"State of Emergency".
The success of "State of Emergency" was immediately
obvious from the tele-club discussions which followed each
transmission. At first, many teachers thought it unlikely
that the telecasts would stimulate such debates. "Coun¬
tryfolk will never dare to say what they think in front
of people from their own village," they said, "they are
inarticulate". But in all the tele-clubs, even in those
where it had previously been impossible to start any
discussions, the main themes of the 13 telecasts were
hotly debated. In some clubs, discussions went on until
two in the morning.
The debates and the information collected during an
opinion survey soon showed what the tele-club members
thought about the rural problems dealt with in the pro¬
grammes.
?bad for the land*
The ideas which the small farmers had about modern¬
ization of farm equipment, either on an individual
or a collective basis, varied considerably. Almost
everyone wanted' to buy if he did not already possess
them certain items of equipment now regarded as part
of the bare- minimum required for his work. Less than
10% of small farmers without such equipment were
against buying it.
The things which people considered as essentials varied
greatly: a farm building in a good state of repair, an
all-metal wheel plough, a reaper and binder, artificial
fertilizers, an electric motor or a diesel engine.
Then there was equipment which 10% to 30% of small
farmers did not wish to buy. Slightly over 10% of

The Unesco Courier
OVER FORTIES are more interested in telecasts on social problems than are young people. But
both age groups find common ground in approving news, outside broadcasts and studio plays.
UNESCO-Le Fauconnier
A - 1- 4T
4 \ ^\\
CLASSROOM BENCHES are hard but
tele-clubs usually have a "full-house".
Ut lESCO-Cassirc,
farmers were not interested in selected seed; about the
same number wished to buy it. The small farmers were
suspicious of artificial insemination, about one in three
being against this scientific method of stock-improvement.
The natural way, they said, was good enough for them:
"I've got a bull", "My neighbour has a bull", and so on.
Only about 10% wanted to repair dilapidated buildings.
The others thought it "useless" or "too expensive". About
85% of those questioned had no modern machinery such
as milking and separating machines, and close on 30%
were definitely against them.
While 80% of farmers had a bank account, as against
some 15% who did net want one, things like a progress
table or an account book were considered utterly useless
on a small farm: "Pointless." "I keep the accounts in my
head."
Opinion was much the same on the subject of tractors :
about 80% had none and barely 20% would like to buy
one. More than 30% were openly against them. When
asked how they would like to spend an extra
500,000 francs, an even more minute percentage of small
farmers (0,3%) said they would buy a tractor, while
16% said they would buy a car. Spending money on
the home (6%) also got priority over a tractor. All in all,
these small cultivators had a strong aversion for the very
machine most likely to raise agricultural output: "There's
no money for it", "I get along all right with what I
have", "The holdings are too small", or "'They're bad for
the land".
Perhaps if they clubbed together the small 'farmers
could buy and make good use of a tractor. But how do
they feel about co-operative undertakings, leaving aside
silos, cellars and wine presses which are not of equal
interest to farmers and wine-growers alike? The inquiry
showed, in fact, that something like 40% of all categories
did not belong to any buyers' co-operative, and less than
15% were keen to enter any such co-operative association.
Eighty percent had never heard of a users' co-operative
which could give them the use of such large and costly
machines as tractors.
When it same to domestic aid appliances, opposition
towards co-operation was even more marked. The idea
of a collective washing machine was unknown to or
rejected by 90%. Reasons most often given against co¬
operation were : "There aren't enough of us", "It wouldn't
pay", "I don't believe in it", and (in the case of the
collective washing-machine), "It's unhygienic".
Against sewage and water mains
If rural workers are to adjust themselves to the pro¬
gress of techniques and ideas, they stand in increasing
need of information and education. Nearly all of them
have joined or wish to join school extension associations.
Tele-clubs come under this heading. Yet, roughly 85% of
viewers live in villages where there are no young farmers'
groups, and only 40% thought that it would be useful
to found such a group.
How did the small farmers feel about the modernization
of public and domestic equipment? Among large com¬
munal undertakings, road and bridge building was their
first choice (22%), followed closely by the laying down
of a mains water supply (only 65% of the televiewers had
water laid on).
About 50% of people without running water wanted
it and the same proportion were in favour of
public sewage, yet about one quarter of the (Cont'd on
villagers did not want either main drainage or next page)
main water supply. The most stubborn oppo-
1 1

[TV TEST TUBE
1
J
FOUR MONTHS' RESULTS WERE
STRIKING-AND POSITIVE
sition came from small farmers: only 30% of them wanted
running water as against 65% of workers.
Though women are the first to suffer from lack of
domestic comfort, they were more hostile than men to
such schemes: 52% of men wanted running water as
against 36% of the women; 61% of men favoured public
sewage while only 36% of women wanted it. The argu¬
ments, whether justified or not, were always the same:
"The commune is too scattered", "The village is too
small", "We have no money for it", "'We get along all
right as we are", and so on.
Although 90% of the people have a wash-house, over
50% considered it quite inadequate. Nearly 95% have no
bath or shower, or are dissatisfied with what they have.
Yet barely 35% wanted to improve the wash-house and
only about 50% were anxious to install a bath or shower.
Here again, farmers are more strongly opposed than
workers, and women (37%) are less enthusiastic than men
(58%).
What reasons do they give for their objections? "The
village is too scattered", "There isn't any water", or, more
often, "That wouldn't work", "The brook isn't far off",
"I've lived in dirt and I'm not going to change now",
"Things are all right as they are".
In these, as in other rural areas, entertainments are
few and far between. For example, between 70% and
75% of the people questioned lived in localities with no
village hall or sports ground or said they considered
existing facilities inadequate. About 40% wanted "to do
something" about having a village hall and about 25%
wanted a sports ground. Both men and women equally
favoured a sports ground, but more men were in favour
of having a village hall. As could be expected, young
people under 25 years of age were the most enthusiastic
supporters of these projects 50% in favour of the sports
ground compared with 15% of persons over 40.
'Gas for cooking ? It might blow up'
Some expenditures aimed at modernizing the home met
with practically no opposition. This does not apply
to the coke cooking stove or the radio which
practically all homes (about 90%) already have, nor to
sewing machines owned by approximately 70% of viewers'
families. But 55% of those questioned have no water laid
on to the sink by means of a pump, or a tap feed from a
tank, and this was demanded by 50% of the people,
particularly the men.
About 40% are without butane gas, and only 20% of
those questioned, wanted to use it. Eighty percent have
no household sewage, and less than 50% wanted to install
it. As for washing machines of their own, 85% of viewers
had none and only 45% wanted one. Central heating is
practically non-existent and over half the people consider¬
ed it an unattainable ideal.
Generally speaking, workers were far keener on pur¬
chasing modernizing equipment than were the small
farmers. The lack of enthusiasm of the women for the
modernization of household equipment, though less mark¬
ed and consistent than for public equipment, still showed
them to be, more conservative than men.
Arguments against up-to-date household equipment
varied greatly : "Butane gas? It might blow up." As for
the electric cooker: "We have our wood for nothing", and
"There are breakdowns." Sewage: "What would I want
that for?" or "I've got a cess pit". Washing machines:
"They aren't perfect yet", "They're a luxury" or "They're
hard on the linen." Central heating: "That's all right
for the people of Paris", and so on.
12
The reasons behind these ideas and attitudes usually
fall into two categories: Either genuine, material obstacles,
and economic or geographical ones, or imaginary obsta¬
cles due to prejudices. Those in the second category
reflect indifference or conservatism towards technical
progress. ("We've been doing things like that for 20 years,
so why should we change now?") or asocial or anti-social
attitudes ("I have my own wash-house; the others can
look after themselves..."). In general, those based on real
obstacles only made up about 50% of the total.
Prejudice against building overcome
In any case, the title of the programme "State of
Emergency" was justified. Modernization is vital to
French agriculture and is an urgent national problem.
In every field mechanization or credit, the re-allocation
of the land and the situation of women in rural areas,
the community spirit, vocational training and the orga¬
nization of recreation for young people ignorance and
prejudice add their weight to genuine obstacles and slow
down the forces of progress.
How far did the series of telecasts succeed in uprooting
prejudice and in creating a constructive approach? As
the experiment lasted four months it would be unrea¬
sonable to suppose that centuries-old prejudices could be
broken down in this length of time. It would be still less
reasonable to expect education alone to create a new type
of mentality. This requires higher standards of living
and basic changes in the structure of rural life.
When the programme had ended, a second survey of
opinions was made, the same questions being put to the
same people. Comparisons between the two results
revealed the positive effects of "State of Emergency".
Reports, observations and statistical tables all agreed.
Most of the positive changes in attitude applied to the
repair of buildings or the building of new ones. Many
people, too, had changed their ideas about using artificial
fertilizer and about seed selection, and others, far fewer
in number, about the use of tractors.
But little change had been worked in the anti-co¬
operative ideas and there was still strong objection to
collective agricultural equipment. There was, however,
much more positive feeling among the small farmers, as
regards collectively owned cultural materials and resour¬
ces, as applied to after-school leisure activities.
Farmers wives stand to benefit
The most marked progress showed up in the small
farmers' attitudes towards domestic equipment
washing machines, housing repairs and the installa¬
tion of running water. It looks, therefore, as though
farmers' wives stand to benefit most from any improved
conditions stimulated by the TV programmes.
More positive ideas were to some extent noted among
persons in all age-groups, sexes and occupations. Most
striking was the change in attitude of those who had
previously been the most strongly opposed to or wary of
modernization. While they had certainly not all been
converted overnight, they had changed as a group more
than the other categories.
The experiments helped to give the lie to assertions
such as "country people take no interest in anything", or
"all they care about is making money". These village
people were shown to be keenly interested in the basic
problems of daily living. They are not loquacious but
their ideas, though often limited, are clear and consis¬
tent. Using this as a starting point, popular education,
popular culture and popular art should start their efforts
among such people to bring about a gradual im¬
provement in the level and scope of knowledge and skills.

The Unesco Courier
Its the talk
of the village
The first practical effect of the "State of
Emergency" telecasts was to stimulate
discussions and arguments in the village
tele-clubs often for the first timeon
the rural problems dealt with in the I 3 pro¬
grammes. Here, taken at random, are
some of the ideas expressed by the small
farmers and wine-growers during the
debates that took place in schoolrooms and
village halls.
Re-allocation of land ? We'd be expected
to give good land in exchange for rubbish!
together to buy a tractor ? If one
man handles It badly everyone has to pay
for the repairs!
No! we need to be less individualistic
and have some confidence!
In a co-operative a man is not working
for himself, but for his children and for
everyone in general!
machine for outside work is all right,
but the inside of the house can wait!
Improve the house equipment! We'd
look fine with a grand farm and no modern
equipment to work it with!
Why do young people drift to the towns ?
When they see that town-folk can rest from
Saturday to Monday, it tempts them!
once took four families to get in the
Harvest, now one lad can do it by himself!
13
