CEREMONIAL MASKS from different African regions form part of
unique collection in museum of Dundo, in Luanda region of Angola,
whose people, the Quiocos, are famous mask-carvers. Museum at
Taken from £/ Arte Negro by José Ocorio de Oliveira, published by Indice, Madrid, 1956.
Dundo, probably Africa's largest ethnographical museum, was founded
by Angola Diamond Company and has become a widely-used centre
for studies of African art and culture. It is considered unique in its field.

They stay close to the people
by Grace L. Morley
Amuseum has been called "a window on the world."
That it often is when it brings together the art or
science of the world at large for exhibition and
explanation in its own halls. But it can also interpret its
local scene or a limited subject, if used like a high-
powered lens to bring into clear focus and strong relief
characteristics and important features. Examples are
local museums everywhere and museums devoted to a
single theme.
Variations in museum development and programme,
however, are infinite, as a recent 70,000 miles round-the-
world trip to survey nearly 100 museums in 40 cities of
Africa, Asia, Latin America and Australasia revealed. Yet
despite the greatest diversity in aims and local conditions
and the contrasts in organization and programme, the
contribution museums make to contemporary society
stands out clearly.
Perhaps the most interesting examples of museum ser¬
vice to the local community are among those found in
British East and Central Africa. Museums here have
prehistory, natural science and ethnology collections, on
which an imposing amount of scholarly publication is
. based, but their exhibitions are planned to help directly
the local populations. For the foreigner from Asia or
Europe seeking to learn quickly about the people and the
country, they are the usual short-cut to knowledge, be¬
cause of their direct visual communication. But for the
African, who now uses them most, they have a broader
function: they provide a link with his own recent past
and they furnish an insight into the contemporary scien¬
tific world, drawing on it to help him in his daily life.
In the Rhodes-Livingstone Museum of Northern
Rhodesia daily concerts of African music on tribal
instruments, ceremonial costumes and traditional crafts
which have so largely disappeared as urban culture
spreads, represent for the African his ancestral arts and
traditions, honoured in a way to encourage his own
pride in them. The Zanzibar museum has exhibits on
the history and products of the island and models that
illustrate the best way to arrange farm buildings for
health and convenience, while the National
Museum in Bulawayo has health and
hygiene exhibits, designed to teach visually,
as well as sculpture from Zimbabwe and
costumes of the region. In Nairobi the
Corydon Museum presents vividly the
Cont'd
next page
TEACHERS' CLASSES and art
courses for more than 40,000 chil¬
dren drawn from Hawaii's schools
are chief features of The Honolulu
Academy of Arts' applied educa¬
tional programme. This art mu¬
seum In remote Hawaii is associa¬
ted with Honolulu's Bishop Mu¬
seum whose vast and world-
famous collections Illustrate folk¬
lore and culture of Pacific peoples.
Sato, Honolulu Academy of Arts
UP-TO-DATE SETTINGgreen,
grey and white colour scheme and
neon-lighted showcasesenhances
striking effect of ancient Congo art
In Museum of Native Life at Leo-
poldville, Belgian Congo. By pre¬
serving this old art, museum en¬
ables young artists to draw Inspi¬
ration from traditional cultures.
Lamote, Musée de la Vie Indigène
25

Close to the people (Continued)
story of prehistoric man in that region where he deve¬
loped early and left much evidence of his life, and com¬
pletes it by relating it to prehistory elsewhere. It has a
section on Bushman painting, and others on natural
sciences, but it also has exhibitions on timely subjects.
Important as is this function of interpreting the en¬
vironment, of serving as a teaching medium on science,
natural history and applied sciences, and as a link with
the industrialized life which is making such rapid pro¬
gress in the country, the museum as a preserver and in¬
terpreter of the traditional past probably has its most
important role to play in Africa's rapidly changing society.
Guardians of the Maori treasures
Museums in New Zealand, which have collections of
Maori arts and ethnology and architecture, likewise
have meaning for the original inhabitants of the
country, and bridge to some extent the long step from a
pre-European period to the present. Several of the
museums act as official custodians of Maori meeting"
houses, canoes, and other treasures which still retain
symbolic significance for the people, and they also accept
from Maori families guardianship of family ceremonial
treasures which, on occasion, are borrowed back for use
at some family function. The result is that the museums
are living places of pilgrimage and a part of the life and
pride of the Maoris.
Ethnological collections have importance in Africa and
New Zealand because of their meaning for the people
themselves, but in many places museums of ethnology
and those with collections of the related material of folk
and popular arts are valued sources for artists in develop¬
ing a national style and adding to national culture.
The Museum of Popular Arts in Lima has collected and
put attractively on exhibition fine examples of ceramics,
wood, metalwork and textiles from various parts of Peru.
Peruvian painters study them as well as local pre-
Columbian material, just as Mexican artists, in develop¬
ing their distinctive art, drew on their folk arts and
Aztec and Maya archaeology.
Humorous scenes from daily life
For the same reason, in Dacca, East Pakistan, a region
especially rich in popular arts, the new National
Institute of Art has provided exhibition space for
a museum of popular arts on a small scale, deliberately
planned to aid the young artists being trained there to
remain in contact with the arts of their own tradition
even while learning to take their place in the contem¬
porary international world of art. The toys of Bengali
children, the covers on which women stitched and quilted
geometric patterns or quaintly humorous scenes of daily
life in bright colored silks, the ceramics and brass work
used in the villages, all reflect a long tradition of decora¬
tion and have meaning in terms of contemporary design
for the life of Pakistan today. On the other hand, the
Museum of the Indian in Rio de Janeiro collects and
exhibits the popular arts of the peoples of the Amazon
and of other distant regions of Brazil, not yet much
touched by urban life, primarily to inform Brazilians
about the richness of the cultural patterns in their own
country and so bring it into the whole country's life.
Another example of a museum that remains close to
the people, but in a quite different fashion, is the Mu¬
seum Albert Sarrault in Phnom-Penh, Cambodia. It has
a great collection of Khmer sculpture including many
statues of the Buddha, and some of them are still vene¬
rated. The clusters of praying faithful here and there
in the shady halls of the great museum give a reality and
a sense of relation to life.
Everywhere museums respond in some fashion to local
needs and conditions. Those described here only a
few of the striking and unusual forms museum adapta¬
tion has taken in widely separated places are eloquent
evidence of museum use and usefulness.
DR. GRACE McCANN MORLEY has been director of the San Fran¬
cisco Museum of Art since 1934, prior to which she was Curator of the Cincin¬
nati Art Museum Ohio. Between 1946 and 1949, while on leave from the
San Francisco Museum of Art, she was Consultant for Museums to the
Unesco Preparatory Commission and later became Head of UNESCO's Divi¬
sion of Museums. She has written many articles on contemporary art and
Latin American civilizations and her books include, Le sentiment de la nature
en France dans la première moitié du xvm« siècle.
26
