MUSEUM V. EXPERTS. Panel of specialists
stares hard at 35,000 year-old-skull of woolly rhl-'
noceros, one of the unusual museum objects they
are asked to identify on popular B.B.C. telecast.
Copyright CO. I., London

Museums' telecast
with 5,000,000 fans
' ANIMAL, VEGETABLE, MINERAL ? '
by Paul Johnstone
Archaeology has never been so popular as it is in
Britain today. Archaeological discoveries are head¬
line news and the more important excavations have
crowds of interested visitors. University extension courses
and adult education classes in archaeology are hopelessly
over-subscribed. More volunteers than can possibly be
used wait to take part in digs. Serious books on the sub¬
ject printed in cheap editions sell in vast numbers.
This tendency has existed for some time but its most
striking encouragement has come in the last three years
from a television programme called "Animal, Vegetable,
Mineral ?". In this programme, three experts are con¬
fronted by a selection of unusual objects from a museum,
which they are asked to identify. The chairman, who sees
fair play, is a lecturer in archaeology at Cambridge Uni¬
versity, and a different museum supplies the objects for
each programme.
The critics gave the programme a cold welcome when
it started. Professors and fossils seemed an unlikely
source of entertainment, they said. Of what possible
concern could it be whether a bronze razor was B.C. or
A.D. But the public thought otherwise. There was a sense
of wonder at the uncanny skill of a man who could take
one look at a carved wooden idol and say which island in
the Pacific it came from, or date a stone tool by its shape.
There were the wild guesses viewers themselves made,
until told the answers, and then the drama of the gradual
approach of the experts, clue by clue, to the same.
Finally, there was the good talk. Good talk is a rarity
on television, but here it has every chance. The experts
do not have to rehearse, look at cameras, take cues or
undergo any of the normal tiresome restraints of appear¬
ing on television. They just have a good dinner together
and then sit round discussing a number of interesting
objects as they are passed from hand to hand, while the
cameras eavesdrop on their conversation.
Expert was right about the rapier
Today the programme has had one of the longest runs
of any on British television and evidence of its
popularity is the size of the audience some five
million people who "watch it regularly. Its two principal
performers are probably the best known academic figures
in the country. Dr. Glyn Daniel, the chairman, was
awarded in 1955 the annual silver medal of the Television
Society of Great Britain. Sir Mortimer Wheeler, the most
frequent member of the panel, was in 1954 elected Per¬
sonality of the Year by the Television Producers' Guild.
The museums too, some of which may have annual
attendance of only a few thousand, are delighted that
audiences of such size should see their treasures and lis¬
ten to some of the greatest authorities in the country talk¬
ing about them. Between fifty and sixty have now con¬
tributed to the programme and many have reported in¬
creased attendances after the programme, with numerous
enquiries for the objects seen on the screen.
But there is one aspect of the programme which mu¬
seum curators regard with a certain caution. A number
of times their identification of objects has been ques¬
tioned by the experts and subsequently altered. A typical
instance was a beautiful rapier which a museum said was
Spanish, early 17th century. When it was handed during
the programme to Sir James Mann, perhaps the greatest
expert on arms and armour in the United Kingdom,
30
he soon declared the hilt to be 18th Century, the blade
late 17th century, and the name of the maker inscribed
on it, by which the museum had dated it, to be a forgery.
Investigation after the programme proved him to be right
and the rapier now has an altered label in its showcase.
Curators of course, especially in smaller museums, can¬
not possibly have the specialized knowledge to check all
their collections themselves or the time to consult other
authorities except about the more important pieces. They
have therefore found the programme useful too for getting
a line on objects they cannot identify themselves. The
answer may come from the panel or from viewers.
¡Grandma's peeler and Viking's thimble
!
I
For instance there can only have been one or two
people in the whole country who could have helped '
one puzzled curator over a mysterious carved piece
of bone found with other Viking objects in Norfolk. For¬
tunately one of them was watching and was able to
inform the museum that it was an early type of Scan¬
dinavian thimble. On the other hand innumerable letters
were received about a 19th century mechanical potato
peeler. This was used for peeling apples, not potatoes,
many viewers declared, because they could remember
their grandparents using just such a machine for that
purpose.
The programme has had other repercussions too. A
national newspaper, conducting an enquiry into the
effect of television on reading habits, discovered from
librarians that this programme more than any other had
widened people's choice of books and encouraged their
reading of archaeological books.
Other papers have reported that volunteers at exca¬
vations and pupils of adult education and extra-mural
classes largely ascribe the awakening of their new interest
to the programme.
Then the Manchester Museum reports that casual finds
brought to them for identification and dating have more
than doubled since the programme started.
Finally the programme has considerable possibilities for
closer international understanding. Already museums from
Denmark, the United States, Ireland, Australia, France,
and Switzerland have safely and successfully contributed
articles from their collections to the programme and
visiting experts from America, Canada and Denmark have
appeared on the panel.
Similar types of programmes already exist or are
planned in France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Switzer¬
land and the United States. The first transatlantic
exchange programme, in which American experts, on
film, were seen discussing a group of objects immediately
after their British colleagues, in the studio, had done the
same, was a definite success.
Now we are planning to televise a programme of British
experts in a Dutch museum with a Dutch Television unit
sending the picture back via the Eurovision link to
Britain. This programme, which is planned for
November 1956, should be unique in various ways. It
will be the first time the programme has actually origi¬
nated in a museum in a country outside Britain.
We are also hoping to televise programmes from
museums in Belgium, France, Italy and Denmark. The

The Unesco Courier
programme from Denmark, we hope, will coincide with
the celebration of the centenary of the Danish National
Museum at Copenhagen in May 1957.
In the meantime we have developed another version of
the programme in which, instead of objects, details from
famous paintings are given to the experts to identify.
The viewer is first shown the whole of the picture, with
a detail marked in, and told what the picture is and by
whom. The experts are then shown the detail only, very
much enlarged, and asked to identify it.
We have already shown details from the National
Gallery in Washington and the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York, as well as British galleries. We have also
successfully applied the principle to architecture, giving
the experts details from famous buildings to identify.
But perhaps the most remarkable programme of the
last year was the occasion when the objects were provided
by the National Museum at Prague. They were after
wards put on display for ten days at the British Museum.
These international contributions are very vital to the
programme, for as it reaches its fifth vear with its
popularity apparently undiminished, it becomes more
than ever necessary to turn to other countries to maintain
the interest and appeal of the material that is shown.
Clearly the possibilities for using television in this way
to increase mutual understanding and appreciation of
other countries' art treasures and history are considerable
and it never ceases to be a subject of wonder and pleasure
to me that I should have had the privilege of starting
this programme and seeing it develop so remarkably.
Paul Johnstone launched the "Animal, Vegetable, Mineral ?" TV programme
in 1952, a year alter transferring to TV from the BBC. Overseas Service.
Other programmes which he has produced include "Hidden Treasure" which
takes televiewers on a treasure hunt of art and archaeology, "Modern Uni¬
verse" which illustrates man's discoveries, and "Up-to-date", a modern près,
entalion of historic events like the Battle of Hastings and the Great Plague.
COLLECTIONS IN THE KEEP
One of the largest provincial mu¬
seums In Britain is housed in the
Keep of the Norman Castle overlook¬
ing the ancient city of Norwich In
Norfolk. Over 1,000 people visit It
everyday. Photos on this page show
some of the many reasons for which
both the general public and special¬
ists use Norwich Museum. Above,
museum teacher and demonstrator
points out features of Museum's
Norman architecture to visiting school
children. Fearsome looking dragon
as " Snap " was used in
local civic processions from 1451 to
1835. Left, curator of another British
museum photographs some of the
600 teapots In the collection to illus¬
trate a book he has written on York¬
shire pottery. Right, two specialists
reconstruct ancient pottery they
found on site of Anglo-Saxon town
of Theodford (now Thetford) which
is some 30 miles from Norwich.
Copyright CO.I., London
P? /utà
31
