THE REAL
MYSTERY
OF EASTER
ISLAND
by Alfred Metraux
Photo A. Metraux. Copyright, Bishop Museum, Honolulu
GIGANTIC STATUES on Easter Island amazed Dutch voyagers who first saw them. Their leader, Jacob Roggeveen, wrote: "We could not
understand how a people deprived of stout spars and ropes could have raised them upright." A good 300 statues may once have dotted the island
but many, carved in soft stone, have disappeared. Some are over 30 feet high. Their purpose and mode of transport are still shrouded in mystery.
14

The Unesco Courier
A
§B
c
rA f' A* C
a1 SI Al UÄ (tf %
id #* A* 1 & Ä
X w X * £
V T « M *£
STRANGE HIEROGLYPHS have been discovered on Easter
Island. Most are engraved on wooden tablets (far left) or other
wooden objects such as fish (below). They depict human beings,
birds, fish, plants, shellfish and ceremonial objects but so far
no definitive evidence as to their meaning has been discovered.
Photos copyright Musée di- l'Homme, Paris
SIMILARITIES between Easter Island writing and that of
ancient China and the ancient Indus Valley civilization have been
noted by a Viennese scholar who concludes that Easter Island
writing had been transported to Pacific from Central Asia or
Iran via Southern China. In columns, on left, are (a) Indus
writing; (b) Easter Island symbols; (c) Ancient Chinese writing.
Drawing from "Die Ostennselschrift", by Heine-Geldern, Vienna, 1938
Ever since a Dutch vessel chanced
across it two centuries ago,
Easter Island, no more than a
speck in the vastness of the South
Pacific, has intrigued the world with
mysteries which have so far been
only partially and tentatively ex¬
plained. For long the principal
mystery of Easter Island lay in the
colossal statues which still dot the
bare slopes of the Rano-Raraku vol¬
cano and which once stood in far
greater numbers like sentinels over
the mausoleums along the seashore.
In my opinion the greatest "mys¬
tery" of Easter Island
is not to be found in
the crop of colossal sta¬
tues. There is no doubt
that it was the ances¬
tors of the present Po¬
lynesian inhabitants
who hewed out these
statues and dragged
them to their present
sites, abandoning tne
workshops where they
carved them perhaps
only three or four
centuries ago. How¬
ever, no one has yet
been in a position to
give a satisfactory ex¬
planation for what appears to be a
form of writing among a population
still living in the Stone Age.
This writing first came to light
around 1860 when the people of the
island, newly converted to Christi¬
anity, sent the Bishop of Tahiti, a
Monseigneur Jaussen, a long cord
braided from their own hair and
wound around an old piece of wood,
as proof of their devotion. Looking
casually at the improvised spool, the
Bishop Was surprised to see that it
was covered with small figures, all of
the same height and carefully ar¬
ranged in straight lines which re¬
minded him of Egyptian hieroglyphs.
He wrote to the missionaries on
Easter Island asking them to look
for other tablets and to try to deci¬
pher them.
Brother Eyraud, the first mis
sionary to go to the island, had
already noticed carved wooden sticks
in the huts while Father Sumbohm
had picked up a fragment of a worm-
eaten tablet. Seeing how interested
he was in this object, one of the
islanders brought him a large tablet,
perfectly preserved. . Since then,
other tablets have been found on the
island and now total 24, including
one large wooden rod covered with
hundreds of symbols.
At the time when the first, tablets
were discovered, it would probably
have been possible to obtain the key
to the mystery from the surviving
members" of the priestly caste. The
old civilization of Easter Island had
only recently collapsed as a result of
the raids made by Peruvian slave-
traders, but there were still a few
"wise men" who, had they been
questioned, could have explained the
meaning of the strange symbols
covering these tablets.
Unfortunately, the missionaries
were not skilful investigators. They
questioned the islanders who, at the
sight of the tablets, began to intone
chants, instead of "reading" them.
The missionaries treated them as
frauds and lost interest in the matter
after a few unsuccessful attempts.
Mgr. Jaussen, however, was more
persevering. In Tahiti, he found an
Easter Islander, called Metoro, who
had learnt the mysteries of the
tablets under a famous master. The
Bishop handed him a tablet and
asked him to "read" it. Metoro turn¬
ed it this way and that and suddenly
began to chant. He "'read" the
tablet from left to right, then from
right to left, without bothering to
turn it round, although in each line
the signs are upside down in relation
to that preceding or following.
Jaussen took down the text as
Metoro recited it, and his manuscript
has recently been published. If each
phrase is compared with the corres¬
ponding symbols, it appears that
what Jaussen had
taken to be a connect¬
ed text is simply a dis¬
jointed succession of
brief descriptions of the
symbols viewed by his
interpreter, and a se¬
ries of isolated words
or phrases suggested
by those symbols. There
is no logical develop¬
ment or general sense
in the chant or recital.
Mgr. Jaussen ended by
losing heart himself
and abandoned h i s
efforts to get to the
bottom of a mystery
which he might otherwise have
managed to unravel.
Other attempts Were made to
extract from the islanders inform¬
ation which might have made it pos¬
sible to fathom the system underlying
the symbols. On a visit to Easter
Island in 1886, an American paymas¬
ter, Mr. W. Thomson, was taken to
the house of an old man called Ure-
Vaeiko, who, in his youth, had attend¬
ed the school of the Tangata rongo-
rongo (singers or bards) and had
learnt to read the tablets. As it hap¬
pened, Ure-Vaeiko, having become a
good Catholic, did not wish to make
even a momentary return to the
former heathen practices, and fled.
He was recaptured one
stormy night in the open (Cont'd on
country, and finally con- next page)
sented to "read", if not

THE REAL MYSTERY OF EASTER ISLAND
(Continued)
the tablets themselves, at least photo¬
graphs of them. He had recognized
them by certain details and recited
their contents from end to end
without a moment's hesitation. It
was noticed, however, that he was
not paying attention to the number
of symbols in each line and, worse
still, that he did not even notice it
when the photographs before him
were surreptitiously changed. He
went happily on reciting hymns and
legends until he was accused of being
a fraud.
Responsibility for these lost oppor¬
tunities lies, not with the islanders,
who appear to have acted in good
faith, but with the early investigators,
who were incapable of imagining a
system of writing different from their
own and were bent at all costs on
having the tablets "read".
During my stay on Easter Island in
1934-35, I tried to discover, in the
memories of my informants, some in¬
dication, however vague or apparently
insignificant, which might have put
me onto the right track ; but it was
all useless. The people assured me,
indeed, that the tablets were similar
to the "cat's cradle" patterns, each
of which suggests a chant to the
viewer. This interpretation tallied
with the attitude of the natives of
the last century who, when asked to
"read" the tablets, simply recited a
poem or intoned a chant. I conclud¬
ed that the tablets were mnemonic
pictographs used in reciting the
genealogies and long sacred hymns
which form a very large part of the
Polynesian liturgy. I was all the more
inclined to this interpretation be¬
cause, in the Marquesas, which are
probably the original home of- the
Easter Islanders, the singers or bards
associate their liturgical poems with
small fibre pouches from which hang
thin knotted cords. It was therefore
possible that each symbol on the
tablets represented a sentence, a line
or even a stanza.
Two script sleuths
This, then, was the supposition at
which I arrived and which was
accepted by other ethnographers.
However, I have been less sure that
my interpretation is correct since a
letter from a German anthropologist,
Dr. T.S.Barthel, suggested to me that
it was something far more complicated
than mere picture-writing, and that
the system used by the Easter Island¬
ers was a real script, partly ideogra¬
phic and partly phonetic, employing
the rebus in somewhat the same way
as the Mexican and Maya scripts. It
consisted of symbols indicating the
general meaning of a sentence and
suggesting a number of catchwords.
It will be impossible to decide whether
the long-standing riddle has finally
been solved until Dr. Barthel's book
is published, but his findings are con¬
vincing and decisive progress seems
to have been made towards decipher¬
ing these texts.
No article on the "hieroglyphs" of
Easter Island would be complete
without some reference to the com
parisons drawn by Mr. Hevesy, a Hun¬
garian linguist, between certain of
the Easter Island symbols and those
of a still undeciphered script which
has been discovered among the ruins
of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, two
ancient cities of the Indus Valley
where a brilliant civilization flourish¬
ed some six thousand years ago.
Link with the Lolo ?
An Austrian scholar, Professor Hei¬
ne-Geldern, considers it doubtful
whether there is a direct
connexion between these two scripts,
since the number of symbols differing
is greater than that of the symbols
which are similar. His archaeological
research had led him to believe that
the Polynesian civilizations originated
in China, and it was therefore in that
country that he sought the first begin¬
ning of this system of writing. Com¬
paring the symbols of the Indus cities
and Easter Island with those of the
ancient Chinese writing with which
we are familiar through inscriptions
on shells and bones dating back to
2,000 B.C., he found that some of the
symbols were common to all three
scripts. He concluded that the writ¬
ing of Easter Island had been trans¬
ported to the Pacific by a people from
Southern China, having a system of
writing which must have originated
in Central Asia or Iran.
Heine-Geldern has also compared
the Easter Island writing with the
pictographs which are still used
among the Cuna Indians in Panama,
while the famous prehistorian, Dr.
Koenigswald, has pointed out similar¬
ities between the Easter Island sym¬
bols and certain drawings on fabrics
found in Indonesia. An Argentine
scholar, Dr. Imbelloni, has compared
the Easter Island symbols with scripts
found in Ceylon and with that of the
Lolo of South China.
I think it is fairly easy to dis¬
cover startling similarities between
scripts of the pictographic type. The
very fact that it is so easy should put
us on our guard. Whatever the true
nature of the symbols on the tablets,
it is certain that the scribes who
made them sought their models in
the natural and cultural environment
of Easter Island.
To me, all the indications seem to
be that the writing of Easter Island
was invented in that remote little
island, probably on the basis of some
mnemonic system brought by the an¬
cestors of the Easter Islanders from
their original home. If it is proved
that these symbols are indeed hiero¬
glyphics which can be "read," then
the Easter Islanders, who have
already amazed the world by the qua¬
lity of their art and the impressive
proportions of their monuments, could
claim the additional honour oí hav¬
ing made a decisive step forward in
the development of civilization.
Alfred Metraux's career as a practising ethnologist
has taken him over most of Latin America and
the South Sea islands. He is the author of a
book on Easter Island, due to appear in English
in October.
FANTASTIC FIGURES and symbols were
found carved on rocks at Easter Island in 1934
by a Franco-Belgian research expedition which
included Dr. Metraux. Stylé and subject of
carvings (below) are often same as those on
Island's mysterious wooden tablets showing
human beings, fish and turtles. Cliffs at
Orongo village contain many carvings of
"bird-men" (above). Village was once centre
of a "bird-man" cult. Carvings were outlined
with chalk before they were photographed.
Top photos Alfred Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum,
Honolulu
Bottom photos copyright Prof. Henri Lavadery, Brussels
16

The Unesco Courier
' éfíjrW'»** "*
r:
LIKE FALLEN SKITTLES, giant statues of Easter Island lie
scattered on soil or half-buried in earth. Time and rude climate
have eaten away much of the statues made of soft stone. When
European navigators visited island two centuries ago many statues
were still upright. Some had red-coloured cylinder-shaped stones
on their heads. Drawing below, made on spot by member of
Captain Cook's expedition to South Seas in 1774, is only exist¬
ing document showing how island looked nearly 200 years ago.
Photos A. Metraux, copyright Bishop Museum
Drawing copyright British Maritime Museum, Greenwich
W^JÄKTm.*'-: ,
17
