THE HUMAN SIDE
OF PROGRESS
by Luther H. Evans
Director-General of Unesco.
r-p-i ECHNicAL assistance to the so-
^ J_ called underdeveloped coun-
^Lm ^f^^m ^B tries has been referred to as
^m ^^^Ê 1 "the great hope of the 20th cen-
^1 *^^L9 ^M tury". The initial enthusiasms,
^^ mm^ ^H however, which characterized the
^^^^^_ ^H launching of this great pro-
^L^L^L^L^k ^^k gramme, whether in the form of
^^^^^y T^LU bilateral or regional national
agreements or through the United
Nations and the Specialized
Agencies, has been associated recently with an increasing
concern with what such a programme does to the human
beings and to the societies at the receiving end of
Technical Assistance.
Many people and many organizations have undertaken
a reappraisal of both the goals and the methods of the
"bold new programme," drawing our attention to what
has been called "the human cost of progress," and raising
the question of how this cost can be reduced or at least
can be kept within reasonable limits.
As we look back now on a good many years
of collective experience in this field, we
cannot fail to be struck by the errors we
could have avoided and the time and energy
we could have saved, if we had started out
with an adequate knowledge of the culture
into which an innovation was introduced.
Too often we have assumed that i'f something
was obviously good and acceptable to us, it
would prove to be equally good and
acceptable to others.
A school for the training of nurses, for
example, is set up in a particular region, and
then it is discovered that the attitude
toward nursing is such that "respectable" girls will not
enrol; courses are instituted for instruction in agricul¬
tural techniques in a community where long-stand¬
ing tradition is opposed to the tilling of the soil, etc.
These are perhaps extreme examples, but in varying de¬
grees we have proceeded without sufficient concern for
the value systems of others. It was, I believe, George
Bernard Shaw who suggested a revised version of the
Golden Rule, which would read somewhat as follows : Do
not unto others what you would have others do unto you.
Their tastes may be different!
It seems to me that a knowledge of motivations,
particularly economic motivations, is primary and essen¬
tial. What makes people work ? "What kinds of incentives
will make them work harder, produce more ? What kinds
of work do they like and why ? .How do they rank the
various occupations open to them ?
These questions are not always easy to answer, even
within a culture with which we are reasonably familiar.
Interviews with Western workers indicate that their
choice of occupation is by no means always determined by
practical economic motives. Other factors such as
pleasant companionship, working hours, attractive
surroundings, prestige, and the feeling of accomplishment,
may be much more powerful in many cases. When we
compare different cultures the variations are even more
striking. In some cases the prestige motive is so strong
as to override all others.
In parts of Africa, for example, it is reported that an
improvement in methods of breeding and caring for
cattle has resulted not in bringing more cattle to market,
but merely in the accretion of ever larger herds in order
to prove one's superiority over others. A knowledge of
the nature and strength of such motivations may help us
to predict the results of any change which we are plan¬
ning to introduce, and in that way pave the way for more
intelligent and effective action programmes.
Economists and administrators in many parts of the
world have become increasingly concerned with motiva¬
tions, and in some cases have even called in the survey
expert to give them the necessary background informa¬
tion. To cite only one instance, the United ' States Gov¬
ernment during the last War arranged for a survey to
be conducted on the factors which influenced Americans
to buy War Bonds. The interviews showed
a wide variety of motives to be operative,
and a new War Bond campaign, based on
this information, resulted in a definite
Increase m sales. There is no reason to
believe that a knowledge of motivations in
other societies and under other conditions
should prove less fruitful.
Our present concern is with motivations in
zonnexion with change, technological change.
The prevailing attitudes toward change
represent an area in which we are in need of
background data. Some cultural groups ac¬
cept change, almost any change, more
readily than do others; all cultural groups
are likely to accept change in some fields more readily
than in others. Anthropologists have discussed this
problem in some detail in connexion with the general
phenomenon of acculturation or cultural contact, but here
too their findings need tp be supplemented by data
referring to larger social units.
Psychologists have conducted investigations of resist¬
ance to technological change, but almost exclusively in
countries already highly industrialized; they have studied
resistance to further changes among people accustomed
to a complicated technology. We need to know more
about resistance to technological change on the part of
relatively unindustrialized com¬
munities why there is resistance,
under what conditions, to what
extent, and to what kinds of
change. This would be a fertile
field for further investigations by
social scientists which should
yield the practical guidance
which we require.
In overcoming resistance to
technological change there can
be little doubt that a major rôle
12

The Unesco Courier. Fcbiuary 1956
BREE
should be a step ahead of the surrounding culture ; they
should be adapted to the situation which is coming rather
than to the one which is here. This may entail certain
hardships, at least for a time. Schools and universities
may turn out Bantus or Egyptians or Brazilians with
advanced training as technicians or teachers in numbers
greater than can be absorbed by existing opportunities,
and some of these will unfortunately find themselves in
occupations far below the level for which they are fitted.
is played by the school, and by other, related, educational
influences. That is why we have always operated on the
assumption of a close and intimate relation between
unesco's programme in the field of education funda¬
mental education, primary and secondary schools, adult
education, etc. and the whole programme of Technical
Assistance. The school has rightly been described as the
connecting link between the old and the new culture. It
provides new skills and techniques ; opens up new horizons
of action; adds new values, and modifies pre-existing
attitudes. Through children it influences the adults and
therefore the community as a whole. Some concrete
evidence of the influence of the schools is furnished by
reports from Africa (by Meyer Fortes and Margaret Read)
which indicate that a large proportion of the boys who
attend school move to the cities to work for wages; it
appears that there is a direct relation between the amount
of schooling and the frequency of such migration.
Danger of wasted skills
At a more advanced level technical and university
training, whether at home or abroad, is beginning
to provide a group of leaders in many countries (the
French refer to them as évolués) who play a special rôle
as intermediaries between the old culture and the new.
Sometimes they are in competition with traditional leader¬
ship ; sometimes they find themselves uprooted and
insecure in their position. Frequently, however, they play
an important rôle as interpreters of the new technology
and as teachers of others in their community. Frequently
too they develop a deep sense of their mission as inter¬
preters of the new way of life. We have been so im¬
pressed by the potential importance of this group that
our Social Sciences Department is conducting a series of
studies of actual and potential leaders in various regions
of Africa, and we are now extending the investigation to
include the role of feminine leaders. It is quite possible
that women in such a position may prepare the way more
easily than men for some kinds of technological change.
We have all been reminded on many occasions of the
difficulties and dangers inherent in the direct transplan¬
tation of an educational system developed in one area
into another quite different cultural and economic
context. Certainly the schools must serve the needs of
the community, and be adapted to those needs. For this
reason we have welcomed and co-operated in the creation
in Brazil of a National Centre for Educational Research,
which is directed towards this very end of reorganizing
the Brazilian education system in order to make it fit
the present conditions of Brazilian life, with all its local
and regional variations.
At the same time we venture to suggest that the schools
Their very existence may, however, lead the way to
further progress and may help to bring on the next stage
of technological change. There is a dilemma here, since
no one wishes to see training go to waste, but it still seems
to me that the schools have the special function of point¬
ing the way to further progress.
It is difficult to over-emphasize the importance of the
educational process in technological change, when we re¬
member that resources in raw materials go to waste if
there are no adequate resources in trained personnel.
Economists have recognized the fact that in assessing the
real wealth of a community the range and extent of the
skills possessed by its men and women are of the greatest
importance. Whatever we can do to add to those skills
represents a contribution of present or potential wealth.
We in Unesco have recognized this fact by devoting a
considerable proportion aï our fellowships, in the Ex¬
change of Persons programme, to precisely this purpose of
adding to the skills of nationals from relatively unin¬
dustrialized countries.
All old ways 'go west'
It is sometimes argued that technological change de¬
stroys indigenous cultures, that it replaces many diffe-
rent traditional ways of life by one way the Western
way, that it will mean eventually the loss of all the rich¬
ness and variety which at present characterize the civili¬
zation or civilizations of the world. Since we in unesco, as
well as in the United Nations family generally, profess
respect for the values of all cultures, do we not run the risk
of endangering precisely those values by substituting for
them those which inevitably accompany technological
change? Should we not devote our skills to the preserva¬
tion of those cultures, rather than contributing, whether
we wish it or not, to their eventual disappearance ?
To these difficult questions I would propose the follow¬
ing answers. Of course we are interested in the preserva¬
tion of the cultural contributions of all peoples of the
world. Within unesco we are working toward this end.
We are doing what we can to make the world aware
of the artistic and philosophical achievements of cultures
with which most of us are not sufficiently familiar. We
Q^SEs
13

TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE
(Continued)
are committed to the belief in
the value of cultural diversity.
At the same time we must face
the fact that in many parts of
the world technological change
is necessary for the improvement
of living conditions, if not for
survival: We must also face the fact that with the
increase of contact and communication among the peoples
of the world, technological change is inevitable. iWe do
not have the possibility of keeping each tribal culture fully
intact on a kind of reservation. We have rather the alter¬
native between technological change which is haphazard
and mechanical, and one which is based on a knowledge of
pre-existing cultural values, and on a genuine desire to
preserve them, as far as possible, in the new framework.
This is not an impossible goal, but it is by no means
easily achieved. A change in one aspect of the culture
may have repercussions on other aspects : there are
"chain effects" which have consequences far beyond those
originally envisaged.
One of our publications, prepared by the World Federa¬
tion for Mental Health under the editorship of Margaret
Mead, deals precisely with this question of "Cultural
Patterns and Technical Change," and shows how under
certain conditions technological change may be intro¬
duced in a manner to fit the prevailing culture. Professor
Raymond Firth in his book on "Social Changes in the
Western Pacific" shows the possibility of maintaining
community solidarity in spite of the rapid economic chan¬
ges which have occurred. In any case there is no reason
to assume that the arts must necessarily fly
out of the window as soon as technological
change darkens the door. There are still
some people who write poetry in London or
New York, or paint their pictures in Paris
or Sao Paulo or Sydney and Melbourne!
The second source of concern over techno¬
logical change is closely related to the first.
The words "social implications" have some¬
times been used as if they necessarily
referred to harmful consequences increased
disorganization, disruption of the normal
lines of authority, maladjustment, delin¬
quency and crime, mental disorder, etc.
Since industrialization has usually meant
also urbanization, there has been some tendency to blame
these unhappy phenomena on the rapid growth of new
cities, which draw off the surrounding rural populations
into a situation where the old regulations no longer apply.
Without the restraint of the mores and public opinion,
the individual may find himself adrift without proper
bearings, and antisocial behaviour may be a result.
This may happen ; in fact, it has happened in many
places. It should be pointed out, however, that in some
cases the frequency of such behaviour has beenexaggerat-
ed. A recent report by the International Research Office
on the Social Implications of Technological Change in¬
dicates that the statistics for delinquency and crime
sometimes give a wrong impression because the alleged
misdemeanours may be explained by the temporary con¬
flict between two sets of standards of behaviour, and not
represent acts of far-reaching importance or consequence.
More significant from our present standpoint is the fact
that urbanization, even rapid urbanization, is not ne¬
cessarily accompanied by such
phenomena. There are new
African cities which show a great
deal of crime and delinquency,
and others that show very little.
It would be most helpful if we
could have detailed studies of
such contrasts which would bring
into relief the differentiating
conditions in the two situations,
and enable us to discover why
things went wrong in one case
and not in the other. We should
look at both the sucessful and
unsuccessful cases of adjustment
to technological change in order
to get a balanced picture.
A few years ago, Mr. Nehru,
speaking at a conference on
community projects, pointed out
that advice given from outside,
even good advice, was not always
welcome.
"We have got into the habit"
he said, "of doling out good advice to everybody, to the
country, to our people... Obviously it is necessary to plan,
to direct, to organize and to co-ordinate, but it is even
more necessary to create conditions where spontaneous
growth from below is possible and can take place."
The United Nations and the Specialized Agencies had a
somewhat similar point in mind when they set up a very
broad programme of community development with all its
ramifications. It is when local communities themselves
become identified with new techniques, aid in their de¬
velopment and application, take responsibility for their
success, that the changes introduced have the best chance
of being fully adapted to the local situation. Indeed, one
might almost go so far as to say that the main criterion
for the success of any project is the degree of involvement
at the grass roots level ; the capacity of the people to
carry it forward after outside assistance has ended. .
In connexion with Western technology we have been
hearing a great deal lately about "human relations in in¬
dustry," which represents an attempt to take
into account the personal or social relation¬
ships within a factory or other industrial
enterprise in order to improve its function¬
ing. One of the aspects of this approach
which seems to me to be most pertinent to
our present discussion is the demonstration
that it is much easier to have a new tech¬
nique adopted and successfully applied if the
workers themselves have a voice in the
decision, if they are consulted in advance
instead of being presented with a fait accom¬
pli. It then becomes their decision, and
they react accordingly.
There is always danger in generalizing
from one cultural situation to another, but I venture to
suggest that here we are on relatively safe ground. To
the extent that a society adopts a new technique after
consultation, it will be more likely, other things being
equal, to see it through. When, as so often happens in
the contacts between relatively untrained local workers
and visiting experts, feelings of inferiority are developed
by the discrepancy in skills, the workers may gain self-
respect and dignity if the "human relations" aspects of
their jobs are given due consideration.
Human relations become complicated, in many situa¬
tions, by race relations. Here the position of unesco
and of the other United Nations agencies is clear and
unequivocal ; there is no place in our Organizations for
prejudice or discrimination.
It is, however, possible that we have not always been
successful in choosing for technical assistance missions
or for other related assignments individuals who have
been entirely free from such attitudes. It seems to me
most important that the people we send to represent us
in other cultures should have a wholesome respect for
ways of life different from their own, should be able to
forget distinctions of race, and to contribute by their own
example to a better understanding between the peoples
brought into intimate contact through the process of
industrialization.
This article is taken from an address given by Dr. Luther
Evans to the Australian Library Association at Brisbane, on
August 22, 1955.
14
