A STRIPED POSTER SAYS 'COME INSIDE'
Wherever you may happen to be this autumn
your eye is likely to be caught by a poster
with a bold black curlicue superimposed on
bright stripes of yellow, red and blue. That poster
will be like an international flag flying in the four
corners of the world all through the second week
of October, 1956. It signals Museums Week, the
International Campaign for Museums sponsored by
unesco, and taken up by one after another of the
member nations.
Each country knows the value of museums,
"symbols", as Mr. Stephen Thomas, Chairman of
the U.S. Committee for the International Campaign,
has said, "of culture and knowledge dedicated to
the use of the people." For the scholar and
student, the object matter stored and provided for
his research and study; for the teacher and educa¬
tionalist, the concrete and vivid adjunct bringing all
forms of education to life; for the child, the spark
lighting first wonder and curiosity; for the ordinary
citizen, that value of a museum most often for¬
gotten, least mentioned, and perhaps most impor¬
tant of allpleasure, delight, the joy of knowledge
and beauty drawn for him from
all the corners of the world.
MtJtMIt-iMI iEach country, therefore,
according to its capacity, is
making an effort to bring these
values home by building some
sort of programme around
Museums Week this October.
Some cannot manage much,
but even those with few
resources are planning to
display the unesco poster and
leaflets, and organize a com¬
petition for children's drawings
as part of the big international
competition sponsored by
unesco, as well as arranging for
special lectures and radio talks.
The importance of museums
to the national life of a country
can be seen from the number
of new museums, or new
galleries in existing museums,
which will be opened in the
course of Museums Week.
They will include a school
science museum in Ceylon, a
new Science Museum in Buda¬
pest, a new art section and a
new archaeological section in the Jerusalem Mu¬
seum in Israel, the foundation of a children's mu¬
seum in Hungary, and two new museums in India,
one of them being founded on the spot where the
revelation of Gautama the Buddha's religious voca¬
tion took place.
Some countries, like Greece, Japan and the Ne¬
therlands, are marking the occasion by publishing
guides and much-needed catalogues; others are
showing new acquisitions. In the United States, for
instance, where over two hundred museums are
taking part in the campaign, the Metropolitan
Museum of New York is opening a new gallery for
its collection of armour, while in Italy, a Marconi
hall will be inaugurated, complete with manuscripts,
instruments, and other objects of interest. Others
again, are organizing special exhibitions. In Bolivia
there will be a display of archeological material from
Peru and north Argentina in the museum at La Paz.
Hungary is holding a Rembrandt exhibition, and
Iraq, remembering the needs of villagers and Be¬
douins, is sending round a travelling exhibition of
antiquities which is based on the theme of "Writing
its invention and development".
The use of the museum to emphasize community
INTERNATIONAL
CAMPAIGN
FOR MUSEUMS
services and promote international understanding
is stressed in a number of American displays. The
Cleveland Museum of Art has organised a big exhi¬
bition entitled "Art, the Universal Language", and
with the co-operation of widely assorted bodies
another American museum, the Canton Art Institute
in Ohio, is arranging sets' of children's drawings to
be exchanged for similar sets from Mexico City,
Japan, Israel, and Ave South American countries.
Countries are borrowing ideas from each other.
There must be many who remember the charm of
the mid-day concerts held in the National Gallery
in England during the war. A large number of
museums are organizing concerts as part of Cam¬
paign Weekin particular both France and Poland
are inaugurating the whole Campaign Week with a
performance of Darius Milhaud's "Cantata", the one
at the Louvre in Paris, the other at Warsaw, where
the National Museum is being reopened for the first
time since the War. Receptions are being held at
the Louvre and the old Hotel de Lauzan in Paris,
while London is starting the week off with a big
reception at the National Gallery held under the
auspices of the Queen Mother.
For some years the Louvre
has made a practice of illu¬
minated displays at its Friday
night openings, and visitors
from all over the world have
gone home to talk about the
wonder of the Winged Victory
gleaming white against black
shadow, and the sudden beauty
of a small Egyptian figurine
lit up like a jewel. A number
of museums have taken a leaf
out of the Louvre's book, and
are celebrating Museums Week
by opening at night. Bolivia is
running evening opening from
8 to 12 p.m., as well as flood¬
lighting the museum; so is
Japan, and also the Arnhem
Museum in Holland.
. IMUIMlti.MII. 111.. »11 -it-
HV WMUK-im OF I NKSCll
19 3 6
Many museums have consi¬
dered the Biblical injunction
"Cause them to come in". A
number of them, as in Greece,
Israel and Japan, are institut¬
ing free entrance to their mu¬
seum for that week ; special
stamps, special post-cards, illu¬
minations, all play their part. In Paris there is a
museums display from the provinces displayed in an
underground station (see opposite page) ; in Ame¬
rica shop-windows are being used. In some places
school-children are being taken to special displays;
in others special displays are being prepared and
taken to school-children.
The brightly striped poster with its black curlicue
will be everywhere the second week in October. It
signals Museums Week. It signals, to every passer¬
by, an added richness in his life which, maybe, he
has refused, maybe, overlooked; and maybe, will
now accept.
MUSEUM
The International Review for Museums, published by
UNESCO
Annual subscription (4 Issues) . S5.00 21/- 1.000 fr.
Each number	 S 1.50 6/- 300 fr.
Enquiries and subscriptions should be sent to: Sales
Division, UNESCO, 19, avenue Kléber, Paris (XVI
22
