TUE world of tomorrow will be aJL peaceful ne supp rting two or
three times its present population
only if the courage and the determina-
tion of all those who are seeking new
knowledge-especially the men of
science-are mobilized today.
Scientific discoveries are no longer
the monopoly of a privileged elite whose
members used to meet regularly in the
academies of Europe. The great discov-
eries of our time, rather than being the
fruit of the work of a group of scientists
in a given centre, are usually the sum
total of fragmentary results achieved by
scientists on every continent. This geo-
graphic expansion of science, however,
has complicated the problem of co-
ordinating research. It was primarily
40
in order to tackle this problem that
UNESCO established its network of
science co-operation offices. In Monte-
video, Cairo, Delhi and Jakarta, these re-
gional offices have become important
factors in the scientific life of three
immense areas of the world : Latin Ame-
rica, the Near East and southern Asia.
Meagre resources
and total disorder
CREA TED to encourage internationalexchanges and to combat the iso-
lation of universities and labora-
tories they have already supplied a
remarkable impulse to scientific work in
the three regions which they serve.
This is no cause for complacency.
Scientific research must travel a long
road before it is equal to the possibilities
- to say nothing of the needs-of our
modern world. For that matter, research
has never really been well organized in
the past-except for war and destruc-
tion."We worship research", a great
thinker and scientist who recently died
declared a few years ago,"and yet
narrow-mindedness, meagre resources
and total disorder are still the lot of
present-day research."
With the help of international scien-
tific organizations, UNESCO has at least
been able to encourage and co-ordinate
research in certain key fields, such as
nuclear physics and the development of
the world's arid zones.
UNESCO brought into being the

S. T. E. P. and Esso.
European Organization for Nuclear
Research and the Organization is now
constructing a laboratory near Geneva.
The 12 nations which founded this
Organization under UNESCO sponsorship
contribute to its annual budget of several
million dollars. Huge accelerators will
be built for research in high energy
particles to add to basic knowledge of
the structure of the atom.
Another international laboratory, the
International Computation Centre, is
being created in Rome. Similar steps
will probably be taken over the next
few years in such specialized branches
of science as cell growth (a contribution
to cancer research) or in developing the
use of radio-isotopes in physics, chemis-
try and biology.
The Unesco Courier
zone research is among the major
projects upon which, it is proposed,
Unesco should concentrate its efforts
and resources for the next five or tcn
years if need be. This is UNESCO's
answer to the recent warning of one of
the scientists collaborating in its arid
zone programme :"Up to the present, the
desert has kept the upper hand and we
have not been able to halt its advance.
Most of the work already accomplished
has been qualitative rather than quanti-
tative : we have still to establish a co-
ordinated research programme capable
of meeting the situation."
UNESCO has also launched research in
other fields. An advisory committee
on the ocean sciences has been set up to
apply our basic sciences to oceano-
graphic study. By grouping together
physicists, chemists, biologists or geolo-
gists for the study of specific problems,
UNESCO may contribute to the develop-
ment of fishing industries or the tapping
of plant and mineral resources in the
oceans. But it will also encourage
additions to human knowledge in a field
where unbelievable gaps still exist.
Hidden wealth of
oceans and forests
SCIENTIFICALL Y speaking, no oceanhuas ever really been studied and
there are great stretches of the
Indian Ocean and the South Pacific
which remain completely unexplored.
During a meeting called by UNESCO at
Tokyo in 1955. one oceanographer re-
called the eternal, universal attraction of
the sea."The study of the oceans,"he
added."is a source of wealth for man."
Other scientists have found equal wealth
in chemistry or in geology or in the
study of virgin forests. The goal of
every branch of science is to conquel
the world, not through violence but
through knowledge.
To scientists, the 15 million square
miles of humid tropical zone also rep-
resent unknbwn territory, even in cases
where they are overpopulated. They
make up one-third of the world's useable
land area, but the study of soils and
forests and hydrological, botanical and
zoological research have barely scratched
the surface in these regions. Here,
too, it is quite clear that while local
economies will be the first to benefit
from research, the scientist must set his
sights higher than the improvement of
agricultural or industrial conditions.
The most urgent need of all is the need
for knowledge.
41
The problem of the world's unproduc-
tive wastelands has become an urgent
one in recent years and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations has clearly demonstrated the
need for solutions in the face of an
ever rising world population It has
often been repeated that"forest may
precede civilizations, but deserts follow
them". More than one-quarter of the
world's land area is now useless and the
desert is one of the greatest challenges
facing man and science.
Wind & sun energy
for fuel-poor lands
r-rHERE is no easy solution. First, thecausses f the lack rainfall must
be studied in each country facing
this problem. The geologist must step in
to analyse the structure of rocks and the
composition of soils and sands. Under-
ground water tables must be discovered
and a close study made of the plants
and animals which have adapted them-
selves for desert survival. Finally, full
use must be made of the energy of the
wind and the sun-the only natural
resources of fuel-starved lands, and
resources which have been virtually
ignored until now.
The problem of deserts and semi-arid
regions affects no less than 37 nations.
No single country can hope to carry out
all the research implied, but all countries
can benefit from the success achieved
by one. UNESCO's task is to encourage
research aimed at solving this problem
and to teach people to apply the results
of this research to their daily lives.
To halt the advance
of marching sands
T N 1951, UNESCO founded its AdvisoryCommittee on Arid Zone Research
to organize new research programmes
and to bring together information on re-
search already carried out. Meeting suc-
cessively at Ankara, Montpellier, Delhi,
Paris, and Tucson (Arizona), this com-
mittee has conducted symposiums in
subjects vital to the struggle against the
desert : hydrology, plant and animal
ecology, energy sources for arid zones
and soil study.
Over the past five years, UNESCO has
offered financial aid to centres and to
laboratories working to salvage arid or
semi-arid zones. This assistance will in
future be considerably expanded. Arid

THE'S'IN UNESCO
Links for world science
It can be said that international scientific activity is
guided today by two organizations-UNESCO and the In-
ternational Council of Scientific Unions (Icsu). Icsu was
set up in 1919 to co-ordinate research in pure science but
its activities were for long hampered by lack of funds.
It has gained new importance through work made possible
by the financial support it has had from UNEsco in the
past ten years, and today it is a centralizing link between
no less than 200 separate Unions.
When UNESCO came into existence some branches of
science still lacked a centralizing agency like Icsu. UNESCO
saw the need for councils on the Icsu pattern for the me-
dical and technological sciences and therefore helped to
establish the Council of International Organizations of
Medical Sciences in 1949 (50 members today) and the
Union of International Engineering Organizations in 1950
(13 members today). Together Icsu and these two newer
international bodies receive total annual subsidies from
UNESCO of about $200, 000 to assist them in their work.
Institute of the Hylean Amazon
As its first attempt to set on foot new kinds of inter-
national scientific co-operation UNEsco proposed to set up
an Institute of the Hylean Amazon. This region of South
America has never been explored in a co-ordinated or
systematic way. Tremendous research possibilities exist
there in many fields : types of wood suitable for building,
medicinal plants, geology, mineralogy and meteorology.
In 1947 eight states signed a convention stipulating that
the Institute would start work after five countries had
ratified it. These five ratifications were never secured and
the project ended in complete failure.
The basic idea, however, was later
revived in the form of a programme
of research for the humid tropical
zone (see next column).
WoHd's arid lands
In 1948 when it was proposed to
establish an Institute of the Arid
Zone, UNESCO, mindful of the lessons
of the Hylean Amazon project, exam-
ined the question cautiously. In
1950 it set up an Arid Zone Advisory
Committee which has since focussed
attention each year on one particular
problem concerning the world's arid
lands : hydrology, plant ecology, the
sources of power available in the arid
zone, particularly wind power and
solar energy, human and animal
ecology, and arid zone climatology.
Other activities have been encour-
aged including the preparation of
maps, and of reports on the purifica-
tion and use of saline water, dew
research, etc. The Arid Zone pro-
gramme is developing smoothly and
the project, important in itself, is
also a significant experiment in
international co-operation. Under
the leadership of the Arid Zone
committee, specialists in many lands
are put in touch with one another
42
through publications and at meetings such as the Wind
and Solar Energy Symposium at New Delhi in 1954 and
last year's meeting of arid zone specialists at Albuquerque,
New Mexico.
Humid tropical zone
Experience gained in launching the Arid Zone project
should serve to guide UNESCO in its new international en-
terprise relating to the humid tropical zone. Surveys of
institutes carrying out humid tropical zone research have
been made and a meeting of specialists engaged in this
type of research was held in March 1956 at Kandy (Cey-
lon), together with a symposium on methods of studying
tropical vegetation. Recommendations from the meeting
outlined the most useful areas for initiating and develop-
ing research. Other meetings of specialists and sympo-
siums will be held and fellowships for specialized training
in foreign institutes will be awarded to research workers.
Experts will be sent to those of UNESCO's member states
who make requests for them.
Exploring the vast oceans
Among deep sea areas we have little knowledge of the
South Pacific and still less of the Indian Ocean which, it
has been said, is less known to us than the surface of the
moon. But recent advances in the basic sciences give
hope that knowledge of the least explored regions of the
world's oceans can be developed, provided co-ordinated
use is made of the new techniques. In 1955, UNESCO set up
an Advisory Committee on Marine Sciences to study me-
thods of developing the scientific study of the ocean and to
supply information which would lead to increased use of
marine resources. It modelled this committee on the Arid
Zone Committee. The marine experts have since made
many suggestions as to where and how research could

The Unesco Courier
Science on show around the world
Few people would question the importance of science to society or the individual.
Yet educating the public in the achievements of modern science requires ways and
means which are not within the reach of all countries. Unesco has been able to support
the efforts of many governments to improve science teaching in schools. It has also
contributed to science education through articles in specialized publications and in
the general press, and through its travelling exhibitions which have well proved their
worth in all parts of the world.
The first of these exhibitions, (recent discoveries in physics and astronomy) toured
13 Latin American countries between 1950 and 1952. rit consisted of charts, photo-
graphs and also apparatus on which visitors could themselves conduct experiments.
Its success (13 countries visited, 470, 000 visitors) led to the organization of other
travelling exhibitions :"Our Senses and the Knowledge of the World", on display
for four years in the Far East (8 countries, 650, 000 visitors) ;"New Materials", first
shown on the shores of the Mediterranean before leaving for South America (7 coun-
tries visited since 1952, 630, 000 visitors) ;"Man Measures the Universe", touring
Europe since 195-4 (-4 countries, 200, 000 visitors)."Energy and its Transformations",
(photo, left) shown first in Paris in March 956 ; will tour the Far East for three years.
In addition to these exhibitions, each of which had demonstration apparatus
and which sometimes weighed as much as seven tons, Unesco organized a series of
exhibitions made up of photographic panels. These included :"Man Against the Desert"
(shown in Jerusalem in 1953) ;"Zoological Gardens-Wild Life and Mankind" (Indo-
nesia, 195-4) ;"Balance and Unbalance in Nature" (prepared with help from Unesco
by the International Union for the Protection of Nature) ;"The Construction of
Laboratory Apparatus for Schools" (Cairo, 1955).
most usefully be carried out. The use of an international
research vessel operated jointly by a group of UNESCO
Member States has been proposed.
Nations pool their resources
In 1950 UNESCO was asked'''to assist and encourage the
formation and organization of regional research centres
and laboratories."Out of this Conference resolution came
CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research,
now building an international laboratory for basic research
into the structure of the atom, at Geneva. (See below)
Another international laboratory project.'catalysed"
even earlier by UNESCO is the International Computation
Centre, but here progress has been disappointingly slow :
the convention establishing the centre in Rome still re-
quires ratification by five more countries to bring it into
force.
During the past two years UNESCO has been studying
problems involved in research into cell growth. Further
steps it now proposes in its programme for 1957/58 in-
clude : the encouragement of contacts between different
disciplines in the field of cell biology, symposia, fellowships
and research, the setting up of centres
for breeding pure lines of laboratory
animals and preparations for a regional
institute for the study of life under coin-
trolled conditions.
- *
Europe's Laboratory for Nuclear Research
Few governments can afford a major nuclear research programme
by themselves. It takes large, expensive and highly organized expe-
ditions to cross the frontiers of atomic science. The only solution is
international collaboration.
It was by being a catalyst for international scientific collaboration
that Unesco was able to bring into being the European Organization
for Nuclear Research and its research centre now being built at Meyrin,
near Geneva.
in n ! 950, Professor Rabi, Nobel prizewinner and member of the U. S.
delegation to Unesco's General Conference in Florence, defined the
idea of an international laboratory which has since found its place in
Unesco's doctrine of international co-operation. He urged that a
centre should be established in Western Europe and devoted to nuclear
research, pointing out that scientists in the U. S. A. and to a less degree
in the United Kingdom had at their disposal facilities which for financial
reasons were not available in the rest of Western Europe and elsewhere.
Professor Rabi urged that Unesco should try to combine nations in
regional groups so as to set up research centres comparable to those
existing in the U. S. A. He thought Unesco should serve as a catalyst
for world science, not operating research centres, but drawing up
preliminary plans and seeing they were satisfactorily carried out.
After several intergovernmental conferences called by Unesco, the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (usually referred to as
CERN from the French title of the temporary body that preceded it :
Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire) reached its final form in
a convention now ratified by 12 countries, which came into force at
the end of t954, after three years of preparatory work.
The CERN laboratory is not concerned with atomic energy, but with
basic research on the structure of the atomic nucleus. Study of the
mechanism and behaviour of nuclear forces is focussed on the very
high-energy particles found principally in cosmic rays which reach the
earth from outer space, but which can be created artificially by bom-
barding atomic nuclei with the help of giant machines called particle
accelerators.
So CERN set up teams of leading specialists from its Member
States to design two accelerators : a 600 million electron-volt synchro-
cyclotron and a 25 thousand million electron-volt proto-synchrotron.
The speed of the particles generated in the second accelerator will
approach the speed of light-the absolute ceiling. (See the Unesco
Courier special number on"The Promise of Atomic Power", No. 2,
1954 ; U. S. March, 1955).
This is the first international organization for scientific research
set up by an inter-governmental convention. Its 1956 budget
amounts to about 40 million Swiss francs and the cost of the building
premises and plant, about 200 million Swiss francs, is being contri-
buted by CERN'S 12 member states. The cyclotron is expected to be
finished by the end of 1957 and the more powerful proton-synchrotron
at the end of 1960. Photo, loft. shows one of the two energizing
coils of the synchro-cyclotron electro-magnet being placed over the
pole plates.
43

THE'S'IN UNESCO (Cont'd)
Explaining and teaching science
Since 1950 science teaching and dissemination has had
an important place in UNESCO's programme. One of its
most successful activities has been the travelling science
exhibition (see page 43). Inventories of apparatus and
materials for science teaching have also played an im-
portant part in this programme. A series of eight volu-
mes deals with the teaching of science in primary, sec-
ondary and vocational schools, universities and in six
types of technical colleges. These inventories have helped
to solve many problems of equipping school laboratories
in countries now in the throes of development. Published
in several languages they also provide a multilingual
glossary of scientific and technical terms.
In 1948 UNEsco published a little book entitled,"Sugges-
tions for Science Teachers in Devastated Countries"to
aid teachers whose work was handicapped by lack of
equipment. It has since published manuals for instructors
in countries where science teaching is developing for the
first time, explaining how to build simple apparatus using
easily obtainable materials.
To draw the attention of legislators, statesmen, ad-
ministrators and the organs of public opinion to the
social, political and economic consequences and possibi-
lities of science and technology, UNESCO publishes"Impact
of Science on Society."Now in its seventh year, this
quarterly, appearing in English and French, is largely
devoted to original studies on the social aspects of
science (1).
Guiding the steps of research
During the past two years, the development of science
on a really world-wide scale has been helped by the
work of an International Advisory Committee on Scientific
Research. It was established by UNEsco to'''promote in-
ternational co-operation between the national councils
and centres of scientific and technical research in fields
of common interest"and to advise UNESCO's Director-
General on"research and related matters in the Natural
Sciences Programme of UNESCO."The Committee can
advise UNESCO on the order of priority to be given to in-
ternational undertakings and, by organizing meetings
like the one at Milan in 1955 for representatives of
national research centres, it can help to stimulate the
formation of new national research centres in countries
where none so far exists.
Field Science Co-operation Offices
Latin America, the Middle East, South Asia and South-
east Asia-all these vast areas are now covered by scien-
tific missions in the shape of UNESCO's Field Science
Co-operation Offices. The Latin American Office (in
Uruguay since 1949) has done much to co-ordinate and
develop scientific research in this continent through
meetings, courses in modern research techniques, associa-
tions for the advancement of science and science exhibi-
tions. The Middle East Office (Cairo) has helped to solve
thousands of individual problems for scientists and has
concentrated chiefly on arid zone studies. The South
Asia Officie (New Delhi) and South-East Asia Office
(Jakarta) have helped scientists in these vast areas to
overcome many obstacles and to establish contacts with
each other. Set up to aid scientific liaison and becoming,
by force of circumstance, UNESCO liaison offices, they are
now situated in the centre of the latest trend in UNESCO's
policy toward direct participation in the efforts of
Member States, at their request, and a more judicious
implementation of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance.
(1). 4 detailed and impartial account of ten years of science at
VSESCO bru Professor Marcel Florkin is qi"en in the latest issue of
"Impact", (t'olume \'11, So 3, September 1956).
44
CHARTER AGAINST
INJUSTICE
T N December 1948, the U. N. General Assemblyadopted the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. UNESCO, which had con-
tributed to its preparation, immediately decid-
ed to make this declaration known as widely as
possible-a decision which it is still carrying
out. For UNESCO found in the Declaration of
Human Rights a source of support and encour-
agement. Charged with"reinforcing the mor-
al and intellectual solidarity"IOf mankind,
UNEsco was able to remind the world that such
solidarity could exist only if it were solidly
based upon respect for the individual.
All of UNESCO's activities contribute directly or
indirectly to the realization of human rights.
Through technical assistance and fundamental
education in the less developed countries, it has
worked to improve economic opportunities and
raise standards of living. It has helped to extend
free and compulsory primary education, so that
more and more children might enjoy the right to
education, and to improve teaching methods and
materials. It has aided in the development
of education for international understanding
through seminars, publications and experimental
programmes in schools. It has helped to promote
artistic and cultural activities and the advance-
ment of science, and to bring their benefits
within the reach of more and more people.
For UNEsco, The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is not only a definition of stand-
ards, but a programme of action as well, and
every task it undertakes is aimed at making a
living reality of the principles of the Declaration.
Above, the U. N. stamp issued for Human Rights
Day (December 10) 1956. Below, the stamp com-
memorating U. N. Day (October 24) 1956.
