Govt, of India
A SLOW-MOVING STREAM OF 7.000,000 REFUGEES FLOWED FROM PAKISTAN TO INDIA (ABOVE) AND MORE THAN 4.000,000 CROSSED THE NEW BORDERS IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION (BELOW).

THE BIGGEST MIGRATION IN HISTORY
Pakistan Embassy, Pa Copyright Almasy
Sadness and exhaustion mark the faces of two elderly refugeesMoslem and Hindu(above)
who have been uprooted from their ancestral homes and holdings. Below, weary refugees who
have come from East Pakistan rest in the shade of a buildingand await the next move.
Copyright Almasy
The world's biggest mass migration in recorded his¬
tory took place in 1947 when the State of Paki¬
stan was carved out of the sub-continent of India.
Predominantly Moslem areas in the north and east
were separated from the rest to form the new state of
Pakistan. Hastily-drawn boundary lines left millions
of Hindus and Sikhs in Pakistan and millions of Moslems
in India.
Religious feuds which had been simmering for some
years burst into frenzied rioting, killing, looting and
arson. People who found themselves on the wrong
sides of frontiers had to leave their homes and property
without any notice and trek in convoys, sometimes 150
miles long, to run the gauntlet of marauding bands,
cross rivers in flood over two narrow bridges alongside
people of the other community coming from the opposite
direction, and face hunger, pestilence and disease. The
loss of life1 and property ran into astronomical figures.
The problem of resettling refugees was the first that
the Governments of India and Pakistan had to face
after their newly won freedom. The magnitude of the
task could be better appreciated if we visualized the
problem which would face the United States and Unit¬
ed Kingdom Governments if the entire populations of
London and New York were suddenly ordered to change
places within one month, and found both the cities in
complete discorder.
The Indian and Pakistan Governments have a credit¬
able record in tackling their refugee rehabilitation.
Scores of camps housing more than 70,000 men, women
and children were set up. An immense operation to
redistribute land of an area as large as France was
carried out.
Exchange of urban property was arranged. Uprooted
people were taught new trades. New townships
were built, and, above all, the morale o'f the re¬
fugee population kept up by infusing enthusiasm for
the new nations they were helping to build by their
sacrifice.
In eight years India has resettled over seven
and a half million and Pakistan over four and a half
million refugees. This is an example which other coun¬
tries with similar but infinitely smaller problems could
emulate,
Pakistan Embassy, Paris
I8

