KEY WORDS OF UNESCO
the free flow of ideas &. information
DURING UNESCO'S early days, civi-lized life had only begun to
reassert itself. The railway
map of Europe offered a symbolic
picture of the wounds inflicted on
civilization : it consisted of segments
of lines running from blown-up brid-
ges to burned-out stations and linking
only the most important cities-not
very successfully, at that. Men, ma-
terials, ideas were almost unable to
move. If such a paralysis
had continued, immense re-
gions would have slipped
back into the drear chaos of
isolated villages. People
might not have died, but
they would have vegetated.
Free movement has become
a basic condition for civilized
life. In the language and in
the action of UNESCO, free
flow have become key
words. There must be a
flow-like that of blood in
the arteries, or of electricity.
At first, this meant sparing
no effort to enable ideas to
move again. The network
indispensable to the existence
of centres of study and re-
search had to be re-estab-
lished or else created. Every
break in this current and
every obstacle, whether mor-
al, material or political,
required quick action.
First came books and the
networks linking libraries.
UNESCO has achieved one of
its most clear-cut successes
over the past ten years in
encouraging the exchange
of papers and publications.
among libraries and scientific
institutions. At first, contacts
were established with a few
hundred librairies. In 1955,
the number of these libraries
had risen to more than 10, 000. These
institutions represent more than 100
countries or territories and their
regular exchanges amount to half
the world's annual volume of publica-
tien exchanges. Before the second
world war, there were 50 national
centres maintaining a steady fow of
books and information. UNESCO ac-
tion had already some years ago rais-
ed this number to 65. This year, it is
99. These are the centres which
34
organize the exchange of learned
publications and scientific documents
which are offered by more than 3, 500
institutions.
But other lines had also to be clear-
ed. Political and economic controls
had laid a heavy hand on books and,
at the same time, on newspapers,
films and phonograph records. In
1914, countries had stopped all trade
in articles not required by war. The
TEACHING BY TELEVISION has been encouraged by Unesco
with practical results. The success of an experiment in rural educa-
tion and entertainment conducted by the French National Radio
through tele-clubs in lonely country villages has led to similar
experiments with Unesco participation in Italy and Japan. Unesco
surveys also provide a world picture of the amazing strides in televi-
sion in the past decade, as symbolized by this photo, taken from
the top of a giant television mast at Sutton Coldfìeld, England.
depression of the 1930's saw even
more rigid controls adopted. Then
came the destruction of the second
world war and foreign currency prob-
lems to deal a coup de grace to in-
ternational exchange. Neither books
nor teaching materials nor works of
art were officially considered as
"essential articles."
UNEsco has waged a steady cam-
paign over the past decade to over-
come these obstacles by sponsoring
being applied by 21 nations.
Twelve governments are
applying a second agreement
which came into effect in
1954 and covers audio-visual
materials such as films,
microfilms, sound record-
ings, models, wall charts,
maps and posters. If these
articles are of an education-
al, scientific or cultural na-
ture, they are exempted
from, customs duties, im-
port licences and all quo-
ta restrictions in countries
where the agreement has
come into effect.
In order to meet the prob-
lem of currency shortages,
UNESCO also launched an in-
ternational coupon system in
1948. Under this scheme,
soft currency countries were
able to buy coupons from
UNESCO and sell them to ins-
titutions or individuels ho
were then able to use them
to buy books, films or scien-
tific materials in hard
currency areas. These cou-
pons were backed by UNESCO's
hard currency reserve.
At the beginning of 1956,
38 countries in Africa, Asia,
Europe and the Americas
were participating in this
scheme as either buyers or
suppliers. The total value
of UNESCO coupons issued
exceeded $9, 000, 000.
In all these fields, the response
of governments has demonstrated
that they are becoming more
and more determined to eliminate
obstacles to the free flow of ideas.
Support from the press and public
opinion for UNESCO's campaign has
raised the hope that, sooner of later,
the tools of knowledge will be brought
within the reach of peoples in all
parts of the world.
international agreements. The first
of these went into effect in 1952 and
it eliminated customs duties on the
importing of a wide range of articles :
books, publications and documents ;
works of art and collector's items ;
audio-visual materials destined for
recognized institutions ; scientific ins-
truments and apparatus ; and objects
destined for the blind. At the begin-
ning of 1956, this agreement was

T 11, (, \II Ilr
NEWSPRINT SHORTAGE ALARM
was sounded by Unpsco in ! 949whcn
Its Directol'-Gcnel'ol dcclo,'cd"Evcn
if present newsprint minufacturing
capacity ère fully utilized and tlrc
most up to date metlrods applied, it
could not fill immcdiate needs, still
'ess the needs of tomorrow. Unesco
strcssed the need to cncourage rcsearch
into thc possibility of using other raw
materials. At its request, the U. N.
Economic and Social Council discussed
the newspri nt pi'Oblem in 19 S I and
proposed both short-term and long-
term action to meet it. Today the
hunger for books, magazines, newspa-
pers and every kind of printed publica-
tion is greater then ever. Unesco is
conducting studies on aspects of the
newsprint problem, particularly as it
affects underdeveloped areas where
rising literacy is creating new readers-
and new consumers of newsprint. A
long-term programme to expand paper
production has been undertaken by a
sister U. N. agency, the Food and Agri-
culture Organization. Left, huge logs
destined for the pulp mill are guided
down a river in Canada, which is
the wor ! d's largest producer of paper.
,. i : c
UNESCO'S GIFT COUPONS SERVE 50 NATIONS. Since 1951, more than 300 institutions
in 50 countries-mainly in Asia, Africa and Latin America-have received equipment and other
forms of practical aid to the value of S750. 000 through the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme.
Its operation is simple. Unesco selects a list of institutions (schools, universities, laboratories)
needing equipment, and a sponsoring organization-perhaps a women's association in England,
a high school in Holland or a Unesco Club in France-chooses a project from this list and raises
money (through concerts, lectures, film showin'gs or exhibits) to buy Gift Coupons. These are
sent to the chosen project which then buys the equipment it needs, using the coupon as a sort of
international money order. Unesco in turn redeems the coupon for the supplier in his local
currency, In the process, direct contacts are established between the donor and the recipient.
Small boy from India (right) is learning to walk again thanks to Gift Coupons. A victim of infan-
tile paralysis, he is being helped to recover his sense of balance on special apparatus at the Bombay
Society for the Rehabilitation of Crippled Children. French schools and American voluntary
organizations gave equipment to the Bombay Centre through the Gift Coupon Programme.
35
Fui ! r) ßC ; ird or C ; : H'lada.

What Unesco has done to...
series of educational telecasts aimed at rural populations.
These are helping tele-clubs now springing up in countries
like Japan and Italy.
In April 1956, UNESCO convened the first international
gathering devoted exclusively to education in journalism.
which suggested ways in which UNESCO could help to fill
some of the training gaps, and drew up a plan of action
on a broad international scale.
UNESCO has enlisted the aid of editors, journalists, film
producers and broadcasters to make known what has been
accomplished by peoples who are working to build up
through education, science and culture, a peaceful in-
ternational community based on respect for Human
Rights.
In 1949 UNESCO created the World Braille Council and
aided the unification of Braille in the various languages
of the world, with the aim of creating an easy written
medium for the blind student to learn, read and commu-
nicate in other languages than his own. Results were
published in"World Braille Usage"in 1954.
Man-made barriers to the
free flow of information,
ideas and knowledge between
countries and to the inter-
rational circulation of edu-
cational scientific and cul-
tural materials are legion.
Some obstacles : currency
and travel restrictions, cen-
sorship, quotas and tarifes.
UNESCO tackled the problem
vin three ways : sponsorship
of international agreements
to remove obstacles, action
in co-operation with other
international organizations, publication of studies
focusing public attention on the issues.
As a first step UNESCO tackled the currency problem in
1949 by providing a"Coupons Scheme"under which cou-
pons (a kind of international money order) were made
available for the purchase of books, films and scientific
equipment (later extended to educational travel). Through
the scheme, people and institutions in soft-currency
countries have been able to buy badly needed items from
countries with hard currencies. Coupons worth $9, 000, 000
had been issued by the end of 1955.
UNESCO sponsored an international agreement on the
importation of educational, scientific and cultural mat-
erials. This eliminates customs duties on books, news-
papers, magazines, works of art and a wide variety of
other educational items. Its effect : such materials are
easier to get and cheaper to buy in the 22 countries which
have ratified it to date.
To help remove barriers in particular fields, UNESCO
works with other international organizations. Examples :
-, With the International Telecommunications Union
(iTu) on the question of press rates throughout the world.
The flow of news and information is impeded by the high
and divergent rates between different nations. (A press
message costs 2. 04 cents a word when sent from London
to New York and 5. 54 cents in the opposite direction.)
- With the Universal Postal Union (Upu) on postal
rates and concessions which might be granted to publica-
tions. By the end of 1954 over 30 governments had gran-
ted concessions in response to these efforts.
- With the International Air Transport Association
(latta) to reduce charges on the despatch of information
materials by air. In April 1954 a concession came into
effect whereby books were granted a discount of up to
50% of normal airfreight charges in non-European
regions and up to 33 1/3% within Europe.
The aim of UNESCO at all these conferences is to make
it easier and cheaper for information to circulate from
country to country, whether in the form of a newspaper
sent through the mail or a press despatch sent by cable
or a radio broadcast intended for listeners abroad.
%
People in highly industri-
S t I'h't th alized countries are apt topOI g', e take newspapers, radio, films
and television for granted.
W O'rld'S e d S They are surprised. when""they read, as they did re-
cently in UNESCO's publica-
'. <ii.''.".. i.,'. f'tion"World Communica-
tisons", that Africans, Asians
and South Americans toge-
ter only buy 24% of the
C omm U n IC, I Ion world's daily newspapers,
whereas Europeans buy 38%
and North Americans 24%,
and that while 50% of the
world's radio receivers are in North America, only 11%
are in Africa, Asia and South America.
Striking facts like these have been brought to light and
publicized by UNESCO since it began to make investiga-
tions in 1947 into how many printing presses, film studios,
news agencies, radio stations and receivers and similar
resources existed in different countries. Between 1947 and
1952 UNESCO surveys covered the structure, equipment and
operation of mass communication media in 173 countries
and territories. The facts, widely publicized, have been
used in campaigns and missions, studies and monographs.
With technical assistance programme funds, experts
(and materials) in the communication field have been
sent to underdeveloped countries. By the end of 1955 :
85 fellowships awarded ; missions working in 15 countries.
A study of the Canadian Farm Radio Forum broadcasts
in 1952-53 was put to practical test in India's campaign
for adult education by radio. Specialists from 30 countries
pooled experience and techniques at a UNESCO Seminar on
Visual Aids in Fundamental Education in Sicily, in 1953,
and produced the first catalogue of films and filmstrips for
this kind of education and eight sets of travelling libraries
of visual aids.
UNESCO publications on mass communication questions
have been aimed both at the general public and specialists.
Titles from"Press, Film and Radio in the World Today"
series reveal range and variety of these studies :"Profes-
sional Training of Journalists","Training for Radio","The
Problem of Newsprint and other Printing Paper","Radio
in Fundamental EdMcation","The Film Industry in Six
European Countries","Low-Cost Radio Reception". In
1954 UNESCO published"Television-A World Survey",
covering 44 countries where TV was either in operation
already or in the planning stages. Fourteen more,
countries were surveyed in 1955
As well as improving the
methods and media of mass
communication through co-
operation at the interna-
tional level, UNESCO works
through all means of com-
munication for mutual un-
derstanding between peoples
and countries.
Television is a case in
joint. Several countries ask-
eu for help in arranging the
exchange of TV techniques
and programmes which
could be used to teach about
other peoples and customs. UNESCO and the British
Broadcasting Corporation in 1954 convened the first
seminar ever held on this subject. Producers and edu-
cators from 12 countries took part. In 1955, film and TV
producers met at an international conference in Tangier
to discuss obstacles to the exchange of films and televi-
sion kinescopes.
TV viewing through community tele-clubs (first develop-
ed in France) offers another means of breaking down
isolation within countries and (since the growth of inter-
national TV programme co-operation) within continents.
In 1954 UNESCO and the French TV service produced a
