THE NOBEL
PEACE PRIZE
Honours work of
U.N. Refugee Office
The Nobel Peace Prize for 1954 has just been awarded to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, headed by Dr. G.J. van Heuven Goedhart
of the Netherlands. On December, 10, 1955, the High
Commissioner spoke at the prize-award ceremony in
Oslo. Below are some passages from his speech.
Gerrit Jan van Heu¬
ven Goedhart, of the
Netherlands, is an LL.D.
of Leyden University.
Before the Second
World War he was
editor of two well-
known Dutch news¬
papers. In 1941 he went
" underground " and
edited the then illicit,
"HetParool".ln1944he
escaped to Great Bri¬
tain via Belgium, France
Spain and Gibraltar and
shortly after his arrival
in London was appoint¬
ed Minister of Justice
in the Netherlands Gov¬
ernment-in-exile. After
the war he resumed
the editorship of "Het
Parool" which post he
held until 1950. Dr. van Heuven Goedhart has
represented his country at U.N. conferences and
was Vice-Chairman of thé Netherlands Delegation
to the 4th and 5th sessions of the U.N. General
Assembly. He was appointed U.N. High Commis¬
sioner for Refugees for a three-year term with
effect from January 1 1951. Upon expiry the term
of office was renewed by the U.N. General Assem¬
bly for a further five years.
\ \ hat have refugees got to do with peace? Many
people may have asked themselves this question on
hearing that the Nobel Peace Prize had been awarded
to an international office working on behalf of refugees.
The answer, according to the U.N. High Commissioner,
can be found in the life of Alfred Nobel himself. There
were, he said, very definite links between Nobel's ideas
and those which are at the root of any constructive
refugee programme.
"My colleagues and I my¬
self," said Dr. van Heuven
Goedhart, "are very much
aware of the fact that it is
not the first time that the
existence of such a link
seems to have been recogniz¬
ed by the Nobel Committee
of the Norwegian Storting in
its deliberations regarding
the award to be made.
Forty-three years after the
death of Nobel in 1895, the
Nobel Prize for Peace was
awarded to the Nansen Office
for Refugees. That happen¬
ed eight years after that
great Norwegian, Fridtjof
Nansen, died, but during his
lifetime the Nobel Committee
had already given proof of
its awareness of the "indivi¬
sibility of a reasonable no¬
tion of peace" by awarding
in 1922 the Nobel Prize for Peace to Nansen personally.
"Peace has been rightly described as much more than
just the absence of war. It is rather a state in
which no people of any country, in fact no group
of people of any kind, lives in fear or in need. Real peace
is therefore an ideal to be pursued by mankind, relentlessly
and with unflagging perseverance, but at the same time
an ideal which mankind can never realize to the full
extent. Alfred Nobel certainly was aware of the indivisi¬
bility of peace and of its all-embracing character. I would
4
WHAT IS THE OFFICE OF THE U.N. HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES? It is
not a specialized agency but part of the
United Nations itself. Established at the
end of 1950 by the U.N. General Assembly,
the Office originally had a mandate for
three years since extended to the end
of 1958. The High Commissioner is assist-
ted by a Deputy, Mr. James M. Read,
of the United States, and an international
staff numbering 130, working at the Geneva
headquarters and in 14 branch offices.
Eleven of these offices are located in
Europe and one each in the Middle East,
Latin America and North America. Joint
offices with the Intergovernmental Com¬
mittee for European Migration are also
maintained in Hong Kong and Shanghai.
like on this sixtieth commemoration of his death to pay
tribute to his memory.
"During its five years' lifetime our office has had to
fight on at least two fronts. On the one hand there was
the necessity of convincing the governments that there
was still an unsolved refugee problem of considerable
magnitude left after the International Refugee Organiza¬
tion closed its doors. On the other hand there was the
necessity of persuading the
governments to make contri¬
butions to the United Nations
Refugee Fund, which is the
financial basis of the four-
year programme for per¬
manent solutions for refugee
problems and for emergency
aid to needy refugees.
"Given the fact that today
there are, mainly in Europe,
but also in the Near and Far
East still hundreds of thou¬
sands of refugees who so far
have not been able to find a
solution to their difficulties
there can be no doubt about
the necessity of a programme
such as the one we are in the
process of carrying out.
"But whereas we may say
that the first battle to get
recognition of the fact that
the problem still existed and
that something had to be done about it has been won,
the second oneito obtain the necessary contributions for
the carrying out of our four-year-programme is still
undecided.
"So far the response of governments to our appeals for
funds has been disappointing. It is therefore for this
reason that we are deeply grateful for the encouragement
given to our Office through the award of the Nobel Prize
for Peace, encouragement which will also affect the
governments themselves:".
