ANGKOR
CITY OF
TOWER
FACES
Almost a century ago, Henri Mouhot, a
French botanist who had been intrigued by
reports of ancient cities hidden deep
in the jungle, was making his way through
the great forests of the Mekong River in
Cambodia. One morning he saw an
amazing spectacle a series of stately
towers rising like peaks above a sea of
jungle. Mouhot had come across the city
of Angkor, ancient capital of the Khmer
Empire (9th to 15th centuries) and the mas¬
terpiece of an art and an architecture
that had hitherto been hidden from the
world.
When the Khmer Empire collapsed about
1440 A.D. after a hundred years' war with
Siam, the capital was withdrawn from
Angkor to Pnompenh, present capital of
Cambodia. Angkor had been described in
1490 by' a Chinese pilgrim Chou Ta-kuan,
and in the 17th century Spanish mission¬
aries had brought back descriptions, but
their stories were hardly believed.
It was only at the end of the 19th cen¬
tury that archaeologists were able to make
proper studies of the Angkor temples freed
at last from the invading jungle. They
found on the site more than twenty major
monuments covering some 10,000 acres.
Gradually they reconstructed the story of
an empire whose dominion extended over
what is today Cochin China and part of
Cambodia, and retraced the development of
the singularly harmonious Khmer art.
Musée Guimet Archives, Paris.
-'J-
ífil|«j,¿í
¿ÙvêO.
26

The first city of Angkor and its Great
Temple were the creation of Suryavar-
man II (1112-52) who was not a Buddhist.
In 1181, one of his successors, Jayavar-
man VII, a Buddhist king, founded a new
capital, Angkor Thorn, close by. It was
Jayavarman VII who adorned the Great
Temple of the former capital (previously
dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu) with
Buddhist decorations and gave it the title
which this great temple . fortress still bears
Angkor Wat (the palace monastery).
In the centre of Angkor Thom, at the
point where the four roads leading inwards
from the principal gates meet, stands the
Bayon Temple, built at the end of the 12th
century as a Buddhist . shrine of the
Mahayana school dedicated to Lokesvara,
the compassionate Bodhisattva. The
Bayon itself is not so much a work of
architecture as one of sculpture with towers
like so many statues in the round. The en¬
tire site of Angkor Thom is a vast,
brilliantly planned and ordered arrangement
of buildings. Not only are the temples
magnificent in themselves, but the great
roads along which the faithful passed to
the holy place were conceived and execut¬
ed with genius.
Photos of Angkor on these pages show :
Left, detail of a bas-relief in the Bayon
Temple, depicting the legend of the Leper
King. The king is shown in his palace
and, on the lower part of the relief, two
The Unesco Courier
women are dancing on a stage to the
accompaniment of a harp. Centre, The
Footprint of Buddha covered with sacred
signs and symbols including, at centre, The
Wheel of the Law, carved at Angkor Wat
in the 12th century. The Buddha is said io
have been born with certain imprints on the
soles of his feet and Buddhist iconographers
have made great use of these signs of pre¬
destination, adding many other symbols
including the Wheel of the Law.
Right, A manyheaded naga (snake) held
by the hands of several deities. A series
of figures all gripping the body of the ser¬
pent, form a balustrade along the main
approaches to the Bayon Temple at Angkor
Thom.
Copyright Giraudon. Musée Guimet Archives, Paris.
27

ANGKOR (Cont'd)
LORD OF THE WORLD. The most dis¬
tinctive feature of Bayon Temple at Angkor
Thom is the carving of gigantic masks of the
Bodhisattva Lokesvara ("The Lord of the
World") to whom the temple Is dedicated,
on the four sides of each of the 50 or so
towers. Similar heads are repeated on the-
towers of the chapels on the corners of the
city walls and over the four main gateways
at the points of the compass. The faces have
been interpreted as ideal portraits of the
king as an incarnation of the Bodhisattva
Lokesvara and their multiplication at every
point of the compass as signifying and ensuring
radiation1 of royal power over all the realm.
Top photos by Hélène Hoppenot, taken from
"Extrême-Orient", Copyright by Editions Ides and
Calendes, Neuchatel, Switzerland.
Photo right, Copyright Cartier-Bresson-Magnum.
ROYAL CITY of Angkor Thom shown in
this plan was built on similar lines to the
palace monastery of Angkor Wat about one
mile away. It is a palace city with moats
measuring about 100 yards across and walls
broken by five gates from which roads lead
to the central temple-mountain, The Bayon.
Drawing taken from "The Art and Architecture of
India" by Benjamin Rowland. Copyright by Penguin
Books, London.
28
