" "if ii 	JIB"~zz-¿"3'j
'Daddy, what's the
good of history?'
Copyright Lisel Haas
Birmingham
ç Ç-r*\ ADDY< what's the good of history?" With this ques-
II tion, put by a small boy to a father who was a
"^^^ historian, the French historian, Marc Bloch, began
his remarkable essay, Apologie pour l'histoire, ou Métier
d'historien. As Bloch observed, the small boy in his
apparently naive enquiry had with the embarrassing
directness of youth raised a fundamental question. -What
is the use of historical study in a practical world ? It is
a question that strikes with double force the thousands
of men and women whose daily task it is to teach history
to children of all ages in the schools of the world.
Bloch and other eminent historians of many lands have
argued cogently that history is a study worthy of the
adult mind, opening a door to wisdom and tolerance and
a power of profound criticism.
History can satisfy in a unique way the growing child's
curiosity about other people, about their lives, per¬
sonalities, deeds and ideas ; and it can awaken an
imaginative wonder and excitement about the whole
world of humanity past and present. History can develop
an understanding of the cultural heritage of mankind,
or provide a measure of background knowledge for the
appreciation of literature, art and ways of life of other
people. In the realm of intellectual discipline, the study
of history can train pupils to be accurate in comprehen¬
sion and expression, to weigh evidence, to separate the
trivial from the significant, to distinguish between pro¬
paganda and truth.
Rich harvest from classroom seeds
History can provide twentieth-century men with
standards of reference against which to measure
values and achievements of their own age ; it can
encourage an enlightened awareness of the problems of
modern communities, political, social and economic. Not
least important, it can train men to handle controversial
questions in a spirit which searches for truth, insists on
free discussion, and permits compromise. This is a rich
harvest for any school subject to yield. No teacher of
history would maintain that he can do more than sow
some of its seeds and nourish them so long as his pupils
are still at school. But he will assert confidently that the
seeds are worth the sowing.
There can be little doubt that the majority of history
teachers the world over, called on to justify their work,
would find common ground in a single conceptthat of
training for national citizenship. The child is one day
14
by C. Peter Hill (*>
to vote, perhaps to serve in the army, to pay taxes, to
take a part great or small in the working life of his
native land, to carry out the duties of a citizen. One of
the special functions of history teaching in schools
therefore has been to help to develop in children a love
of their own -country, and an understanding of its tra¬
ditions and ways of life ; how the homeland has become
united or has freed itself from foreign rulers, how its
system of government has come into being, what are its
distinctive customs and traditions, what changes have
taken place in its economic and social life, and so on.
A survey of history curricula in the schools of the
majority of member states of Unesco reveals that the
teaching of national history predominates at every stage
of the school course, and is as evident in countries with
a decentralized school system as in those where national
control of education is far-reaching.
This is understandable and reasonable. But the citizen
these days must concern himself with problems that
transcend national frontiers. For men now live on a
globe which is shrinking and a world which is fast
becoming a closely interrelated unit. Nation is dependent
on nation as never before. This dependence, clear in the
friendly intercourse of peacetime, has been driven into
men's minds and hearts by the terrible argument of war.
Men must learn to live together, and the two world wars
of this century have brought in their train the first
elaborate attempts to establish permanent international
organizations in the political field, the League of Nations
and the United Nations. The League did not endure ;
U.N. remains, embodying the political concept of the
twentieth century, that of constructive co-operation
between the nations of the world.
In the teaching of the past, historical truth has often
been sacrificed in the interests of national pride, and
history has often been distorted in order to arouse
patriotic emotions. Children have often been left with
the idea that contacts between nations in different parts
of the world are invariably connected, directly or
indirectly, with war. The chauvinist has made history
serve the purposes of nationalism ; the history textbook,
with its unavoidable generalizations and its necessary
has frequently been turned into a power¬
ful instrument of this nationalism. (1).
Certainly, in the last 50 years, the teaching of history
in many countries has greatly improved, in this as in
many other respects ; some textbooks have become more
objective in their presentation of facts, syllabuses have
become more international in their outlook and scope.
But the need for further improvement remains great, ana .
it becomes daily more urgent. Children of today must
grow up to know that there are other types of human
communities than their own and they must learn that
(*) This article is taken from "Suggestions on the Teaching of
History", published by Unesco.
(1) See the Unesco nolume, "History Textbooks and International
I'nilerstanding", hy J. A. I.nmoerys : 75 rents; 4/-; 200 frs.

the past has made other countries what they are, just as
it has made their own what it is.
History properly taught can help men to become critic¬
al and humane, just as wrongly taught it can turn them
into bigots and fanatics. For the child can begin to
develop, even from an elementary historical training,
qualities and attitudes of mind which all aid interna¬
tional understanding. He can acquire an abiding interest
in the lives and achievements of peoples outside his
own homeland and realize what they have contributed
to the common cultural inheritance of man ; he can .
learn to be accurate and critical and grasp the idea of
change as a factor in human affairs.
The cause of international understanding benefits yet
further when children reach adulthood knowing
something of the causes and results of past human
conflicts, and something of the history of man's efforts
towards international co-operation, and when the
history they have learned teaches them both about the
growing interdependence of nations and about the
strenuous efforts of millions of individual men to
establish human freedoms.
Few would deny that international understanding is
a desirable result of history teaching, and that the
teacher who strives to promote it is pursuing a laudable
end. But many will ask whether history which has
formerly been focused on national concerns is now to be
distorted to serve international ends. The answer is
emphatically "no". There may be teachers who believe
that by omitting or by glossing over the wars and in¬
ternational rivalries of the past they will thereby
promote the spread of international understanding in
the present ; but surely they are very few. This would
be a fallacious practice, educating the child to unreality;
peace is not gained by pretending wars have not existed.
Champollion and the Rosetta Stone
What principles might guide the teacher to select
materials which would contribute to international
understanding? Some suggestions on this score
have been advanced by a committee of eight experts, pro¬
fessional historians and teachers of history, at the request
of unesco. These suggested principles are as follows:
The search for truth: "History is a record of a people's
past based on a critical examination of documents and
other facts. The essentials of this historical method
are not beyond the grasp of even young children. Con¬
crete examples, such as the story of the Rosetta stone,
which enabled Champollion to establish the first prin¬
ciples of the deciphering of Egyptian hieroglyphics, vivid¬
ly illustrate the fundamental processes involved. This
search for the facts can be used to illustrate one side of
search for historic truth.
"The other side is the truth of historic interpretation.
The facts cannot be changed, but the interpretation of
them can and does change. An explanation of ar¬
chaeological techniques (excavation and research are
going on in most countries) will demonstrate how the
past can be investigated, what facts archaeological re¬
mains can reveal and what interpretations can be placed
upon them. If children can be brought to appreciate
the distinction between the objectivity of facts and the
inevitable subjectivity of interpretation, an invaluable
lesson will have been learnt. They will be less likely in
adult life to fall victims to propaganda."
History as an evolutionary process: "Pupils should be
helped to realize that history is an account of an evolu¬
tionary process, that man has conquered the world by
slow degrees and re-fashioned it to fit his needs; that
technological advances, to which peoples all over the
world have contributed, have accelerated the evolution of
human societies; that civilizations have developed, ma¬
tured, and died, to be replaced by new civilizations which
have always preserved some part of the heritage left by
those who had gone before. History should not be pre¬
sented as if it were static. On the contrary, it is a dyna¬
mic story of continual change. Pupils should be helped
to appreciate the unity of history, and not to view it as a
broken pattern of stories which they are all too likely
to equate with tales of adventure."
Mutual influence among Nations and Peoples: "In this
connexion children can be shown that races and nations
have never really lived in complete isolation from each
other. In technology, politics, culture and philosophy,
The Unesco Courier. March 1956
there have been constant exchanges, borrowings ana
mutual influences. Teachers should make a point of
seeking out examples of interchanges of this kind from
their national history. In order to develop a sense of
the interdependence of nations and to avoid encouraging
unwarranted feelings of superiority, what their own
country has received should be recognized as frankly as
what has been contributed to others."
Importance of economic and social factors: "The eco¬
nomic history of the past is still far from complete, but
the patient work of historians is gradually bearing fruit.
Today many school textbooks give considerable attention
to economic and social factors, and in most countries
sufficient information is now available to enable teachers
to show their pupils how important these factors have
been at all periods of human history. The struggle for
food and shelter, the bartering of goods, and the growth
of means of communication can be easily appreciated
even by quite young children. In this way a good basis
can be given for a later understanding of the complex
economic problems of our time."
Importance of intellectual and moral factors: "Intel¬
lectual and moral currents of thought have probably had
as great an influence on history as have economic and
social factors. Regardless of frontiers, they have in¬
fluenced millions of men and women throughout the
world and inspired them to action. These factors should
be brought home to children."
The struggle for tolerance and peace: "Throughout
history there has been a time-lag between moral and
material progress. Pupils should be helped to understand
why this has been so and to see that not only the desire
for power of rulers, politicians and national cliques, but
also ignorance, intolerance mutual distrust and the pre¬
judice and selfishness of groups and individuals have been
responsible. Moreover, intolerance has contributed both
to civil and to national wars. In many countries, exam¬
ples can be taken from national history to show that
intolerance and prejudices have been successfully over¬
come so that former enemies can live together in peace.
"At a suitable age, children must learn that war has
brought in its train not only death for millions of soldiers
and civilians, men and women, children and old people,
but also incalculable suffering and destruction of which
the defeated have never been the only victims. War has
frequently caused serious damage, or has brought utter
ruin in a brief space of time a few years, months, days,
even a few seconds to the results of centuries of human
effort, the achievements of generations of architects,
sculptors, painters, engineers and technicians, craftsmen,
peasants and labourers of all kinds."
If history is taught in the light of principles such as
these, children should be better able to see for them¬
selves how important it is to try to understand their
fellow-citizens and the citizens of other nations and to
help in the struggle of mankind against prejudice, intol¬
erance and selfishness.
Nefertiti, the
Queen of Egypt
some 3.000 years
ago. She was
mother-in-law to
the famous King .
Tutenkhamen.
Copyright J. E. Bulloz
