ELLORA GROTTOS (Central India) are a series of rock-cut temples and cave sanctuaries which
offer the only example In India of the monuments of three religionsBuddhism, Hinduism and
Jainism standing side by side. Carved out over many centuries they present a diversity of styles.
Above, inner hall of one the great Buddhist carved cathedrals at Ellora. The colossal figure of the
Buddha seated In teaching position at its far end is made more Impressive by the arrangement of
the natural lighting. The beam of light seen shining at the Buddha's feet comes into the
cave through a special window. Below, one of five pillared aisles in the Tin Thai ("three-storied")
cave at Ellora. At far end is the Buddha in the posture of calling the earth to witness.
Photos Eliot Elisofon, from "The Art of Indian Asia" by Heinrich Zimmer. Copyright Bollingen Foundation Inc..

INDIA
Fountain-head
and glory of
Buddhist Art
It is a great paradox that Buddhism, as
a religion, has practically ceased to
exist in its own birthplace, India, since
the 12th century A.D. But the art which
was created and developed in India under
the direct influence of Buddhism has
bequeathed to this country works of art
whose beauty and magnitude place them
among the foremost of mankind's cultural
treasures.
As Buddhism spread across the face of
the Asian continent and down into south
east Asia, Indian Buddhist art inspired and
influenced the painting and sculpture of
countries as far away as Japan and Java.
Episodes in the Buddha's life and legends
telling of his previous existences offered
painters and sculptors a rich variety of
themes with .which to express their faith.
For, as the texts of Buddhism declared that
the making of images led to heaven,
sculptors carved the image of the Enlighten¬
ed One in wood and stone and on the
living rock of mountainsides.
Little remains of the earliest Indian
Buddhist art that was done on perishable
buildings of wood and brick, carved in clay
and wood or painted on walls, wooden
panels, palm leaves and cloth. What do
remain are the rock temples and dwellings
of the early Buddhist monks like those at
Karli, Ajanta, Ellora and many other sites
whose semi-obscurity gave an added touch
of mystery to the paintings and sculpture
decorating their walls and pillars.
Other early storehouses of Buddhist art
are the stupas which, in their earliest forms,
like those at Sanchi and Bharut, are
moundlike shrines containing sacred relics
surrounded by railings and sumptuously
carved gates. Most art historians regard
the 4th century A.D. as the richest period
of India's Buddhist art. From the new
ideas brought by contacts with other lands
and from the greater skills and improved
techniques of the Indian painters and
sculptors came a great flowering of art.
This period can well be described as
"classic" in the sense of describing a
degree of perfection never achieved before
or since and in the perfect balance and
harmony of all elements stylistic and icono¬
graphie. The magnificent frescoes at
Ajanta are a reflection of this supremacy
of aesthetic achievement.
Despite the great evolution it underwent
and the many styles it developed during its
history of ten centuries, Indian Buddhist
art maintained a striking unity, due to the
fact that the various styles followed each
other in the same religious sites: the tem¬
ples and sanctuaries which art and faith
enriched down the centuries.
Buddhist art lost its vitality as the reli¬
gion declined in India, but its last phase
has enjoyed a prolongation of nearly a
thousand years in the Himalayan regions of
Nepal and Tibet.
15

INDIA (Cont'd;
Copyright Allahabad Museum
Seen with
mirrors
The founding of the first
Buddhist shrine at Bodh Gaya
InN.E. India where the Buddha
achieved Illumination under
the Bodhi tree, Is attributed
to the great king Asoka In
the 3rd century B.C. Many
alterations have been made
since and elements exist there
from nearly every period of
Buddhist art. In the 7th and
8th centuries A.D. Buddhists
raised a magnificent edifice,
the Mahabodhi Temple (right),
In the form of a truncated
pyramid, to replace Asoka's
shrine. Between the 7th and
10th centuries the temple con¬
tained a statue of Sakyamuni
(one of Buddha's names :
"Sage of the Sakyaclan")
which stood In a dark chamber
and could be seen properly
only with the help of a mirror
to reflect the sun's rays.
The stupa at Bharut, a famous
Buddhist centre in the northern
part of central India, Is also
rich in examples of early
Buddhist art. Above, carving
on a pillar at Bharut depicts
a pyramid of acrobats flanked
by a yaksa and a yaks! (the
male and female guardians of
the treasures of *he earth).
Indian Embassy, Paris
16

The Unesco Courier
Photo by Gilbert Etienne, taken from "Inde Sacrée", Copyright Éditions Ides et Calendes, Neuchatel, Switzerland. Unesco
AJANTA
Primitive austerity
to mellow richness
The Ajanta caves, northeast of Bombay, are justly renowned as one of the remarkable
collections of the world's religious art, and its enchanting frescoes and wall paintings
of Bodhisattvas, female figures, various flower and animal motifs are now fairly well known
In most countries (see The Unesco Courler Nos. I & II, 1954). Ajanta's sculpture,
architecture and decorative pillars, however, deserve to be better known too. The
earlier of the 29 cave-monasteries and chapels, all hewn from the rock In the 2nd century
B.C., reflect the simple, ascetic character of Hinayana Buddhism (see page 25). Photos
on this page are examples of 5th and 6th century A.D. Mahayana art. The primitive
austerity and purely spiritual appeal have completely vanished, and the art has become
rich, mellow and gracious under the Influence of the Gupta stylethe Golden Age of
Indian art. While in the earlier sanctuaries of Ajanta Buddha was never represented,
his ¡mages here shine forth in supramondane beauty, both in seated and standing positions
(photos above and below left; detail below right). An example of how the pillars and
panels were decorated with lavish bas-reliefs and carvings is seen in photo, above right.
1 ^*tj_»
17

INDIA (Continued)
KARLI
Rock cave chapel
The history of Buddhist architecture is defaced
by many sad and dark chapters, for the monu¬
ments were levelled time and again by con¬
quering invaders. India, like Europe, is covered
with ruins of princely towns and wondrous
temples. The most impressive religious re¬
mains from the period B.C., besides the great
stupas, are Buddhist cave-monasteries (viha-
ras) and chapels (chaitya) at Karli, Bhaja and
Nasik in the Western Hills near the Bombay
coast. There are others in the east in Orissa.
They have survived only because they were
carved in absolutely solid stone. Photo shows
one façade of Karli chaitya (2nd century B.C.)
bearing a finely sculptured donor couple.
Copyright Phaidon Press, London.
SANCHI
The pilgrims' way
The Great Stupa at Sanchi in the Indian
province of Bhopal is one of the oldest
and best preserved of early Buddhist
sanctuaries (1st to 2nd centuries A.D.).
Photos show: (I) The ambulatory of the
Great Stupa along which multitudes .of
pilgrims have walked around the monu¬
ment. (2-3) Damaged torsos of two
statues of a kind often found on the gates
to the Stupa. (4) One of the richly
decorated pillars flanking the East Gate.
Copyright Phaidon Press, London
1-2-3-4'Govt. of India photos.
ROCK-HEWN BEAMS. In the early period of Buddhism, wood"
and thatch buildings were raised to house images or sacred relics.
When these were replaced by structures built of stone or hewn from
18
Copyright Werner Bischof-Magnum.
cliffs and rocks, the sculptors often made replicas in stone of the former
wooden vaulting. The two fine examples shown above are 7th century
carvings at Aurangabad, in the state of Hyderabad, Central India.

The Unesco Courier
* * ^ .
J**1 ... -> *s=r-Ai
:l
5- kid i a/L^ï»
I9

A lesend carved in stone
Musée Guimet Archives
The ancient masters who carved bas-reliefs and friezes on the walls and doorways of
the sacred pagodas often took for their subject the Jataka tales (stories of the former
existences of the Buddha). Many of these tales are told in stone on one of the most
famous monuments of Buddhist art, the Great Stupa at Sanchi, in the Indian province
of Madhya Bharat, which contains some of the oldest (1st century A.D.) and best-
preserved of Buddhist carvings.
The carving on the North Gate, one of four main gates of the Sanchi Stupa, recounts the
story of Prince Visvantara (the last of Buddha's incarnations before he was born as
Gautama) who practised the virtue of "the perfection of giving." Prince Visvantara
(the name means "one who transcends or conquers all") was the most charitable of
men and could never refuse a request for alms.
According to the legend he owned a white elephant endowed with the magical power
of bringing rain. When the king of a nearby drought-stricken country asked for the
elephant, Visvantara gave it to him. This so angered the people that they banished the
prince, his wife and his two children. Thus began a series of trials by which Visvantara's
steadfastness and charity were put to the test. Other trials came when, as he left his
kingdom, two Brahmins stopped him and asked for the two horses pulling his chariot,
while a third asked for the chariot itself. The prince granted their requests,
The part of the story told in the South Gate frieze shown here begins on the right, when
the exiled prince and his wife Madri, have reached the foot of the Himalayas after a thou¬
sand hardships. They are shown clad as forest dwellers, tending the fire in front of
their leaf-domed hut.
In the peaceable jungle, the children, the animals and the trees are friends. Then,
20

The Unesco Courier
Reproduced from "The Art of India" by Stella Kramrisch courtesy, of The Phaidon Press
The unselfish hermit-prince
while Madri has gone into the jungle to seek fruit and roots, a wicked Brahmin arrives
and asks Visvantara to give him his children as servants. Despite their tears and his
own anguish, Visvantara acquiesces. Even when he sees his children being tied and
beaten (left of centre) he does not interfere or protest.
Finally another Brahmin appears and asks the hermit-prince to relinquish his beloved
wife (centre left). But as the prince accepts, the trials end for the Brahmin is none other
than the god Indra who has come down to earth in disguise to subject the prince to this
supreme test. Directly above, Indra crowned and carrying his thunderbolts, is shown
reuniting the prince and his wife.
The rest of the relief reads from the left. It shows (bottom row) the prince's father,
who has purchased the children's freedom from the Brahmin, setting off to meet his
son and daughter-in-law. Top row, the parents and the children (mounted on an ele¬
phant) are seen regaining their kingdom.
Sanchi art, one of the earliest of Buddhist art forms, depicts such scenes from the Jataka
and from the life of Buddha in continuous narrative reliefs. The carved gateways of
the Sanchi Stupa mark the transition from ivory to stone carving and at least one of the
gateways was donated by the ivory carvers' guild of the Andhra Kingdom.
In effect, these carvings do give the impression of a delicate work of ivory, with their
figures crowded closely together and the great attention given to details. As one
critic has said, the carvings suggest that the artists were still so used to working on
small ivory that they did not adapt their technique to the greater space and freedom
afforded by huge blocks of stone.
. Musée Guimet Archives
V-rrffi'
21
