Copyright Majnum-Bischof
Bronze colossus
The period of 80 years, when the capital of Japan was established In Nara In 7 1 0 A.D. until
its transfer to Kyoto in 794, is known as the Golden Age of Japanese sculpture. It was In
this period (referred to by art historians as the Late Nara or Tempyo era) that the famous
Great Buddha, the biggest bronze statue in the world (shown here) was made. The casting
of the Bronze Buddha was first started by the order of Emperor Shomu in 743 and completed
in 749. The seated figure measures 53 feet in height; the face 16 feet, the eye almost 4,
the ear 8]/2 ft. It Is said that the casting of the statue required 437 tons of bronze, 288
pounds of gold and seven tons of charcoal. It is enshrined in the Todaiji Temple, the Buddhist
cathedral meaning "The Great Temple of the East" which Is the largest wooden structure
In the world. Although bronze statuary flourished in the Late Nara Period, clay and dry-
lacquer sculpture were most frequently used. Buddhism In Japan at this period took on
all the characteristics of a national religion and the Buddhist monasteries were built as
national Institutions. At the same time many temples were raised, all competing with one
another in their display of grandeur. Buddhist temples and monasteries were easily
accessible to the public during this era and sculpture and architecture were emphasized.
Later, the nucleus of Buddhist art came to be painting which has held sway ever since.
52

The Unesco Courier
Copyright Magnum-Bischol
tri
1 1 K 1
;' ^nSl H^1
Mourners' Lament
The Buddhist sanctuaries which form part of the Horyujl monastery at Nara are renowned
as being among the world's greatest treasure houses of art. In one of these, the famous
Five-Storeyed Pagoda, there is still preserved a series of clay statuettes remarkable for
their poignant realism, their expressions of emotion, tenderness and grief. The first floor
of the Pagoda is occupied by a clay miniature of Mt. Sumeru (the mountain believed in
Buddhism to be the centre of the world) with recesses on the four sides resembling mountain
caves. In these recesses more than 80 of the clay figures, each about afoot high, are arranged
to present four scenes relating to the life of Buddha Sakyamuni. Photos here show some
of the figures In the north cave which depicts a scene of the Nirvana or passing away of
Sakyamuni with various saints, disciples and ascetics lamenting his departure. The Horiuji
Inventory of 747 A. D. records that the statuettes were made in 711. They are the oldest
dated works of clay sculpture in Japan. In the late I 9th century there were I 14 pieces and
originally a good number more, but many of the statues have been lost or seriously damaged.
Most of the existing original statues have been repaired to a greater or lesser extent and
some appear to have been changed about among the four caves. But many figures still
retain their original appearance and are registered as important cultural properties of Japan.
S3

JAPAN (Cont'd;
Manshidi Sakamoto, copyright Toto ßunka
Co., Tokyo from "Pageant of Japanese Art'.'
Photo by Yonpachi Fujimoto taken, as are all photos on pages55 to 57,
from "Japanese Sculpture", published by Bijutsu Shuppan-Sha, Tokyo.


A Wooden Image
Floated Ashore
Japanese history, shrouded for centuries in myth and
legend, begins in a small strip of country some
225 miles southwest of Tokyo. Here, in the green
fields and tree-clad mountains around the cities of Nara
and Kyoto, the Japanese nation was born. Like Athens
in ancient Greece, Nara was the gateway through which
religion and art, education and culture entered and spread
through the land of Yamato (the native name of Japan).
Nara was Japan's first great capital, the seat of its first
emperor and the birthplace of Buddhism in the country.
According to legend, a Buddhist image made of camphor
wood floated ashore from the Bay of Chinu (present
Osaka Bay) and henceforth the new religion flourished.
Historically, Buddhism was .introduced when, in the
middle of the 6th century, emissaries from Korea present¬
ed the emperor with a statue of Buddha, several scrolls
of Buddhist scriptures and various ritual implements.
Buddhism immediately struck a sensitive note in the minds
of the people. Buddhist art in Japan starts from this
period. Within 50 years, temples and monasteries, built
under the patronage of the court, rose gracefully from
the heavily wooded landscape at Horyuji near Nara, at
Koryuji near Kyoto and from the hills and valleys of
this whole area the cradle of Japanese art and culture.
With the new religion had come echoes of the art of
India but more important the powerful impact of China
where Buddhism was so greatly transforming and enrich¬
ing Asian art. The story of Japanese architecture and
sculpture is one of successive waves of influence from
China, but like Greece which absorbed and reforged the
aesthetic elements it received from Egypt, Assyria and
Phoenicia, and like China itself in regard to India and
Afghanistan, Japan moulded to its own mode of thought
and expression the artistic traditions it received from China
and distant India. It gathered them up, gave them new
life, added a new conception of Buddhist tenderness and
dignity and a new spirit of grandeur and exaltation that
we discern in the masterpieces of the Asuka, Nara, Heian
and Kamakura periods (7th to 14th centuries.)
Why so much of Buddhist architecture and sculpture
was made of wood instead of stone (though bronze, clay
and dry lacquer were other major materials for statues) is
explained by the abundance of timber from Japan's forests
and the relatively small number of stone quarries. Many
of the wooden treasures have disappeared consumed by
fire, destroyed by earthquake or eaten away bv the ravages
of time. The great bronze Amitabha Buddha of Kama¬
kura outside Tokyo, for instance, now sits unsheltered
under the open sky, but it was once enshrined in a
majestic structure which was struck repeatedly by natural
disasters until it was finally carried away by a tidal wave
in 1495. Despite such calamities, 72,000 ancient sanc¬
tuaries and temples and countless statues, carvings and
reliefs continue to testify to the unique greatness of
Buddhist art in Japan.
In 1180 civil war and fire ravaged the great sanctuaries of Nara.
The repairs and restorations which followed (demanding meti¬
culous knowledge of the older styles) ushered in the great
school of realism of the Kamakura period in the 13th century
which attained its supremacy with the sculptures of such
geniuses as Unkel, his pupil Kaikei and his son Tankei. Left,
a detail of one of two towering doors guardians, 27 feet
high, carved in wood by Unkei and Kaikei for the ravaged
Todaiji monastery at Nara. It illustrates how "realism was the
bone and manly strength the flesh" of the sculpture produced.
The Kamakura spirit of renascence affected not only sculpture.
Old Buddhist sects of the Nara period were revived and new
sects such as Zen Buddhism appeared after the renewal of
contact with China in the I Ith century (suspended In 9th).
These sects shunned icon worship of divinities and developed
portrait sculpture and scroll-paintings to Illustrate lives of
high priests and sect founders. Outstanding example of Kama¬
kura portrait sculpture is statue of the hermit Bahisen carved
by Tankei in 1254 and now at Kyoto. Note flashing eyes In
parchment-like face furrowed by fasting, dessicated body
leaning wearily on pilgrim's wand, hand tendering prayer
scroll. This statue has been described as "one of the most
powerful monastic figures of all time".
54

The Unesco Courier
This 7th century camphor-wood statue of the young Buddha (Miroku
Bosatsu) has been called "one of the noblest images of meditation
ever created by the hand of man." The figure which is in the same
Copyright K. Domon
half cross-legged pose as the statue on page 56 has been compared to
Rodin's "The Thinker" but the smiling lips and the non-oriental shape
of eyes and face strangely recall Leonardo da Vinci's "Mona Lisa".
55

JAPAN (Continued;
Matchless
calm, grace
and beauty
In the western suburbs of Kyoto, In an area
where many of Japan's film studios are today
located, stands the wooden temple of Koryuji,
one of the richest yet least known storehouses
of Japanese art. Some of the temple's master¬
pieces surpass anything to be found even in
Nara, yet until 1950 no photographs of the
treasures at Koryuji were permitted and they
remained practically unknown. Of all the
works of art In the temple, the statue of
Miroku-Bosatsu (a Bodhisattva, or future
Buddha) is probably the most graceful and
subtle. With its gentle smile, the left hand
on the left ankle and the right elbow on the
right knee, two fingers at the cheek, the
figure is of peerless beauty. This pose,
known as the "Hanka shi-i" attitude, was
the one Prince Gautami assumed when he
was plunged in meditation just prior to his
enlightenment. The statue is carved from a
single block of plain wood but it is thought
that it was originally gilded. It dates from
the early 7th century period, called Asuka.
The piece is now housed in the Treasure Hall
of the Koryuji Temple, established in 1922.
Copyright K. Domon
56

The Unesco Courier
This clay statue of a deva or
deml-god has remained in
an almost perfect state of
preservation since the 8th
century in the Todaljl Mo¬
nastery at Nara. It is prized
as one of the great mile¬
stones in the history of
Japanese sculpture for Its
composed serenity and noble
humbleness. It is the out¬
standing example of how
piety and art, holiness and
beauty found perfect unity
during the period of Tempyo
sculpture. Especially expres¬
sive is the posture of the
two hands. Clasped hands
are not found in any previous
periods of Buddhist sculp¬
ture. The statue is known in
Japan as Nikko Bosatsu and
stands near an almost Iden¬
tical figure (Gakka Bos¬
atsu) almost equally well
preserved In the great Hok-
kedo Hall of the monastery.
Photo Taikichi Irie.
57
