TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE
GREAT
HOPE OF
THE 20th
CENTURY
During the past five years, thousands of men and
women have left their home countries and have
gone to all parts of the world ranging from the
plateaux of Bolivia to the rice paddies of the Philip¬
pines to work for a common ideal: to help other peoples
fight three great evils: hunger, poverty and ignorance.
They have been transplanting their special skills and
experience to help these peoples to modernize their
industries, increase their knowledge and develop their
natural resources, under the United Nations Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance.
Technical Assistance covers a wide range of diverse
activities. As one authority has said: "'Truly to judge and
assay technical assistance, one must go out into the fields
and to the factories, the fishing grounds and the hospitals,
the classrooms and the airfields in which the Programme
operates. It is there that one finds out what technical
assistance means and with what true appreciation and
regard the governments and peoples of these countries
look upon those who perform its works."
The degree of under-development differs from country
to country; consequently, the nature and the types of
UNESCO is expanding its technical assistance programme in education and science
this year to the highest point it has ever reached since the United Nations
world programme of technical assistance for economic development went
into operation five years ago. Following recent approval by the U.N. General
Assembly of a $29,734,000 programme of technical assistance by the United Nations
and its agencies in 1956, unesco announced that its share of this programme will
amount to $4,940,933 as compared to $3,937,653 in 1955.
Malcolm S. Adiseshiah, Assistant Unesco Director-General and former head of
UNESCO's technical assistance department, reported that UNESCO will have 300
technical assistance experts in the field in 51 countries this year. At the end
of 1955, 162 experts were working in 43 countries.
The expansion of UNESCO's programme and also the rise in its share of the
total U.N. technical assistance budget from 13 % to 16.6 % were attributed by
Mr. Adiseshiah to an increased demand for aid in education and science. Requests
now total 327 and come from 52 countries on four continents. Demand is highest
for international specialists to assist countries in modernizing their systems of
primary and secondary education. Next biggest field is that of fundamental
education (education aimed at raising living standards), followed by scientific
research, technical education, science teaching and scientific documentation centres.
Among its other technical assistance operations, UNESCO has helped to set up a
national fundamental education training centre in the back country of Liberia, has
helped to reorganize primary and secondary schools in Thailand, has shared in the
launching of two modern institutes of technology in India and has participated in
the study of water resources in Brazil and in desert research in Egypt.
assistance vary greatly in different parts of the world.
In some cases, projects may be in the preliminary stage,
designed to advise and assist the less-developed countries,
to survey their potential resources, to formulate general
plans of development and to establish the institutional
framework: administrative services and institutions
covering labour, agriculture, education, health, civil
aviation, meteorology and telecommunications.
In other cases experts or teams of experts carry out
specific assignments in connexion with particular develop¬
ment programmes. International experts are helping to
establish penicillin and DDT factories, steel and cement
plants and fertilizer and food-processing factories. They
are helping to carry out man-power organization and
vocational and technical training programmes. They are
co-operating in the development of land and water
resources, o-f livestock production, of modern slaughter¬
houses and improved systems of production and distri¬
bution of milk, with United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) assistance for pasteurization plants, mechani¬
zation of fishing craft, effective use for farm implements,
and improvement of nutritional levels.
They are helping in the organi¬
zation of schools to train teachers
and provide specialized experts to
develop courses in particular bran¬
ches in technological colleges and
institutes. They are aiding in cam¬
paigns to wipe out common epidemics
and diseases such as malaria and
tuberculosis, and helping to train
personnel for the development of civil
aviation and telecommunications and
meteorological services.
The major emphasis In technical
assistance activities is on the training
of the nationals of less-developed
countries so that, in time, they can
assume the work initiated by the
experts. Special training program¬
mes are provided, such as regional
training seminars or fellowships for
study abroad at particular institu¬
tions or for practical observation and
training in the more advanced
countries.
Most technical assistance projects
also involve on-the-job
training of local person- (Cont'd on
nel under international next page)

TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE
(Continued)
experts. Training is provided
for a host of administrative, cleri¬
cal and accounting staff, engine¬
ers, nurses, health workers, gen¬
eral mechanics, leather-tanners,
plumbers, carpenters, agricultural
extension workers, economists,
statisticians, teachers and commu¬
nity-development workers, radio, telephone and telegraph
technicians, air navigation and aircraft maintenance
personnel, and meteorologists. Courses are provided in
different countries by the eight organizations which
participate in the Programme.
A few illustrations show the vast range and the scope
of the U.N. Expanded Programme activities. In Brazil, in
Libya and in Turkey, the public administration schools
organized by the Technical Assistance Administration
have trained a large number of nationals in public
administration, accounting and general clerical work. In
Mexico and other Latin-American countries, in Libya, and
Haiti, in Egypt, Iraq and other Arab States, in Ceylon and
Thailand, more than 1,000 trained specialists in funda¬
mental education and community development are now
at work on national plans for decreasing illiteracy and
raising living standards.
Over 600 engineers, foremen and skilled workers from
various branches of industry in Yugoslavia, Turkey,
Bolivia, Colombia, Israel and Iran have been placed under
the International Labour Organization (ILO) worker-
trainees' programme for observation and for on-the-job
training in 314 different firms of sixteen host countries.
In Haiti ILO experts have assisted in developing training
courses through which many automobile mechanics,
general mechanics, woodworkers and leather-tánners
have been trained.
In Afghanistan, Ceylon, India and Thailand malaria
control according to standards and methods recommend¬
ed by World Health Organization (WHO) experts has been
expanded under local responsibility and has become an
integral part of the national health services.
In Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Gold Coast, Greece, Iran,
Iraq, Jamaica, Pakistan, Syria, Tanganyika and Yugo¬
slavia international experts were provided to assist in the
development of water resources for power production,
land reclamation, irrigation and consumption in connexion
with the over-all development programmes of these
countries.
Vast projects for years ahead
As a result of preliminary surveys carried out in 1952-
53, planned and systematic assistance is now being
provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) to Brazil for the development oí the Amazon Valley.
In Ceylon and in India, the fishing-boat mechanization
programme of FAO has reached a stage where practical
results in terms of better and larger catches can be
realized.
Assistance is being given under regional and inter¬
regional projects. A number of problems concern more
than one country, and thus could often be handled more
economically and more effectively on a regional basis.
Training seminars, in which nationals of countries with
similar climatic and physical conditions participate, provi¬
de practical demonstration and training. The eradication
of human and animal diseases which do not respect
national frontiers, depends on joint action on the part of
the countries concerned. The improvement in the living
conditions of particular groups, such as the Andean-
Indian population in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, can be
brought about more effectively through special regional
projects. The Central American States have decided to
promote their economic co-operation and to carry out a
programme of economic integration, and experts are
being provided, on a regional basis, to advise the States
concerned.
National and international problems that call for
technical assistance are on a vast, even an alarming
scale. They will take years to work out satisfactorily.
And, in the long run, the solutions will depend on the
efforts of the people themselves. Many countries are
now engaged in far-reaching development schemes of
their own, but where technical assistance is applied
properly, the process may be shortened in innumerable
ways for more than half of the world's people.
33 EMBLEMS
OF INTERNATIONAL
CO-OPERATION
Natural Resources
Survey
Productivity Cottage Industries,
Handicrafts
land and Water Use Crop Production
and Protection
n m es
Medical Education
and Training
r^ikT
Public Health
Administration
Teacher Training Science Teaching
To give a complete picture of all work being done
under the U.N. Expanded Programme of Technical Assis¬
tance around the world would require a map many times
the size of the one above. Only the locations of regional
and inter-regional projects, seminars and training centres
10

The Unesco Courier. February 1956
Economic Planning Statistics
and Policy
LuHJ Mi5-**>^S
Public Power Production Transport
Administration and Distribution
ö E
Civil Aviation Manufacturing,
Processing
Mining
s a
\nimal Production Fisheries
ind Disease Control
Forestry
n ra
Agricultural
Economics
Agricultural
Extension
Malaria and
Insect Control
m f1
Communicable
Diseases
Health Demonstration
Areas
p.i m
rechnical Education Vocational Training Labour Conditions Social Security Housing and
and Administration and Social Welfare Planning
ÇÎ FS G
Fundamental
Education
Nutrition and
Home Economics
Co-operatives
together with symbols indicating type of work being
done last year are shown here. Where development
problems concern several countries, they can be handled
more economically by regional projects. Bolivia, Ecuador
and Peru, for example, are working together to improve
the living standards of the Indians on the-high plateaux
of the Andes and are being aided by the Andean Indian
Mission. The Central American ¿States are carrying
out a programme of economic Integration with advice
and assistance given by United Nations technical experts.
I I
