THE LAST REFUGE
OF YELLOW FEVER
by Dr. J. Austin Kerr
Rockefeller Foundation
YELLOW fever will invade Mexico within the next few months
probably, and almost certainly within a year. This prediction has
just come from Dr. Fred L. Soper, director of the Pan American
Sanitary Bureau, regional office of the World Health Organization in
Washington. Official notification has been received from the Govern¬
ment of Guatemala that dead and dying monkeys are now being found
around Lake Izabal and there is evidence of the presence in the region
of the yellow fever virus. Yellow fever is now only 75 or 80 miles from
the Mexican-Guatemalan border and 800 miles from the U.S. border
where the whole southern third of the nation is classified as a' yellow
fever "receptive area".
In December 1954, Dr. Soper had already warned: "Yellow fever is
not a 'dead duck', it has not been conquered, it has not been eliminated
as a permanent threat to the United States. It has recently come back
to nearby countries where it had been unknown for decades. Yellow
fever seems of little international importance or concern until it
suddenly appears in a port city as it did in the summer of 1954 in
Port-of-Spain, Trinidad. Then the picture changes overnight and in¬
terest in the disease as a public health menace is rekindled."
Although yellow fever in cities (carried by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes)
has been practically eradicated from most of South America and parts of
Central America, another type of the same disease known as jungle
yellow fever still exists in tropical jungles attacking monkeys which keep
the virus alive. A wave of this jungle yellow fever has been moving
slowly but steadily up through Panama and Central America since 1948,
reviving old memories of the devastating epidemics that preceded the
building of the Panama Canal. The wave reached the north-west corner
of Honduras in September 1954. The threat now is that a jungle in¬
fected person reaching a port city may spread the disease to Aedes
aegypti mosquitoes, starting a chain reaction of urban yellow fever.
One the five great pestilential
diseases from which mankind
suffers, yellow fever, is transmitt¬
ed to man by certain mosquitoes.
It is a tropical disease, primarily of
the shores of the Atlantic Ocean. At
its greatest extent yellow fever spread
from the Belgian Congo to Spain,
France and England in the Old World,
and from Buenos-Aires, Argentina, to
New York, Boston and even Que¬
bec, in the New World. The
disease did make some excursions
to the Pacific Coast of the American
tropics, but it has never been present '
on the East Coast of Africa.
This disease is the "yellow jack" of
history. It is a disease of cities, trans¬
mitted from man to man by the Aedes
aegypti mosquito. The disease was
first diagnosed in the Americas but it
well may have originated in Africa.
Yellow fever is caused by a virus.
The organism is very much smaller than
an ordinary bacterium or germ, and is
transmitted to man by the mosquito.
No mosquito is ever hatched infec¬
ted. It has to acquire its infection
from some infected person or jungle
animal after it hatches.
In 1918 the Rockefeller Foundation
became much interested in yellow fever
and undertook to eradicate it from the
face of the earth. A careful appraisal
of the situation at that time resulted in
. the conclusion that the disease could be
eradicated from the earth in 10 years
at a cost of $5,000,000. Much work
was done, much very successful work,
and in 1925 it was thought that the era¬
dication of the disease was in sight.
But the next year there was a set-back.
Again, in 1928, the goal seemed to be
in sight but in that year there was a
more severe set-back in the form of an
epidemic of more than 1,000 cases in
the city of Rio de Janeiro. In the next
few years the development of in-
CARLOS JUAN FINLAY
The first scientifically based
suspicion that mosquitoes might
be guilty of spreading disease
came In 1881 from Dr. Carlos
Finlay of Cuba. He propounded
the theory that the tiger
mosquito (Aedes aegypti) was
responsible for transmitting
yellow fever. -His theory was
confirmed in 1901 by Walter
Reed of the U.S. Army, in Cuba.
The Wellcome Historical Medical
Museum, London.
creasingly effective measures for the
control of Aedes aegypti so greatly
reduced the amount of yellow fever that
it was possible in 1932 to recognize
that yellow fever was occurring in the
complete absence of this particular
mosquito.
The name given to this form of the
disease was jungle yellow fever. It has
since been recognized to be widespread
in South America and in Africa, where
it exists permanently in the tropical rain
forests of the Amazon Valley and of
the Congo River Basin. From time to
time epidemics of the disease burst out
of these huge central reservoirs.
Jungle Yellow Fever is transmitted to
man by the bite of a jungle mosquito.
The species of mosquitoes present in the
American and African tropical forests
are very different in name but not
really different in their habits. Both
kinds live in the leafy canopy, or top
layer of the forest rather than down at
the ground level where man spends
most of his time.
The distribution of the Aedes aegypti
mosquito nowadays is very much more
restricted than it used to be because of
the presence in all large cities of a
supply of piped water, which we take
for granted. The mosquito is gone
from the temperate regions but it does
remain in the tropical and subtropical
regions.
From many of the seaports of tropical
America, the mosquito has been eradi¬
cated ; in most of the others it is rather
scarce. However, it still remains wide¬
spread in the southern U.S.A.
The confirmation by Walter Reed,
and his co-workers, of Carlos Finlay's
theory that yellow fever was transmitted
by the Aedes aegypti mosquito made it
possible to eradicate yellow fever from
Cuba in 1901 and from the Panama
Canal Zone a few years later. With
the perfection thirty years later of the
techniques for eradicating Aedes aegypti
from cities, towns, villages and rural
houses" in the Americas, it became
possible to protect the residents of those
non-jungle areas against the disease.
Where there were no mosquitoes there
could be no yellow fever.
Quite a different situation exists
regarding jungle yellow fever, for it is
manifestly impossible to control the
jungle mosquitoes which transmit the
disease to man and it always will be.
Reliance has to be placed on individual
protection by vaccinating against
yellow fever the persons who have to
25

YELLOW FEVER
	 (Cont'd) 	
enter the forest and run the risk of
contracting the disease.
One of the great mysteries of modern
medicine is the fact that yellow fever
is not present, and never has been
present, in India or in any other place
in the Orient.
As a matter of fact it has never been
recognized on the coast of East Africa,
so that it would appear that the barrier
to the eastward spread of the disease
lies somewhere inland from that coast.
The yellow fever mosquito (Aedes
aegypti) is widespread in the tropical
portions of the Orient and among the
islands of the Pacific. Furthermore,
this whole area is rich in species of
mosquitoes which are first cousins of
Aedes aegypti.
More important still, some of these
species have been shown in the labora¬
tory to be capable of transmitting the
disease experimentally from monkey to
monkey.
Howler monkeys fell
dead from the trees
IN the Americas there have been two
episodes in recent years which have
been of great interest and impor¬
tance. The first of these was the epi¬
demic of yellow fever which began in
Panama in 1948. In succeeding years
it spread northwards through Costa
Rica, Nicaragua and Honduras causing
cases and deaths each year through
1954, when it burned itself out.
This epidemic was accompanied by
a fantastic mortality of howler and
spider monkeys in the forests of Central
America. In many places the stench
of dead monkeys in the forests was
overpowering.
With the human population well
vaccinated and with Aedes aegypti well
under control in the port cities and other
centres of population, this epidemic was
of relatively little economic importance.
Not since 1925 had yellow fever
previously been diagnosed in Central
America. In that year some cases
occurred in Mexico ; and they are
considered to have been urban cases
transmitted by Aedes aegypti.
In 1920 there is a well authenticated
history of heavy mortality of howler
monkeys in the forests of Honduras.
And in 1882 there is also a very clear
story of an epidemic of yellow fever
in man in the forests of the Guate¬
malan Peten. At the time of the epi¬
demic howler monkeys were observed
to fall dead out of trees by people still
living today.
The second epidemic in recent years
occurred in 1954 in Trinidad, British
West Indies, where yellow fever had not
been diagnosed for 40 years.
By great good fortune, a virus
research laboratory which had been set
up in Port-of-Spain isolated a virus from
a forest labourer who was sick with an
insignificant fever. The virus was
identified as that of yellow fever.
In the succeeding few months, numer¬
ous other strains of yellow fever virus
were isolated in Trinidad from men,
monkeys and mosquitoes. It is prob¬
able that the warning given by the first
virus isolation prevented an epidemic in
the island's aegypti-infested areas.
It is good to know that a disease
which was once one of the great pesti¬
lences of mankind has now been brought
under effective control. In cities the
disease is best controlled by eradicating
the mosquito which transmits it.
Elsewhere, vaccine is available for
everybody who has occasion to enter the
MAJOR WALTER REED
His work was among the most
important in history of medical
research. In I 900 he led group
of U.S. Army doctors to Cuba
to study yellow fever. At end
of series of heroic experiments,
with soldiers and doctors volun¬
teering to be injected with the
fever germs, he proved that
the tiger mosquito caused
yellow fever, and made future
control of the disease possible.
The Wellcome Historical Museum,
London.
jungle and there come into contact with
the disease.
Great though the accomplishments
have been, there is still much to be done.
There should be no complacency in face
of the fact that yellow fever virus is
solidly entrenched, and always will be,
in two enormous tropical areas the
rain forests of the Amazon and Congo
River Basins.
The eradication of Aedes aegypti
from the entire New World is a practical
goal toward which the World Health
Organization is working hard. Eradi¬
cation seems feasible also in certain
areas in Africa and Asia, but precise
information on certain habits of the
mosquito is necessary before a final
decision can be made in regard to
continent-wide eradication in the Eas¬
tern Hemisphere.
