FLEAS, RATS
AND MEN-
LINKS IN A
DEADLY CHAIN
this achievement. Yersin who was one
of Pasteur's pupils, had an adventurous
career. A laboratory research worker
by training, he set out for the Far East,
became an explorer in Indo-China and
found himself in Hong-Kong during the
bubonic plague epidemic of 1894. It
was here that he made his great dis¬
covery which he recounted as follows :
"'Before being buried in the cemetery
the bodies were left for an hour or so
in a kind of cellar. They were already
in coffins and covered with quick-lime.
Institut Pasteur, Paris.
Plague bacilli seen through a microscope.
One of the coffins was opened and I
removed some of the lime. The bubo
(plague boil) was unmistakable ; in less
than a minute I had removed it and I
went up to my laboratory. I quickly
prepared a specimen and placed it
under the microscope. At the first
glance I made out an absolute swarm of
microbes all alike. They were like
very tiny rods, thick, with rounded ends
and not very well coloured..."
After having identified this bacillus in
both rats and men, Yersin was able to
affirm : "'The plague is a contagious and
inoculable disease. It is probable that
rats form the main reservoir."
The early plague investigators in
Hong Kong, however, were obsessed
with the idea that bubonic plague was
LT. COLONEL P. L. SIMOND
primarily a gastro-intestinal infection,
and it was not until 1901 that rat des¬
truction was started there, even though
this had been recommended by Yersin
as early as 1897.
How this question was cleared up by
two scientists, M. Ogata, and P.L Si-
mond working independently is told in a
monograph on plague by Dr. R. Pollit¬
zer, published by WHO.
Working in Formosa. Ogata assumed
that the plague was an insect-borne
infection and suspected rat fleas in par¬
ticular. "'One should pay attention to
insects like fleas", he wrote, "'for as the
rat becomes cold after death, they leave
their host and may transmit the plague
virus direct to man". After inoculating
mice with a mixture obtained by grind¬
ing up fleas collected from plague rats,
he obtained positive results and was
able to prove that the fleas had actually
absorbed plague virus.
Discoveries ridiculed
SIMOND, a French surgeon working in
India, was quite unaware of
Ogata's findings when he began his
own investigations in 1897. He found
that when healthy rats were placed near
infected ones (without there being any
direct contact) the healthy ones contract¬
ed plague. Under exactly the same
conditions no infection was transmitted
as long as both animals had been freed
from fleas beforehand. "On that day,
June 2, 1898", wrote Simond later, "I
experienced an indescribable emotion at
the thought that I had just solved a
mystery that had haunted mankind since
plague first appeared in the world."
Though the findings of Ogata and
Simond were at first ignored or even
ridiculed, their scientific accuracy was
soon established. Further investigations
carried out in all areas where plague
became rampant at the end of the 19th
and in the early 20th centuries showed
that the plague bacillus is constantly
present among the rodents, being spread
from animal to animal not directly but
through their blood-sucking fleas.
They also showed that the danger of
the disease spreading to men arises as a
rule only at times when the infection
among the rodents becomes so wide¬
spread that many animals die and thus
their fleas are driven by hunger to
attack other than their usual hosts, par¬
ticularly man.
17
