The Unesco Courier
a
,
=au
3` 3q ̀ 3, :e ,.,. ' :
. a * e,° :,'- 3 : X :L.. : 4: ·-. , r=·, r ".... ·^', t : ? ̀ . F'. 8 a =  :, :R"s > :·, $. ,£'r` ". It. ^ ;: ̀xii ·a,. if p`...s s''..., `K n : ·, Ha·` r. . r. :·-, .·jazz̀kil.,. :. £' y , ·f : 3x a... e, >n .,, xv .  3'Ri. - a e"`jy,'b3 : i .'k..-, S. : s, ° Y : k Y4 Dus r. · i',, · r, ;. : E\", · . ez ; ; _
,g,, :sur.",, ;..,, 3', 
s L``,H
 :. =z r,.,  : i_ :",, ,., r wF. rut· ;.., ,  .  x..-.,, s . a -, a i3"v :,  : "'_ :, r. ''. :,. . & -.  ;  e. .-.. : ·,. ,. `.x= . : i,.= s=·`. 4,.., G, , r.-, -,, a ",: -a .. _-. . z.. _' , ,.. zF. 3- x".. s..b r. :.^ S.... &r,"3·-. ` ... "r : ,. ; :' : .. :. --_E : 3',. $ :. -... ` `-"p.,  : .-a. _.... e  =. ̀ A, a..,.   «,. a,  : .. _.,, "a", *. , a,.-...,  . ,. s.,.. , ; -.,.. s, 3"- _,  ·.-" `.. -., a...,-... ` ;.
Y T is mankind that counts in the long run. Man
is always the final goal of research. If this
- world is making progress, then it is thanks to
the union of science and of a humanism open to all
traditions and to all spiritual forces. In this respect,
the work now being undertaken on the publication
of a scientific and cultural history of mankind will
serve a use-ful purpose by shedding light on the
unanimity of hopes and the diversity of efforts
which, over the centuries, have built the heritage
we call civilization.
UNEsco has already shown how present-day man
manages to profit only poorly from this heritage.
He teaches his children an almost exclusively
national"history", thus giving them a deformed,
inadequate and occasionally absurd image of the
story of mankind. He painstakingly studies each
relic of'''his''literary or artistic traditions, exalting
their superiority over all other traditions. He boasts
of his great men and preaches their philosophies,
casting only scorn upon the glories and the philoso-
phies of others-when he is aware of their existence.
Realistic exchanges between the cultures of East
and West ; education stripped of political prejudices
and more receptive to the contributions of litera-
ture, the arts and religion without any arbitrary
exclusions : these are the goals sought by the
teachers, the writers and the philosophers who have
been called together on many occasions by UNESCO
to compare curricula and teaching methods. A host
as contacts has been established, books have been
published, and practical results have been achieved
in such fields as textbook revision in some lands.
In carrying out a great part of its work in this
field and in all fields growing out of a broadened
and rejuvenated humanism, UNESCO has received
the assistance of many associations which it
grouped together in 1949 in the International
Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies.
The activities carried out with the support of this
council run-from archaeology to the history of reli-
gion, from Hellenism to ethnography or from
Orientalism to medieval philosophy. However, the
objectives of this work are revealed in the review
Diogenes published by the council since 1952.
*
TT AST year, in defining itself as"a crossroads with
signposts indicating where man stands today
among all cultures of which he can be equally
proud to have been the author", this international
review at the same time drew the image of a future
toward which UNESCO must work. This extension of
the domain of the humanities to the fifteen or
twenty centres of civilizations which have given
modern man unequal but equally irreplaceable gifts,
has placed him in a position where he can no longer
afford to grant exorbitant privileges to one centre.
These results could not have been achieved had
UNESCO not declared, ten years ago, that one of its
foundation stones was"the intellectual solidarity of
mankind", and decided that it would favour.'all
action leading to a stronger union of traditions".
Throughout the entire world-and not merely in
45
the 77 countries making up UNESCO in 1956-men
have embarked on this intellectual collaboration
'from which all sources of civilization must benefit.
Over the past ten years, many barriers, once belie-
ved immovable, have fallen and many prejudices
have disappeared. Every time a breach has been
opened in the walls of ignorance, routine and fear,
it is because men have chosen knowledge rather
than resign themselves to a twilight existence.
This is the exploration of all the landmarks in the
last decade of the cultural life of nations. Free,
compulsory education has been given to millions of
children whose fathers never had the right to
schools. Through books, films and the radio, a huge
mass of knowledge has reached an ever-growing
audience. Cities and nations have awakened to
their historical and artistic treasures-and to the
human value of such treasures in general. In every
case, there have been leaders and pioneers-and it
is they who make up UNESCO.
*
su, in this respect, it would be wise to watch in
the future the work of UNESCO fellowship
holders. At present, they number more than a
thousand and, to many of them, their countries
have entrusted special responsibilities upon their
return from study abroad. Whether educators,
scientistes, sociologists, writers or artists, they have
been able to perfect their methods and techniques.
More important, they have acquired experience in
international co-operation. If they teach what they
have learned from this experience, the results of
their apprenticeship will be incalculable : in Europe,
more than 3, 000 workers representing almost every
trade have already been able to visit their counter-
parts in other countries. Students, too, are travel-
ling in greater and greater numbers : an annual
directory published by UNESCO lists more than 50 ; 000
fellowships for foreign students throughout the
world (1).
Here, too, youth organizations have played a
major role o'f which the international work camp
movement is only one example. For the past
decade, their organizations have learned to know
each other, to profit mutually from their experiences
and to settle their differences. Youth has found,
especially in fundamental education work, a chance
to use its generosity and its love of action.
These associations also help to constitute UNESCO,
a UNESCO reinforced by 400 international non-
governmental organizations. Thanks to them and
thanks to the UNESCO National Commissions of Mem-
ber States it is now possible to co-ordinate the efforts
of all men who seek to work for the progress o'f
reason and justice. In this way an immense intel-
lectual network is being built, a network resemblin. g
a nervous system whose sensitive tips reach out to
urate scientists in laboratories, workers in fields and
factories, and students in schools and universities.
It is in this way that modern men can work"in
the service of peace". Not by preaching peace...
but by building it.
(1) Vol. VII, 1956-57 of"Study Abroad"has recently beer
published. Price $2. 00 ; 10/6 ; 500 frs.
