The Unesco Courier
END) NE IHE WORLD'S
COPYRIGHT MUDDLE
SUTURE generations of authors and publishersmamy well remember September 16, 1955 as the
day when a small ray of light penetrated the
legal jungle of international copyright protection, a
jungle where many an unsuspecting author had
seen his works swallowed up.
This date marked the coming into effect of the
Universal Copyright Convention sponsored by
UNESCO. Since Sept. 16, 1955 a Spanish author or
publisher, for example, has been able to obtain
copyright protection in the United States with no
other formalities than a line of type bearing the
symbol C, his name and the date of publication of
his work. This holds true, of course, for an Ameri-
can author's works in Spain and for the works of
foreign authors, composers and other creative artists
in all the 21 countries which have to date joined the
Universal Copyright Convention (1).
The Convention came into force three years after
its adoption by an intergovernmental conference
convened by UNEsco at Geneva in September 1952.
Although it is still in its infancy, its effects have
already been felt. The United States, in implement-
ing this international agreement, has wiped out a
provision of its copyright law which stated that full
copyright protection could be granted foreign
authors writing in English only if their works had
been printed from type set in the United States.
The exemption from this"manufacturing clause"
applies to authors in all countries adhering to the
Convention. One of the principal beneficiaries will
be the United Kingdom where existing copyright
laws are now being revised so that the Convention
can be ratified.
Behind the adoption of the Universal Copyright
Convention lies the centuries-old story of the
author's struggle to earn a living by his writing.
The"successful"author is, after all, a relatively
new being : Cervantes kept body and soul together
by working as a tax collector ; Spinoza ground lenses
in Amsterdam for his living and Shakespeare relied
on acting for his main source of income.
The 19th Century saw a wave of national legisla-
tion instituting copyright protection for authors.
Unfortunately, the 19th Century also saw a wave of
international literacy piracy. It became quite
obvious that national law could not protect the
author whose works were being plagiarized abroad
(1) Andorra, Cambodia, Chile, Cosio Rica, France, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Haili, the Holy See, Iceland, Israel,
Japan, Laos, Liberia, Lurc11Ihoury,"foIloco, Pakistan, the Phi-
lippines, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland and the United Stales.
just about as fast as they came off the presses in
his on country.
Back in 1842, one of history's most famed victims
of plagiarism, Charles Dickens, drank a hopeful
toast in New York to"international copyright, the
only turnpike between the readers of two great
nations". But the turnpike had yet to be opened in
the 20th century. It was not until 1946 that the
idea of a universal copyright convention was brought
up at the United Nations and the problem turned
over to UNESCO. It was one of the items of unfinished
business which the U. N. inherited from the League
of Nations.
Preparatory studies revealed two basic reasons for
the failure of previous attempts to build a worldwide
system of copyright protection and, in particular
explained why the Berne Copyright Convention of
1886 and that of Montevideo, signed three years
later, were not as effective as had been hoped.
Firstly, sufficient allowance had not been made for
the fact that certain countries could not adhere to
international agreements because of provisions in
their national legislation and secondly, too little
attention had been paid to the economic effects of
copyright law.
It was with this in mind that UNESCO drew up a
realistic convention. It is a complex technical ins-
trument designed to meet a complex technical
problem, but it expresses certain basic principles
which stand out clearly. Countries which are party
to the Gonvention undertake to give the same
copyright protection to foreign authors as to their
own nationals, if the foreign authors come from a
country adhering to the Convention or if their work
has been published in such a country. The minimum
period for copyright protection is fixed at 25 years,
with the exception of photographs and works of
applied art for which the minimum is 10 years. The
author is given the exclusive right to make or
authorize the translation of his work for seven years
after publication. If no translation has been made
in that period, a country may restrict this right
subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions
protecting authors such as payment and the assur-
ance of a correct translation.
Many of these principles already existed in the
Berne and Western Hemisphere conventions but it
is as part of a worldwide agreement that they can
be most effective. The Universal Copyright Conven-
tion draws the world together and bridges the three
watertight compartments into which it was formerly
divided : the Berne Union countries, the Western
Hemisphere countries and the countries which had
never joined any convention.
39
