0
The
Spread of
Buddhist
Art
Two worshippers, one with folded arms, the
other carrying offerings, walk within an arched
niche in this fragment of sculpture made by
an artist of the Gandhara school in the 2nd to
3rd century A.D. The term Gandhara art
is applied to the school of architecture, sculp¬
ture and painting which flourished In north¬
western India and in parts of what are today
Pakistan and Afghanistan, from the 1st to
the 7th centuries A.D., the designation
coming from the ancient name of the region.
Gandhara art was outside the main stream
of Indian tradition, 'and though its subject
matter was Indian, In certain aspects it is
entirely Western in form. The surrounding
arch of the niche with leaf pendants, griffin
socles and draped figures leaning on Its outer
curve shown in this 10-inches high fragment,
is a well-known motif in Gandhara reliefs.
(See also the photograph shown on page 2)
Reproduced from " The Art of India " by Stella Kramrish, courtesy The Phaidon Press, London
The first notable monument to perpetuate the memory
of Buddha was built at Sanchi in Central India
some 2,200 years ago, three centuries after his death.
And although Buddhism disappeared from its native soil,
it spread to other countries of Asia to become the living
faith of millions (some 500 million people today) who in
their turn built monuments to honour Buddha throughout
the vast continent.
Some of these lay hidden for over a thousand years,
buried under sand or lost in the solitudes of impenetrable
tropical jungles. It is only in the past 70 years or so that
explorers and archaeologists have made systematic
studies of these monuments, hacking their way through
entangled undergrowth or digging in the desert wastes
to reveal art that has amazed the world great Buddhas
in eternal sleep or standing in watchful meditation.
The opening up of the Cave of the Thousand Buddhas,
at Tun Huang in Northern China, which had been walled
up since the 11th century A.D., brought to light the
thousand Buddhas whose mysterious smiles had remained
hidden in the dark ; frescoes with gorgeous colours, lapis
lazuli blue, ruby red, gold, topaz, emerald green, glowed
like jewels in the dim light of these incredible caves. In
Cambodia, Indonesia, Burma and Siam were abandoned
monuments around which huge trees had wrapped their
monstrous roots like octopus tentacles.
At the death of the Buddha his ashes were divided up
into eight parts; these were put in jewelled caskets and
enshrined in eight stupas. (A stupa is a sacred shrine
built as an enormous dome mounted on a pedestal with
a stylized umbrella, symbol of royalty, on top.) Around
the main Buddhist stupas containing important relics of
the Buddha or his disciples, there are often smaller ones
containing other reminders such as images, sacred
writings and prayers.
The choice of the dome-like form may have been
suggested by the sepulchral mounds or barrows of ancient
times. However, according to legend, the form of the
stupa was dictated by Buddha himself. It is said that
when his disciples asked him how they should honour his
remains, he laid out his garments one on top of the other
like the steps of a pedestal, placed his alms bowl over them
in reverse and held his stick over it to represent an
umbrella.
The first stupas gave birth to a million others. The
Emperor Asoka (3rd century B.C.) took the relics of
Buddha from seven of the eight original stupas and
redivided them, building another 84,000 stupas in which
to house them. Down the centuries the stupa modified its
form and in each country in Asia it took on distinct
national characteristics. The great stupa of Borobudur
in Java has been described by A.K. Coomaraswamy, the
eminent Indian archaeologist as being like "a ripe fruit
matured in breathless air". In China the stupa was given
a different form and name the pagoda. In Ceylon and
Burma where it is called a dagoba, and in Siam, it soared
skywards till its spire looked like an arrow.
Probably the most remarkable monuments of early
Buddhist art (3rd to 1st century B.C.) are the stupas at
Sanchi in the former Bopal State of India and at Bharut
and Bodh Gaya in Central and Northern India. The
striking thing about this early art is its profound kinship
with nature. Processions led by gaily caparisoned horses
and elephants, men, women and children, animals,
luxuriant vegetation, flowers, fishes, birds, deer, tree
spirits, snakes, are modelled with a natural quality which
carries with it the pulse of life, of tenderness,
of movement, and vitality. (Cont'd on
At this time, Buddha was portrayed symbo- next page)
lically. His birth scene simply showed his
13

BuddhlSt Art (Continued)
mother on a lotus flower with an elephant above. (His
mother, Maya, is said to have dreamt of an elephant
entering her womb; the lotus is an emblem of fertility).
A riderless horse symbolized the Great Departure, when
the Buddha left his palace, his wife and his child to
become an ascetic. The tree with an empty seat under¬
neath stood .for the attainment of Supreme Wisdom,
Buddha having sat in meditation under a tree* the sacred
Bodhi tree when he achieved Enlightenment. Buddha's
first sermon is represented by a wheel The Wheel of the
Law; and finally, the stupa represented death or salvation.
It is significant that early Christian art also expressed
itself in symbols, the Fish, the Dove, and the Cross, while
Christ on the Cross was only seen very much later.
About the 2nd century A.D. these symbols were replaced
by images of the Buddha himself. The horse got its rider,
the empty seat its occupant
and the stupa gave way to the
recumbent figure of Buddha
himself with two trees near his
head and feet and a group of
mourning disciples. The first
images of the Buddha were
made independently by the
sculptors of Mathura and
Gandhara in the north of
India. Mathura was the great
trading centre where Buddhist
images were made to be sold all
over Asia. The Mathura artists
used the earlier genii or yaksha
statue of pre-Buddhist cults as
their model ; the sculptors of
Gandhara and Taxila in the
north-west (Afghanistan and
Pakistan) used Greco-Roman
models of the Apollo for their
first Buddhas.
Later, the classical or Gupta
style, (5th century A.D.) of the
Buddha image was influenced by
both these early types, and all
three, the Mathura, the Gan-
dharan, and the matured classi¬
cal Buddha, influenced later
Buddhist art in general. Indian
influence on the art of Asia of
the time is reflected all over the
Continent in the flying figures
of the Yun Kang caves in
Shansi in China ; in the calm
nobility of the reliefs of Boro-
budur in Java, in the strength
of the early Siamese Buddhas,
in the frescoes of Pagan in
Burma, in the sensuousness of
the women of Sigiriya in Ceylon
and in the movement of the
dancers in the grottos of Kizil
in Central Asia.
The problem that faced the
Buddhist artists at this time was
how to standardize the Buddha's
image so that it would be easily
recognizable. Basing themsel¬
ves on the legend that tells how
Gautama the Buddha was born with certain signs of
greatness, the artists depicted him with a protuberance on
the skull, a third eye and long ear lobes. Right down to
the present time, images of Buddha have borne these
unmistakable characteristics.
The ancient Buddhist artists also depicted particular
moods, such as the tenderness and compassion which
characterize the Buddha. Unlike the later Christian
artists who portrayed Christ undergoing human suffering
on the Cross, they present the Buddha as one completely
detached from human pain, looking with compassion on
all humanity.
Buddha's message is conveyed through graceful gestures
or mudras, derived from earlier gesture language in
common use in ancient India, and from which the ela¬
borate Indian classical dance mudras are developed. Most
frequently the Buddha is shown seated on a lotus throne,
the lotus being in this case the symbol of purity; the
gestures express various things, a state of Illumination,
Meditation, Preaching, The Act of Giving or Charity,
Fearlessness or Reassurance, setting The Wheel of the
Law in motion, etc.
The main themes for the Buddhist artist were the Jataka
tales (stories of Buddha's previous lives, see page 22)
and incidents of his life. Side by side with these are
scenes of everyday life. The figures of prince and prin¬
cess, slave and peasant, soldier and merchant; ships sail¬
ing on rough seas, dancing girls whirling to the music of
ancient instruments in painted and sculptured pavilions;
pious devotees, standing or kneeling in reverence, holding
bronze incense burners; horsemen riding out, their steeds
galloping into space, leaving behind strong fortified
cities; landscapes with curious shaped mountains dotted
with streams and waterfalls;
pools covered with lotus; peas¬
ants ploughing the earth with
the help of bullocks; peacocks
strutting around formal gar¬
dens; women waiting for their
lovers...
The spread of Buddhism
throughout Asia came in several
waves emanating from India
from the first century A.D.
Bronze statues of the time have
been unearthed from the jun¬
gles of Annam, Borneo and
Celebes. Buddhist culture ap¬
parently superimposed itself on
the whole of South East Asia.
Nevertheless each region retain¬
ed much of its own personality
and character. In the 8th cen¬
tury A.D. Buddhist art began
to mature and flower in these
countries, gaining in movement
and vigour when local tradition
dominated. We see this clearly
at Borobudur (Java) in whose
1,400 panels and 504 statues of
the Buddha the Javanese pat¬
tern of composition, harmony
and repose are blended with
the Indian style of art. Later
Javanese art threw off this
influence and asserted its own
national characteristics.
tf,
Musée Guimet Archives, Paris
First portrayals of Buddha as a man rather than as a
symbol are accredited to the Gandhara school whose
images reveal its debt to Greco-Roman art in the 1st
century. The resemblance of some of the Buddha
heads to the Apollo Belvedere is apparent. Buddha's
cranial protuberance has been disguised by the adapta¬
tion of the top-knot of the Greek sun-god, though the
other marks of greatness the third eye between the
brows and the ear lobes are in the Indian tradition.
Chinese Buddhist sculpture
includes some of the most
beautiful religious sculpture in
the world. The Buddha as¬
sumes a strange smile, his eyes
half closed, robes fall in a
gracious pattern, scarves float
boldly, creating arabesques in
space, groups of court ladies
holding lotus buds walk out of
the rock on their way to worship,
flying figures plunge down like
soft curling clouds.
The Chinese Buddhist artist
produced countless steles which
he carved out in wood, stone and bronze, as these were
in great demand for shrines in Buddhist homes. These
steles were decorated with interlaced dragons, floral
motifs, the figures adorned with scarves, necklaces, brace¬
lets and diadems.
In China there are literally thousands of grottos and
temples. The Emperors of the Wei, the Sui and the T'ang
dynasties constructed grottos in the four main sites of
Tun Huang in the north (started in 366 A.D.) where there
are several hundred caves of all periods; Yun Kang
(455 A.D.) in Shansi ; Lung Men (494 A.D.) and Tien Lang
Chan (713 A.D.) near Lolang. Work on these sites went
on for generations. One of the earliest sculptors whose
name we know and whose work still stands is the artist
monk, Hai-t'ong, who in 73 A.D. finished the
colossal stone statue of the Buddha nearly C-0"1 ° on
170 feet high at the temple of Kai-ting fou. page S8)
14

Buddhist Art (Cont'd from page 14)
In Japan the technique and even the esthetics that guided the
artists after the 6th century A.D. came from China and Korea.
The great temple of Horyuji (an extraordinary example of wood
architecture) was built in ten years by Korean carpenters working
at the Imperial Japanese court. Their national genius prevented
their art from being mere imitation of the Chinese style. The
spirit is entirely Japanese, the most characteristic sculpture being
powerful and virile, frequently leaving a disturbing impact.
As south east Asian cultures were coming into maturity in the
8th century A.D., those of Afghanistan and the Central Asian
kingdoms, ravaged by repeated invasions, started to decline. Many
peoples and many influences had mingled in the art of this region.
Here were found hundreds of terra cotta figures, mammoth
Buddhas, frescoes and reliefs in cave monasteries and in grottos
along the old silk route. The colours of the frescoes show us an
astonishing uniformity of technique and a rich mixture of styles.
The Muslim invasions of the Middle Ages destroyed the last
stronghold of Buddhism in India. Artists and monks living in the
university city of Nalanda fled for refuge to Tibet and Nepal.
Nepalese art continued the mediaeval tradition of Indian Buddhist
art. Tibetan painting and sculpture shows a strange mixture of
Chinese, Indian and local tradition.
India and China were the two countries that spread their cultural
mantle over Asia, but these two giants assimilated into their own
heritage various foreign elements. Chinese Buddhist art absorbed
Indian, Greco-Roman, Central Asian and Iranian influences.
During all those centuries right up to the late Middle Ages,
Chinese Buddhist art passed through various styles but the essential
contribution of China towards Asian Buddhist art is in the expres¬
sion of the Buddha's face. The mystic smile is purely a Chinese
creation and is the expression of a profound religious sentiment.
Wherever we find the suggestion of this smile, in Cambodia, in
Japan, in Java, Siam or Burma, we sense the affinity with China.
During the T'ang period (618-907 A.D.) the figures lose their
hieratic character and become more human, but still full of ma¬
jesty and divinity. It is predominantly T'ang sculpture and painting
that influenced Japan.
China, whose inventive genius has benefitted the world (printing,
the magnetic compass, etc.) also invented many new techniques in
art such as the use of dried lacquer and metallic sheets for sculp¬
ture, and repoussé work. Not only did Buddhist artists develop
landscape painting but Wang Wei (699-759 A.D.) created the
monochrome landscape in Chinese ink which reached its supreme
expression under the Sung dynasty (960-1127 A.D.).
Buddhist art has an amazing unity and an amazing diversity. It
can be compared only to the unity and diversity of Christian art in
Europe. All art seeks to bring us nearer to the values which
guide all men. The Buddha brings a message of peace; Christ
brings us a message of peace; the artist tries to interpret this mes¬
sage in his own way. In the knowledge of the similarity of all men
lies also the fact of the unity of all men and with an understanding
of other arts we deepen our understanding of our own.

