Today's archaeology was
pioneered by museums
DIGGING UP
HISTORY FOR
THE SHOWCASE
by Sir Leonard Woolley
ROYAL TOMBS at Ur and other sites of ancient Sumerian civilization
in present-day Iraq were excavated in the early I920's by expeditions
financed by Western museums. Excavators at Ur (above, left, digging
out tablets) were from joint expedition of the British Museum and the
Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, directed by Sir Leonard
I
N the old days, which after all are not so very old, say,
sixty years ago, the museums of the Western world
played the principal part in archaeological excavation.
Th& reason for this was simple. Museum directors
needed material to fill their glass cases. Generally speaking
the objects of the sort wanted were to be found in countries
whose people and governments were but little concerned with
the artistic' or scientific importance of antiquities; sometimes
they allowed the free export of such things ; sometimes they
PRIDE AND INTEREST of Near and Middle East countries In their own past history and
cultural monuments have been stimulated by rich finds made in their soil, and have led to deve¬
lopment of national antiquities services and museums. Above, statuettes from temple of Ishtar,
goddess of love and fertility, at Mari, Syria, on display at Damascus Museum, where a great
exhibition grouped priceless antiquities, works of art and documents found in Syria in 1952.
conceded to the excavator half of the objects he found and
kept the other half themselves; sometimes, either from patriotic
motives or 'because they had exaggerated ideas about the
financial value of antiquities, they forbade export altogether;
but the law was not easy to enforce, and often the officials
winked at breaches of it.
Turkey in the days of Sultan Abd el Hamid was a case in
point. When in the early years of this century David Hogarth
dug at Ephesus he found deep down in the mud and water
that hid the ruins of the altar of "Diana
of the Ephesians" a number of gold orna¬
ments and precious figurines carved in
ivory. One evening towards the close of
his season, as he was working over his
catalogue, the Government Inspector
attached to the expedition came and
asked him which, and how many of the
treasures he proposed to take back to
England. As Hogarth had signed an
undertaking to hand everything over to
the Turkish Government he was aston¬
ished at the question and replied that
he was of course taking nothing; the
inspector was equally astonished, and
also very angry that he was not going to
receive the bribe that he had expected.
But not all archaeologists were so
conscientious; thus, nearly all the small
objects unearthed by the German exca¬
vators at Sinjirli found their way to
Berlin. How the famous head of Queen
Nefertiti got there has never been
explained. The German mission digging
at Tell el Amarna discovered it, and at
the season's end the finds were duly
examined and divided by the Egyptian
Government inspector; the excavators
said that he allotted the head to them in
the ordinary way, the inspector declared
that he never even saw it and had he
Copyright Museum of Dasmascus

The Unesco Courier
Taken from "Digging up the Past" and "Ur : The First Phases" by Sir Leonard Woolley, copyright Penguin Books Ltd.. London and New York
Woolley. Most interesting treasure from Ur now in the British Museum
is the "Standard of Ur", a work in mosaic which when found was nothing
more than minute bits of stone and shell lying loosely in the soil. Months
of delicate restoration revealed Sumerian representations of War
and (above, right) a victory banquet. Top row of figures are feasting
Sumerian captains wearing sheepskin kilts and being entertained by
woman singer and lyre player. Centre and lower rows show servants
carrying in food and soldiers bringing spoils and a bound prisoner.
Such rich discoveries encouraged other museums to enter the field.
By 1933 eleven Western museum expeditions were at work In Iraq.
done so would never have let it go. Scandal says that the
lovely head was shown but shown under an effective disguise
of plaster-of-paris; but whatever happened, Nefertiti went to
the Kaiser Friedrich's Museum, and Cairo refused to licence
any more German excavations in Egypt.
But of course most of the objects acquired by museums
from their own diggings were got legally, conceded to them
by the government concerned. Egypt, for example, (and
Egypt was one of the first countries to organise its antiquities
service) allowed expedi¬
tions to keep half of the
things they found; it was
a very sensible arrange¬
ment, whereby the for¬
eign museums were en¬
couraged to dig and the
Egyptian National Mu¬
seum amassed a vast col¬
lection of treasures with¬
out having to spend a pen¬
ny on excavation.
This possibility of build¬
ing up a national collec- 	
tion "on the cheap" was
one argument in favour
of the law dividing finds equally between the two parties, and
a further advantage was that the dispersal of Egyptian anti¬
quities and their exhibition in foreign museums was wonder¬
fully good propaganda; people in other lands who saw these
treasures of art and antiquity acquired a profound admiration
for Egypt as the birthplace of an ancient civilization, so that
Egypt won a preeminent position in men's minds.
In proportion as the museums of Europe and America were
able by their exhibits to impress upon their public the interest
and the importance of the history which those antiquities
illustrated, the greater grew the demand for additions to the
collections or for their expansion so as to include objects
from other countries which had in the past influenced the
growth of culture.
UNESCO and its International Committee on Monuments, Artistic
and Historical Sites and Archaeological Excavations have always
sought to improve international co-operation in such matters as
access to archaeological sites and the proper study of remains and their
preservation. A series of International principles applicable to archaeo¬
logical excavations has now been formulated and will be presented
for approval to UNESCO'S General Conference in New Delhi in No¬
vember. While recognizing that the regulation of excavations is
primarily for the domestic jurisdiction of each state, UNESCO proposes
to its member states that this principle should now be harmonized
with that of a liberally understood and freely accepted co-operation.
But it was realised that the need could not be met by the
mere purchase of antiquities; things bought from dealers
might be intrinsically important, but their historical contribu¬
tion was small; only the objects found in the course of
scientifically controlled excavation could be considered to have
real documentary value. So it was that more money became
available for excavation and more missions took the field
and nearly all of them were sponsored by museums.
This is very well illustrated by the case of Iraq. After
the first World War the
British, finding themselves
in control of the country,
abrogated the old Turkish
law whereby all antiquities
remained the property
of the government and
introduced the principle
of equal shares between
government and excavator,
and at once the museums
saw their opportunity.
In 1922 there were two
	 missions working, one at
Kish and one at Ur; the
results they obtained were
so important for ancient history and the objects which they
were allowed to take home were so fine and so numerous that
in 1933 there were eleven expeditions in the field, all of them
representing museums of the western world.
This archaeological activity aroused world-wide interest in
Iraq, which was for the country's good, and incidentally
brought in a lot of much-needed foreign money; another
result was the foundation of an Iraq National Museum. When
in 1922 the government's share of objects from the two
expeditions was brought to Baghdad there
was no museum to house them and they were
simply laid out on rough trestle tables in a
government office. Then, as more came in
each year, Miss Gertrude Bell, the British
Cont'd
on
next page
II

DIGGING UP HISTORY (Continued)
archaeologist, took over an old building which served the
purpose for a time, and finally a real museum was built in
'which could be properly exhibited the finest collection of
Mesopotamian antiquities in the world.
But a museum requires a staff, a staff of experts in various
branches, and while at the outset foreign officials had to
undertake the task of guidance, in due time Iraquis, trained
in scientific methods, could form an independent service and
fulfill all the many duties that museum charge entails.
I well remember the government Inspector coming to Ur
at the close of our 1928 season and asking me what was the
best object I had unearthed. I showed him something and
he looked blankly at it and enquired what it was. I told him
that I didn't know. It had undoubtedly been a large and very
fine piece of mosaic, but as its background of wood and
bitumen had decayed and the minute bits of stone and shell
had been lying loose in the soil the only means of lifting it
out which I could devise had prevented my ever seeing it,
since it had had to be
treated half an inch at a
time; what I had now
was an ugly lump of
muslin, wax and dirt,
and I really did not
know what could be
made of it. It would
need months of work
and if the work were
successful it would, I be¬
lieved, prove to be the
best object of the year;
but then nobody could
be sure of success.
The inspector said that
there was nobody
connected with the Iraq
Museum who could pos¬
sibly undertake a job of
that sort; I must keep
the thing and the Iraq
Government would take
in its place the next-best
object, something that
did not need elaborate
treatment. Well, I did
put in months of work,
and the "Standard of
Ur" is the most interest¬
ing of all the treasures
from Ur now in the
British Museum. But
today the Iraq Museum
would tackle such a task
itself and would there¬
fore keep its treasures.
It was the museums of
the world that opened up
Iraq as an archaeolo¬
gical centre, and undoub¬
tedly they were enabled
to do so by the fact that the law allowed them to keep so
much of what they discovered. When in 1934 a new Anti¬
quities Law was passed and the old generous terms were
changed, the foreign excavations, almost without exception,
closed down; digging had ceased to pay, from the museums'
point of view. Egypt also modified its old terms and was no
longer a fruitful field for museum expeditions. Turkey main¬
tained its old exclusive Antiquities Law, justified by the fact
of there being fine museums with scientific staffs for mainte¬
nance and also for excavation. The good work done by
Western museum missions in developing the interest of so
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY has spent over half a century "digging up
history". From 1907 to 1911 he was with the Eckley B. Coxe expedition
at Nubia in the Sudan and until 1914 was in charge of the British Museum
Excavations at Car*chemish, on the Euphrates. From 1922 to 1934 he
conducted the excavations at Ur in Mesopotamia for the Trustees of the
British Museum and the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania. His
many works include : "Ur Excavations", "Ur : The First Phases",
"Ur of the Chaldees" and "A Forgotten Kingdom".
Copyright Iraq Museum
IVORY MASTERPIECE discovered in Iraq under ruins of Nimrud, Assyrian
capital in the I Ith and 9th centuries B.C., is a plaque showing in a relief a lioness
attacking a man in a lotus field. Inlaid with lapis lazuli, cornelian and gold,
it is one of many important findsinscribed clay tablets, ivory works of art
and potterymade at Nimrud In I 952 by expedition of British School of
Archaeology ¡n Iraq, which were later exhibited in the Iraq Museum, Baghdad.
many peoples in their own past history and cultural monu¬
ments now turned against them in so far as they were now
no longer able to dig, as in former days, for the enrichment
of the Western museums.
But digging goes on. In some parts of the world conditions
still make it possible for museums to play the major part in
such work; but generally changed circumstances have brought
in a change of policy (not to say a change of heart) as
regards archaeological excavation. Today most foreign mis¬
sions working in the field do so under the aegis and largely
at the expense of scientific bodies which are interested in the
increase of historical knowledge, and not in the acquisition of
objects by the museums of their own countries; they are
satisfied that the greater part of the objects found, or all of
them, should remain in the country owning the site, provided
only that they are preserved in a properly organised museum
where they can be studied by scholars; what they do reserve
for themselves is the right to publish the results of their work
and thereby to gain the satisfaction and the credit of having
made a contribution to
scientific knowledge.
Clearly this is a more
altruistic attitude than
that of the museum
which promoted excava¬
tions with an eye to the
empty shelves in its glass
cases, but the present
system could not have
been introduced if the
old policy of museum
acquisitions had not pa¬
ved the way for it.
Those exhibits aroused
the interest of the public
which, in the end, pays
for the work now being
done. Granted that in
the past precious treasu¬
res were allowed to leave
the lands of their origin,
that is the price which
those lands have had to
pay for the recovery of
their own past history
through the generous
expenditure of other
people's money and for
the possession of rich
collections of antiquities
unearthed by members
of foreign archaelogical
expeditions.
Yesterday Iraq might
have complained that the
unique bronze gate-fit¬
tings of Balawat were in
the British Museum; to¬
day an expedition financ¬
ed by the British Institute
of Archaeology in Iraq
and supported also by museum contributions has been
able to hand over to the Iraq Museum a new set of bronze
gate-fittings found at Balawat, no less important artistically
than the original ones from this site, but scientifically more
important because, coming from properly controlled diggings,
they have all the value of known historical associations.
