Papyri hunt ¡n Egypt
DESERT 'WASTE PAPER BASKETS'
REVEAL CITY LIFE 2,000 YEARS AGO
- . .. I¿=
~
t
Jr.
' s5
71 h tf
"N.
. ' - ¡r '
=>-{
;X( -"?:;; f^ riV^^j>Té-4
m-, -V¡TTfÍJU,7iB
\ ¿2%
.KV
in
TATTERED TEXT unearthed from the sands of Egypt is one of papyrus fragments from which the daily life of Greeks and Romans living in the
Valley of the Nile two thousand years ago can be reconstructed. This text, dating from the third century, contains illustrated verses on the Labours
of Hercules (Heracles). The only Labour illustrated on this fragment is the killing of the Nemean Lion and is from the beginning of a roll.
Photo from " The Oxyhrynchus Papyri " published by Egypt Exploration Society, London,
by E. G. Turner
Professor of Papyrology in the University of London
Supposing the contents of your waste paper basket
were by some miracle to be preserved for two
thousand years, generations of the future would have
the most exciting material from which to construct a
picture of your daily life.. Yet that is almost exactly
what has happened in some of the cities in which the
Greeks and Romans lived in Egypt two millenia ago.
The dry climate has preserved those everyday writings
and notices that are usually the first victims of time.
TRIUMPHAL ARCH erected by Romans in the city of Antinoe where
many ancient papyri have been discovered. Drawing, taken from
the book Description de l'Egypte, shows the state of the ruins in 1817.
British Museum
Turn over casually the pages of a catalogue of papers
from these cities and you find here an invitation "Theon,
Origens' son, invites you to his sister's wedding tomorrow,
9th Tybi, .2 o'clock," here a shopping reminder "to get
olive kernels," here again a duplicate of the form you put
in at the local town hall to register yourself and your
family in the census.
The material principally in use for writing two
thousand years ago was papyrus (it is the same actual
word as paper). It was manufactured by cutting the
stem of the papyrus plant into fine vertical sections with
a sharp knife, and laying these pithy ribbons across each
other in two layers placed at right angles. Skilful
ancient craftsmen turned out a smooth surface which
had the colour and expectation of life of good hand¬
made paper. For writing, a reed pen and carbon ink
(lamp-black and gum) were employed.
It is only in the last hundred years that these papyrus
texts have begun to re-emerge from the sands in -which
they have slept and to speak to us again. At first a few
were picked up by chance travellers and treated as
curiosities. Then the ancient sites began to be systemat¬
ically exploited for the "fertile earth" (potash salts)
they had accumulated, and papyri in their thousands
turned up. Finally came the idea of systematic explor¬
ation of some of the better preserved cities, especially
Oxyrhynchus, Antinoe, Hermopolis, by men such as Pétrie,
Borchardt, Breccia, Johnson, Boak, and above all, Grenfell
.and Hunt. The town to which the latter devoted the
greater part of their lives, where they excavated . and
published their finds in the handsome series known as
"The Oxyrhynchus Papyri" (the last few volumes of
26

which have been published with the support of Unesco),
is perhaps the best known of them all.
Its name Oxyrhynchus is derived from the sharp-nosed
fish held sacred by its inhabitants. Though four hundred
miles from the sea it was a place of importance. From
what can be seen on the ground today only a poor idea
of its appearance can be formed. "We can get some help
by inspecting the pictures of it and of Antinoe drawn by
Napoleon's team of surveyors a hundred and fifty years
ago, when the ruins were in better condition.
But we learn to know the place best of all from the
allusions contained in letters and papers found on the
spot. Its walls, pierced by five principal gates, were about
four miles round. The main streets were lined and
roofed with colonnades. In the centre of the town stood
an enormous temple of Sarapis; at its south-western side
stood the theatre, where 9,000 persons could be seated to
take part in public events as well as watch
dramatic performances.
One popular show of which we have what
appears to be the producer's script was the
mime of Charition. On the coast of some
barbarian country the pretty heroine is
about to be sacrificed to the moon by the
native king. In the very nick of time she
is rescued by her brother and a party of
Greeks who make her gaolers drunk. There
is a great deal of comic barbarian jabbering
and low gags by the clown, the whole punc¬
tuated by drums beating. At other times
the stage is given over to a Homeric reciter,
one of whom was paid a fee of 448 drachmas
(£20) for a recital. At other times again
The Unesco Courier
24, Thoth 4, 41bs of meat, 2 trotters, 1 tongue,
1 snout.
Thoth 6, tongue and chaps.
Thoth 11, 2 lbs of meat, 1 tongue, 2 kidneys."
Theophanes, a civil servant who went on an official
trip to Antioch has left us his laundry list: "Fine tunics 2,
self-colour 1, Dalmatics 2, self-colour 1, other wraps 2,
birruses 2, chlamys 1. Ditto linen: Tunics 4, Dalmatics 4,
mantles 3, face-cloth 1, -scarf 1, bath-towels 4, face towel
1, linen squares 4, 'Romans' 2, counterpane 1, dressing-
gown 1, bolsters 2, breeches 2, boots 1, felt slippers 1, rug-
cushion 1, small rug 1, carpet-bag, ground-sheet, small
pillow, etc." These were clothes intended to last for a
trip of some five months in summer time. Some of them
seem to have gone missing for there is a query mark
against them.
CHILDHOOD TREASURES of a
little boy named Theon were found
among ruins of houses at Oxyrhynchus.
They include a rag doll, a wooden
horse and spoon and a papyrus rosette.
British Museum.
the crowd is gathered for a religious festival
or to hear a new Roman emperor proclaimed.
Trades carried on and different classes of
inhabitants are reflected in the names given
to the various districts of the townthe
Shepherds' or Gooseherds' Quarter, the Cob¬
blers' Market Quarter, the Cretan or Jewish
Quarter. In the shade of the principal build¬
ings, the scribes and bankers set up their
booths and attended to customers in the
street, writing letters for the illiterate,
registering contracts, making out receipts
such as this one: "Quintus Zenas, son of
Quintus, greetings to Gaius Iulius Zosimus
I have received from you the ten drachmas
of Ptolemaic silver left to me by Gaius Mae¬
cenas Gratus, according to a will made in
Roman form. Year 1 of Tiberius Caesar Augustus."
The economic position of the inhabitants can be
measured by what they leave in their wills or what they
deposit with the pawnbroker. There is a very large class
of manual labourers who live in a single room only just
at subsistence level, and have a hard fight against hunger
and the tax gatherer. Above them come the educated
classes, some of them skilled craftsmen, but the majority
living on rents from their lands. They are Greek in
origins and sympathy, like the very few really rich per¬
sons in their midst who in fact come from Alexandria.
AÍ a however. sufficiency rather than ostentation
is the key-note of this community: a stone-built house
with an enclosed courtyard and a few rooms opening out
of it for entertaining, half a dozen slaves, a few books
an adequate but not sumptuous table. Here is a meat
bill for one such household:
Among his miscellaneous papers Theophanes kept a few
sheets that stimulated a father's pridethe letters sent to
him by his schoolboy sons. They are beautifully written
and spelled, and of impeccable sentiments, no doubt put
together under a tutor's eye. So other schoolboys write
formally to their parents, occasionally relaxing with a
postscript: "Please feed my pigeons."
Some fathers however failed to gain such respect from
their children. Here is how little Theon writes to his
father: "That was a fine thing not to take me with you to
town. If you won't take me with you to Alexandria, I
won't write you a letter, I won't speak to you, I won't
talk to you. And if you go to Alexandria, I won't ever
take your hand or ever greet you again. That's what
happens if you don't take me with you... In
future send for me, please do. If you don't
send I won't eat, I won't drink, so there." (Cont'd on
For all his childish tantrum, little Theon next page)
27

L
ILArt^jííS^^^
LEGACY RECEIPT reads :
"Quintus Zenas, son of Quintus,
greetings to Gaius lulius Zosi-
mus. I have received from you
ten drachmas of Ptolemaic silver
left to me by Gaius Maecenas
Gratus, . according to a will
made in Roman form..."
British Museum
LAUNDRY LIST of Theo¬
phanes, a civil servant who
took with him on an official
mission to Antioch sufficient
clothes to last for five
months in summer time. Some
items, with query marks against
them, seem to have gone astray.
Courtesy of John Rylands Library,
Manchester
m f
r J'JÍ'ci
l_J* - - - -
writes a long letter. He has probably already put away
his toysthe rag-doll, the wooden horse, that were
found among the remains of the housesand gone to
school. And schooling is a serious business. First come
exercises in writing : the letters of the alphabet, then
maxims such as "Letters are the foundation of life" or
"Sea, fire and woman are evils three," then exercises in
grammar. Next follows reading of the poets, especially
of Homer the favourite. So many copies of Homer have
been found in Oxyrhynchus that there was certainly one
for each house.
Most often the lesson would have consisted in learning
by heart, but occasionally the homework had to be
prepared in writing and has survived. At a later stage,
when the modern undergraduate writes essays, the pupil
is asked to write speeches on imaginary situations. A list
of subjects includes such topics as this: "'Write a speech
accusing Euripides of impiety for representing Heracles
turning mad on the stage."
The great event in a young man's life is the time he
spends among the ephebes, the adolescents' section of the
gymnasium. The gymnasium itself was more than a
centre for physical exercise. It formed a kind of social
club for all the Greeks in town, and had its junior and
senior sections. The young were offered more than
physical instruction. Of course they developed their
bodies and ran races (in which a spectator might invoke
magical aid for a favoured competitor), but they compet¬
ed in cultural events as well. A list recently discovered
gives the names of the winners in the town games over a
period of thirty years in three events playing the
trumpet, acting as herald, and in poetry. They were well
worth winning, for the four top boys every year were
given exemption from taxes.
For the leaders of society their life's work is government
service and the conduct of municipal affairs in their own
town. It is a career that will require them to dip freely
into their pockets on behalf of their fellow citizens as well
as give freely of their time. There will be oil and fuel to
supply free for use in the gymnasium, the market to be
inspected, tax collection to-be supervised and any defi¬
ciencies made good, the sessions of the local council to be
attended. And very stormy some of these meetings
appear from their minutes, especially when it is a matter
of election to one of the more onerous offices.
Other young men are bound apprentices to learn a trade
such as weaving, or the craft of writing. A line of Virgil
written out again and again in a beautiful handwriting is
probably the work of one of the latter. Such trainees live
in their master's house, are fed and clothed by him, and
get 20 days holiday a year. Other persons find it ne¬
cessary to seek a livelihood away from home. To join
the army is one resource, and may offer a snug berth.
"I give thanks to Sarapis and Good Fortune that while
all are sweating breaking stones all day long, I swagger
about as a principalis and do nothing" is how one of
them writes home from the Arabian desert. Another has
reached Italy with the great convoy of grain ships that
leaves Egypt regularly for Rome and sends back word:
"We had a slow trip but not a bad one, and I felt none
of the ill-effects that often occur, especially on a first
crossing."
It is, however, not only in their joys but their sorrows
too that we can share. A friend writes to comfort one
whose son has died young: "The gods are my witness that
when I heard of my master, our son, I was as distressed
and mourned as if he were my own child yes, for he was
winsome. When I was eager to rush to you, Pinoution
held me back, saying that you, my lord Apollonianus, had
instructed him I was not to come up since you were gone
to the Arsinoite nome. But bear it nobly. This, too, is
what the gods have in store."
Two thousand years are annihilated by the poignancy
of this distress.
el
^ ¿¿ft*
WEDDING INVITATION
like other missives was written
on papyrus by the people of
ancient Oxyrhynchus using a
reed pen and carbon ink (lamp¬
black and gum) for ink. This
particular invitation was sent
by the bride-to-be's brother.
Courtesy Egypt Exploration Society
SHARP-NOSED FISH is the
Oxyrhynchus a member of the
mormyr family of fishes which
vary greatly in size and shape,
and are found in the fresh wa¬
ters of Africa. It was regarded
as a sacred fish and city of Oxy¬
rhynchus was named after it.
28
