YUGOSLAV MASTERPIECES
in the palm of your hand
Hardly any part of Europe can show a variety in art traditions to compare with that of Yugo¬
slavia. This land has not only been a meeting ground of East and West for centuries but also a
great cross-roads at which many antique civilizations flourished Byzantine, Romanesque, Gothic,
Baroque, Mohammedan. Ruins of Roman aqueducts rise along the Adriatic coast not .far from
the monumental walls of the palace of Diocletian in the heart of Split. Relics of Greek and other -
antique architecture and sculpture are being brought to light. Montenegro and Macedonia in the
south are treasure houses of ancient Serb and Macedonian cultures. In the Macedonian moun¬
tains are the famous medieval monasteries, sepulchres of medieval Serbian kings with their
frescoes which bridge an important gap in the history of painting from the 6th to the 13th
century. (See unesco courier N° 11, 1954.) The sculpture, architecture and painting on these
pages reveal a few of the masterpieces of Yugoslav art from the 9th century onward which the
Yugoslav Government has chosen as the designs for a series of twelve new stamps issued on March
26, to illustrate the development of Yugoslav art through the centuries.
Croat King
ibjâet
This relief portrays a Croat king (seat¬
ed on throne) from an early period
probably 10th century. Next to the king
is his counsellor, and at their feet a
bearded figure, possibly a vanquished
prince. Relief is found on stone slab in
former Temple of Jupiter, later converted
Christian baptistery, at palace of
Diocletian in Split. Split arose around
the great palace which Roman emperor
Diocletian built there in 302 A.D. Less
than five miles from Split, at Salona,
excavations have uncovered important
architectural remains and many prehis¬
toric objects now housed in Split Museum.
Pre-dates Giotto
FftFSK* lMp*0(
m
m
T
Sc
si
V
no
ra
cc
pe
PC
in
ba
le
A
W(
m
of
lis group of figures from a fresco
jpocani monastery in Serbia is expr
ye of grief at the death of the H
rgin. The first frescoes at - the n
stery were executed about 1265, a
nk among the finest and most valua
mpositions of European painting of t
riod. They pre-date Giotto and
rtrayal of human emotions and suff
5. Frescoes were painted against a golc
ckground which peeled off with tin
iving an intriguing under-tint behii
comparison of these frescoes with t
3rks of Greek origin shows how the e
:nts borrowed from Byzantium we
ten enriched among the Serbian artis
at
es-
3ly
Ki¬
nd
Die
lis
his
er¬
en
ie,
id.
he
le¬
re
ts.
Phantasy in Stone
These two female figures, bearers of the
sacred oil, chrism, are part of the Ro¬
manesque portal of the cathedral of Tro-
gir, on the Adriatic coast, considered
the loveliest anywhere in Yugoslavia. Its
decorations are symbolical representations
of Sin personified by the nude figures
of Adam and Eve while a series of other
figures from the life and torment of
Christ speak of Redemption. Executed
in 1240 by the master sculptor Radovan,
this portal depicts Christian legend, the
history of the years and the months,
plants and animals mingled in a phan¬
tasy in stone with ivory-like splendour.
30

The Unesco Courier
Mysterious Bogomils
Peace in Bronze
This equestrian statue in bronze is the
work . of one of the outstanding living
sculptors of Yugoslavia, Antun Augus-
tincic, born in Croatia. Symbolizing
peace, it was a Yugoslav gift to the U.N.,
now stands in gardens of U.N. building
in New York. (See UNESCO COURIER
No 10, 1955; U.S. edition Dec. 1955.)
THE ILLUSTRATIONS ON
THESE AND THE FOLLOWING
PAGES ARE TAKEN FROM
THE ORIGINAL ENGRAVINGS
FOR THE SERIES OF 12
STAMPS ON YUGOSLAV ART.
THE STAMPS ARE PRINTED
WITH SERRATED EDGES.
This huge block of stone represents an art which has no parallel in either East or West.
It is a massive tombstone placed over, a grave by a sect of heretics (called Bogomils) who
challenged the Roman . and Eastern Orthodox churches in the 13th and 14th centuries.
Over 30,000 Bogomil -tombstones have been found in Bosnia and Herzegovina, others in
Serbia and Macedonia.' Often grouped in enormous cemeteries in remote forests or mountain
areas, they are decorated with scenes from the hunt or dance and with foliage or geometrical
figures. Their meaning is still obscure. Formidable figure, here, may symbolize a feudal
lord of yore, his raised arm suggesting his sway over lands and people, the bow and arrow
his warrior's prowess, the circle next to his hand, the moon or sun. But no one is sure.
Church or Castle?
The ancient church of St. Donat at Zadar (formerly Zara) on the Adriatic coast, resembles a castle
with its narrow slit-windows and forbidding high walls. Dating from the ninth century, and now
containing an archaeological museum, the church was built out 'of the remains of a Roman temple.
It is perhaps the most important Adriatic architectural monument of the pre-Romanesque epoch in
Yugoslavia. Its style reflects Byzantine and Ravenna influences. Art historians have compared
this church to the royal chapels of Charlemagne but St. Donat's'is simpler of line and more rustic.
31

YUGOSLAV MASTERPIECES (Cont'd)
A Saint's
Story *
Genius
Ridiculed
rvj - SlBF.NIk
The Montenegro city of Kotor in southern Yugoslavia has been
compared to "a Venice without canals and a Verona without its
river Adige." Hemmed in on all sides by rugged mountains, it
is one of the most picturesque ports on the Adriatic. Here are
to be found some of the great masterpieces of Romanesque-
Gothic style sculpture executed in the 14th and 15th centuries.
Above, part of frieze from ciborium in Kotor cathedral. Reliefs
depict scenes from life of St. Tryphon, patron saint of the city,
tell of his healing the sick, expelling evil spirits, converting ' the
heathens,, and his suffering and dying for his faith. The harmo¬
nious restraint and light and shade effects are remarkable.
The great cathedral built at Sibenik on the Croatian coast
north of Split, is testimony to the great genius of Juraj Dalmatinac
(also called Matejavic). When Dalmatinac built it in 1431, foreign
experts ridiculed the cupola he set on a square tower. And
when he combined the ceiling of the nave with the roof built of
great blocks of stone, they said it would collapse under its own
weight. The section where the heads pictured above occur took
the great architect and sculptor 30 years to complete. A belt of
heads of sailors, ships' captains, citizens and peasants girding the
body of the cathedral are all Dalmatinác's work. Each head is
striking for its human expression, its gentleness or suffering.
Self Portrait Serbia's Golden Age Pulpit Saint
At té. **
ké
The monastery of Studenica provides a
striking example of the golden age of
Serbian architecture and sculpture.
Here we see a part of the arch and a
griffin from the western portal of the
church of the Holy Virgin in the mo¬
nastery. Built by the Serbian ruler
Steven Nemanja between 1190 and 1196,
the church combines Romanesque and
Byzantine elements. Important frescoes
adorn the interior.
1(11 R \ 1/ CR.KVL U BÉÍ.CU
70'*<; ,
norm PORTAL CRKVE U STUDENICT
Jfc.*T
Rihard Jakopic is considered one of the
outstanding representatives of modern
Slovene impressionist painting. Before
his death during the last war, he de¬
veloped his school of painting with a
group of artists at Skofja Loka, near
Ljubljana. This 100 dinar stamp repro¬
duces one of his self portraits.
Yugoslav churches in the middle of the
18th century abounded in a host of co¬
loured or gilt baroque figures. Many
are found on church pulpits such as
the siint shown here. The work of an
unknown artist, it adorns the church of
Maria Snjezna at Belec in the northern
part of Yugoslavia.
