When Europe styled itself the "Old World", it did so
for reasons of chronology: it had discovered and
occupied a land that was completely unknown.
But today there are people who use the phrase with an
entirely different connotation. The Old World to them is
an exhausted, worn-out continent which has run its
course and now stands crouched over its own tomb.
Meanwhile, facing it, a New World has arisen, full of
vigour, throbbing with vitality and of unlimited promise.
Neither Europe nor America form complete, homogen¬
eous blocs; each in fact is infinitely diversified. The
European continent, though small in size, is so composite
and so charged with history that it has been incapable of
forming a coherent whole. The difficulties encountered
by those favouring an integrated Europe make this
abundantly clear.
The New World too is a veritable mosaic. Within the
Anglo-Saxon, Spanish and Portuguese Americas there are
countless areas marked by French, Irish, Italian and Ger¬
man influences, to cite only a few, and overlooking for the
moment the role of the American Indians and the Negroes
of Africa. Furthermore, the problems dividing Latin
America and the United States are no less serious than
those which must be solved between the two sides of the
Atlantic. Culturally, the South American countries have
closer ties with the Iberian peninsula than with the United
States. It is this internal diversity within each of the two
worlds which renders a study of their similarities and
differences so difficult.
For many years, Europeans believed that America had
no history. Certain Americans it is true recent immi¬
grants not yet firmly rooted in their country of adoption
sometimes helped to strengthen that illusion. But that
period is past. Everywhere an effort is being made to
unroll the past, to unearth the civilizations of the pre-
Columbian eras. New York points to its kinship with New
Amsterdam, Mexico looks back to its ties with the Aztecs
and the Mayas, Brazil takes pride in the Baroque churches
of its colonial period...
The influence of European thought and European art
and religion on the New World makes a fascinating subject
for study. European culture, when transplanted abroad,
underwent many modifications in the course of time. It
developed its own peculiar characteristics, with some
notions exaggeratedly overdeveloped, others degenerating
quickly, and some merely adapted to the new environment.
Thus the American language has diverged from English,
Brazilian now reveals subtle differences with Portuguese,
while Romanticism in South America and the positivist
philosophy in Brazil or Chile are far removed from their
European models.
The literatures of the two Americas were once no more
than extensions of European literature; today they are
not only independent but, having reached maturity, are
inspiring certain literary trends in the Old World.
European architects, headed by Le Corbusier, have made
a by no means negligible contribution to architectural
development in the two Americas; now their ideas, trans¬
formed into new and original designs, are making their
way back to Europe.
Events such as these, though particularly striking today,
are in no way new. They have repeatedly occurred
throughout the centuries. But there is no need to exag¬
gerate their importance. Is there any real justification,
for instance, in saying (as some have in Brazil) that the
Baroque style was originally inspired by the tortuous roots
and branches of the vast Amazon forests? Nonetheless it
does remain true that an intellectual give-and-take
developed from the start between both sides of the
Atlantic, with the role of America becoming more sharply
defined as political and spiritual independence were pro¬
gressively achieved.
One of the most striking features of a number of Latin
American countries today is their determination to esta¬
blish the link between themselves and their pre-Colum¬
bian civilizations. It is a pity that so much of what these
civilizations once contained was destroyed by the Conquest.
Paul Rivet, the French authority on ancient American
civilizations, defends the thesis of an"Indo-Mediterranean
humanism" derived from a combination of European and
native cultures. Other authorities however, like Paulo
Carneiro of Brazil, believe that the current "return to the
past" is little more than a vogue of fashion and the cult
of the native a figment of modern imagination. Whoever
is right, there is no escaping the attachment of many
Latin American nations today to the roots of their
pre-Columbian past.
The New World is also growing increasingly aware of its
debt to Africa, even where racial prejudice and segregation
still persist.In certain countries (Brazil for example) the
problem of Negro-white relations seems practically solved.
Certainly no one can deny that the Negro has made his
contribution to America both during the slavery era and
since emancipation.
Then, too, there is the contribution which is quite
important in more than one region of the Americas of
inhabitants from China, Japan and the Near East. Thus
Europe cannot help but admit that it has no exclusive
claim to the settling of the American continent.
Between the Old and the New World relations are far
too often dominated by a complex of inferiority. Even
America does not escape this when it views Europe's
extraordinary contribution to civilization.
But the complex is at present greater on
the European side of the Atlantic. Europe
feels humiliated after the two wars which
ripped it asunder and which it could not
have brought to an end if indeed it really
Cont'd
next page
15

TWO WORLDS
FACE TO FACE
(Continued)
ended them without the intervention of America. Europe
also ponders the material aid which the United States has
given and continues to give it. Europe is alarmed at the
world's economic instability, by the growing industrial
power of the United States and its gigantic technical civi¬
lization... by certain trends in America which may ultim¬
ately result in a dangerous limitation of freedom to
thought and opinion.
Europe and even Latin America often accuse the United
States of inundating them with a low-type literature, with
a kind of pre-digested intellectual (or so-called intellec¬
tual) fare, commercialized films, and soulless mechanical
devices. In my opinion, we are
not wrong to defend ourselves
against things of this kind, but
we are often unjust in believing
that is all the United States
has to offer us.
We are unjust when we
ignore the spiritual and non-
material side of life in the
United States despite the fact
that it has been developing and
penetrating the nation in depth;
when we ignore the highly ori¬
ginal efforts which have led to
a renewal of art and literature
in that country. Why do we
keep looking only at what the
United States does in the
practical and technical sphere
and forget that there are large
numbers of scientists who de¬
vote their lives to nothing but
pure and disinterested res¬
earch activities?
Europe is also over-inclined
to neglect Latin America as
a whole, its efforts, its struggles
and its material and spiritual
achievements. ' How many of us
in Europe have even an inkling of the obstacles which the
painting, music and films of Mexico and Brazil had to
overcome before there was any response whatever from
the Old World? This is only one of many examples.
But the problem is by no means one-sided. Americans
do not find it easy to understand Europe. True, they
know our continent a little better as a result of the
contacts made during the last wars, the troops stationed
on our soil, the influx of tourists, our fashion trade, and
the increasing exchange of scholars, teachers and students
as well as the translation of representative works of
European thought. In addition, European emigration
which followed recent political events has contributed to
and even helped to inspire the new growth of intellectual
life in the New World.
Many Americans gladly point out that, despite certain
appearances to the contrary, Europe's influence in the
intellectual world is actually increasing. This is parti¬
cularly gratifying in view of the great numbers of Ameri¬
cans who believe, as I have already said, that Europe is
doomed to internal strife, decadence and probably death.
It is time America stopped believing as it has for so
long that Europe's role in the world,' is henceforth
reduced to that of former Greece, that is, a sort of
museum or library to be tapped at will but devoid of any
activity of its own. That is a role which Europe has never
accepted. America is only now beginning to recognize its
error of judgment. In reality, the Old World, politically
and materially weakened though it be, is more active
than it has ever been in the intellectual field. Its
creative powers remain unimpaired and its living con¬
tribution to contemporary civilization continues.
The New World;
' Is Europe doomed to
strife, decadence and
certain death?
The Old World:
'Do human values
take second place in
America ? '
The American side of the Atlantic also finds it hard
to understand Europe's intellectual torment. Its endless
searching and discussion is criticized readily as "Byzan¬
tine". In the eyes of some Americans, the Old World
seems like Byzantium arguing over the sex of the angels
while the enemy is hammering at its gates. And yet,
this desire for deep investigation, this inquisitiveness, is
the very essence of intellectual vigour.
These are but a few aspects selected at random from
amongst hundreds of others of the lack of comprehension
and the misunderstandings which separate the New from
the Old World, and in many instances the United States
from both Europe and Latin America.
Is such lack of comprehension inevitable? and is this
kind of misunderstanding irrefutable? The answer must
be "No", for it behoves thinkers and men of action alike
to work for the Old World and to reinforce the ties which
unite them.
But if this is to succeed, the exchange of ideas and
minds across the Atlantic must be a two-way bridge with
each continent offering the other the best and most
valuable elements it possesses. I am quite aware that
exchanges and cross-fertilization of this kind are fraught
with a terrible danger; they may well lead to dreary uni¬
formity. We already suffer from this in a number of
domains, and particularly in
architecture.
How much difference is there
between certain sections of
Montreal, New York or Rio de
Janeiro and the reconstructed
parts of some of the cities
devastated by the war, such as
Frankfort or Berlin? The
danger should not be under¬
estimated; it should be taken
seriously, for there is no doubt
it can be eliminated.
Despite the cries of certain
alarmists, the civilizations on
both shores of the Atlantic are
not diametrically opposed but
in fact complementary. They
are developing In the same
intellectual climate, condition¬
ed by Christianity which, in its
two branches and under the
influence of Greco-Roman cul¬
ture, has produced Western
civilization. This element is a
living force even for those who
deny any religious belief.
The American sociologist
Pitrim A. Sorokin, professor
at Harvard Unisersity, who began his career in Europe
and then continued it in America, and thus knows both
civilizations since he is a product of both, has laid great
stress on the points of convergence of the New and the
Old World. His conviction is that "'despite three or four
centuries of geographical separation, there has for a long
time been, and still is, only one culture, namely Western
or European-American culture, all the features of which
are identical on either continent. Being fundamentally
a single unit, this culture is as old on one continent as it
is on the other; it is no younger in America than it is
in Europe. For the same reason, it evolved in either
place in the same direction, passing through the same
phases and developing the same trends."
Moreover, the problem of intellectual relations trans¬
cends the boundaries of the two continents. Qur
Western civilization cannot be isolated from the rest of
the world. It must form an integral part of a community
in which each nation contributes its original share to a
new humanism of tomorrow, so that each element is
subtle and differentiated to reflect the universe itself.
A provocative volume, "The Old and the New World" has just been
published by unesco in its series Unity and Diversity o] Cultures (price:
$4.00; 21/-; 1,000 francs). It contains the addresses and discussions of two
International Forums organized by UNESCO in 1954 in Geneva and Sao Paulo
during which scholars discussed the cultural and moral relations between
Europe and the New World. The above text is an edited and abridged
version oí the address by Mr. Babel, chairman oi the International Forum
committee of Geneva.
16
