From India across the face of Asia
THE SPREAD
OF BUDDHIST
CULTURE
by Anil de Silva Vigier
Two thousand five hundred years ago a great part of
the world was still plunged in the darkness of
ignorance and barbarism. New centres of civilization
had appeared in Greece and Italy, but the Parthenon had
still to be built and Rome was only a small town.
Yet already for , many centuries, in the Middle East,
China and India, men had known how to write and build ;
their ships travelled far and wide exchanging goods,
works of art and ideas. All over this antique world men,
becoming more and more masters of their own destinies,
felt a growing need for a more human creed. Buddhism
in India, Taoism in China and, five centuries later,
Christianity in the West, all played the same role : man
ceased to be dominated by superstition and was given
an opportunity to achieve his own salvation. Buddhism
spread its message in Asia as, later, Christianity spread
over Europe.
Two thousand five hundred years ago Gautama Buddha
lived and preached his doctrine. He taught that all men
were equal in the face of suffering. By his own example
he showed that suffering could be overcome by the
renunciation of desire and the elimination of ignorance.
This doctrine is today the living faith of many millions of
Asian people.
Buddha's message is essentially a peaceful one and
there is no instance in the whole history of Buddhism
where violence in the form of torture or war has ever
been used in its name. In a world of permanent conflicts,
Buddhism met man's eternal desire for peace. In India,
the Emperor Asoka (3rd century B.C.) after a bloody
war against the neighbouring Kalinga Kingdom, was
converted to Buddhism and issued his famous edict which
he caused to be carved on rock and stone throughout his
kingdom. It said : "' One hundred and fifty thousand
people were deported, one hundred thousand people were
killed, many times this number perished... Remorse fills
the King friend of the Gods since he has conquered
Kalinga. The conquest of an independent country means
murder, death or captivity for men. All are victims of
violence and death and separation from those who are
dear to them. These thoughts weigh heavily on the King
friend of the Gods...
'"Even if the number of victims in the conquest of
Kalinga were a hundred thousand times smaller, the
thought of this would afflict the King friend of the Gods.
Even if they were in the wrong the King friend of the
Gods believes we should have been as patient as possible.
The victory that is the best of all is the Victory of the
Mme Anil de Silva Vigier of Ceylon, is the first Asian woman to specia¬
lize in archaeology and art history, and has spent many years of study and
research on Buddhist painting and sculpture. She is the author of "The
Life of the Buddha" retold from ancient sources, published by the Phaidon
Press, London, in 1955. Mme Vigier has greatly assisted in the preparation
of this special issue.
Pakistan
Bamiyan
\ /
Kabul %/
AFGHANISTAN
AJANTA CAVES
(India)
Good Law (Buddhism) . This text
of the Law is engraved for my
sons and grandchildren so that
they will not dream of new
victories. Let them seek real
victories through the exercise of
patience..."
The world in which Buddhism
was born and spread was a world
of vast movements of men and
ideas, much vaster than we gen¬
erally imagine. In this world
India was, geographically, the
crossroads between Western and
Far Eastern civilizations. Both
the great land routes entered her
Northern passes from the West
through Persia and from the East
through China and Central Asia,
over the old silk caravan route.
On the maritime routes, Per¬
sian, Greek, Roman and Alexan¬
drian ships scoured the ports of
Gujerath and Konkan oh "the
west coast, and Coimbatore,
Andhra, Bengal and Ceylon in
the South. India was also the
port of call for Far Eastern ships
going westwards, and her own
ships sailed out in all directions.
Contacts between the Western
world and India were continuous.
The Persian Emperor Darius left
his great terraced palace at Per-
sepolis to lead an expedition into
the Punjab and the Indus valley
a few years before the death of
Buddha in the 5th century B.C.
Alexander's expedition in the fourth century B.C.,
bringing with it topographers and scientists, helped to
strengthen the land route kept up by the couriers of the
Persian monarchs. Alexander built a port and a fleet
on the Indus and his captain, Nearque, sailed down the
Indus, forging a maritime route between the Indus and
the Tigris. Alexander returned through Afghanistan with
elephants and Indian soldiers in his army.
The whole of North West India, Afghanistan, Gandhara
(Afghanistan and Pakistan territory) and the Punjab re¬
mained for centuries under a succession of Greek princes,
one of whom, Milanda (Menander), became a Buddhist.
These Greek kingdoms favoured the penetration of Greek,
Hellenistic and Roman culture. Greeks intermarried with
Indians and these colonies formed centres of a new
Greco-Roman Buddhist culture. The new culture develop¬
ed rapidly under the Kushana Empire which succeeded
10

The Unesco Courier
UNESCO COURIER ' MAP
the Greeks in the 1st century A.D. (The Kushana were
nomads who invaded India from China and Central Asia
and whose emperors were converted to Buddhism)
More important than wars and conquests was the long
period of friendship between Alexander's successors, the
Seleucid kings in Persia and the Mauryan kings in North
India, whose palace was modelled on that of Darius at
Persepolis, Persia. Ambassadors were exchanged and for¬
eign merchants thronged the capital Pataliputra (today
Patna, capital of Bihar province, N.E. India). The Emperor
Asoka married a Greek princess and sent his missionaries
both to the East and the West. His emissaries to the
West, carrying the message of Buddha, reached Persia,
Egypt, Macedonia, Cyrenaica and N.W. Greece.
The Roman historian Pliny tells us that Rome bought
50 million sesterces worth of merchandise from India
every year: cotton from Malwa, lacquer and nard from
Pataliputra, indigo, spices and precious stones from Kon-
kan, jades, ivories, silk and elephants which the Romans
used in large numbers for their army and circus. Roman
coins of gold have been found in the North West
and along the coast of South India at Cannanore, Coim-
batore and Mahabalipurum with effigies of Augustus,
Caracalla, Claudius, Theodore and Constantine. A Roman-
Asian artist named Titus painted Buddhist frescoes at
Miran in Central Asia. Alexandrine merchants aided
Buddhist convents at Nasik and Junnar near Bombay.
History gives us only a glimpse of the vast movement
of men at this time: prisoners of war, recruits in various
armies (Indian archers excelled in the Persian army) , and
deserters who roamed about from place to
place; craftsmen, metal workers, ivory carvers (Cont'd on
(Indian ivories have been found in Pompeii); next page)
weavers, jewellers, sculptors and ceramists
II

Buddhist Culture (Cont'd;
were sought after at any price and protected by great
merchants and prices.
Central Asia was composed of the regions of Bamiyan
(south of ancient Bactria in Afghanistan), and of Kashgar
and Kutsha, up to the frontier town of Tun Huang in
North West China. This territory, closed in between
immense mountains, the T'ien-chan or Celestial Mountain
in the North and the massifs of Karakorum and Kouen-
Lun in the south had two routes through the desert: the
northern one passing by the oases of Kashgar and Kutsha,
Kizil and Tourfan, and the southern one through Yarkand,
Khotan, Miran and Lobnor.
All of them met at Tun Huang. These were the princip¬
al arteries of Buddhist expansion in Central Asia and
China and all became powerful centres of Buddhist
.culture. Thousands of grottos were excavated and open-
air constructions were built. At Kizil alone, the Mingoi
or Thousand Grottos (not to be confused with the Cave
of the Thousand Buddhas at Tun Huang, see below) were
cut out, painted and carved by hundreds of artisans from
the Middle East, India and Chinai
Cavaliers escorted Hsuan Tsang
HsuAN Tsang the famous Chinese scholar who made
his pilgrimage to India by the northern route in the
7th century A.D., leaves us an unforgettable account
of his journey through burning deserts and snow-clad
passes, whose hardships were relieved only by the
luxury and plenty of these oasis kingdoms in Central Asia.
Of Kutsha he says: "The Kingdom was about a thousand
li (1 li = 654 yards) to the East and West and six hundred
li to the South and North. The soil produces rice, red
millet, raisins, pomegranates, pears, prunes, peaches and
apricots. There are mines of gold, copper, tin and plum¬
bago. The climate is mild, the ways of the people pure
and honest and their writing is taken from India. Their
musicians are renowned for their skill in flute and guitar
playing."
We find too historians of the Chinese T'ang dynasty
talking of the charm of the women of Kutsha and re¬
cording that musicians and dancers from Kutsha were
seen at the Imperial Chinese fêtes, dressed in crimson
silk turbans. We are told that they san.g "The Meeting of
the Seventh Evening," "The Woman of Jade Takes Round
the Cup," and "The Battle of Flowers."
The frescoes of Kutsha, Kizil and Kumtura show us the
splendid cavaliers those who, Hsuan Tsang tells us,
escorted him on his way, for many of these paintings
were made by contemporaries of Hsuan Tsang. They
'show cavaliers wearing long boots, riding coats of silk
falling to the knees and taken in at the waist with metal
belts. Their tunics of blue, grey, white and olive green
were embroidered with pearls, lined and bordered with
fur. Their reddish hair was caught up with ribbons at the
neck. They must have formed a glorious sight with their
coloured and gilded banners and standards, sculptured and
painted with heraldic animals like the tiger and the
dragon. Hsuan Tsang returned to China laden with
manuscripts and images of the Buddha.
Marco Polo stopped here
Marco Polo, who in the 14th century seems to have
gone by Kashgar, Yarkand and Lobnor, also
stresses in his memoirs the luxury and refinement
in these kingdoms. For instance, writing of Khotan, he
says: "Everything necessary for human life is here in the
greatest plenty cotton, flax, hemp, grain, wine. The in¬
habitants cultivate farms and vineyards and have
numerous gardens. They also make a living by trade and
manufacture." Of Lobnor he writes: "'Travellers who
intend to cross the desert usually halt for a considerable
time, both to rest from their fatigues and to make the
necessary preparations for their further journey."
But most interesting for us is his obvious reference to
the large composition of the Parinirvana or The Death
of Buddha. He says: "The town of Camipichu is large
and magnificent. The bulk of the people worship idols
and they have many monasteries and abbeys built after
the manner of the country. In these are a multitude of
idols, some of wood, some of stone and some of clay. They
are all highly polished and covered with gilding. They
are carved in a masterly style. Some are of very great
size and others are small. The former lie in a recumbent
posture, the smaller figures stand behind them and have
the appearance of disciples in the act of reverential
salutation. Both great and small are held in extreme
veneration."
Bamiyan in Afghanistan was the halting place for ca¬
ravans either going to or coming from the difficult passes
of the Hindu Kush which barred the way into India. Into
the façade of the great cliff of Bamiyan, cave sanctuaries
with colossal Buddhas were carved and painted, two of
these images reaching 173 and 120 feet in height. Mer¬
chants paid craftsmen and artists to paint and carve
statues as thank-offerings for a safe journey.
Tun Huang at the other end of the route was developed
with the help of merchants and royal benefactors, for
the Wei, the T'ang and the Sung dynasties in China all
contributed to the creation of one of the most extraordi¬
nary monuments of Buddhist culture. Among the
hundreds of cave temples at Tun Huang the Cave of the
Thousand Buddhas, sealed up for centuries, housed price¬
less treasures of manuscripts and paintings on silk. Today
archaeologists look after the preservation of the Tun
Huang monuments, while dozens of artists make copies
from the innumerable frescoes. Yang Kang and Lung-
Men are two of the other great Buddhist sites in China.
The first time we hear of Buddhism in China is in
65 A.D. when the Han prince, Tch'ou protected a small
Buddhist community at Lo-yang. The translation of Bud¬
dhist texts from Sanskrit and Pali into Chinese was offi¬
cially encouraged by the Kushna Empire in India (30-224
A.D.). Kushna missionaries were heard reciting Buddhist
scriptures to a Chinese official named Ching Lu in the
2nd century A.D. In addition, Chinese travellers, mer¬
chants, imperial envoys and pilgrims came to India by
sea. In fact it is to Chinese historians that we owe the
only written accounts of these early kingdoms in South
East Asia.
Yi-T'sin saw a thousand monks
Eventually there were large monasteries and univer¬
sities in all the Buddhist countries of south east Asia,
Japan and Korea. Pilgrims in their thousands from
all over Asia thronged the great Buddhist universities of
Takila in Pakistan and Nalanda in India. Hostels were
built by the kings of Ceylon and Java to house the
students and pilgrims from their countries at Nalanda
and at Bodh Gaya in the Indian state of Bihar, where
Buddha attained enlightenment under the Bodhi tree.
Many of the ships leaving Bengal and the southern India
ports carried pilgrims and missionaries and, in addition to
the spices, precious stones, muslins and silks in their
holds, they bore statues of the Buddha made in the busy
centres of Mathura and Nalanda.
Yi-T'sin, another Chinese pilgrim, travelling by sea
stopped in the kingdom of Crivijaya (Malay peninsula),
for six months to learn Sanskrit grammar. He says :
"There are more than a thousand Buddhist monks whose
minds are set on study and good works. They examine
and discuss all possible subjects exactly as in India itself.
If a Chinese monk wishes to go to the West (India) in
order to read and study he cannot do better than stay
here for a year or two. He will then be fitted to go to
India for further study." Yi T'sin spent ten years at
Nalanda and later copied and translated into Chinese
many Buddhist texts, and also wrote his memoirs.
The coming of Buddhism, coinciding as it did with
increased trade and intercourse between Asian countries,
resulted in a period of intense intellectual life. The mes¬
sage of the brotherhood of men "No one is a Brahmin
or an outcast by birth, but one becomes a Brahmin or an
outcast by one's actions" (Vasala Sutra) was like rain
falling on parched earth. It stimulated a resurgence of
popular feeling just as Christ's message did in Rome in
early Christian times.
The richly human content of the Buddhist message was
the spiritual basis of an art which overrode the frontiers
of artistic expression, revitalized local traditions, making
them truly Buddhist and at the same time free expres¬
sions of national character. It was a message of hope. It
was a message of peace. And these two important factors
helped the development and maturity of a noble art that
has enriched the artistic traditions of the world.
12
