Copyright Franco Albini, Milan
1
J
SPIRAL STAIRWAY
TO THE HOLY GRAIL
A museum of unique design which was built under the courtyard of the Archbishop's
Palace In Genoa, Italy, is to house religious treasures from the nearby cathedral of San
Lorenzo. It consists of a series of circular rooms "tailored" by the architect to "fit" the
permanent collection of gold and silver objects formerly locked away in cupboards in
the Cathedral sacristy. Visitors descend into the museum, which resembles a crypt
or catacomb, down a spiral staircase. San Lorenzo's treasures are now easily accessible
to the public and can be quickly taken into the Cathedral for religious ceremonies. Upper
photo shows models of the three main rooms. A smaller room enshrines the Holy Grail, a
Roman glass vessel of the first century A.D. which according to tradition received the Blood
of Christ. Lower photo shows largest room seen through aperture giving access to it.
RAMESES II
CALLED IT:
If the term "museum" strikes
terror in the heart of the average
layman, it is as nothing compar¬
ed to the sense of panic which its
sound produces in the poor innocents
who spend their lives rationalizing its
very -existence. Going back into the
far reaches of time, the word '"mu¬
seum" has succeeded in meaning
nothing vital to anyone in particular,
yet at the same time it has strangely
meant all things to all men.
Through a metamorphosis lasting
many centuries it has emerged from
the simple designation of a temple of
the Muse to be the encompassing
catch basin for all those disparate
elements of hereditary culture which
are not yet woven into the general
fabric of modern education. And
since education has been defined as
"the art of casting artificial pearls
before real swine," it is only natural
that museum workers should have
concerned themselves with the elabo¬
rate furnishing of the trough at the
expense of the digestive capacity of
the feeders.
Museums came into being at a very
early date. There are records of
Egyptian kings who formed collec¬
tions of votive offerings to placate the
gods. Rameses II was the proprietor
of a large library of papyri at Thebes,
above the entrance of which was
carved the hieroglyphic incription,
"A Place of Healing for the Soul."
Centuries later, at the lower end of
the Nile, Ptolemy Soter founded the
Great Museum of Alexandria, the
fountainhead of later humanistic
study. This was not the museum of
sterile objects we know today, nor yet
a temple, but rather a Platonic grove
or academy in which were gathered
about the famous library the leading
intellects of the day.
Socrates spurned sculpture
The role of the collector in the an¬
cient world is steeped in legend¬
ary speculation and coloured
with political oratory. The idea of a
public collection, or in fact any collec¬
tion at all, was unknown to the early
Greeks, whose creative impulses were
so balanced, and whose spiritual
contentment and harmony so complete
that they were never conscious of the
intellectual processes involved in the
creation of a work of art itself.
Beauty to the Greek of classic
times was an accepted fact and,
paradoxically, he despised the factors
that produced it. Socrates, originally
a sculptor, gave up the calling as low
and ignoble, and in Plato's "Republic"
the artist was looked upon as the
lowest order of citizen. He was con¬
sidered a common labourer or decora¬
tor. Since the Greeks, therefore, had
few opinions of art and even fewer
theories, they obviously could not be¬
come collectors in the sense in which
we use the word today. For the col¬
lector is first and last a theorist of
taste upon whose acceptance or re¬
jection of fashionable judgements the
art market fluctuates, up or down,
with startling inconstancy.

'A PLACE OF HEALING FOR THE SOU L'
by Francis Henry Taylor
The work of art remained, then,
until the time of Alexander, either an
oblation to the gods or part of the
public wealth to be guarded in the
treasury of the temple and reckoned
in terms of its monetary or material
value.
As the over-expanded empire of
Alexander the Great crumbled of its
own weight and succumbed to oriental
influences, there developed a nostalgia
for the purity of Athenian civiliza¬
tion. The Hellenistic monarchs of
the Near East began to collect syste¬
matically and reverently the ruins
and fragments of the classic age, and
one may well say that the true fathers
of European collecting were Attalus
and Eumenes II, kings of Pergamum,
outrivaled only by the reigning
houses of Antioch and Alexandria.
Cicero castigated Caesar
Collecting, both public and priv¬
ate, came into its own with the
prosperity of the Roman Em¬
pire. It was incumbent upon every
citizen of rank to be a collector. An
entire quarter of Rome was devoted
to art dealers and galleries, much like
New York' s Fifty-Seventh Street.
Latin literature is filled with the
exploits of art dealers, of their forge¬
ries and swindles, of their ennoble¬
ment and of the fantastic auctions of
Caligula, who forced his retinue to
bid against each other for the fruits
of his military plunder. Cicero ful¬
minated against the rapaciousness of
Caesar and Sulla in stripping the
colonies of their artistic wealth.
The Middle Ages open another
vista in the retrospect of the "mag-
piety" of mankind. Collecting con¬
tinued, but for another purpose. As
the lamp of classic learning flickered
out in the dark night of barbarism,
the Church became at once the sym¬
bol and repository for our intellectual
heritage. Yet the number of objects
preserved in the collections of the
medieval palace or cathedral treasury
are negligible. They were the occa¬
sional gifts of visiting sovereigns, or
conscience tributes paid to patron
saints in expiation of accomplished or
anticipated sin. It was in the mon¬
astery alone that the work of art
was estimated for its own sake.
Whether in regard to the illumination
of a sacred text or the intricacy of a
gold-enameled reliquary, such pre¬
lates as the Abbot Suger of Saint-
Denis or Bishop Bernward of Hildes¬
heim displayed a connoisseurship that
might humble the most impeccable
curator of the present day.
To understand the formation of the
great Renaissance collections and
their implications for those of us who
have to show them and dust them
off, it is necessary to digress into the
distinction between the humanism of
Italy and that of the graver nations
of the North. For in this distinction
lie the differences of viewpoint that
in later centuries were to segregate
the museums of art from similar ins¬
titutions of history and science.
Throughout the quattrocento, col¬
lections of antiques were gathered to¬
gether either to furnish formal aca¬
demies of art, as in the case of the
Medici Gardens, or as the properties
of artists' studios. The ateliers of
Bertoldo, the master of Michelang¬
elo, and the Squarcione in Padua were
rich in fragments of the past. Dona-
tello made constant studies from the
antique, while Lodovico Conzaga,
Bishop of Mantua, formed a collec¬
tion of plaster casts probably no
better than those which are gathering
grime in our museum basements.
The Italian, very much like Ameri¬
cans and Europeans today, was living
for the pleasures of this world, having
only a slight concern for religion and
ethics. He admired art for its own
sake, and more than that, he accepted
it as part of his daily life. The art
of Italy has ever sought to reconcile
the human with the humanistic for
there the art gallery of today was
born even to the extent of bringing
into common use the Italian word
gal.eria to designate its purpose.
The scientific museum, on the other
hand, is the product of a curiosity
and literalness that are purely Teuto¬
nic, and it grew out of the hereditary
accumulations of the petty German
rulers. These collections, like the hu¬
manism of the North, were more con¬
cerned with the dawn of science and
social regeneration than with beauty.
The intellectual movements here were
essentially religious ; they developed
a rational spirit of enquiry which
helped, in many ways, to bring about
the Reformation.
A phoenix from the Bishop
The collections themselves compris¬
ed gifts of all sorts, sea shells,
fossils, stuffed alligators, mine¬
rals, works of gold, silver and glass,
as well as a hodgepodge of painting
and statuary. The Archduke Al-
brecht of Bavaria possessed, for
example, 3,407 objects which included,
in addition to 780 paintings, "an egg
which an abbot had found within
another egg", manna which fell from
Heaven in a famine, a stuffed ele-
pnant, a hydra and a basilisk.
The Elector of Saxony, Augustus I,
was possibly more fortunate, for his
collections included "a series of por¬
traits of Roman Emperors from
Caesar to Domitian, said to be copies
of originals done by Titian from the
life." To this very remarkable array
were added in 1611 a unicorn and a
phoenix which were presented to him
by the Bishop of Bamberg. Even as
late as our own times Mark Twain
records that it was possible to see in
the sacristy of Cologne Cathedral an
elaborate reliquary containing the
skull of a child, labelled "Head of
Saint John the Baptist at the age of
twelve years."
These objects were gathered toge¬
ther into what was known as the
Wunderkammer. Julius von Schlosser
has shown that the differences in
temperament between the North and
South are inherent in the conflicting
meanings of those two words, Wun¬
derkammer (wonder chamber) and
gallería (the formal gallery). More¬
over the passion for classification
and spinning a priori theories from
artifically established premises had
already begun to assert itself at a
very early date. It set a standard for
unintelligibility which has remained
in vogue until the present day, and
which has done more to keep the
public out of our museums than any
regulations issued by trustees or gov¬
ernmental bureaucracies have ever
succeeded in doing.
Rival royal collectors
There is a strange irony in the
fact that the art galleries of the
world, filled with works of art
originally collected by the brilliant
open-minded humanists of the Italian
Renaissance, are being made a battle¬
ground for conflicting attributions of
iconography and authorship by schol¬
ars trained in the tradition of know¬
ing everything about a work of art
except its essential significance.
By the end of the sixteenth century
the future pathway of museum deve¬
lopment was clearly marked. Political
factors, moreover, were to determine
the successive ' steps by which this
path was to be followed. For, as the
economic crises of the seventeenth
century made it necessary for the
High Renaissance collectors princes,
dukes, merchants, and cardinals to
dispose of their treasures, nationalism
and the conception of absolute mon¬
archy had brought about another
use to which these collections could
be put. The Hapsburgs in Austria,
the Netherlands, and Spain found
themselves in open competition with
the English Stuarts and the Bourbons.
It was obligatory for the Roi Soleil to
shine not only in his own brilliance,
but also to cast the reflection of his
authority upon the accumulations of
the wonders of the past. This was the
philosophy of collecting until the
French Revolution, when the idea of
the public institution virtually the
only one we know today was born.
FRANCIS H. TAYLOR Is Director of the Wor¬
cester Art Museum, Massachussets, U.S.A. and
Director Emeritus of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York. He is the author of "The Taste
of Angels: a history of art collecting from Rameses
to Napoleon" and numerous monographs and
articles on art and archeological subjects. The
article on this page is taken from a paper prepared
by Dr. Taylor under the title "Babel's Tower: The
Dilemma of the Modern Museum" for the Fourth
International Conference of Museums held in
Switzerland, in July 1956.
