TATAKA BIRTH TALES
Th
by
e jungle
a magical
le touched
wand
by Jeannine Auboyer
Curator, Musée Guimet, Paris
The ancient writings relating to Buddhism are neither
esoteric nor philosophical; they are a collection of
fables, legends and. tales about the previous lives of
the Buddha. This follows logically from the Indian doc¬
trine of the transmigration of souls which teaches that
the individual dies only to be born anew time after time
reborn as an animal or as a man according to his deserts.
Thus the whole of nature is united in a single indissoluble
fellowship, since all living creatures are partners in the
same great adventure of shared immortality, whatever the
in which they are reborn. Indians thus adopt a spe¬
cial attitude towards animals, for these may be reincar¬
nations of near kinsfolk ; they suffer as humans do ; and
so it is natural to treat them with the greatest of consi¬
deration.
In the third century B.C. the emperor Asoka, alone of
Mile Jeannine Auboyer is a leading French authority on ancient India. In
1950 her book Le Trône et son Symbolisme dans l'Inde Ancienne won the
Paul Pelliot Prize. Her other works Include Art et Style de l'Inde. She has
collaborated with French orientalist, Alfred Foucher, in a recent book on
the Jataka Tales, Les Vies antérieures du Bouddha.
all rulers throughout history, issued edicts renouncing
hunting and war for himself, advocating a vegetarian
diet and urging his subjects to treat every form of life
with respect. In the next century the death penalty was
actually abolished. Throughout the whole course of Hindu
history, both in India itself and in other lands where
Indian culture penetrated innumerable hospitals and refu¬
ges for sick or aged animals have been built, and when
the 1949 Constitution of the Republic of India was drawn
up, a special article on the protection of the cow was
included.
Despite this compassionate attitude, however, cases do
unfortunately occur in India, as elsewhere, of animals
being ill-treated, sacrificed or (killed for food. But, as
Alfred Foucher, the French archaeologist and scholar of
Buddhism, has said, belief in the brotherhood of all living
beings still flourishes more in India than anywhere else.
Buddhism, which originated in India, made this out¬
standing and all embracing compassion its own and carried
it to its highest pitch of perfection, while reinterpreting it
in terms of Buddhist thinking. As the sole objective of
KANTHAKA, THE FAITHFUL STEED. When Prince Gautama
left his palace and his family to seek supreme wisdom, the legend says
that he secretly rode off on his faithful horse, Kanthaka, accompanied
by his charioteer. This 9th century relief from Borobudur, Java, depicts
the prince saying farewell to his horse and his charioteer. On their
22
Musée Guimet Archives, Paris
return to the palace, Prince Gautama's father, the King, reproached
Kanthaka: "Ungrateful steed! You have received at my hands all marks
of affection and much kindness and now you have borne my beloved
son away from me." Hearing this reproach Kanthaka, unable to bear
his grief, sinks to the ground and dies, to be born again in heaven.

The Unesco Courier
Unesco
A FOREST SCENEA SUBJECT IN WHICH BUDDHIST ARTISTS, EXCELLEDCARVED ON A DOOR AT WAT SUTATTEÎ1PLE, BANGKOK, PROBABLY XVIII CENTURY A.D.
the Way was deliverance from suffering and hence the
escape from the terrors of transmigration, it therefore had
not only to proclaim the great Law of Love but to get
people to put it into practice.
So it is that animals figure largely in the Jataka, the
tales of the Buddha's previous lives, showing how before
the final human incarnation in which' he attained
Enlightenment (Bodhi), the Buddha himself had been
reborn innumerable times as an animal as various kinds
of fish, a crab, a cock, a woodpecker, a partridge, a fran¬
colín, a quail, a goose, a pigeon, a crow, a zebra, a buffalo,
several times as a monkey or an elephant, as an antelope,
as a stag and as a horse. In other tales the characters
are animals but the Bodhisattva appears as a man.
These tales are often spiced with a sly humour. Inci¬
dentally we know that they inspired La Fontaine; he must
have heard many of them from Dr. François Bernier, who
had learned them while serving for eight years as physi¬
cian to one of the nobles of the Great Moghul.
The stories are perfect illustrations both of how Indians
feel about animals and of their intimate understanding of
animals' reactions. The tales about monkeys are parti¬
cularly good examples. Indians, we should remember, are
extremely well acquainted with the. "bandarlog" of
Kipling's "Jungle Books" and their faults, every one of
which curiosity, grasshopper minds, impudence and stu¬
pidity is faithfully recorded.
For instance, there is the tale of the King of Benares's
gardener. This man thought he had earned a holiday,
but he did not want to leave his garden unattended while
he was away, or to pay the wages of a substitute. So he
decided to ask a tribe of monkeys which had settled in the
royal park to do the job gratis. Before he left, he gave
them lengthy instructions, urging them in particular not
to forget to water his tree-nurseries. The King of the
Monkeys had a methodical mind: to spare his subjects
useless exertion, he decided that the first thing to do was
to pull up all the saplings and see how much water the
roots were likely to need! The feelings of the
gardener on his return can easily be imagined.
Then there is the story of the monkey who (Cont'd on
made a butt of a zebu, teasing it endlessly and next page)
¿3

JATAKA TALES
(Continued)
Legends and imagery
of the animal world
playing all sorts of tricks on it of which the least painful
was to jump on its back and cover its eyes with his hands.
Everyone was amazed at the zebu's patience until one day
the monkey, while up to his pranks as usual, was thrown
to the* ground, trampled on and killed: it was a different
zebu! The first was the Bodhisattva; the second had no
Buddhist forbearance in its heart.
In all these stories and it is indeed their whole point
the future Buddha, in whatever shape he happens to be
incarnate, is always a model of virtue. Usually, for
instance, the foolishness of the monkey is emphasized
rather harshly, but when the Buddha takes this form, the
animal shows wisdom and courage.
The tale of the self-sacrifice of Mahâkapi, King of the
Monkeys, is typical. The King of Benares had set off with
an army up the Ganges to seek a wonderful fig tree whose
fruit he desired, but when he got to the place he found the
monkey people in the branches wreaking ruin on what he
considered his property. Night was falling and the king
had to wait till daylight for his bowmen to be sure of
hitting their marks, but realizing his intentions the mon¬
keys became terrified.
Their king then made up his mind to get them away
from the danger spot. With a mighty bound he leapt over
the Ganges to the farther bank and, cutting a long rattan,
tied one end to a tree opposite the fig tree and the other
to his own leg. Then he leapt back again and with the
rattan and his own body made a bridge from tree to tree.
The whole monkey people passed safely to the other side,
but when the last was over their king, exhausted, let go
his hold. And the King of Benares, moved by such self-
sacrifice, had a cloth stretched beneath the fig tree so
that the monkey should come to no harm.
Charity carried to the point of sacrificing one's own
life is a favourite subject in the Jataka. The hero may be
a man or an animalthe King of the Gazelles offering
himself to the King's cook so that his people and in parti¬
cular a doe in fawn may be spared; a captured elephant
fasting to make his captors release him and let him return
to his blind and lonely mother; the great six-tusked
elephant letting himself be struck down and his priceless
ivory be taken to make good a slight fault he had made.
Thus animals have their undisputed place in the drama
of life; they are made to act, speak, suffer and behave in
every respect like men. The reason, as we have seen, is
the Indian concept of the brotherhood of all living things,
from the least to the greatest, as beings bound to the
Wheel of Life. r
While the attitude of Buddha towards nature is made
clear enough in ancient writings, it is brought out even
more strongly in the visual arts. Even the earliest
sculptures known to us (dating back to the second or third
centuries B.C.) are impressive for the loving care and skill
with which the forms and attitudes of animals are shown.
Gazelles, birds, elephants
in a harmonious cavalcade
The portrayal of animals is indeed one of the chief
branches of Indian art and at no stage in its de¬
velopment has the skill of the artists faltered. At
the very beginning we get the Dhauli elephant (at
Orissa), carved from a single block, quietly impressive in
its representation of mass and power. True, it is un¬
completed since only the forequarters have been carved
out of the blocki but the craftsmanship is so fine and
sensitive that it is hard to believe that the sculptor
stopped there because he lacked the skill or knowledge
to complete his work.
Ancient Buddhist art, taking its themes from the tales
of the Jataka, draws abundantly on the animal world for
its images, and the storied bas-reliefs of the period from
the second century B.C. to the third century A.D. are a
harmonious cavalcade of beasts ponderously majestic
bull elephants; gentler cows, and calves appealing in their
infant combination of clumsiness and grace; bounding
gazelles, alert with heads high; fish; turtles; birds; stags
24
calmly dignified; predatory beasts crouching menacingly;
all the animal folk whom the Indians know so well, seem¬
ing to want no more than the touch of a wand to come
alive. They are sketches from daily life in the forest
hermitages, where familiarity with the denizens of the
wild imparts that sense of oneness already referred to.
The scenes unfold like an endless fresco, with the same
themes repeated again and again the six-tusked elephant .
at Bharut, Sanchi, and Ajanta; the self-sacrifice of the
monkey king at Bharut, Sanchi and elsewhere. All the
heroes of Buddhist legend are there, singly or in groups,
portrayed against backgrounds which, though conven¬
tionalized and reduced in scale, are sufficient to indicate
the setting, whether forest, town or royal park. Like the
human beings, the beasts play an active part in these
scenes. For instance, it is they who assemble to pay
homage to the sacred fig tree of the Enlightenment ;
or again, it is elephants who sprinkle water with their
trunks on the mother of the future Buddha, echoing the
Brahmin ritual for the anointing of a king.
Nothing escapes the trained eyes of the old sculptors
and painters. Their naturalistic representation of the
beasts speaks of long hours spent in studying the attitudes
of each species. Anatomical details are accurate. Even
though an element of caricature may sometimes appear,
this always follows a recognizable aesthetic principle: the
corpulence of the elephant is exaggerated boldly to bring
out to the full the impression of giant power and mass he
conveys; the slimness of the gazelle, the grace and dignity
of the stag, are exquisitely stylized; and a note of humour
is supplied by comic monkeys. In a word, a whole world is
called to life by no other magic than that of an artistry
which despite its apparent simplicity can only have been
attained by long experience.
To the two-legged, love ;
to the many-legged, love
This world is an image both of the eternal succession
of transmigrations and of daily life, a world where
any of us may recognize a kinsman in the animal
hero of a legend and where, at the same time, man plays
the part of an elder brother. Anything further removed
from abstruse philosophy it would be hard to conceive ;
at the origin is an earnest concern to threaten no form
of life, and this idea recurs time after time in Buddhist
writings. Hunters, fishermen and butchers are held in
the lowest esteem because of the destruction they commit.
"For him," we read, "who rejoices wickedly at the
slaughter of a living creature or at seeing a living
creature led to the slaughter, long ages of pain and
misery are reserved." (Samugutta Nikaya, III, 301.)
The life of the infinitely small is equally precious. We
read again: "Fools! How can you dig the soil or have it
dug by others? People think there are living beings in
the soil and any monk who digs it or has it dug commits
an offence for which he must atone. Fools! How can
you fell a tree or have it felled? The people think that
there are living beings in a tree. Destroying the growth
of a plant is an offence for which atonement must be
made." (Vinaya, Pitaka, IV, 32 and 34.) So likewise it is a
fault in a monk knowingly to take the life of a breathing
creature, to use water Which he knows contains breathing
creatures or to cast it on the grass or the soil (Vinaya
Pitaka, IV, 124, 125, 49).
There is, on occasion, a kind of calculation in this
attitude. It is not absolutely selfless charity, since the
ultimate ground for reverence for all living beings is the
hope that they will return it. What is remarkable and a
point to be emphasized. is that this reverence is based
first and foremost on love:
To the two-legged, love;
To the legless, love;
To the four-legged, love;
To the many-legged, love.
(Angtjttara Nikaya, II, 72-73.)
