The Unesco Courier
PATHS OF KNOWLEDGE
FOR ALL PEOPLES
EVEN when books, films and paintings are able to crossfrontiers, they still have to reach the men and women
who need them the most urgently... and who are
often not even aware of their need. From its earliest
days UNESCO encouraged the growth of libraries in cities
and villages and of mobile libraries, whether transported
by bus or boat, in isolated regions. It organized seminars
and published manuals, to help governments, local
authorities and educators to create new libraries or to
improve existing ones so that they might serve as cultural
centres at a broad level. Then UNESCO passed from
preaching to practice. With the co-operation of govern-
ments and communities, it opened model public libraries
in India, Colombia
and A'frica. The
"oldest"of these,
the Delhi Public Li-
brary, was set up in
1950 ; five years
later, it had loan-
ed nearly a million
books to its 30, 000
regular readers.
Similar assistance
obviously had to be
offered museums as
one of the most
effective instruments
for the spread of
knowledge. For far
too many years, too
many museums con-
sidered their role as
one of jealously
keeping the public
away from the trea-
sures of history on
the pretext that this
was the only way
of preserving them.
The true role of a
museum, however, is
to serve the public
and to contribute to
its education in the
largest sense of the
word. By establish-
ing international co-
ordination for mu-
seums, UNESCO help-
ed them modernize.
With the Interna-
tional Council of
Museums, it has carried out campaigns to bring the people
into museums, so that the people-and not merely a hand-
ful of specialists-might have access to the treasures of
art, history, folklore, science and technology.
Museums can even go to the people. UNESCO organiz-
ed travelling exhibitions of colour reproductions of an-
cient and modern paintings and sent them on an odyssey
to villages and cities, town halls and universities in more
than 60 countries. Other exhibitions took the road to
reveal to millions who had never set foot inside a mu-
seum, the drawings of Leonardo da Vinci, Japanese
prints, Chinese art and Persian miniature. Then
UNEsco opened-through its new series of Art Albums-
an imaginary museum displaying priceless collections
which not even the most seasoned of travellers had been
able to contemplate in their entirety : the Ajanta cave
paintings, Egyptian tombs and temples, Yugoslav medie-
val frescoes, Australian aboriginal paintings, and the
wooden stave churches of Norway.
The gates barring universal access to the wealth of
literature, drama, music and science had to be unlocked.
Despite startling technical progress, we live in an era
where the world's great civilizations still dwell in mutual
ignorance of their achievements.
Masterpieces of literature which form a perfect
EVENT OF THE WEEK for children and adults in outskirts of Medellin, Colombia,
is arrival of bookmobile from the city's model library opened as a pilot project by
Unesco and Government of Colombia in 1954. Carrying more than 5, 000 books,
the bookmobile covers an area of about ! 00 mi ! es, making stops each week at 45 places.
Medellin Public Library has set off a chain reaction in public library development in
Latin America, just as a similar project, the Delhi Public Library, has done in India.
Colombian, Cuban, Dominican, English, French, German.
Greek, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Marathi, Mexican, Punjabi,
Persian, Sanscrit, Siamese, Spanish, Tamil and Uruguayan.
As far as the theatre was concerned, the main problem
was to set up channels of co-operation and exchange from
one country to another. This liaison task was given to
the International Theatre Institute founded in 1948 and,
since then, national centres have made their appearance
on all continents. Information and research
were also among the Institute's tasks. For
the past seven years, a bilingual quarterly,
"World Theatre,"has reflected a faithful next po. enext ¢cge
picture of theatrical activity. International
37
C^lJl. C. : : >. : : >lUU U lilC
traditions and spirit
of a people often
remain unknawn on
the other side of
national boundaries.
Certain books, rated
as the master works
of a particular civi-
lization, had been
awaiting for cen-
turies the trans-
lators who could
make them known
to the rest of the
world. This meant
an immense under-
taking and UNESCO
made its contribu-
tion by publishing a
collection of repre-
sentative works-
works which private
publishers had hesi-
tated to translate
owing to language
difficulties or limit-
ed sales possibilities.
In March 1956,
seven years after
this work was begun,
UNESCO had publish-
ed translations in
either English, Ara-
bic, Spanish, French
or Persian of works
from 25 sources :
Arabic, Argentine,
Bengali, Bolivian,
Brazilian, Chinese,

PATHS OF
KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Doors opened to
World's wealth of
music and drama
Theatre Weeks and international fes-
tivals have also been able to bring to
many countries foreign plays which
can help international understanding
and thus serve the cause of peace.
The Institute has paid particular
attention to the influence of the
theatre upon youth and, indeed,
much of its work has dealt with vari-
ous educational aspects of the theatre
and with plays produced by young
people as part of school programmes.
A similar institution, the Interna-
tional Music Council, was created in
1949 with the object of making
known contemporary music and folk
music, of assisting the publication of
works of musicology and of encourag-
ing, among both adults and young
people, the appreciation and the
playing of music. Recordings of tra-
ditional popular music have been
made in 35 countries. In addition,
works have been commissioned from
relatively unknown young composers
and international works on the history
of music have been published.
The role of music in education-a
basic role in the eyes of so many phi-
losophers and yet largely ignored to-
day-has been examined in numerous
studies and in international discus-
sions bringing together educators and
musicians ; various methods have
been put to practical test and recom-
mendations made to authorities.
Returning music to its rightful place
in our culture may be an almost
superhuman task, but it is one well
worth trying.
EAGER YOUNGSTERS took the Medellin Library by storm after a campaign in schools to en-
courage readership. Because of previous ! ack of public libraries and outside bookloan services in
Medellin, many people predicted that there would be no readers for Colombia's model library.
But is has outgrown its present home, is building a bigger and better one. Photos show some
of many extension activities which include children's choir, musical puppet shows, dramatic society,
discussion and study groups, weekly concerts, and exhibitions on art and other subjects. Future
plans include new branch libraries, and services to hospitals, homes for the aged and orphanages.
38
