UNESCO
WITH THESE
TWO RANDS...
2, 600 MILLION PEOPLE must somehow live together and share the resources of the earth.
To an extent which might have seemed inconceivable ven 50 years ago, there has come increasing
realization that the general impoverishment of any area is a matter of vital concern to all areas.
6


WITH THESE HANDS (Conf
MEN STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE cannot be expected to regard literacy as an end in itself. Unesco has linked the three"Rs"to the needs
of the illiterate adult-to farming, to the need for better crops, better food, better health and sanitation, in a plan of education labelled"fundamental
education. Today it is being put into practice in many parts of the world with the participation of governments and United Nations Agencies
such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Labour Organization (ILO).
UNATIONS
UNESCG
NOT BY BREAD ALONE does man live. Man also needs the beauty found in line and form and style and music
and poetry. And it is the appreciation of the creative work of others, revealing to him the best that is in his fellow-
men, that Unesco has helped to promote for the past ten years, in the fields of literature, drama, music and art.
8

The Unesco Courier
U4ESCO
SHARING OF SKILLS is stressed in aid now being given to economically underdeveloped countries.
Industries are sprouting everywhere but they need skilled workers, foremen, engineers and research scien-
tists. Here, dozens of scientific documents all on a single spool of microfilm, are packed for shipping at
Mexican Documentation Centre, set up with Unesco help, and now serving the whole of Latin America.
CO, I.. London
IN THE SEA there is far more lifte and food than on land yet the
oceans provide only a small fraction of man's food. Plankton from
the sea's depths is one of the great unexploited food resources.
Unesco's Advisory Committee on Marine Sciences is hopeful that
research may eventually lead to its addition to the human diet.
UNESCO
WOMEN OF ALL LANDS are increasingly
offered the newest means of learning, as Unesco
helps to make a reality of the ideal, enshrined in
its Constitution, that all shall have"equality of
educational opportunity without regard to race,
sexor any other distinctions, economic or socia !".
Press Information Bureau. Govt. of India
THE POWER OF THE SUN is a source of
energy into which research is being carried out
in many countries. A semple, sun-ray oven for
cooking food was devised during Indian experi-
ments aimed at solving the desert fuel shortage.
9

WITH THESE HANDS (Confd ;
UNATIONS
THE ATOM showed only an evil face for almost ten years. Today, as a result of international co-operation through the United Nations and Unesco,
it has begun to show a happier one. Atoms-for-peace research has made possible new benefits in medical treatment (left) in industry and agri-
culture. A great new research laboratory at Geneva will soon explore the heart of the atom for 12 European countries as a result of Unesco's efforts.
Right, remote control tongs handle radio-active materiats at recent"Atoms-for-peace"exhibition, organized by the United Nations at Geneva.
USIS
NEEDS OF NATIONS, from elementary vocational instruction to
the training of petroleum geologists, are being met by more than
200 educators and scientists working for Unesco. In 48 countries,
they are carrying out Unesco's share in the U. N. world programme of
technical assistance, demonstrating how education and scientific
research can help to shatter the vicious circle of poverty and ignorance.
UNESCO
LIFE-GIVING WATER for a
parched region. Scientists esti-
mate that one-quarter of the
earth's surface is desert. Devel-
opment of the arid lands is one
answer to the world's increasing
need for food. Unesco's continu-
ing programme of research and
co-ordination is helping scient-
ists and governments to explore
many aspects of the problem.
Renié Zuber
FREE ACCESS TO NEWS
and ideas has been called the
touchstone of all freedoms.
Unesco has promoted"the free
flow of ideas by word and image"
by working to eliminate censor-
ship, reduce tariff barriers to
information materials, press and
cable rates, the newsprint short-
age, and by helping to build up
inadequate information facilities
in under-developed countries.
10

II
The Unesco Courier
TO 7, 000, 000 BLIND
throughout the world the
Braille alphabet of raised
symbols is the most powerful
key to human freedom and
scholarship ever devised.
Yet the existence of dozens
of variations of Brailla have
seriously hampered Braille
book production. Unifica-
tion of Braille alphabets is
one of tasks which Unesco
has already completed.
UNESCO
USIS
APPRECIATION OF THE ARTS should begin in
chi) dhood, yet in very few countries have art and music
played an adequate part in the regular school curriculum.
Unesco has brought creative artists and educators toge-
ther to see how this can be brought about, and has helped
the creation of international societies which aim to
foster education through music and also the plastic arts.
