Sayings of Buddha
THE DHAMMAPADA
'Path of Virtue'
The spirit of Buddhist teaching is embodied in the Dhammapada, an anthology
of 423 verses written in Pali (an Indo-Aryan language of Buddha's time). The
name Dhammapada comes from Dhamma (discipline, law, religion) and pada
(the path, means or way) and for Buddhists it represents "the path of virtue". The
verses are attributed to The Buddha himself, as thoughts spoken during his 45 years
of missionary wandering after he had attained Enlightenment under the Bodhi tree.
Though the Dhammapada may not contain the very words of The Buddha, and though
it is only one part of the total Buddhist canon, it does embody the whole spirit of his
teaching. This collection of verses is much moré than a breviary; it englobes a way
of life and a code of conducttaught by Buddha who said: "My action is my possession,
my action is my inheritance; my action is the matrix which bears me; my action is
the race to which I belong; my action is my refuge." The verses below from the
Dhammapada are taken from the complete translation by Professor N.K. Bhagwat,
published in 1955 by Dr. M. Venkatrao, President of The Buddha Society, Bombay.
Never in this world can hatred be stilled
by hatred ; it will be stilled only by non-
hatred this is the Law Eternal.
Some quarrelers do not realize that in
this world we must all at some time cease
to live ; but there are others who do so
realize, and they will settle their quarrels.
Just as the monsoon rains fail to pene¬
trate a house that is well thatched, so
craving will not enter the mind which is
collected.
The perfume of flowers cannot travel
against the wind be it the scent of sandal,
tagara or jasmine but the sweet odour of
a good man travels even against the wind ;
the righteous pervade every place with
their fragrance.
Wakefulness is the way to immortality ;
heedlessness is the way to death ; those who
are wakeful die not, the heedless are
already dead.
As a fletcher makes straight his arrow, so
does the wise man make straight the mind
which, trembling and unsteady, is difficult
to guard and restrain.
Death bears off the man whose mind is
intent on plucking the blossoms of sense,
as a great flood sweeps away a sleeping
hamlet.
A fool brings grief on himself with the
thought : "This son is mine, this wealth is
mine." How can he, if he does not even
belong to himself, be the possessor of a son
or wealth?
An unworthy deed, like milk freshly
drawn from the cow, does not all at once
turn sour, but smouldering within as a fire
covered with ashes, it pursues the fool.
As a solid rock is not shaken by a strong
gale, so wise persons remain unaffected by
praise or censure.
42
Though one should in battle conquer a
thousand men a thousand times, he who
conquers himself has the more glorious vic¬
tory.
*
It were better to live one single day in
the commencement of strong endeavour
than to live a hundred years in idleness
and lassitude.
Think not lightly of good, saying, "It
will not come unto me;" even a jar be¬
comes full with the constant dripping of
water. So does the wise man, little by little,
fill himself with good.
The gaily painted chariots of kings wear
out ; so also does the body wear out. But
the Law of the Good wears not away; thus
do the wise proclaim to the wise.
The man of little learning goes through
life like an ox; his flesh increases, but his
wisdom does not.
The evil done by oneself, begotten of
oneself, sprung from oneself, crushes the
wicked man as a diamond crushes a hard
precious stone.
Victory breeds hatred, for the vanquished
is stricken with suffering ; but the tranquil
man lives in happiness, disregarding both
victory and defeat.
He who has enjoyed the flavour of soli¬
tude and the sweetness of tranquility is
unperturbed and free from sin as he drinks
in the sweetness of devotion for the doc¬
trines.
*
Let a man conquer anger by absence of
anger, wickedness by absence of wicked¬
ness, miserliness by liberality, and a liar by
truth.
There never was, there never will be, nor
does there now exist a being who stands
wholly praised or utterly condemned.
Very easy it is to discover flaws in others,
but very difficult to see one's own. One
winnows the shortcomings of others like
chaff, but one covers his own as a dishonest
gambler covers a losing throw.
To control the eye is good; to control
the ear is good; to control the nose is good;
to control the tongue is good. To control
the body is good; to control speech is good;
to control the mind is good; good is control
on every side. A Bhikkhu who is thus
controlled on every side is freed from all
suffering.
It is a trained elephant that is led to the
field; it is a tamed elephant whereon the
king mounts. It is the one who is self-
controlled who is best among men, who
bears patiently with abusive language.
*
If you should find a wise companion with
whom to consort, a man of good life and
self-possessed, walk with him joyfully and
deliberately, vanquishing all troubles. But if
you should not find such a wise companion,
then travel as a king who has renounced his
kingdom and his conquests ; travel alone as
an elephant who has renounced the ele¬
phant forest.
As a tree, through hewn down, grows up
again and again if its roots be uninjured
and secure, even so the yearnings of
craving, if not destroyed, will reproduce
themselves again and again.
He who has reached the goal, who is
free from worry, who is free from craving,
and who has rid himself of demeritorious
tendencies such a one has thereby des¬
troyed the darts of existence and wears this
body for the last time.
The sun shines by day; by night doth the
moon shine; resplendent in his armour ap¬
pears a warrior; lustrous in meditation a
Brahmin. But the Buddha shines radiant
by day and by night.
