Copyright Camera Presi
Call to prayer on the roof of the world
In Nepal, the birthplace of the Buddha, religious architecture has a
character of its own, as is shown by the famous 9th century stupa at
Bodnath near Katmandou, (inset, left) The "eyes of Buddha" above the
dome are painted in blue and white on a background of gold. It was
from Nepal and the neighbouring state of Sikkim that Buddhism spread
50
to Tibet where It led to the founding of the Lama order of Buddhist
monks. Above, A lama standing beside a small shrine, holds a prayer
wheel and beads during meditation. Inset, right, before a richly deco¬
rated monastery door, a lama prepares to sound the twin metal horns
which are traditionally used to call the faithful to prayer.

Copyright Robert J. Sodet.
Painting on a"than-ka", or prayer banner, (above) represents the heavenly court of the Buddha with
the first twelve Dalai-lamas (religious and secular rulers) of Tibet. The present Dalai Lama ("all-
embracing" Lama) is considered to be the 14th. reincarnation of the first. This .painting follows
the general pattern of the Tibetan Buddhist spiritual portraits in which figures are grouped symme¬
trically around the central personality portrayed. Their positions above and below the deity or
saint have symbolical meanings, so also their colours, their attitudes and the details of their costumes.
Below, an allegorical fresco on a temple near Bodnath, Nepal, which showsastrong Indian influence.

Banne r
paintings
from the
Himalayas
With the caravans which toiled
their way through the Hima¬
layas from Sikkim and Nepal
in the 7th century A.D., Buddhism
came to Tibet. Its influence soon
spread with the help of the great king
Song-tseen Gam-po who had married
a Chinese princess of Buddhist faith.
The king was converted to Buddhism
and sent his chief minister to the
sacred places of India to study the
teachings of Gautama the Buddha. A
century later, in about 750 A.D., an
Indian Buddhist monk named Pad-
masambhava crossed the mountains
into Tibet and preached a doctrine
known as Tantrism. This was a mix¬
ture of Mahayana Buddhism (see page
25) and certain magical and mystical
doctrines derived from Hinduism.
In its popular aspects it involved
prayers, ritual dances and the exorcism
of devils. Padmasambhava founded
the branch of monks, or lamas,
known as the "red caps" and trans¬
formed a nation of warriors into a
vast community of monks. Today, at
the great monasteries hidden among
the Himalayas, on the high plateaux
of Tibet and Nepal or scattered over
the Tibetan countryside, thousands of
Buddhist prayer wheels turn endlessly
in the wind. Here, on the "'roof of
the world" the people are among the
most religious of any on earth, and it
has been estimated that a quarter of
the entire male population enters the
priesthood.
In Tibet, Buddhism brought forth
a strange art in which influences
from India, China and Central
Asia were intermingled. A whole
world of symbols came to life in
sculpture and painting. Artist monks
made spiritual preparations includ¬
ing fasting before painting the
than-kas or temple banners which
are a special feature of Tibetan
Buddhist art. Painted on silk or
other fabrics, these banners usually
contain a spiritual portrait of one or
other of the saints and deities, and
also many other figures and scenes,
which tell the story of the central
personality.
A great historian of Asian art, the
late Heinrich Zimmer, wrote of those
works : "One sees here an impressive,
really frightening genius for the ren¬
dition of the terrible aspect of the spi¬
ritual powers. Even the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, who elsewhere in the
extensive Buddhist domain are re¬
presented almost exclusively in bene¬
volent guise, here appear as veritable
demons." The Buddhist paintings of
Tibet and of Nepal have much in
common with the art of medieval In¬
dia of which they were originally the
faithful copies. This tradition of
Tibetan painting has been maintained
down the centuries.
51
