As an anthropologist sees it
A STEEL AXE THAT
DESTROYED A TRIBE
In a previous issue of the Unesco Courier (No. 7
1955; U.S.A., Oct. 1955) Dr. Metraux described how
the thirst for iron and steel tools among the Indian
tribes of Latin America led to bloodshed and war¬
fare. Here he tells how steel axes completely upset
the lives of an Australian aboriginal community.
To give a tribe of Australian aborigines steel to
replace the stone axe heads which they had used
since the earliest times would seem to many to
be a very modest step forward along the path of
economic advancement. But with primitive peo¬
ples the possible effects of the smallest changes made in
their way of life have to be weighed carefully in case the
results produced are entirely opposite to those intended.
A book recently published under the title of "Human
Problems in Technological Change" (edited by Edward H.
Spicer) includes a fascinating account by an experienced
ethnographer, Lauriston Sharp, of the upheavals which
occured in the life of an Australian tribe when, through
the generosity of missionaries, stone axes were exchanged
for steel ones. The tribe was the Yir Yoront, inhabiting
the west coast of the Cape York Peninsula, in the middle
of dry bush country with so little to recommend it that
26
there had been no white penetration until quite recently.
The Yir Yoront were scattered in small nomadic groups
over a huge tract of land. Almost all their activities were
connected with hunting and food-gathering. The stone
axe was the most important implement among their pri¬
mitive tools, essential for procuring and cooking food,
building their scanty shelters and keeping warm; it was
in fact, the very foundation of all their technical skills.
The stone axe was not only the principal tool but also a
factor making for social cohesion.
It was comparatively easy for the Yir Yoront to make
axes. Any man knows which branches are suitable for
making the handle, and where to get the gum and fibre
binding to hold the head in position. Their only difficulty
was to obtain stone axe-heads for an implement which
was easily damaged and often had to be replaced. These
axe-heads came from a distant part of the country,
inhabited by unknown tribes who traded them for spears
tipped with sting-ray spines, in whose production the
coastal tribes naturally specialized.
Trading relations were therefore established between
the regions supplying the two kinds of raw materials, and
the Yir Yoront used to play a very active part in this

The Unesco Courier. N' I. 1956
trade. Trading, like the manufacture of axes, was a male
monopoly. It gave rise to a network of partly commercial
and partly political relations, in which each group played
a clearly defined part. At the great initiation ceremo¬
nies, "buyers" and "sellers" used to meet and, combining
business with religious ceremonial, exchange axes for
spears. The profits to be made in this way were one of
the attractions of these festivities.
Although the men were the owners of the axes, these
were most often used by the women, who had to borrow
them from their husbands, fathers or uncles in conformity
with traditional rules. In the same way, young men who
had no trading partners were obliged to apply to their
elders whenever they needed an axe, which thus became
a symbol of virility, dominance of the male, and the
prestige of age.
The social function of the axe was also reflected in the
supernatural world and the myths of the people. One of
the clans forming the tribo the Sunlit Cloud Iguana
clan had, among its totems, the stone axe. Although this
clan's Ancestors were supposed to have been the discov¬
erers of the tool, the clan had no monopoly of the manu¬
facture of axes. On the other hand, it had the privilege
of symbolically representing the use of the implement in
the religious festivals.
This fact is also of some importance as, in the belief of
these tribes, everything taking place in their world had to
be an exact reproduction of the activities and incidents
which marked the life of their Ancestors when the world
was new. The present life is simply a repetition of the
mythical life of yore. With the function of the axe thus
. defined in its cultural and social context, it becomes easier
to understand the changes brought about by the advent
of steel.
In the course of recent years the Yir Yoront received
large numbers of steel axes, generously
distributed to them by missionaries,
either in return for work done on the
mission station, or as gifts to win over
the tribesmen. The missionaries
expected the implements to bring
about a rapid improvement in the
natives' living conditions. Even groups
living far from the mission stations
soon obtained axes for themselves
by barter.
In short, the steel axe quickly drove out the stone. But,
contrary to all expectations, it did nothing to improve
the welfare of the Yir Yoront. They gained by the change
in one way ; their work became easier and they had more
leisure than they had ever known. They used it, however,
not for enriching their lives, but for sleeping "an art at
which they were past masters." Had that been the only
result of the introduction of metal, there would be no
cause for regret. Unfortunately there were much more
serious consquences ; the steel axe shook the social
structure of the Yir Yoront to its foundations.
In the first place, the trading system which linked the
different groups was entirely disorganized. The bonds of
by
Alfred Metraux
friendship and
partnership be¬
tween i n d i v i-
duals of differ-
ent groups
ceased to have
any basis.
Goods no
longer flowed
from the coast
to the interior,
and vice versa.
The price the
tribes paid for
the axes was
their indepen¬
dence. They all
became depend¬
ent on the mis¬
sionaries, whose
principles for
distributing the axes must have appeared completely ir¬
rational and incomprehensible to the tribes.
The men were no longer the unquestioned masters of
the axes; their position was usurped by women and
adolescents, who acquired rights of property which had
formerly been considered an adult masculine prerogative.
The old men were particularly affected by this "technolo¬
gical revolution". Their dignity and age placed them at
a disadvantage in relation to the young men, who hired
themselves out as labourers or thronged the missions
when axes were being given away, and they thus came to
depend on the women and the young men, and so lost
their prestige and authority. For the first time, the word
"axe" was used with a feminine possessive a revolution
in the linguistic sphere as well.
The initiation festivals became less
exciting, since those who used to
come to them in search of stone axe-
heads were no longer drawn by the
need or prospect of a good bargain.
The political situation also changed.
In the past, relations between indi¬
viduals had been strictly governed by
the bonds of kinship, age and sex.
The tribe had no chiefs in the sense
in which we understand the world. Collective under¬
takings were organized in accordance with long-establish¬
ed tradition. When the tribesmen sought work in the
missions or on farms in order to get steel axes in return
for their labour, they had to submit to the European sys¬
tem of work. Foremen were put in charge of gangs and,
for the first time in their history, the Yir Yoront had
"bosses".
It was, however, in the sphere of sentiments and values
that the steel axe caused the greatest number of changes.
The destruction of the bonds of dependence and the
customary relationships very soon had repercussions on
the moral sense of the tribe. The idea of property was
weakened, and thefts and other offences became more
frequent.
Hitherto, the Yir Yoront had had a mythology which
provided answers for all eventualities. Whenever any
slight change occurred in their traditions, they added a
new episode to their myths so that the innovation became
a part of the traditional background. . With the steel axe,
such a re-adaptation was impossible.
Efforts were indeed made to attribute it to a clan whose
totems included the white ghosts, with which the white
men were associated; but the Sunlit Cloud Iguana clan
itself had already appropriated the honour of counting
this wonderful new implement among its totems. This
was only one of countless examples of the confusion
introduced by this technical change.
Today, the tribe is going rapidly downhill. The totem
system has been swept away by innovations which could
not be reconciled with it. With it have gone the religious
traditions and the cultural and social order which used to
hold the tribe together and provided the reason for
existence.
Far from bringing security and well-being to the Yir
Yoront, the steel axe has been primarily responsible for
their decline and may well lead to their ultimate
extinction.
27
