IN THE CENTRE
OF THE MAP
Nations see themselves
as the hub of history
by Marshall G.S. Hodgson
In the sixteenth century the Italian missionary, Matteo
Ricci, brought to China a European map of the world
showing the new discoveries in America. The Chinese
were glad to learn about America, but one point in the
map offended them. Since it split the earth's surface
down the Pacific, China appeared off at the right-hand
edge; whereas the Chinese thought of themselves as
literally the "Middle Kingdom", which should be in the
centre of the map. Ricci pacified them by drawing
another map, splitting the Atlantic instead, so that China
appeared more central; and maps are still commonly
drawn that way in that part of the world.
Europeans of course have clung to the first type of map,
showing Europe in the upper centre; while the commonest
maps in North America show the U.S.A. in that post of
honour, even at the cost of splitting a continent in two.
The temptation not only to put one's own land in the
centre of the map, but one's own people in the centre
of history, seems to be universal.
The most famous case of this is indeed that of the
"Middle Kingdom". Many Chinese used to suppose that
the Temple of Heaven at the Emperor's capital, Peking,
marked the exact centre of the earth's surface. To be
sure, Chinese scholars even in the Middle Ages were
aware that China could not be said to be mathematically
central; they knew the general lay of Europe and Africa
and the Indian Ocean, and a writer could remark that
the "centre" of the earth was along the equator. Never¬
theless, even for sober historians the pivotal fact of
human history was the condition of the great Chinese
empire, in which was concentrated all the splendour of
polished civilization.
At times that empire was strong. Then (as they told it)
the Emperor was able to command peace among the fair
lands stretching out around his capital ; the choicest
products of the mountains on the one hand and the sea
on the other poured in to enrich the vast fertile plains of
the empire; and the barbarians of the less favoured lands
beyond deserts, mountains, and remote islands divided
and weakened by the Emperor's wise policies, came to
bring humble tribute and to learn what they could of the
arts of civilization.
Thus came the Koreans, the Japanese, the Tibetans ;
thus came also the English from their distant islands,
seeking Chinese luxuries and offering little in return the
Emperor could approve such as opium. Even the English
envoys were graciously received, but when they showed
want of proper respect for the Emperor they were
dismissed with contempt.
At other times the imperial power grew feeble, local
rulers seized power and tyrannized the people, prosperity
faded. It was then (as they told it) that the barbarians
came as insulting conquerors, and civilization was eclipsed
in the world. Thus came the Central Asian Turks, thus
came the Mongols under Kublai Khan; and thus came
the English when the Manchu dynasty was declining,
invading the Middle Kingdom (whose wealth attracted
every barbarous nation), and forcing their crude ways
upon the people.
It could in fact be claimed that for a time China was
16
the wealthiest and most populous, the most aesthetically
cultivated and even the most powerful state on the earth;
but when this fact was made the basis for the Chinese
picture of the world, the result was tragic miscalculation.
For the medieval Hindu the -world was a place for the
purification of souls. Kings and their empires came and
went, the gods themselves arose and perished time was
infinite, space immense, with unlimited opportunity for
every soul to reap in birth after rebirth what it had sown.
In much of the universe, indeed, souls dwelt in untroubled
bliss; it was the distinction of our own toiling, earthy
regions that here men could choose responsibly between
good and evil and. their consequences. Here life was
arranged for the exercise of virtue, each caste of men
having its own function in society; if a man fulfilled one
role well, in another life he would have a higher role to
play, and might eventually rise beyond the transient
vicissitudes of existence altogether.
Accordingly, so far as history was significant, it was as
ages varied in the degree to which society was well
enough ordered to give virtue its due place. As a given
cosmic cycle wore on, disorder increased and justice faded.
Our own age (they explained) was in the latter part of
such a cycle ; only in the central parts of the earthy re¬
gions in India, that is-was society still well ordered :
there Brahmins still offered sacrifices and the other
castes ruled or served according to their status.
In the benighted lands to the east and west so tainted
already with decline that pious Brahmins dared not set
foot there souls were doomed to be born as barbarous
Mlecchas; there they lived unhallowed lives till they
should earn the right to be born in India. As our degen¬
erate age drew on, even in India itself the social order
was upset, rulers rose from the basest castes, and finally
even Mlecchas entered as conquerors Muslims from the

The Unesco Courier. March 1956
west, and even the remotest Europeans. Through all this
outward humiliation, however, the Hindu could know that
there in the central lands where the sacred Ganges
flowed he could still live the way of truth and holiness
inaccessible to lesser breeds of men and aspire to the
highest degrees of rebirth.
To the medieval Muslim the world looked very different
from what it did to his Chinese or to his Hindu
contemporaries. History was not a matter of the
varying strength and weakness of an imperial centre of
authority and civilization, nor was it a passing incident In
an infinite succession of worlds. Rather it was the story
of a single species created just some 5,000 years ago by
God to do His will once for all. From Adam on, God had
sent thousands of prophets to the various peoples, bring¬
ing to each its laws and sciences; at last he sent Mo¬
hammed, proclaiming the final law in which all earlier
truth was perfected and which was gradually to prevail
over the whole world, replacing all former laws.
Many Muslims believed that Mohammed's birthplace,
Mecca, was the centre of the earth's surface. To Mecca,
men pilgrimaged yearly from the farthest parts of the
earth, and it was supposed that in the heavens above it
the angels themselves performed worship ; here was the
very throne of God, where heaven and earth were nearest.
To be sure, scholars knew that the earth was a sphere,
and God equally present everywhere in the hearts of the
believers. But their more sober picture of the world was
equally effective in supporting the eminence of Islam.
They thought of the inhabited quarter of the globe as a
land mass lying between the equator and the North Pole,
and between the oceans to the west and to the east
roughly Eurasia and northen Africa.
This was divided into seven "climes" from (Cont'd on
south to north, and from extreme heat to cold, next page)
FROM THE FIRST
KNOWN WORLD
ATLAS
The most important attempt of the ancient
world to place the study of geography on a
scientific basis was made by Claudius Ptolemy,
celebrated mathematician, astronomer and
geographer of Alexandria. His Geographia,
written in Greek around 140 A.D. comprised
eight books which included a general map
of the known world and twenty-seven maps
covering different countries. Ptolemy's ori¬
ginal work written on papyrus, has not sur¬
vived but copies were made, the oldest dating
from the I 3th century. In I 886 a manuscript
was discovered in the monastery at Mount
Athos, Greece, which included a reproduction
of Ptolemy's original world-map. The section
of this manuscript containing the map (left)
is now in the British Museum. The Geographia
was printed for the first time in a Latin transla¬
tion together with maps in Italy in the latter
part of the I 5th century. Its contents, how¬
ever, had already become known in Western
Europe through manuscript copies, and their
study influenced map-making in two ways.
They led firstly to the addition of degree lines
to maps and secondly to the compilation of
new maps of countries which had been inade¬
quately represented by Ptolemy. The map
above is a reproduction of an engraving on
copper made in Rome in 1478 by a German,
Arnold Bucking and published by another
German, Conrad Schweinheim, the same year.
17

IN THE CENTRE OF THE MAP
(Continued)
Muslims writing in the latitude of Syria or Iran explained
that in the hot south men grew lazy and so remained
backward in civilization; and likewise in the far north
where it was too cold in northern Europe, for instance
men's skins were pallid and' their minds sluggish. Hence
it was that only in the central, moderate climes, like the
Mediterranean lands or Iran, were minds most active and
civilization most advanced ; from there the blessings of
Islam were gradually being brought even to the remotest
areas, among the Negroes in the hot south and the white
men in the cold north.
World histories written by medieval Muslims, might
therefore, have a preliminary section on the older Per¬
sians, Hebrews, and Romans; but, from the time of Mo¬
hammed, the modern part of the history dealt almost
exclusively with the Islamic peoples. Other peoples might
be curious in their quaint ways ; the Chinese might be
clever at gadgets, and the Greeks at philosophy ; but
now the only peoples whose story really counted were
those who had abandoned their old local creeds with
their many idols or their many saints' images and joined
in the imageless worship of the One God, in the interna¬
tional brotherhood of Islam which,- advancing farther
every year, already stretched
from the straits of Gibraltar
to those of Malacca. ' 	.	_^___
The West-Europeans of
the same age had many of
the same ideas of history
and geography as the
Muslims, getting them from
the sanie Greek and Hebrew
sources ; but their interpret¬
ation was very different.
For them history was the
story of God's progressive
dispensations of law or of
grace to his favoured people.
Out of the descendants of
Adam, God has first chosen
the Hebrews, but with the
coming of Christ it was a
"new Israel", the Christians,
that received His favours.
Even among the Christ¬
ians God had made a
further selection casting
aside those of the Levant
and Greece as heretics or
schismatics, in favour of the
West-Europeans under the
Pope at Rome. The favoured
people of each age lived unde'r a succession of great
monarchies : ^in earlier times Chaldean, Persian, and
Greek, which all conquered the Hebrews ; but last and
greatest, under which Christ Himself was born, the
empire of Rome in the west, which should endure till
Judgment Day.
The West-Europeans allowed, that the centre of the
world's surface was Jerusalem (by exaggerating the length
of the Mediterranean, their maps could show Spain and
China as equally distant from it); but they assured
themselves that, just as at the beginning of history
Paradise was in the east where the sun rises, so in these
latter days the centre of God's vicarship on earth was in
the west, where the sun sets ; henceforth Rome was the
centre of all authority, spiritual and temporal.
In modern times all these medieval pictures of the
world have vanished, or been modified. With the discov¬
ery of America and the circumnavigation of the globe,
the discovery that Earth is a tiny planet in an immensity
of space, that mankind has been upon it hundreds of
HOW ANCIENT HINDUS
SAW THE UNIVERSE
According to an ancient Hindu conception of the
universe, the world was supported on the backs
of several elephants, standing on a giant turtle.
The cosmos is depicted here by a snake, the Naga.
thousands of years and is still a newcomer, we have had
to rethink our situation. The great ideals of faith and of
culture have to be seen in spiritual terms rather than as
reflected in the very map of the universe.
The West-Europeans were the first to be really faced
with the new discoveries and have consequently led the
way toward creating a new picture of the world. But
they have not yet escaped the temptation to make geo¬
graphy and history centre upon themselves. One need
only examine the table of contents of any proper Western
"world history". Civilization began in Mesopotamia and
Egypt »(with perhaps some local variants in India and
China); but (it would seem) soon history was almost a
monopoly of the Greeks ; and though other peoples might
still be curious, in their quaint ways, hereafter it was
really only Europe that counted and after the rise of
Rome only Western Europe; here was the home of truth
and liberty.
If during long centuries it was hard to find either truth
or liberty in Western Europe, this period was regretfully
labelled the Dark Ages of mankind; but in modern times
the West-Europeans have duly gone forth to enlighten
(and subdue) the world so that the history of a hence¬
forth "Westernized" world may be safely reduced almost
to that of the West itself.
The map of the world is constructed accordingly.
Westerners distinguish five or six "continents": Africa,
Asia, North and South America and Europe. It is some¬
times ingenuously remarked
how much smaller Europe is
than the "other continents"
yet in political discussions,
in grouping statistics, or in
historical comparisons these
divisions repeatedly recur as
if fixed by nature
In European "w o r 1 d
atlases" each European
country has its own map,
with the rest of the world
in a few pages at the end.
The map ordinarily selected
to show the world as a whole
is ideally suited to reinforce
this way of seeing mankind.
On the Mercator world map
not only is Europe in the
upper centre : it is repre¬
sented as a good deal larger
than the other great culture
areas. Most of these lie
south of the fortieth
parallel, while Europe is
almost wholly north of it,
where Mercator's projection
begins to exaggerate the size
of things enormously.
Accordingly even on the world map, which ought to
provide a sense of proportion, there is space to name a
great many places in Europe, while in other populous
centre's like India or China, shown on a much smaller
scale, only a few chief places need be indicated. Although
equal-area projections of the world have long been avail¬
able, in which shapes as well as sizes are much less
distorted, Westerners understandably cling to a projection
which so markedly flatters them. They explain (as if
they were engaged in nothing but sailing) that the true
angles given on the Mercator map are of convenience to
navigators ; and in atlases and wall-maps, in books of
reference and in newspapers, when Westerners turn to see
what the world looks like as a whole their preconceptions
are authoritatively gratified.
The story is often told of a small tribe whose word for
"mankind" was the name for the tribe itself. Other tribes
were merely incidental in their picture of the world
perhaps not even fully human. Chinese, Hindus, Mus¬
lims, and Westerners alike have smiled perhaps too
quickly at the rather perilous naïveté of that small tribe.
18

The Unesco Courier. March 1956
" a « in v* isny
ONE OF THE OLDEST CHRISTIAN WORLD-MAPS
This is how Beatus, a geographer and monk at the monastery of Valcavado, Spain, depicted the known
world in 776 A.D. Considered to be one of the oldest Christian world-maps, it was attached to his Com-
mentaria in Apocalypsin and was probably intended to illustrate the distribution of the apostoJic missions
throughout the world. It has survived only in ten copies, varying in date from the 9th to the I 3th century.
The one shown here, made at the monastery of St. Sever in France around 1030 A.D., the most valuable,
is now in the collection of the Bibliothèque Nationale, in Paris. The earthly paradise is shown at the east
of the known world (right of map). The adjoining inscription Gens Seres (The silk people), is Beatus's
description for the Chinese. Beatus has represented mountain chains by markings with sawlike edges.
Like earlier geographers he sees the world as an island in a circumfluous ocean filled with fishes and islands.
19
