A unique TV experiment puts the question :
WHAT'S WRONG ON
FRENCH FARMS?
UNESCO-Cassirer
LIFE ON THE LAND was described most convincingly when the farmers themselves spoke from the
TV screen. This farmer advocated mechanization, described advantages of planting several crops.
A unique experiment carried out in
France through the co-operation of
Unesco, French Television and rural
tele-clubs has shown conclusively how
television can now be used to develop
popular culture and adult education cam¬
paigns on a vast scale.
It took the form of a series of 13 TV
programmes dealing with one of France's
most serious national problems the mo¬
dernization of agriculture and the raising
of rural living standards from which it
took its title: "State of Emergency".
Through the rural tele-clubs groups
which meet for collective TV viewing in
many villages it spoke directly to the
country people of their own problems
the drift to the towns, modernization diffi¬
culties of small farmers, land re-allocation
and lack of community enterprise and the
people who did the talking were the small
farmers, wine-growers and labourers them¬
selves, turned actors for a day.
Opinion polls and surveys showed that
its results were striking and positive. It
encouraged one local council to go ahead
with long-delayed community projects,
people pooled resources to buy equipment
for community use, parents decided to
send their children to agricultural and
domestic science schools (1). Thus it will
suggest ideas for similar projects to TV
producers and educators in countries where
TV is a growing force, infusing new blood
into TV and bringing new vitality to adult
education. On the following pages, the
Unesco Courier tells the story of "State of
Emergency" and how it changed the atti¬
tudes of many French farmers towards
problems of rural modernization.
(I) Full results of the study are published by
Unesco in " Television and Rural Adult Educa¬
tion", by J. Dumazedier, price $ 3.50; 2I\-;
1,000 francs.
TELE-CLUB TERRITORY covered by the Unesco experiment was in the rectangle shown on
this map, to the north east of Paris. It includes celebrated Champagne wine-producing region.

The Unesco Courier
Some 60 miles to the north east of Paris lies the De¬
partment of the Aisne, a largely agricultural region
of woods, plateaux and valleys, whose fields of sugar
beet, potatoes and vines give it a prosperous air. Yet
most of the people live in conditions of extreme
discomfort.
In the villages around Chateau Thierry, the most
southerly county town, for example, 65% of the people
have no running water and 95% have no communal
draining system. (Of 21 1/2 million living in France's
rural areas nearly half the population only 9 million
have running water.) One rural housewife out of two has
a primitive wash-house with no real shelter. Seventy
percent of villages have no communal hall and 65% are
without a sports ground.
The houses look quaint. But, as J. Dumazedier points
out in the Unesco study, "Television and Rural Adult
Education," most of them are more than a century old,
and less than half have been renovated since they were
built. The women fetch their water from the public foun¬
tain or horse trough.
More than half the
people have no water
laid on at all. "A tap
above the sink?" That
is just a dream. One
house in five has an
electric cooker, one
person in two uses bu¬
tane gas for cooking
and central heating is
a luxury beyond the
reach of 90% of the
people. Nine out of ten
people have a radio but
less than two have
main drainage in their
homes or a washing
machine of their own.
Most of the small
farmers have all-metal
wheel ploughs, but
only 12% have tractors.
These are conditions
one might expect to
find in isolated De¬
partments of France
rather than 60 miles
from the French
capital. Yet the people
of these Aisne villages
have access to one of
the most modern of
inventions television
through the tele-
clubs which have
sprung up in many
places. .
A few years ago
television was just as remote from the everyday life of
these villages as an atomic pile or an electronic calculating
machine. What they did have were rural film clubs set
up after the war for educational purposes. By 1950 with
. rising costs, these were running into difficulties.
It was then that the treasurer of one of the clubs,
writing up his annual report, concluded with this wry
remark: "If we are to survive we shall have to give up the
cinema and turn to television." It was as though he had
said: "As we have no money left to buy bread, let's buy
cake instead."
Roger Louis, organizer of a group of cinema clubs took
the joke seriously. He began to investigate the technical
difficulties of turning from film shows to collective view¬
ing of television: Could telecasts be received in the Aisne?
Were there sets with screens large enough for 30 to 40
people to watch at a time? Would the images be clear
enough to be seen from the back of a large room? How
much did sets cost? Some of the answers he got were
discouraging. Just the same he went to Paris to have a
look at a television programme, and came back full of
enthusiasm.
His enthusiasm was contagious and soon a plan was
worked out for the collective purchase of sets, the
subscribers to be reimbursed from fees charged for ad¬
mission to the broadcasts. A manufacturer of TV sets
agreed to loan two sets for try-outs in two villages though
he was sure the experiment would not work.
FRIENDLY ATMOSPHERE of the
village people. Together they look out
screenand also begin to see local life
has done much to offset the loneliness
The first tests made in the villages of Nogental and
Etampes were highly successful. Luck was with the em¬
bryo tele-clubs. Reception turned out to be good con¬
founding the forecasts of experts and the village people
liked what they saw.
A friendly rivalry sprang up between Nogental and
Etampes to see which would be the first to raise the cost of
a receiver and thus launch its tele-club. Out of wood and
cardboard Nogental built a thermometer and Etampes a
clock dial marked out in thousands of francs. Each day
the villagers watched the totals mounting. In a week
sufficient money had been subscribed.
The movement spread rapidly. By the beginning of
1952, 43 clubs had been formed and were giving regular
programmes, while 43 receivers provided by the manu¬
facturer on "permanent loan" were used to help open new
clubs. In 1954, some 180 tele-clubs in about ten De¬
partments were giving regular programmes.
The telecasts attract audiences from every class of the
community. Creating
links between groups
with conflicting inter¬
ests is not always easy,
but at least people
from every group come,
whereas in the ' old-
established village as-
sociations, such as the
firemen's society or the
municipal band, social
taboos are much more
in evidence.
The tele-club is a
form of recreation
which is finding a
natural place in village
li'fe. It is not reserved
for any particular
social circle, nor is its
membership largely
confined to a handful
of T.V. fanatics. It
attracts a widely varied
audience, each member
fitting the club activi¬
ties into his personal
programme of recre¬
ation.
While some people
come only at very
irregular intervals to
celebrate some event of
personal, family or
general interest others
make the club their
favourite spare-time
haunt. Some come
regularly to a parti¬
cular programme, some make it the occasion for an
"evening out" and others use it to meet their friends or to
join in group activities. As a social Institution, therefore,
the tele-club is rich in possibilities and easily adaptable to
the varying needs of a small village.
The cinema and the theatre, it has been said, owe much
of their success to their well-padded seats and their
attractive decorations. The tele-clubs' appeal cannot be
explained in the same way. Most are housed in school
class-rooms, often half a century or more old, which are
neither comfortable nor beautiful. Furthermore, the old
school buildings were certainly not planned with a view
to radio or television reception. Acoustics are often bad,
and as all the seats are on the same level, the view from
the back rows of a packed house leaves much to be desired.
Despite these shortcomings, the audience squeezes on to
the cramped old benches which pinch their knees, usually
bunching into groups here a flock of children, there a
cluster of old ladies, several local wine-growers or young
men about to leave for their military service, exchanging
banter with the girls. They all have their favourite seats.
All talk, laugh, stamp their feet or let out catcalls, and
even during the telecast there is never complete silence,
except at particularly tense moments. Most of the time
the programme is accompanied by noisy
comment, whispering, exclamations, stifled
squeals and children's laughter. In other (Cont'd on
words, everyone feels at home. next page)
Copyright Bcizeaux
tele-clubs attracts diverse classes of
on different horizons through the TV
in new perspective. Group viewing
that often afflicts country people.

TV TEST TUBE
(Cont'd)
Tele-club activities have
highlighted the social func¬
tions of the village school¬
master and especially his
role as a leader and organiz¬
er in rural communities.
Despite their uncomfortable
premises and the meagre
grants these teachers manage
by a display of competence,
energy and self-sacrifice, to
continue their educational
work outside school hours. Among young people and
adults they wage a struggle against the ignorance and
prejudice that impede individual development and hold
the villages back.
Educator and village leader, the schoolmaster has to be
something of a psychologist when it comes to choosing the
days and the hours of tele-club meetings. Amusement
and recreation must take second place to the long hours
and hard work of farming life. The Unesco inquiry show¬
ed how difficult it is to please everyone in the matter of
fixing evenings for collective viewing.
Some favour Saturday evening because they can bring
the children who have no school next day. The same
applies to Wednesday (in France primary schools are clos¬
ed on Thursdays). Some people find every day difficult
because, as they point out, "We have to get up every
morning at 6 a.m. to milk the cows."
But while they may differ on this question, most villag¬
ers are agreed that despite some present technical
shortcomings, the potentialities of TV are boundless,
compared with the cinema and other means hitherto
available for widening the horizon of village daily life.
After four years' experience, the village televiewers are
able to weigh the cultural and financial advantages of
group television against the technical advantages of the
cinema (most tele-clubs were previously film clubs). They
see their club as an information centre, a window on the
outside world, a source of knowledge on all kinds of prac¬
tical subjects, a theatre, concert hall or cinema.
How do the club members feel about the future of
collective viewing ? Do they regard it as something likely
to be replaced by T.V. in the home? They were asked:
"Would you like to have a TV set in your own home one
day?" Sixty-eight percent replied "Yes" and 34% said
"No." Most of the negative replies came from small
farmers burdened with work. Those who wanted a set at
home said: "It's a home entertainment which you can
switch on or off as you please." "It's a home variety
show," or "It's like having one's own cinema."
Asked, "If you found yourself with 150,000 francs in
hand next year, would you buy a television set?", 34%
replied "Yes," and 53% "No." Most of the 34% were not
employed directly in agriculture, while among the 53%
there was a large majority of agriculturists and small
farmers.
It's the club that counts
In reply to a complementary question: "If not, what
would you buy instead of or sooner than a television
set?" they gave these answers: a motor-cycle, a car or
a scooter (33%); modern household equipment washing-
machine, refrigerator, central heating, a shower bath, etc.
(27%); various projects farm equipment, "moving into a
house," paying off debts, "travelling in Europe," etc.
(17%).
These answers show clearly the sort of things that
televiewers feel they need more urgently than a television
set. There is therefore every chance that in France and
still more in countries with lower standards of living, the
tele-club will long continue to provide a majority of people
with their only chance to enjoy telecasts.
But tele-clubs do more than simply fill an economic
need. To the question "If you had a television set at
home would you still like going to the club?", 75% of the
replies were "Yes!"
The reasons given for continuing to visit the tele-club
were very diverse. Most people were interested in the
debates because they wished "to discuss interesting pro¬
grammes". Other reasons ranged from "so as to be with
other people" to "because its like going to a show."
There is no doubt that this new type of adult education
activity meets a social need and that people come to it not
only to enjoy the programmes but for the sake of other
group activities as well.
A FARMER-ACTOR AND
HIS INVISIBLE FRIEND
Professional actor or farmer-
actor? The Unesco experi¬
mental TV programmes gave
a clear answer to this question.
No one could present the life of
the farmer better than himself.
Even when it came to putting
forward other people's views, the
non-professional who knew his
subject inside out carried more
conviction than a professional
actor could ever have done.
As the films for the programmes
had been shot "'silent" in the
country they had not only to be
cut, but a sound track added.
For the first telecast of "State of
Emergency" the story was to be
presented by a countryman who
was both the author and the actor.
This is what happened when his
commentary was recorded.
The man in question, M. De-
marck, a wine-grower at Grouttes,
a little village in the south of the
Aisne, had been asked to write the
commentary for his own story, as
related in the film. But when this
had been written down and read
back by its author it somehow
struck a false note. Furthermore,
the recording sounded unpleasant.
The wine-grower's characteristic¬
ally gruff voice, which the product-
er was keen on using, seemed
artificial and the text flat and un¬
interesting.
After several unsuccessful at¬
tempts, the producer wrote a
different text; with no better luck.
On the point of giving up the
idea of using the "story told by its
author" approach, the producer
said to M. Demarck as a last hope:
"Try to imagine you are telling
your story to a friend... try to keep
pace with the picture, but if you
can't manage it, don't worry... just
carry on!"
"What about my paper?"
"Put it in your pocket and forget
it!"
"Ready?... Go ahead!"
Then from behind the glass par¬
tition of the control room, the pro¬
gramme team watched this unique
sight: a farmer alone in front of
a microphone, gesticulating and
grimacing as he told his story,
while it was being shown on the
screen, to an imaginary friend. It
went on for 20 minutes. When it
had finished, M. Demarck, without
a page of script, had recorded a
faultless commentary with no
over-running. The sound engineer
said he had never known anything
like it.
