OUT, OUT,
DAMNED SPOT !
What did people do in the
days of no dry-cleaning ?
by Anna Sommer Lenn
Drawings by Ulrich
Copyright Unesco Courrier
You, when you read of the blue
and white habiliments of me¬
diaeval pages, may conjure up a
vision of castles, crusades and pale
ladies in peaked hats. The slashed
satins and gorgeous brocades of the
Renaissance no doubt put you in mind
of Leonardo, Lorenzo, and black¬
hearted Borgias. Powdered dandies
and belles in sky-blue taffeta and
apple-green velvet probably send you
into a reverie of Revolutions.
Not me. As a practical housewife
and any woman who is the single-
handed chatelaine of a 7-room house
and a family of 4, has to be either
practical or a drudge I behold in my
mind's eye something else. Spots
from a venison pasty on a knightly
tunic. Gravy from a roast pheasant
on a Medici bosom, or, ugh, brown
driblets from the newly fashionable
cup of chocolate on an 18th century
waistcoat or hooped skirt. I see
velvet trains rustling over stone
floors strewn with rushes and greasy
bones from the last meal; the pea¬
cock-blue satin shoes of 15th century
Venice treading on slimy cobble¬
stones; champagne-coloured knee
breeches stained by saddle leather.
Od's Bodikins, what did they do in the
days of no dry-cleaning?
Granted that other eras were not
so fastidious as ours, that perfumes
masked body odours, that sewage
stood in the open streets, and privies
were noisome holes. You can picture
the gentry of these periods wearing
undergarments unclean because not
seen, but can you imagine the cele¬
brated Duchess Isa¬
bella d'Esté dancing
in a spotty gown, or
Sir Walter Raleigh
discarding his cloak
because it was fouled?
Cont'd
next page
17

Out, damned spot
(Continued) Ancients had secret of soapless detergents
Clothes were not easily come by,
even among the wealthy. All stuffs
were hand-loomed until 1787. Weeks,
often months, of handwork went into
the making of a garment of quality.
Lucrezia Borgia had a dress that cost
15,000 ducats. Gentlemen of the court
of the French king, Charles IX, dressed
in hose costing £60 to £100 the pair.
Clothes like these were not thrown
away like paper napkins. On the con¬
trary, festive robes and mantles were
often passed on from parent to youth.
Ergo, visible and disfiguring soil
must have been attacked in some way.
How? The question does not seem to
have plagued the writers of books on
costume, the history of dress, decora¬
tive arts, modes and manners, house¬
hold arts, almanacs, books of curious
facts and where else would you have
looked? I read through several li¬
brary shelves of this material without
discovering a clue. The encyclopaedias
offered some information after you
found the spoor, but they had nothing
so direct as "Spots and Stains anti¬
que methods of removing," or "Clean¬
ing Clothes history of."
I consulted the Curator of Decora¬
tive Arts of a large and famous
western museum, noted for its collec
tion of costumes of bygone eras. The
Curator confessed the question had
never kept her awake at night and
said she could not help me. I popped
in and out of dry-cleaning shops. A
few proprietors were aware of the
fact that their trade dated from the
first half of the 19th century, but could
tell me no more. I wrote to the Na¬
tional Institute of Dry Cleaning.
"For years we have been looking for
answers to the questions you propound,
but have found very little," replied the
Institute. "See if you can find some
old-time recipe books."
'Witch's brew' of cleansers
The first disclosures came to light
among formulas for 12-egg cakes
and how to dye Grandma's me¬
rino shawl, in such yellowed volumes
as Wright's "Book of 3,000 Practical
Recipes" (1840-1850), Thomas Love's
"Practical Dyer and Scourer" (1852),
and Youman's "Handbook of House¬
hold Sciences" (1866).
Next I turned to San Francisco's
Sutro Library with its rare collection
of genealogical books and papers. It
was the first time the library ever had
had a request on this subject, and its
librarians went to work like blood¬
hounds on fresh scent. One library
sleuth discovered the existence of "a
profitable boke declaring dyvers ap-
prooved remedies to take out spottes
and stains. Taken out of Dutche and
by L. Mascall, 1583." More
facts, buried in two century-old diction¬
aries of antiquities, were unearthed by
San Francisco's Public Library.
In time I had a list of cleansing
agents used by peoples from the an¬
cient Egyptians to the Victorians, a list
that sounds like a veritable witch's
brew. Not eye of newt or toe of frog,
but ox gall, soapwort, hollow bones,
decomposed urine, pig dung, sheep ma¬
nure, egg yolk, boiling milk, spring
water, nitre (saltpetre) hot bran, fuller's
earth, cowherb, gum arabic, honey,
logwood chips, soap berry, soap bark,
potash, pearlash, bean meal, Paris
White or French chalk, barley leaven
and glue water. These were the spot
removers, detergents, water softeners,
and dirt solvents of our ancestors!
When Caesar's wife decided her lord's
second best yellow woollen toga was too
soiled to wear to the Forum that day,
she would dispatch it to a fullery or
fullonica, the clothes cleaning esta-
olishment of ancient times. Here the
18

The Unesco Courier
garments were trodden by the feet of
fullones (fullers or laundrymen), stand¬
ing in vats of water-alkali mixture.
The cheapest and most widely used
laundry alkali was the decomposed
urine of men and of animals, an in¬
gredient which had a soapy effect on
dirty woollens. So necessary was urine
to the Roman way of life and to
the laundering of the universally
worn woollens, that vessels ' for its
collection stood on almost every street
corner. Down the centuries this un¬
appetising cleanser was used ; as late
as 1799 we read of it as "old lant",
collected by servants in England.
Fuller's earth, of which there are
numerous varieties, derives its name
from the fullers who used the powdery
clays to absorb grease and grime from
clothes. Pliny recommended that clo¬
thes be washed in the Sardinian variety
of Fuller's earth. The Greeks favour¬
ed such earths as Cimolite, and those
from Selinus and Chios. After the
scouring process, the clothes of the
ancients were often brushed and card¬
ed with the skin of a hedgehog, or
with thistle plants, to raise the nap.
In Biblical times a fuller's field was
located outside the wall of Jerusalem
where cleaned garments were spread
to dry after being washed in copper
tubs. ("For he is like a refiner's fire,
and like fuller's soap."Mai. 3.2; "And
his raiment :.-;came shining, exceeding
white as snow; so as no fuller on earth
can white them" Mark 9.3).
Englai. . for centuries had the
. world's largest supply of fuller's earth
in its Cretaceous beds (chalk depo
sits). When Henry VIII's damask sur-
coat became too encrusted by his ar¬
dours as a trencherman, a Palace
servant would rub the cleansing earth
into the spots. Shakespeare, in his
play about old Hank, mentions fullers
(1.2.33) who have since joined the lim¬
bo with such artisans as fletchers (bow
makers), wainwrights (waggon builders)
and sawyers (sawers of timber).
Centuries before the advent of auto¬
matic dish washers and washing ma¬
chines, the ancients had the secret of
soapless detergents. In every country
from Egypt of the Rameses to the
lands of the Incas and from China to
France, there grew members of a fa¬
mily of "soap" plants. The roots or
bark or berries of these plants exuded
a mucilaginous liquid which produced
a lather in water.
Gudewyfe used Bouncing Bet
In these natural detergents, the most
delicate silks could be washed with¬
out damaging the material or
mingling the dyes. Egypt had soaproot
(gypsophylia struthium) ; Spain, the
so-called Spanish soaproot. China had
soapberry which is still used today for
laundering among the poorer classes;
the West Indies had shagbark or soap-
bark. In Mexico the Indians used a
soap root which is still found as far
north as California and Colorado. In
the countries of Europe, soapwort, also
known as fuller's herb or (in England)
Bouncing Bet, was the most commonly
used member of the saponin family.
Soapwort (saponaria officinalis) was
a pinkish herb that grew wild by every
European roadside, in thickets, and by
the banks of streams. As far back as
the Middle Ages, the Gudewyfe used
an extract of Bouncing Bet's leaves
and roots to cleanse grease spots from
woollens, linens and cottons. In the
Castle they used it on the silks and
velvets that came from the Orient.
As clothes became more intricate
in cut, design, and ornamentation,
housewives found it expedient to
rip them fuily apart for a thorough
dunking in soapwort lather. Section by
section, each garment was cleaned, and
the sections laboriously pinned to fin¬
ishing boards, so that shrinkage and
loss of shape could be held to a mi¬
nimum. The drying of the pinned
sections was hastened by rubbing
with clean cotton cloths, or by placing
the pinned sections in a hot stove
room. Later the sections were stitched
together again by hand. (No sewing
machines until 1841 !)
The dust and mud of horseback tra¬
vel in, say, Chaucer's time, were treat¬
ed by first allowing the garments to
dry on the immemorial clothesline.
They were then vigorously beaten
with a smooth stick or "beetle," the
name of the mediaeval pestle or paddle
board with which women pounded
linens on the banks of steams. After
that, the housewife went to work on
the garments with the detergent of
her choice Bouncing
Bet, urine, or perhaps
nitre. The use of nitre
as a cleanser is men¬
tioned by Pliny and
in the Old Testament.
Cont'd
next page
19

OUT, DAMNED SPOT!
(Continued)
"For though thou wash thee with
nitre and take thee much soap, yet
thine iniquity is marked before me,
saith the Lord God." (Jer. 2.22.)
Another old-time antidote for dirt
was ox gall, the actual bile of a
bullock, mixed with boiling water.
This was considered fine for grease,
particularly the axle and waggon
grease that begrimed clothing as civi¬
lization took to carriages. Garments
were sponged with ox gall solution,
then with spring water. They were
then treated with "glue water"' and
dried before a fire. "'Glue water," no
doubt, acted as starch or sizing, to
restore body and texture to the ma¬
terial. Honey and gum arabic seem
to have served the same purpose.
After spots were removed with ox
gall solution, fine, damp sand was
beaten into the cloth, followed by a
good stiff brushing. Two or three
drops of olive oil on a soft brush were
often passed over the fabric to bring
back the lustre.
Still another approved remedy for
dirty woollens was a strong solution
of logwood chips in water, with a
small quantity of gum arabic. The
logwood chips acted as detergent, and
the gum arabic as sizing. The gar¬
ment was dried in the shade and
brushed in the direction of the nap.
Hot bran, rubbed or brushed into
furs, was a time-honoured way of
cleaning the skins of animals, the
heated particles being grease-absorb¬
ent. Warm pig dung and fresh sheep
manure were prized as spot removers
20
even as late as the early 19th century.
From the Dark Ages until Victorian
times, the housewife tackled dirty
clothes via yet another method:
"bucking," a mediaeval term derived
from (1) the beech tree which produc¬
ed a desirable wood ash or lye for
laundering purposes, and (2) from
"bouken," akin to Low German "bue-
ken," i.e. to soak, steep or boil in lye
or suds. Linens were soaked in a
simple solution of lye from beech or
fir ashes, hollow bones, and boiling
water. The garments were then rins¬
ed, soaked again, then spread flat to
bleach in the sun.
Oxgall and soapwort were out
The ubiquitous Pliny also gives us
an early history of soap. "Sapo,"
he relates, was a Gallic inven¬
tion, introduced to the Romans by the
conquering Gauls and Germanic
tribes. It was a soft concoction of
goat's tallow and causticized wood
ashes or potash ("pot" for the iron pot
in which the ash was evaporated).
Pliny was evidently not aware that
the Phoenicians, Egyptians, and
other Biblical peoples, knew diverse
forms of soap. The soaps of the Old
Testament were a crude substance
compounded by fullers from vegetable
alkalis, while the Egyptians combined
Trona, their native soda which is a
cousin of California borax, with ve¬
getable oils or tallow. The Greek
physician Galen, of the second cent
ury, wrote of soap as a specific for
certain ailments.
However, as late as the Middle Ages,
soap was strictly a luxury item, used
sparingly by persons of wealth as a
cosmetic (in Pliny's time chiefly as
a hair pomade) or as a medicament.
Not until the 16th century was soap
widely used for general cleansing and
scouring. By that time it had been
discovered that soap could be hard¬
ened by treatment with salt. For
centuries it was moulded in a spheri¬
cal shape rather than in the flat bars
of today, and for most of those cen¬
turies, it had a strong animal smell.
Until the early 19th century, the mak¬
ing of soap was still a household task.
In the early 1800's, scientists like
Michael Faraday in England, and
Karl Reichenbach in Germany, blew
the whistle on soapwort, pig's dung,
fuller's earth, urine, ox gall and simi¬
lar cleansing agents.
Experimenting with coal-tar (Fara¬
day) and petroleum (Reichenbach),
they rang in the era of cleansing with
naphthas. Dry cleaning is said to
have been born when a careless serv¬
ing maid upset a turpentine lamp on
a table cloth which became miracu¬
lously bright and clean. The first
dry-cleaning ("nettoyage à sec") es¬
tablishment was opened in 1845 in
France by a M. Jolly Belin.
Not long thereafter the bell tolled
for Liebig's classic pronouncement: a
civilization is measured by the amount
of soap it uses. Dry-cleaning super¬
seded soap as the yardstick.
