Unesco tackles a world problem :
THE PARADOX OF THE JUNGLE
by Gerald Wendt
One-third of the world's usable land 15 million square
miles is warm and rainy. In what is called the humid
tropics the average temperature during the coldest month
does not fall below 64° Fahrenheit and the minimum
annual rainfall is 27.5 inches. Some parts of this vast area
are almost uninhabited, others are among the most densely
populated regions of the earth.
In the 12 million square miles of the hot and humid parts of
America, Africa, Australia and New Guinea the population
does not exceed ten per¬
sons per square mile, but
the three million square
miles of tropical Asia
are populous. The valley
of the Ganges and the
plains of Orissa in India
have 1,200 people to the
square mile. The densest
populations in the world
are in the Bengal Delta,
Cochin and Travancore
in India, the Adiwerno
district of Java and the
delta of the Red River
in Tonkin, where the
population reaches nearly
4,000 per square mile.
In spite of weather
conditions that promote
plant growth, the stand¬
ard of living is low in
these areas because the
land available per family
is too small, because the
heavy rains wash the fer¬
tility from the soil, be¬
cause bacterial decay is
so rapid that little humus
is formed, sometimes
because heavy floods
alternate with dry peri¬
ods, and because of the
prevalence of bacterial
and insect-born disease.
Like all human priva¬
tion, this is a matter
of world import. The
humid tropics, like the
arid and desert lands,
extend all round the
globe; they are not limit¬
ed by national boun¬
daries and their problems
are essentially scientific
ones of understanding
and mastering nature in
which not only many
nations but many sciences must co-operate. Experts in
climate and weather, in geology and soils, in water control
and irrigation, in plant and animal life, in bacteria and insects,
in diseases, psychology and education, must put their heads
together and work together.
The pattern for such co-operation has already been establish¬
ed by Unesco in the five years that its Advisory Committee on
Arid Lands Research has been at work. Now, the rain forest
14
fc'llif?
W. H. O.
THE HUMID TROPICS, like the arid and desert lands, extend all around
the globe; they are not limited by national boundaries and their problems
cannot be solved solely by national action. Today, Unesco and other U.N.
agencies are co-operating with governments to find solutions for the many
problems of life in the tropics. High disease rate, for example, is a major
obstacle to greater food production and improved living conditions. Above,
clearing banks of a Philippines' stream, a breeding place for snails which carry
the parasites responsible for bilharziasis, an intestinal and bladder disease.
and the rice paddy, the fisheries and the milk supply, over¬
population and malnutrition, insect control and tropical
diseases, eroded soil and the use of fertilizers, flood control and
irrigation, and other aspects of life in the humid tropics are
also being included in the new scientific research programme
being undertaken by Unesco.
They were discussed at a meeting sponsored by Unesco at
Kandy, Ceylon, last year, which was attended by specialists in
tropical research from ten countries (Brazil, Ceylon, France,
India, Indonesia, the Ne¬
therlands, Pakistan, the
Philippines, the United
Kingdom and the United
States), by observers
from four international
scientific organizations
(the International Geo¬
graphical Union, the In¬
ternational Union for the
Protection of Nature, the
Pacific Science Associa¬
tion and the Pan-Indian
Ocean Science Associa¬
tion), and representatives
from four Specialized
Agencies of the United
Nations (the Food and
Agriculture Organization,
the World Health Organ¬
ization, the World Mere-
orological Organization,
and Unesco).
A general discussion
on tropical vegetation
opened the meeting,
which closed with specific
recommendations for
Unesco's programme of
research on the improve¬
ment of humid tropical
life. According to the
recommendations of the
Preparatory Committee
at Kandy, the same pat¬
tern as was used for the
Arid Zones will be fol¬
lowed with regard to the
humid tropical zones in
the expectation of similar
success.
The first step will be
the organization of a
permanent Advisory
Committee on Humid
Tropics Research. From
Brazil, Unesco received
an invitation to hold the
first meeting of the new committee next July in the city of
Manaus, in the heart of the Amazon jungle. In conjunction
with this meeting, an international symposium is to take place
on the various chemicals that can be derived from tropical
plants. Another international symposium, on climate, vege¬
tation and land utilization in the humid tropics, is scheduled
to be held in conjunction with the Ninth Pacific Science
Congress when this opens in Bangkok next December.

The Unesco Courier. March 1957
The committee at Kandy
submitted a list of 19 recommen¬
dations for action by Unesco in
the humid tropics programme.
One called for a special effort
to identify and classify the
enormous number of tropical
insects that play so large a part in
tropical life, many of which are
still largely unknown. Another
indicated that priority should be
given to a classification of tropical
soils, with a reference collection of
soil types and a study of the role
of organic matter and nitrogen
compounds in soils of humid
regions. A third recommendation
was for the establishment of a
system of fellowships to enable
research workers in humid tropical
sciences to study abroad. The
committee also proposed to
Unesco that some financial assis¬
tance be given for the publication
of a map of the main vegetation
regions of Africa and for the
publication of bibliographies on
the plant families of Indonesia, the
tropical Pacific Islands, and of
Africa south of the Sahara.
Man's use of tropical vegetation
differs widely in various parts of
the world. The Kandy meeting
recognized rice culture as probably
the most valuable since the flooded
fields do not allow the nutrient
elements in the soil to be washed
away. But both the varieties of
rice and the methods of cultivation
can be improved. One expert,
Dr. Camargo, Director of the Na¬
tional Agricultural Research Ser¬
vice, of Brazil, strongly condemn¬
ed the "extractivist mentality"
which extracts and exploits the
wild wealth of the forest with no
effort at permanent cultivation or
the growing of food. "Today",
he said, "the Amazon territory,
with everything necessary to grow
abundant food, is still importing
milk, rice, beans, meat and fats."
Malnutrition in tropical countries
is usually due to a lack of proteins
in the diet. Dr. F.R. Barucha,
Director of the Institute of Science
at Bombay, pointed out that in
India there is an average of one
bullock to each person, but that
.they do not contribute to the meat
supply, and even the milk yield of
the cows and the buffaloes is small
in quantity and poor in protein content because the grass on
which the cattle feed is itself low in protein. One of the chief
needs for tropical peoples is the development of a high-protein
grass that grows well under humid conditions, if only to
improve the milk supply.
Comprehensive reports were submitted to the symposium on
Java and other Indonesian islands, on conditions in Ceylon, on
the Caribbean region, the Philippines, the Amazon basin and
the tropical zone of Africa.
One report pointed out that Africa is probably a unique
test tube in which to evaluate the various physiological and
psychological elements of "tropical inanition or fatigue" in
indigenous peoples. It suggested carrying out comparative
studies and tests among sample groups from Africa's hot
tropical, hot desert, and temperate regions to evaluate the
relative mental and physical capabilities of groups in each
C.O.I. London, Crown Copyright Reserved
TRUNK-WALKING FAMILY of the Iban tribe in Sarawak, North Borneo, crosses a stream on its
way to work in the rice paddies. In warm and rainy Asia man has found that the best answer to the
problem of growing food crops in this climate is to cultivate rice under water. This produces a better
harvest and preserves the soil. Where crops are grown in fire-cleared patches of jungle, the yields
are uncertain and it is only a question of time before the absence of trees will lead to soil erosion.
type of climate, also a study of Kalahari Bushmen said to
run long distances in extreme heat on little or no water.
An impressive panel of consultants who will be available for
special reports or committee work has already been listed by
Unesco as a result of invitations from the Director-General to
the member states. Twenty-three countries named 120 experts
who will thus co-operate in the humid tropics research pro¬
gramme. They are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Burma, Ceylon, France, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, Netherlands, Pakistan, Philippines, Spain, Switzerland,
Syria, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom, United States
and Viet Nam.
Unesco is also compiling a list of all research institutions
that deal with humid tropical questions, which already shows
87 institutions in 22 countries. More will be added in the
coming campaign for complete international co-operation.
15
