U.N. faces the question :
NEED WE GO
HUNGRY?
by Professor
André Mayer
I remember in 1939 a certain well-known person saying
to me: "The idea of organizing nutrition on a scien¬
tific basis is a wonderful one, but it is a dream." Six
months later war broke out and put to the test all the
ideas that had been advanced in this field some years
earlier by the League of Nations.
In the case of nutrition, the results were striking in
countries like Great Britain where it was possible to
organize feeding scientifically. Despite all the upheaval
caused by the war, infant mortality fell to lower levels
than any that had previously been recorded. On the other
hand, France, occupied, held to ransom, and devastated,
had just the reverse experience.
In the case of agriculture, the problem, even for a highly
equipped country, was how and with what speed a well-
managed agriculture could adapt itself to a "nutritional
planning." The United States decided to feed an addi¬
tional 40 million people in the forces and in the liberated
countries, and it succeeded in doing so in less than two
years by increasing its agricultural output by one-third.
At the same time, the prices of rational foodstuffs were so
fixed that wages were sufficient to cover "the cost of
living." Thus a veritable social experiment in a large
industrialized nation showed how sound were the estimates
that could be based on the new knowledge.
The results were such that people began to wonder if
what was done during the war and for war purposes could
not also be done when peace was restored and for the
maintenance of peace. It was this thought, in fact, that
gave birth to the idea of setting up the Food and Agri¬
culture Organization (Fao) and then the World Health
Organization (Who).
To what then was this undeniable impact of the war
due? A modern war, as the last two have taught us,
brings into play all the forces of society. In that sense
Professor André Mayer, an eminent French doctor and scientist, was
one of the founders of the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, with
which he became so closely identified that he was often refvrred to as
"Mr. FAO". Professor Mayer tackled FAO problems with a particular in¬
terest, not only as a nutritionist, but as an internationalist, because, as he
once said, "every effort to outline a plan for social rehabilitation 're¬
considering' agriculture as a whole." He died on May 27, 1956. This
article is taken from his inaugural lecture at a nutritionists' training course
organized at Marseilles in 1955 by the French Government, FAO and the
World Health Organization.
they were "total wars." Total war can be conducted only
if all social activities are completely mobilized. Such
mobilization rests on plans and the plans in turn on
estimates and calculations which are only possible if much
is known about the society.
Some early surveys of diet and state of nutrition were
associated with the work of the League of Nations at
Geneva. The aim was to determine nutritional status in
the more advanced countries. The results were astonish¬
ing. In the southern states of the U.S.A. pellagra was
killing more people than tuberculosis; in parts of Great
Britain, 90 per cent of the children had mild signs of
rickets; and in France, obvious manifestations of mal¬
nutrition were found in certain social groups.
No sooner had Fao been set up than it was faced with
a threat of world famine. As it was bound to do in the
circumstances, the Organization launched the first survey
of world food supplies, based on all the documentation
that governments, research institutions and financial
groups could provide. This survey excited great universal
interest. It drew attention to a situation about which, in
fact, people had only very vague ideas, and which, perhaps,
no great attempt had been made to bring to light. It
revealed an amazing inequality in the amount of foodstuffs
available to human beings.
There are in this world some 2,500,000,000 human beings
grouped into societies and into some 80 nations that
have monopolized the dry land but, fortunately for the
future, have left undisturbed for the most part the
freedom of the seas. Of some 13,500,000,000 hectares,
these nations make use of that part which is arable land,
grass land or forest land. They cultivate only 8 per cent
of the total land area.
Ten years ago it was shown that Western Europe, which
comprises 3 per cent of the total world land area and 15
per cent of the world's population, produces almost one-
third of the world's food. Add the U.S.S.R. and North
America, and one-third of mankind consumes three-
quarters of the food produced in the world. Asia, with
almost half the world's population, has available only 17
per cent of the world's food. What is more,
the situation in different parts of one and
the same country may be quite dissimilar.
Fao's first survey has shown that the food
available to two-thirds of mankind provides
less than 2,750 calories per capita; for half

The Unesco Courier. April 1957

mankind, less than 2,250; in addition, the composition of
the diets which yield this low amount of calories is
defective.
This means that the various countries are not equally
capable of feeding their people, or of feeding them well.
Ability to nourish its members is, therefore, one of the
characteristics of a society, an important social fact.
It is associated with another social fact. Within
different nations different social groups are not equally
well fed. The extent of this disparity is also a social
characteristic. We must remember too that the daily
food intake of these groups differs as much in composi¬
tion as in quantity. Diet, therefore, raises a social prob¬
lem in one sense of the term, that of the inequality of
men in the face of the same need for food. What is
important and more significant still, it raises a social
question in the first sense of the term "social", that of
social behaviour and structure.
Inequality in the matter of food is not the only in¬
equality between people of different countries, or in one
and the same country. There is another, and a serious
one, of which the doctors are aware. It is inequality in
the matter of health. This is strikingly reflected in the
mortality statistics for both children and adults. Such a
state of affairs can be expressed in several ways. For
instance, we can calculate statistically the life expectancy
of a newborn child, and we find
that it ranges between about 27
years in India and 67 years in the
United States. A person, therefore,
has a longer or shorter life, accord¬
ing to whether he happens to have
been born in one country or another,
and a more or less full life and a
life more or less unimpaired by
sickness and disease. It is said that
until recently one-quarter of the
population of India suffered from
malaria. This entails millions of
hours of painful inactivity. That
then is a second inequality between
nations and between groups within
a nation; it has been called "in¬
equality in the face of death." It is
a second characteristic of societies.
Worthy of note is the fact that
the countries with most sickness
and disease are also those with the
poorest health services. They have,
practically speaking, no doctors. In
France there is one doctor for every
1,600 inhabitants. In Ethiopia one
for every 176,000. Situations like
this exist because in some countries
education is open to all while in others the majority of
people are illiterate. But these three characteristics of
nations and of societies are not the only ones by which
they can be differentiated and defined. Nations are not
all equally capable of producing foodstuffs. What has
been called the "productivity index" for foodstuffs differs
widely from country to country.
Comparisons between societies show that the lower the
income the higher the proportion of the income spent on
food. Again, the quality of the diet depends largely on
income. In a poor nation or group, the diet will contain
less meat or milk than in a wealthy group. Plant foods
are obtained directly from the earth, while livestock feed
on plants which they convert into meat or milk at a high
cost in terms of calories; consequently meat and milk
are expensive foods, sometimes inaccessible to the poor.
In the case of milk, this can be serious.
But it is not only in respect of food that productivity
varies widely in different countries. This is reflected in
the cash value of annual national per capita production,
which is as much as $770.00 in the U.S.A. and as low as
$20.00 in India. There are thus relatively rich and rela¬
tively poor nations just as there are within the nations
relatively rich and relatively poor groups. Significantly,
when countries are classified according to income, pro¬
ductivity, the quality and quantity of food resources, the
life span of people, health and education, it is invariably
the same countries that are at the top or at the bottom
of the scale. Thus the characteristics enumerated here
are not associated by chance. They are inter-related,
and indeed interdependent. Curiously enough, this inter¬
dependence is reflected in the social structure itself.
In countries with a low per capita income almost all
WORLD HEALTH
UAY
'Food and Health'
7 APRIL 1957
Organised jointly
by WHO and FAO
human labour is devoted to the production and processing
of food. Conversely, in countries with higher income, an
increasingly small part of the population is engaged in
agriculture. The reasons for this are that in the latter
people know how to manage the land and the crops, and
how to use chemical fertilizers for the enrichment of the
soil; that they protect livestock and plants against pests
and breed better types; that they make farm machinery,
which either eases man's work or does it for him.
All this implies an existing well developed industry. In
such countries industrial products are exchanged for agri¬
cultural products. This presupposes transport facilities
and organized marketing services. The improvement of
agricultural techniques Is accompanied by the estab¬
lishment of technical, financial and administrative ser¬
vices. The division of labour among men changes; tasks
are divided up among them. Society is organized diffe¬
rently; the social structure is in fact transformed.
Statistics show that the distribution of the working popu¬
lation over the various types of economic activity, for
example agriculture and industry, is not the same in rich
as in poor countries. It is evident from any study of
them that the wealthier the society, the more complex
is its pattern, and vice versa.
Just as man himself is a single whole and his activities
are interdependent, so the activities of every society are
interdependent. The satisfaction of
hunger is a primordial one. It is
not, however, an activity inde¬
pendent of. other factors. It is
conditioned by the social structure,
on which in turn it has an impact.
As a result, human diets cannot be
modified or changed without at
some point impinging upon the
social structure itself. Not only
technical questions are involved but
also social issues.
Expectation of life and the in¬
cidence of disease differ widely
from one country to another. There
are many other related differences.
Children may be healthy and attain
a healthy adult life, or many of
them may die prematurely. The
diet may be good in quantity and
quality, or it may be the reverse.
People may be well clothed and
housed, or the opposite. They may
be engaged in productive work
which is not too arduous, or in heavy
work which gives low returns. They
may have opportunities for material
and social advancement because
they are well educated, or such opportunities may be
closed to them. Great inequality among nations and
within a nation is a feature of our world today.
However, I think we can safely say that something can
be done to remedy this situation. Countries at the bottom
of the scale are not intrinsically different from those at
the top. Life expectancy in India until recently was 27
years; in France, on the eve of the Revolution, it was 26
years. Infantile mortality was higher in Lille in 1848
than it is today in Bombay. Famine killed 5 percent of
the French population in 1770.
Until our day, technical progress spread but slowly.
There were all kinds of obstacles to communications
between countries, and many societies were completely cut
off from the others. Thousands of years were needed for
the use of stone instruments or bronze or iron to spread
throughout the world. And some societies today are still
in the Stone Age !
One of the consequences of technical progress is the
growing speed of communications. This has brought
nations closer together. But what is more serious, it has
made it possible for nations to involve all the other peoples
of the world in their wars. Not only our inventions, but
also our ways of thinking and our ways of doing things
have reached them. They have thus become conscious of
their poverty and been led to follow in our footsteps. We
have begun to help them and in so doing have started a
movement which, even if we wanted to, we cannot stop.
This raises a tremendous problem. It is nothing less
than that of directing the development of all mankind an
unprecedented undertaking and one from which we cannot
draw back. In fact, we must even speed up that develop-

The Unesco Courier. April 1957
ment; and one of the reasons for this illustrates the
interdependence of social activities.
For our own safety, as much as for that of others, we
must control communicable diseases, which are no respec¬
ters of national boundaries. Naturally Who and Unicef,
whose concern this is, are conducting campaigns against
such diseases and all other diseases; and they are doing so
with remarkable success. They are driving back the
spectre of death. But, by the same token, they are
contributing to a rapid increase in the population of the
world. If more children survive, if more adults live
longer, how are they to be fed? This is where the eco¬
nomists evoke the shade of Malthus.
Malthus will be right only if we fail to act. But we must
act quickly faster than the population increases; other¬
wise, what will happen to these millions of starving, miser¬
able people? History teaches us the danger of poverty
when poverty has become conscious of itself. We must,
therefore, resolutely pursue our task.
Let us not be deceived by words as to its nature. It is
not merely a technical undertaking, as might appear from
the name given to the assistance in developing countries.
It is much more than that.
We, too, have our under-developed areas, but our peoples
have learned that if technical progress Is to continue to
contribute to an expanding economy and a fuller life, it Is
in the interest of all to raise the standard of living of the
whole population, and not only of a part of it. Again, the
cumulative and universal nature of science and technology
makes it necessary to recognize a community of interests
not bounded by natural frontiers. Whether they wish to
or not, the countries of the world are becoming inter¬
dependent. They must ¿help one another, as their
individual citizens have helped each other. Such mutual
assistance is being organized under many names. Basi¬
cally, however, it is mutual assistance.
This movement raises a tremendous problem of world
dimensions. But whether a problem is narrowly defined or
is apparently unmeasurable, it is never well to tackle it
unsystematically. This particular one cannot be left at
the mercy of immediate political and economic considera¬
tions. We know that it is international, that it involves
all the activities of nations. It must, therefore, be dealt
with by international action, joint and simultaneous
action for the satisfaction of all man's basic needs. An
extraordinary adventure has begun, one of the most
splendid and astounding that men have ever embarked
upon in all their history.

Kg.
Uruguay
Australia
New Zealand
Argentina
United States
France
United Kingdom
Ireland
Sweden
Switzerland
Austria
German Fed. Repub.
Union of South Africa
Netherlands
Norway
Brazil
Italy
Yugoslavia
Turkey
Greace
Portugal
Egypt
Philippines
China
Japan
India
Kg.
Finland
Norway
Sweden
New Zealand
Switzerland
Netherlands
Canada
Austria
Denmark
Ireland
United States
United Kingdom
German Fed. Repub.
Australia
Belgium- Luxembourg
Uruguay
France
Argentina
Italy
Yugoslavia
Union of South Africa
Egypt
Greece
India
Turkey
Portugal
Japan
Philippines
p ' t '!f '? !)0 ÍjjO IDE JO ')j0 100 |o rço rç
"r
1
1
URUGUAY, AUSTRALIA
GREATEST MEAT EATERS
Uruguay and Australia eat more meat per capita than
any other countries In "the world, according to the
latest survey made by the Food and Agriculture
Organization. Next in order come New Zealand,
Argentina, the United States, France, the United
Kingdom and Ireland. Graph (left) shows meat
consumption (including poultry and offal) in kilo¬
grams per inhabitant per year for 26 countries.
SCANDINAVIANS
DRINK THE MOST MILK
The consumption of milk and of dairy products
in 28 countries is shown in this graph in
kilograms per person per year. The black band
indicates the consumption of liquid milk in
almost all cases the figures include the whole
milk equivalent of cream. The grey band
represents the consumption of milk and dairy
products combined (in terms of liquid milk).
Scandinavians are high on consumers' list.
Statistics of milk or of milk and dairy products
are not available for all countries indicated here.
-L ) ' ! iJ ! >, i.i Ü i p ¡10 in 20 30 fü 15/) IpO 1 70 130 1 30 : 00 210 220 2}0 2^0 ? 502i- 11 30 290 300 316 3?0 330 3 ¡0 3 0
! 1
1 !
i
! rr
ftw?"aiMfv^^>fH|MyH^ia i Mpii^iiiiiii|iui|w,nfM|BBfBafnaHVHqMqM
'
i 1
~
m
"
'-
1
!
1
nT-rrnn
!
- 1 T'T"r
Í" 7 ! "Ml. FT
: i i ; 1 1
i i ! r i
t i
e
W
Unesco Courier graphs - R. Jacquemin
