THE WISDOM OF AL-GAHIZ
CROSSES THE FRONTIER
by Georges Fradier
Many an author has won fame in his own country and,
long after his death, his books continue to be admired
and to give pleasure but only to the relatively few
who happen to know the same language. To the rest of the
world he is unknown and will probably remain so.
And then suddenly comes a change. Someone decides to
translate him into a language understood by perhaps 50 or
100 million people. Our author, long dead, takes wings.
He finds a welcome among strangers. To them he brings
new treasure, something of the wit, wisdom and poetry of his
own folk and times.
This does not happen as often as might be imagined, but it
has now happened to a rare man of letters who died eleven
centuries ago. The name of Abu Uthman 'Amr Ibn Bahr
AI-Gahiz was unknown outside the Moslem world (except to
a few orientalists) until his Book of Misers was translated into
French by Charles Pellat and published in the Unesco Collec¬
tion of Representative Works.
Al-Gahiz was born in 776 or 777 A.D. at Basra, then a
flourishing city, traversed by countless canals, thronged with
merchants, singers and grammarians, the gateway to the East
Nature study
and theology,
poetry and
geography :
all was grist
to his mill
and a centre of Mesopotamian trade with India and China.
Its inhabitants were notorious for their sharp wit and difficult
character.
But Al-Gahiz seems to have inherited only their intellectual
capacities. Tactful and polite, he knew that a man of culture
deserves a quiet life, one that neither requires him to stake
his all upon reputation, nor makes excessive calls for self-
denial.
Though he was a contemporary of Charlemagne, his career
in the craft of letters was like that of any talented, ambitious
young man in 17th century Europe. Success meant living
in the capital and finding a patron there. For an author who
wished to live by his pen, there was no alternative but to offer
a few dedications in return for gifts and a pension.
Al-Gahiz, therefore, dedicated a book to the Caliph and
became a success in Baghdad. But his success owed nothing
to sycophancy. There are no fulsome praises in his book,
which is about the thorniest and most controversial problems
of those times, the political and religious system of the Cali-
12
phate. It does not take sides, but gives an unruffled account
of the most divergent trends of opinion.
All subjects came naturally to his pen : theology, natural
history, poetry, geography. Neither palace revolutions nor
revolts disturbed his output. The Vizir fell into disgrace, the
Caliph died. Their rivals and successors were equally
friendly to Al-Gahiz, who grew old wisely and only retired
from the Court when compelled to do so by a stroke and
rheumatism.
Al-Gahiz' Book of Beasts and Abu-Hanifa's Botany are
among the first works devoted to the study of nature. The
Book of Beasts contains many quotations from Aristotle,
though Greek influences are not otherwise particularly
conspicuous. There are also passages from the poets, used
as in all mediaeval treatises "to point a moral and adorn
a tale".
But our author has set down some observations of his own
as well. His object is to prove the unity of nature, to show
how, in the eyes of a sage, all things in nature are of equal
value. He had an odd predilection for insects and the Book
of Beasts foreshadows certain modern theories concerning the
evolution and adaptation of species.
Al-Gahiz, however, was not a scientist, nor a specialist in
any particular subject. He wrote books on Corn and the
Palm-tree, on Metals, on Whites and Negroes, though not
as one versed in the science of husbandry, or of metal, or of
mankind. His aim was to give a stimulus to such studies
and pleasure to the reader. Even when he wrote about
theology, elegance of style did not desert him : he eschewed
speculative theories in favour of historical fact and personal
experience.
The Book of Misers, for instance, is not an essay on
avarice, but a collection of anecdotes, recollections, apt quo¬
tations and original ideas, the whole apparently flung together
haphazardly. It is the obiter dicta of a sage with a smile
on his lips and a fluent pen, who has ceased to have much
faith in teaching, and refers to it only with a touch of
humour.
"In this book", he writes, "shalt thou find three things
original arguments, subtle artifices, amusing tales. Therein
mayst thou draw, according to the mood, matter for laughter
and distraction, if grave things weary thee."
And thereupon he laun¬
ches out he has always a
weakness for digressions
upon an enchanting
apology for mirth. But
he closes in dignified
fashion :
"Laughter and jesting have
their measure and golden
mean. That boundary
passed, we fall into frivo¬
lity; but short of it, then
we are found wanting
in the scales."

The Unesco Courier. June 1957
wjH-
l ht«« nwtm *miv .-»,
DISCOURS
DE LA MÉTHODE
b Jailli. uUi.t
Classical works In six different Western
languages have been translated or are
being prepared for translation Into Arabic
or Persian under Unesco's Translation of
Representative Works Programme. Here
are the covers (In French and Arabic) of
the Arabic translation of Discourse on
Method by Descartes. The other Western
classics chosen for translation from French
into Arabic are: Monadology by Leibniz; The
Spirit of Laws by Montesquieu ; Le Contrat
Social and The Origin of Inequality by Rous¬
seau ; An Introduction to the Study of Experi¬
mental Medicine by Claude Bernard ; The
Division of Labour ¡n Society by Durkheim;
Les Pensées by Pascal and The Future of
Science by Renan. English works are repre¬
sented by Shakespeare's A Winter's Tale and
Locke's Two treatises on Civil Government.
Works from other languages now being
translated are: Aristotle's Politics, Cervan--
tes' DonQu/xote and Dante's Inferno. To date
two classics have been translated Into Per¬
sian: Nletzche's The Will to Power and three
plays by Corneille. Two others are being
prepared : Locke's An Essay concerning Human
Understanding and selected plays by Racine.
The main pleasure in this book for us today lies in the
picture it paints of mice and men. Few are the historical
documents so close to life and the stuff of things. The Book
of Misers throws a dazzling light on Mesopotamian society
in the ninth century. It describes its customs, fashions, cul¬
ture, folklore, money troubles, police, trade, the funny stories
men told each other and what they ate in fact, the whole
tale of daily life, which is ignored by schoolroom history.
Our author did not think of depicting only misers in this
Wheat red as
the beaks of
nightingales ;
dates soft as
the throats
of lizards
work, and when he comes to them, he supplies us with an
essay on manners. And strange birds they are, his misers.
Their vice is usually kept for the dinner-table, like the one
who rationed his guests' helpings, but loaded them with gold
and jewels !
We have a glimpse of a brilliant civilization, though one
not far removed from the austere living of the nomadic
tribes who gave it birth, and still imbued with the poetry
wherewith the men of the desert transmuted their poverty
into gold. Listen to a Bedouin describing his meal :
"They brought us wheat red as nightingales' beaks, and
we kneaded bread, which we threw upon the fire ; the
embers tumbled out as the belly tumbles over the belt.
"We then made of it a pottage that went around in the
melted fat as the hyena goes around in the sandhills.
"Then they brought us dates like the throats of lizards, so
soft that the teeth sank into them."
Al-Gahiz had too much learning and too keen a sense of
humour to compose this prose poem himself, but he must
have felt happy as he copied it out. Through it we catch a
glimpse of one who was always good company, a man of
insatiable curiosity, not very deep, but always on the watch
for "wise saws and modern instances" wherewith to make his
meaning clear and help the mutual understanding of peoples.
The Book of Misers was one of a series of essays on
society, others include: Of Thieves, Of Young Lovers, Of
Schoolmasters, Of Singers. The essay on Women is
crammed with sex psychology and, in another series, our
author pleads for equality among the three races that then
made up the Moslem world the Arabs, the Persians and
the Turks.
All Basra mourned him when he died at the ripe old age
of 91. They mourned him as an admirable writer, but above
all, as a lovable man. It is a pity we have no portrait of him.
He was, it seems, extremely ugly, with big bulging eyes, and
that is the meaning of his nickname, Al-Gahiz. It is, too, the
reason why the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil felt unable to make
him tutor to his sons.
But we are reminded of Socrates ; his ugliness must have
been offset by his smile and his intelligence, and it must have
been forgotten in the enchantment of his speech. Maybe he
would not have stuffed his pupils with strategy and the Law
of the Koran. He would have taught them to cultivate an
open and inquisitive mind,
tolerance, a taste for
friendship, respect for
their mother tongue, the
whole seasoned with a
pinch of scepticism, for he
would certainly have im¬
parted all he had to give.
It would perhaps be
fantastical to see in him
an early Francis Bacon.
In any case the sons of the
Caliph are to be pitied for
what they missed.
13
