WeBtminstur Palaoe Hotel ,
4, Victoria Street,
1 0 N D O M , W.C.
10.11.1909.
YyV
0
MAHATMA GANDHI
T*¥
Dear Sir:-
I beg to tender my thanks for your registered letter
in connection with t!;e letter addressed to a Hindu, and
with the matters that I dealt with in my letter to you.
Having heard about your failing health I refrained
in order to save you the trouble, frem sending an acknow¬
ledgment, knowing that a written expression of ray thank3
was a superfluous formality, but Mr. Aylmer Maude, whom I
have nowbbeen able to meet reassured me that you were keep¬
ing very good health indeed and that unfailingly and regu¬
larly attended to your correspondence every morning. It
was very gladsome news to me, and it encourages mé to write
to you "urther about matters which are, I know, of the
greatest importance according to your teaching.
I beg to send you herewith a copy of a book written by
a friend - an Englishman, who Is at present in South Africa,
In connection with my life, insofar as it has a mzy bearing
on the struggle with which I am so connected, and to which my
life is dedicated. As I am very anxious to engage your ac¬
tive interest and sympathy, I thought that it would not be
considered by you as out of the way for me' to send you the
book.
In my opinion, this struggl-i of the Indians in the Trans¬
vaal is the greatest of modern times, inasmuch as it has been
idealised both as to the goal as also th& methods adopted to
ree.ch the. goal. I am not aware of a struggle, in which the
participators are not to derive any personal advantage at the
en8 of it, and in which 50**¿ of the persons affected have under¬
gone great suffering and trial for the sake of a principle. It
has not feen possible for me to advertise the struggle as much
as I ahould like. You command, possibly, the widest public to¬
day. >Tf you are satisfied as to the facts you will find set
forth in Mr-. Doke's book, and if you consider thi»t the conclu¬
sions I have arrived at are Justified hy the facts, may I ask
you to use your influence in any manner you think fit to popu¬
larise the movement ? If it succeeds, it will be not only a
triumph of religion, love and truth over irreligion, hatred
and falsehood, but it is highly lilely to serve as an example
to the millions in India and to people in other parts of the .
world who may be down-trodden, and will certainly go a great
way towards breaking up the party of violence, at least in
India. If we hold out to the end, as I think we would, T en¬
tertain not the slightest doubt as to the ultimate success;
and your encouragement in the way suggested by you can only
strengthen us in our resolve.
The négociations that were going on for. a settlement of
the question hare practically fallen through, and together
with ray colleague I return to South Africa this week, and in-
rite imprisonment. I may add that my son hashappily Joined
me in this struggle, and is now undergoing imprisonment with
hard labour for sir months. This is his fourth imprisonment
in the course of the struggle.
mù*ù
rc*".*'-V>.
".-¿Ci-'viiA-,
"* vnjr A0,*-*»*«
>
«a
Is
, <i At
If y ou would to So
mcy I ask you to address
Box 653E.
reply to this letter,
to n« at Johannesburg, S.A.
Hoping that this will find you in good health, 1 remain
Your obedi ent' servant ,
ü«
PtJiÄU^**-.-*»-*!**.
Count Leo Tolstoi,
Yasna Polyana,
Russia.
* .: * «C**-?!
LEO TOLSTOY
22

Tolstoy museum solves a 50-year-old mystery
THE 'LOST LETTER' OF MAHATMA GANDHI
by Alexandre Chifman
Tolstoy Museum, Moscow
The ideas of men of genius do not -wither with age. Though
nearly half a century has elapsed since the exchange of
letters between Leon Tolstoy and Gandhi, their
correspondence continues to be the subject of study in many
countries of the world. Scholars of the East as well as the
West have been drawn to the letters of these great thinkers and
have admired the profundity of judgment and the inspiring ideas
about friendship and peace between peoples expressed in them.
The Tolstoy-Gandhi correspondence was first published in
Germany in 1925 by Tolstoy's Russian friend and biographer,
Pavel Biryukov, in his book, Tolstoi und der Orient ("Tolstoy
and the Orient"). It was in this form that it subsequently became
known throughout the world.
When Romain Rolland discussed the universal cultural
influence of Tolstoy and Gandhi in his book La vie de Tolstoi,
published in 1933, he had Biryukov's edition of the
correspondence before him. So
did Stefan 'Zweig, when he wrote
about Tolstoy and Gandhi in his
Adepts in Self-Portraiture. The
same letters were published in 1939
by the Soviet review Literary
Heritage, in a special volume
devoted to Tolstoy.
Strangely enough, however,
editors and commentators in many
countries failed to notice that one
of Gandhi's most interesting letters
was missing from the collection of
fifty thousand letters received by
Tolstoy and carefully preserved in
the Leon Tolstoy archives in Moscow.
And yet this letter had undoubtedly reached Yasnaya Polyana
(the novelist's country home) and had been read by Tolstoy. A
copy preserved in India testifies to its existence, as do Tolstoy's
replies when carefully examined. But how did the letter disap¬
pear, and what happened to it? For nearly fifty years these
questions remained unanswered.
Recently, two staff members of the Yasnaya Polyana Museum,
Nicolai' Puzin and Yelena Nasselenko, were examining some old
foreign periodicals which Tolstoy had received during his lifetime
from all parts of the world. Flipping through the pages of an
English magazine of the period, they came upon a Russian
translation of one of the articles in the review, made for Tolstoy
by his daughter-in-law, O.K. Tolstaya. Underneath it lay the
"'lost letter". Tolstoy probably left Gandhi's letter there,
intending to reply to it. But on the same day he fell ill; the
magazine was taken from his study, and the letter lay hidden
for nearly fifty years. Thanks to this find, a missing link in
the correspondence between two great thinkers has now been
filled.
Gandhi wrote to Tolstoy for the first time on October 1, 1909,
from London, where he had come to negotiate with the British
Government's representatives about the position of Indians in
the Transvaal. His first message to Tolstoy was devoted to a
description of living conditions of the Indian population.
The great Russian writer was intrigued by this Indian from
faraway Transvaal who had written to him, but whom he had
never met. "'I was greatly touched by the letter from the Hindu
of Transvaal", he wrote to his friend V. Vhertkov. On Octo¬
ber 8, 1909, he sent Gandhi a friendly reply, expressing his
sincere sympathy for "our dear brothers in the Transvaal..."
He also approved Gandhi's intention to distribute among his
fellow Indians the famous article, Letter to a Hindu, which
Tolstoy had written in 1908. "I am very pleased", he wrote,
"that my letter should be translated and circulated in an Indian
language."
Tolstoy's letter of approval, reaching London at the moment
when Gandhi's negotiations had ended in failure, was a source
of great satisfaction to Gandhi, and he at once sent a second
letter to Yasnaya Polyana, in which he continued his account
of the Transvaal Indians' struggle against the local authorities.
This second letter is the famous "lost letter" which is reproduced
in full alongside.
Tolstoy was ill and did not reply, though he had been
interested by Doke's book on Gandhi which had been sent to
him at about the same time (1).
The correspondence was resumed five months later, in April
1910, when Gandhi sent Tolstoy
a third letter as well as his
book written in English, Indian
Home Rule. "I did the trans¬
lation from Gujarati myself",
Gandhi wrote. "It is strange that
the Government of India should
have confiscated my book in that
language, but that is why I have
hastened to publish a translation."
Gandhi asked Tolstoy to read
the book and give him an opinion,
which, he said would be of the
greatest value to him. At the
same time, he sent Tolstoy a few
copies of the Letter to a Hindu, as published and prefaced by
Gandhi himself.
Tolstoy, however, was never quite able to carry out his
intention of replying to Gandhi's letter in detail. On April 25,
1910, he sent him a short letter thanking him for the books
which had been sent.
At that time, the struggle of the Indians in the Transvaal had
reached an acute phase. Hundreds of Indian families which had
refused to submit to the local administration found themselves
ruined and homeless. In order to save the neediest among
them, Gandhi organized, on a property offered to him by his
friend Kallenback, a self-supporting colony which he called
"Tolstoy Farm". Gandhi and Kallenback told Tolstoy of all
this in a letter dated August 15, 1910.
Gandhi's new letter, his preface to Letter to a Hindu, and
especially the book he had sent increased Tolstoy's interest in
the fate of the Indian people. He notes in his diary that he
spent several days in absorbed reading of Indian Home Rule and
of Doke's book on Gandhi.
These letters as well as Gandhi's review Indian Opinion, which
had also been sent to him, were a source of great satisfaction to
Tolstoy. "Good news from the Transvaal about a colony of
non-resisters", he noted in his diary on September 6. The same
day, he dictated a reply which was to be his last letter to Gandhi.
Tolstoy wrote it only two months before he left Yasnaya
Polyana. It reached Gandhi after much delay not, in fact,
until Tolstoy was on his deathbed, in the Astapovo railway station.
So ended this remarkable correspondence. It stirs us even
today. It is like a torch, lighting the path for future generations.
(1) J. Doke, M. K. Gandhi. An Indian patriot In South Africa. London,
1909.
23
