HUMANISM FOR
A MODERN WORLD
The 1958 Brussels International Exhibition is opening
its doors wide to the interests of Humanism, taking
as its major theme, service to mankind. It also
seeks to present a complete balance sheet of this
prodigious era, and to provide a new approach to human
activity for a better world. Its theme also stresses the
increasingly urgent need for all men to know and to
understand each other better.
So far so good. No one could find fault with such
commendable aims. But the word Humanism, while not
equivocal in itself is, to say the least, polyvalent a
somewhat abstract term which can be construed in many
ways. Where does Humanism begin? And what is a
Humanist? Over a long period of time the term had a
very concrete meaning. Humanism implied classical
knowledge, a well defined branch of learning: that form
of intellectual attainment which, in particular, is impart¬
ed by the study of Latin and Greek. Thus, the typical
Humanist was a cultured man and a scholar, the gentleman
who knew his classics and could quote his references in
Greek or Latin.
Traditional Humanism is also almost automatically
associated with the Renaissance, with the discovery of
the world of the Ancients and of all its culture, which
the mystical and scholastically-mind-
ed Middle Ages does not seem truly
to have known, despite its learned
men, theologians and abstract specu¬
lators on the essence of things. Ron-
sard, so deeply inspired by Greece, is
a Humanist. But so is Erasmus and
in his case more comes into play than
form alone, more than the admiration
which his doctrines may arouse.
Here we already have a feeling of a
certain individualism, which has since
become .known as "the human dimen¬
sion" that which is measurable by
and within the grasp of man.
But is it within the terms of this definition certainly
valid and even noble, yet nonetheless somewhat narrow
that the Brussels Exhibition has sought inspiration for
its theme to illustrate the spirit which it hopes will emerge
from this meeting of nations, civilizations and cultures.
The ambition has been at once less abstract and yet,
in essence, more far-reaching. It is to highlight the most
significant characteristics of our times, and show that
the period of amazing expansion in which we live must
not blind us to, and less still make us disregard, the
part played in it by Man by each and everyone of us.
The aim too is to show what must be done or attempted
in order that our modern world, our increasingly col¬
lective and technological civilization, shall bear the stamp
of the primacy of the human being, and of "'the human
dimension".
No one can deny that ours is a prodigious era. Have
we not, in one century, made greater progress than in
the entire period of historical and prehistorical times
which preceded it? Of the past hundred years, a mere
speck on the page of time, the last twenty-five have been
the richest in discoveries which are transforming our
ways of life and the very basis of man's estate.
This dynamic and seething growth, this greatly acceler¬
ated conquest of knowledge and the expansion which
derives from them in every field, are evident to everyone.
All around us we see the effects of this growth, in our
daily existence, in our family and professional lives.
The expansion which overshadows all others and in
large measure determines them is the one expressed by
the demographic curve. In one century the population
of the globe has more than doubled. Within twenty-five
years it may well have increased by another 1,000 million.
It may reach or even exceed four and a half thousand
millions within one hundred years. This eruptive in
crease in the population of our planet obviously creates
a corresponding increase in needs of every kind. On the
world-wide scale our only scale of measurement possible
today the provision of food, clothing, and housing
presents enormous problems which scientific progress and
the growth of technical skills alone can solve.
The face of the world is changing literally before our
very eyes. Its most stable elements, once considered as
traditional, are disintegrating. Others are striving to
establish themselves. Peoples which for centuries have
slumbered, are now awakening. The demand for social
progress now universally echoed has aroused a desire for
independence which has sometimes assumed the form of
virulent nationalism.
But if demographic expansion and that of the needs
which it carries with it may be considered as the most
determining forces of the political and social changes
which we are now witnessing, they still only bring about
these changes through the equally irresistible growth of
human genius, expressed through inventions and discov¬
eries in sciences and technical skills.
Would the tremendous demographic expansion which
marks our times have been possible, for example, had
medical skill and hygiene not stepped in to arrest
infantile mortality and increase the
average life-span all over the world.
It is also through science, through the
organization of the exchange of goods,
Oy through the expanding media of com
munication and information, through
/ nmhlllinffp better techniques, methods of organi
zation and productivity, that man¬
kind can hope to find a positive ans-
byntheses, an in- wer tQ its gigantiC( growing needs.
And how vast is the potential for
progress in every field and in every
direction. We have reached a point
where we can no longer decide whe¬
ther to place our era under the sign of the discovery of
atomic energy, or under that of electronics and automa¬
tion, which soon will be entering more and more fields.
True, a gap still exists between resources and needs. Too
many people are still under-nourished. But we do know
that this gap can be bridged. Natural sources do exist
and human genius has already given sufficient proof, in
science and in technical skills, of its ability to multiply
still further the resources indispensable for the future.
The world has entered upon a phase which cries out for
and demands the co-operation of all men in every field of
endeavour. Not because co-operation, is, of itself, a great
and noble concept, but because it provides the only access
to such technical equipment as will ensure balanced
production for all peoples and the higher standards of
living to which they rightfully aspire.
Science, moreover, is increasingly revealing itself as the
birth-right of all mankind, a birthright to which neither
nations nor groups nor indeed scientists themselves can
for long claim exclusive rights and privileges.
By the very nature of the goals it sets in terms of
productivity and the fantastic resources it requires,
modern technology accentuates with each day that passes
the collective character of modern life. Our era is fast
leaving behind the day of the small craftsman and is
producing in its stead a "technicist and herd civilization".
It would be futile to attempt to oppose such a trend
the imperatives of which are all too obvious. And it
would be unjust to condemn it in advance and to consider
the hive-and-herd character of our times from a solely
critical point of view. The gradual rise in a
standards oí living, the decrease of individual Cont'd
physical efforts, the fading of age-old fears I
bred by hunger and disease (a relief not yet next pa£e
afforded to all peoples unfortunately) all I
13

HUMANISM
FOR TODAY
(Continued)
are, on the whole, definite factors of human progress and
new openings for individual and collective development.
This evolution (I believe it essential that all its charac¬
teristics be fully grasped) poses multiple problems which
affect man and the humanizing element of man directly.
Neither the equipment of industry nor the development
and modernization of technical methods to meet the
need of our expanding human race can be achieved by
the old methods applied up until now. At any rate they
cannot be applied in a short enough space of time to
count. A stage of planning and of co-operation at all
levels and in every branch of human activity is hence
essential. Certain phases of this co-operation have al¬
ready been carried out by many international organiz¬
ations during the past years.
But 'this undeniable and urgent need for close co¬
operation requires in turn more favourable moral and
intellectual exchanges between men and between nations.
These must get to know each other better before they
can hope to achieve better understanding. This is one of
the motivating concepts of the Brussels Exhibition.
The increasingly collective character of this "technicist
and herd civilization" which is spreading to all peoples
irrespective of historical or religious background further
implies an increased solidarity between men and increas¬
ed solidarity between the communities which they form.
The close relationship between this feeling of individual
responsibility and one of dignity is well established.
In fact that relationship opens up one of the avenues
towards a Humanism which may perhaps be termed
Empirical, and to which the 1958 Brussels Exhibition will
give particular emphasis. The vigour of this empirical
Humanism will in no way be diminished nor will it clash
with the most traditional forms of culture. On the
contrary, it will add a new dimension by directly linking
these cultural forms to our daily life.
A leading place will be accorded to the arts, to letters
and to science. Not only will the full sweep of human
progress down the ages be delineated, but the deep-rooted
kinship which unites mankind and has united it through¬
out history will probably be a revelation to many people.
From the new perspectives and trends already taking
shape and clearly emerging today, a new lesson is coming
to the fore: the importance now assumed by all those
values connected with the inner being which make man
really human. For the true sources of knowledge and
human creativeness are born within the individual, even if
the means of translating them into action and of giving
them body later develop in a collective group. The source
of all advancement, of all spiritual development is inner
inspiration. Moreover these high concepts must be lived.
Thus on a broad canvas and with generous strokes of
the brush, may be portrayed some of the outlines not,
indeed, of a new Humanism, but of an evergrowing
concern with the defence and safe-guarding of the most
authentically human qualities of each one of us.
In planning the Brussels Exhibition it was felt that
there was a duty to set forth, to the greatest extent
possible, the most striking characteristics of our era, so
that millions of people might have an inkling of the
many educational and cultural paths which can reinforce
the individual and human aspect within a civilization
dominated both by the technological and group-conscious.
The man of tomorrow can look forward to much from
a civilization of this kind provided he demands and
achieves the primacy of the human element.
14
' A -
q**W ' M^U V*

The Unesco Courier. July 1957
