THE FIRST
RIGHT OF
THE CHILD:
HEALTH
by S.M. Keeny
Regional Director for Unicef, Asia
MOST NUTRITIOUS OF THE DAY FOR MILLIONS OF CHILDREN AROUND
All over the world people today are talking about the
rights of the child. The rights of the child mean
many different things to many people ; his right to
be protected on considerations of . race, nationality or
creed ; his right to receive education and training in order
to earn a living ; and (a general belief we hold in the Uni¬
ted Nations) the right to live in a peaceful world.
Now we in unicef concern ourselves primarily with what
is perhaps the first right of the childhealth. Without
health he has nothing.
Sometimes it's easier to understand if we don't think of
children in the millions, but one at a time. Meet, for
example, Mrs. Srinchan and baby Ta, aged nine months,
from the heart of Asia. Their costumes may not be those
of your home town, but Mrs. Srinchan thinks as much
of her baby as does any mother anywhere. If you were
to ask her, in the stilted language we in the United
Nations too often use, "'What are the opportunities for
improving child health in Asia?" she would probably
giggle nervously and think you were even crazier than
foreigners usually are. If you were to ask her what the
question really means: "Can we do something to help
little Ta grow up a healthy youngster?" she would think
you crazier still ; for the answer is "of course"
Why "of course"? Because baby Ta is pretty lucky to
be alive even at nine months ; for in his part of the
world one baby in five dies in the first year (in some
places, it is one in two) and another one in five before
they grow up. In New Zealand, by way of contrast, the
death rate in the first year is one in forty, and in any
one of a dozen other countries less than one in thirty.
Why do they die? Come with me into a typical village
in Java not one of the worst. Put on your old shoes,
for it rains, a lot here and the "street" is full of puddles
of dirty water in which ducks swim and children play.
The families get their drinking water, at best, from an
open jar of rain water; or froin shallow wells or pools
into which the surface water runs ; or from the canal,
where people swim and wash their clothes and dishes,
and which they use as common toilets.
As we wander about in the evening we keep slapping
for no village in these parts is complete without mos¬
quitoes.
Everywhere about us families are eating together, sitting
on the ground. Usually the plates are green leaves. If
there are real plates and cups, they will be washed after¬
ward in cold water probably from the canal.
Inside the one-roomed huts the whole family sleeps
together, whether all are well, or whether one or more of
the family has open tuberculosis.
If the baby is sick, mamma holds him a little tighter
and hopes that love will make up for everything else that
is missing. All too often she feels that baby is hotter
than usual. But that does not mean the doctor comes,
for in this country there is only one doctor to 75,000 people.
No, the few doctors are for city people, and for the rich
even there. So baby gets hotter for two or three days,
and thenall too often is hot no more.
We are looking at just one village with perhaps 500 chil¬
dren in it. It is pretty much like the others in which live
three-quarters of the 1,200 million people in Asia more
than a half of all those in the world. The numbers are
enormous ; but the problem is essentially the problem of
that one village. And we should be thinking less about
whether we can help protect the rights of babies like Ta,
but where we should help first.

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
UNICEF photos
THE WORLD IS THE CUP OF MILK SUPPLIED THROUGH UNICEF FEEDING PROGRAMMES WHICH HAVE BEEN SERVING CHILDREN FOR PAST ELEVEN YEARS.
Of course, we can take the position that high death
rates are part of Nature's Way. We may think that,
unless many of these children die, there won't be rice
enough to go around, so that it is better they should die
young before they eat too much rice. The answers to
this hoary question, which generally assumes a static
amount of food in the world, are many. The conquest
of malaria opens new land for cultivation ; well people
can work better than sick ones ; new seeds, irrigation, and
better methods of cultivation can multiply crops ; even
the birth rate can be lowered, as Japan has shown by
reducing its annual rate from thirty to twenty per thou¬
sand in the last seven years. But the people who talk
about "Nature's Way1' usually stop thinking when they
have used the phrase. Besides, they seldom use it when
they are talking about their own children.
Into this eastern world, where half the world's children
live, has come unicef, as a symbol of the concern that
nations feel for all the world's children. Fortunately,
unicef need not do the whole job ; local governments are
already doing a great deal with their limited money ; and,
of course, the missionaries and many voluntary agencies
have been in Asia a century before us. There need be no
rivalry, however; there is plenty of work for all. In unicef
we have decided that we should not be paralyzed by the
all-too-common attitude toward the East that the need
is so great that it is no use trying to do anything about it.
Rather, we have taken the decision that we should select
for attack a few diseases that are the greatest enemies of
childhood and, among these, the ones where we can save
the most children from death or years of suffering for the
least money. This decided, we simply begin.
After we have got started, we push ahead wherever we
get results ; for, no matter how great the need, we can
give help only where the people co-operate and where
the government can organize the work that is to be done
with the aid of expert help from outside and from impor¬
ted supplies. We must work this way ; for our policy is
to spend money on essential supplies and not on imported
personnel for administration. Thus, in Indonesia, where
we have programmes approved costing nearly $7,000,000,
we have just three imported administrative staff.
The repulsive disease called Yaws is almost unknown
outside the tropics. But in Asia its dreadful ulcers, often
two inches across and half an inch deep, make life
miserable for at least twelve million people, half of them
infants and children, not to speak of the several million
people whom it has crippled. From time immemorial
yaws was just one more thing to be endured. But in the
last few years it has been discovered that one shot of
penicillin, costing on the average about five U.S. cents, is
an almost certain cure.
With the assistance of the World Health Organization,
unicef has financed three projects in Indonesia, Thailand
and the Philippines, which within the last six years have
cured nearly seven million cases. That is not all of the
twelve million, but the job is more than half done, and the
rest of it will be done within the next five 'years.
In this, as in all other medical projects, unicef provides
the money for the imported supplies and equipment, but
the World Health Organization gives the
technical direction to the project. Who
provides only a few highly skilled person¬
nel; foreign technical people supervise the
cure of the whole twelve million cases. next page
All local expenses are paid by the

World battle against tuberculosis:
56 million children vaccinated
governments, which supply
hundreds of personnel and
which are responsible for
the projects from the
beginning. This policy has
been established both to fix
the responsibility with the
governments concerned and
to ensure that they will be
better prepared to carry on
after U.N. aid has stopped.
Yaws is only one of many
dangers that baby Ta must face. Most of our money
therefore, goes into a multipurpose project that tries to
help baby get a good start in life, beginning with the care
of his mother when she is still expectant and continuing
until he is well on his way to healthy childhood. This work
is at the heart of all our planning, but to get all the results
we want is complicated indeed; for in most countries
babies are not generally delivered by child specialists or
even by general practitioners. All except a few in a thou¬
sand come into the world with only the aid of the old-style
midwife, who goes about her work cheerfully chewing
betel nut, with which she not only consoles herself at her
work, but also uses as a chief ingredient for a poultice on
the baby's tummy to heal the umbilical cord.
If these slightly outmoded practices are to be changed,
nurses must be trained who are willing to admit that
Lister had something, and that there is nothing like
boiling water to put the quietus on germs that thrive in
hot climates as nowhere else in the world. Not just a
few midwives and nurses are needed, but thousands and
thousands of them, and so unicef is helping the schools
of nursing and midwifery to turn out more and better
graduates. The chances for improvement are excellent:
even in Afghanistan it is becoming fashionable among the
better families for women to go in for nursing a job
that would have been scorned ten years ago. The group
will still be much too small, and there will be considerable
"wastage" from marriage, as our technicians so anti-
socially put it; but it is a step. And the group, though
small, will make a good beginning.
Although mosquitoes bite adults just as greedily as they
do infants, malaria is a far greater killer of infants than
of grownups. In India, Pakistan, Burma, Thailand, In¬
donesia, it is the number one killer of infants. But the
answer is simple: ddt. And so who and unicef, with
much assistance from United States bilateral aid, are
helping governments in Asia to apply the methods that
have been so spectacularly successful in Italy, Greece, and
elsewhere.
Tuberculosis is an exam¬
ple of a job in which many
different agencies can work
together, fao wants to get
rid of malaria in order to
increase agricultural prod¬
uction ; who as a public
health measure; unicef
especially for the protection
of children.
Here is a disease poles
apart from yaws. It is not
easy to discover and diffi¬
cult to deal with after it has
been found. We are told
that the best way to help
children is to prevent the
disease with bcg vaccin¬
ation. Nearly one hundred
and sixty million children have already been tested and
more than 56 million who needed it have already been
vaccinated. Mass bcg campaigns are more difficult to
organize in Asia than in Europe ; but the children now
vaccinated in Asia every month are about three-fourths
of all those reported for the whole world. Vaccination
against tuberculosis in underdeveloped countries is becom¬
ing as much a routine as it is against smallpox.
But what about the millions of open cases now living
with their families and infecting millions of others?
These must be found. Mass X-rays and follow-up of
suspected cases are all a beginning, but they are useless
if nothing more is done. There are. very few hospitals in
the area for all purposes and still fewer for the care of
tuberculosis. But Chemotherapy now promises a simple
system of home treatment and care that even Asia can
afford. But, to make it effective, thousands of home vi¬
sitors must be trained.
The children in Asia are among the most poorly fed in
the world. One of the basic shortages is that of protein,
in which powdered skim milk is especially rich. Moreover,
there is nothing to the legend that Asian children won't
drink milk because they are not used to it. They guzzle
it out of coconut shells in Thailand as readily as out of
enamel mugs in Spain.
Surplus milk from the United States is being moved
constantly to Asia. This is
no long-term cure for
undernourished children,
but it will serve to span the
gap until nations can devel¬
op with unicef aid their
own indigenous sources of
protein, such as soya bean
"milk" in Indonesia.
Some reader is sure to
ask : "'But can we afford to
keep up these expenditures."
Let's not get too self-right¬
eous on this point. In all
Asia, unicef spends only
about $5 million a year or
two cents a child per year.
That bill is divided among
about eighty countries and
territories. The half paid
by the United States is
about one third the cost of a single bomber, or of five miles
of a modern super-highway, and about the same amount
per year as American girls spend on home permanent
waves every week.
I've indicated five opportunities that we at unicef are
taking to improve the rights of the child to health. There
are, of course, many more. And we are constantly seeking
more partnerships with governments, voluntary and semi-
voluntary community organizations, and the international
agencies set up to provide technical and material assis¬
tance.
It is a beginning. We at unicef can see week by week
the changes accomplished by unremitting attacks on the
miseries that have beset children for centuries. We can
see the children gaining strength and acquiring new per¬
spectives and more skill and more knowledge with which
to confront their share of tomorrow's problems. We be¬
lieve by the time baby Ta is himself a father, his sons will
not only have gone far in winning the well-established
right to health, but can look forward to enjoying more
of the other Human Rights in the brighter days that lie
ahead.

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
UNICEF photos
STRUGGLE FOR SURVIVAL. In Asia one baby In five (in some
places one In two) dies in its first year. In 1957 more than 45 million
children and pregnant and nursing mothers will benefit from Unicef-
aided disease control and feeding programmes in over I 00 countries
and territories. Yet some 600 million children still live and die in
want. Three-months old Indonesian baby (below) has gone blind in a
few days through contracting an eye disease called xerophtalmia.
