A woman's life in an African village (Part m
Ministère de la France d'Outre-Mer
GOD OF THE FORGE and of fire in Dahomey, named
Gou, is shown here with headdress bearing symbols of
the metal-working trade.
D
uring the two years she spent in
Dahomey, Claudie Hauferlin, wife of an
ethnologist, was brought face to face with
the two Áfricas that exist side by side today
new Africa undergoing the birth pains
of modernization, and traditional Africa with
its polygamous families, minor rulers and
sorcerers. In the new Africa, where women
have won the right to vote, they have also
become printers and journalists, doctors
and magistrates. In the old Africa women
too have important roles as guardians of
traditions, for they cling, far more than do
the men, to ancestral rites and customs.
In the first part of her article, "A Woman's
Life in an African Village", (THE UNESCO
COURIER, March, 1957), Claudie Hauferlin
depicted the traditional Dahomey family
lifethe quarrels between wives, the songs,
marriage customs and social etiquette. Here
she shows us her friends in the village of
Mitro as astute and independent business
women, enjoying a larger measure of free¬
dom, as women, than is commonly believed,
and bringing up their families.
BUSINESS AFFAIRS
EXTENSIVE FREEDOM
RAISING A FAMILY
by Claudie Hauferlin
<t 1957
Few of the women of Mitro the nearest village to my
home in Dahomey cook meals very often for their
husbands, but as the Dahoman market is exactly like
an open-air restaurant, the husbands are in no danger
of starving. Bosi, a young woman with whom I spent
much time, is typical of the majority of wives in this
respect.
Her household chores include little cooking and not
much sewing, but on the other hand she often does
washing. Here in Dahomey, it is not considered em¬
barrassing to wear torn clothes. While it would be un¬
seemly to appear in a soiled pagne (half-skirt), a torn
garment is a sign of mourning or of straitened circumstan¬
ces, but never a proof of negligence.
Bosi rises early, about five o'clock, and washes and
dresses in her "bathroom" one of the little outhouses
made of dried, interwoven palm leaves which lean against
the side of every hut in the village. She sees to her
children and cleans out the hut. (The cleanliness of the
Southern Dahomey villages is striking; the women, with
brooms made of palm branches, seize every occasion of
sweeping in and around their huts). There are always
children to be washed and some laundry to be dried. Mo¬
thers rub their offspring vigorously with soap, and sluice
them down with water several times a day. At
Porto-Novo, they even install themselves with their tubs
on the pavements. Yet there are no taps in the houses;
water has to be fetched from the river or the well, which
is not always near, and carried back on the head in jars.
Since Dahoman women hardly ever have to cook, they
are able to devote time to trade in fact, "business" is
their main occupation. On the market place at Mitro,
Bosi sells akasa, a starchy maize paste, resembling
maizena, which, in Dahoman cooking, is as important as
the potato in some European cooking. She takes up her
stand at the market from 8 a.m. onwards or else, with her
basket on her head, goes round from tata to tata, display¬
ing her wares. (A tata is the group of houses of a single
family surrounded by mud walls.) At about 4 p.m. she
goes home where she finds plenty to do until the evening:
preparing the akasa for market, carrying maize to be
ground at the mill, making palm-oil for home use, and
paying various visits to kinsfolk in mourning, to her
mother, to a friend who has just had a baby, or to a
newly-married fellow trader.
Night falls swiftly in Africa; at 7.30 p.m. it is already
dark. For an hour, with lanterns flickering in every hut,
the whole village, looks like a Christmas tree. At 9 p.m.
everyone is asleep and the only sounds are the drone of
insects and the deep-throated croaking of the bull-frogs.
Sometimes, the harsh sound of the night-guards' horns
haunts the village until dawn. On such nights, no woman
would venture outside or even dare to peer curiously
through the window; for the task of policing the district
at night falls to a secret masculine society, known as the
14

Zangbeto, and no woman is allowed to see what goes on.
One evening, Bosi, who had stayed late at a distant
market, met the night-guards as she reached Mitro. She
was fined, and recounting her adventure to me next day,
she added in a whisper: "If things were still as they used
to be, I should be dead now."
All the women of Mitro are traders. Tavi, the richest
of my women acquaintances, has a stall with a very
strange mixture of wares: pencils for schoolchildren, reels
of cotton, fish hooks, talcum powder, antimony for the
eyelids, and cigarettes. Videhu sells small piles of leaves,
which are used here as wrapping paper. As for Henrietta,
she takes her stand at the market with some frying palm-
oil and sells piping hot maize fritters to the passers-by,
inviting them to come and sample her "delicious crisp
fritters."
I spent a great deal of time at the market. An African
market is a place where news is exchanged quite as much
as goods. The Mitro market, held every other day, is one
of the busiest in the region; it is a meeting-place for the
people of the nearby plateau and those of the river.
Women who come from distant villages to buy or sell, set
out at two or three o'clock in the morning with forty to
fifty pounds of merchandise on their heads and their
babies comfortably asleep attached to their backs. They
return home about five o'clock in the evening.
As soon as she used to see me, Laly Yemadje, an old
fetisher-woman with whom I often
sat, would unwind the Madras hand¬
kerchief round her head to make me
a cushion. We would exchange smiles,
gestures and the few French or Gun
words which we both know: "Alors, ça
va?" (Well, everything all right?)
"Dagoe, dagbe." According to Daho¬
man etiquette, any conversation must
be prefaced by a long series of compli¬
ments and good wishes. With the
help of my interpreter, questions and
answers followed in quick succession:
"How are you?" "I am very well"
"How is your husband?""Very well,
you." Every member of the
family is mentioned .
Then came the good wishes: "May
you have continued good health",
"May your children be strong and
healthy", "May your business pros¬
per", etc. To every wish, Laly Yem¬
adje replied "ami", rubbing the palms
of her hands together. In her turn,
she hoped that I would have many
children, that my husband would be
made a governor or earn a larger
salary to which I answered "ami",
rubbing my hands. Here, silence is
certainly not golden. Patiently, the
family is enquired after again and
more good wishes are expressed.
When you receive a visitor in your
own house, etiquette does not require
that you stay to keep him company, but it does demand,
that you come back from time to time to say: "Please
make yourself comfortable."
When I first arrived in the village, Laly Yemadje was
selling maize. Although there is a whole series of recepta¬
cles for measuring cereals accurately, Laly Yemadje, like
all maize vendors, prefers to use baskets a little smaller
than the standard size. She presses her arms round the
basket, squeezing the maize up into a dome. Thus the
customer, impressed by the overflowing pyramid, always
has the feeling that he is getting more than his money's
worth and is better served here than elsewhere. As for
the vendor of fritters or croquettes, she does not raise her
prices at times when maize or manioc are scarce, but gives
smaller portions for the same price, which the customer
notices less.
Women are not obliged to stick to one kind of trade.
If Henrietta is in mourning for a few weeks and cannot
go near the fire or do any cooking, she collects wood and
chops it up for sale as firewood; Bosi does not hesitate to
give up her akasa trade temporarily in order to speculate
on maize. She keeps an eye on the price of cereals, finds
out how things are with the farmers who sell them and
cleverly takes advantage of the slight differences between
the harvest on the plateau and that in the valley. As for
Laly Yemadje; after dealing in maize for a few months
Ministère de la France d'Outre-mer
One of the wives of the head chief of Porto
Novo shows off her magnificent jewellery.
The Unesco Courier. Mo/ 1957
she turns to selling palm-oil. This is the great trade of
women one of the most profitable, but also the one which
is the most severely threatened by the establishment of
oil factories. These concerns buy directly from the men
who own the palm-plantations and the women are thus
in danger of losing an entire source of earnings. For them
it is a potential catastrophe.
The profits that a Dahoman woman makes from her
business are administered by her alone in other words,
she benefits from similar rights to those which women
enjoy, for example, In England, under the Married Wo¬
man's Property Act. The receipts from the market often
do not amount to much fifty to one hundred francs a
day but they are regular and, moreover, a woman's right
to keep and to dispose of her earnings as she pleases, gives
her a privileged position in the country's economic system.
A woman is thus able to keep herself if her husband
does not fulfil his duty to feed his wife. And husbands
are often slack about that "He used to keep me when I
was young," Videhu told me, "but now he seldom gives
me any money." Bosi and Tavi who have "'good"
husbands admit that they sometimes contribute to the
household expenses, especially during that period of bridg¬
ing the gap between harvests when food prices rise.
They all told me, too, that they lend money against
interest. Women are often the bankers of the family, and
sometimes even of the entire village, where they control
practically all of the trade. They
earn less money than men, but they
earn it more regularly and it is to
them that the men turn when in need
of funds; often, in fact, men in debt
obtain loans from the women by
pledging their future harvests as
security. This whole financial bal¬
ance is now, of course, threatened by
Industrialization.
Tavi uses her money to make herself
attractive. She showed me her ward¬
robe one day; it contained twenty-
six skirts for special occasions and
ten everyday ones. "If they are
shabby", she said, "I give them to
my grandmother".
Bosi, the most thrifty, confided to
me that she is putting money aside
in the hope of buying herself a palm-
plantation one day; that is exception¬
al, because palm-plantations belong
to men and when a woman possesses
such land she tries to hide the fact
that she is the owner.
Henrietta, before her marriage,
used her earnings to set up her future
home; but now she puts some aside
so that she may one day be able to
open an ironmongery business. When
I questioned Videhu, she threw up
her hands in despair and said: "I have
only the skirt I'm wearing. Money?
I never have any I don't know where it goes. I'm sure
that someone has cast a spell on me!" Remarks like these
are very common: you do not manage your affairs badly,
but you have enemies who send you bad luck. One day,
I asked a schoolboy how he had done in his examinations
and he replied: "Badly! An uncle of mine has a spite
against me."
One day, Laly Yemadje said to me: "When I have given
a customer credit and she does not pay up, I go to see her
and flatter her, but above all I do not get angry with her,
otherwise she would buy nothing more from me." Few
women, however, are as patient as Laly Yemadje. Fre¬
quent disputes take place during which the defaulting
customer often puts on an offended air. Insults to the
family and warnings of impending diseases follow there
is no lack of pursuasive arguments. "Personally," said
Bosi, "I warn all my friends if one of my customers is in
the habit of not paying for the goods that she buys on
credit. The word goes around and in the end the woman
is forced to change markets because no one will sell her
anything any more." One morning, I saw
a shabbily-dressed man arrive at the mark¬
et; he strode round it several times, shout- Cont'd on
ing volubly and making threatening ges¬
tures. "One of the vendors has given him
some money", my interpreter explained, "to
15

WOMAN'S LIFE
(Continued from page 15) How free is the African housewife?
come here and publicly denounce a customer who hasn't
paid her debts!"
The Dahoman woman is free, far -freer than is
commonly imagined in Europe she is free to go out (and
even to travel), free to carry on her business as she thinks
best and to do exactly as she likes with the money she
earns.
Bosi and Henrietta were born at Mitro, but Videhu and
Tavi lived in neighbouring villages before they were
married; and Se Kande, the Chief's wife, is from Porto-
Novo. These women often visit their families. From time
to time, Tavi, piling a few skirts, crockery, provisions
and gifts on her head, sets out with her children on foot,
or in a lorry if she is lucky enough to find "a lift". Her
visits to her native village last a week or two. Once she
was away nearly two months: "My mother was ill, so I
looked after her", she explained. One of Henrietta's
friends made up her mind one day to visit some of her
relations in Nigeria... the other side of the world 'for a
little village girl. Another set out for Natitingu, a
Northern town some four hundred miles away, to see her
daughter.
For the three religions
tolerance is de rigueur
But though the Dahoman woman is free, she has to
conform to a very severe traditional code of morality.
iOne day I found Tavi in bed with a high fever; she
accepted the quinine tablets which I offered her, but said,
"I am going to see the witch-doctor to 'find out what gave
me the fever". It is never by chance that one is laid low
by sickness. Fever is either a punishment for having
forgotten to make some offering, or a sacrifice demanded
by an ancestor, or, again, a penalty for having offended
the gods. In such circumstances, a doctor is all very well,
but a witch-doctor is still better. There are remedies
medicinal plants to soothe a stomach ache, bring down a
fever or a swelling and relieve pain but, most important
oí all are the purifying baths and penances prescribed by
the witch-doctor.
The Dahoman woman lives with a sword of Damocles
over her head the possibility that she may be punished
for a sin, even unconsciously committed, by seeing one of
her relations become sick or even die. One day, I asked
after a fisherman whom I had not seen for a long
time. Bosi told me with a confidential air: "His body is
swollen, he is very ill", and she added: "Perhaps it is
because of his wife." This woman was reputed to be
and, according to tradition, when a woman is
unfaithful to her husband he is always warned of it
because he falls ill. "Time was when the gods killed the
woman", said an old fetisher-woman regretfully. If the
invalid Is to recover, the misdeed must be confessed and
the name of the seducer revealed.
So far as the punishment of adultery, theft, scandal-
mongering or disrespect is concerned, Dahoman morality
is a private code, designed to keep the family intact; the
principal punishments are sickness or sterility, which, as
they strike the individual, show that he or she has
offended against society.
There are other obligations and other things forbidden.
The school-teacher's wife explained to me that every
family, probably for reasons connected with its distant
antecedents, refrains from eating certain foods. Tavi
does not eat eels, Videhu does not eat snails and Bosi does
not touch certain vegetables. When she gets married, a
woman never forgets to ask an old aunt for her husband's
"'diet sheet", so that she will not run the risk of serving
him with types of food forbidden in his family.
The gods may forbid those who worship them to eat
certain foods. Thus Videhu, a fetisher of serpent-
worship, eats no fish that is smoked and rolled around a
stick because its form suggests a coiled snake.
Henrietta's sister-in-law, Mary-Jane, is a Roman
Catholic but her husband worships the vodun. She had
her last child baptised but all the others, who are dead,
were not Catholics: "As all the other children died, I had
this one baptised", she informed me. And (she must have
acquired tolerance in her family) she added: "In anj¬
ease, the witch-doctor had told me to do it." I met a
fetisher woman whose two sons were Animists, one of her
daughters a Protestant and the other a Roman Catholic;
and when I asked the reason for this diversity, she
replied with some such words as "One mustn't put all
one's eggs in one basket!" In the village, religious
differences do not lead to quarrels and, in a tata,
Moslems, Christians and Animists get on very well
together.
Although Christians and Moslems may refrain from
taking part in the religious ceremonies, ancestors continue
to be universally hallowed. Before they drink, Henrietta
and Bosi, like their fetisher friends and kinswomen, never
forget to sprinkle a few drops on the ground "for oui-
an cestors". While Tavi's children wear greegrees on their
wrists, Bosi's three children have devotional medals, and
Animata hangs round her little daughter's neck a sachet
containing a few verses aï the Koran. They believe that
scapulars and verses of the Koran have the same value
and function as greegrees to ward off sickness and
death, the two disasters which haunt Dahoman women.
And there is some justification for their fears: Bosi's baby
died of a fever in three days, and Mary-Jane has lost
three children. There are very -few women at Mitro who
have never lost any children and I have met some who
have seen four or five and even as many as seven of their
babies die.
In these African villages where three religions coexist
the old Animist religion, Mohammedanism and Christia¬
nity great tolerance reigns among the people. When
Henrietta's old uncle died, part of the family sacrificed
the traditional chickens, while cousins from the town
sprinkled the body with holy water. Tavi, who is very
particular about her appearance, once enumerated the
occasions on which a "smart" woman likes to dress up;
in addition to religious festivals and traditional
ceremonies, I was astonished to hear her a devotee of
thunder-worship mention Christmastide. "For my Chris¬
tian kinswomen and friends, it is a festival", she
explained, "so I too put on my best clothes, and go to
church to see what the ceremony is like". One day, a
high dignitary of a local religion told me that he was a
Roman Catholic. Seeing my amazement, he gave me a sly
smile and said: "After all, I wasn't born in Rome!"
I saw the finest example of this tolerance one day when
I was invited to a big local wedding. The young couple,
who had been married the day before according to local
custom, called at the Civil Registry Office in the early
morning, were married in the Roman Catholic church at
ten o'clock and then, about midday, received a blessing
from the Moslem Imam. As one guest, who was toasting
the couple, told them: "You'll run into terrible difficulties
if you ever try to divorce!"
Herb-tea prepared
by ' those who know '
About one year after her marriage, Henrietta had her
first child. Throughout her pregnancy, she followed
the advice of her mother, of elderly aunts and of
other old women, and wore round her hips a greegree cord,
which is supposed to protect the child; she drank herb-
tea, carefully prepared by women "who know" and avoided
going near too hot a fire; but she continued to work and
carry burdens. No word was spoken, in her hearing, of
her pregnancy and no plans or preparations were made
for the child, in order not to tempt Providence. Death,
they say, is always lying in wait and its attention is easily
attracted. Many women have refrained from telling me
how many children they have, or else have told me in a
32

whisper, so as not to arouse the interest of Death, or of
jealous women "friends" who would rejoice in their
decease.
Henrietta gave birth to her child in her hut, assisted by
the village matrons. Only about a third of the village
women go to the clinic for their confinement. "The
clinic is twelve and a half miles away from here", the
school-teacher explained to me, "and it is not always
easy to go there; besides, the women here calculate their
period of pregnancy very roughly". Se Kande, one of the
wives erf the village Chief, waited over a month at the
clinic for the birth of her last son; and two of her sisters,
who had gone with her to help prepare her meals, stayed
with her throughout that period. Near to the clinics I
have often seen women, surrounded by children, cooking
on a portable stove for a relation who is in hospital.
Patients whose families live nearby have their meals
brought to them every day.
Alihossi, the little girl
' who was born on the road '
For Se Kande, this absence from home was no handi¬
cap, since, being the Chief's wife, she does not go in
for trade; but for the other village women it is a
serious matter to stay for several weeks at the clinic, doing
and earning nothing. "And on top of that", said
Bosi, "one is never sure of being able to get one's custo¬
mers back afterwards". Nevertheless, when she was
expecting her little girl, Bosi decided to have her baby
at the clinic and to go there at the very last minilte.
Indeed, she left it so late that the child was born in a
ditch, a few miles from Mitro. The little girl was thus
called "Alihossi", or "she who was born on the road".
In Dahomey, one's name is almost a curriculum vitae.
It describes one's birth, events in the family during one's
mother's pregnancy, and anything unusual that happened
when one was born. One of Videhu's children is called
told lies" because, when he was born, his family
was in the throes of a quarrel involving slander.
So many names here recall to mind that infant
mortality is the great scourge of the countryside. One
child is called Kudunukpo, or "Death has taken my
children"; another is called Yemalo, or "'He who is no
longer awaited". As for Se Kande's baby, his name is
"It is Death's fault", because, before he was born, Se
Kande had lost her three children, one after the other.
Her last-born has special tattoo marks on his cheeks and
wears copper bells round his ankles, so that his little dead
brothers may not come to fetch him.
Roman Catholics give their children the name of the
saint's day on which they are born. Henrietta's son is
called George because he was born on April 23. Had he
been born the next day, he would have been called Gaston.
One day I saw a man, who had just become a father,
looking very crestfallen. He said to me: "My child was
born last Sunday what am I to do?" It was Septua¬
gésima Sunday!
Christians also have several African names which are
given to them seven or nine days after their birth, during
the ceremonies succeeding the confinement. These
traditional ceremonies still take place at Port-Novo, in
modern and old-fashioned families alike; they are
accompanied by a great deal of pomp. Sugared almonds
(the traditional sweetmeat offered at French christenings)
may not yet have appeared on the scene, but the custom
of displaying all the "birthday presents" is becoming
increasingly common. One day when I went to see the
newborn son of the wife of a Porto-Novan official, I
found the baby dressed in pink garments and lying amidst
embroidered cushions and bowls overflowing with tins of
talcum powder, bottles of scented oil, cakes of soap and
eau-de-cologne.
Henrietta's son, George, is a member of his father's
family. That is what is meant by the expression "a child
belongs to his 'father". If Henrietta divorced, she would
take her son with her, but would later send him back to
his father. For it is from his father that he will later
receive his lands and titles; when he is of an age to marry,
again it is his father who will give him his first wife by
helping him to pay the dowry.
The Unesco Courier. Moy 1957
In the towns, modern young women are beginning to
consider this custom unfair, and several have said to me:
"We should at least like to keep our daughters with us."
In the village, however, the women considered my
questions on this subject out of place. This rule, perhaps,
surprises us; yet it is responsible for the strength or* the
African family, for it keeps the men in the same place
and thus ensures the family's continuity.
In reality, the link between the child and its mother is
a very strong one. I am always struck by African
children's affection for their mother, and also by the
tenderness of their relationships. Completely naked, with
little rounded stomachs and rolling their large inquisitive
eyes, they are adorned with multi-coloured pearl necklaces
and bracelets. There are never any "washed-out" looking
children. I went to see Henrietta's son the day after his
birth and found the baby asleep. He was hardly browner
than if he were slightly sunburnt, and I exclamed: "He's
a little vovo, a little white boy!", for newly-born Africans
all have fair skins. There was general laughter and my
interpreter said: "You'll see him in a few weeks and
he'll be completely black."
Henrietta's friends came to visit her, almost all of them
with a child hanging in a cloth on their backs. The
babies were dressed in their best clothes and, with their
faces smeared with talcum powder, looked like little
pierrots. The women chattered and, whenever a child
started to cry, its mother would sit down, lift up her
muslin blouse, undo the cloth, catch hold of the baby
under the armpit and pull it round on to her knees to
give it the breast. Children are reared in this way up to
the age of two or even three. This lays the foundation of
children's affection for their mothers; a child who later
joins his father never forgets his mother, and will help
her and often house her in her old age.
I seldom hear children cry. Is it because their mothers
seldom scold them and they are not always being told,
"don't touch this", "don't do that", "don't pick your nose",
or "hold yourself straight"? A child's mother -feeds him
when he is hungry and puts him to sleep when he is tired
and he doesn't seem any the worse for it. An African
child is relaxed and free and appears thoroughly happy.
He does not know what loneliness means. Agossu, Bosi's
eldest child, has a host of small cousins in the tata with
whom he can play; he also has his neighbours and as
many friends of his own age as he could wish. They
dance in a ring and together build little bamboo cages or
make whistles. A little ten-year-old cripple, his legs
wasted away by a mysterious disease, makes miniature
lorries out of bamboo sticks. He forgets nothing, not even
the spare tyre, which is made out of a dried 'fruit, round
and flat like a fig.
Solving the great problem
of an empty continent
Agossu, who is already seven years old, does not spend
all his time playing. His mother asks him to do
little jobs for her. He often goes to market to buy
one or two francs' worth of peanuts. "He is learning the
value of money" Bosi said, and added : "When you take
him to France, he will already know how to count"; she
winked as she said this, for Agossu's trip to Europe was
a standard joke between us. From time to time, his father
takes him into the fields where he hoes the furrows with
a little hoe just the right size for him. He is already
treated like a little man. Helen, his cousin, who is six, is
also learning to work. She has a little jar with which she
goes to fetch water from the marigot, and a miniature
palm-broom to sweep out the hut (or pretend to). On
market days, her mother entrusts her with manioc cro¬
quettes which she carries on a tray on her head, selling
them from door to door.
A child is always wanted and always expected with joy.
To have a large family is one of the reasons invoked in
defence of polygamy. In a farmer's family, children are
a guarantee that labour will always be available. They
are also a guarantee that the dead will continue to be
revered. Lastly, as every African vaguely feels, even in
thickly populated areas, to have children is to help solve
the great problem of Africa how to populate an almost
empty continent, and give it vitality.
33
