A Unesco Collection
GREAT LITERATURE
OF EAST AND WEST
by M. Arrbe
It is well known that if a man writes a bestseller, he
may make a fortune. It is true that the tax office
will probably take ninety-percent of that money
away from him, but what is left is still not to be looked
down on.
What everybody does not know is that if a novel does
not happen to turn into a bestseller, then not only may
the publisher not break even on his investment, but he
may often lose anything between one and ten thousand
dollars. Furthermore in countries like the United States,
England and France, many leading publishers lose money
on as much as fifty-percent of the books they put out
and sometimes more! The publication of novels by
young writers, for example, is a tremendous gamble.
For every one that becomes a bestseller there will be
several dozen that make a small profit or barely break
even, and a hundred that sell less than a thousand copies
meaning a loss.
The situation for other types of books varies. Technical
books usually have limited but well-defined specialized
markets, and their publishers suffer financial loss much
less frequently because such books can be priced higher
than fiction without discouraging would-be purchasers.
A book of poetry that achieves commercial success,
however, is rare indeed.
It should not be thought that commercial publishers
look at each manuscript purely from the money-making
point of view. Many publishers put out numerous books
simply because they believe in their contents and think
others should read them too. In some cases the publisher
is moved by enlightened self-interest to issue at a loss
not only one but as many as five or even more books by
a "promising young writer", who, he hopes, will in due
time attract public notice and become a commercial
success. In other cases a writer has such an obviously
unique contribution to make to literature or thought that
the publisher will issue his book "'for prestige", even
though he knows full well that there will not be enough
purchasers to cover the cost of publication.
The commercial publisher must obviously limit the
number of books he publishes at a loss and must con¬
tinuously seek for successes which will offset his losses.
If he didn't he wouldn't be able to stay in business.
It is no wonder, therefore, that publishers are cautious
in deciding to publish a work by an author who
is unknown to the public, and that they have
developed a complicated routine for sorting out the
books which they accept from those which they reject.
I have purposely avoided saying "sorting out the good

from the bad", because this selection process, stringent
though it is, is based on human judgments, and as
everyone with experience in the publication field knows
(and as the high percentage aï losses seems to prove),
such judgments are wrong almost as often as they are
right. It is the exception rather than the rule that a
book is published by the first publisher who reads the
manuscript, and there are dozens of cases of books
becoming bestsellers and reaching hundreds of thousands
of readers in all countries after the manuscript had been
refused by ten and even twenty publishers before the
persistent author (or his agent) finally got it accepted.
If this is the picture for manuscripts written in the
language of the publisher, then how much more difficult
must it be to get a book published when it is written
in a language which the publisher does not understand.
Let us examine the publisher's selection process in
detail. Let us consider what happens to a book by a
French author, published in France, which is submitted
to a publisher in England or the United States by the
author, his publisher or his literary agent, in the hope
that the work may one day be made available to the
English-speaking world.
The English publisher may be able to read French, but
he is a busy man. His firm may receive as many as a
thousand manuscripts a year, and publish perhaps
twenty-five. The French author's book then must first
go to a professional manuscript-reader, just as would the
manuscript of any English writer who still had to make
a name for himself. If the reader's report is not enthu¬
siastic, that ends the matter as far as that particular
publisher is concerned, and the author, after removing
the rejection slip, is free to submit his brain child to
another publisher.
What if the reader's report is favourable? There is still
a long road to climb. The book will almost inevitably be
submitted to a second reader, and if his report is also
favourable, in most cases to yet a third critic. If all three
reports give the book good marks, then it will be dis¬
cussed by the publisher's editorial board. Various other
factors are considered here. Is the subject matter in
line with that publisher's general policy (many publish¬
ers do have a very definite point of view, as examination
of their catalogues will reveal). Does the book contain
anything libellous or defamatory? Have any other works
on the book's subject matter been published during the
last twenty years, and if so, does this work really have
a new contribution to make? And many other questions.
Various specialists on the publisher's staff will be
consulted. How much will the book cost to produce?
What is the estimate of potential sales? Is it the sort
of book that libraries will want to buy? Are there any
factors that will make it possible to promote the book
easily, to obtain publicity for it without too large
expenditure? and so on.
Let us assume that all opinions are favourable. The
publisher then sends the author the happy news that
the book is accepted, and makes an offer aï terms. In
due time a contract is signed covering the rights, and
another contract is made with a translator. Some
months later the translation will be ready, and within
a year or eighteen months barring fires, floods, paper
shortages and other cases of force majeure the book
will be published.
We have been assuming that our English publisher
was able to read French, and that after the book
had obtained three excellent reports, he had him¬
self read it (or at least a few chapters, if he was as busy
as some publishers are). Let us suppose that he was not
able to read French and now, with the translation before
him, he really sees the book for the first time, and he
finds to his dismay that it is not at all what the three
favorable reports had led him to expect! It may seem
incredible that a manuscript that has gone through so
many trials and for which the publisher may have made
a sizeable payment of advance royalties, not to mention
the translator's fees may be rejected at this point.
Nevertheless dozens of publishers' projects are abandoned
each year under similar circumstances.
If so many obstacles stand in the way of publication
of a French work in English, then how much more
difficult is it for a book originally written in Urdu, Punjabi,
Thai, Korean, Arabic, Norwegian, or Portuguese-
How many publishers in England or the United States
(or France, or Germany, or any of the other big book-
publishing countries, for that matter) have three pro¬
fessional readers aï Punjabi to report on
manuscripts in this language? Or even one Cont'd
such reader? Obviously very few indeed. 0n
Unesco's annual publication, Index Transía- next page
tionum shows that of the 21,667 translations

GREAT LITERATURE
OF EAST AND WEST ^^
published throughout the world in 1954, 7,498 were from
English, 3,874 from Russian, 2,870 from Frenchand none
from Punjabi.
And yet, as is true of many of the languages of India,
and Indeed of many of the world's so-called "languages
of little diffusion", the Punjabi tongue has a literature
which can add enrichment to the world's common fund
of culture and thus merits translation into the more
widely-spoken languages (1).
Obviously, if the literary riches of the "languages of
little diffusion" are ever to be made known to the world
at large, then new channels must be found other than
the usual ones of commercial publication.
There is, of course, a certain type of publisher who
comes in where the commercial house fears to tread
publishing houses supported by organizations which will
risk putting out books that merit publication, but which,
according to the experts, will probably not sell enough
copies ,to cover the expenses of a
minimum printing.
Outstanding in this field are the
university presses and the govern¬
ment presses. Unesco, in its trans¬
lations' programme, acts, to some
extent, like an international univer¬
sity press.
One of the tasks of Unesco, within
the framework of the Organization's
larger aim of helping to make the cul¬
ture of its various Member States
better known in all other countries, is
to attempt to break through the
"translation curtain" which makes
the literature of so many countries
almost entirely unknown outside their
national boundaries.
As part of this undertaking, known
as the "Translation of Representative
Works Programme", Unesco is con¬
ducting a project for the translation
into English and French of books
originally written not only in Punjabi,'
but in many other "languages of little
diffusion" as well. This translations'
programme which was originally set
up as the result of a recommandation
made by the General Assembly of the
United Nations in December 1946, has
been part of Unesco's programme
since 1948. It covers not only trans¬
lations into English and French, but
also "counterpart programmes" o*
translations of .Western classics inU
certain Asian languages. At first the programme was
confined to translations from and into Arabic. Unesco
and the Lebanese Government agreed upon the establish¬
ment, at Beirut, of an "International Commission for the
Translation of Great Books", to assume direct responsa-
bllity for the translation of Arabic works into English and
French, and also of Western works into Arabic.
In later years succeeding General Conferences of
Unesco's Member States voted to extend the translations'
project to other languages. In 1949 a Latin-American
collection was set up; under this project Unesco is res¬
ponsible for the translation of works from Spanish and
Portuguese into French, and the Organization of American
States handles a parallel series of translations into English.
A year later the programme was enlarged to include
translations from the Italian and Persian, and also, under
an agreement with the University of Teheran, translations
into Persian from Western languages. Then, in 1952,
Unesco's General Conference decided to extend the field
so as to include works from the languages of Asia. Finally,
Unesco's General Conference, which met in New Delhi in
1956, approved the addition of a series of translations of
classics from the little known linguistic regions of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and another series of
anthologies of the written and oral literatures of Africa.
In carrying out the translations' programme, Unesco is
limited both by its budget and by the scarcity of competent
translators. Certain countries, however, particularly
desirous of aiding Unesco in» its task, help to defray the
cost of translating and publishing their literary master¬
pieces. Several learned Institutions, moreover, provide
Unesco with the assistance of distinguished specialists.
The works to be translated are not chosen arbitrarily;
the National Commission for Unesco, or some other
competent body in a country, is first asked to supply a list
of the works most representative of the national literature.
These lists are then examined and supplemented by a
committee of experts appointed by the International
Council for Philosophy and Humanistic Studies. This
same committee has the task of recommending qualified
translators and revisers each translation is revised, so as
to guarantee its absolute accuracy and literary quality.
So far, translations into English and French of works
from twenty-two different literatures have been published
or are in preparation. Translations into Arabic and
Persian have been published or are in preparation from
five Western tongues. In addition a single translation
(1) See on page 15, "Sacred Writings of a Warrior Race", an article on
the Adi Granth, the Psalms of the Sikhs, which Unesco is now having
translated from the Punjabi.
from the Arabic has been published" in Spanish. A com¬
plete list of the works translated so far in the "Unesco
Programme,"' or in preparation, will be found on page 22.
The programme described above is concerned exclusively
with books by writers no longer living. The 1952 General
Conference of Unesco's Member States voted that a
further programme be undertaken for making better
known the works of contemporary writers working in lan¬
guages that are little spoken outside of their national
areas. A programme was developed in co-operation
with the International P.E.N. Club, which had showed its
interest in this field by holding a symposium on "The
Literature of Peoples whose Language Restricts Wide Re¬
cognition" during the course of its XXVth International
Congress, held in Dublin in 1953. Each year the Inter¬
national P.E.N. Club calls upon its member clubs to
recommend works by contemporary authors that merit
international renown, and then submits brief synopses of
these works to Unesco, which makes the final choice.
So far the translation of seven works has been under¬
taken under this part of the Unesco translations pro¬
gramme one each from Dutch, Greek, Japanese, Nor¬
wegian and Persian into French, and one each from Ja¬
panese and Swedish into English. It is expected that one
work in Turkish and five in various Asian languages will
be chosen for translation during the next two years.
