THE RIGHTS OF
900 MILLION
CHILDREN
by Paul Almasy
The conflict over child labour
The emancipation of women is generally considered
to be one of the greatest conquests of the 20th
century. No less important has been the eman¬
cipation of the child by legal measures and the codification
of his rights.
Until the beginning of our century, children in most
countries were deprived of any right whatever. Their
parents or tutors were their undisputed masters. Their
physical and moral well-being depended entirely on the
goodwill of adults for whom they were little more than
pieces of property, the law merely protecting the life of
the child.
If children were nevertheless treated with kindness in
the overwhelming majority of families of all classes, and
if parents did their utmost to ensure a happy life to their
offspring, no merit for this was due, in most cases, either
to the state or to society as a whole but simply to the
happy consequences of natural instinct and maternal and
paternal love.
It was only toward the middle of the 19th century that
legislators began to take a serious interest in the juridical
status of the child. Public opinion was suddenly aroused
by news that millions of young people, many no more
than infants, were then living under the most revolting
conditions, that in many countries children were working
as virtual slaves, that boys and girls were employed as
labourers under conditions which defied every sense of
human dignity. . It was urgent that the law-makers step
in and put an end to such abuses.
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, countless
working families rejoiced at the possibility of increasing
their slim incomes by sending their children out to the
factories to work. It was mostly in the textiles and food
industries that children between the ages of 10 and 14
(boys and girls) found it easiest to get jobs, for certain
jobs in such factories required neither physical force nor
the intelligence of an adult person. Reports dating from
1825-1840 relate that thousands of children between the
ages of seven and ten were employed in factories, forced
to work 14 to 16 hours a day, and received a maximum of
15 to 20 per cent of the salary of an adult for the work.
In England, for example, the children of needy families
suffered particularly, since the employment of children
was, up to a certain point a necessity of the national
economy. The Industrial Revolution had swept across the
country and factories, mines, etc., were faced with a
sudden need for increased manpower but too many hands
could not be spared from farming lest the entire food
situation of the country be threatened. Children were
the victims of the manpower shortage. Thousands of
children, no more than six or seven years of age, were
sent into the collieries. Hitched to coal waggons by
groups of ten, they took the place of horses in galleries
too low and too narrow for beasts of burden.
The situation was no different on the European
continent. Of all European authorities, it was the
24
AT THE END OF THE 1 9TH CENTURY IT WAS COMMON IN MANY COUNTRIES TO
Cantonal Council of Zurich which was the first to react
against the abusive use of children as labourers. By 1815
the working conditions of minors Were severely re-
glemented in the entire territory of the Swiss Cantons.
Ten years later, England too recognized the necessity of
intervening in favour of children working in industry.
In 1825 a law was passed making it illegal for children to
be employed more than 69 hours a week. In 1867, the law
was completed by an ordinance making a medical
examination mandatory for juvenile labour.
These two examples were followed -in 1839 by Prussia,
in 1841 by France, and by several of the States of
the U.S.A., such as Massachusetts, in 1842. In France,
legislation for the protection of children progressed in a
regular pattern. In 1841 employers were forbidden to
employ children of 12 to 16 for more than 12 hours per
day. In 1892, working hours were further reduced to
10 hours, and for children of 16 to 18, to 11 hours a day.
In 1900, maximum working hours for children up to the
age of 18 (both boys and girls) was fixed at 10 hours, in
1919 to 48 hours a week, and in 1936 to 40 hours a week.
In many instances, however, the good intentions of the

The Unesco Courier. October 1957
FIND SMALL CHILDREN IN THE MINES FOR EXAMPLE WORKING AT THE HARDEST TASKS, HARNESSED TO COAL WAGGONS LIKE BEASTS OF BURDEN
legislators went unheeded since no organized control
existed to enforce the laws. Thus both parents and
employers continued, by tacit agreement, to exploit
juvenile labour. It was only by the beginning of the 20th
century that most countries took the stringent measures
necessary to ensure the protection of children and that
their lot really improved.
Today, in almost all countries of the world the working
conditions of young people are strictly regulated by law.
Since its inception in 1919, the International Labour
Organization has had as one of its primary objectives
the protection of children and young persons. The
international standards for protecting young workers
established by the ilo are embodied in Conventions and
Recommendations adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its annual meetings attended not only by
government delegates but also by representatives of
management and labour, all voting on a basis of equality.
Owing to this "tripartism", which is a special
characteristic of the structure of the ilo, the Conventions
and Recommendations adopted by the International
Labour Conference are instruments of great practica
authoritative value. Taken together they form what has
been called the International Labour Code.
The main provisions of the International Code
concerning young workers may be summarized under the
following headings:
1. The minimum age of admission to employment:
Young persons under 14, and according to later (revised)
Conventions, under 15 years, must not be admitted to
employment in the various branches of economic activity.
Higher ages should be prescribed for work which is
dangerous to the life, health or morals of the young. For
admission to work underground in coal-mines a minimum
age of 16 years should be prescribed and recommendations
are laid down to protect young workers under 18 years
against lead poisoning and employment as trimmers and
stokers at sea.
2. The prohibition of night work: Young persons under
18 years of age must not be admitted to
work at night in industrial and non-
industrial occupations, except under specific
safeguards in certain well-defined cases.
next page
25

CHILD LABOUR (Continued)
3. Medical examination for fitness for employment:
Young persons under 18 must not be admitted to employ¬
ment in industry, in non-industrial occupations and at
sea unless they have been found fit for the work on which
they are to be employed, by a thorough medical
examination. Their continued employment is made
subject to periodic re-examination. In occupations in¬
volving high health risks, the medical examination and
re-examinations are prescribed until at least the age
of 21 years. Rehabilitation measures are required for
those who are found unfit.
4. Preparation for employment and placement in
suitable work: Various Recommendations lay down
guiding principles as regards measures to combat un¬
employment among young workers, the organization of
apprenticeship and of vocational training and guidance
services.
The standards laid down are of course not meant to
remain a deadletter but to be applied by the Member
States. In the case of a Convention, the State which
decides to ratify it is bound to apply its provisions by
national law and practice and report every year to the ilo
on how this obligation has been fulfilled. These reports
are thoroughly examined and if necessary the States are
invited to bring their law into full harmony with the
ratified Convention. Recommendations are less binding.
They cannot be ratified, but States nevertheless are called
upon to report on the extent to which they were able to
apply their provisions by national law and practice.
There is no doubt that the Conventions and Re¬
commendations concerning young workers have had a
considerable impact on the development of social policy
for young workers in a great many of the 77 States at
present members of ilo although it is hardly possible to
assess the extent of this impact.
As of June 1, 1957, eleven countries had ratified the ilo
Convention fixing the minimum
age of employment in industry at
15; eight countries had ratified a
second Convention fixing the
same minimum age for young
people in non-industrial occupa¬
tions. In a number of countries
of Europe the minimum age in
industry and agriculture stands
at 14, but a certain laxity is
permitted as regards its applica¬
tion to farms. The law, in several
States, permits the employment
of children in agriculture below
the age of 14 provided that the
child's school work is not interfer¬
ed with.
One principle which seems to have triumphed in most
parts of the world is that the minimum age for
young workers should correspond with the end of
compulsory education (1) . Thus the majority of industrializ¬
ed countries have fixed the age limit at 14. In the United
federal legislation forbids the employment of young
people under 16 (though certain States have legally lower
standards). Australia, South Africa, and New Zealand
are considering raising the minimum working age to 16,
while in Europe, curiously enough, the only country to
have thus far adopted the U.S. federal example, is Albania.
In some countries it is considered that a child of 12 can
be a useful and productive member of society, and the
legislation of these countries does not prohibit the
employment of boys or girls of 12 in either industry or
agriculture. Amongst these countries, varying widely in
economic and social structure, are Costa Rica, Egypt,
Haiti, Honduras, Iran, Mexico, Pakistan, Portugal and
Turkey. In Egypt, a special provision concerning the
textile industry permits the employment of children of
9 years, and in the Lebanon where the minimum age is
fixed at 13 generally, certain special provisions permit the
employment of children of 8 years.
In Latin America, the situation is rather complex.
Argentina was the first country to regulate the employ¬
ment of children with a national law passed in 1907,
although one year before, Nicaragua had already passed a
mining code fixing the minimum working age in coal-mines
at 17. In Argentina, the employment of minors under 14
was forbidden and for young people of 14 to 18 years
working hours were limited to six hours a day. For
children over 14 who continued their studies the maximum
working hours were set at four per day. Argentine
26
legislators have put into effect a particularly interesting
measure: compulsory savings for young workers of 14
to 18. The employer must deposit a part of the youth's
salary in a savings bank; the youth cannot withdraw the
savings until he reaches the age of 18.
According to the International Labour Review (March
1954) published by the ilo the efforts and experiences of
the countries of Europe and North America have spurred
an important legislative movement for young workers in
the Latin American Republics, some of which are
comparable in result with those achieved in Europe and
North America. Nevertheless, according to the Review,
it is estimated that more than 12 million children and
adolescents less than 18 years of age are employed in
various branches of economic activity.
In most countries night work is prohibited for children
under 18 years in accordance with the International
Labour Code, but many are the countries that nevertheless
legally lower the age limit for enterprises where the
nature of the work is such that production continues day
and night. In such cases minors between 16 and 18 years
can often be employed. Similar exceptions exist for
industries in tropical countries where work is generally
considered less difficult at night than during the daytime.
Working hours of children are nevertheless limited so that
the child has a minimum of 12 consecutive hours of rest.
"It is undeniable", the ilo indicates, "that there is not a
single country in the world, even among the industrially
highly developed ones, which has as yet applied all the
provisions of the International Labour Code concerning
young workers."
In any event it may be safely stated that the internation¬
al standards for young workers have been extensively
implemented in the industrially developed countries.
There the premature employment of children has been
largely replaced by compulsory education, the age of
admission to employment raised
to 14, 15 and 16 years, the con¬
ditions of employment of young
workers strictly regulated and
the necessary measures for the
administration and enforcement
of the law taken. The problems
of working youth have thus
been largely resolved in the
industrialized countries even
though there is still work to do
as regards the strict enforcement
of the law, especially in smaller
undertakings and also as regards
the protection of children and
young persons in rural areas and
in various forms of non-industrial employment, including,
for instance, domestic service.
But it is in the economically less-developed countries
where the problems of working children and young persons
call most urgently for attention and remedial action. In
these countries, where poverty is 'widespread, and compul¬
sory education facilities are inadequate or lacking, many
small children are found working under detrimental
conditions for their health and physical development in
order to earn their own living or to contribute to the
family income.
In these regions, the standards of the International
Labour Code for the protection of young workers can, as
a rule, only be applied by stages and governments need
the help and practical advice the ilo is able to give. (The
ilo offers practical help and advice to countries who ask
for it under the agency's technical assistance programme
and under the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance of the U.N. and the Specialized Agencies.)
The protection of young workers cannot be dealt with in
a vacuum. Measures for the health, education and
general social welfare of children are essential for their
future well-being as workers and citizens. Where, for
instance, no compulsory primary education facilities exist,
it is difficult to prevent young children taking up work
and they will lack a proper basis for their later vocational '
training. This inter-relation is recognized in the "ilo
Youth Charter", a comprehensive programme for child
and youth protection adopted by the International Labour
Conference in 1945. Whenever appropriate, therefore, the
ilo deals with .youth questions in collaboration with U.N.,
Unesco and the other Specialized Agencies.
(1) A report on " Child Labour in Relation to Compulsory Edu¬
cation" has been published by Unesco. Price: $1.50; 8/G; 400 fr.
