MASACCIO
Florentine genius who flashed
through life like a meteor
by
Gabrielle
C abri ni
SCHOOLROOM OF
THE RENAISSANCE.
For nearly a century after
1428, the Brancacci Chapel
in the Church of St. Maria
del Carmine, Florence, was
the schoolroom of Florentine
artists. Botticelli, Leonardo
da Vinci, Michelangelo, Ra¬
phael and other giants of
the Italian Renaissance went
there to study and to copy
the frescoes of the young
painter Masaccio. The cha¬
pel was decorated on the
order of the wealthy Floren¬
tine, Felice di Piuvichese
Brancacci. The frescoes were
damaged by the fire which
gutted the church in 1771
and by the treatment which
they subsequently received.
The history of art up to the 15th century records no
painter who achieved so much in so short a time as
the Florentine artist, Masaccio, who '"'flashed
through life like a meteor."
The masterpieces which revealed his genius and powers
to the world are the few frescoes he painted in 1427 and
1428 in the Brancacci Chapel of the Carmelite Church at
Florence works which place him as one of the
"fathers" of modern painting.
It was as if Masaccio had been destined for a brief
existence, 'for he only needed a few years to complete the
cycle of his passage in the history of art. But though
small in space and short in time his achievement was to
blaze like a beacon down the centuries.
In Masaccio's 27th year his life and the soaring flight
of his masterpieces were alike cut off by a death so
sudden that many of his Florentine contemporaries
believed he had been murdered by poisoning.
To his creative life of six short years he brought such
a thirst for research, so ardent a desire to excel all others,
that after his death and for more than a century later,
the "giants" of Italian painting came to study his work
minutely. They came to marvel at his innovations, to
analyse his discoveries and to learn from his composition
and colour. What chiefly attracted them was what
Masaccio strove most of all to accomplish: the painting
of human forms which stand out in relief against
background. One painter who lived long after him and
who, like so many others, sought in his work fresh
creative inspiration, has described them as "bodies
pulsating with life".
Masaccio, or Tommaso, as he was baptized, was the son
of a notary and was born at San Giovanni Valdarno,
about 30 miles 'from Florence, on December 21, 1401. At
that time, despite the civil wars which mark its entire
history, Florence was experiencing an extraordinary
flowering of talent in building and in the arts.
Travellers from elsewhere in Italy and from other lands
who passed through the country of Dante all wrote
accounts of what they had seen to their rulers and their
friends, describing the Florence of that time as one vast
workshop. On every side buildings were going up, or
being pulled down and rebuilt. The only thread erf con¬
tinuity in a political life forever interrupted by changes
of the parties in power and by their internecine feuds
was a passionate love of the arts.
So great was this affection that when Cont'd
decadence had already set in and freedom
was at an end in the 16th century, Giorgio
Vasari, the remarkable author of "Lives of

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
TWO CARMELITES. A detail from The Enthroned St. Peter venerated by the
Faithful. This fresco in the Brancacci Chapel, which also depicts St. Peter raising
the son of Theophilus, was left unfinished by Masaccio in 1428 when he departed
for Rome, where he died soon after. The work was completed in 1484 by Filippino
Lippi. This reproduction and those on pages six to ten are taken from the Unesco
Album, "Masaccio, Frescoes in Florence", which is to be published shortly.

MASACCIO (Continued)
the greatest painters, sculptors and architects" concocted
for himself an entirely apocryphal grandfather who was
supposed to have been a great artist at Arezzo. He did
this simply to win the admiration and esteem of the
Florentines, for whom ambition was so closely linked with
artistic glory. Had Vasari lived elsewhere he would have
invented distinguished soldiers, or men of noble birth as
forebears.
The sun of artistic glory shone generously on Florence.
For centuries, Tuscany peopled the world of art from its
nursery of studios and workshops. But though the work
of creation went on, its masterpieces quickly failed to
satisfy; people felt that there had once been something
other than the so-called medieval art which had so far
held sway, and above all that there could yet be something
else awaiting discovery.
Masaccio grew up at this moment of crisis and search
child, being dissatisfied within art. It is said that as a
what surrounded him in
his own ' village, he wan¬
dered everywhere making
drawings, though he was
as displeased with his own
efforts as he was with what
was done by others. Like
all artists of his time,
Masaccio was still living in
the imposing shadow of
Giotto, born a century and
a half earlier. Yet he felt
that painting not only
could, but should be taken
further than Giotto had
carried it.
Young Tommaso was so
absorbed and carried away
by his problem that, at a
time and in a country
which prided itself on a
refined elegance, he was
completely blind to his own
appearance. He was obli¬
vious to everything, Giorgio
Vasari tells us, except to
drawing and mixing colours
which never satisfied him.
His carelessness and his
disregard for everything
not connected with art
were so great; to the end
o'f his life he lent money to
friends and never re¬
membered afterwards to
whom, and would only try
to remember when he
himself was without a
penny piece that his name
"Tommaso" was soon
changed to "Masaccio" (an
abbreviation of Tomasac-
cio), a rather disparaging
diminutive o'ften used for slipshod, muddle-headed and
good-for-nothing children and youths.
While Masaccio paid no attention to his immediate
surroundings, he did not lose sight of the contours of the
Tuscan countryside, and the villages which seemed blurred
in its luminosity," and he strove continuously to convey
this sense of distance, which no one had yet been able to
do before him.
Masaccio, in his short life, had the great good fortune
to meet and to become the intimate friend of two men,
very much older than himself, whose names were
synonymous with the artistic glory o'f their country. One
wasBrunelleschi, the architectural genius who sought to
create an impression of infinite space in a building of
modest proportions like his chapel of the Pazzi, which
has not a single rectangular line. The other was
Donatello, the sculptor who dreamed of making people
who looked at his statues afraid, less they emerge from
their niches and advance towards them.
Why, reasoned. Masaccio, should not this problem of
perspective, which Brunelleschi and Donatello had solved
in the case of architecture and sculpture, be overcome by
him in painting? Why should he not break up the flat
outline of surfaces by giving them the semblance of
relief? Suddenly the masterpiece took shape. After
producing a number of works in his research, Masaccio
WOMAN AND CHILD. Det
Goods of the Community which
Masaccio's portraits. For a larger
knew at last that he had found the solution to the
problem, that he would thenceforth be able to give depth,
a natural depth to something as mundane as a wall.
The opportunity (Florence was an inexhaustible mine of
opportunities) was offered him, as might be expected in
this great commercial city, by a wealthy merchant named
Brancacci, who, wishing his name to go down in history,
had chosen the most appropriate way of doing so at that
time through the arts. Having decided to offer his city
a work of art, he engaged the successful artist Masolino
to decorate a chapel o'f the Carmelite Church with
a number of frescoes.
Masolino undertook the work, a work full of charm, in
the most classical Florentine style in 1424-25. Later,
Masaccio took his place, and at last his teaching, his
conversations with the architect and sculptor of genius
bore their fruit: Masaccio painted living beings. His
Adam and Eve, driven out of the earthly paradise, have
the ravaged expression of
human beings unable to
face the life that awaits
them, and fills them with
horror; they are indeed
"bodies pulsating with life".
The scenes recounted in
the Gospel or in the Acts
of the Apostles, those first
accounts of the life of
Christ and his disciples that
Masaccio depicts with his
brush, are scenes of real
life and no longer mere
conventions. Masaccio
adds a sense of reality to a
dramatic genius like that
of Giotto, depicting men
who fit naturally into their
proper walks of life, who
are truly made for the roles
which destiny has reserved
for them.
The apostle Peter is a
fisherman tanned by the
sun, broad shouldered, who
knows how to draw up nets
and launch his boat into
the sea. The sick and the
beggars are wretched speci¬
mens of humanity, craven
and downtrodden. Christ is
not God triumphant; he
has the dignity and sadness
of one who will be betrayed
and cannot forget it.
Around them, behind them,
in that chiaroscuro which
was to be the admiration
of future generations, the
trees, the houses fade away,
lose themselves in the dis¬
tance, as, for example, in
the case of the extraordinary castle wrapped in the mist,
in "St. Peter distributing the Goods of the Community",
which might have been painted by an Impressionist.
Masaccio died leaving his work unfinished, but his
renown was such that many painters, including those who
were to become the most famous, while not knowing for
generations how to follow the path he had so barely
outlined, came to meditate in front of his work, trying to
decipher its message. Today, as we contemplate Ma¬
saccio's work, we may well ask ourselves, as did Vasari, to
what heights would he not have attained had not death
cut short his career?
2¡l from St. Peter distributing the
illustrates the realistic humanism of
detail of the same fresco see page 29.
LIFESPAN OF THE «GIANTS'
Masaccio, who died in his 27th. year, had the shortest life of
any of the "giants" of the Italian Renaissance. Here are the
ages to which other great Italian painters of this time lived.
Caravaggio
Raphaël
Correggio
Ghirlandaio
Veronese
Botticelli
37 Leonardo da Vinci 67
37 Fra Angélico 68
40 Tintoretto 76
45 Donatello 80
60 Michelangelo 89
66 Titian 99

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
HIGHPOINT IN ART was reached by Masaccio in The Tribute Money whose majestic central group is reproduced above. The apostles in a
compact group around Christ have an epic grandeur in them, and the whole, a three-dimensional quality. The scene, in three episodes, tells the
story of Christ being asked for the toll to enter the city of Capernaum. St. Peter appears three times in the fresco: (I) In the central group at
right hand of Christ when he is told to find a piece of money in the first fish he will draw from the lake (2) catching a fish in which he finds a
coin with which to pay the toll (below, right) and (3) paying the tax collector (below, left). For a detail of St. Peter's head, see page 28.

MASACCIO (Continued)
ST. PETER
CURING
THE SICK
FLORENTINE STREET SCENE was painted by Masaccio
as setting for St. Peter curing the Sick by his Shadow (left). As
the Brancacci Chapel was dedicated to St. Peter, subjects prescrib¬
ed for its decoration were drawn from the "Acts of the Apostles"
and "The Golden Legend" (a 13th century collection of bio¬
graphies of saints). Masaccio drew his scenes from real
life and painted living beings. Details from the same fresco
show (above) a sick man and (opposite page) two heads.

The Unesco Courier. January 1957

MASACCIO (Continued)
Copyright UNESCO
CASTLE IN THE MIST, detail from Masaccio's St. Peter distributing the Goods of the Commu¬
nity, (see page 29) might almost have been painted by one of the Impressionists. Through his
treatment of light and shade, Masaccio's trees and houses fade away, losing themselves in the
distance. His street scenes were often inspired by the palaces and houses of Florence such
as those on the XlVth century Ponte Vecchio (Old Bridge) over River Arno (right). Camera study
of light and shadow recalls Masaccio's art in which one form blends insensibly into another.
10
