BAUDELAIRE
an artist haunted
by his own face
rrr-p«HE whole lower part of the face is bad... the chin not
I protruding enough... too many criss-cross lines in the
shaded areas... a better effect can be obtained with a
few well-placed lines..."
These observations, scribbled by Charles Baudelaire on the
margins of his self-portraits, reveal how severely critical he
was, how meticulous and painstaking when he worked on his
drawings.
Art played as great a part in Baudelaire's life as did poetry
and love. "Les images, mon unique, ma primitive passion,"
he once cried out. Pictures were, indeed, his earliest passion
and his lifelong rapture. His father, "a detestable painter"
and one-time drawing teacher, had delighted in fostering in
Charles an appreciation of painting, and before the age of
six took him on regular visits to Paris's many museums.
The author of Les Fleurs du Mal (published and condemned
by the courts just 100 years ago) is today famous not only for
his poetry and his translations of Poe, but for his critical
studies on art, his Salons (1845-1859) and other essays of
aesthetic criticism which he began to write at the age of 24,
revealing his remarkable perspicacity, vision and feeling.
Though he wrote mostly about painting, three other tech¬
niques had a strange fascination for him drawing, etching
and caricature. He considered Delacroix "the most original
painter of ancient and modern times," yet it was his etchings
not his paintings that he hung in his room. He once bought
the entire series of Delacroix's lithographs on Hamlet and cov¬
ered his walls with them. He was the great champion and
defender of Daumier, "one of the most important men not
only of caricature but of all modern art," and contemplated
a complete history of caricature which he never wrote. He
did, however, publish three studies on the subject, now
assembled in his Curiosités esthétiques. His loudest praise
went to Daumier and Goya but he did not neglect Gavarni,
Grandville, Cruikshank, Hogarth and Breughel. He sought
to show the dignity and importance of caricatures which he
called "often the most faithful mirror of life," and affirmed
that they deserved "the attention of the historian, the ar¬
chaeologist and even the philosopher, and should take their
place in the biographical registers of human thought."
Baudelaire himself produced a few caricature sketches
which he executed with great speed, perhaps mindful of De¬
lacroix's remark to him one day: "If you are not skilful
enough to complete the sketch of a man who has jumped out
of a fourth floor window by the time he hits the ground, you
will never produce any big things." But Baudelaire concen¬
trated mostly on ink or pencil portraits, of his friends and
above all of himself, where speed was no factor. Haunted
by his own face, he would scrutinize every inch of it in the
mirror and then attempt to portray its quality. He worked
hard at rendering the melancholy look in his eyes, the line
of his thin lips and the lock of hair that fell across his fore¬
head.
In one self-portrait, drawn under the influence of hashish
in 1845, he appears with a cigar in his mouth, twice as tall as
the Place Vendôme column, surrounded by a rising sun and
a halo of bright stars. Of this drawing, a friend of his
wrote: "From time to time, he would put down his pen, and
rolling a pointed paper stump between his fingers, caress his
picture with evident pleasure."
In one of his essays on portraits, Baudelaire exclaimed:
"A portrait! What is there more simple, yet more complicat¬
ed, more evident yet more profound?" He saw two manners
of treating a portrait: in the first, "the contours and relief
of the model must be faithfully, severely and minutely ren¬
dered." In the second, the portrait becomes "a poem with
accessories, full of spaces and dreams" where imagination
plays a greater, part. Here the artist "must know how to
bathe a head in soft vapours of a warm atmosphere or make
it emerge from the depths of a twilight evening." To Baude¬
laire, a portrait was "a dramatized biography, or rather the
natural drama inherent in every man."
30
Self-portrait. I860. Under this drawing Baudelaire noted:
"Here, the line of the mouth is better."
Baudelaire entitled this an "Example of Ancient Beauty.'

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
Woman without a name.
Self-portrait. 1845. Honoré Daumier. Ink drawing by Baudelaire.
31
