/-Vv
& x$*HW
I 'Xifc
La Locandiera
These eighteenth century engravings depict scenes
from Goldoni's comedy La Locandiera (The Lodging-
House Keeper). Figuratively and in fact, Goldoni
"unmasked" the Commedia deii'Arte of his day. "A
mask cannot help but detract from the power of an
actor," he wrote, "whether he is being amorous, fierce
or amusing... it is always the same leather which is
seen ; and however much he may gesture or vary his
tone of voice, he will never reveal the passions which
grip his yery being." Goldoni painted life... not as a
philosopher, but as an artist, as a man of the theatre.
Ja
m ' Vi-
{>
. C-v ;
GOLDON
by François
Last summer, Venice was already making preparations
for a resounding celebration this year of the 250th
birthday anniversary of one of its most illustrious
sons, Carlo Goldoni, a great dramatist who has been called
the real founder of modern Italian comedy.
It decided, for example, that his spirit shall preside over
this year's Venice Art Biennale, and in many countries the
anniversary of Goldoni's birth will be the occasion for
turning the spotlight on his works which have known con¬
stant success ever since their author died in 1793. As a
preface to these celebrations, Unesco last year published
French translations of five of Goldoni's comedies.
He was a giant of the theatre, this Goldoni, who noted
in his Memoirswritten directly in French while he was
living in retirement at the Court of Louis XVI"I am
sometimes tempted to look on myself as a phenomenon.
I gave myself without a thought to the spirit of comedy
and was carried away; I ignored two or three perfect
opportunities to be something better, and always let myself
be snared in the same nets. Yet, I'm not sorry. I should
perhaps have found an easier life anywhere else, but I
should have had less satisfaction."
He was a child prodigy, and at eight years of age, he had
had, as he put it, "the temerity to sketch out a comedy".
The first books he read were works by authors of comedies.
This taste, already ingrained, was fed and encouraged by
his family. Goldoni's first playthings were the puppets in
the theatre which his father built for him and in which
he and his friends presented their own productions.
Operas and comedies were staged in his grandfather's
house. "All the best actors", Goldoni relates, "and all the
most celebrated musicians were his to command; people
came from near and far. I was born into this noise and
activity, amid this abundance; how could I reject the
plays; how could I fail to love the gaiety?"
Gaiety ! That, without doubt, was the overriding feature
of his works. Goldoni's brand of gaiety was particularly
unbridled, certainly far freer and easier than that of
Moliere to whom he has been compared. He was an
Italian, a son of Venice, famed for its gay and flashing
carnivals, and he was heir to the Commedia dell' Arte, the
mediaeval Italian comedy though its last faithful defend¬
ers attacked his plays. Thus, the gaiety in Goldoni's
works is both natural and traditional.
His quarrels with the supporters of the Commedia dell'
Arte began in Bologna where he was accused of breaking .
away from two centuries of Italian tradition. Goldoni
points out in his Memoirs the true origins of the principal
characters of this school of theatre inspired by the come¬
dies of Platus and Terence and created one after the other
in Venice, Bologna, Bergamo, Rome and in Tuscany.
There were four of them: Pantaloon, Harlequin, Brighella
and the Doctorthe famous masked characters of the
Italian comedy. They had been famous since the 15th
agrafes*?;
"Of all the comedies I have ever written, I would
go so far as to say that this is the one with the great¬
est moral lesson, the most useful and the most
instructive," wrote Carlo Goldoni, referring to La
Locandiera in his Memoirs. "And yet," he added,
speaking of Mirandolina, "I have never depicted a
woman so full of wiles or more dangerous than she."
His character, Mirandolina, runs a hotel in Florence
28

The Unesco Courier. June 1957
BENEATH
ASK A S
T H E
L E
Thiraulf
century and Goldoni wanted to suppress them. There was
a great outburst of indignation. But Goldoni explained
his reasons.
"A mask cannot help but detract from the power of an
actor whether in joy or sorrow; whether he is being amor¬
ous, fierce or amusing it is always the same leather which
is seen; and however much he may gesture or vary his
tone of voice, he will never reveal, through his features
which speak from the heart, the passions which grip his
very being. Today an actor is expected to reveal this
being, yet when hidden by a mask, it is like a fire smother¬
ed beneath the cinders."
Goldoni was the advocate of truth and new ideas when
he set about reforming the masked plays and "replacing
farces by comedies". Giving way from time to time to
those who attacked his reforms, he produced "skeleton"
plays in which the lines were improvised, but he devoted
himself to his main objective which was to create a comedy
of character in Italy. His obstinacy was rewarded for he
was later able to write: "After several years my taste
became that of the majority, the most widely followed in
Italy."
His efforts resulted in more than 120 comedies written in
Italian, in Venetian dialect and in French a language
he learned when he was about fifty as well as other
works: a total of 212 plays in which many characters
fishermen, lacemakers, courtiers, gondoliers, servants and
waiting maidswere taken from real life.
Before he came to Paris, where he taught Italian to the
royal princesses and wrote one of his best comedies, Le
Bourru Bienfaisant, Goldoni had lived in many Italian
cities: Rome, Perugia, Rimini, Chioggia, Pavia, Milan,
Verona and others. Everywhere he went he applied his
curiosity, observing closely and exploring the personalities
and characters of those around him and the circles in
which he moved. "Nothing interests me more than analys¬
ing the human heart", he once said.
He knew the doctor and the lawyer (he had once studied
and practised law himself), the great landowner and the
servant, the nobles (not always, it was said, given the
kindest of treatment in his plays) and the common people
whom he often made to speak in dialects. To all these
personages he restored the life which the masks had taken
from them.
He hewed out universal characters like the person of
jealous nature, the miser, the liar, the bumpkin and the
imposter. He also wrote satires on manners and morals,
some of which still retain their vigour, concerning the
education of girls, freedom of marriage, the status of
women and relations between married couples. Thus he
has bequeathed to us a true and vivid landscape of his
times and portraits of characters whose features we still
recognize today.
and has among her guests two suitors, a count and
a marquis. Fabrice, her servant, is also in love
with her. However, Mirandolina is much more
interested in another of her lodgers, the knight
Ripafratta, because of the indifference he shows
towards her. First she does everything in her
power to attract Ripafratta but finally she sends her
noble suitors packing in order to marry Fabrice.
29
