WILLIAM BLAKE IN A WORLD OF VISIONS
William Blake, the bi-centenary of
whose birth occurs this year, is
equally well-known as an artist
and poet. He is unique among English
writers because of the mystical quality
of his works.
At the age of four he is supposed to
have seen God's head at the window,
and at seven to have seen Ezekiel in the
fields and angels among the trees "their
bright wings bespangling the boughs
like stars."
A nervous child who never went to
school, he was apprenticed at the age
of fourteen to an engraver in London.
Here he learned a craft which enabled
him to earn a living in his future life.
Because of this training, he put his faith
in line and stated that artists who do
not work by line are liars hired by Satan
"to depress art."
Blake was a visionary with a keen
sense of the spiritual dimension in
which the world is set. He had little
use for "vegetable" existence. For
him art was a spiritual activity and the
artist was a soul sent by God to fulfil
this activity at the expense, if need be,
of all others.
' Wild effusions of
a distempered brain*
Obscure as an artist all his life, he
decided in 1809 to force public
recognition of his works by
staging an exhibition, for which
he also contributed a catalogue. The
exhibition was a complete failure.
Hardly anyone went. Critics talked
of the pictures as "wretched" and
of the artist as an "unfortunate
lunatic whose personal inoffensiveness
secures him from confinement."
The catalogue was described as a
"farrago of nonsense... the wild ef¬
fusions of a distempered brain."
Happily to-day, William Blake has
won universal recognition.
Blake, together with his wife, Cathe¬
rine, published his works almost en¬
tirely alone. By a process all his own,
he etched words on copper, decorated
the plates with designs of great beauty
and added an occasional full-page pic¬
ture. He blended the ink, ground the
colours and mixed his own paint. His
40
wife made impressions, tinted the prints
and bound them on boards. Together
they had made everything but the paper.
Such a publication was Jerusalem, a
book of one hundred engraved plates,
for which all the pictures on these two
pages were drawn.
In his introductory notice "To the
Public" Blake wrote, "The Spirit of
Jesus is continual forgiveness of Sin	
I am perhaps the most sinful of men!
I pretend not to holiness! yet I pretend
to love, to see, to converse with daily,
as man with man, and the more to
have an interest in the Friend of Sinners.
Therefore dear Reader, forgive what
you do not approve, and love me for
this energetic exertion of my talent."
Blake did the powerful pencil
sketch (above) of "Time's
Triple Bow" for his book
Jerusalem. Final drawing
as published, Is shown at left.
From Pencil Drawings by William
Blake. Geoffrey Keynes editor.
Nonesuch Press 1956.

The Unesco Courier. August 19S7
William Blake was an Imaginative genius of tremendous originality. His mystical paintings and sketches evoke another world, and he
has often been compared with Michelangelo in the expressiveness of his physical forms. Among the different kinds of work done by
Blake are unique engravings that illustrate his own sensitive poetry as well as the works of Dante and the Bible. Reproduced on this
page are three of his engravings forJerusalem (done between I 804- 1 820) for which he evolved a special method of printing and engraving.
WA
mi
ho *' S
y-> t.-:''
7\ ajaa
41
