UNESCO AND THE I.G.Y.
The Department of Natural Sciences of unesco has no laboratories,
observatories or scientific equipment, conducts no researches,
and cannot take an active part in th« Year. Its function is to
advance world science, primarily by means of existing international
scientific organizations such as the Scientific Unions that are organiz¬
ed into the International Council of Scientific Unions and the Inter¬
national Council of Medical Sciences. It stimulates international co- '
operation in the attack on problems that are regional or world-wide.
For example, its Advisory Committee on Arid Zone Research has
effectively unified the programmes of the 37 nations that are handi¬
capped by deserts or arid lands. Humid tropics, marine biology and
the use of radio-isotopes are similar projects.
Unesco has for the past ten years allocated an annual subvention
of around $180,000 from its own limited budget to support the meetings
and the headquarters of the International Council of Scientific Unions
(I.C.S.U.), which are now in London (1). The council established, the
Special Committee on the International Geophysical Year which did
its original organization and planning partly on subventions from
unesco, listed below (larger funds were later supplied by many other
scientific organizations and governments) :
$1,400 for the organization of the first meeting of the Committee
at Brussels in October, 1952.
$1,000 for the first preparatory work on the Year in 1953.
$2,000 for the second meeting of the Committee at Rome, October
1954.
$20,000 for the establishment of the permanent Committee head¬
quarters, for the work of the Committee and maintenance
of its headquarters in 1955.
$15,000 similarly for 1956.
$50,000 for the biennium 1957-58.
However, education in science is also an important unesco function.
This issue of the unesco courier, devoted to the International Geo¬
physical Year, is only one aspect of unesco's educational support.
Another is the newest of unesco's famous travelling science exhibi¬
tions, dedicated entirely to geophysics and to the scientific activities
of the Year, which will tour almost the entire globe in 1957 and 1958.
These exhibitions are enormously popular educational displays that
travel from country to country at the invitation of the member states
of UNESCO.
Unesco's international fellowship training programme in science has
also provided and financed eight fellowships to augment the supply of
competent experts needed by the Year's widespread activities. Fellows
have been appointed from Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Egypt, Pakistan,
Peru, Thailand and Yugoslavia. They have been in training during
the past year at the Institute of Meteorology, Charlottenlund, Den¬
mark ; The California Institute of Technology ; The U.S. Weather
Bureau, Washington ; The U.S. National Bureau of Standards,
Washington ; The University of Colorado U.S.A. ; The U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey ; The Carnegie Institution of Washington.
In addition to the grants made by unesco, the Special Committee for
the International Geophysical Year has received annual grants from
the I.C.S.U. since 1952, and more than ten countries have made indivi¬
dual contributions varying in size from several hundreds to several
thousands of dollars.
(1) The members of the International
Council of Scientific Unions are : Inter¬
national Astronomical Union ; Internation¬
al Union of Biological Sciences ; Inter¬
national Union of Pure and Applied Che¬
mistry ; International Union of Crystallo¬
graphy ; International Union of Geodesy
and Geophysics ; International Geogra
phical Union ; International Union of the
History and Philosophy of Science ; Inter¬
national Union of Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics ; International Union of Pure
and Applied Physics ; International Scienti¬
fic Radio Union ; International Mathema¬
tical Union ; International Union of Phy¬
siological Sciences ; International Union
of Biochemistry.
