WHERE THE SKY
IS BLACK
There is an eerie fascination in the
high ionosphere. It is 50 to 250 miles
above the earth, higher than man ever
dreamed of reaching until the recent devel¬
opment of rockets. Nothing can live
there because the air is too thin only one
ten-millionth as dense as on the earth.
There can be no sound. The sky above
is black because there is nothing to break
up and reflect the sun's rays. But the
black sky glitters with brilliant stars, and
the sharp beam of the sun if one could
look at it would burn like a rod of white-
hot metal, yet is embroidered with grace¬
ful solar flares and the shimmering lace of
the corona.
The aurora is ever present, by day as by
night, weaving electronic rays into gorgeous
designs over the poles, waving majestic dra¬
peries of light hundreds of miles high and
thousands wide. Millions of meteors from
the depths of space flash into burning dust
on all sides, like fireflies on a Spring night.
Unseen and unheard is a turmoil of radio
waves from distant stars and from clouds
of cold gas between the stars. And finally
cosmic rays, projected from unknown explo¬
sions somewhere deep in the black sky,
pierce through any obstacle only, sooner or
later, to crash head-on into the nucleus
of some lone atom and thereby create a
whole shower of secondary rays that repeat
the collision miles and miles below as they,
in turn, dash earthward.
There in the black ionosphere is the dra¬
ma of cosmic energy, variegated and mani¬
fold, impinging on the tenuous halo of the
earth, with no man to see it. But the irre-
C. T K. Bratislava
MOUNTAIN OBSERVATORY in the High
Tatra range, Czechoslovakia, is making special
cosmic ray studies for I.G.Y. Another obser¬
vatory is perched on Mount Lomnitze (8,000
-feet high) seen in background. Cosmic rays
are also being studied in Central Europe's
deepest mine, at Pribram, Czechoslovakia.
26
sistible fascination is that without being
there, without the supersenses that would be
needed to detect these rays and radiations,
man nevertheless can know them through
the instruments he devises and the mathe¬
matics that makes them subject to reason.
The first inkling of all this complexity
came when it was discovered that radio
waves are reflected from something in the
sky so that they do not escape into space
when they pass the horizon but bounce
down again to reach distant receivers in
spite of the curvature of the earth. A
simple measurement of the time required
to reach the reflector and return to earth
showed that the reflecting layer is 60 to
90 miles above the ground. This discovery,
made in 1925, explained how wireless
messages can be sent across the ocean and
made possible the sending of radio broad¬
casts beyond the horizon. It also proved
that there is an electrified layer in the thin
air at that height which contains free elec¬
trons that are set into oscillation by the
radio wave. It absorbs the energy of the
wave so that it does not pass on but the
electron oscillation generates the same
wave-length and part of the new wave
returns to the ground.
This simple mechanism of reflection
means that large numbers of free electrons
and of electrically charged molecules, called
ions, are present in the upper atmosphere.
It is now known that there are three major
layers of ionized air which reflect radio
waves of different frequencies. The one
mentioned is known as the E layer. Above
it, at a height of about 90 to 150 miles, is
the F-l layer and still higher is the F-2
layer. The E-layer normally has 120 elec¬
trons per cubic millimetre, the F-l layer
220, and the F-2 layer 450. Ions are there¬
fore the outstanding characteristic of the
upper atmosphere so that it is properly
known as the ionosphere.
Storms in outer space
cut world communications
The ions are formed by the detachment
of electrons from atoms and mole¬
cules of ordinary oxygen, nitrogen
and other gases in the air when they are
bombarded by radiations from the sun, by
particles from outer space, even by passing
meteors. The chief source is the ultra¬
violet light from the sun which is intense
at that height but never reaches the surface
of the earth itself. The number of ions
at any moment is therefore dependent
on the amount and the type of radia¬
tions received from outside the earth.
Thus the ionosphere is a sort of sen¬
sitive skin for our planet, receiving and
responding to external influences. And
because the ionization can be observed from
the surface, by radio reflection, by radar,
and often optically too, it acts as a sort
of relay station to report external events
to puny men far below on the ground
whose senses are inadequate but whose
instruments, added to those senses, can feel
the skin of the planet and can thereby
learn what goes on hundreds of miles
high in the sky at the spherical border of
space. This is the function of what is
AURORA BOREALIS
called the physics of the ionosphere, one
of the major activities of the Year.
Below the ionosphere is the stratosphere
with air dense enough to support radio¬
sonde and other light balloons. The
highest unmanned balloon has risen to
about 30 miles. This is the frontier of
weather studies, as described in another
article in this issue. Recent rockets have
entered the ionosphere but none has as yet
gone through and beyond it. But above
the ionosphere is the unknown exosphere
where even ions are few and far between.
This will be the playground of the artifi¬
cial satellite, careering freely through space
by virtue of its velocity and held captive
only by gravitation, the one earthly force
that extends outward without limit.
The ionosphere is restless, more so than
any layer below, more restless than the
sea, because its ions are sensitive and very
light. It rises and falls in majestic tides
with the passage of the sun and- the moon.
The ionization grows by day and wanes by
night as the sunlight comes and goes. It
is stronger in winter than in summer. A
passing meteor may increase the ionization
locally a thousand-fold, as is described in
an article that follows. Each of these has
its effects on the transmission of wireless .
messages and of radio broadcasts. But
still more impressive are the major turbu¬
lences that are known as storms. They
may be real storms in the sense of violent,
high-altitude winds. They may be res¬
ponses to storms on the sun which spew out
vast fountains of swift particles and put the
ultra-violet radiation into spasms. Cer¬
tainly the ionization is affected by the solar
eruptions that cause the aurora borealis and
the aurora australis (Northern and Southern
Lights) and it varies regularly with the
eleven year cycle "of sunspots.
A consequence of all this turmoil on
high is the variation of the magnetic field

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
was photographed at Kiruna, northern Sweden, by all-sky camera (above,
left) which took in auroral displays from horizon to horizon by means of
curved mirror that reflects sky's image onto film.- Small white dots above
camera are pilot lights which determine aurora's position in both azimuth
and altitude. During I.G.Y. observing stations will be clustered for the
first time about both magnetic poles in zones of maximum auroral activity.
Photos courtesy Uppsala Ionosphere Observatory, Sweden
of the earth and the "magnetic storms" on
the surface which disrupt even ordinary
telegraphic and telephonic communication.
This is presumably because a layer of ions is
a conductor of electricity and a movement
of ions is an electric current. Every electric
current generates a magnetic field, whether
it flows in a wire or flows free. So iono¬
spheric winds could well produce enough
magnetism to magnify or counteract the
earth's own magnetism or to change its
direction somewhat, and thus to affect every
compass on every ship and plane.
Aside from such practical matters, it is
the task of ionospheric physics during the
Year to relate these various causes and
effects to each other and to deduce a single
consistent picture of events in the iono¬
sphere and their effects on human affairs.
This means that sunspots and solar flares
must be observed at the same instant as the
earth's magnetism is measured at as many
points as possible on the earth's surface.
The aurora must be observed in relation
both to the solar flares and to magnetic
variations. Measurements of the ioniza¬
tion in the various layers of the ionosphere
must also be tied to the other variations,
whether sunspots are involved or not. Iono¬
spheric physics and meteorology are there¬
fore both vitally concerned in the World
Days and the World Intervals when special
efforts will be made to obtain simultaneous
measurements all over the world. By this
time it is obvious that such world pheno¬
mena can be effectively studied only by
world-wide co-operation among scientists of
many nations and that to geophysics an
occasional period such as the present Year
is a necessity.
Since the major source of influence on
the ionosphere is the sun, it will receive
primary attention in the observatories that
are equipped for solar studies. Both the
magnificent eruptions of flares that spurt
hundreds of thousands of miles into space
from the face of the sun and the trembling
variations in the sun's much fainter corona
can now be observed on any clear day
without waiting for a total eclipse to make
them visible. This is the accomplishment
of the coronagraph, a telescope so equipped
that it blocks out the brilliant face of the
sun completely and precisely, as an
eclipse does, and thus permits the surround¬
ing flames and luminous clouds to be pho¬
tographed. Combined with a spectograph,
which can detect the separate light from
individual chemical elements on the sun,
and with a motion picture camera to record
action, the sublime drama is already record¬
ed on film. The timing of such solar
events with related effects in the ionosphere
will be a major feature of the Year.
Gorgeous celestial ballets
at the ends of the earth
The aurora is almost certainly the
consequence of a shower of particles
from the sun, probably electrons
and possibly protons (the nuclei of helium
atoms) too. As they approach the earth
these charged particles are deflected
toward the magnetic poles of the earth
and strike downward to ionize the upper
air. With this much known, the exact
course of events in the aurora is still
unknown: the explanation of the gor¬
geous "curtains", the '"draperies", the
"rays" and the "arcs", the location about
the poles, and the relation of the
northern to the southern lights. For the
first time a series of observing stations will
be clustered about both the magnetic poles
in the zones of maximum auroral activity.
Radio contact has already been established
between the stations at the two ends of the
earth in order to link the two celestial
ballets which cannot be seen at the same
time from any point on earth. There is
every reason to suppose that even more
particles are showered on the earth by day
than by night, which is to say that more
can be expected on the side of the earth
that faces the sun than on the back side.
Yet the aurora is not visible by day.
Efforts will therefore be made to track the
aurora by radar and radio reflection during
the daylight hours.
The radio-telescope, (see page 25) which
has undergone rapid development in the
past few years, will also do its share not
only in "listening" to the sun but
in detecting variations in the radio-waves
from distant stars as related to change in
the ionosphere.
The greatest mystery of the skies, how¬
ever, are the cosmic rays. They are compos¬
ed of the smallest of nuclear particles and
reach the earth with energies measured in
millions of millions of volts. With this
high energy they are less affected by the
earth's magnetic field than the particles
which cause the aurora. But the actual
particles from space seldom reach the
lower atmosphere. These primary rays
collide with atomic nuclei in the iono¬
sphere or in the stratosphere to produce
showers of secondary rays, composed of
atomic fragments, which themselves have
higher energies than any man-made parti¬
cles. The properties of the primary parti¬
cles can be deduced from the secondary
ones in the showers but their origin cannot.
It is not known from whence they come.
It is possible that they or some of them
originate on the sun or that their passage
to earth is strongly influenced by the sun.
This again means correla¬
tion with many other
ionospheric observations.
But cosmic rays are re¬
latively rare and do not
cause any mass effects ;
next page
27

WHERE THE SKY
IS BLACK (Continued)
they must be studied individually. And be¬
cause they change their nature as they
crash downward, they need to be measured
and identified at different altitudes. They
have been caught on mountain tops, under
the surface of deep lakes and in the depths
of a few mines. Balloons have been used
to study them to the reachable heights. But
all this is too low and a cosmic-ray counter
is needed that can ascend into the iono¬
sphere. For this reason rocketry has
become an invaluable instrument. It is a
poor rocket these days that cannot climb
50 miles into the lower ionosphere and
they have been sent up higher than 100
miles. During the Year rockets will be
increasingly used to make brief excursions
into these high levels and to bring back
cosmic ray data. But more hope for
valuable cosmic-ray information is borne
by the artificial satellite which will cruise
even beyond the ionosphere for a period of
weeks, as described in the final article of
this issue.
The Soviet Union and the United States
have developed rocketry to a high degree.
The disadvantage of the rocket is that it
makes a vertical penetration of the iono¬
sphere at a single spot and does not remain
more than a brief moment at the top of its
trajectory. Nevertheless important data have
been collected. In a recent paper in the
Journal of the British Interplanetary Society
S.M. Poloskov and B.A. Mirtov of the
U.S.S.R. describe a method of obtaining
samples of air and of measuring wind
velocities at altitudes of 50 miles and above
by fitting a rocket with a series of mortars
inside the shell which explode at prede¬
termined altitudes and eject vacuum bottles
to "some distance" from the rocket itself,
hence from its combustion gases, where
their valves open to collect samples of the
air to be parachuted down for recovery and
analysis.
Similarly, other mortars in the rocket
eject cannisters containing 33 pounds of
smoke-forming materials which are explo¬
ded at a distance from the rocket to form
large smoke-clouds. Five such cannisters
are exploded at different altitudes but the
speed of the rocket makes them appear
almost simultaneously in a vertical pattern
which can be accurately measured from
the ground with telescopes to determine
their altitude and the speed of their motion
with the ionospheric winds. Such obser¬
vations have confirmed that these winds
are of high velocity, always of the order of
200 to 300 feet per second, or about 150
miles per hour. The direction of the
observed winds is from east to west in
summer and from north to south in
winter.
Another method for estimating iono¬
spheric winds is by the study of meteors.
These tiny wanderers through space, prob¬
ably the debris of comets or ejected from
comets during their passage around the sun,
enter the ionosphere by the hundreds of
millions daily, most of them mere specks
of dust. They have had little scientific
study except for the larger ones that survive
the fall through the atmosphere and strike
the earth. But scientists of the Soviet
Union have set up a comprehensive pro¬
gramme for their study, which is described
in the following article by Dr. V. V.
Fedynsky. a distinguished member of the
U.S.S.R. National Committee for the
International Geophysical Year.
28

