The first thing most people do when they get a new
passport is to look at the photograph. "Don't I look
awful", they say, "'it doesn't look a bit like me; it
might easily be someone else."
This isn't always a case of injured pride, for most passport
photographs do "look like someone else" or, rather, they
look like a number of people. They are unreliable because,
generally, they are taken without observing certain special
rules and reveal none of the specific characteristics which
make it possible to identify a person, whether he be a
dangerous criminal or an ordinary tourist.
In fact for purposes of identification a photograph is not
really important; it is enough to note down the facial
characteristics so as to be able to pick out a person in a
crowd. These facial characteristics, arranged in a given
order according to a set code, make up the portrait parlé
("speaking portrait"), a system of visual identification deve¬
loped about 60 years ago and still taught in most police
forces.
This system, which is practically irreplaceable, was one of
the most important discoveries of Alphonse Bertillon (1853-
1914), "'the father of scientific detection", whose life and
work are described in a recent issue of Unesco's scientific
quarterly "Impact" (1) by Charles Sannié, a professor of
organic chemistry and director of the French Criminal
Records Department.
The story of Bertillon's life makes fascinating reading, for
he was truly a paradoxical
character, and his career, like
that of many public figures,
was due in a great measure to
chance.
If he had not been an unruly
youngster, a dunce who was
expelled from one school after
another and who reached the
age of 20 having failed every
exam, he would probably have
ended his days as an obscure
laboratory assistant at the
Museum of Natural History,
with an annual salary of
some 1,200 francs.
But as he had none of the
necessary exams to realize this
early ambition, there was
nothing else to do but pack
young Alphonse off to England
where he would at least learn a
foreign language and, since he
was given hardly any money,
learn to face life the hard way and show what he was made
of. This trip to England was Bertillon's first stroke of luck
and influenced his whole life. Not only did he adapt himself
thoroughly to the English outlook and way of life, but he
learned to write and speak English fluently, which later
proved very useful.
His next stroke of luck, strangely enough, was his military
service at Clermont-Ferrand in the centre of France, which
seems to have left him plenty of leisure. So much so that
Bertillon was able to attend courses at the faculty of medicine
and work in the anatomical theatre measuring and comparing
the length of human bones. A strange way, indeed, for a
young soldier to spend his spare time, but perhaps not so
strange after all since Bertillon was merely following a family
tradition, playing over once again the games of his childhood.
Bertillon's father, Louis-Adolphe, a doctor by profession,
was one of the founders of the internationally-known School
and Society of Anthropology of Broca. AU his children,
including Alphonse, were used to hearing their father,
grandfather and their friends holding lengthy discussions on
statistical and anthropological problems and the instruments
for measuring the human body; and soon they learned to
use these instruments.
This explains young Alphonse's bent for anatomy. But
ifter several happy years in the army he had to face up to
the hard realities of life and find himself a job. His first
experience as a clerk in a bank was short-lived since he was
scon dismissed for his untidy handwriting and unruly conduct.
In desperation, he took a job as clerk at the Paris police
headquarters where his father had influential friends.
This proved to be his third stroke of luck and the turning
point in his career. By chance he was assigned to the office
responsible for copying out the index cards of the offenders
committed to the cells each day, where the records of habitual
offenders had to be sorted out from among the others. And
as Bertillon was of an independent disposition and hated
routine work, he could not bring himself to accept the stupid
procedure of his office and set out to improve it by the only
means at his disposal, the only scientific methods within his
range of knowledge.
Thus, between 1878 and 1882, was born the science of
anthropometry. It cost Bertillon an amazing amount of
effort to work out his methods. As Prof. Sannié writes:
"He made up for the gaps in his knowledge by tenacity and
unremitting efforts... the saying that 'Genius is an infinite
capacity for taking pains' is pre-eminently applicable to him."
The trait of obstinacy in Bertillon's character was probably
at the root of his life-long distrust of fingerprints as a method
of identification, though many people today still believe him
to be the "inventor" of this method. In spite of the opinion
of experts in this field, Bertillon maintained that it was
impossible even to begin to classify people especially large
groups of people on the basis of their fingerprints.
Yet in 1902 Bertillon was the first to identify a criminal
who was entirely unknown to the police except by the marks
of his fingers on the glass panel of a piece of furniture which
had been broken open after a
murder. "With the help ol
these marks", writes Prof. San¬
nié in "'Impact", "Bertillon
reconstructed the murderer's
fingerprints and then, with infi¬
nite patience, worked systemati¬
cally through his cards, on
which fingerprints served mere¬
ly as a basis for subdivisions.
He finally discovered a previous
offender whose fingerprints were
identical with those found at the
scene of the crime." The man
was subsequently arrested and
confessed.
The father
of scientific
detectives'
But stubbornness and tho¬
roughness often go hand in
hand, and it was probably these
:haracteristics allied to brilliance
which made Bertillon a pioneei
in his field. "He undoubtedly
invented the art of criminal
identification", writes Prof. San¬
nié, "introducing into police methods the techniques and
reasoning of a real science, namely anthropology."
Long before Bertillon's time, people had thought of making
a plan of the scene of a crime and then photographing it,
but the process was still too complicated to form part of a
policeman's everyday duties. Similarly, though specialists
had thought of collecting material evidence and studying it
in a laboratory, no one before Bertillon had had (he idea of
setting up a special body for this purpose. In both these
fields, the work done by Bertillon represented the
establishment of a full-scale laboratory for scientific detection.
But it is the portrait parlé which remains his most important
discovery and one which has stood the test of time. Scarcely
anything is left of the system of anthropometry, for Bertillon's
photographic methods and apparatus have now been super¬
seded by more advanced techniques. But visual identification
is still, and will continue to be, what it was when invented
by the genius of Bertillon.
"His work", writes Prof. Sannié, "opened up a new era in
criminal investigation... He brought to Ihe police, which had
previously worked on a purely empirical basis, the attitude
and methods of the experimental scientist... The impetus
which he gave to accurate research on evidence and the
attitude of mind he introduced into the police force have
continued to make steady progress ever since."
(1) "Impact of Science on Society", December 1956. Annual sub¬
scription : 51.75; 9/6; 450 fr.
31
