M nà
1670
Apostle ot modern
education and of
world understanding
by Marie-Madeleine Rabecq
Curator of the Musée Pédagogique, Paris
Just three hundred years ago, in 1657, there appeared
in Amsterdam the first complete edition of the didactic
works of a Moravian bishop-philosopher named John
Amos Comenius, regarded by his contemporaries as one.
of the greatest minds of his epoch.
His Didáctica Opera Omnia, as the work was entitled
was to have the most far-reaching influence on the think¬
ing of educators from the 17th century up to the present
day and the principles of his philosophy were to be
reflected in the major plans elaborated in the course of
the past centuries to achieve peace and international
collaboration in the world.
Yet the name of Comenius was to remain practically
unknown in most countries for some 200 years. Although
a Letter on "Comenius the Humanitarian" by the German
thinker Johann G. Herder appeared in 1795, and a few
essays were published in Germany, England and the
United States between 1828 and 1868 on the life and work
of this great educational reformer, little came of these
efforts.
It was not until 1871, the bicentenary of Comenius'
death, that an international movement of any size took
form and resulted in the foundation of the first "Comenius
Societies" and the translation of his works into different
languages. Since then the name of Comenius has grown
steadily in international stature until today he is recogniz¬
ed as the father of the science of education and one of the
great apostles of the brotherhood of men and nations.
This year the world of education is celebrating the three
hundredth anniversary of the publication of his didactic
works, particularly The Great Didactic.
In commemoration of this occasion Unesco has just
published a volume containing selections from Comenius'
major works (1) ; a film strip on Comenius has been
completed for use in schools, and Unesco's quarterly
review Museum has published a special study on the
Comenius Museum at Uhersky Brod, where he spent
much of his childhood and early youth (2). Comenius
scholars from many lands recently met in Czechoslovakia
at an international congress to reassess the importance
of the Moravian thinker in modern life.
The personality of Comenius, his philosophical and
educational writings, the influence he has had on
(1) John Amos Comenius (1592-1670). Selections. Introduction by
Jean Piaget, Director of the International Bureau of Education. The
volume is illustrated and contains notes and a bibliography by
Professors Chlup, of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, and
Patocka, lecturer at Prague University. Besides extracts from The
Great Didactic, it includes chapters from lesser-known works and also
hitherto unpublished ones. Unesco 1957, $3.25; 16/-(stg) ; 1,000 Fr. fr.
(2) Museum. Vol. X, N» 2, 1957. The Comenius Museum, Uhersky'
Brod.
modern educational thinking all help to explain the
considerable efforts now being made to make Comenius
better known to both the general public and specialists
alike. The mass of Comenius' writings our knowledge
of which has been greatly enriched by the . discov¬
eries of the group now working at the Comenius
Institute in Prague is a highly complex and original
body of material from which we have still much to learn.
But the guiding ideas of Comenius' system and their true
significance are difficult to appreciate fully without some
prior knowledge of his life. Comenius' life and. work are
as closely interwoven as his ideas on world brotherhood
and his religious precepts are inseparable from his
educational reforms.
Jan-Amos Komensky (Comenius) was born in 1592 in a
Library of the National Museum, Prague
SKETCH OF A TOWN by John Amos Comenius which appeared
in his original manuscript of The Labyrinth of the World and the
Paradise of the Heart, which, In certain respects, has been compared
to John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress also a 17th century work.

little town in Moravia (today Czechoslovakia). His father,
a miller, belonged to the Moravian Brethren, a Protes¬
tant sect following the teachings of Jan Huss, and sent
the boy to a parish school at Uhersky Brod. Orphaned
at an early age he was shipped off to Stranice, at the time
a terribly war-ravaged area, where he was placed in the
care of an aunt and began manual training in accordance
with the Moravian Brethren custom. It was not until he
was 16 that he began his secondary education and learned
to read Latin. He later travelled to Herborn in Nassau,
Germany, for his higher studies where he worked under
the guidance of two remarkable teachers, Johann Fischer
and Johann-Heinrich Alsted.
This first period in Comenius' life the period of his
intellectual formation was to have a decisive influence
on his later philosophical and educational views. From
the Moravian Brethren he was to learn the deep sense of
religion, the dignity of labour and the importance of help¬
ing one's neighbour which formed the basis of their
doctrine along with their love for their native Bohemia.
From Herborn, his efforts to make up for lost school time
and his unpleasant memories of the ill-organized schools
inspired him to look toward improved methods of teaching
and for a school system accessible to everyone.
It was at this period that he conceived the plan for his
Linguae Bohemicae Thesaurus, "a complete glossary fol¬
lowed by an exact grammar of elegant phrases, figures of
speech and proverbs" such as existed in no other language.
The ardour of his patriotism and his sorrow at seeing so
many of his countrymen neglect the Czech language led
him at the same time to compile an encyclopedia which
he called the Amphitheatrum Universitati Rerum. Thus
Comenius while still a young student was instrumental in
making Czech a literary language and in this respect his
role in his own country can be considered analogous to
that of Calvin in France and Luther in Germany.
The Thirty Years' War and its terrible aftermath were
to give a new orientation to Comenius' thinking. In 1618
he was serving as pastor at Fulnek, Moravia, when the
town was captured and put to the torch. Comenius'
manuscripts and entire library were destroyed. Then his
wife and children died, victims of a plague epidemic. As
a Protestant preacher he was proscribed by the Counter-
Reformation party which had triumphed throughout the
lands of the Bohemian crown. For ten years he lived in
hiding in remote districts of Bohemia, before leaving his
country for ever.
Accompanied by Moravian Brethren
followers he fled to Poland, taking refuge
in the town of Leszno where he was named
headmaster of the secondary school. It was
at Leszno that he began his extensive
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris-UNESCO filmstrip, "Comenius"
1657-1957. A great collection of didactic works entitled
Didáctica Opera Omnia was published In Amsterdam in 1657.
The works had been written some thirty years earlier In
the Czech language by J.A. Comenius, while the author was
still living In his native Moravia. This year the third cen¬
tenary of the publication In Latin of this volume Is being
celebrated throughout the world. (Below, an original copy of
the volume). Comenius was one of the first men to propagate
the ideas which Unesco took for its guidance at the time
of its establishment. Above, frontispiece of the volume
drawn by Crispin de Pas. To commemorate this third
centenary, the Czechoslovak Government has minted a
special coin, both sides of which are reproduced, above left
& opposite page. (Comenius Is the Latin version of Komensky)
C.T.K.-Leos Neto-
Cont'd
on
next page

COMENIUS
(Continued)
He did not fear to assert:
'Spare the rod improve the child'
correspondence with scholars in foreign countries and
wrote some of his major works. In addition to The Great
Didactic, he produced the Labyrinth of the World and the
Paradise of the Heart, a Guide for Infant Schools, and his
lanua Linguarum Reserata which was so successful that
ii was translated into twelve European languages, into
Arabic, Turkish, Persian and Mongolian, and soon won him
world renown.
He was working on his Prodromus Pansophiae (a work
on education which attempted to organize all human
knowledge within the reach of everyone, and which
attracted the attention of Descartes) when he was invited
to go to England by Parliament to set up a College of
Universal Knowledge. But fate seems always to have been
against him. When he arrived in London, England was
on the verge of civil war and he found that the project
had been put off by Parliament. Comenius then accepted
another offer to reform Swedish schools which he had
received from a Swed¬
ish philanthropist,
Louis de Geer, who was
to be his lifelong pat¬
ron and friend. Again
dogged by misfortune,
however, he resumed
his wandering life.
Named Bishop of the
Moravians, Comenius
returned to Leszno, but
in 1650 left for Saros
Patak in Hungary
where he hoped to
found a pansophic col¬
lege. He worked out a
plan for educational
reform but his efforts
were frustrated by the
lack of appropriate
textbooks and the
shortcomings of teach¬
ers and students alike.
It was at Saros Patak,
however, that he wrote
his famous Orbis
Pictus.
After a further peri¬
od at Leszno, during
which he again lost all
his property, Comenius,
now 65, once again
took up his pilgrim's
staff and set off for
Amsterdam by way of
Stettin and Hamburg
to stay with Laurenz de
Geer, the son of his
former patron.
It was during this last stage of his life that he succeeded
in publishing his complete didactic works under the title
Didáctica Opera Omnia ab anno 1627 et 1657 Continuata.
At the head of the great collection, Comenius placed his
monumental Didáctica Magna or Great Didactic. First
written in Czech, Comenius later translated The Great
Didactic into Latin. It is this version which first appeared
in print in 1657.
On November 15, 1670, Comenius died at Naarden, in the
Low Countries at the age of 78. He had written more than
140 works, travelled the length and breadth of Europe,
discussed his ideas with Descartes and Hartlib, formed
groups of disciples around him, and never relaxed in his
effort to apply everywhere he went the great principles
he had evolved during his lifetime.
Comenius' great principles concerning education stem
naturally from his conception of the world. For Comenius,
as for Rousseau a century later, man is capable of infinite
perfection, and education is the path that leads to his
development. Comenius believed that the one sure way
to the heart and confidence of a child was through love;
UNESCO filmstrip, "Comenius"
THE MASTER WILL STAND BEFORE THE CLASS on an elevated
platform, keeping the scholars in his sight, allowing none of them to
do anything but attend and look at him. Just like the sun he will send
his rays over them all, while the scholars must direct their ears, eyes
and thoughts towards him, and attend to everything that he tells them
by word of mouth or explains by means of his hand or of diagrams.
This, in part, was the solution proposed by Comenius to the problem,
"How can a single teacher teach a number of boys, no matter how great,
at one time?" In this engraving of an early ¡9th century classroom
the top-hatted teacher has brought out a pupil to continue the lesson.
that the one sure method of success in teaching was the
observation of nature and respect for its laws. He
advocated that school lessons be carefully adapted to the
different aptitudes of children and that a child's
spontaneity and dignity be fully respected. Whereas Eras¬
mus did not hesitate to recommend the use of the rod
(and even John Locke praised it as an educational ins¬
trument) Comenius denounced corporal punishment at a
time when it was so widely practised and so rigorously
administered that schoolchildren were sometimes left
permanently crippled.
Comenius did not envisage education only at school.
He saw it as beginning in early infancy, "the age when
learning is absorbed most naturally" and described the
education of pre-school children in his Informatorium
(Guide for Infant Schools). His Great Didactic and other
textbooks were designed for different school ages, and
he arrived, finally, at the conception of all human life as
a school, calling it the
Pampaedia (The Educa¬
tion of All).
Comenius went on
the postulate that
children are malleable
and flexible beings,
that as they develop
in body and mind their
horizons can be con¬
tinuously enriched and
expanded, but that to
develop a real sense of
awareness the teacher
must start with those
elements which the
child's senses can
grasp, and attempt
always to associate
"the word and object
referred to ." "Words,"
he said, "should be
taught and learned
only in association with
things for what are
words but the husks
and coverings of
things?"
"Whenever instruc¬
tion is given in any
language, even though
it be in the mother
tongue itself," Comen¬
ius wrote, "the words
must be explained by
showing the child * the
object denoted. 0:-.i the
other hand, everything
that the child sees,
hears, touches or tastes,
he must be taught to express in words, so that the
command of language and development of the mind pro¬
gress uniformly side by side." Thus Comenius in the 17th
century challenged the sterile verbalism prevalent in the
schools of his time, and was a forerunner of sensory educa¬
tion which has achieved notable results in our own day.
Since the acquisition of all knowledge presupposes some
effort of attention on the pupil's part, the Czech educator
stressed the idea that the child's attention would be
spurred by his natural interest in his immediate surround¬
ings and therefore condemned exercises in a vacuum in
favour of activity based on interest. "Do not undertake
any teaching," he wrote in his Great Didactic, "without
first arousing the interest of the pupil." And again :
"Always offer something which will be both agreeable and
useful; the pupils' minds will thus be prim¬
ed and they will come forward eagerly,
with ever-ready attention."
The development of the mind, Comenius
said, is based on a love of learning. "Before
setting about making of his pupil a

ParISIOS STOMDVAi SI OVIS TEANmiTTAT AS"I:LLVAI-<5i HIC EST ASINVS NON £RIT ILLIC EQVyS
ßC rejffl den efefe tet fcfjoCen om ¿eren ¿^ ¡ft een'en efefe fjji eg faf fy/jeen jreert \eder fotrey
CHAOS IN THE CLASSROOM. In Comenius' day, schools
were not very different from the disorderly, unmethodical institu¬
tions satirically depicted by Breughel the Elder in his "Donkey
in the Classroom", about a century earlier. Realizing that the
situation could not be remedied permanently by changes of detail,
Comenius conceived and wrote The Creat Didactic as a scl-
UNESCO filmstrip, "Comenius"
ence of education. Though he does enter fully into practical
details he handles his subjects systematically. A school, he said,
should as far as possible be in a pleasant spot, green and shady
with gardens or trees and decorated with pictures. In school
architectural design and decoration today, (as shown by class¬
room below) the great educator's ideas have come to fruition.

COMENIUS (Continued)
THE 'ORBIS PICTUS'
WORLD'S ORIGINAL
PICTURE TEXTBOOK
Comenius was responsible for a brilliant innovation
when he added pictures to some of his books and dir¬
ectly linked word and ¡mage for education. His most
outstanding work In this field was the Orbis Sensua-
lium Pictus, an original kind of illustrated encyclo¬
pedia of human knowledge In the early 17th century.
To illustrate two of its chapters entitled "God" and
"The World" he used the engravings on the opposite
page (6 and 7). Numbering of the details in each
picture made the Orbis Pictus a school textbook
of a kind hitherto unknown. In the chapter on
"metals", for example, each object depicted in the draw¬
ing on the left-hand page (4) bears a number which
corresponds to the numbers and descriptions on the
opposite page. As this example shows, the Orbis
Pictus was also an illustrated Latin-German lexicon.
The two engravings from the chapter on "Man"
(2 and 5) show that this linking of the objects and
their descriptions was often done in great detail.
For the teaching of anatomy, Comenius was a firm
advocate of the maxim "seeing Is believing". He
called for "ocular demonstrations with organs such
as intestines, lungs, the heart and the liver, made of
leather and stuffed with wool". Plastic cutaway
models of the human body and its organs (I and 3),
which can be taken apart and handled by the class,
are modern versions of those proposed by Comenius.
Explaining how a dummy human body could be built
for teaching purposes, Comenius declared: "If you
take the student of medicine to this construction and
explain each part to him separately, he will grasp all
the details without any effort, and from that time forth
will understand this mechanism of his own body."
Illustrations taken from the UNESCO filmstrip, "Comenius"
feell Laboratories' Record

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
Mundus. DEUS. @.02£
O ©feSBífc DEUS eft ©OSSífÍ O

COMENIUS (Continued)
10

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
: ..M.I1' *
WORDS ARE BUT THE HUSKS OF THINGS
UNESCO filmstrip, "Comenius"
"Words," said Comenius, "should always be taught and learned In combination with
things... just like a tree with its bark and a fruit with its skin. For what are words
but the husks and coverings of things ?" In his illustrated textbook, Orbis Pictus, he
outlined a system for teaching children to read which resembles the "global method" widely used today. Following this system, the first pages of
Orbis Pictus show drawings of different animals and alongside each one the noise it makes. Modern education has absorbed much of his system.
Opposite page, two engravings from the same work. Above, left, illustrations from a present-day textbook. Modern out-of-school lessons such as
visits to places of Interest (above, right) were also recommended by Comenius: "In Spring they may be taken into the garden or into the country and
taught the various species of plants, vying with one another to see who can recognize the greater number." Below, in a Chicago Natural History
Museum showcase, scientists and artists have skilfully recreated the natural habitat of the animals, thus giving a "real life" emphasis to the exhibit.
II

COMENIUS (Continued)
FAR-SIGHTED DOCTRINES advocated
300 years ago by Comenius, are applied in
modern education. Right, a class in the Mira-
flores pilot-project school at La Paz, Bolivia.
Above, an illustration from the Orbis Pictus.
At Miraflores school two Unesco technical
assistance specialists have worked out with
Bolivian educators the best ways of applying
new teaching methods. Here, murals illus¬
trate the "linking of words and things", an
educational technique on which Comenius
firmly insisted. Opposite page, illustra¬
tions from chapters in the Orbis Pictus.
UNESCO
12

COMENIUS (Continued from page 6)
The Unesco Courier. November 1957
well-cultivated mind by cramming him full of rules, the
teacher should make him eager for learning, and better
still, capable of receiving learning. But who takes the
trouble of doing this with kindness and love? Generally
speaking, the teacher takes his pupil as he finds him,
each one setting about at once turning, tanning, carding,
weaving and modelling him as he thinks fit. The child
is expected immediately to become a well-formed product,
a polished jewel. And if the miracle does not take place
in a hand's turn... the teacher grows indignant and storms
and rages."
Comenius therefore emphasized the need for attractive
lessons given in pleasant and harmonious surroundings by
teachers who were both gentle and understanding. This
was a far cry from schools "littered with fragments of
blood-stained birch" and resounding with "the cries of
children tortured by rage-impassioned masters" one
horrifying description of which Montaigne has left us.
In this new type of school, set amid gardens where the
children "will enjoy the beauty of the trees and flowers,"
Comenius pioneered a system of progressive education
adjusted to the stage of development of each pupil. He
distinguished four different schools or "cycles in which
the children would be separated according to age," and
which we should now call the four major periods of
education : infancy, childhood, adolescence and youth.
But Comenius did more than this. With remarkable
intuition, he grasped the fact that the same forms of
knowledge are necessary at the different levels, the differ¬
ence between the levels lying mainly in the way in which
the forms of knowledge are presented. Thus each stage of
learning covered a complete Meld of knowledge with each
succeeding stage going deeper and covering a wider area.
"Though these schools be different," Comenius wrote,
"we do not wish them to teach different things but rather
the same things in a different manner. I mean, all things
which can make men truly men, and the learned really
learned; they should be taught in consideration of the
pupil's age and the standard of his prior preparation,
which should always tend gradually upward."
Open up the living book of the world !
Comenius' idea of progression by "'concentric circles"
was based on the precept that the first step in
training the mind was instruction in the elementary
principles essential for acquiring "universal knowledge".
His aim was to get his pupils to believe nothing without
prior reflection and to do nothing without prior reasoning.
As he put it, the aim of education was not only the acqui¬
sition of knowledge but also the development of character,
the training of judgment and the progressive awakening
of sensibility.
"Let no man exhaust his desires, his senses and his
energy, submit to the desires of others, subordinate his
feelings to those of others or let himself suffer compulsion
from without," he said. "Each of us must realize that he
bears his own happiness within himself."
Having thus so clearly defined the spirit and aims of
education, Comenius then went on to seek the methods to
be used. His suggestion: one which "will enable the
teacher to teach less and the pupils to learn more." Since
children were capable, in the eyes of the 17th century
educator, "of examining everything by themselves without
surrendering to adult authority," their education should be
based on direct activity methods. The pupil's role should
be to search, discover, discuss and repeat; the teachers'
merely to supervise and guide them in their efforts at
discovery. He recommended that the teacher should take
his students on visits to manufactories and on field trips
to study the land, plants and animals. In this way, he
said, "the children will be engaging in studies which will
give them as much pleasure as if they had spent the day
playing games."
Children should study nature whenever possible,
Comenius said, for "instead of studying
dead books, why not open the living book of Cont'd
the world, the study of which offers us more
pleasure and benefit than any person could on
ever give us? ... Men should learn by study- next page
ing the sky and the earth, the oak trees and
13

COMENIUS
(Continued)
Theologian enamoured of metaphysics,
patriot seeking a union of nations
the beech trees." The objects referred to should be
actually shown to them ; anatomy should be taught by
dissection. And when it is not possible -to show pupils the
real viscera they should be given "ocular demonstrations,
of livers, lungs, intestines, etc., made of leather and stuffed
with wool."
The textbooks of Comenius are conceived in this same
spirit. Two are of unusual importance: his Gate of Lan¬
guages Unlocked, already referred to, and his Orbis Pictus
(The World in Pictures). Though not the world's first
illustrated textbook it is the first school book in which
the pictures are not merely illustrations added for attract¬
iveness and interest but basic to the whole conception
of the work. In this sense Comenius is the father of the
illustrated textbook.
The Orbis Pictus is a great pioneer work for other
reasons too. Comenius shifted the emphasis in instruction
from words to things, and taught language by means
of pictures. The book tied the thing, shown in the picture,
with the word forming part of a sentence, passing from
word to thing to new word. Furthermore it provided the
Latin words and sentences and their translation side by
side. The subject matter was not the world of classical
antiquity but everyday, useful information and scientific
knowledge. Comenius thus broke completely with the
sterile traditions of Ciceronianism that afflicted the schools
of his time and for hundreds of years afterwards, and
abandoned the method of teaching language by grammar
and by rule.
Young scamps no longer raised the devil
CC"T"*his book," he said, "will provide small children with
I a marvellous device for learning to read with far
greater ease than heretofore." He explained that
he intended to use the Orbis Pictus as a miniature ency¬
clopedia serving as both a primer and a lexicon for
learning Latin and German. His device was a picture
alphabet in the form of animals followed by individual
letters imitating the sounds the animals make. In this
way, he said, a child "only just beginning to learn the ABC
or to spell will bethink himself and immediately call to the
mind the sound and force of each character merely on
seeing the animal from which it is derived, until such time
as his imagination, strengthened by use and daily practice,
leaves him with full and ready knowledge..."
Once familiarized with the alphabet, the child could
then examine the illustrations above each chapter heading.
The image would tell him what the title indicated. When
he had scanned through the whole book, "he will auto¬
matically have learned to read from the mere titles of the
pictures without having had to make use of a tedious and"
boring syllable presentation which is both mental torture
and a strain for young minds." Thus Comenius, who was
the father of education through pictures, was also the
precursor of the global method of teaching reading.
It was also Comenius who first formulated the monitorial
system of teaching, highly in vogue during the 19th
century, and the idea of team-unit activity which stems
from it. In The Great Didactic he advocated the division
of classes into "groups of ten" each led by a monitor,
with a head monitor in charge of several groups, "so as
to stimulate attention and give all the pupils the benefit
of what any one of their number says." Describing a
written translation exercise (he pointed out that it could
equally apply to other lessons) he wrote : "As soon as the
14
leaders of divisions have secured attention, one scholar
should be called upon to stand up and choose as his
adversary any other scholar that he pleases." The pupil
then reads out his exercise sentence by sentence while the
entire class listens. "At the end of each sentence the
scholar stops and his adversary has the opportunity of
pointing out any mistake... Then other scholars in the
division, and after them the whole class, may make
criticisms on the rendering, and finally the teacher sup¬
plies any point that has been omitted... Then the adver¬
sary should read out his in the same way... Individual
words and phrases are then criticized as before. After this,
a second pair of adversaries is chosen and the same proce¬
dure is repeated for as long as time permits. Those who
are still uncertain about a passage may bring forward
their difficulties, or those who think that their rendering
is better than that given may read it and receive criticism
on it."
LEARNING BY SEEING. The use of visual aids In education for which
Comenius was one of the pioneers, opened the road to the publication of
many other illustrated textbooks. Above, illustration from a 19th century
In this way, collective teaching based on both emulation
and the team spirit was substituted by Comenius for
teaching imparted by the master to each pupil individually
a system which gave scamps left with nothing to do a
magnificent opportunity to "raise the devil."
A whole study could still be written on all of Comenius'
influences on modern teaching methods. One of his pleas,
for example, was that classroom walls should be hung
with pictures representing famous men and events of
history, maps and other illustrations, as well as "models
of all kinds to assist the memory to retain ideas and facts."
The attractive appearance of the classroom, he said,
"teaches the child, when he grows up, to beautify his home
and make it more pleasant."
Comenius insisted that art education should be included
in the curriculum. He protested (even at that time!)
against over-work at school and held that children should
not attend classes for more than four hours during the

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
mornings, leaving the afternoons free for singing, drawing
and dancing.
In an age when education was limited to the privileged
few and had neither a coherent body of doctrine nor
firmly-established rules, Comenius conceived a systematic,
comprehensive doctrine of school organization and laid
the foundation for the modern ideals of universal, demo¬
cratic education which is such an important part of
Unesco's world programme today. To Comenius must go
the credit for writing the Charter of Free and Compulsory
Education: "Not only are the children of the rich and
the noble to be drawn into school, but alike gentle and
simple, rich and poor, girls and boys, in great towns and
small, down to the country villages. Everyone who is born
a human creature should be educated." With his com¬
prehensive ladder system of schools he saw a Mother
School in every home, a Vernacular School in every ham¬
let and village, a Latin School in every city, and a
University in every province. Centuries were to pass
before these ideals were to be incorporated in the.
educational policies of nations.
Free schooling for all, an educational system based on
the harmonious and progressive development of all the
child's faculties up to the end of secondary education,
vocational guidance, the application of activity and
intuitive methods of teaching, the proper eauipment of
UNESCO nimstrip, "Comenius"
Russian-German dictionary. The possibilities of wider applications of
the three-centuries' old principles are now greater than ever before,
thanks to the cinema, television, filmstrips and other modern inventions.
schools, teacher-trainingsuch in brief are some of the
major reforms which the Moravian philosopher set forth
in The Great Didactic and which Unesco has espoused.
Comenius, however, was not content just with the
provision of educational opportunities for all. He believed
that universal education must be informed with know¬
ledge garnered from all the world, and that education
must become a way of light so that "men's minds should
be gradually raised from darkness to light and withdrawn
from the vague and casual opinions to the one straight¬
forward way of everlasting truth."
In his Via Lucis (Way of Light) written when in London
in 1641, he recognized that his plans for the reform of
education could not be carried out without newly organized
collaboration on an international scale, including the
foundation of a world academy. This led him to his plan
for the General Consultation on the Reform of Human
Affairs, the bulk of the manuscript of which was long
thought to have been lost and was rediscovered only at the
beginning of the Second World War by a Comenius scholar,
D. Czyzevsklj, at Halle, in Germany. The Pampaedia
and The Panorthosia (a treatise on a Universal Improve¬
ment of Human Affairs) form the keystone of this huge
unfinished work.
Comenius dreamt of closer links between all the coun¬
tries of Europe and, once this union was solidly established,
between all parts of the world. He did not underestimate
the difficulties in the path of international collaboration,
and preached tolerance and understanding to overcome
them: "Let no one be blamed for the errors of the past...
As in educating the young, what matters Is to lead men
from the known to the unknown; and 'to lead' like
'to educate' means to use peaceful means and never violent
ones." He advocated therefore that men join together in
the cause of peace, that they gather together in a great
unified assembly of human solidarity, a community of
minds and knowledge set up in a "Council of Light", an
international organization where education, science and
culture could be employed for the good of all mankind.
Are these not the very principles, upon which Unesco was
founded?
The success of Comenius' works at the time of their
publication was no doubt due in part to his skill in rework¬
ing and assimilating ideas which others had formulated
before him. Comenius obviously knew of the educational
doctrines propounded by Luther, Calvin and Melanchton
who, while striving to reform the church had also proposed
programmes of broad popular education. Nor was he
ignorant of the reforms proposed by men such as Erasmus,
Rabelais, Montaigne and even Milton. The revival of
classical studies and discoveries in science had opened
up new vistas for the human mind and created a new
thirst for knowledge. There was a demand for new
educational methods so that this vast, new body of know¬
ledge might be included.
Genius synthesized a complex character
But historical perspective is not enough to explain the
enduring interest of Comenius' work. Though the
Czech educator owed much to pre-Renaissance and
Renaissance thinkers such as Vives, Campanella, Aisted
and particularly Bacon (from whom he derived his deep
love of scientific progress, his ideas of collaboration
between societies of learning, and his interest in the
inductive method and its development) he also combined
the abstract, deductive thinking of Central Europe with
the more down-to-earth and individualistic philosophy of
the English.
As Jean Piaget writes, "he was a theologian enamoured
of metaphysics and imbued with the speculative spirit of
the seventeenth century... This explains the twofold
impression of outmoded form and up-to-date substance
which one continually receives when reading the great
educationist's works. In this respect, Comenius' meta¬
physics lies between scholasticism as Inspired by Aristotle
and the mechanicalism of the seventeenth century."
In a word, his character was highly complex. An ardent
patriot, he dreamt of a peaceful federation of all nations.
A methodical rationalist, he was imbued with the mystical
theology of the Hussites. But these apparent contra¬
dictions in no way mar the deeper unity of his work, and
are to be explained by his family background, his education
and his life experience. Only a mighty genius could have
merged them into a vast synthesis, the essential principles
of whichat least as far as education and international
affairs are concernedhave an amazing actuality. Leib¬
nitz, Buisson and Raumer marvelled at his extreme
breadth of mind; Michelet called him "the Galileo of
Education"; and the American educator, Nicolas Murray
Butler said of him that his relation to our present teaching
is similar to that held by Copernicus and Newton toward
modern science, and Bacon and Descartes toward modern
philosophy.
15
