FRANCE'S GIANT MACHINE
ON 'BIG WIND' HILL
EXPERIMENTAL WINDMILL which will be used for wind energy
research in Algeria. Built in England under French licence the machine
is one of the largest of its kind (its rotor is 80 feet in diameter). Total
annual energy from the generator It will drive is expected to be about
200,000 kilowatt hours. Photos show It being assembled in England.
by E. W. Golding
In this age of rapidly increasing mechanization for
almost every job originally done by man or his
working animals, power and development have become
Inseparably linked. To have an abundance of power is
to have means of development towards that better way
of life which is the legitimate aim of all peoples.
But from whence is this power to be provided? From
the so-called "fossil fuels"coal, oil or, perhaps, natural
gas but these are being exhausted at an ever-increasing
rate which has already achieved an alarming figure in
relation to the known world resources of such fuels.
Again, their distribution is extremely uneven; some coun¬
tries have an abundance of coal, some large reserves of
oil, but others have neither of these natural riches. Nor
have they always the means of importing them in suffi¬
cient quantity to serve as a basis for development.
Nuclear energy is coming to the fore so quickly in some
of the more technically-advanced countries that their
anxiety for the future of power supplies through fossil
fuels may be largely relieved, but both the technical and
economic problems involved in this new method are such
that it would be wrong to assume that nuclear energy will
overcome all the difficulties of power supply, for the world,
in the near future.
In some parts of the world it is possible to utilize "geo-
thermal" energy, i.e., energy obtained from the internal
heat of the earth, but special geological formations are
needed for this to be economical.
What are the other possibilities for power production?
They are the inexhaustible energy resources which consti¬
tute the world's annual energy incomeas distinct from
the energy capital, in the form of fuels, which is being
exhausted at such a high rate. These resources are water
from rivers and mountain lakes, the winds, solar radia¬
tion, and, in some regions, the energy from the tides, from
sea waves or that obtainable from the differences which
exist between the temperature of the water deep down in
the sea and that at the surfaceone of the other effects
of solar radiation.
Of these possibilities, water power is already providing
a major contribution to our energy supplies. In fact, it
is being exploited on such a large scale in North America,
Scandinavia and Western Europe that, in some areas, few
economic schemes remain for future development, but
there are great untouched sources of water power in
Africa, Asia and South America. These, undoubtedly, will
be used sooner or later but there are serious difficulties in
that the cost of building hydro-electric schemes is very
large and is often beyond the financial means of the
. countries concerned.
The locations of these schemes also are often far distant
from the centres of population where the power could be
used so that heavy costs would be involved in transmitting
the power to the users. Less serious, but still important,
difficulties arise, again, from the uneven distribution of
water power between countries and from its irregular
availabilityeither because of lack of rainfall in some
years or, seasonally, because of the water being ice-bound
in the high mountain lakes.
The other inexhaustible energy resources, vast though
they are in total, have so far been used for power pro¬
duction only to a very slight extent but their potentialities
are now being recognized and, encouraged by the new
technique of manufacture, and new materials, which have
been introduced during recent years, very considerable
20

efforts in research and development, all over the world,
are now being applied towards the perfection of machines
and operating methods for their exploitation.
As with water power, but in a rather greater degree,
these resources are irregular in recurrence; the wind
blows, or dies away, with no very certain pattern; the sun
shines with rather more certainty but only in the day
time; tidal power is usable at varying times of the day
at certain places where the conformation of the coast is
favourable, and so on. Because of the lightness of the
air for wind power purposes and the "thin" distribution
of solar radiation over the ground, machines to capture
the energy on a significant scale have to be large, and
unless designed and built with care and ingenuity, tend
to be expensive.
These unconventional energy sources of wind and sun¬
shine have, however, important advantages they are
widespread and are freely avail¬
able at many places where power
is badly needed so that questions
of power transmission are there¬
fore eliminated.
It is possible, of course, to store
energy so that a superabundance
at one time can be made to coun¬
terbalance a later deficiency.
But such storage is often ex¬
pensive and wasteful and a better
solution to the problem of effect¬
ively using random supplies of
energy is to be found in combin¬
ing that from several different
sources so that they may comple¬
ment one another.
News of an interesting experi¬
ment towards this end comes
from Algeria where the national
utility company, Electricité et
Gaz d'Algérie, is installing a
large windmill, of novel design
driving an electric generator
which will help to provide power
for the electricity network.
The demand for electric power
in Algeria has increased very ra¬
pidly in the past few years. To
meet it there are a number ai
modern power stations and also
some hydro-electric installations,
the most important being in the
Petite Kabylie region. These
power stations are linked by a transmission system which
includes a line operating at 150,000 volts, running along
the coastal region from east to west. Natural energy
resources likely to offer possibilities for exploitation are
few, with the possible exception of natural gas which was
recently discovered in the south and whose development is
now being studied.
For the past eight years, therefore, Electricité et Gaz
d'Algérie has been investigating the possibilities of wind
power which might perhaps offer a worthwhile auxiliary
to hydraulic power, though this has already been har¬
nessed by the capacity of the dams. Now the company
is to make tests with the windmill built by a British firm,
under French licence.
The site chosen for the installation of the windmill is*
a small, well-exposed hill (about 860 feet high), some six
miles from Algiers and five miles from the sea. This hill,
which has the promising name of "Big Wind", lies close
to a road and to a high tension line carrying 10,000 volts.
Extensive wind surveys in Great Britain have shown
that hills of a similar shape to this one in Algeria, espe¬
cially when near the sea, have a wind regime which is
very favourable for wind power.
Theoretically, the average annual production on this site
is about 2,000 kilowatt hours per cubic metre which would
mean that the machine could give an annual output of
energy equivalent to its running at full capacity for some
1,800 hours each year. *
The experimental wind-driven generator has a capacity
of 100 kilowatts so that the annual total of energy to be
expected from it will be about 200,000 units (kilowatt
hours). Although this is not a very large total as com¬
pared with the country's needs for energy, successful.
The Unesco Courier. July 1957
results from tests with such a machine would Indicate the
possibility of installing more, and larger ones to provide a
significant contribution of energy.
The late M. Andreau, of Paris, first expounded the novel
principle of operation followed in this new machine which
was built in Great Britain. One firm was responsible for
the project and another developed M. Andreau's ideas In
the machine's design and construction so that it is by far
the largest plant of this kind which has yet been built.
The principle can be explained as follows:
A wind-driven generator of any kind must have a rotor,
driven by the wind, and this rotation must be transmitted
to an electric generator. In other windmills the power
transmission has been through gearing to obtain, from a
slow-running rotor, the high speed which is needed for the
generator; both the gearbox and generator are usually
mounted immediately behind the windmill rotor at the
top of the tower. In the Andreau
principle the blades of the rotor
are hollow and are open at their
tips. The rotor hub and support¬
ing tower are also hollow. When
the wind causes the rotor to
rotate, air is flung out centrlfug-
ally from the tips of the blades
and a suction is created so that a
large volume of air actually, in
this machine, some 58,500 cubic
feet per minute when the wind
speed is 30 miles an hour is
drawn up the hollow tower and
through an axial-flow air turbine,
with a vertical shaft, mounted
near the bottom. The turbine
drives an a.c. generator carried
below it on the same shaft.
Although the 80 ft. diameter
rotor, which has two hinged, alu¬
minium alloy blades each weigh¬
ing 1,600 lbs., runs at only 100
revolutions per minute, the tur¬
bine and generator rotate at 1,000
r.p.m. The rotor runs downwind
of the tower. This facilitates
orientation to follow changes in
wind direction; the orientation is
power assisted and is controlled
by a wind-direction indicator
which is mounted above the front
of the hub.
The height of the hub, above
ground, is 100 feet and the steel
tower, which is supported by 12 galvanised steel cables, has
a diameter of 9 feet at the bottom and 3*5 feet in the upper
part. The weight of the complete machine is 60 tons.
Full output of 100 kilowatts will be produced by a wind
of 30 m.p.h. For higher wind speeds this same output will
be maintained by an automatic changing of the pitch of
the blades until, when the wind speed rises to 65 m.p.h.,
the blades are feathered and the rotor stops. For wind
speeds below 30 m.p.h., down to about 17 m.p.h., the ma¬
chine produces a reduced amount of power. The 3-phase
alternator, of the synchronous induction type, generates
power at 415 volts.
Advantages of the Andreau-type of wind-driven ma¬
chine are that the generating plant and control gear are
located at ground level, where they can be inspected
frequently and easily maintained, and also that the rapid
fluctuations in wind speed which commonly occur are
damped out by the very flexible drivethrough a long
column of airand so do not cause trouble by passing a
correspondingly variable power output into the network.
It will indeed be most interesting to follow this Algerian
experiment, with not only an unconventional source of
energy for the network, but with such a novel form oí
machine to capture and utilize it.
Photographs and explanations regarding the functioning of the
Andreau-type wind-driven machine referred to above figure
in the Unesco Travelling Exhibition, "Energy and its Transfor¬
mation". This Exhibition first opened in Paris in March 1956,
later visited New Delhi and Ahmedabad in India and is
now touring cities in the Far East. It has already been seen by
more than 270,000 people.
21
