PINOCCHIO, Italian writer Carlo Collodi's
famous story of a puppet, as published in England.

IN WORLD TRANSLATION DERBY
Agatha Christie,
Peter Cheyney
Lead Cervantes
Homer & Dante
0
Which of the world's books enjoy the greatest popu¬
larity? In other words, apart from the literature
of their own mother tongue, what do people like
reading most? Do their tastes vary greatly? Do works
from one country suddenly become popular in others or
does literary popularity follow a regular pattern? Ques¬
tions like these spring to one's mind on looking through
Index Translationum, Unesco's annual index of books
which are translations from an original version into
another language and which have been published during
the previous year.
But to answer these questions with any degree of
accuracy we have to exclude from our calculations those
books which people read, not because they necessarily like
them but because of a religious, educational, political or
scientific need or duty.
Books on mathematics and grammar are certainly not
favourites with children, yet in countries where compul¬
sory education is really an established fact, almost as
many such books are printed as there are children. The
Bible, of which an enormous number of translations is
made, is usually read as a religious duty and is often dis¬
tributed free in the course of missionary work. Works of
political doctrine, like those of Marx and Lenin, are
constantly being reprinted in many countries to serve as
textbooks for political instruction, and certain important
scientific works are translated into many languages, often
because no exactly equivalent works exist, and they are
therefore indispensable.
We shall find the answers to our questions, therefore,
by considering the books which the main libraries of the
world classify, according to the Universal Decimal Classi¬
fication system, under the number 8. In libraries around
the globe, from the Library of Congress at Washington to
the National. Libraries in Paris and Tokyo, the number 8
is applied to all books classified as "literature" all those
works which men down the ages have written for their
own enjoyment, or because of something they wished to
forget or other men to remember, or out of a desire to
place on record (both for themselves and for others) their
enthusiasms and convictions, their hatred and despair,
their emotions and hopes, or simply the stories they spun
to while away the time.
. Thanks to Unesco's comprehensive comparative studies
of translations throughout the world presented in Index
Translationum and in Book Production 1937-1954 and
Translation 1950-1954, we can find our way through the
maze of literary translation without giving to certain figu¬
res (accurate in themselves), an absolute value to which
they are certainly not entitled.
12
In 1954, for example, the U.S.S.R. reported its transla¬
tions (actually spread over a number of years) as 776.
Now this figure does not have the same meaning it would
have if given by, say, France, Germany or any other
country where one principal language is spoken and read
by practically the entire population. Owing to the large
number of languages in the U.S.S.R. 328 of the total of
776 translations made were from Russian into other lan¬
guages of the Soviet Union, which thus reduces the
number of translations of works coming from outside the
U.S.S.R. to 448.
Another unusual case is found in Greece where of 358
translations in 1955, 260 were "literary." Out of these,
BABBITT, a satire on the average businessman
by Sinclair Lewis, as it appears in a Polish edition.
SINCLAIR I-EWI
í Jlñ. f\ Tt
BABBiT
P ' I I
» III I r
::¡¡!itii mm
:¡¡SÍ¡*:¡ es mm
ÏÏUÎ Ü 3°
} -
m

HARD TIMES a novel written by Charles Dickens
in I8S4, as it appeared when published in Polish.
49 were translations from classical Greek, a much higher
proportion than in any other country. The people of
Greece, understandably enough, never tire of the great
masterpieces of a past that is still very much alive. In
France, during the same year, 1,452 books were translated,
including 861 works of literature.
In drawing a balanced and accurate picture of the
world's literature translations several other factors must
be taken into account. A distinction must be made
between first or original translations and re-issues of
translations. These figures, however, are difficult to pick
out from literary production as a whole though easily
identified in the case of recent works, they are almost
unobtainable for the older books.
Again, in the case of these older works, a number of
translations may have been made in the same language.
Generally speaking, books whose authors have died too
recently for the copyright to have lapsed on their works
can only be translated and published in each country by
one publisher who has acquired the exclusive rights. But
once the copyright has lapsed, translations of the book
can follow each other thick and fast in every country
where it is read, and may sometimes appear simultan¬
eously. Thus in Italy, for example, ten publishers may
bring out their own translations of a Shakespearean
tragedy at the same time, whereas a novel by the great
German writer Thomas Mann, who died only a few years
ago, can only be translated by one publisher who has
exclusive rights over the work for fifty years.
And the final rule in this game of discovering which
authors' books are the most widely read is to consider the
figures for any one year in relation to those for preceding
years. Sometimes the popularity of an author whose
works have been re-issued regularly year after year
suddenly seems to be on the wane. Is he being less widely
read? Not necessarily so, and, in fact, the contrary is
sometimes the case. What has happened is that publish¬
ers, counting on large sales, have printed big editions to
cut down overhead costs. Thus the market is temporarily
saturated and no new editions need be published for the
time being.
If we were to think of the translation of the world's
great literary masterpieces in terms of a horse or motor
racing contest, with each new language covered represent¬
ing an obstacle overcome, who would be the winners in
1955?
Heading the field, both by the number of works translat¬
ed and the variety of languages in which he continues his
steady course, comes Leo Tolstoy, a true giant amongst
writers. Since 1948 he has been at the head of the leading
group, and in 1955 no writer or poet, past or present, can
The Unesco Courier. February 1957
compete with the author of War and Peace. Translated
in 23 countries and read all over the world, from Japan to
Brazil by way of India and Indonesia, his works, complete
or abridged, are always to be found.
Following Tolstoy and running neck and neck (in the
language of the turf) are two authors translated in
22 countries the creator of angelic beings and of monsters,
William Shakespeare, the greatest dramatist of the modern
world, and Hans Christian Andersen, the father of the
little mermaid and the ugly duckling, for whom so many
adults have retained their childhood affection.
Just behind these two comes a group of four made up of
two Russians, a Frenchman and an American: Maxim
Gorki, Anton Chekov, Honoré de Balzac and Jack London.
In 1955 each of them was translated in 19 countries. Of
the four, however, Chekov appears to have made the most
progress since the Second World War and to have had the
greatest number of new works translated.
Two more Russians, Dostoievski and Turgenev follow
close behind, along with Charles Dickens and Alexandre
Dumas, all of them having translations in 18 countries.
They are all familiar figures among the leaders in this
annual contest for it is many years since The Brothers
Karamazov, David Copperfield and Fathers and Sons first,
journeyed forth from their own countries. As to The
Three Musketeers, the fame of their swashbuckling
adventures has long since spread to Africa, Asia and the
Americas.
Here comes the first woman contestant: Pearl Buck, an
American, alongside a fabulous poet and storyteller,
Pushkin, both of them having translations in 17 countries.
Following them is a compact group of eight: Jules Verne,
Mark Twain, Guy de Maupassant, Plato, Victor Hugo, Emile
Zola, Somerset Maugham, and Daphne du Maurier
(16 countries).
But why continue to place the arrivals? Anyone picking
up the Index Translationum for 1955, which will shortly be
published, can make scores of interesting and amusing
discoveries like these. A few more, however, are worth
mentioning here: Aristophanes and the Brothers Grimm
have been translated in 14 countries, Fenimore Cooper
in 13, Goethe and Cervantes in 12, and Homer, .
Dante and Cervantes in 11 countries.
Yet the number of translations is no yard¬
stick of genius and it would be absurd to draw next page
THE SUN ALSO RISES, Hemingway's novel of a
"lost generation" became "Fiesta" in its Italian version.
13

WORLD
TRANSLATION
DERBY
(Continued)
from the statistics
which seem to show
Dante, Homer and
Cervantes as losers,
other conclusions
than the proper
ones. So let us look
at some different
figures, and, keeping
in mind that this is
still a sort of game,
since genius again
cannot be measured
by the number of
works it produces, let us see how many works of the 1955
winners were published during the year in the countries
where their translations were made.
Tolstoy still leads with 105 titles, Gorki follows with
102 and the unforgettable Jules Verne, despite the extra¬
ordinary scientific discoveries since his time, holds third
place with 92. Shakespeare boasts 74 titles (Julius Caesar
and A Midsummer Night's Dream, by the way, recently
appeared for the first time in the Indonesian language),
then Hans Andersen with 71, followed by Chekov, 66;
Dostoievski, 62; and Pushkin, 61.
Ninth in the list comes Jack London, the friend of
outlaws, icy wastes and wild beasts, with 55 titles, then
Mark Twain (52) in tenth place, followed by Balzac (50)
and Dumas (49). Several authors tie for the following
places: Plato and Turgenev (13th with 41 each); de Mau¬
passant and Somerset Maugham (40) and Victor Hugo and
Zola (37). Leaders among the women authors are Pearl
Buck with 32 and Daphne du Maurier (21). There is
certainly no question about it, the Russians are the
undoubted champions of the "translation Derby".
As our look into the world of translations has shown us,
one type of literature which holds a leading place and
which has for long left its imprint on grown-ups and
young people alike, is the adventure story. It has many
variations from cloak and dagger plots to exploits in
far-off lands, from flashbacks to the days of chivalry to
forward-looking accounts of life in future times.
Its heroes seem to combine both the qualities and roles
of law-enforcers and bandits, those romantic outlaws to
whom the continuing vogue of "westerns" appears to be
giving a permanent lease of life. The adventures nearly
always take place in some exotic setting the frozen wastes
of the Far North, the virgin forest, the parched desert, the
forgotten island, unless it happens to be... the Moon. These
kinds of books are firmly entrenched in public taste, and
who knows what astronomical publishing figures may one
day be credited to the latest conqueror, Davy Crockett.
Now a newcomer has joined the school of Jack London,
Oliver Curwood, and Fenimore Cooper José Mallorqui, a
writer who has taken the Spanish-speaking world by
storm, and whose
Prairie Wolf ad¬
venture series is now
also being widely
translated in four
northern European
countries (Denmark,
Finland, Norway
and Sweden).
Another type of
book, whose leading
producers are trans¬
lated more widely
than Dante, Cer¬
vantes or Sophocles,
is now challenging
the supremacy of
the adventure stor¬
ies. This is the de¬
tective novel which
one half of the read¬
ing public prefers
not to regard as
literature, but which
the other half often
reads to the exclu¬
sion of all else. Its
once undisputed
GERMAN VERSION of last publi- leading exponents,
shed work by H. G. Wells, Mind Conan Doyle (trans
at the End of its Tether. (This was lated in eight lan-
published in Zurich, Switzerland) guages in 1955) and
14
II.GWrLLS
DER GEIST
AMENDE
SEINER
MÖGLICH¬
KEITEN
V*nA.A*¿**».**tmUtoiUAai¿ti-fitA-anmitB^4*rAiri*tÍAki»
K*li.*litíAA,liA,mmA..*^*At>,*AmiiFt»'':4-VAAat**A,rí»<<
Simenon (12 languages) are now being outstripped by
others: Agatha Christie (translated in 13 countries; ten
different titles in Japan alone and three in Spain) and
Peter Cheyney (translated in nine countries) to mention
only two of the most popular writers at the present time.
Here is a significant fact. Of the six titles of literary
translations given in Thailand's bibliography for 1955,
three are detective novels of the Sherlock Holmes series by
Conan Doyle. The "'thriller's" world-wide success inspir¬
ed us to carry out a little research into the fate of two of
its pathfinders, Eugène Sue and Ponson de Terrail. They
were among the most widely translated authors of the
19th century and had' many devotees and imitators.
Brazil, Norway, Portugal and Yugoslavia, we found, were
still translating ' Ponson de Terrail while Finland and
Norway still read Eugène Sue.
Do films have any influence on translations? A great
deal, according to booksellers who find sales of great
ANTHOLOGY OF
JAPANESE LITERATURE
COMPILED AND EDITED BY DONALD KEENE
TRANSLATION OF GREAT WORKS into languages
of wider diffusion has been a Unesco activity since
1948. So far translations into five languagesArabic,
English, French, Persian and Spanishhave either been
published or are in preparation. Thirty volumes have
already appeared and 70 others are under preparation
(altogether they will cover 25 literatures). Above,
book jacket of the Anthology of Japanese Literature
in the Japanese series of Unesco's Collection of
Representative Works. The Unesco Courier will
devote part of a forthcoming issue to this Collection.
books increasing whenever they are made into successful
films. Does this mean that the best literary works will
have to depend on cinema box office successes to find
admirers? Will Cinemascope encourage reading? In view
of the many great works now being adapted for the cinema
we should soon know the answer.
Finally, we think it is worth while to list all the authors
given under the "Literature" column of the bibliography
for Iran, whose works were translated in 1955. The list is.
quite short: Honoré de Balzac (Le Père Goriot); Joseph
Bédier (Le Roman de Tristan et Yseult); Edward Brown
(A Literary History of Persia) ; Alphonse Daudet (Les
Femmes d'Artistes); Nicholas Gogol (Tarass Bulba);
Nathaniel Hawthorne (The Scarlet Letter); Victor Hugo
(Quatrevingt-treize and Les Travailleurs de la Mer) ; and
Friedrich Schiller (Wilhelm Tell). Eight names in all:
four Frenchmen, one German, one American, one English¬
man and one Russian.
