HEMINGWAY, FAULKNER, MAUGHAM :
THE BIG U.S.S.R. BOOK NEWS FOR 1957
VS**'
Ki.
n3J*
^£-"
PASSION FOR BOOKS is so great
in the U.S.S.R. that overcrowded
bookstores, especially those in Mos¬
cow, are unable to cope with the
rush, and make use of services of
street vendors, whose stocks are
soon snapped up. Moscow, Lenin¬
grad and other great cities regu¬
larly organize "poetry days" when
poets visit the bookshops to read
their poems, meet their admirers
and autograph copies of their
works. Right, Serge Smlrnov, a
Moscow poet, reads his verses in
Bookshop No. 6. (All Moscow's
bookshops are .numbered). The
Inscription behind him reads:
"Poetry Day. Works ofSoviet poets".
Left, bookstall in Soviet village.
Photos Soviet Information Service, Paris
A foreign visitor to the Soviet Union last year expressed
surprise at the large number of street vendors he saw
selling books on a commission basis for the over¬
crowded bookstores of Moscow. The street vendors are
almost as common as the ice cream stands, he reported,
adding : "Russia today is a nation of readers, and book
production, although immensely increased since the
Second World War, has not yet begun to satisfy the
demands."
How much of a demand there is and how much pro¬
duction is increasing can be gleaned from some of the
latest information on Soviet book production and book
translations which has reached Unesco. Figures for a
single year are staggering ; those 'for the 38-year period
from 1918 to 1955 (since the Soviet regime came into
being) are almost astronomic.
In 1955, according to official U.S.S.R. book industry
reports, 54,732 titles of books were published in the Soviet
Union, and copies printed topped the one thousand million
mark. During the same year, Japan (the world's second
largest book producer) published 21,653 titles or less than
half the number. Between 1918 and 1955 over 1,268,000
titles were published in the U.S.S.R., in editions totalling
more than 18 thousand million copies.
Soviet translation figures are almost as impressive :
14,580 titles by 1,730 foreign authors with a total of over
371 million copies printed during the past 38 years. For
1955 alone, Unesco's latest volume of Index Translationum
lists 4,282 translated works published, by far the highest
of any country and more than double the figure of
Germany, which is in second place.
Today the book industry of the Soviet Union leads all
countries of the world both in number of titles published
and in number of translated works produced.
A large percentage of Soviet translation figures is made
up of Russian-language works published in the many
languages of the U.S.S.R., and of translations from these
languages into Russian. The production of many language
versions 'for internal consumption has always been an
24
important part of the Soviet book industry. In regular
use are 80 chief languages, and some 140 language groups
are recognized. Each of the 16 Republics has its own
official language. In the past 38 years books have been
published in 122 languages, and in 59 languages in 1955
alone. Books have been translated into tongues ranging
from Uzbek to Kazakh, but the most important are
Russian, Ukrainian, Georgian, Lithuanian, Latvian and
Armenian, in that order.
As early as 1927 the Soviet Commissariat of Education
decided that education should be given as far as possible
in the vernacular. Where Russian was not the mother
tongue it was to be the compulsory second language. By
1935 teaching was being conducted in more than 80 lan¬
guages, and the various publishing houses were issuing
books in all these languages as well as publishing works
in various foreign ones.
Libraries best customers
In the Soviet Union, where publishing houses are State-
or union-owned, the principal houses are co-ordinated
under the Ministry of Culture. An important producer
in the country is the Writers' Union, which has its own
publishing house for new books. The most successful
publications of the Soviet Writers' Union are reprinted
in mass editions by the State Literary Publishers. Most
Soviet publishing firms are "central institutions" which
have headquarters in Moscow and maintain provincial
branches, although some are local or are centred in
provincial capitals.
A large part of book distribution is handled by a Ministry
of Culture organization, the Central Book Sales Adminis¬
tration, which sends the publishers' lists to the 24,000 book
sellers in the country and supplies orders. Another outlet
is the "Book Post", a department of the Post Office, which
supplies public libraries and bookstalls and runs a sub¬
scription scheme whereby individual buyers can order
books and pay on delivery at their local post office.

The Unesco Courier. February 1957
Libraries buy more than half of all books published in
the U.S.S.R.
Centred in Moscow are the three major translation
houses in the Union, each specializing in a particular
field. The Foreign Literature Publishers deals exclusively
with modern writers who are translated into Russian and
other Soviet languages. Its production is not limited to
literary works but ranges over the entire field of non-
It is this publishing house which has undertaken
the translation and publication of a Russian-language
edition of The Unesco Courier (see inside back cover).
The State Literary Publishers is the big classics
producer both Russian classics appearing in Russian
and translations of Russian and foreign classics into
Soviet languages. Thousands of Russian classics were
destroyed by the last war and the publishing house work¬
ed overtime for years to restore the supply. The third
major translating house is the Foreign Languages Pub¬
lishers which is limited to works translated from the
Russian into languages other than those of the Soviet
Union. The U.S.S.R. is a major book exporter, and most
of its exported books are printed in foreign languages.
Many of these foreign-language books are also used for
internal consumption (see below).
The people of the Soviet Union have so great a passion
for things cultural that it is said they will read any good
book they can lay their hands on. The works of Russian
authors such as Pushkin, Gorki, Leon Tolstoy, Chekov
Gogol and Mayakowsky are so popular that they have been
printed in editions running into millions of copies. Scores
of foreign authors have been no less successful. Victor
Hugo, Jack London, Mark Twain, Balzac, Jules Verne,
Dickens, O. Henry and Maupassant; to name only a few
have been favourites for many years and their translated
works have been published in editions totalling many
millions of copies.
Most translated of all foreign authors are the French,
followed by the Americans, the British and the Germans,
in that order. . Between 1918 and 1954, nearly 77 million
copies of French authors in translation appeared (the
volumes would fill a bookshelf running from Paris to Ber¬
lin) as well as over 50 million copies of translations of
American writers, 38 million volumes by British authors,
and 36 million by German writers.
Among French writers, Victor Hugo is by far the most
popular with over nine million copies of his books printed
in translation during the past 38 years. Charles Per-
rault's Fairy Tales is close behind having topped the eight
million mark, while Balzac, Jules Verne and Maupassant
are almost tied at six million copies, although Balzac has
a slight edge over his two compatriots. (For the names of
the 1955 leaders, see page 10)
The most popular U.S. writer in the past 38 years has
been Jack London, with Mark Twain and O. Henry close
behind him. Among British authors, Dickens has long
stood at the top of the list.
No. 1 American Author
Among contemporary Western writers who have become
"best sellers" in Russian and other Soviet languages,
two American names stand out: Theodore Dreiser and
Howard Fast (though neither has managed to obtain any¬
where near the same success in the United States) . Dreiser
is so popular in the Soviet Union that according to one
report few cultured persons in Moscow, Leningrad and
Kiev are unacquainted with at least one of his books.
Along with separate translations of his novels, a 12-
volume edition' of his collected works in Russian was un¬
dertaken in 1951. Though sales of his books cannot be
compared with those of the old standbys like Jack Lon¬
don, Mark Twain or O. Henry, he is well on his way to
becoming a "classic" in the Soviet Union.
Of contemporary French authors, Romain Rolland has
probably had the greatest sales. Between 1918 and 1954
almost 2,500,000 copies of his books had been printed, and
in 1955 a 14-volume edition of his works was Cont'd
launched. The same year saw the publication
of G.B. Shaw's Devil's Disciple, A.J. Cronin's °n
Hatter's Castle, Carlo Levi's Christ Stopped at next We
25

U.S.S.R. BOOK NEWS
(Continued)
Eboli, as well as translations of Lion Feuchtwanger, Stefen
Zweig, Halldor Laxness, and Martin Andersen Nexö (a
15-volume edition of his works was started in 1951).
Last year, a 570-page volume of Erskine Caldwell's
novels and short stories appeared and found a large
following. Scores of current British and American books
became "best sellers" including Cronin's The Citadel and
The Stars Look Down; Sinclair Lewis's Arrowsmith, Sean
O'Casey's play Juno and the Peacock, Upton Sinclair's
Jungle, along with 19th century authors such as Thackery,
Emily Brontë (Wuthering Heights) and Charlotte Brontë
(Jane Eyre). The year 1956 was also marked by a series of
translations of mystery stories and adventure. Rider
Haggard, Conan Doyle, William Wilkie Collins (Moon¬
stone). H.G. Wells's fantastic stories (War of the Worlds,
Invisible Man, etc.) appeared in two volumes. This year,
James Cain, author of The Postman Always Rings Twice,
will appear for the first time in a Russian translation.
One of the most talked about novels of recent years is
Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea, published
early in 1956 in the first two issues of a new magazine
Inostrannaya (Foreign) Literatura. This was Heming¬
way's first Russian translation in 17 years. In 1957, sev¬
eral of his novels and many of his short stories are
scheduled for publication in a special two-volume omnibus
edition.
In fact, 1957 promises to be a bumper year for contem¬
porary foreign works in translation. In a special report
to The Unesco Courier, A. Krassilnlkov, assistant director
of the Foreign Literature Press in Moscow, announces that
more than 540 titles are scheduled for translation this
year an increase of 20 per cent over 1956 production.
Editions totalling at least seven and a half million copies
are to be published of which four million copies will be
works of literature a high proportion for the Soviet
Union where political, social and economic publications
usually far outnumber literary works. Translations will
be made irom over 30 foreign (non-Soviet) languages.
Asian 'firsts' for 1957
published. One general work, dealing witn German,
Swiss, English and American authors between 1930 and
1940 has already gone to press; the translation of another,
->n contemporary Icelandic literature, is being completed.
As in past years many novelists and poets from the
People's Republic of China and the Popular Democracies
of Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia will be
translated. Twice as many Yugoslav prose and poetry
works will be published in 1957 as compared with last year.
(There are numerous book stores in Moscow, Leningrad
and other large cities devoted exclusively to the literature
of the Popular Democracies.) Some of the authors: Maria
Dombrovska (Poland); Sacharia Stanou (Rumania); Di-
mitri Tolev (Bulgaria) ; K. Sedlacek (Czechoslovakia) ;
M. Kranets (Yugoslavia) ; Lei Tsia, Chou Li-Bo (China).
A collection of short stories by 18 contemporary Indian
'writers as well as various Indian novels are at present in
press.
Long waiting lists
An interesting sidelight on Russian reading habits can
be noted in the number of foreign books read in their
original languages. It is not uncommon in Moscow
and other cities of the U.S.S.R. to find persons discussing a
contemporary French author they have read in the ori¬
ginal French or an American or British writer they have
read in English.
An American visitor to the Soviet Union recently report¬
ed that a young woman showed him her copy of a Soviet
edition of O. Henry in English. The size of the edition
20,000 copies was printed on the end page (as it is in all
Soviet books). Compared to Russian-language editions of
translated books this was small (a 1956 edition of Dreiser's
The Titan in Russian was printed in 225,000 copies).
"But," commented the visitor, '"imagine trying to sell
20,000 copies of a Russian-language edition of, say, Chekov,
in the United States."
The complete works of many foreign authors are often
available in their original languages in Soviet public li¬
braries, long before translations are undertaken. Thus,
all of Faulkner's and Hemingway's books in their Ame¬
rican editions have been on public library shelves for
years. Their books are in constant circulation and the
waiting lists are long (Russians read American, British and
French literature in great quantities). Extra English co¬
pies of Faulkner and other American authors have re¬
cently been ordered for the public libraries to meet the
growing demand.
Western European and American writers are to
receive special attention this year, Mr. Krassilnlkov
informed The Unesco Courier. Sean O'Casey's
selected works will appear for the first time in Russian in
a two-volume edition. The first volume by the Irish
novelist came off the press in January 1957 while the
second is due for publication at the end of the year.
Novels by Cronin, Steinbeck, Sinclair Lewis, François
Mauriac, and Vercors are scheduled for publication in
Russian this year, as are works by Italian, German, Swiss,
Canadian, Swedish and Argentine contemporary writers.
But for Western fiction, the most important translation
events of 1957 will be the two-volume Hemingway already
referred to, a volume of plays by Somerset Maugham, and
a volume of short stories by Nobel Prize winner William
Faulkner. The books by Maugham and Faulkner will be
the first to appear in the Russian language. Until now
only three of Faulkner's short stories have been published
in Russian. The first appeared in an anthology in 1934;
the second was printed in a magazine in 1935; the third
was published last year in Inostrannaya Literatura. As
Mr. Krassilnlkov reports, Faulkner and Maugham are
expected to arouse considerable interest among readers
throughout the Soviet Union.
Several other "firsts" are in store for Soviet readers this
year, the Foreign Literature Press announces. For the
first time Indonesian, Burmese and Thai works will be
translated into Russian, including a volume of short
stories by Tur Pramudia Anat of Indonesia, an anthology
of Burmese epic poetry, and a novel (Facing the Future)
by Si Burapa of Thailand. For the first time too, transla¬
tions of histories of literature by foreign authors will be
26
Soviet Information Service, Paris
ARCTIC CIRCLE BOOKSHOP. Well-stocked shelves
of bookstore at Kirovsk, a Russian town In the Kola
Peninsula, north of the Arctic Circle. Kirovsk, which
is an important scientific agricultural station, has
the only Polar Arctic Botanical Garden in the world.
