One of the least-known chapters in
the history of European painting
is the one written from mediaeval
times up to the Renaissance in lands
which are today encompassed by the
frontiers of Czechoslovakia. The Ro¬
manesque and Gothic art treasures of
Czechoslovakia have been carefully pre¬
served in its museums, castles and ca¬
thedrals but until recently they had never
been displayed outside its borders.
This year, for the first time, they were
shown abroad at an exhibition of ancient
Czech art at the Musée des Arts Déco¬
ratifs in Paris. The treasures assembled
in Paris included paintings, sculpture,
richly illuminated manuscripts dating
from the early Middle Ages down to the
Renaissance, rare examples of jewellery
and unusual prehistoric artifacts. It was
more than a unique exhibition; it was the
revelation of an art development practic¬
ally unknown to the world.
Particularly revealing was the art of
the 14th and 15th centuries which
marked a high point in the development
of Czechoslovak art.
However, in the old Czechoslovak
lands, as elsewhere, Gothic art did not
originate spontaneously. All great
artists have not only precursors but also
those who continué their work, and each
one builds on the achievements of
others. Prior to Gothic art there had
been a rich and complex evolution going
back to the earliest times. The country
stood at an important cross-roads of
Europe and this had a direct influence
on artistic development through the
contacts it facilitated with nearby lands.
These contacts began in very early
times. Recently, for example, traces
have been discovered of Christian cul¬
tural penetration in the 8th century.
The latest excavation of the foundations
of pre-Romanesque buildings and the
frequent discovery of large edifices, iden¬
tified as monasteries and churches, and
of houses in Prague all demonstrate the
importance of the initial period of Me¬
diaeval art in Czechoslovakia as well as
its astonishing wealth.
Though Romanesque art may. have
developed hesitantly in terms of figura¬
tive sculpture, the art of illuminating ma¬
nuscripts was already well established by
the end of the first millenium and its
masters went on to produce some extra¬
ordinary works.
As the Gothic period began the new
art found here a fertile soil for its deve¬
lopment. The representation of the
human form became of prime impor¬
tance,, inspiring masterpieces which
revealed a progressive emancipation from
the Byzantine influence.
With the development of Gothic art
during the 14th century and until the
revolt of the Hussites, religious ideas
themselves became more humanized.
The first Madonnas, dating from this
period, already reflect the artists' urge
to express the passions and emotions of
their fellow men.
This same artistic feeling radiates
from the countenance of the Virgins,
which found their most graceful expres¬
sion in the "Beautiful Czech Madonnas."
Yet it is also found in many other com¬
positions and notably in the magnificent
works of Theodoric, a master painter at
the court of Charles IV, whose paintings
are imbued with this spirit.
The Golden Age of Czech art indeed
owes much to Charles IV. The
son of King John of Luxembourg
(known as John the Blind), Charles was
brought up at the French Court in close
contact with great European humanists.
He built the castle of Karlstein close to
Prague and for its decoration he ordered
many paintings and frescoes. The walls
of the chapel at Karlstein The Chapel
of the Holy Crossare decorated with
Theodoric's paintings representing the
heads of saints.
Another great painter of this period
was the Master of Trebon (his real name
is unknown). Several of his works,
including The Entombment, Christ on
the Mount of Olives and The Resur¬
rection, rank among the outstanding
masterpieces of European mediaeval
painting. With a masterly use of shad¬
ing he has given them a plastic quality,
infusing into his scenes remarkable
effects of depth, breadth and intensity.
In the first half of the 15th century,
artists continued to draw inspiration
from the traditions of the previous epoch,
but added some new characteristics such
as landscapes in which the influence of
Dutch painters was apparent. At the
end of the 15th century and at the start
of the 16th, the Gothic style was losing
its vitality as the dawn of the Renais¬
sance began to shed its immortal light.
30

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
Josef Ehrn, Prague
THE MADONNA OF STRAKONITZ (detail) is one of the "Beautiful Czech Madonnas" which mark the zenith of Czech art in both sculpture
and painting and the full development of its originality. Dating from the middle of the I 4th century, it is carved in wood like most of the Madon¬
nas of this period. Originally in the church of St. Procopius at Strakonitz, it is now in the National Gallery, Prague. Masterpieces displayed at the
Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris, this year, revealed for the first time outside Czechoslovakia the wealth of this little-known art.
31

CZECH ART (Continued)
KNEELING SHEPHERD, an early 16th-
century wooden statue from the church of
St. James at Levoca In Slovakia. This is not
the work of a Czech sculptor. It was carved
by Master Paul of Levoca, the most outstand¬
ing of the Late Gothic artists of Slovakia
whose stylistic conception markedly influenced
the development of 16th-century Slovak art.
Tibor Honty, Prague
THE VIRGIN AND CHILD, a wooden
statue (c. 1390) from the church of St. Bar¬
tholomew (famed for its soaring, 337 ft.
spire) at Pilsen in Bohemia. Recent research
has Identified it as the work of the finest
of the Czech sculptors of that period.
National Gallery, Prague
32

The Unesco Courier. December 1937
National Gallery, Prague
THE APOSTLE (DETAIL). MID-UTH-CENTURY WOOD STATUE FROM CHURCH OF ST. JAMES AT BRNO. NOW IN BRNO'S MORAVIAN MUSEUM
33

mlmmâmmàm
imam tints mtus fir
ïfitotîotîmiitfnitrî
*r-faJ&fytto imtoitirmrmt
tiimmnttrmmvm
tofl qui troptât tt
iômttiinin Vitó
Iâ6 fOfttfftr CVttlOltCf
rdticr tonnas nttis
|itoffmt-6iapamer-
iOfâmomits Jtr
'ftttfliKft*
Oltrpitf
V_>\amrrorá
avattvfiîoimt
tiamüspfttmife
imams mimar
cjb mtirptajamar
^pt.MrtammGil
mm- «Dmami fo
]triyi4îVu
limita
íunrxim
iiîimfvmjmrsv
movatmttimuttt
iingflûimmiimJ
tfrnaian ftiftipor
vounntpttiftiipii
nomits-vrwtivf
trfimifaganmô
itmisattstw/
Ï4

Unknown treasure
In the Middle Ages illuminated manuscripts
were among the greatest artistic treasures of
Bohemia and Moravia. Recently, when some
of (the most remarkable of these manuscripts
dating from early mediaeval times to the Re¬
naissance were exhibited at the Musée des Arts
Décoratifs in Paris, they could truly be described
as "unknown treasures". The forthcoming
publication of the album, Czechoslovakia - Ro¬
manesque and Gothic Illuminated Manuscripts In
the Unesco World Art Series will bring these
treasures within the reach of all countries. On
these pages we reproduce three of the manu¬
scripts which will appear In colour in the Unesco
Album. (A fourth manuscript is reproduced in
colour on page 22 of this issue):
The Annunciation (opposite page) is from the
missal of the Bishop of Olomouc, probably John
of Streda. The Bishop is depicted kneeling at
the feet of the Virgin. In the centre of the
bottom margin are shown the arms of the
Bishopric of Olomouc. The missal (c. 1364),
is now In the St. Guy Capitulary Library, Prague.
The Embrace of Christ and the Holy Mother
(below, left) is from the famous Passional of
the Abbess Cunegonde and is now in the Uni¬
versity Library, Prague. It was copied and illu¬
minated about 1320 for Cunegonde, daughter
of a King of Bohemia and abbess of a Prague
convent. Her death in 1321 interrupted the
work and the manuscript remains unfinished.
Genealogy of Christ (below, right). Page of a
gospel book which was originally in the Vys-
cherad Capitulary Church, Prague. It is now in the
Library of the National Museum, Prague. This
work, probably executed for the coro¬
nation of King Vratislav in 1085, is also refer¬
red to as the Gospel Book of the Coronation.
The Unesco Courier. December 1957
CHURCH DIGNITARY executing a manuscript. Painting by the master
painter Theodoric who, as royal artist to the Emperor Charles IV, worked
for ten years (1357-1367) at Karlstein Castle, where the panel remains.
quAjifcniufmjríiuí
¿fcrntyttfrofiairti
Ufrntttbttiuyci
töinftstfamiiifem)
ttfentfWflWttrafo
uttftótmoulttttrí
ttpHtftuutfmeutn
fmetfll0u*ffl4tftai
rat»)»
^i-^â ^ a\Mm f mm) mtommÊm\^*^^Â^^ *t% i
gttt-jdtn premaní pi
ftytib/ttttiititftfittni
ôuttujtrfoamâsoi
taw (MJdTtftmnon
tatra&rtU0tâiU'$4i
W^rmmtrrmmmmw' W mymrm^^mwmjm^^mt ^mr ^m^r
Wilma qwdfztáats
^tfintt mout mttru
mftrttttuHicdfltttfl
rejtmaoquÄmfmi
âbytttttumetttft'iti
tin*latumCuitó
mdatiimttdtiinp
35

CZECH ART (Continued)
*'
THE RETABLE OF ST. GEORGE (c. 1470). Detail of the central panel of a Triptych representing
the Dormition of the Virgin. This Tryptich was originally in the church of the Benedictine Monastery
at Hradcany and is now in the National Gallery, Prague. It is attributed to a painter, simply identified
as the The Master of the Retable of St. George, one of the greatest late I Sth-century Czech artists.
VOTIVE PAINTING of John Ocko of Vlasim, Archbishop of Prague. Left, the Emperor Charles IV
(detail of the upper section of the panel). Right, Saint Ludmilla (detail of the lower section). This
panel is originally believed to have come from the chapel of Roudnitz Castle, the former residence of
the Archbishops of Prague. It is now in mediaevel art collection of the National Gallery, Prague.
Photos National Gallery, Prague
36
