RIÑE OF A
OWNING THE
LION'S ROCK
by Dr. S. Paranavitana
Professor of Archeology, University of Ceylon
W
VtëZmA
The elements of civilization were first introduced into
the Island of Ceylon, some five centuries before the
beginning of the present era, by an Aryan-speaking
peoplethe forefathers of the modern Sinhalesewho
came from Northern India and settled down there. When
the missionaries despatched by the great Indian emperor
Asoka preached the doctrines of Buddhism in the middle
of the third century B.C., the early Sinhalese had spread
themselves over almost the entire area of the Island and
founded a dynasty with its capital at Anuradhapura, in
the centre of the northern plains. The adoption of Bud¬
dhism by the Sinhalese marked the beginning of a period
of great building activity, designed to serve the needs
of their new faith, which gave an impetus to the growth
of the arts, including sculpture and painting.
Anuradhapura remained the capital of Ceylon for over
a thousand years. For a brief period of eighteen years
in the 5th century A.D. Sinhalese royalty moved its seat
to Sigiri, a city built with an impregnable rock fortress
as its central feature, situated some forty miles to the
south of Anuradhapuraan interlude which marked an
epoch in the history of painting in Ceylon.
Often during the first millenium and a half of their
history, the Sinhalese had to contend for the possession
of the Island with Tamil invaders from South India and,
in the first decade of the 11th century A.D., the greater
part of Ceylon was subjected to the mighty Chola empire.
24
When the Sinhalese regained their independence after
three-quarters of a century, the old capital Anuradhapura
was abandoned in favour of Polonnaruva, which was
the headquarters of the Chola rulers. In the 12th cen¬
tury, Polonnaruva witnessed a brilliant period, note¬
worthy for its political and military achievements, as
well as for the fostering of the arts. But this later efflor¬
escence of Sinhalese culture was of short duration and
was followed, in the third decade of the 13th century,
by the collapse of the ancient monarchy.
The history of the next three centuries is a tale of steady
decline. Those regions of the Island where the Sinhalese
achieved their greatest triumphs in architecture and art
became gradually depopulated and the seat of govern¬
ment was shifted at different times to various places in
the Western and Central districts. On the arrival of the
Portuguese, early in the 16th century, the Sinhalese
king had his abode at Kotte, close to modern Colombo.
The struggle with the Portuguese compelled the Sinha¬
lese to shift the seat of government to Kandy, which
had a natural defence in the mountains surrounding it.
In the meantime, Buddhism, the national faith which
provided the inspiration for most of the artistic achieve¬
ments of the Sinhalese, had sunk to a very low ebb.
There was a revival in the 18th century, when a number
of religious edifices were built anew and many ancient
shrines were restored, in the embellishment of which the
services of the painter were pressed into service.

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
Time has dealt severely with the vast quantity of paintings
which must have been produced during a period of over
two thousand years in Ceylon. The frescoes on the
walls of palaces and shrines have disappeared with the collapse
of thoses edifices. Paintings executed on wooden boards and
cloth, belonging to a date prior to the 18th century, are
no longer to be found, save for a few covers of ola (palm-leaf)
books, for such materials have a limited duration of life in
a climate like that of Ceylon. We have, therefore, from early
times, only such paintings as were in positions sheltered from
the weather and beyond the reach of destructive human hands.
The earliest remains of pictorial art in Ceylon are found
in a rock pocket at Sigiri, in the Mátale District, and can
be authentically dated as belonging to the 5th century. On
the summit of this well-nigh unscalable rock, which rises
600 ft. above the level of the surrounding plain, a Sinhalese
king, Kassapa I (circa 473-491 A.D.), fixed his abode so that,
as the chronicler informs us, he might be safe from his
enemies who were determined to mete out justice to him
for having murdered his father to secure the throne for
himself.
Hugging the perpendicular, and in some places overhanging
faces of the rock on the western and northen sides, a pathway
has been constructed, giving access to the summit. Halfway
up this pathway, on the northen side, is a plateau on which
has been built, in brick masonry, the forepart of a colossal
figure of a seated lion, projecting out of the rock face. A
flight of steps through the body of this lion has solved the
problem of taking the pathway above a perpendicular
stretch of the rock face. The figure of the lion has given
the rock the name by which it has since been known: Sigiri
means "Lion's Rock".
The pathway was protected at its outer edge by a brick
The colossal figure of a seated lion projecting
out of the cliff face has given the name "Sigiri"
(The Lion's Rock) to the enormous mass of
stone rising 600 feet from a plain in the Mátale
district of Ceylon. Here, in the 5th century a
parricide king, Kasappa, took refuge from his
enemies and built a handsome palace. The
tempera paintings of women similar to those
which still exist in an almost inaccessible rock
pocket at Sigiri may also once have covered a
large area of the western face of the Sigiri rock.
wall averaging eight feet in height and coated with lime
plaster so highly polished that, even today, after the lapse
of fifteen centuries, one can see one-s reflection in it. Hence,
the wall is appropriately known as Kadapat-pavura, "Mirror
Wall". Sections of the pathway that were open to the sky
have long since collapsed, but a good stretch, sheltered by
the overhanging rock, is still in a fairly good state of pre¬
servation. The rock pocket in which the frescoes are now
seen is at a height of about forty feet above the floor of this
pathway, generally referred to as the Gallery, on the western
face of the rock.
In olden days, there was no means of access to this rock
pocket, and the presence of the figures of women painted at
the place has to be explained as due to the fact that, formerly,
there were such painted figures over a very large area of the
western face of the rock, and that these only have been
preserved due to their being sheltered from the sun and rain.
Patches of plaster in the crevices of the rock outside the
pocket support this view, which is also confirmed by refer¬
ences in the graffiti on the Mirror Wall to five hundred
"golden-coloured ones" on the rock, whereas we have today
only twenty-one. figures. These graffiti also refer to figures
which could be touched by the hand as one proceeded along
the gallery and to a painting of a lady holding a flute in her
hand. No such paintings are to be seen now;
we have, therefore, to conclude that, in olden
days, there were many more figures than are
preserved at present.
The figures of women, somewhat less than
UNESCO Album "Ceylon"
SUDDHAVASA BRAHMAAn inhabitant of the Pure Worlds
(above) adoring Buddha. From a painting on the walls jaf a relic-
chamber (c. I Ith century) In the Mahiyangana Dagaba, a stupa or relic
mound, in the Uva Province, and one of Ceylon's most venerated
Buddhist shrines. Now in the Anuradhapura Museum. Below, a female
figure from frescoes at Sigiri with hands in a conventional dance pose.
IS

26

The Unesco Courier. December 1957
Buddhist artists have never tired of recounting in paint and
stone the jataka storiestales of Buddha's previous lives
before he attained Enlightenment. A favourite subject is
the temptation of Buddha by his great enemy, Mara, chief of
demons, who is often represented as attacking Buddha with
innumerable hosts of demons and monsters (below). Buddha
resisted the temptations of Mara and finally vanquished the
evil one whose downfall is depicted (bottom of opposite page)
with him being thrown from his elephant. Both these 18th-
century paintings are in the Dambulla cave temple in the
Mátale district. Another 18th-century Jataka painting (left)
from a cave temple, Degaldoruva Vihara, near the hill-capital,
Kandy, shows Prince Vessentara (the last but one of Buddha's
incarnations) riding in state upon a white elephant. This
treasured beast had the power of bringing rain, but the
prince, practising "the perfection of giving ", presented it to
another ruler, so angering his people that he was banished.
Reproducedfrom "Mediaeval Sinhalese Art" by Ananda K. Coomaraiwamy
3 - - - --
Photos UNESCO Album "Ceylon"
27

UNESCO Album "Ceylon'
EARTH-GODDESS, (Mahi-Kanta) painted on the ceiling of the cave temple at Degaldoruva, near Kandy. The goddess is bearing
witness to the Buddha's right to occupy the diamond throne at the foot of the Bodhi tree where he found Enlightenment. This
18th-century work dates from the period of the Buddhist revival in Ceylon when many ancient religious shrines were restored.
Reproduced from "Mediaeval Sinhalese Art" by Ananda K. Coomaraswamy
ROYAL RAIMENT. Sinhalese drawing of Sri Vikrama Raja Simha (last of the line of 18th-century Kandyan kings who were
great art patrons during the Buddhist revival) attended by his ministers. The king wears a shirt, tunic, cape, trousers, and
sandals, earrings, necklaces and pendants, and bears a lacquered arrow. Attendants hold pearl-fringed umbrellas and royal fans.
28

(Cont'd from p. 25)
life-size, are depicted in three-quarter profile as rising from
clouds, being cut off below the waist. Some are in pairs, a fair-
complexioned lady being 'attended by a dark-hued one, while
others are single figures. The golden-coloured ones are nude
above the waist, while the dark damsels are wearing breast-
bands. All are wearing jewellery in profusion, and have ela¬
borate coiffures. Some of the women hold trays of flowers
in their hands; others are holding or scattering flowers.
Some figures hold their hands in conventional dance poses.
The faces are oval in shape, with sensuous lips, while the hands
are delicate and expressive. The figures may be taken as
representative of feminine types common among the upper
classes of Sinhalese society in those days.
On grounds of style, the fragmentary remains of frescoes
in a cave at Hindagala, about six miles to the South-East of
Kandy, can be attributed to a period co-eval with, or some¬
what later than, those at Sigiri. Nothing is known about the
history of this ancient Buddhist monastery. There are inscrip¬
tions of the 6th or 7th century on rocks at the place, but
they do not mention its ancient name. The painting depicts
the Buddha surrounded by figures, presumably divine, in atti¬
tudes of adoration. As the Buddha is shown twice in the
same scene, it is clear that the method of continuous narration
has. been adopted by the artist.
The walls of the relic-chambers of some stupas in Ceylon
appear to have been covered with paintings which, of course,
would not have been seen by human eyes after the chambers
were sealed. A monument which has yielded fragmentary
remains of this type of fresco is the Mahiyangana Dagaba, a
stupa or relic-mound, in the Uva Province, one of the most
venerated of Buddhist shrines in Ceylon, which, in its historic
form, dates from about the second century B.C. But the
relic-chamber containing the paintings, opened in 1950,
belonged to a subsequent period of restoration, several cen¬
turies later. The plaster with the paintings had peeled down,
but many of the larger fragments were collected and carefully
joined together. The scene represented is the defeat of Mara,
the Evil One, by the Buddha, and the adoration of the Buddha
by heavenly beings after the victory. It is interesting to find
the sectarian gods of Puranic Hinduism, Siva and Vishnu,
among the celestial beings paying homage to the Buddha.
Inner sanctum for
Buddha's life scenes
Pictorial remains in a rock shelter called Pulligoda-galge,
near Dimbulagala in the Tamankaduwa District of the
North-Central Province, consist of four haloed divinities
seated on a carpet, probably the remnant of a large composition
in which gods were depicted as adoring the Buddha. This
painting has been ascribed to the 7th century by V.A. Smith,
but the fact that the deities are provided with haloes and the
general character of the drawing would indicate a much later
date. In caves on the adjoining hill of Dimbulagala, there
were, before a fanatic recently obliterated them, fragmentary
remains of paintings of the first half of the 12th century; the
same date appears to be reasonable for the frescoes at Pulli¬
goda-galge.
The paintings on the walls of the shrine anciently called
Tivamka-patima-ghara, at the mediaeval capital Polonnaruva,
dating from the reign of Parakramabahu I (1153-1186 A.D.)
The Unesco Courier. December 1957
or the decades immediately following, are, next to those of
Sigiri, the most important monuments of pictorial art which
Ceylon possesses. They prove that the classical tradition of
Indian painting, represented at Ajanta and Bagh, was kept
alive in Ceylon after it had lost its vitality in India itself.
These paintings have suffered badly from neglect since they
were first brought to light over half a century ago, but what
remains today is impressive enough.
As is to be expected of paintings in a building dedicated to
religion, their subjects are of an edifying nature, and the
artists seem to have followed a set scheme in. the decoration
of the walls. Scenes illustrating the previous lives of the
Buddha, while he was yet perfecting the virtues which led to
the final attainment of Supreme Wisdom the Jataka Stories,
as they are known among the Buddhists are painted on the
walls of the vestibule; the inner sanctum was reserved for
scenes depicting episodes in the life of the Buddha after the
Great Awakening.
. Almost every shrine at Polonnaruva of the Xllth century
contained frescoes on the walls; even the exterior was
brilliantly painted with floral designs, as may be judged from
traces yet visible. Apart from the frescoes in the Tivamka
shrine, however, the only noteworthy example of a painting
at Polonnaruva is the figure of a bearded old man in the
rock-cut shrine at the Gal Vihara monastery. The centre of
the rock wall at the back of the cave is occupied by a Buddha
image in high relief.
Ancient works inspire
cultural renaissance
The classical school of Sinhalese painting seems to have
ceased to exist after the fall of the Polonnaruva king¬
dom. At any rate, we do not possess any examples of
its work after the 13th century. It is from the 17th and 18th
centuries that we have, once again, examples of the work
of a school of indigenous painters. This school does not seem
to have had its roots in the artistic traditions which created
the masterpieces of Sigiri and Polonnaruva.
The subjects painted by Kandyan artists, on the other hand,
have much in common with those of earlier masters. The
representations of Jataka Stories were as popular then as at
any other epoch in the history of Buddhism.
Paintings of this school are found today at Degaldoruva
near the hill-capital, Kandy, at Dambulla in the Mátale District,
an impressive cave temple dating from pre-Christian times, but
redecorated in the 18th century, and at Ridi Vihara and
Kaballalena, shrines of similar historical character in the
Kurunagala District. Artists of this school were employed to
paint shrines built in the Maritime Provinces in Dutch and
early British times; for instance, Mulgirigala in the Hamban-
tota District and Telvatta in the Galle District.
It will thus be seen that there was considerable artistic acti¬
vity among painters in Ceylon during the course of its history
of over two thousand years, and that the old masters, mostly
anonymous, have succeeded in creating works of a high aesthe¬
tic standard. These ancient works of art have had and still
have a profound influence on the artists of present-day Ceylon,
who are striving to bring about a cultural renaissance in the
Island. The splendid colour reproductions of selected
examples from the pictorial art of ancient Ceylon, which
Unesco is now making available to lovers of art throughout
the world, will undoubtedly result in gaining for them a far
greater circle of admirers than they have ever had.
