Hermann Hesse
FAIRY TALE
IN PARADISE
Hermann Hesse has been rank¬
ed with Thomas Mann as "'the
greatest contemporary German
author," yet his writings were
little known outside German-
speaking countries until he won
the Nobel Prize for Literature
in 1946. Since then the author
of Steppenwolf, Narcissus and
Goldmitnd, Siddharta, Magister
Lttdi, and Demian has become
one of the world's most trans¬
lated authors (see the Unesco
Courier, Feb. 1957: 104 trans¬
lations published between 1948-
1955; 16 of his great philo¬
sophical novels translated in
Japan alone during 1955).
Hesse, born in Germany 80 years ago, has lived in Swit¬
zerland since 1912 and became a Swiss citizen in 1923.
In 1921, an album of his water colours, Elf Aquarelle aus
dem Tessin (Eleven Water Colours of the Canton of Ticino)
was issued by a Munich publisher. One of these, The village
of Ticino, is reproduced here. But perhaps Hesse's most
interesting undertaking as an artist is his delightful, though
unfortunately untranslated and little-known fairy tale Piktor's
Verwandlungen (The Metamorphosis of Piktor) which he
wrote and illustrated in the twenties. The tiny volume was
produced with the text either in Hesse's own handwriting
or typewritten, the illustrations for each copy being hand-
coloured by Hesse. For each copy Hesse modified his draw¬
ings according to his mood of the moment. A facsimile
edition of one of the handwritten manuscript copies was
published in 1954 by a German publisher, Suhrkamp Verlag
(Frankfurt-am-Main). The two illustrations, left, are taken
from this manuscript copy.
The Metamorphosis of Piktor is a fairy tale about a young
man, Piktor (the German word contains the meaning of
"painter") who arrives in Paradise in search of happiness.
He finds a world peopled by trees which are both man and
woman, moon and sun. He watches a bird turn into a
flower, then into a butterfly, then into a dazzling precious
stone. Learning that the stone will grant his wish, he seizes
it and asks to become a tree. For years he is content to be
a tree, until he realizes that everything else round him can
change form at will. True happiness, he discovers, requires
change. But Piktor remains a tree until one day a beautiful
girl appears and sits beneath his tree. A bird flies past,
drops the magic jewel from its beak. On picking it up, the
girl's secret wish is immediately granted. She turns into a
branch on the Piktor-tree and
rises until she is alongside him.
From a half-tree Piktor has
become a full-tree. Henceforth
he is able to change into any
form he wants and has found
true Paradise. "He became a
deer, he became a fish, he
became a man, a snake and a
cloud and a bird. But in every
shape he was complete for he
was a pair. In him he had the
sun and the moon, man and
wife; he flowed like a twin-
stream through the land, and
stood like a double-star in the
heavens." Inset (right) is from
a typewritten manuscript.
