AN AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE
TO FORTY MILLION CHILDREN
UNICEF
'ASSIGNMENT CHILDREN', took comedian Danny Kaye to the Far East in 1954 to film the work of
the United Nations Children's Fund in Burma, Hong Kong, India, Korea, Japan and Thailand. His film,
translated Into I 8 languages, was seen by more than 90,000,000 people. Here, on the steps of a Buddhist
temple near Bangkok, Danny Kaye endears himself to Thai schoolchildren by joining in a game of handball.
by Danny Kaye
I have some sober advice to offer in case an ambassa¬
dorship ever comes your way, and if you think it
couldn't happen to you, you'd better think again. It
happened to me and I was born in Brooklyn.
In the past three years I've travelled 100,000 miles across
Europe and Asia and into Africa as a special ambassador
for unicef, an organization that this year will give milk
and medical aid to some 40,000,000 under-privileged chil¬
dren throughout the world. I carry a United Nations
document so big you have to fold it six times to get it into
your pocket. It's very effective with customs guards from
Algiers to Bombay: but all its fancy language means, I've
found out, is simply, "Let this bum t'ru."
And that's not all I've learned. An ambassador may be
called upon to speak any language from Tagalog to Thai.
But don't let this scare you; languages are a snap. I
wasn't in France more than a week, for example, when I
was able to say to the benefit audience in Paris, "Je ne pas
trense electrol ensi tren toi". Pretty, eh? Imagine my
dismay when the audience laughed. It was all straighten¬
ed out when a friend explained that what I had said was,
"I can't help the train although the rattlesnake is
limping."
Not knowing languages, you can, of course, use an inter¬
preter. But you must know how to use him. I advise
breaking your sentences into even fragments. In Spain
last summer I used an interpreter because my Spanish is
not as good as my French. Greeting the audience, I said:
«T at
The interpreter translated: "Yo..." I said: "... am..."
The interpreter said: "... soy..." I said: "... very..." The
interpreter said: "... muy..." I countered: "...glad to be
able to meet with you ladies and gentlemen to talk about
the great work being done by the United Nations Chil¬
dren's Fund."
Such thoughtfulness toward an interpreter is bound to
be repaid many times by his undying gratitude. We can
dismiss the reaction of my interpreter on that day as
atypical.
The next rule I learned as an ambassador is also very
important: Always observe protocol.
The best way I can define protocol is to illustrate. In
Vienna, I called on Austrian President Theodor Körner at
the Imperial Castle. That day I had paid my respects to
the mayor, the minister of social welfare and the minister
of finance. My feet were killing me. When Herr Körner
came into the hall to greet me, he stood and talked. When
my feet could no longer take it, I asked him, "Wouldn't
you like to sit down?"
"But I'm supposed to ask youHe was flabbergasted,
that", he said.
"So ask me," I replied, grinning. This is what is known
as protocol.
Perhaps the most important ambassadorial rule of all
is this: Neglect no one. In Bonn last year, Unicef officials
gave me a banquet. One by one those at the head table
rose and proposed a toast to the guest of honour, me.
Each time, when the toast ended, we all stood and drank.
We were two thirds of the way through the brass when
I jumped up, raised my glass and shouted: "To the
gentlemen who serve Unicef! The Waiters!" And so
everyone stood and drank a toast to the waiters.
By now I hope you realize I'm jesting. I know no more
about protocol than what common sense tells me. You
couldn't get a top hat on my head because a golf cap is
usually there already. As for foreign
languages, I don't know themnot even
French. Continued
Nevertheless, I'm an ambassador, even
though the form of diplomacy I practice page 10
is limited to the little world of laughter.

The Unesco Courler. October 1937
MAN WITH A MISSION
Since 1954 Danny Kaye has travelled 100,000 miles across Europe and Asia and
into Africa as a special ambassador for UNICEF. He has seen and talked to the sick,
handicapped and undernourished children being helped by UNICEF, and with his
clowning, miming and dancing has administered his own particular brand of medicine-
laughter. Here he is seen in Nigeria where he visited a leper settlement.
UNICEF photos

AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE (*,«,
I've played to 6,000 Israelis jammed into an amphitheatre
beside the Sea of Galilee, and to a mere half dozen Greek
kids seated in a polio bath in an Athens rehabilitation
centre. I've clowned before 20,000 Turks at a children's-
day parade in Ankara, and before half a. hundred kids
with yaws in Thailand. I'm not swaggering about all
this, for the truth is that my association with Unicef
was an accident. I was about to leave for the Orient on
a tour three years ago when Maurice Pate, Unicef's
executive director, asked me if I'd look in on some of
his organization's outposts. I did and I haven't stopped
looking since.
I've seen a little Siamese boy whose skin was almost
overcome by infectious yaws cleaned up in three weeks
with one shot of penicillin; I've seen Korean kids drinking
milk who'd never seen milk before. I've seen some unplea¬
sant things, too, like Moroccan children disregarding the
clusters of flies on their faces, not because they were lazy,
but because to brush them off would do no good. The flies
would only come back. I've played ball with little Italian
boys balanced on one leg or catching with stumps of arms.
But wherever I wentand I travelled through 24 coun¬
triesI found unicef staffs giving the kids the same
devotion, the same quality of helpcolour and country
of origin no matter. That's what really got me.
So I did a little work to help these
kidsmy. kind of work. I tried to
make them laugh. I played to crowds
that had never heard of America, had
never seen a movie, couldn't tell the
difference between Danny Kaye and
Santa Claus, and what's more,
couldn't understand what Kaye was
saying.
So what? Kids 'will laugh at any
man willing to act like an idiot. To
those kids, I was the funny man with
the red hair.
I'd walk funny, and make faces.
I'd get mixed up in dances, I'd mimic
every kid I could. If he covered his
mouth, I'd cover mine ; if he waved
me away, I'd wave back. And I'd
listen hard to get the rhythm and
sound of his language, because among
other things I learned in my Unicef
travels that people flip if you utter
so much, as a single phrase of their
tongue. In a Roman polio ward, I
watched a nurse leading a group of
little boys in abdominal exercises. At
her count of "one", the youngsters,
lying on their backs, would arch their
bodies. At her count of "two", they
would recover. "Uno... due", she went,
"uno... due."
I asked if I could count too. She
said I could. I counted: "Uno...
cinque." Just that delighted those
little boys.
I have no desire to create the
impression that I think all kids are !
good, or even that I like all kids.
There are good kids and bad, and I like some and not
others. Some kids don't like me. But good or bad, Greek
or Siamese, their reactions are always the same. And so
are reactions to them especially when they're sick.
Adults want to make them well. I haven't met one yet
who didn't, and I've been looking for three years and
100,000 miles;
I went to Zagora, Morocco, in the summer of 1956. It's a
tiny town of 667 people who live in an ancient fortress
built on the desert. Zagora in the summer is frightening-
ly hot, dusty and insect-ridden a climate favourable to
conjunctivitis, an eye inflammation that usually paves the
way for a contagious disease called trachoma. Trachoma
strikes mainly at children. Often it blinds them. In some
southern areas of French Morocco, it blinds them all.
Three years ago, after a government study of preventive
treatments, 17 teams of health workers spent five months
in heat that reached 115 degrees treating the entire popu¬
lation of one foothill area. Twice a day for half a year,
10
Kamerabild, Stockholm 1957
IN SERIOUS MOOD during his European
trip for UNICEF, Danny Kaye tells a group of
young doctors at the Stockholm Medical
institute about the varied world-wide activities
of the United Nations Children's Fund,
they treated the eyes of 114,000 people with antibiotic
ointment. That summer, there was no conjuctivitis there..
I can't forget Luc.Dulière, one of the doctors in this
campaign. A young man, he came from France to devote
his life to the trachoma programme. I can't forget him
because every three or four weeks he gets conjunctivitis
himself. He cures himself and he keeps on working.
Because of devotion like this, Morocco's war against tra¬
choma is on the edge of success.
But Unicef personnel and local officials and World
Health Organization experts with whom they co-operate
cannot easily step into a community and go to work
immediately.. Often they must first overcome ancient
fears. Unicef workers four years ago set up a maternity
and child health centre in a small Syrian village. They
were ready for business, but they had none. Their
methods were foreign. They were suspect.
One evening a nurse midwife, trained by Unicef, was
roused from her bed by an insistent knocking at her door.
Several Arab men. stood outside. "Come quickly," one of
them urged. A cow was calving, and in trouble. If Unicef
knew all about delivering babies, here, said the men, was
a chance to prove it. The midwife rushed off with them
to the scene of the difficulty. There was little she could
do. But she did that little. In time the calf arrived. The
next day, there were women and children at the clinic.
I found perhaps the most striking story of the fight
against superstition in Nigeria. The
man who leads this fight is a fifty-
year-old Irish doctor who could very
well double for Barry Fitzgerald,
hanging eyeglasses and all. His
name is Charles McConnaughy Ross.
Ross went to Nigeria 28 years ago to
fight leprosy.
If he lives long enough, Dr. Ross
may- well see the end of leprosy. A
relatively new group of drugs
sulfone has revolutionized treatment
of the disease. Until a few years
ago to be a leper meant social
and economic ostracism. Today
lepers have begun to walk among
their people. The new drugs reduce
the symptoms and in many cases
hasten recovery. As a result lepers
who had stayed in hiding for fear of
being ostracized and had un¬
wittingly endangered their families
are now coming out of hiding for
treatment.
All this means much more than
just what appears on the surface.
The world's less fortunate people are
beginning to understand that the
more fortunate want to help them.
To the Nigerian or Moroccan this is
overwhelming knowledge. For per¬
haps the first time, he can see a life
of work instead of beggary. The
people I have met are proud people ;
they'd rather work than beg. Now
that they are being helped, they are
beginning to help themselves. They
are taking independent measures to
protect their health.
One of my firmest beliefs is that there is no common
formula for happiness. Each human being finds happiness
in his own way and time. To a Nigerian leper the idea
of mingling with nonlepers is happiness. I remember a
welcome I received at a leper settlement in northern
Nigeria. The lepers formed a large, thick circle, and when
drummers set upon their drums, some children began to
dance. I felt like dancing too so I got up and started
dancing with them. . Suddenly out from the crowd came a
young lady a leper to dance with me. We faced off,
shuffled feet, swirled and circled as though we had
rehearsed the dance for weeks. I had a great time, and so
did my partner. So did the audience laughing at us.
To be laughed at, you know, is the nature of comedy. At
one point I wanted to be a doctor, because the idea of
making people happy appealed to me. I never became a
doctor but I think I've made people happy by making
them laugh. And I think when you make someone laugh,
you're giving him medicine.
