TO SUIT ALL TASTES.
Drawings by the famous Bra¬
zilian author Gilberto Freyre
illustrate the remarkable va¬
riety of beard styles in vogue
in 19th century Brazil. From
Freyre's Sobrados e Mucambos,
published by Livraria José
Olympio, Rio de Janeiro ©.
CCO0 he died but not in humilia-
O tion or defeat. Before giving
up the ghost, he placed upon
his head a crown not an old hat or
a tub that might offer the spectators
tangible evidence of his madness. No,
indeed, Rubiao picked up a handful of
nothing and encircled his head with it;
he alone saw the imperial insignia,
heavy with gold, glittering with dia¬
monds and other precious stones. The
effort that he had made to raise him¬
self did not last long; his body fell
back again, but his face preserved its
look of radiant exultation. 'Take
care of my crown', he murmured."
The excerpt is from one of the
world's most fascinating novels on
insanity. The author: Joaquim Maria
Machado de Assis, Brazil's greatest
19th century novelist. The book:
Quincas Borba which, after attracting
wide critical acclaim when published
recently in England and the United
States, has now been issued in a
French translation in Unesco's series
of Latin American classics.
Philosopher or dog?
The theme of the book is the mad¬
ness of the hero, Rubiao. Ma¬
chado de Assis was himself an
epileptic and throughout his whole life
he was haunted by the fear of losing
his mind. He was born in 1839 of a
coloured family and his mother died
when he was still a boy. Severely han¬
dicapped by ill-health and poverty in
his early years and obliged to earn
his living as a petty government offi¬
cial, he nevertheless managed to raise
himself by incessant work to a high
position in Brazil's cultural élite.
His first attempts at poetry, drama
26

HUMOUR-AN ANTIDOTE
FOR MADNESS?
and fiction were discouraging, and his
success as a novelist in later years
paralleled the increasing severity of
his disease. From 1892 onwards, as
his fits became more frequent, he
published his best novels: Epitaph of
a Small Winner, Quincas Borba, Dom
Cazmurro, Jacob and Esau. His cyni¬
cal humour became a defense against
sickness a sort of bitter philosophy
of life.
Machado's novel Quincas Borba
tells the story of Rubiao, a provincial
school-teacher who, almost by acci¬
dent, inherits a large fortune. Ru-
biao's benefactor is Quincas Borba,
the mad philosopher, who on dying
names Rubiao his sole heir upon
condition that the latter takes care of
Quincas's dog. Oddly enough, the
name of the dog is also Quincas
Borba, and hence the doubt as to
whether the philosopher or the dog
gives his name to the book.
Rubiao, then, suddenly becomes a
man of wealth. He leaves his native
village and settles in Rio de Janeiro.
Soon, of course, he is surrounded by
hangers-on and spongers of all kinds.
The episodes described, though purely
incidental, provide an interesting side¬
light on the life of the Brazilian
middle-classes at the end of the nine¬
teenth century.
The real story, however, is the
problem of the simple Rubiao, whom
Machado de Assis exhibits as a lover,
man of wealth, politician a pathetic,
egotistical clown bent on creating his
own comic downfall. His madness
stems chiefly from the doctrine which
Quincas Borba had bequeathed to
him before he died.
To the victor, potatoes
Quincas Borba (who identifies
himself with Saint Augustine)
explains his philosophy of "Hu¬
manity" as follows: "Humanity is the
principle. In all things there is a cer¬
tain hidden and identical substance, a
principle, unique, universal, eternal,
common, indivisible and indestruc¬
tible... Humanity... sums up the uni¬
verse, and the universe is man...
There is no death. The encounter of
two expansions, or the expansion of
two forms may determine the suppres¬
sion of one of them; but, actually,
there is no death; there is life, because
the suppression of one is conditional
upon the other's survival, and the des¬
truction does reach the universal and
common principle."
To explain his theory more fully to
Rubiao, Quincas illustrates it by the
story of a potato field and two
famished tribes. If the two tribes
were to divide the field of potatoes
peacefully, they would die of starva¬
tion, for there are not enough potatoes
for everybody; but if one of the tribes
exterminates the other, this suppres¬
sion is only partial destruction: "To
the vanquished, hatred or compassion;
to the victor, the potatoes." Hence
the preservative and beneficent nature
of war.
As soon as Rubiao understands the

The Unesco Courier. June 1957
significance of this doctrine, he makes
up his mind to become hard and ruth¬
less so as to fully enjoy the potatoes
life at last has offered him. He does
it in such a way that he dissipates all
his wealth within a few months and,
though the woman he loves receives
his attentions with indifference, he
finally triumphs over the frustration
of reality by donning the crown of
Louis Napoleon not in exile and
defeat, but rather as an emperor trium¬
phant and victorious over all his ene¬
mies. Forgotten is all the sad failure
of a futile and insignificant little life
in that supreme gesture of picking up
nothing and placing it on his head
to the accompaniment of the exultant
cry: "To the victor..."
Penniless and sick, Rubiao escapes
from the hospital where his friends
have taken him, and goes back to die
in his native village together with
Quincas Borba, the faithful dog the
old philosopher left him in his will
and in whom Rubiao comes to see a
reincarnation of the philosopher him¬
self. Three days after Rubiao's death,
the dog, which is unable to live with¬
out his adopted master and is pining
for him, is found dead in the street.
All one to the stars
In this bitterly ironic novel, peopled
with cynical politicians, grafting
officials, speculating financiers
and social parasites, the women stand
out as the most gracious characters.
There is beautiful, virtuous, though
weak-willed and superficial Sophia,
and the generous and noble Dona Fer¬
nanda, whom Machado de Assis prob¬
ably patterned after his own wife.
As for Rubiao, he finally finds hap¬
piness in madness and this is the
theme which Machado's genius deve¬
lops. In Machado's sardonic inter¬
pretation of life, ridicule and sympa¬
thetic understanding flow together.
Life, he says to us, is wholly un¬
concerned with man's suffering. "If
you have tears", he concludes, "weep
for these two not long dead. But if
you have only laughter, laugh. It is
all the same. The Southern Cross...
is too high in the heavens to be able to
distinguish between man's laughter
and tears."
FROM THE FAMILY ALBUM. DAGUERREOTYPE OF A TYPICAL BRAZILIAN FAMILY OF THE 1850'S. FROM PAULISTA MUSEUM COLLECTION, SAO PAULO
27
