Two Great Russian Artists : Rublëv and Theophanes
Soviet art critics are today making a
thorough study of the works of
Theophanes the Greek and Andrei
Rublëv, the two most outstanding artists of
the 14th and 15th centuries in Russia.
Until recently, very little was known about
them and most information was based more
on fiction than on fact. The works of
Rublëv, for instance, were formerly attri¬
buted to the Novgorod school of painting,
an error arising from the fact that until
recently no other schools of 14th and 15th-
century Russian painting were known.
Although much still remains to be disco¬
vered about their lives, their works can
now be as surely identified as those of the
ancient Greek sculptors Phidias and Myron
or the Italian painters Masaccio and Fra
Angélico.
The true greatness of Theophanes and
Rublëv has been revealed to us largely by
Soviet restoration experts who have restored
the frescoes of cathedrals in Novgorod,
Moscow, Vladimir and other towns. Soviet
art critics have contributed to a better
understanding of the art of these masters,
explaining it as an expression of the great
period of Russian history when the Tartar
yoke was thrown off and the unification of
the country began.
Theophanes the Greek came from Byzan¬
tium, arriving in Russia at the* end of the
14th century. His work .unquestionably
resembles that of the Byzantine masters of
the 14th century, but his highly original
creative efforts place him beyond the
bounds of Byzantine art.
One cannot resist drawing a comparison
between Theophanes and another great
Greek artist, Dominico Theotocopuli, called
16
by Mikhael Alpafov
Member of the Fine Arts
Academy of the U. S. S. R.
El Greco. El Greco received his first
training on his native isle of Crete ; later
he studied in Venice, but his long stay in
Toledo, his adopted home, made of him a
typical representative of Spanish art. In
similar fashion Theophanes' genius came
to full flowering in Russia.
The stern, passionate nature of Theo¬
phanes' art is clearly demonstrated in his
icon of the Virgin in the iconostasis of the
Blagoveschensky cathedral in the Kremlin
at Moscow, painted in 1405. Here the ar¬
tist tempered the force of his passion,
given full rein in the Novgorod frescoes, but
his hand is clearly discernible in the blue
draperies enveloping the Virgin, in the soft
drawing of her features, and in the prayer¬
ful attitude of her extended hands.
It is known that Rublëv worked with
Theophanes in the Blagoveschensky cathe¬
dral. By right of seniority Theophanes'
name comes first in the chronicles. So
different is Rublëv's work from that of
Theophanes that some critics have called
them representatives of opposite schools of
art: Theophanes of the "picturesque style",
Rublëv of trTe "graphic or icon style".
As, a matter of fact, Rublëv is as fine a
painter and colourist as Theophanes, but
the poetry with which he imbues his art is
of an entirely different order. The art of
Theophanes is ardent, impassioned, drama¬
tic, full of movement, contrast, and psy¬
chological tension. The art of Rublëv is
mild and expresses exquisite lyricism, spi¬
rituality and harmony.
The most mature and most famous work
by Andrei Rublëv is his "Trinity". At first
this icon adorned the iconostasis of the Tri¬
nity cathedral at the Monastery of the Tri¬
nity and St. Sergius near Moscow. At
present it is one of the most valuable
acquisitions of the mediaeval Russian
collection of the Tretyakov Gallery.
In his '"Trinity" Rublëv uses the Biblical
legend of the appearance of the Godhead
to man. The Godhead is incarnated in the
lovely forms of three youths.
With the laconism of genius the artist
conveys the finest nuances of expression as
these three youths converse together ; he
tells us they are united in love, that the
will of each is subordinated to that of all,
and that all three are saddened by a
contemplation of the sufferings awaiting,
one of them. The greatest charm
of the colouring is the purity and
brightness of the tints, especially of the
light blue. These gleaming tints are in
complete harmony with the lucid, balanced
composition of the icon.
Theophanes the Greek and Andrei Rub¬
lëv were contemporaries of the Italian
and Flemish artists of the early Renais¬
sance. The work of both masters, repre¬
sentative as it was of mediaeval Russian
painting, differs greatly from that of the
founders of the realistic school in western
Europe. Modern criticism, however, has
admiration for the artistic achievements of
both schools. In the Soviet Union, An¬
drei Rublëv is particularly beloved. By a
decree of the Soviet Government, the An-
dronikov monastery in Moscow where
Rublëv was buried in 1430, has been
turned into the Rublëv museum.

..~"S7 V ' m
The Unesco Courier. December 1957
] ' " * ' ' ' ' ' ' . i
; ^ .- . ?
¡R 7-x' . 'if ï
V
i*
£W ' t
I^^SHn^^B Hb ^ >*
1 ^Qr Bf Sj\ i
'W ^íí
/íj|j y\Ä-
/ ;$L¿A ''//»>
^m^fcjj-r' 4 '
v'*' ~- ^í- '^SK*1*»
UNESCO Album "U.S.S.R."
HIGHEST EXPRESSION of mediaeval Russian ¡con painting is found in The Trinity (above) and detail (left) painted about 1411 by Andrei Rublëv,
in whose works the aesthetic ideals of the Moscow school of painting came to full flower. At first this icon was kept in the cathedral of the Trinity
at Zagorsk, near Moscow. Regarded as one of the world's great masterpieces, it is now a treasured item in the mediaeval Russian collection of the
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow. Opposite page (far left), detail from The Virgin (See also p. 18) by Theophanes the Greek, who came to Russiafrom Byzan¬
tium in the 14th century. The true greatness of Theophanes and Rublëv has been revealed to us largely by Soviet restoration experts who have
worked on the frescoes of cathedrals in Novgorod, Moscow, Vladimir and other towns, during dozens of research and restoration expeditions.
17

Great Russian
Icon Painters
(Continued)
	T - T.. . -»T-*"
1
Up** . L _Mg|
mmum^
1
' "** tWWm i
i
JÍlaafl
54 mW* À\\
m> -* Am
1
t
i Am
I
p
p
VH
1
1
Id B^^^^H PWj
UNESCO Album 'USS.R."
TWO ARTISTS, SAME SUBJECT. These paintings of the
Virgin show how two of Russia's great artists gave individual
expression to the same subject. Above, The Virgin from the
Cathedral of the Annunciation, in the Kremlin, painted by
Theophanes in 1405. Left, Virgin painted by Rublëv when he
decorated the Uspensky Cathdral, in Vladimir, in 1408. True
beauty of old Russian ¡cons was hidden under metal settings or
layers of overpainting. When their cleaning was first undertaken
it was found that the mediaeval paintwork had been well preser¬
ved and had acquired the firmness and close texture of bone.
18
