FAMOUS AUTHORS
AS ARTISTS
******
? « * * *
* £ -i * A
6 ** .Í
"ONE MAY LIVE WITHOUT MEAT, but one
cannot dispense with bamboo. Lack of meat makes
one lean but lack of bamboo leads to vulgarity."
So runs a line of the famous poet-painter Su Tung P'o,
whose "Bamboo Branch" is reproduced above.
4.
by Bertha Gaster
Q Cavante once prepared to paint an angel", wrote the famous
1 J English poet Robert Browning, recreating Dante's descrip¬
tion of himself when he settled down to his only attempt
at painting when,
"Certain people of importance...
Entered and would seize forsooth, the poet.
Says the poet 'Then I stopped my painting'."
For Browning, the poet's desire to express himself, if only once,
in a medium alien to his genius, was inspired by love. "'Whom to
please? You whisper Beatrice. " Yet time and again great masters
of their own craft have been tempted by the sister arts, sometimes
in relaxation or play, sometimes in serious emulation. Raphael
wrote sonnets lost unfortunately, so we may never know their
value; Michelangelo wrote sonnets, and they have passed into the
Italian literary heritage. Ingres played the violin with passion, and
the phrase violon d'Ingres has passed into the French language
to describe any hobby.
Writers and poets, however, seem to have been more attracted to
the brush than painters to the pen, and the tradition goes back a
long way. It is said that Euripedes was fond of drawing, and that
it was one of Petrarch's amusements in his hours of ease. In
various civilizations a certain ability to paint or draw was as much
a part of a gentleman's education as the power to touch a lute
gracefully or turn a sonnet was in Renaissance Italy or Elizabethan
England. Under the Guptas in India, for example, from the fourth
to the sixth century, even the kings indulged in the painting of
miniatures, and every cultivated man owned his set of brushes and
.paints, though none of their works exists to-day.
With a few exceptions, however, the cultivated man who plays
with the arts, or the great writer who dabbles in painting or drawing,
is rarely more than a gifted amateur. It is the glory of China to
have produced, from the eighth to the twelfth centuries, a
constellation of poet-painters :" gentlemen-painters", they were
called to whom painting, writing and calligraphy were arts to be
practised in leisure hours when free from their duties as high and
responsible Government officials. Yet their poems are among the
finest jewels of Chinese literature, and their paintings enjoy the same
reputation, though few fully authenticated specimens survive.
The basis of their technical mastery was a profound study of
calligraphy, which in China, it should be remembered, is an art of
the brush. It is appreciated as a form of abstract painting, as a
"dance on paper", and the same technique in line and brush stroke,
the same standards of criticism, applied equally to the masterpieces
of handwriting and painting, all of the three arts, as it were,
intermingling. "When enjoying myself with Wang-Wei's poems,"
said Su Tung p'o, "I find pictures in them; when looking at Wang-
Wei's pictures I find in them poems."
Wang-Wei (699-759 A.D.), who for most of his
life occupied one important Government post after
another, and ended his life in Buddhist retreat, was
one of the earliest and greatest of the "gentlemen-
painters." Music, calligraphy, poetry, gardening,

AUTHOR-ARTISTS
(Continued)
Line-and-brush 'dances on paper'
with China's gentlemen-painters
painting, in all of which he passed as
a master, were to him all alike as
pleasant recreations of his spare time.
His poems live today as part of
Chinese literature; his paintings
but listen to the tale told long ago by
one of his early biographers of
how one of them was accidentally
discovered.
The picture was called "Clearing
after Snowfall on the Mountains
. Along a River", and had been hidden
for many years in a lacquered bamboo
tube serving as a door bolt, which
eventually broke, revealing the scrolls.
"At first", related the owner, "I did
not believe in it, but after looking at
it several times my spirit was aroused.
I closed my door, burned incense, and
made myself free from all other
thingsthen I felt
the spirit of the 	
mountains, the
freshness of the
streams, and the
mist over the spring
garden... It was
really Wang-Wei's
refined spirit, fused
into water and ink,
which had produced
this precious thing."
Another of these
"gentlemen-paint¬
ers", perhaps the
greatest of them all,
was Su Tung p'o
(1036 - 1101 A.D.),
outstanding person¬
ality and great poet,
philosopher and
painter, who lived
under the Northern
Sung dynasty. As a
government official
he was enlightened
and progressive.
He built dams. He
improved the condi¬
tions of prisoners.
He even started a
very much earlier
Save the Children
Fund to rescue the
babies of poor pea¬
sants who were often
drowned because
their parents could
not afford to raise
them. His courage
and composure, his
human delight in the beauties of art
and nature, bore him through the
adversities of a political career which
would have broken the spirit of a
lesser man, and which left him to die
in poverty and exile. Here is his
own trenchant comment on political
life, in the poem written when his
infant son was three days old:
''Families, when a child is born
Want it to be intelligent.
I, through intelligence,
Having wrecked my whole life,
Only hope the baby will prove
Ignorant and stupid.
Then he will crown a tranquil life
By becoming a Cabinet Minister."
There are many stories of Su Tung
p'o and his group oí brilliant friends
6
meeting to make merry over wine, and
amusing themselves with the arts, the
great figure painter Li Lung-mien
adding figures to Su's landscapes, Su
making poems on Li's pictures. Su
specialized in the painting of bamboos,
and twisted dry trees beside stone and
water. "His wrinkled and sharp
rocks", said his friend Mi Fei, a
passionate collector of paintings and
calligraphy, "were queerly tangled
like sorrows coiled up in his breast."
One day Mi Fei invited Su Tung p'o
to dinner. "Two long tables were
placed facing each other, and on
them were piled fine brushes, exquisite
ink, and 300 sheets of paper, with
some food and drink at the side.
When Su Tung p'o saw this arrange¬
ment he laughed heartily and sat
TíS, Í* \
i
\,
M
' V
*M ^
DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, lyric poet and painter, and leader of-the
Pre-Raphaelite School, was a great admirer of Dante, translating and illustrat¬
ing his works. Above, Rossetti's early pen and ink version (1849) of his
painting "Dante Drawing an Angel for First Anniversary of Beatrice's Death".
City Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham.
down. Between each drink they
would flatten the paper and write.
(Su used to say that it was only when
exhilarated by wine that he could
write the "large grass characters" and
the "small model characters" really
well). Towards evening the wine was
giving out, and so was the paper.
Then each of them took the other's
papers and said good-bye. Afterwards
they found they had never done
better writing."
With a few strokes of the brush Su
Tung p'o would dash off little poems
on the shawl or fan presented by one
of the entertainers at the convivial
banquets he loved to attend:
"Oh hush the night, each minute an
[ounce of gold,
While -faintly floats the music of
[flute and song.
So fragrant the air, so cool the
[moonlit courtyard,
While darkly glides the silent night
[along." (1)
There have been periods in Euro¬
pean cultural history, moments, it
would seem, of great intellectual and
aesthetic expansion, like the Renais¬
sance, when the divisions between the
arts faded; when a Leonardo da Vinci
was painter, engineer, botanist, ana¬
tomist; a Cellini, painter, goldsmith,
writer; a Michelangelo, painter
sculptor and poet; but in the whole
course of European art there is
perhaps only one comparable figure
whose genius entitles him to rank
beside the "gentlemen-painters" of
China as an equally
undisputed master
in both literature
and painting the
English artist and
poet William Blake
(1757-1827).
Blake's poems and
designs might in one
sense be considered
his recreation after
the tedious toil of
engraving by which
he earned a humble
living a number of
the poems were en¬
graved and pulled
on single sheets and
then coloured by
hand for sale with
the assistance of his
devoted wife. Yet in
the deepest sense
they were the dedi¬
cated work of the
isolated and fiercely
independent mystic
who saw visions and
talked familiarly
with angels, dictat¬
ed, he claimed, by
the spiritual world.
"I may praise it",
he said, "since I dare
not pretend to be
any other than the
Secretary; the Au¬
thors are in Eter¬
nity", but he could
resort to blunt com¬
ment and caustic
epigram when roused:
"Thy friendship oft has made my
[heart to ache,
Do be my enemy, -for friendship's
[sake."
Blake was an isolated phenomenon,
unrecognized in his own lifetime by
all save a few perceptive friends. A
passion for painting, sketching and
drawing, however, seems to have
possessed many of the writers and
poets of the Romantic revival and
later European movements.
It may have been, as
an eminent critic of
Victor Hugo maintain-
(1) Translated by Lin
Yutang in The Gag Genius.

NIKOLAI GOGOL
Illustrator of 'Dead Souls'
Nikolai Gogol (1809-1852) the great Russian novelist and dramatist, is
one author whose drawings have been used to illustrate the cover of
his books. He drew the illustration for the cover of his classic
novel, Mertvuiyo Dushi ('Dead Souls') with its amazingly descriptive pic¬
tures of Russian provincial life and types of Russian society. Gogol had
originally intended to be a painter, and art problems figure prominently
in his works. He looked at the world around him with the eyes of a painter,
and once wrote: "My imagination... has never created anything that my
eyes have not chanced upon somewhere in Nature." Gogol's Dead Souls,
written while he was staying in Romea city which left a deep impression
on his mindwas first published in 1842, with his own drawing on the cover.
The same cover was used for the second edition (above) in 1846.
AUTHOR- ARTISTS (Cont'd)
THE PROLIFIC
19TH CENTURY
ed, that the arts never overlapped in
more classical periods, but that in the
Romantic Revival a palpitating sensi¬
bility took precedent over reason, and
language and painting came closer
together, language being used some¬
what as a brush, to paint impressions
rather than to express thoughts.
But it may also be connected more
prosaically with the 'fact that drawing
was one of the accomplishments of
the polite young person of the period.
woman must have a thorough
knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing and the modern languages to
deserve the word accomplished", cries
Miss Bingley in Jane Austen's Pride
and Prejudice. Young Goethe (1749-
1832) for instance, who led the way,
was promptly given a drawing teacher
by his father when he displayed a
taste for art. He studied art seriously
at Leipzig during his student days,
drew and sketched throughout most
his life, and on several occasions had
thoughts of giving up poetry and
devoting himself entirely to painting.
Landscapes of his abound, and he did
illustrations to some of his books and
portraits of intimate friends.
In France, in the eighteen-twenties,
they all painted and drew. As
Wordsworth wrote: "Bliss was it in
that dawn to be alive, but to be young
was very heaven." There was Prosper
Mérimée (1803-1870), the brilliant and
cynical young author who passed off
his first book, a series of mordant
one-act sketches, as the work of a
non-existent refugee Spanish actress,
and later became the trusted coun¬
sellor of the Empress Eugenie whom
he had taken out to buy ices when she
was nothing but the engaging little
daughter of a close friend. On his
journeys as Inspector of Antiquities
he filled notebooks with sketches of
the country; he drew caricatures with
easy familiarity and "scattered them
around like cigar butts" "sufficiently
amusing", said Sainte Beuve, the
French literary critic "'for everyone to
recognize himself as rather more ugly
than in reality." And a whole series
of water colours and drawings,
unpublished as yet, which were to
remind a woman of the charmed
hours they spent together, bear wit¬
ness to a love affair of more than
twenty years that nearly broke his
heart when it ended.
There was young Théophile Gau¬
tier (1811-1870) in his defiant red
waistcoat and with his hair floating
to his shoulders, who started as an art
student and abandoned painting for
poetry and novels and art criticism.
There was Alfred de Musset (1810-
1857) with his charming portrait of
Pauline de Garcia. And there was
young Mme Dudevant, (1804-1876)
preparing to break away from hus¬
band and home for the independence
she later found as a novelist under
the name of George Sand, who thought
she might turn to account a gift for
sketching and catching a resemblance,

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
and sat down to draw ten hours a day
at her country house. She soon
relinquished the idea, but the young
woman who finally arrived in Paris
in 1831 and jumped 'from the coach in
her velvet jacket and coarse hunting
trousers, cap and men's boots, looking
a duplicate of the two excited
students waiting to welcome her, had
also made attempts to earn money by
decorating little boxes and fans with
flowers and birds in water colour, and
exposing them, vainly, for sale in shop
windows.
There was one among them,
however the greatest whose draw¬
ings and paintings bear in them some
authentic overspill of genius. A visitor
to the Victor Hugo Museum, situated
in the author's old home in Paris, is
immediately struck by the profusion
of drawings, sketches and paintings
by Victor Hugo (1802-1885), hung
along the walls, and by their remark¬
able quality.
Some 450 drawings are in existence,
varying from stamp to canvas
size. The drawings of old Gothic
castles and cathedrals recall his
travels through France, Germany and
Switzerland, and his passion for pic¬
turesque architecture, set high on
rocky summits over sombre gorges and
rushing rivers, all seen through the
wild gleams of storm and lightning
and set in the play of menacing
darknesses. He drew illustrations for
some of his books such as the
completed series for Toilers of the
Sea sketched out ideas and rough
conceptions on the same page of the
notebooks as the written descriptions,
and though uninterested in portrait¬
ure, produced drawing after drawing
of grotesque and preternatural figures,
grimacing and monstrous faces. Many
spring from the hallucinations which
haunted him in his first years of exile
in Jersey, and which he would
sometimes jot down in the dark on
awakening.
A few large, carefully conceived
designs date from the middle of his
career, the period after the death of
his daughter from drowning when for
a while he could write no more. These,
such as Bourg à la Croix and Castle
in Moonlight, are not drawn, but
painted in ink. He worked on them
in the early morning, when his first
breakfast was brought him when a
sprinkling of black coffee bronzed the
black with warm tones, the coffee
grounds added to the texture of old
rock, a streak of sunlight on the slope
of brown hillside was laid on with
café au lait.
Responsible critics took his work
seriously. The volume of Son¬
nets and Etchings of 1869 which
marked the emergence of a new school
of etching included a design of Victor
Hugo's among such names as Corot,
Doré, Daubigny and Manet. Baude
laire and Gautier, both fine critics oí
art, spoke enthusiastically of his
drawings. "Victor Hugo's talent",
wrote Gautier, "whether in writing or
drawing is remarkable in that it is
accurate and iantastic at the same
time", while another critic described
him as a "Turner of the night."
Just as the visitor to the Hugo
Museum in Paris is struck by Hugo's
artistic capacity, so the pilgrim who
visits an old parsonage at Haworth
on the edge of the Yorkshire moors
in England where a great English
writer, Charlotte Brontë (1816-1855)
and her equally famous sister Emily
lived out their short and solitary lives,
is struck by the strange imaginative
fervour that breathes through the
correctly drawn, minutely detailed
drawings of Charlotte Brontë display¬
ed on the walls. Her drawings illus¬
trated the amazing saga of the
private world invented by the Brontë
children and set down in tiny
volumes; Charlotte copied engravings
with such detailed exactness as to
injure her sight; and there at Haworth
Parsonage hanging on the wall is a
water colour by her which in a flash
calls to mind the incident in Jane
Eyre where Mr. Rochester examines
Jane's drawings, so similar Ls the
subject. "Were you happy when you
painted those pictures?", asked
Mr. Rochester, and who can doubt
that it is Charlotte Brontë answering
in Jane's voice: "I was absorbed, sir;
yes, and I was happy. To paint
them, in short, was to enjoy one of
the keenest pleasures I have known."
Alexander Pushkin (1799-1837),
Russia's greatest poet, drew intermin¬
ably in his lighter moments, cari¬
catures of himsel'f and his friends and
enemies, half portraits, women's faces
scribbled on the margins of his
manuscripts. In the year of his
death another famous Russian writer,
Nicolai Gogol (1809-1852) who was
staying in Italy, passed days in the
company of his friend, the Russian
poet Dzukovsky, sketching views
Rome. Gogol had
originally intended to
be a painter. When he
he first went to St.
Petersburg from his
native U k r ai n e, he
E.T.A. HOFFMANN. Ernst Theodor
Wilhelm (he later changed "Wilhelm" to
"Amedeus" to conform to the then-prevailing
" Mozart " cult) Hoffmann, the German
Romance writer, was also a composer, thea¬
trical manager, lawyer and many other things
in the course of his diversified career.
Hoffmann (1776-1822) provided the Inspi¬
ration and the book for Offenbach's Tales of
Hoffmann, based on three of his fantastic stor¬
ies. Among the many drawings and carica¬
tures he left were sketches for costumes,
theatrical plans, scenery for his opera Undine
and cover illustrations for his humoristic story,
Lebensonsichten des Katers Murr. Below
and left, Hoffmann's illustrations for volumes II
and III of this work and, above, an aquarelle.
on

AUTHOR-ARTISTS
(Continued)
Twentieth century names
Follow in swift succession
wrote to his mother how he still went
to classes at the Academy of Fine
Arts three times a week. "I'm attend¬
ing a course in painting ; I cannot
give it up."
All through the nineteenth century
writer-artists follow each other in
swift succession. We have a brief
glimpse of Charles Dickens interview¬
ing and turning down a young
artist who presented himself with
sample drawings applying to take
over the illustrations to the Pickwick
Paperp, then appearing in fortnightly
parts. The young man later turned
to literature, and became Dickens's
most formidable rival as W.M. Thack¬
eray. Gautier, Thackeray, the Swiss
novelist Keller, the English critic
Ruskin, all started with the intention
of becoming professional painters, and
found their true vocation later.
Dante Gabriel Rossetti was equally
a poet and a professional painter;
William Morris, poet, decorator, dyer,
printer, socialist and revolutionary in
nearly everything he touched, was for
a brief period influenced by Ruskin to
try to paint. Charles Baudelaire, the
French poet, haunting the studios of
Delacroix, Manet and Daumier in his
youth, had a remarkable power of
fixing a likeness in a few astonishing
lines. "He would have been a great
artist", said Daumier, "if he had not
preferred to be a great poet."
For most of these writers sketching
was a light-hearted exuberance,
another way of writing letters, another
way of expressing the warmth and
laughter of companionship. Verlaine,
Rimbaud and their friend Delahaye
illustrated their letters to each other
with caricatures and recounted their
adventures and experiences as Ver¬
laine himself put it:
"Two comrades let us be, gossiping
[each to each
Quick with our fingers in sharp
[sketch and in laughing speech."
So did H.G. Wells, the English
novelist. So did Garcia Lorca, the
Spanish poet and dramatist.
Other names come crowding to
mindTolstoy, Pierre Loti, G. B. Shaw,
Apollinaire, Valéry, George Moore,
Max Jacob, Saint-Exupéry, Henri Mi¬
chaux, Dostoeivsky, Winston Chur¬
chill, Gustavo Bécquer, O. Henry,
Alfred de Vigny, Eugene Sue, W.
James, Vercors, Rodolphe TöpfTer,
Wyndham Lewis, Ibsen, Yeats, Evelyn
Waugh, Samuel Butler, Anatole France
and many others. But let us finish
with an American loved on both sides
of the Atlantic for the drawings he
turns out of his sinister dogs, lugu¬
brious males and battle-axe females,
and for his enchanting and wry
essays in humour James Thurber, a
master in both mediums.
Photo courtesy Dictionnaire des fuvres. Laffont-Bompiani.
D.H. Lawrence: Stormy petrel of English letters
Perhaps as much for his personality and for his ideas and attitudes as for his actual writing, D.H. (David Herbert) Lawrence, the English novel¬
ist, poet, essayist and playwright, is regarded as one of the outstanding literary figures of the 20th century. During the time he was writing
famous novels like Sons and Lovers and The Plumed Serpent and his many poems and short stories, he travelled widely, visiting or
living at one time or another Italy, Switzerland, Australia, Ceylon, New Zealand, Tahiti, the French Riviera, Mexico and the United States.
In Taos, New Mexico, an artists' colony, he once dreamed of setting up an ideal social community. Towards the end of his life (he died in I 930
of tuberculosis at the age of 44) he began to paint and in I 928 held an exhibition of his works in London. It was raided by the police on
the grounds of immorality. Today the exhibition would hardly cause astir. Three figures shown here are from his work, "The Resurrection".
10
