ARTIST BY DAY
AUTHOR BY NIGHT
LOVERS, a painting
done in 1955 by Carlo
Levi. Below, Levi's por¬
trait of the great Italian
poet, Umberto Saba (in
the National Gallery of
Modern Art, Rome).
Photos © Oscar Savio, Rome
Carlo Levi gained international in 1945 his
prize-winning novel Christ Stopped at Eboli, but
prior to that he had already begun to make a name
for himself as a professional painter. Levi's life has been
a long series of adventures and struggles since he was
born in Turin 55 years ago. Painter, journalist, novelist,
medical doctor, he was formerly the editor of an anti-
Fascist underground publication and a wartime resistance
leader in Italy. But a few years ago he wrote: "Of the
many enterprises I have undertaken in my li'fe, I consider
only two to be fundamental: painting and writing."
Levi began to take up painting seriously In the 1920s
while studying for his medical degree. In this early period
he followed the neoclassical style. After receiving his
M.D. he abandoned medicine to devote himself to
painting, reacting against his earlier style to become a
post-impressionist. Between 1929 and 1934 he held one-
man exhibitions in Turin, Milan, Rome, Genoa, London
and Paris; and since the war has exhibited in many
countries. His paintings have been described as "ranking
with the very best of his generation."
For anti-Fascist activities he was exiled in 1935 to the
isolated village of Gagliano in Lucania and there he not
only painted some of his best pictures but also collected
the material for the 'famous novel he was to write nine
years later during the last war. He has since said that
his year in Gagliano (he gave clandestine medical care
to the peasants in defiance of the authorities) "had more
influence on my painting than any period of my life."
Today he has a studio on the top floor of a 17th century
palazzo from where he can see the whole oí Rome. Here
he keeps a cat, a turtle and a ping-pong table which he
uses "either as a drawing board or for sport". He divides
his time between painting and writing, rising late to
paint during the afternoon, reserving his writing for the
night "when darkness and silence induce a sense of soli¬
tude."
Another animal that Carlo Levi loves is a rare and
beautiful Royal Owl from Ethiopia which he has named
Graziadio. He first saw it nearly 17 years ago in a small
ambulant zoo and was immediately attracted to the bird.
"Was it the almost human quality which struck Carlo the
philosopher", his close friend, the noted photographer
David Seymour wrote a few years before he was killed
in a jeep during the Suez affair, "or was it the extraordi¬
nary yellow-gray plumage, combined with the bird's
reddish eyelids and bluish beak which impressed Carlo
the painter? It might even have been the striking
resemblance of the owl to Carlo Levi himself, who looks
like the human edition of an owl."
At any event, Graziadio became Levi's obsession and he
painted, wrote and even composed poetry about it. Soon
his studio was filled with drawings, sketches and paintings
of the owl. Today, Graziadio has become Carlo Levi's
signature and symbol.
25
