THE NOT SO SOLID EARTH
In the scientific attack on so complex a problem as the
complete understanding of the earth, the first step
must be to separate it into smaller problems and to
approach them one by one. The Year does this first of
all by eliminating all human and biological questions,
important as they are. This is a Geophysical Year and
only the physical sciences are involved. But even from
that restricted point of view, the earth has three major
aspects.
First, it is a celestial object, a planet rushing through
space at a velocity of 18.50 miles per second in its annual
orbit around the sun that is some 93 million miles away.
It constantly encounters radiations, particles and meteors
which add thousands of tons to its mass every year and
have a profound effect upon the upper atmosphere as
they impinge upon it.
Second, it is an almost spherical mass of 6,600 million -
million million tons (in figures: 6.6 followed by 20 zeros),
that as a whole is 5.5 times as dense as water. The globe
has a diameter of 7,920 miles. It is composed of three
major layers: a central core, 4,300 miles in diameter, that
may be metallic and probably is fluid, surrounded by a
magma, 1,800 miles thick of compressed rigid rock, and
around this the thin crust, only about 20 miles thick, that
is made up largely of rocks that have descended from the
surface after chemical action by the sea and by air.
And the third aspect of the earth is known in common
speech as the surface, between the globe and the sky, the
abode of life and the scene of history. It extends over
197 million square miles. Strictly speaking, it is not a
simple surface but a complex of three separate interfaces,
one where earth meets water on the sea bottom, another
between the sea and the air, and a third where the dry
land is itself exposed to the atmosphere. This is the
smallest of the three and covers only about one fourth of
the entire area. Here most of the geophysical studies of
the Year are concentrated in terms of geography and
geodesy, Antarctic exploration, weather studies and the
exploration of the great heights. They are closest to
man's common life and natural interest.
Sixty million lbs. per sq.in.
But logically it is the solid earth that is the base of
geophysical science. It is also the least explored.
The deepest mine goes down about 10,000 feet, less
than a tenth the thickness of the crust. Oil wells, how¬
ever, have penetrated to more than twice that depth, to
22,000 feet, nearly one-fifth of the way to the underlying
magma. The materials thus penetrated are the familiar
surface rocks. Such borings, however, do give direct evi¬
dence of heat in the interior. In deep mines the tempe¬
rature rises about 54°F per mile of depth. If this rate
continued, the temperature at the centre o-f the earth
would be above 200,000"F. But it is practically certain
that the rate of increase is much less farther down so that
the temperature of the centre is estimated to be between
3,600 and 11,500°F. Exact knowledge is lacking.
Under surface conditions such temperatures would be
adequate to melt or liquefy most materials. But the
distinction between solid and liquid becomes less definite
under the high pressures of the earth's interior that result
from the enormous weight above. Here again no direct
measurements exist but indirect calculations that gave
astonishing results have. been made by Prof. K.E. Bullen
of the University of Sydney in Australia. The pressure at
the bottom of the Pacific Ocean is known to be about
800 atmospheres, one atmosphere being the normal weight
of the air pressing on the earth's surface at sea-level
(15 pounds per square inch). Only 200 miles down in the
earth's mantle below the crust the pressure is already
100,000 atmospheres, equal to the highest pressure ever
produced in a laboratory. But at the base of the mantle
1,800 miles down, the pressure is more than a million
atmospheres and at the centre of the earth nearly four
million. It is difficult to imagine the condition of any
form of matter at a temperature of perhaps 10,000 °F and
under a pressure of 60 million pounds per square inch.
Antarctic 'ice-quakes'
Certainly the density is much higher than at the
surface. Professor Bullen has estimated that the
rocks just below the crust have a density oí 3.3
grammes per cubic centimetre, compared with water at
one gramme per cubic centimetre (or 62.3 pounds per cubic
foot). But the density increases to 5.5 at the bottom of
mantle, then jumps suddenly to 9.5 at the top of the core
and increases gradually to 11.5 within the core. This is
close to the density of metallic lead at the surface (about
700 lbs. per cubic ft.).
Most of our knowledge of the earth's interior has come
from the careful study of earthquakes and the many lesser
vibrations that reach the surface from disturbances
within. Nearly all are based on the continuous records of
earth vibrations made at many points on earth by an
instrument called a seismograph, from the ancient Greek
word, seísmos, for an earthquake.
It is by the analysis of seismograph records from differ¬
ent stations that the location of the 'quake itself is deter¬
mined. The rate of travel of the shock wave through the
earth's interior also gives important information on the
composition of the magma and the core. For instance
pressure waves, in which the motion at each point is in the
same direction as that of the wave, pass through the
central core, though they are deflected somewhat. But
secondary waves, in which the motion of the individual
particles is cross-wise, or perpendicular, to the direction of
the wave, do not pass through the core. The resulting
"shadow" of these waves on the opposite crust is both
major evidence for the existence of the core and an indica¬
tion that it is fluid rather than solid and may be compos¬
ed of molten iron and nickel.
In the seismological programme of the Year earth
tremors will be measured by expeditions and special sta¬
tions at points where observations are usually unobtain¬
able, for instance in the Antarctic and on remote equa¬
torial islands in the Pacific. This is to get more accurate
information on seismic events in those areas and thus on
the earth's interior. This, in turn, will reveal more about
TELLTALE TREMORS. Most of our knowledge of the earth's
interior has come from studies of waves set up by earthquakes and
from other vibrations recorded by seismologists. To obtain still more
accurate information, earth tremors that occur during the I.G.Y. will
be measured in places where observations are usually unobtainable in
the Antarctic and in remote Pacific islands. Typical seismogram (above)
is of earthquake on Kamchatka Peninsula in Siberia, whose phases
reveal three main types of seismic waves: Primary (P), secondary (S)

The Unesco Courier. Seotember 1957
ourtesy "Scientific American" © I 955
X-RAYING THE
WORLD WITHIN
Waves set up by earthquakes travel
through the whole interior of the
earth and as they travel from their
source their paths are bent and
shaped by the shells of the earth's
internal structure. By Interpret¬
ing the story they tell when re¬
ceived on the surface, the seismo¬
logist, in effect, "X-rays" the earth.
In upper diagram solid lines rep¬
resent primary shock waves and
dotted lines are secondary waves
formed by reflection. The only
primary waves that can get into
"shadow" zone on opposite crust,
shown in upper right, are those
which enter earth's Inner core
and are sharply bent. Cross
section of earth (lower diagram) is
divided into distinct layers through
which seismic waves travel at dif¬
ferent speeds. Outer core is indi¬
cated by lighter tone of shading;
inner core by darker tone. Layer
marked by A is earth's thin crust.
the nature of magma and the core and of a number of
intermediate layers that are now ill-defined.
In another phase of the programme the faint vibrations,
called microseisms, will be studied so that seismographs
can later bë used to detect and locate small disturbances
that are not full earthquakes. Finally, in the Antarctic,
seismic measurements on man-made explosions in effect
ice-quakes will be used to measure the thickness of the
otherwise impenetrable ice layers.
The Reporter for the seismology programme is Prof. V.V.
Beloussov of the Soviet Union.
At first thought gravity would seem to be one of the
most constant forces of nature. To be sure, its actual
cause is unknown and so is the means by which it acts at
a distance except in the esoteric terms of Einstein's
relativity theory. But it is very simply a pull exerted
mutually by any two masses of matter upon each other
which is proportional to the product of the two masses and
inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. This is simple, accurate and perfectly
constant for the pull of the earth as a whole, as it is for
any astronomical body.
But on the surface of the earth there are complications
and the force of gravity is not uniform. For one thing,
the earth is not a true sphere. Because it spins on its axis
it is deformed into an "oblate spheroid", hence flattened
like many an orange. For this reason a man standing at
sea level at one of the poles would be 13 miles nearer the
earth's centre than if he stood at the equator. Without
changing his mass he would be heavier because at less
distance from the centre the force of gravity is somewhat
stronger.
There is also a direct complication from the rotation of
the earth. Near the equator the rotational velocity is
about 1,000 miles per hour. The resulting centrifugal force
counteracts the pull of gravityin effect reduces it.
Furthermore the oblate spheroid is by no means mathe¬
matically smooth. If the earth is shaped like a flattened
orange, it is like a battered one, with bulges
and depressions quite apart from the
mountain heights and ocean deeps. The
major undulations in the earth's shape
again modify the force of gravity at the
surface and this time with a sideways pull
Cont'd
on
next page
Courtesy "Scientific American"
and surface waves which appear in upper 20 miles or so near earth's
surface. The rate of travel of the shock wave through the earth's
interior gives vital information on composition of its mantle and core.
Secondary waves do not pass through core. Separate lines are actually
part of a continuous spiral trace going from right to left on a circular drum.
First disturbance recorded is P wave shown by number I. Then follow the
multiply reflected P waves at 2 and 3. S waves begin at point 4 follow¬
ed by multiply reflected waves at 5,6 and 7. Surface waves start at 8.
7

NOT SO SOLID
EARTH (Continued) DO CONTINENTS DRIFT LIKE ICEBERGS?
so that a plumb line does not point always to the true
centre but at an angle. This means that a supposedly
vertical line does not point to the zenith among the stars
but off to one side. Obviously this interferes with the
accurate long-distance surveying that is called geodesy.
The result of this, in turn, is that world maps are incorrect
because the distances between continents and islands aré
not accurately known.
There are also changes in the force of gravity at some
points which may indicate a slow vertical movement. It
is suspected that the Hawaian Islands have thus been
lifted several inches. This indicates an "earth-tide" simi¬
lar to the tides of the ocean but affecting the great rock
mantle. They are not yet understood but a schedule of
continued measurements of gravity may reveal broad up-
and-down movements as if the earth itself were plastic.
Pull of gravity less over oil deposits
Finally, there is a practical use for gravity measure¬
ments. When large bodies of minerals are present
under the surface they can reveal their presence by
their effects on gravity when they differ in density from
the average rock. Petroleum, for instance, is light and
reduces the local pull of gravity. Metallic minerals are
often much denser than the usual rock and so increase
gravitation. Both oil and mining companies now regu¬
larly prospect underground by measuring the gravity at
the surface. Many of their data are being turned over to
the Year.
The purpose is to make accurate measurements of the
force of gravity at as many points on earth as possible.
This can be done by measuring the time of swing of a
pendulum, but the usual gravimeter is merely a supersen¬
sitive spring-scale in which the earth's pull on a small
weight is indicated by the stretching of a fine wire of silver
or of nickel-steel. There are already hundreds of base
stations scattered over the earth that have made many
hundreds of thousands of gravitational measurements,
including 4,000 points at sea. But it is part of the pro¬
gramme of the Year to extend these stations and to take
advantage of special expeditions, such as those to the
South Pole. With gravity measurements dotted all over
the earth, the earth's actual shape can at last be comput¬
ed. Then it will be possible to obtain exact figures for the
earth's various diameters and for its circumference.
Thirty nations are co-operating in the gravity pro¬
gramme. The Co-ordinating Reporter is Father Lejay,
Director of the International Gravimetrical Office in Paris.
Closely related to the purposes of the gravity studies are
the completely different methods for measuring the exact
position of points on the surface of the earth in terms of
latitude (the north-and-south dimension) and of longitude
(the east-and-west dimension). These are actually mea¬
surements of angles. In the case of latitude it is the angle
between the vertical line from the centre of the earth to
any given point on the surface and the true north-and-
south line which is the axis of rotation of the earth. In
the case of longitude it is the angle between the vertical
line and one drawn through the zero meridian, which
passes through Greenwich Observatory in England.
It takes but a little geometry to see that these angles can
best be measured on the sky. For instance, the vertical
line from the centre to any surface point can be extended
upward and then indicates the zenith, the overhead point,
on the sky. The angle between the zenith and the North
Star then gives the latitude. Thus practical navigation on
the sea and in the air is always done by reference to the
sun by day or to the stars by night. Since the sky has
been so accurately photographed and mapped, almost any
star will do for reference and special stars have been
selected for use in the navigational charts.
But high accuracy is now needed. There is some reason
to think, for instance, that some islands and even the
major continents are like icebergs, in a sense floating on
the magma below, and that they have changed their
positions radically in the course of geologic time. If they
are sliding about then accurate determination of their
latitude and longitude would reveal some slight motion
within a few years.
A new and very precise photographic technique has now
been developed which will locate the position of the moon
against a background of stars at accurately measured
times. Such photographs, taken at more than twenty
different observatories during the Year, will improve all
figures on latitude and longitude and will also give the
basis for noting possible changes of location as time
goes on.
The Reporter for the geodetic measurements of latitude
and longitude is Prof. Danj on, Head of the Paris Obser¬
vatory.
It was easy to think, in former days, that the earth as a
whole is a permanent magnet, much like an iron bar
magnet, with its magnetic poles at the poles of the earth.
This would require that the magnetized atoms inside the
earth be permanently arranged side by side with the poles
pointing north and south. But at the temperature now
known to prevail below the surface, any such permanent
arrangement is impossible. Besides, the magnetic pole is
not at the geographic North Pole but several hundred
miles distant on the Arctic coast of Canada. In addition,
the magnetic pole has wandered over the earth far from
the North Pole, even into the South Pacific, in previous
geological eras. And finally, there are very few places on
earth where the compass points true north, or even points
to the magnetic pole.
Almost all compass readings need correction to give true
north. The amount of deviation has been measured over
almost the entire earth's surface and, for the benefit of
mariners, with especial care over all the oceans. The
study of the world magnetic map indicates that there are
two independent components of the magnetic field, with
separate causes. The major one is somehow connected
directly with the earth's rotation and, if acting alone,
would point all compasses to the North Pole.
But there are also secondary sources of magnetism
produced by some quite different mechanism, which vary
irregularly over the earth and change with time, even in
the course of a few years, or sometimes months. This
secondary or "residual" magnetic field seems to produce
magnetic eddies that are in general wandering westward
and, at the present rate, will circle the earth in 1,600
years. Their net effect is to produce the magnetic
deviations from true north in the main field and to
necessitate ever-new mapping of the earth's whole
magnetic field. New accurate figures are an important
objective of the Year. The actual cause of both the major
and the residual magnetic fields is unknown.
Electric currents from outer space
Superimposed on the slow variation of the total magne¬
tic field over the course of years is a much smaller
variation so small that it would not be noticed on a
compass. It involves only about two percent of the total.
But it is properly called a fluctuation because it varies so
swiftly that instruments capable of measurements in
hundredths of a second are required to study it. These
fluctuations probably do not originate in the earth but on
the sun. They increase in number and intensity with the
number of visible sunspots. Such spots indicate gigantic
electrical and magnetic storms on the sun's surface which
eject radiations of some sort. When they strike the
earth's upper atmosphere, it is supposed that they cause
ionization, i.e. electrification, and winds which result in
broad electric currents at great heights and these, in turn,
affect the magnetic field at the earth's surface.
At present there are about 80 completely equipped
magnetic observatories in the world, most of them in
Europe and Japan in the temperate zone where fluctua¬
tions are least. During the Year a large number of addi¬
tional magnetic stations will be established across North
America and Alaska, on the Paciiic Islands, on the Antarc¬
tic Continent and in the Arctic areas of Canada and the
Soviet Union. The hope is that the causes of the rapid
fluctuations will be discovered and that information will
be gathered to solve the underlying mystery of the earth's
magnetism. Dr. V. Laursen of the Meteorologisk Institut,
Charlottenlund, Denmark, is Reporter for the geomag¬
netism programme.
