DO YOU KNOW
THESE RECIPES?
The sharing of kitchen secrets is of special interest when women of different nations find
themselves together as they do in Geneva, Switzerland, where many members of U.N. staffs
and their families are located. Some favourite recipes of women from all over the world have
now been collected and published by the U. N. Nursery School, Geneva, as an international
cookbook. It offers some typical dishes of more than 20 countries. (Cookbooks obtainable
from U. N. Nursery School, I, avenue de la Paix, Geneva, or from U. N. Nursery
School, 35, rue de Boulainvilliers, Paris 16, France.) Here are a few of these recipes.
CHINA. Chicken and almonds. Chick¬
en (about 3 pounds), 1 cup mushrooms
(fresh), 1/2 cup fried almonds, 3 small
carrots, 1 leek (cut into inch-long shreds),
2 tablespoons soya sauce, 2 teaspoons sugar,
1 tablespoon wine (or dry sherry), 2 tea¬
spoons cornstarch, salt to taste, 2 table¬
spoons oil for frying.
Bone the chicken, remove skin and cut
meat into half-inch pieces. Put leeks,
soya sauce, sugar, wine, cornstarch and
salt into bowl, mix and add cut-up
chicken. Mix well so that chicken can
absorb flavours of sauce. Peel and dice
carrots (same size as chicken) and boil until
tender. Clean mushrooms (preferably
small size) and boil until done. Add
2 tablespoons oil in pan and when hot, add
the chicken. Cook two minutes, turning
all the time. Add boiled carrots and
mushrooms and a little water if too dry,
and cook a further minute. Just before
dishing up, add fried almonds. Mix well
and serve.
GREAT BRITAIN. Scones. Half a
pound of flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
1/4 teaspoon salt, 1 piece of butter the
size of an egg, 1/4 pint milk (equivalent
to 12 tablespoons), 1 teaspoon sugar.
Sieve the flour and salt and baking powder
together and put them into a bowl. Rub
in the butter and add the sugar. Mix to
a soft dough with the milk, using a fork,
and turn onto a floured board and shape
into a round. Roll out to about an inch
EATING IN JAPAN: TWO PLEASURES IN ONE
In ancient Japan it was the
custom to place food on
oak leaves and to break
off twigs from the forest
trees as chopsticks. Today
Japanese tableware expres¬
ses the same artistic spirit,
the vessels being chosen to
harmonize with the shapes
and colours of foods. The
basic materials used are
white rice, tender fish,
vegetables of varied hues,
miso-soup with its fra¬
grance, and green tea.
Right, table set for kaise-
kizen (formal Japanese din¬
ner), a ceremonial meal
with the principal course
(centre), the second course
(left) and the third course
brought in their respective
order. Among them are
foods to be eaten and
others "which may only
be observed respectfully".
Koon Bunka Lab. Tokyo
thick and cut into small rounds. Put
onto a greased baking sheet and bake in
a hot oven for 10 minutes.
ITALY. Zuppe pavese. Fry in oil
two medium slices of bread and put them
in each soup plate. Over these slices of.
bread, break two fresh eggs and season
them with salt and grated cheese. Pour
in very hot bouillon, gently so as not to
break the eggs.
SPAIN. Gazpacho (Andalousian).
Soak half a loaf of white bread in waler.
Purée it with a passe-tout or put in an
electric blender with a clove of garlic, raw
tomatoes and cucumbers. Add olive oil
and vinegar to taste.
Add enough water and a few ice cubes
to liquefy it to soup consistency. Serve
very cold topped with chopped green
peppers.
SCANDINAVIA. Herring salad.
Cooked meat, cold potatoes, red beets,
1 sliced onion, salted and smoked or
pickled herring, sour mustard.
Dice the following ingredients until
they make a mushy mass: meat, potatoes,
red beets, onion and the well-soaked her¬
ring and mustard. If still too dry and
won't adhere together, add a little vinegar
from the red beets. Flavour with sugar.
Make open sandwiches with this spread
on bread and decorate with slices of hard-
boiled eggs, or if you prefer, the sand¬
wiches can be topped with fried eggs.
IRAN. Summer soup (cold). Add salt
and pepper to three yoghourts and beat
well. Add mint (fresh or dried) chives
and one chopped cucumber and also a
handful of Corinth raisins and 1 cup of
water. Chill and serve as an entrée.
SOUTH AMERICA. Caldillo de con¬
grio (Fish Soup). Three and a half lbs
of red conger-eel, 1/2 cup olive oil, 1 cup
white wine, 3 1/2 lbs of potatoes, 6 toma¬
toes or 1 can tomatoes, dash powdered
pepper, 1 cup lemon juice, 2 small onions,
3 carrots, garlic, parsley, salt, 2 cups water,
sliced lemon. Clean the fish, cut in pieces,
salt it and sprinkle generously with, lemon
juice. Cut onions very finely and fry.
Add carrots sliced and then 2 cups of
water, garlic salt, pepper and parsley.
Boil all this from 20 to 25 minutes.
Add to this same pot peeled tomatoes,
14

The Unesco Courier. April 1957
© Paul Almasy 19 57
STREET-CORNER COOKSHOP in Valencia, Spain, is frying buñuelos, a favourite Spanish delicacy. Made with a flour paste, fried in oil and
dipped in sugar, buñuelos are the Spanish version of doughnuts. On certain feast days they are made at home and eaten with chocolate or honey.
without seeds, another layer of potatoes cut
lengthwise and in fours, and then another
of fish, and so on until you finish. Let
boil for 20 minutes and add the wine.
INDIA. Modified curry. Brown finely
chopped onion in a little fat, add finely
chopped green peppers and tomatoes and
simmer until thick. Then add 1 table¬
spoon curry powder, some tumeric, a little
salt and paprika and cayenne. (The latter
to taste, but about 1 tablespoon salt and
1/2 tablespoon of paprika should be ade¬
quate). When sauce is smooth, add diced
meat or vegetables (mutton or egg plant
are most suitable). Simmer over slow
heat (the secret of a successful curry lies
in slow cooking) until nearly done. A
little sour cream may be used towards the
end and peas may be added to a meat curry
if desired. Add only very little water at
a time and take care not to produce too
liquid a curry.
If served with rice, be sure to either rince
your rice in a colander with boiling water,
or dry it in the oven till grains remain flaky
and separate. These ingredients are plan¬
ned per pound of meat or vegetables.
HAITI. Rice and red beans. 2 cups of
rice, 1 1/2 cups beans, 50 grams of
smoked pork, 4 ounces of salt pork. Pre¬
pare and wash the beans and put them to
soak for 12 hours. Put in a saucepan 8 to
10 cups of water, the chopped up salt pork,
a pinch of thyme, a sprig of parsley and
some finely-chopped chives and the beans.
When the beans are cooked, but still firm,
drain them. Put into a saucepan four
tablespoons of butter, and the smoked pork
finely chopped, and leave until it browns
a little. Add the beans and let them fry
until they are crusty. Add four cups of
water in which the beans were cooked, a
clove of garlic, and salt as desired. When
in full boil add the rice which has been
washed and dried. Reduce the heat; the
water should continue to boil until it has
completely evaporated. When bubbles
appear in the rice, cover the saucepan and
let cook for 25 to 30 minutes.
FRANCE. Tendron de veau bourgeois.
Brown in a saucepan 50 grams of lean pork
with an equal amount of butter. Add 1 1/2
pounds of veal shin, brown at medium heat
and uncovered for twenty minutes. Moisten
with half water, half white wine, add mixed
herbs, a dozen small onions, one or two
chopped tomatoes and some small carrots.
Add salt and pepper and let cook over a
slow fire for one hour. Serve the meat
surrounded by the vegetables and cover
with the concentrated juice.
UNITED STATES. Chocolate chiffon
pie. 1 tablespoon Knox gelatine, 1/4 cup
cold water, 6 tablespoon cocoa or 2 squares
of bitter chocolate, 1/2 cup boiling water,
4 eggs separated, 1 cup sugar, 1/4 teaspoon
salt, 1 tablespoon rum, 1 baked pastry shell.
Soak gelatine in cold water. Mix cocoa
or chocolate with boiling water and stir
until smooth. Dissolve the softened gela¬
tine in the hot mixture. Beat egg yolks
slightly, add 1/2 of sugar and beat until
foamy. Add salt and the chocolate mix¬
ture. Chill in refrigerator tray until edges
begin to set. Beat egg whites stiff and add
gradually the other 1/2 cup of sugar. Whip
the chilled mixture until foamy, gradually
adding the rum. Fold in the egg whites.
Pour into pastry shell and chill. Serve with
whipped cream seasoned with sugar and
vanilla, and top with a dusting of cocoa.
15
