THE WONDERS
OF JAPAN'S
LITERARY WORLD
by Mary Burnet
i
TALES OF THE RAlN AND THE MOON (Ugetsu Monogatari), by the I 8th century Japanese
author Akinari Uedanow translated into French under Unesco's programme of translations
of Representative Workshas also been introduced to audiences outside Japan through the
t>>» .
medium of the cinema. Above and below, scenes from the film whose scenario was formed by
uniting two fantastic stories from the collection. The film tells of the tribulations of two peasant
families who lived near Lake Biwa. east of Kyoto, during the civil wars of the 16th century.
my1
'&
* \ .
,
í*í ..
- ^'.'-
Eight hundred years before the Brontes, six centuries
before Mme de La Fayette, a lady of the Japanese
imperial court sat down with brush and writing
case and composed what is still considered the greatest
novel in her language. Lady Murasaki's Tale of Genji
is not only a classic for her countrymen; up until recently
it was one of the rare pieces of Japanese literature to have
been translated into Occidental tongues.
Unlike the Brontë sisters, Lady Murasaki felt no qualms
lest her work be treated condescendingly because of her
sex. Her own contemporaries included a number of
women authors, and the earliest known anthology of
Japanese writing the Manyoshu or Collection of Ten
Thousand Leaves is studded with poems by ladies of
noble birth.
Compiled long before most of the languages now
spoken in Europe had developed (about 750 A.D.), the
Manyoshu initiated a series of anthologies in which the
Japanese systematically tried to preserve what was finest
in their poetry. In the three hundred years between the
ninth and the twelfth centuries, eight such anthologies were
drawn up by imperial command.
But for many centuries to come the work of Japanese
writers was to remain virtually unknown outside Japan.
It was only a few years ago that a handful of Western
students, having mastered the difficulties of the language,
began to make translations of a few outstanding works.
Now two anthologies, compiled by Donald Keene for the
Unesco Collection, provide the first sampling of them in
English, and the most complete in any Occidental tongue.
The first of Mr. Keene's volumes covers the ancient and
classical periods; the second, the writing produced since
the Meiji Restoration in 1868.
The arrival of Commodore Perry's ships in 1853 had
been the signal for a new Japan to be born from the old.
When the Shogun once more allowed foreigners inside
the country, after more than two hundred years of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
18
19


isolation, he had opened the door to
more than Western techniques. Not only
did the cities echo to the whir of facto¬
ries; the minds of men resonated to the
hum of new ideas imported, like the
steam engine, but far and away more
disconcerting.
The history of Japanese literature
since fhen has been largely one of reac¬
tion to these new ideas. First there was
imitation Japan had its would-be Shel¬
leys and its would-be Zolas too then
writers began to show more
originality as the new ideas
were assimilated and be¬
came liberating rather than
enslaving influences. The
result especially in fic¬
tion has been a true liter¬
ary renaissance.
In the firát of Mr. Keene's
two anthologies poetry holds
a major place. Whether
cast in the tight, demanding
verse forms of the haiku
and waka containing 17
and 31 syllables respectively
or in a larger, looser
mould, all these poems
reflect the Japanese love of
nature (a constant in the na¬
tional character) and most
have a melancholy tinge.
Human Life, their authors
never forgot, is just as frail
and uncertain as the cherry
blossoms that flower and
fade or the foam that
glistens and melts away. A
fatalistic and stoical religion
added to their resignation,
as did disasters like the pe¬
riodic earthquakes that
shake their islands, and the
spectacle of man's own per¬
versity in making war upon
his fellows, forgetting his
loved ones, or throwing his
long trusted counsellors into
disgrace.
But Japanese authors of
the classical period also
found expression in many other ways
than poetry. Story-tellers and chroni¬
clers, essayists and diarists, reflected
the history and manners of their times
while two distinctive forms of the drama
the Nô play and the puppet theatre
were developed to a high degree.
It was Japan's chief writer of puppet
plays, Chikamatsu Monzaemon, who
defined the basic aesthetic principle of
classical Japanese art. "Art is something
which lies in the slender margin between
20
the real and the unreal", he said. In
a society where the same exacting code
of behaviour had been followed for
centuries, where convention dictated the
slightest gesture, where etiquette forbade
the direct expression of feeling, art had
to suggest by symbol, metaphor and
understatement. But when the flood¬
gates from the outside world were open¬
ed, restraints were washed away.
Lady Murasaki had made an emper¬
or's son the hero of her masterpiece.
JAPAN'S LITERARY WORLD (Continued)
THE GATE OF HELL, one of the most striking Japanese films of recent
years, was based on a story by the famous writer Kikuchi Kan, one of whose
works is included in the Unesco Anthology, Modern Japanese Literature,
compiled and edited by Donald Keene. An earlier version of the same
story, Kesa and Morito, retold from the 13th century Uji Collection by
Akutagawa Ryunosuke, is included in the Anthology. Another story by
this author was brought to the screen in the Japanese film Rashomon.
Higuchi Ichiyo, Japan's principal woman
novelist of modern times, wrote about
children growing up in Tokyo's licensed
quarter. Her rowdy adolescents might
be taken as symbols of a whole popu¬
lation that was elbowing its way to the
forefront of the writer's attention.
These characters, drawn from all
classes, knew no reticence, and their
authors had deliberately dropped their
own. Instead of apologizing when they
mentioned their personal peculiarities,
they gave full vent to self-expression in
the "I novel".
It was a fast-changing society, where
old standards no longer applied and
thinking men and women were searching
anxiously for new ones. Some tried
to find them in one or the other of the
various philosophies or literary attitudes
current in Europe at the time. Others
turned to Christianity, which, introduced
into Japan three centuries before, was
going through a revival. Whatever the
direction, their search was
reflected in the new
frankness which their writ¬
ing revealed.
One of the most
revealing selections in
Mr. Keene's modern an¬
thology is an extract from
the diary of Ishikowa Ta-
kuboku, written in 1909.
Ishikawa was a would-be
novelist who had left his
wife and child in the pro¬
vinces and gone to Tokyo,
where he held a hack job as
a proof-reader but found
himself unable to write.
Haunted by a compulsion
to do something, but not
knowing what it is, he says
he feels as if he were "bat¬
tling against a stiff current",
and has never a moment of
calm.
"Then what am I seek¬
ing?" he asks himself.
"Fame? No, it's not that.
Achievement? No, not that
either. Love? No. Know¬
ledge? No. Then, money
perhaps? Yes, money. Not
as an end, but as a means.
What I am searching for
with all my heart is peace
of mind. Yes, that's it."
Fortunately, others were
able to conquer Ishikawa's
sort of literary paralysis and
get beyond themselves, rang¬
ing over the scene of contemporary Ja¬
pan and sometimes reinterpreting older
tales and legends with a new psychologi¬
cal insight. In the pages of the modern
anthology we meet some characters who
are lost survivors of an earlier daylike
the haiku poet and his sister the elocu¬
tion teacher in Na.jai Kafu's The River
Sumida but many more who are an
integral part of the world they live in.
There are soldiers, actors, thieves,
geishas and government officials,

The Unesco Courier. June 1957
misunderstood women and a husband
who has killed his wife and cannot
honestly tell the judge whether it was by
accident or design. There are sons
struggling to get free of their families
and young men setting out to study in
the West. There is a country school¬
teacher a most influential personage
and a war prisoner's wife supporting
herself and her little boy by peddling
black-market tea in Tokyo.
Three of the writers represented in
the anthology have been introduced to
audiences outside Japan through the
medium of the cinema. Among those
who recast old material in a modern and
very personal mould was Akutagawa
Ryunosuke, whose Rashomon was made
into a film a few years ago. Akuta-
THE CANNERY BOAT. A
dramatic film was made from
the story of the voyage of a
floating cannery in the waters
of Kamchatka written in 1929
by Kobayashi Takiji. Now
translated into English, it appears
in the Unesco anthology of
Modern Japanese Literature.
gawa also wrote his own version of the
tale of Lady Kesa and the soldier
Morito, from the thirteenth-century Uji
Collection, which in another version by
Kikuchi Kan recently formed the subject
of the even more popular film, The Gate
of Hell. Still more recently a film has
been made of Kobayashi Takiji's The
Cannery Boat, describing the grim life
of fishermen and sailors in a floating
cannery off Kamchatka.
This simultaneous interest in the past
and present seems to point toward a
more complete fusion of influences into
something newer still. "If one looks
back over the long series of changes
which make up its history", wrote
Masaharu Anesaki twenty years ago,
"one realizes that the soul of the Japa¬
nese people has remained about the
same, in spite of all its vicissitudes";
He foresaw the development of a new
"vital formula... when the new factors
have been absorbed by the deeper cur¬
rents of national life". The same point
of view is shared by Mr. Keene.
Meanwhile, the writings in his modern
anthology, as in the earlier one, stand
squarely on their own merits.
21
