This timely article was written long before the launching
of the world's first artificial satellite. It is a revised
version of a paper originally read to the British Inter¬
planetary Society in 1946 and published in 1953 in Unesccs
quarterly scientific review, "Impact of Science on So¬
ciety. The author is a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical
Society, and has written several books on the subject, in
particular "Interplanetary Flight" and "The Exploration
of Space". This article is copyright by the author and
may not be reproduced without permission.
An historian of the twenty-first century, looking back
past our own age to the beginnings of human
civilization, will be conscious of four great turning
points which mark the end of one era and the dawn of a
new and totally different mode of life. Two of these
events are lost, probably forever, in the primeval night
before history began. The invention of agriculture led to
the founding of settled communities and gave man the
leisure and social intercourse without which progress is
impossible. The taming of fire made him virtually in¬
dependent of climate and, most important of all, led to
the working of metals and so set him upon the road of
technological development that road which was to lead,
centuries later, to the steam engine, the Industrial Re¬
volution, and the age of steel and petrol and surface
transportation through which we are now passing.
The third revolution began, as all the world knows, in
a squash-court in Chicago on December 2, 1942, when the
first self-sustaining nuclear reaction was started by man.
We are still too close to that cataclysmic event to see it
in its true perspective, but we know that it will change our
world, for better or for worse, almost beyond recognition.
And we know too that it is linked with the fourth and in
some ways greatest change of all the crossing of space
and the exploration of the other planets.
22
The first spaceships capable of reaching another world
may still lie half a century ahead, but the giant rocket is
already with us and will soon be carrying men to the
limits of the atmosphere and beyond. Nor will it be many
years before a guided missile reaches the moon and blazes
the trail along which men will travel a generation later.
An attempt to construct a philosophy of astronautics is
therefore far from premature: it is, if anything, a little
belated. In the last few years we have seen the political
and ethical chaos produced when a great technical de¬
velopment comes into a world which is unprepared for it.
If our civilization is to have a future, then we must see
that it does not repeat its earlier mistakes. I do not
suggest as some have done that lawyers need start
worrying immediately about the ownership of the moon,
but the ownership of space will soon be a matter of acute
practical importance. If country A fires experimental
rockets across its neighbour B, what does B do? The air
above B is admittedly its own property, but how far does
that jurisdiction extend? There will have to be some
equivalent of the three-mile limit; otherwise in the course
of a day every country will, by virtue öf the earth's rota¬
tion, lay claim to a large portion of the universe! This
problem will be of grave concern in another decade, when
long-range research projectiles begin to travel far outside
the atmosphere with a supreme indifference to the geo¬
graphy beneath them.
The ideals of astronautics are new, but the motives and
impulses underlying them are as old as the human race.
There was a time not long ago when those who advocat¬
ed interplanetary travel were always being asked. "How?"
Even before the war that question could be answered in
general terms, but there had been no large-scale engineer¬
ing achievement to support the claims put forward. It
is amusing to recall that in those days which now seem
so remote there were many people who refused to believe
that a rocket could work in a vacuum or would ever be
able to rise more than a few miles from the earth.

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
Today, the power of the rocket has been demonstrated,
only too thoroughly. "How" is a question one seldom
hears in discussions concerning space-flight: the common¬
er query is now "Why?" And it is much more difficult
to answer, for it involves the motives underlying all
human conduct.
The urge to explore, to discover, to "follow knowledge
like a sinking star," is a -primary human impulse which
needs, and can receive, no further justification than its
awn existence. The search for knowledge, said a modern
Chinese philosopher, is a form of play. If this be true,
then the spaceship, when it comes, will be the ultimate toy
that may lead mankind from its cloistered nursery out
into the playground of the stars.
When the oceans begin to boil
However, it is not hard to think of entirely valid
"practical" reasons why one should wish to cross
space, and some of these we will discuss later. There
is no doubt that eventually sheer necessity would bring
about the conquest of the other planets. I do not believe
that it is possible to have a -virile, steadily-advancing
culture limited to a single world, and taking the long-
term view, we know that our earth will one day become
uninhabitable.
In his book, The Birth and Death of the Sun (1), the
physicist George Gamow points out that before its evolu¬
tion has finished, our sun will become 100 times as lumi¬
nous as it is today. I am glad to see that he draws the
obvious conclusion and visualizes the migration of
humanity to the outer planets before our earth's oceans
have begun to boil.
But the human race will not wait until it is kicked out.
(1) Viking Press, Sew York, 1940, and MacMillan, London, 1941.
Long before the sun's radiation has shown any measurable
increase, man will have explored all the solar system and,
like a cautious bather testing the temperature of the sea,
will be making breathless little forays into the abyss
which separates him from the stars.
To support my argument, I now have to develop some
sort of time-scale. I do this with much reluctance, since
prophecy is a dangerous and thankless business, frequently
fatal to those who practise it. We have, however, learned
by past experience that even the most extravagant fore¬
cast seldom overtakes the truth. H. G. Wells once wrote
and was no doubt laughed to scorn for his follythat
the aeroplane might have some influence upon warfare by
1950. Even Wells never imagined that by that date
aircraft would not only have become of supreme import¬
ance but would have been challenged by still newer
weapons.
The advances in rocket research since the 1940's have
been phenomenal, but they have merely laid the founda¬
tions for what is still to come. Nevertheless, it is worth
recording present achievements to fix the position of
astronautics as it is today.
Heights of 385 kilometres and speeds of over 8,000 kilo¬
metres an hour have been attained by a "two-step" rocket
fired from White Sands, main centre of American rocket
activity. A large number of missiles, some more efficient
and with higher ceilings than the original German V.2,
have been developed. (For example the Viking, which
though a single-stage rocket, should ultimately have a
ceiling of over 300 kilometres)
A great deal has been learned about the upper at¬
mosphere by means of instruments carried
in such rockets, which send their readings
by radio to ground stations. In this way
physical recovery of the rocket is un¬
necessary though recently this has been
achieved by means of special parachutes.
Cont'd
on
next page
23

CHALLENGE OF
THE SPACESHIP
(Continued) Lunar round-trips by atomic rockets
In addition, manned rocket vehicles, such as the Douglas
Skyrocket; known to have flown at well over 2,000 kilo¬
metres an hour have also been developed. These ma¬
chines can hardly be called aircraft, since they operate
at altitudes so great that conditions around them are
almost the same as in (airless) space.
During the next decade, the techniques necessary to
send small, radio-controlled rockets to the moon will
become available. Such rockets would weigh about 50
tons at take-off and have a payload of a few kilogrammes.
They could make astronomical reconnaissance flights of
great scientific and also psychological importance.
There is no reason why such flights should not take
place by 1960. The public, not realizing the problems
still to be faced, will expect human beings to follow in a
very short time. It will be disappointed. During the sub¬
sequent years there will be innumerable short-range flights
beyond the atmosphere by man-carrying ships reaching
heights of a few thousand kilometres and, as I have
mentioned earlier, raising all sorts of petty legal problems.
But if we have to rely on chemical fuels, It may require
at least 20 years of further experimenting before the first
true spaceship lands on the moon and returns to earth.
That brings us to the late 1970's. Any chemically-
fuelled spaceships will be unwieldy, fabulously expensive
machines with fuel consumptions measured by the
thousand tons for a single voyage. Not more than one
or two countries will be able to build them, and they will
be of scientific value only. There will be no question, for
a very long time, of colonization or of voyages to the
other planets. But; and it is a very large butany
prophet would indeed be rash if he based his predictions
upon the use of chemical fuels alone.'
Coasting flights halfway round the sun
Here, as in other fields, the great question-mark is
atomic energy. In theory, a few kilogrammes of
uranium could take a ship weighing 1,000 tons to the
moon and back. In practice, we have a very long way to
go before this can be done. At the moment one possible
solution is that some form of enriched, high-temperature
pile or reactor could be developed to accelerate a "working
fluid" such as hydrogen, helium or some other gas of low
molecular weight and so give a propulsive jet. Very great
engineering difficulties will have to be overcome before
this can be done, and an alternative solution is to use
what has been called the "ion rocket." In this device
charged particles would be accelerated by electric fields
to produce the jet; the necessary fields being generated
by nuclear energy. Such a scheme would have many ad¬
vantages, but it could only operate In airless space and
it could only produce such low thrusts that it could not
possibly lift a spaceship up from the earth's surface
against the direct pull of gravity.
This is by no means a fundamental disadvantage, and
indeed fits in very well with current ideas on astronautics.
The fact that it is not possible for any spaceship to carry
enough fuel for a voyage to another planet and back has
long focused attention on what have been called "orbital
techniques." Once a rocket is above the atmosphere and
therefore no longer subject to air resistance, it becomes
theoretically possible for it to turn itself into a sort of '
"artificial moon." All it need do to achieve this is to
reach the necessary speed in horizontal flight, and from
there on it will stay in its orbit without using any more
power just as the moon itself does. It could wait
effortlessly until "tanker" rockets were sent up to refuel
it: then, when its supplies had been replenished, it could
continue on its way.
In this manner any Interplanetary journey can be
broken down into a number of stages, with refuelling
between them, and this procedure is believed to be the
key to space-flight. It seems likely that we may use the
present-day "chemical" rockets to climb up from earth
into the refuelling orbit, and then continue from there
using atomic or "ion" rockets.
Atomic power is hardly likely to advance the conquest
of space by more than 10 years, but it may make it
24
practical almost from the beginning, which otherwise
would certainly not have been the case. What is equally
important, it will mean that the whole solar system, and
not merely the moon, will be immediately accessible to
man. It requires little more power to reach the planets
than it does to go to the moon, but the most economical
voyages involve months or even years of free "coasting"
along orbits curving halfway round the sun. With atomic
power these journeys could be cut to a fraction of the
time. For example, the "cheapest" journey to Mars as
far as fuel is concerned lasts 258 days. With an atomic
ship, travelling by a more direct route at quite a moderate
speed, it need take only a few weeks.
The last quarter of this century will be an age of
exploration such as man has never before known. By the
year 2,000 most of the major bodies in the solar system
will probably have been reached, but It will take centuries
to examine them all in any detail. Those who seem to
think that the moon is the goal of interplanetary travel
should remember that the solar system contains eight
other planets, at least 30 moons, and some thousands of
asteroids. The total area of the major bodies is about
250 times that of earth, though the four giant planets
probably do not possess stable surfaces on which landings
could be made. Nevertheless, that still leaves an area
10 times as great as all the land "surface of the .'earth.
This, then, is the future which lies before us, if our
civilization survives the diseases of its childhood. It is a
USIS
DESTINATION MOON. An imaginary rocket has landed on the
moon and is about to take off for an interplanetary voyage. This photo
taken from a recent American film, "Destination Moon", produced
with the help of Mount Palomar Observatory in California. Destina¬
tion moon may soon no longer be limited to science fiction tales.

future which some may find terrifying, as no doubt our
ancestors found the hostile emptiness of the great oceans.
But the men who built our world crossed those oceans and
overcame those fears. If we fail before the same test, our
race will have begun its slide into decadence. Remember,
too, that when the great explorers of the past set sail
into the unknown they said goodbye for years to their
homes and everything they knew. Our children will face
no such loneliness. When they are among the outermost
planets, when the earth is lost in the glare of the sun
and. the sun itself is no more than the brightest of the
stars, they will still be able to hear its voice and to send
their own words in a few hours back to the world of men.
Let us now consider the effects which interplanetary
travel must have upon human institutions and ideas. The
most obvious and direct result of the crossing of space
will be a revolution in almost all branches of science.
I shall not attempt to list more than a few of the discov¬
eries we may make when we can set up research stations
and observatories upon the other planets. One can never
predict the outcome of any scientific investigation, and the
greatest discoveries the ones which will most influence
human life may come from sciences as yet unborn.
TV relay stations circling the earth
Astronomy and physics will, of course, be the fields of
knowledge most immediately affected. In both these
sciences there are whole areas where research has
come to a dead end, or has never even started, because our
terrestrial environment makes it impossible.
The atmosphere, which on a clear night looks so trans¬
parent, is in reality a coloured filter blocking all rays
beyond the ultra-violet. Even in the visible spectrum the
light that finally struggles through the shifting strata
above our heads is so distorted that the images it carries
dance and tremble in the field of the telescope.
An observatory on the moon, working with quite small
instruments, would be many times as effective as one on
earth. Far greater magnifications could be employed, and
far longer exposures used. In addition, the low gravity
would make relatively simple the building of larger tele¬
scopes than have ever been constructed on this planet.
In physics and chemistry, access to vacua of unlimited
extent will open up quite hew fields of investigation. The
electronic scientist may well look forward to the day
when he can build radio tubes a kilometre long, if he
wishes, merely by setting up his electrodes in the open!
We may learn more about gravity when we can escape
partially or wholly from its influence.
The prospect of building stations in space, circling the
earth like tiny moons in orbits beyond the atmosphere, is
one that has a peculiar fascination. Such stations were
first proposed by the Germans as refuelling depots for
spaceships, but even if that need never arises they would
have other most important applications. Meteorological
observatories in space could see at a glance the weather
over half the planet, could watch in detail the movement
of storms and rain areas. The wonderful photographs of
the earth from V.2 rockets give a hint of what may be
done in this direction. Indeed, really accurate forecasting
may have to wait until meteorologists get out into space.
The space station has one other application of the
greatest importance, for it provides perhaps the only
means of worldwide television broadcasting. As is well
known, the reliable range of a television transmitter
extends barely beyond the horizon. A dozen stations at
least would be needed to cover completely a country as
small as Great Britain, and continental or world services
would be completely out of the question. Yet three relay
stations circling the earth could provide a steady, reliable
service from pole to pole with no more power output than
a single present-day station.
However, the first direct results of astronautics may be
less important than its indirect consequences. This has
proved true in the past of many great scientific
achievements. Copernican astronomy, Darwin's theory of
evolution, Freudian psychologythese had few immediate
practical results, but their effect on human thought was
tremendous.
We may expect the same of astronautics. With the
expansion of the world's mental horizons may come one
of the greatest outbursts of creative activity ever known.
The parallel with the Renaissance, with its great flower-
The Unesco Courier. November 1957
ing of the arts and sciences, is very suggestive. "In
human records," wrote the anthropologist J.D. Unwin,
"there is no trace of any display of productive energy
which has not been preceded by a display of expansive
energy. Although the two kinds of energy must be care¬
fully distinguished, in the past they have been . . . united
in the sense that one has developed out of the other."
Unwin continues with this quotation from Sir James
Frazer: "Intellectual progress, which reveals itself in the
growth of art and science . . . receives an immense impetus
from conquest and empire." Interplanetary travel is now
the only form of "conquest and empire" compatible with
civilization. Without it, the human mind, compelled to
circle forever in its planetary goldfish bowl, must event¬
ually stagnate.
We all know the narrow, limited type of mind which
is interested in nothing beyond its town or village, and
bases its judgments on parochial standards. We are
slowly perhaps too slowly evolving from that mentality
towards a world outlook. Few things will do more to
accelerate that evolution than the conquest of space. It
is not easy to see how the more extreme forms of nation¬
alism can long survive once men see the earth in its true
perspective as a single small globe among the stars.
The solar system is rather a large place, though whether
it will be large enough for so quarrelsome an animal as
Homo sapiens remains to be seen. But it is surely rea¬
sonable to hope that the crossing of space will have a
considerable effect in reducing the psychological pressures
and tensions of our present world. Much depends, of
course, on the habitability of the other planets. It is not
likely that very large populations will, at least for many
centuries, be able to subsist outside the earth. There may
be no worlds in the solar system upon which men can
live without mechanical aids, and some of the greatest
achievements of future engineering will be concerned with
shaping hostile environments to human needs.
We must not, however, commit the too common mistake
of equating mere physical expansion, or even increasing
scientific knowledge, with "progress" however that may
be defined. Only little minds are impressed by sheer size
and number. There would be no virtue in possessing the
universe if it brought neither wisdom nor happiness. Yet
possess it we must, at least in spirit, if we are ever to
answer the questions that men have asked in vain since
history began.
Every thoughtful man has asked himself: is our race
the only intelligence in the universe, or are there other,
perhaps far higher, forms of life elsewhere? There can
be few questions more important than this, for on its out¬
come may depend all philosophyyes, and all religion too.

Is ours the only abode of life in space?
The first discovery of planets revolving round other
suns, which was made in the United States in 1942,
has changed all ideas of the plurality of worlds.
Planets are far commoner than we had believed: there
may be thousands of millions in this galaxy alone. Few
men today would care to argue that the earth must be the
only abode of life in the whole of space.
It is true it is even likely that we may encounter no
other intelligence in the solar system. That contact may
have to wait for the day, perhaps ages hence, when we can
reach the stars. But sooner or later it must come.
There have been many portrayals in literature of these
fateful meetings. Most science-fiction writers, with
characteristic lack of imagination, have used them as an
excuse for stories of conflict and violence indistinguishable
from those which stain the pages of our own history.
Such an attitude shows a complete misunderstanding of
the factors involved.
Remember the penny and the postage stamp which Sir
James Jeans in the Mysterious Universe (1) balanced on
Cleopatra's needle. The obelisk represented the age of
the world, the penny the whole duration of man's existen¬
ce, and the stamp the length of time in which he has
been slightly civilized. The period during which life will
be possible on earth corresponds to a further column of
stamps hundreds of metres perhaps a
kilometrein height.
Thinking of this picture, we see how
(1) Cambridge University Press, and MacMillan,
New York, 1930.
next page
25

CHALLENGE OF
THE SPACESHIP
(Continued) We may meet superhuman races
infinitely improbable it is that the question of interplanet¬
ary warfare can ever arise. Any races we encounter will
almost certainly be superhuman or subhuman more likely
the former, since ours must surely be one of the youngest
cultures in the universe. Only if we score a bull's eye on
that one stamp in the kilometre-high column will we
meet a race at a level of technical development sufficiently
near our own for warfare to be possible. If ships from the
earth ever set out to conquer other worlds they may find
themselves, as they arrive, in the position of painted war-
canoes drawing slowly into New York Harbour.
But if the universe does hold species so greatly in
advance of our own, then why have they never visited the
earth? There is one very simple answer to this question.
Let us suppose that such races exist: let us even suppose
that, never having heard of Einstein, they can pass from
end to end of the galaxy as quickly as they wish...
That will help them less than one might think. In 10
minutes, a man may walk along a beach but in his whole
lifetime he could not examine every grain of sand upon
it. For all that we know, there may be fleets of survey
ships diligently charting and recharting the universe.
Even making the most optimistic assumptions, they could
scarcely have visited our world in the few thousand years
of recorded history.
Man-made worlds creeping from star to star
Perhaps, even at this moment, there lies in some rather
extensive filing system a complete report on this
planet, with maps which to us would look distorted
but still recognizable. That report would show that
though the earth was teeming with life, it had no domi¬
nant species. However, certain social insects showed
considerable promise, and the file might end with the note:
"Intelligence may be emerging on this planet. Suggest
that intervals between surveys be reduced to a million
years."
I have mentioned before how limited our picture of the
universe must be so long as we are confined to this earth
alone. But the story does not end there. Our impressions
of reality are determined, perhaps more than we imagine,
by the senses through which we make contact with the
external world. How utterly different our cosmologies
would have been had nature economized with us, as she
has done with other creatures, and given us eyes incapable
of seeing the stars! Yet how pitiably limited are the eyes
we do possess, tuned as they are to a single octave in an
endless spectrum. The world in which we live is drenched
with invisible radiations, from the microwaves which we
have just discovered coming from sun and stars, to the
cosmic rays whose origin is still one of the prime mysteries
of modern physics. These things we have discovered
within the last generation, and we cannot guess what still
lies beneath the threshold of the senses though recent
discoveries in paranormal psychology hint that the search
may be only beginning. These are deep waters, and it is
time to turn back to the shore, to leave the distant dream
for the present reality of fuels and motors, of combustion-
chamber pressures and servo-mechanisms.
The desire to give a comprehensive picture of the
outcome of astronautics has compelled me to range not
unwillingly over an enormous field. However, I do not
wish anyone to think that the possibilities we have been
discussing need come in this century, or the next, or the
next. . . . Yet any of them may arise, at any time, as soon
as the first ships begin to leave the earth. Man's first
contact with other intelligent races may lie as far away in
time as the building of the Pyramids or it may be as near
as the discovery of X-rays.
Of this, at least, we may be fairly certain: barring
accidents the most obvious of which I need not specify
the exploration of the planets will be in full swing as this
century draws to its close. To examine them in any de¬
tail, and to exploit their possibilities fully, will take
hundreds of years. But man being what he is, when his
first ship circles down into the frozen wastes of Pluto, his
mind will already be bridging the gulf still lying between
him and the stars.
26
Interplanetary distances are a million times as great as
those to whijh we are accustomed in everyday life, but
interstellar distances are a million-fold greater still. Be¬
fore them even light is a hopeless laggard, taking years
to pass from one star to its neighbour. How man will
face this stupendous challenge I do not know: but face it
one day he will. Professor Bernai was, I believe, the first
to suggest that one solution might he in the use of arti¬
ficial planets, little self-contained worlds embarking upon
journeys which would last for generations. Olaf Stapledon
has expanded this theme in Star Maker, one of the great¬
est of his fantasies, but the thought of these tiny
bubbles of life, creeping from star to star on their age-long
journeys, carrying whole populations doomed never to set
foot upon any planet, never to know the passage of the
seasons or even the interchange. of night and day, is one
from which we might well recoil in horror. However those
who would make such journeys would have outlooks very
different from our own. These speculations intriguing
though they are, will hardly concern mankind in this cen¬
tury. We may, I think, expect that it will be at least years
before confinement to the solar system produces very
marked signs of claustrophobia.
Our survey is now finished. We have gone as far as is
possible, at this moment of time, in trying to assess the
impact of astronautics upon human affairs. I am not
unmindful of the fact that 50 years from now, instead
of preparing for the conquest of the outer planets, our
grandchildren may be dispossessed savages clinging to the
fertile oases in a radio-active wilderness. Yet we must
keep the problems of today in their true proportions. They
are of vital indeed of supreme importance, since they
can destroy our civilization and slay the future before
its birth. But if we survive them, they will pass into
history and the time will come when they will be as little
remembered as the causes of the Punic Wars. The cross¬
ing of space even the sense of its imminent achievement
in the years before it comes may do much to turn men's
minds outwards and away from their present tribal
squabbles. In this sense the rocket, far from being one
of the destroyers of civilization, may provide the safety-
valve that is needed to preserve it.
This point may be important. By providing an outlet
for man's exuberant and adolescent energies, astronautics
may make a truly vital contribution to the problems of
the present world. Space-flight does not even have to be
achieved for this to happen. As soon as there is a general
belief in its possibility, that belief will begin to colour
men's psychological outlook. In many ways, the very
dynamic qualities of astronautics are in tune with the
restless expansive spirit of our age.
Day-time dreamers are dangerous men
I have tried to show that the future development of
mankind, on the spiritual no less than the material
plane, is bound up with the conquest of space. To
what may be called using the words in the widest possible
sense the liberal scientific mind, I believe these argu¬
ments to be unanswerable. The only real criticism that
may be raised against them is the quantitative one that
the world is not yet ready for such changes. It is hard not
to sympathize with this view, which may be correct, but I
have given my reasons for thinking otherwise.
The future of which I have spoken is now being shaped
by men working with slide-rules in quiet offices, and by
men taking instrument readings amid the savage roar of
harnessed jets. Some are engineers, some are dreamers
but many are both. The time will come when they can
say with T. E. Lawrence: "All men dream; but not equally.
Those who dream by night in the dusty recesses of their
minds wake in the day to find that it was vanity: but the
dreamers of the day are dangerous men, for they may
act their dream with open eyes, to make it possible."
Thus it has always been in the past, for our civilization
is no more than the sum of all the dreams that earlier
ages have brought to fulfilment. And so it must always
be, for if men cease to dream, if they turn their backs
upon the wonder of the universe, the story of our race
will be coming to an end.
