OUR GREAT OCEAN RESERVOIR
A THOUSAND AND ONE SECRETS LOCKED IN WATER, CLOUDS & ICE
Tf MP "C APR '57
I
Woods Hole Océanographie Irstitute
ANATOMY OF THE ATLANTIC was studied by research ship Crawford, from Woods Hole Océanographie Institute
(U.S.A.), in 1957. Here, oceanographer shows vessel's track chart across Atlantic. Superimposed on left is chart of
deep-water temperatures between Africa and South America. Island of St. Helena, topping a high mountain peak in
the mid-Atlantic submarine range contrasts sharply with depths of 15,000 feet surrounding it. At this latitude bottom
waters are close to freezing point and only In top 200 metres are ocean waters near the temperature of the atmosphere.
The Immensity of this earth is best appreciated by the
men of the sea. From the air it seems small; on
the land the expanse is always limited. But the
sea is continuous and endless. The continents are only
islands in it. Altogether they cover only 57 million
square miles. But the ocean area is 140 million square
miles two point five times the land area. And ten percent
of the land, six million square miles, is covered with ice
that is slowly crawling back to the sea. Almost three
quarters of the earth's surface is water or ice.
The volume of water, is even more impressive. In
human terms a cubic mile is enormous, for a box one
tenth of a cubic mile in size could easily contain the
entire human race though not comfortably. Yet a cubic
mile would hardly seem a drop in the world's total of
350 million cubic miles of water. While most of the
water is in the great ocean reservoir, of course, about 25
million cubic miles of it is in circulation elsewhere at any
moment, making the grand tour up into the skies by
evaporation, then falling as rain or snow and returning
to the ocean via the rivers. The atmosphere probably
contains about 3,600 cubic miles in the form of vapour
and clouds. The surface rivers and lakes hold about 55,000
cubic miles. The amount hidden in underground rivers
and reservoirs is several hundred times larger and has
been estimated at 20 million cubic miles.
But aside from all these mobile forms, there is still
about one percent of all the earth's water that is detained
in its circuit, frozen, perhaps for centuries, in the form of
22
glaciers and the massive ice cover of Greenland and
Antarctica. How much this is nobody knows because the
thickness of the Antarctic ice has been measured at very
few points. Estimates of the average thickness vary from
2,000 to 5,000 feet but at some points it is certainly 10,000
feet thick. One of the most interesting results of the
Year's researches will be the answer to this question. De¬
pending on the thickness, the total volume of Antarctic
ice is between 2.4 million and 6 million cubic miles.
If all this ice were permanently frozen in place, it
would matter little to human thought or plans. But it is
in constant exchange, always growing with snowfall yet
always flowing to the sea in glaciers or breaking from the
Shelf Ice as icebergs and in sheets that may be several
hundred miles in extent and hundreds of feet thick. Part
of the snow is blown to sea by high winds. Above all, a
rise in temperature causes melting. If it were all melted
and ran to the sea the level of the oceans all over the
world would rise by 60 to 200 feet. Most of the world's
great seaport cities would be inundated. A report to the
American Geophysical Union calls the Antarctic glaciers
"something of a Sword of Damocles hanging over the
heads of all peoples living close to the sea".
It could happen but not soon and only very slowly
conceivably in 10,000 to 20,000 years. In fact, during most
of the world's history the earth was probably free of
glaciers. But in the past million years there have been
four great ice ages when the average temperature was
some ten degrees cooler so that ice accumulated and

covered a million square miles each in Europe, Siberia
and North America. As the ice piled up on the land, the
level oí the sea dropped to some 300 feet lower than now.
In about 3,000 B.C. the climate was warmer and drier
than now and sea level was apparently about six feet
higher than now. Then the glaciers grew again and
reached a maximum in the 18th century. Since then the
glaciers have been receding and the sea level is rising at
a rate of about 2.5 inches per century. Since the temper¬
ature of the earth is variable, the glaciers come and go
and even the "'ageless and eternal sea", rises and falls
again. Man is powerless to control such vast forces but
he has the ability to understand them and to foresee their
effects. This is part of the task of the sciences of glacio¬
logy and of oceanography during the Year.
Accordingly the Antarctic studies during the Year join
with those in the Arctic and with glacier studies through¬
out the world to determine the life history of the ice,
including its rate of formation, its age, and the shifting
balance between its growth and Its melting. Extended
studies are under way by both Soviet and American
scientists encamped on floating ice islands to measure
their drift and observe their fate as well as to measure the
temperature, depth and circulation of the Antarctic and
Arctic seas.
As for many years, since 1912, the International Ice
Patrol will continue its investigation of icebergs in
the North Atlantic for the direct benefit of mer¬
chant shipping but also to obtain weather data. So gla¬
ciology, oceanography and meteorology merge their sur¬
veys of ice, water and clouds for the purposes of better
forecasting of oceanic conditions and especially of anti¬
cipating their changes in the course of years.
Oceanography itself is a many-sided science that inclu¬
des the geological study of the sea bottom and the geo¬
graphy of its submerged mountain ranges and deep tren¬
ches, the variation of the saltiness, chemical composition,
and temperature of the waters, the mapping of the great
movements of the ocean currents both at the surface and
in the deeps, and the study of marine life, both plant and
animal, polar and tropical, at the surface and in depth.
During the Year, however, it is the ocean itself that will
be especially studied, not its life.
The surface currents of the oceans have a direct effect
The Unesco Courier. September 1957
on the climate and the weather of the continents as the
warm tropical waters flow toward the poles, both north
and south, and are driven eastward both by winds and by
the rotation of the earth. Thus the Gulf Stream In the
Atlantic and the Japan Current in the Pacific warm the
western areas of both America and Europe.
But cold water from the Polar regions flows toward the
tropics in the ocean depths. The British research ship
Discovery II has recently tracked the deep currents by
using a float made of sealed aluminium tubing which is
heavier than water at the surface, but can be adjusted to
the density of the compressed seawater at any depth and
can be effectively suspended at different underwater
levels. It drifts with the submerged currents, sending out
sound signals which permit the ship to follow it on the
surface. In the Gulf Stream there is a strong northward
movement at the surface and little movement at depths
of 5,000 to 6,000 feet, but at depths between 8,200 and
9,200 feet the movement is southward. At one point the
deep float travelled 23 miles in 66 hours. Even 18 inches
from the bottom there is noticeable flow to the south.
Thus the ocean "turns over" at a slow pace. The com¬
plete top-to-bottom exchange may take from 150 to 1,000
years, bringing the surface plant life to the lower levels
and mineral nutrients to the top. It is possible that the
fluctuations may be responsible for severe changes in the
climate on land. The "age" of the deep waters I.e. the
years since they were at the surface is measured by
bringing up samples irom far below, releasing its dissolved
carbon dioxide by means of acid, then determining the
ratio of the three forms, or isotopes, of carbon in the gas.
As the radio-active isotope gradually disappears with the
years, the ratio shows how long each sample has been
submerged.
Knowledge of the deep currents will also become in¬
creasingly important if the practice of disposing of radio¬
active wastes from nuclear power plants becomes general
in the atomic age. It is by no means certain that such
materials will long remain where they are dropped. So
it is also important to know the nature of the ocean
floor. It has usually been assumed to be a thick layer of
sediments but there are certainly large areas
of bare rock. Samples are gathered by Cont'd
dropping a core-tube to within a few feet of
the bottom, suspended on a heavy cable, then
releasing a heavy lead weight which drives
the core-pipe into the soft sediment. With a
'AGE' OF OCEAN WATERS at great depthsthe years since they
were at the surfacecan now be measured by studying content of
radio-active isotopes to determine the "turn over" or complete top-
to-bottom exchange which may take from 150 to 1,000 years and
whose fluctuations may be responsible for severe changes in climate
Woods Hole Océanographie Institute photos
on land. Above, right, lowering a water sampler from U.S research,
ship, Crawford, to obtain specimens from the depths. Thousands of
observations of temperature, salinity, oxygen content etc., will be
made during the I.G.Y. by ships of many nations. Above, left, techni¬
cian unhooks a "Nansen bottle" used for collecting submarine water.
23

OCEAN RESERVOIR (Continued)
tube, about 3 inches in diameter,
samples 100 feet in thickness have
been obtained but more recent devices
take wider samples a° less thickness.
Columbia University's research vessel,
the Venia, has taken samples from
the ocean bottom 13,000 feet beneath
the surface. Microscopic study of the
materials in the samples and of their
arrangement in depth reveals their
geological history.
Another ocean-bottom device mea¬
sures the heat that flows to the sea
from the relatively thin crust of the
earth under it. Because of the vast
extent of the oceans this is an
important element in the heat balance
of the earth. It is the only major
source of energy that does not
originate on the sun.
The largest task of the oceanogra-
phers is to map the geography
of the sea bottom over its entire
area, which is 70 percent of the area
aï the earth. It is not flat but, like
the land area, has long chains of high
mountains, most of them wholly
submerged though some extend above
the surface as islands in the sea.
There is one such range 8,000 miles
long, running north and south in the
Atlantic between Europe-Africa and
the two Americas. Its peaks are
10,000 feet above their base on the
Atlantic floor. Another such ridge
runs from Japan south to Antarctica
and that continent is also joined to
South America by an undersea ridge
which projects above the surface to
form the South Sandwich, South
Orkney and South Shetland Islands.
But there are also long deep trenches
that cut into the sea bottom to a
depth of several miles. The deepest
is southwest of the island oí Guam,
more than 34,000 feet below sea-level
at the lowest point yet measured.
If the earth's highest mountain,
Mt. Everest in the Himalayas, were
based on this trench, it's summit
would still be 5,000 feet below sea
level.
Large areas of the sea, however,
have not been mapped and surprises
may appear during the Year as
vessels of many nations continue with
the modern technique of echo-
sounding which measures the depth
by the reflection of sound-waves irom
the bottom. Earlier this year, for
instance, the Lamont Geological
Observatory of Columbia University
announced the discovery of a "rift"
in the sea-bottom that is 45,000 miles
long and coincides with the major
undersea earthquake zone along its
entire length. It averages 20 miles
in width and 7,500 feet in depth. It
is bordered by mountain ridges that
average 6,000 feet in height and about
75 miles in width.
The sea is the source aï all rain
and no certain understanding of the
world's weather is possible without
much better knowledge than is now
available of the controlling factors in
the sea. The relatively unspectacular
explorations of the ocean deeps,
showing only a white research yacht
slowly cruising along, far from the
major traffic lanes, are nevertheless
one aï the most important features
of the Year.
24

