by
Kees Boeke
Text and illustra¬
tions copyright by
the author. Repro¬
duction prohibited.

FORTY JUMPS
THROUGH
THE UNIVERSE
On the pages that follow, we Invite our readers on an imaginery and fantastic journey through space
the world of the infinitely large and the world of the Infinitely small. Our voyage will be un¬
dertaken In a unique fashion, by a series of 40 jumps in the direction of a straight line perpendicular
to the horizon. In the first part of the voyage each jump will be on a scale ten times smaller (In the
second part on a scale ten times larger) than the preceding one until we have reached the two extre¬
me limits of size of our Universe. Forty Jumps Through the Universe, or "Cosmic View", as its author
terms it, has been devised by Kees Boeke founder and former director of the Werkplaats Children's
Community at Bilthoven, Netherlands, a pioneer "comprehensive school" created in 1926. The
school is now associated with the International Federation of Children's Communities founded with
the aid of UNESCO. Forty Jumps Through the Universe reveals In a novel and fascinating fashion
the different orders of magnitude of the Brobdingnagian and Lilliputian worlds around us, and
can serve as a stimulating complement to the UNESCO pamphlet "Man Measures the Universe"
(see inside back cover for details concerning this pamphlet and free offer to subscribers).
IT is important for us human beings who are living together on
our little planet to widen our sphere of interest. We are too
often inclined to consider our immediate surroundings as our
"world". For some of us it may be the house in which we live,
for others our village or town, for many our country. For the
few it is the continent, for fewer still the whole earth. But even
this horizon is too limited. We must develop a truly cosmic view
if we are to become free from the narrow provincialism, the chau¬
vinistic outlook, which is such a hindrance to a truly human atti¬
tude, and therefore one of the great dangers which beset mankind.
In order to develop this cosmic view, and thus as a help in
education for international understanding, the material which fol¬
lows has been devised (1). In the hands of a teacher who has
this wide outlook and interest, it may help children and young
people to realize their relative position in the great and mysterious
whole of the Universe.
At school we are introduced to a great many different spheres
of existence, but they are often not connected with each other.
It is therefore of value in our education to supply ourselves with
the means of developing a wider and more connected view of the
strange world in which we are placed.
This series of illustrations, published for the first time in the
pages of the unesco courier, originated years ago in a school
in the Netherlands, the "Werkplaats Children's Community" at
Bilthoven, where a group of children under my guidance drew
the original pictures which form its basis.
I began this project with them because I realized the importance
of developing a "sense of scale" and I therefore proposed to the
children to draw the same objects in different scales, using the
units of the "metric system".
When we started to make the pictures, we at once saw that it
looked as if we were going right up into the sky, so that we saw
the objects from ever increasing heights, smaller and smaller, where¬
as at the same time a constantly increasing area around them
was included in our view. We also noticed that the imaginary
jump we had to make to see the next picture at a ten times smaller
. (1) It will shortly be published in book form under the title "Cosmic
View : Forty Jumos through the Universe" (John Day Company, 62 West
ASth Street, New York 36, New York, U.S.A.). Price : $2.95. It will then
also be published in the Netherlands in Dutch.
scale had to be ten times higher than the one before, and we
soon found that we had started on a tremendous journey of
exploration, for we began to wonder what we would discover if
we kept on going up in the same way.
In undertaking such a plan, it was first necessary to decide on
the date and time of day, for we had to know where the sun would
be at that moment. With the group of children in Holland, we
assumed that the moment of observation in each case would be,
and would remain, the 21st of December 1951, at noon. We
knew that the sun would then be in what is called the "'Winter
Solstice", and that it would stand in the south.
We chose as our object to start with a little girl sitting in a deck
chair in the courtyard in front of the school building, and facing
south. When we started on our project, we hardly suspected what
our self-imposed task, which seemed so simple, would lead to.
The first 26 pictures are the record of such an imaginary journey
up into space.
The question then arose : what should we see, if instead of
decreasing the scale, we should increase it each time in order to
plunge into the world of the infinitely small ? To find this out,
we had to go back to the original picture of the little girl sitting
in front of the school. We then began a second journey of
exploration, which proved to be as full of marvels as the first,
and which is shown in the second half of this story in pictures on
page 28.
In our jump upwards into the heavens (Numbers 1 to 26) each
illustration is on a scale ten times smaller than the one before it.
This means that every centimetre (or inch) in a drawing is equiva¬
lent to a ten times larger distance, than the drawing preceding it.
Thus the first picture is on a scale of "one to fifteen", that is, one
centimetre portrays what in reality is 15 centimetres. In the
second picture, one centimetre represents ten times the distance or
a length of 150 centimetres, and so on until the centimetre in illus¬
tration 26 stands for a real length of unimaginable magnitude.
1 cm = 10 millimetres or 4/10 inch. Thus a centimetre in one
view simply becomes the same number of millimetres in the next.
In our jump downward into the microcospic world (Numbers 0 to
minus 13) the reverse is true, and each photo is on a scale ten
times larger than the one before it until in the final illustration
each centimetre stands for a real length of unimaginable tinyness.
Under each photo the scientific degree of scale is indicated.
20

The Unesco Courier, May 1957
1 ' One centimetre in picture = I 5 centimetres in reality.
OCHILD AND CAT. Our voyage Into the universe begins with
this simple photograph of a girl holding a cat. This is what we
are going to look at as we move straight up into the sky at noon on
December 21, 1951. Cat is used merely to compare sizes of living
creatures as they would occur In later domains of scale. It is assumed
we look down on scene from a height of S metres (I 6 x/2 ft), or 33 cm
on this scale. Smallest humans are pygmies: average 1. 45 m (4.80ft).
Tallest: Patagonians and Lake Chad Africans (1.84 m; 6.07 ft).
-* One cm = ISO cms. Drawings by EN do Bouter
OTEN TIMES SMALLER. The small square in the centre of this
second illustration is the miniature image, reduced ten times, of the
preceding picture. Near the child with the cat we can see the compar¬
ative size of two automobiles and the front part of a blue whale, the
largest animal the world has ever known. The giant blue whale meas¬
ures up to 34 metres (I 00 feet). Diplodocus was about 25 m (82.5 ft)
long. Certain Américain sequoias have attained heights of 83 m
(274 ft), some marine algae lengths of 100-200 m (330-660 ft).
I i I cm = 1,500 cm = 1 5 metres.
©WHALE IN A SCHOOL. We now look down from a height of
500 meters (1,640 ft) on a U-shaped building (I) the Werkplaats
Children's Community at Bilthoven, Netherlands. In the courtyard
Is the small square which corresponds to the previous illustration. We
now can see the whole whale (2), and the two cars are still visible (3)
but the little girl (4) is practically invisible. The long building (5)
is typically Dutch: It is a large bicycle shed for the numberless bicycles
on which the children from the surrounding area come to school
I cm ' 15,000 cm = ISO metres.
O CHILD HAS VANISHED. It is surprising that already in this
fourth image the child which filled the greater parte**/ the first picture
has completely disappeared. We must not forget that each time we
jump upward we rise ten times higher than we were in order to produce
an image ten times smaller than the one before. The wavy line reaching
the child represents, symbolically, a radio wave of the Hilversum Sender,
enabling us to compare Its wave length with the other objects In this
illustration. We are at a height of 5,000 metres or 5 km (3 miles).
21

FORTY JUMPS (Continued)
i	1 I cm- 1,500 metres.
OUTRECHT AND BILTHOVEN. We have now jumped to a
height of 50,000 meters or 50 kilometers (3 I miles). We notice
the second effect of the jumps we are making: not only do all things we
see become smaller each time, but the area also Increases tenfold.
Picture is not the complete field of vision of what the eye could encom¬
pass at this height. Above Illustration covers a square with sides
15 kilometers long (9.3 miles). Bilthoven (I) is a suburb of Utrecht
(2) fourth largest town of the Netherlands, located in centre of country.
1 v i * y
IV * 1
7 1
7
8 A
\
rt y
]_ \ (jJ\ ) Y ' :$j .v\- "V^-N-
/ ^vT-^^-i 'A&
/emtls
I 6V_
V \ ¿r "v^-^-
9 J~^^--^
I ru^~~~-V *À	f* ^-s^"*"*^
l¥~^^*^*^
&-£^' m'i\ **-** \
/~?V.
XT
' Tl
r4
I cm = I 5,000 metres = I 5 kms.
©CENTRAL NETHERLANDS. Our sixth |ump shows the cen¬
tral part of the Netherlands. Small square contains Bilthoven and
Utrecht. Holland's principal towns: Amsterdam (I), The Hague (2),
Rotterdam (3), and rivers Rhine (4) and Meuse (5) are now visible.
Bay In north (former Zuyderzee) is now a lake named after the river
Yssel (6), an arm of the Rhine which flows into It. In the Yssel Lake
new land (7) is being reclaimed by the use of dykes (8) and water-
pumping apparatus. In right centre, town of Arnhelm (9) is seen.
1	' I cm= I 5,000 kms.
O PLANET. Even more than in previous drawing the Earth now
shows up as the planet It is, spinning in anti-clockwise direction on
its axis in empty space. The sun, to the south, casts Its shadow towards
north. Two dotted lines mark limits of this shadow or "umbra" (I), as
otherwise they could not be shown against the blackness all around.
Other dotted line shows path of earth, moving from right to left. Many
distant stars would be visible but are omitted here and in following
drawings to concentrate attention on our "immediate surroundings".
22
H I cm» 150,000 kms.
«\ EARTH AND MOON. Readers will probably have noted that
r the shaded part of the earth in the two previous Illustrations was
clearly lighter on left side. The cause Is clear In this picture. Here
we see not only the earth (I) its path (2) and umbra (3) but the path
of the moon (4) around the earth. The actual position of the moon
on December 21 1951... when our Imaginary series of jumps through
the universe takes placeis shown at (5). It is now clear that as the
moon was on the left, night on earth was lit up there by Its reflected light.

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
i	1 I cm = I 50 kms.
O 1 5 COUNTRIES. Whereas picture 6 gave part of a country
with its towns, this one shows a portion of a continent (Europe)
with a number of its countries. Actually 15 countries are wholly or
partly visible. The map further shows three seas: North Sea, the
Baltic and Adriatic, and a portion of the Atlantic. The spherical shape of
the earth becomes visible: a parallel of latitude demonstrates this, but
the curvitude is so slight, that the map can yet be thought of as flat.
' ' I cm = 1,500 kms.
O THE EARTH. Now we can see five of the six continents. Only
Australia is not visible. The northern part of the globe is in shad¬
ow since the picture was taken on December 21 at noon. The sun
was then in the South, and daylight did not reach further North than
the polar circle. The shaded area is lighter than it should be in order
to show the visible portions of North America and northeast Asia.
The North pole (I) and the equator (2) as well as the meridians and
parallels of latitude for every IS0 are shown as series of dotted lines.
-n I cm = 1,500,000 kms. -h I cm = I 5 million kms.
®INTO OUTER SPACE. Shape of moon's orbit in previous
picture appears to be a circle. In reality it is an ellipse, but slight
difference Is only visible in the position of earth which is in the focus
of the ellipse and hence not in the centre. Dotted curve in preceding
drawing shows moon's orbit as it would actually appear from our
imagined observation point. Difference cannot be distinguished in
picture above which shows the earth (I), the moon and its orbit (2),
earth's umbra (3) and orbit (4). Latter is seen as slightly curved.
©VENUS IN VIEW. In our I 2th jump we have risen 500 million
kilometres from our starting point. The tiny circle (I) is now
the moons' orbit. The earth has become invisibly small but its position
is marked by a dot although this is much too large. The earth's orbit (2)
is now seen to be clearly curved. Under it the orbit of the planet Venus
(3) has come into view. No other planet approaches so near to the
earth. The ancients atfirst believed Venus was two planets alternatively
visible : Vesper, the evening star, and Lucifer, the morning star.
23

FORTY JUMPS (Continued)
I cm
©
50 million kms.
SUN COMES IN. The sun (I) has now come into the picture.
The dot denoting it and of course that showing the earth (2) are
much too big. Inside the earth's orbit are the planets Mercury (3)
and Venus (4). Outside It are Mars (5) and Jupiter (6) with their
orbits. The position of the planets in this and the following drawings
is that which they occupied on December 21, 1951. Apart from the
sun and the planets we see part of the orbit of Halley's comet (7),
which comes into our "neighbourhood" once every seventy-seven years.
-i I cm = 1,500 million kms.
©OUR SOLAR SYSTEM. Whole Solar System now is in view.
Sun and planets Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are reduced
to tiny circle (I) but other planets and orbits are clearly seen: Jupi¬
ter (2), Saturn (3), Uranus (4), Neptune (5) and Pluto (6). Pluto's
orbit at one place is Inside that of Neptune's. Entire orbit of
Halley's Comet is now visible with its position in 1951 (7). It will
be near Earth again In 1986. Elliptic nature of planets' orbits is
noticeable only for Pluto. Light on this scale would travel I cm per hour.
I cm = 1,5 million million km*.
©SOLAR SYSTEM A PIN POINT. This seems like a most
uninteresting picture; it contains no more than a tiny white dot
In the centre of a black square. Yet the spot stands for our whole Solar
System (the sun along with all the planets, comets, asteroids and meteor¬
ites which move around it... and their orbits!). Numberless stars, we
see at night, may possibly have similar satellites moving around them.
On this scale our SolarSystem would beonlya little more than a tenth of
a millimetre in diameter, and light would travel 6.3 cm in a year!
24
©
I I cm = about 1.5 light years.
OUR NEAREST STAR. For the first time we now show another
star besides the sun. The Solar System is the point (I). The
dot (2) is the double star Alpha Centauri, the nearest visible star to
Earth' It is about 25 billion miles (in U.S. trillion miles) or 4 light
years away, (i.e. light travelling at I 86,000 miles a second takes 4 years
to cover the space). A jet plane going 700 miles (1,120 km) an hour
would take almost a million years to reach it. From our observation
point here looking down the sun is closer to us than Alpha Centauri.

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
-) I cm = I 5,000 million km.
©SHRINKING SOLAR SYSTEM. Here whole "Solar System",
with the sun and all the smaller bodies which move around it,
has been reduced to a circle a little over I cm. These pictures really
give a wrong impression of what the Solar System would look like,
as all the orbits are shown. What would be seen would be only sun
as a small star and near It the planets, which themselves give no light,
but are lit up on side facing sun. Only a powerful telescope would
make them visible from present distance of 500,000 million kms.
-i I cm = I 50,000 million km.
©SOLAR SYSTEM A PIN-HEAD. We have now come to a
height of 5 million million kilometres above the horizon of the
village in Holland from which we started. It would have taken light
more than 6 months to cover that enormous distance from the earth,
travelling at the rate of 299,800 kilometers ( I 86,000 miles) per second.
As we have imagined that we made our trip without spending any
time, this means that if we had a marvellously good telescope we could
at this point see what happened on our little earth over six months ago !
I	' I cm = about I 5 light years.
©36 NEIGHBOUR STARS. Apart from sun and Alpha Centauri,
36 stars are now shown, all visible with naked eye from Earth and
all less than 50 light years from sun. Circle marks distance of 50 light
years from sun. Sun would no longer be visible without a telescope,
for star of its magnitude is barely visible with naked eye from dis¬
tance of more than 55 light years. Present point of observation:
500 light years away. Stars marked 3 and 4 might have been shown
in the previous drawing. The stars are identified in next caption.
1 cm = about I 50 light years.
AJJv 5,000 LIGHT YEARS AWAY. Stars in photo 19 are here
*mr shown from distance ten times removed, now 5,000 light years
from Earth. Best known are identified. Sun is at (I), then Alpha
Centauri (2), Beta Hydri (3), Delta Pavlonl (4), Castor (5), Pollux (6),
Capella (7), Procyon (8), Sirius (9), Arcturus (10), Altair (I I), Wega
(12). Seen from Earth, Sirius is brightest of all stars and relatively
near our planet: 51,000,000,000,000 miles or 6.5 light years. The
star Arcturus is 33 light years from Earth, Castor is 47 light years away.
25

FORTY JUMPS (Continued)
I cm = about 1,500 light years.
¿J\ BEYOND SOLAR SYSTEM. We have now jumped so high
y¿V that we have come right out of the complex of stars to which our
Solar System belongs, and which we can see on a clear star-lit night as
a strip right across the sky: the "Milky Way" or "Galactic System".
It contains thousands of millions of stars. Our sun ¡s a very unimportant
one and is located not In centre but on outskirts as seen above. In
tiny square sun and Its 37 neighbour stars have become a tiny dot.
i i I cm *= about I 5,000 light years.
©THE MILKY WAY. We now see whole galactic system or
"Galaxy". It Is a "Spiral", a circular disk with protruding spiral
arms and bulging centre. We see it partly tilted, hence as an ellipse.
In small square we recognize a rather irregular spiral, near which our
Solar System is situated. Other spiral arms can be seen. Below on
right ¡s a nebulous body, the Great Magellanic Cloud, a much smaller
galaxy, far behind our "Milky Way". White dots around galaxy are
some of the 100 ör more clusters of stars which surround it.
©
I cm = about I 5 million light years. I parsec = 3.26 light years.
MORE WORLDS. Countless galaxies and clusters of galaxies
are known to be spread out in all directions around our "Local
Group". In previous drawings only a few galaxies were shown but
were put in their correct positions. Here no more than a general
sketch can be given of the numberless worlds surrounding them. Each
galaxy or stellar nebula is isolated in space by an almost complete vac¬
uum extending for one or two million light years. Bridges of matter
between certain galaxies have, however, been discovered in recent years.
26
' I I cm = 150 million light years.
©STILL MORE WORLDS. Some thousand million galaxies are
visible with present telescopes, the furthest 2,000 million light
years from Earth. Galaxies are not fixed in position relative to one
another; they are moving away from each other at varying speeds.
According to one theory the Universe Is continuously expanding.
Clusters of galaxies, above, have been placed arbitrarily. What is
shown is certainly very much less than what actually exists, in the Immen¬
sity of the Universe, for the galaxies would be much nearer to each other
and they would continue far beyond the confines of the present picture...

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
I cm = about I 50,000 light years,
®200 MILLION YEARS TO ROTATE. Inside small square
we see our Galaxy (I) and Great Magellanic Cloud (2). Outside
are Small Magellanic Cloud (3) and two galaxies relatively "near"
Milky Way: the "Sculptor (4) and Fornax (5) Systems. Many other
galaxies would be visible but are omitted to centre attention on "our
nearest neighbours". Galaxy Is whirling in clockwise direction, its
spirals trailing; once around in 200 million years. Yet this movement
gives Solar System terrific speed of 216 km (135 miles) per second.
©
i I cm = about 1,500,000 light years.
JUST A 'LOCAL GROUP'. Galaxies tend to draw together
in groups, some small, others hundreds or even a thousand strong.
Our Galaxy belongs to a small group, called the "Local Group". Ellip¬
soidal in shape, its larger axis is 2 million light years long. Nearest
galaxies to ours were shown in previous photo. The Magellanic Clouds
are respectively 150,000 and 170,000 light years from sun. Among
more distant galaxies, Messier 3 1 Cluster (6) the Great Spiral
Nebula in constellation Andromeda is 1,600,000 light years from sun.
FROM MACROCOSM TO MICROCOSM
How far these countless millions of worlds continue outside the large square of illustration n° 26 is
not known. All these worlds seem to be rushing away from a centre somewhere, and therefore
from each other. Their speed seems to increase the further away they have proceeded on their
ways. It seems also that space is curved, but how it is curved is not yet known, nor do we know
if the Universe has a "radius". As all this is still so vague and uncertain, we end our imaginary journey
into these infinite expanses of space and turn back, to go through all the stages we passed on our flight
upwards. Let us attempt to picture to ourselves what it means each time the small central square extends
and extends as we come nearer and nearer to the Solar System, which must be there in the centre... until
at last the small square has grown to the size of the large one, and what we then see is to be found on
the previous drawing. It is clear that on this return journey the height from which we view the pa¬
norama decreases each time tenfold from station to station. When we have returned to the original
picture of the little girl in her chair, which we reproduce again on the next page, the height of our point
of observation has again become only 5 metres, and when we continue in the same way to the next
picture, it will be one tenth of this, that is only 50 centimetres.
We shall see, when we pursue our campaign of exploration, that on this journey we can go
through only half the number of stages we passed on the first expedition. We shall reach the unknown
after 13 of them whereas in the journey upwards we counted 26 jumps. But who will say what wonders
are hidden beyond the limits of man's investigations of today?
27

FORTY JUMPS (Continued)
i
-
-H I cm = I 5 cm in reality.
OPREPARE TO PLUNGE. We now begin the second part of our
adventure, this time plunging downward into the world of the
infinitely small. Our jumping off point is once again the girl with her
cat. One of the things we have wanted to find out has been: in how
many of the domains of scale are living creatures known to occur ;
Thus far we have found them only in photos numbered I, 2 and 3.
From now on we shall continue to look for representatives of the
living world in all succeeding scales. Unusual creatures and objects will
be assembled on the hand of the child to help us compare their sizes.
©
I cm in picture = 1.5 cm in reality.
HIND LEGS UP. We are now looking down from a height of
'50 centimetres (20 in.). The first living creature we meet is an
Anopheles or malaria mosquito. We can tell this from the way it
sticks up its hind legs. We also notice a little cut in the girl's finger.
In the centre of the tiny square we may be able to distinguish a minute
white spot. It is a grain of salt. We will note that, contrary to our
upward flight Into the heavens, in our downward plunge each square
in the centre will be ten times enlarged in the following image while
the tiny square within ¡twill be 100 times enlarged two pictures later.
-* I cm = 1.5 x I0-J cm.
©THE MICROBE SCALE. Height from which we are looking
down on skin has now been reduced to five-tenths of a millimetre,
or 500 "microns" to introduce the microbe scale. A micron is one-
thousandth of a millimetre. Living creatures here are bacteria: coll ( I)
diphtheria (2), tubercle bacillae (3) and pneumonia bacteria (4). Bacte¬
rium in inset can now be recognized as a typhoid bacillus (5) such
as human beings may "carry" unknowingly for a long time. Its
flagella are clearly shown and will be magnified separately in inset.
On this scale height of salt crystal (6) would be over 30 cm. (I ft).
I cm = 1 . 5 X I 0-* cm = 1.5 micron.
©VIRUS OBSERVED. Fourth jump has taken us Into a world
so minute that electron microscope is needed to get an idea of
shapes of living creatures. Diphtheria bacillus is at (I). We see sau¬
sage-shaped coli bacterium (2) being attacked by tiny bacteriophages (3).
A smallpox virus has now come into view (4). We note how keratin
of the skin curls up (5) before falling off. Extreme thinness of gold
leaf is shown at (6). Wave lengths of red (7) and violet light (8) are
symbolically represented. Inset shows typhoid bacillus (9) with flagella
( 1 0). Height of salt crystal on this scale would be over 3 metres ( I 0 ft).

The Unesco Courier. May 1957
;^%,j0f{ir,
s/l\ %ß- 6 5
©INVISIBLE WITH EYE. Minimum distance an object must be
from human eye to be seen clearly is 25 cm. ( 1 0 in.). We have
here reached 5 cm. (2 in.) and with a magnifying glass can distinguish
the furrows in the skin. Small organisms at (I) are water mites and
bacteria. In bottom right corner inset there is a bacterium still too
small to be seen. In wound we see a section of epidermis and above it
grain of salt. Mosquito now appears like huge monster: large com¬
pound eyes are at (2), feelers (3), jaws (4) and proboscis (5) stinging
child. We see flexible sheath (6) bent in curve as it touches skin.
I cm = 1.5 x 0.01 cm = 1.5 x I O-' cm.
©INSIDE THE SKIN. We should need a microscope to see this
picture, taken from a height of only 5 mm. (2/ 1 0 of an inch). One
of the water mites seen on previous drawing is a cyclops ( I). In section
of the skin we note the horny keratin layer (2) on top. Under it the
Malpighian Layer (3) with its numerous pigment cells, and the opening
(pore) of a sweat duct (4). Under that lies the Corium (5) with its
nerve endings or papillae (6), small blood vessels (7) and fat cells (8).
Only point of penetration of mosquito's proboscis into skin is shown
here (9). In inset, we can just see the bacterium as a tiny dot (10).
-* I cm = 1 . 5 x I 0-5 cm = 0. 1 5 micron. I cm = 1.5 X I O." cm = 0.01 5 micron.
©MOLECULES' APPEARANCE. On upper layer of keratin (I)
viruses are crowded together as they often are on skin. One of
the largest is small pox (2). A bacteriophage of medium size (3) is
shown very distinctly from electron microscope observation merely
to give size and shape for it would not be likely to lie there by
itself. Many molecules could be shown. Two starch molecules (4) are
represented in the above Illustration. Inset shows the helical
structure of flagellum (5) as given by electron microscope. Height of
salt crystal on this scale: 30 metres (100 ft) or length of blue whale.
©HIGHER THAN EIFFEL TOWER. This scale has a magnifi¬
cation of more than 600,000. The electron microscope can no
longer give us clear images here, for at most it has magnified 100,000
times. Yet we know that living creatures exist on this scale. Shown
are infantile paralysis virus (I) already visjble in -5, and hoof and
mouth disease virus (2) about smallest known to now. Molecules
of air are visible as dots (3). Electron micro-photograph shows
flagellum (inset) composed of three strands. Height of salt crystal on
this scale would be over 300 metres (990 ft) or taller than Eiffel Tower!

FORTY JUMPS (Continued)
I cm = I . S X I 0-' cm = 0.00 1 5 micron.
©MAGNIFIED 6 MILLION TIMES. Though magnification is
now over six million times, X-ray diffraction method permits dis¬
tances of successive layers of sodium (I) and chlorine (2) atoms in lat¬
tice of salt crystal to be accurately shown. Yet on this scale height
of salt crystal would be 3 kms (1.8 miles). Oxygen (3) and nitrogen
(4) molecules are moving about as "air" at approximate distances
shown. Nitrogen molecules are slighter larger and over 3 times more
numerous. Inset shows one of strands of flagellum, though only
hydrogen atoms are given. Dotted lines (5) show limits of molecules.
3
m
m *
2 %
w
i.
a
fi /
I cm = 1.5 x 10-'= 0.00015 micron = 1.5 Angstrom.
©INTER-ATOMIC DISTANCES. Distances between atoms are
now so tiny they are measured by a new unit: angström (A) one
ten-thousandth of a micron or a hundred-millionth of a cm. Sodium
(I) and chlorine (2) atoms of salt crystal are clearly indicated. Darker
grey area indicates greater probability of finding an electron. As to
oxygen molecules (3) moving in air, their speed at 10° is 470 metres
per second. In the image that speed would seem I 09 times greater, i.e.,
more than one hundred times the speed of light! In inset, only
hydrogen atoms are again shown. Incorneraquarterofahydrogenatom.
' ' I cm = 1.5 X I 0-" cm = 0.0015 Angstrom.
A SALT 18,000 MILES HIGH. This is now the third jump we
^mw have made since seeing the atoms from the outside in " 8" and
we are still In the seemingly endless emptiness of the inside. Chances
of meeting an electron are again 100 times smaller. Wave length of
gamma ray has increased to 5 cm. Grain of salt, which was only half a
millimetre when we saw it in real existence on the girl's hand, has
now become an unthinkably huge cube with sides of more than
30,000 km (almost 20,000 miles). This is 350 times the height of Mt.
Everest! Nucleus of sodium atom is 0.7 mm, that of hydrogen 0.2 mm.
i i I cm = 1.5 x I 0-" cm = 0.00015 Angstrom.
©PROTONS AND NEUTRONS. Nucleus of sodium has grown
to appreciable size. Proton or nucleus of hydrogen atom is shown
in inset. Atoms consist of electrons whirling round a nucleus composed
of protons and neutrons. Hydrogen atom, simplest of all elements,
has single electron revolving about nucleus of one proton. Helium
atom has 2 electrons; sodium I I ; uranium 92; centenium 100. Dimen¬
sions here are 100 million times smaller than wave length of light.
Electrons and protons are electrically charged particles detectable by
Geigercounterand Wilson Cloud Chamber. Neutrons have no charge.

The Unesco Courler. May 1957
0.1 5 Angstrom.
©X-RAY WAVE LENGTH. As darkness of grey denotes prob¬
ability of finding an electron, shading of the Sodium atom filling
most of area of the picture and of hydrogen atom in inset is lighter than
in photo 8, for area is now only one-hundredth in size. Nucleus of
sodium is in center. Its size on this scale is only 7 micron. Twelve
electrons are whirling round this nucleus at speeds of about I 000 km
per second in reality, which would seem 1, 000 million times more on this
imagined magnified image! Wavy line drawn shows wave length of finest
X-rays on this scale. Quarter of a hydrogen atom is visible in the inset.
jj)
m = 0.01 5 Angstrom.
WRIST WATCH GAMMA RAY. Colour symbolizing probable
presence of an electron is even a lighter grey than on previous
drawing because area depicted here is again 1 00 times smaller. Dotted
line coming from left shows wave length of a typical "gamma ray"
(wave length 5 mm) such as is emitted from a wrist watch. On this
scale girl in picture n° I would have a height of about 10 million kms
(6 million miles)! Salt crystal would now be over 3,000 km high (almost
2000 miles). Sodium nucleus would be one-thirtieth of a millimetre,
the hydrogen nucleus or "proton" one-hundredth of a millimetre.
A,
-i I cm=l.5x I 0-1J cm = 0.00001 5 Angström..
©WEIRD PENETRATING POWER. In this last picture we
see the nucleus of sodium atom but cannot even guess how the
12 protons and I I neutrons of which it is composed are placed. Inset
shows proton or nucleus of hydrogen atom. A weirdly powerful
gamma ray from cosmic radiation comes into the picture from left.
Smaller particles than protons or neutrons, such as mesons, have recently
been detected. Looking back on our series of 40 pictures we find that
in only ten of them (Nos. I to 3 and 0 to is life known to exist.
In other scales there may, however, be forms of life as yet unknown.
.ND so our journey ends at the nucleus of the atom, thai
mysterious, utterly small and incredibly powerful centre of
energy which only recently has unveiled some of its secrets
to mankind. Whereas at the end our first journey we stood
in awe before the imposing greatness of the dimensions of the
Universe, and felt as nothing in comparison to their immen¬
sity, the conditions are now completely different. True, we
feel as much awe and reverence when we attempt to think
of the miracles of dynamic power which are hidden in these
domains of the smallest existing entities, but our own dimen¬
sions are now indescribably colossal compared with what wc
see. Thus in the last drawing a man's height on that scale
would be of the nature of 10 thousand million kilometres,
that is about the diameter of the Solar System! If we add
to that the thought, that man is beginning to control and
use these limitless nuclear powers, it is clear that unthinkable
possibilities are within his reach. When we thus think in
cosmic terms we realize, that, if he is to become really
human, man must combine in his being the greatest humility
with the most careful and considerate use of the cosmic powers
of which he can dispose.
The problem, however, is that primitive man at first tends
to use the power put in his hands for himself, instead of
spending his energy and life for the good of the whole growing
human family which has to live together in the limited space
of our planet. But now it is a matter of life and death for
the whole of mankind that we learn to live together and that
our children be educated in a spirit of tolerance and mutual
respect, regardless of differences of birth or upbringing, of
nationality or race, of creed or conviction.
