Magic artisan of Milan
Early one afternoon a few weeks
ago a 65-year old printer in Milan
bent over a huge proof sheet cover¬
ed with a series of delicate colour pla¬
tes. It was probably the hundredth time
he had seen the same proofs. On each
occasion before, he had peered intently at
every detail of colour, at every shade
and tone, had shaken his head and scrib-.
bled a few rapid marks in one spot or
another. To these, each time, he had
added a comment such as '"troppo rosso"
(too much red) or "'blu troppo debile"
(not enough blue). This time, however,
he looked up and nodded to a Unesco
expert. There was a twinkle in his eye
as he smiled and said "perfetto."
The man was Amilcare Pizzi, the
"magic artisan of Milan" and the word
he uttered meant that another album in
the Unesco World Series was now
ready or perhaps just about almost
ready to come off the presses.
When in 1954 the New York Graphic
Society decided to launch the Unesco
series of albums of little known national
art treasures, each with 32 coloui
plates to be reproduced with the highest
technical quality and fidelity, the firm of
Amilcare Pizzi was the immediate and
unanimous choice.
Pizzi brought to Unesco almost half
a century of exceptional craftsmanship
and devotion to beauty which had earned
for him the undisputed title as the finest
colour printer of all Italy ("the wizard
of Italian colour printing" his compa¬
triots call him) and undoubtedly one of
the most meticulous colour printers
anywhere in the world.
Apart from the Unesco World Art
Series, Pizzi's greatest pride is his monu¬
mental tour de force in publishing an
exact replica of the famous Codex Resta,
a 17th century bound collection of paint¬
ings and drawings preserved at the
Ambrosiana Library, Milan. He and his
staff of 300 worked for more than two
years to finish the work in which every
stain, every blotch and every shade of
colour of the ancient paper was repro¬
duced along with one hundred plates
reprinted with the same measurements
and colours as the originals. When the
Codex Resta was completed (2,000 copies
were printed) it astounded book pub¬
lishers the world over and was hailed as
the most perfect publishing achievement
of the graphic arts.
For one of his latest volumes on the
Mosaics of Ravenna in the "Silvana Col¬
lection" he had bagfuls of the tiny
mosaics shipped to Milan to be sure that
his colour reproduction would be replicas
of each stone. During the war he ma¬
naged to photograph all the frescoes of
Mantegna at Padua just three days before
they were destroyed by bombing. His
colour reproductions are the only remain¬
ing testimony of these masterpieces.
Curiously, Pizzi opened his first printing
plant with savings from his exploits as a
football champion (he was halfback on
Italy's national team in his youth).
Photos show stages in colour printing of
Unesco albums. (I) Films for Masaccio vol¬
ume are treated in retouching room.
(2) Photo shop prepares negative for Spain
album. (3) Amilcare Pizzi (white smock) and
Anton Schutz, director of New York Graphic
Society, check colour fidelity of sheet proofs.
(4) Workman pulls colour hand proof from
plate for Spain album, photos UNESCO-Farabola
46

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
47
