Chinese gets
a Latin alphabet
by Chou You-Kuang
Beginning this autumn, some of the
fifty million children in China's
primary schools will start learn¬
ing a new phonetic alphabet using
Latin letters. They will not stop
learning the traditional characters.
For the time being, both will be
taught simultaneously. This is a pre¬
liminary step in the big programme
to change China's written language
from a set oí ideographs to one in
which the words are "spelled out" in
letters denoting sounds.
Up until now students of Chinese
have faced the task of mastering over
3,500 separate characters before they
could read a newspaper or a simple
novel. Each character is made up of
anything from two to thirty strokes.
Besides recognizing what it means,
one has to learn how to pronounce
each one separately. There is no
correct indication of sound in the
character itseli. To reach university
level, it has been necessary to acquire
at least five or six thousand such
symbols. Even this is not a sufficient
key to the great treasure-house
of China's classical literature to
understand the writing of the past, a
scholar may need to recognize at least
10,000 characters.
Now the first big step has been
taken toward a change. Eventually
how soon it is not possible to say, for
we are dealing with a gigantic process
with many complications the Chinese
school child, after mastering 26 letters
and their sounds, will be able to
recognize and pronounce all the words
he knows. He will be doubly fortunate
because he will learn a spelling system
that is being worked out scientifically.
There will be iewer irregularities of
spelling such as exist in languages
whose orthography has grown up by
accidents of history, like English.
The need for such a reform has long
been recognized. To transform China
from a backward country into an
advanced industrialized one demands
the rapid education of the whole
people, and the wiping out of illiter-
racy. At present, simply to learn to
read takes months or years aï time.
The characters also run counter to
the needs of modern techniques
and communication. In the printing
press, types are set by hand. Chinese
typewriters exist but they are slow
and clumsy. In telegraphing, every
character must be changed into a
four-number code, which then has to
be deciphered at the other end a
great hindrance, among other things,
to journalism in these days of split-
second news reporting. Dictionaries
are arranged in several different ways,
18
none of them simple or quick. There
is no satisfactory method of indexing
records or everyday reference works
directories, yearbooks, encyclopaedias
and so on.
For the last sixty years, Chinese
scholars have tried to devise and
promote new systems of writing. The
adoption of the new alphabet by the
State Council was preceded by a
whole year of public discussion
of a drait scheme, prepared by the
Committee for Reforming the Chinese
Script. Over 10,000 language experts
and teachers took part in special
conferences organized by local and
national committees. More than 4,000
letters of suggestion and comment
were sent in, including many from
Chinese living abroad and from
philologists.
Finally, two alternative revised
versions were worked out and these,
together with the original draft and
three other proposed schemes, were
submitted to a special government
committee. The first revised scheme
finally won the approbation of 136
out of the 234 experts who took part
in the study. This was the basis of
the State Council's decision.
Why * was the Latin alphabet
preferred to others? The
reason was that, though not
entirely appropriate for reproducing
all Chinese sounds, it is the most
widely known one in the world.
More than 60 countries now use it,
including the majority of those in
Europe, the Americas and Southeast
Asia. Its letters are internationally
employed as symbols in mathematics
and natural science. Mastery of it
will permit Chinese people to learn
other languages more easily. Its use
will make Chinese more accessible to
foreigners.
Moreover, attempts to use the Latin
script to write Chinese have a long
history. The first was made by an
early Christian missionary scholar,
the Italian Jesuit Matteo Ricci, in the
year 1604. After the Opium War of
1840 more missionaries flooded into
China, and between 1847 and 1893
they "romanized" the sounds of. at
least 17 regional dialects for conveni¬
ence in translating the Bible. 'With
the development of foreign trade and
contacts, names ai places and persons
had to be given some form of spelling
for use in shipping documents, the
post office and the press abroad.
Among the methods devised by
foreigners for spelling the official
"Mandarin" language, the most widely
used was the "Wade system", publish¬
ed in 1867 by the British sinologist
Thomas F. Wade. This is still used in
the Chinese post oifice, and for
rendering Chinese characters in
English maps, dictionaries and so
forth, but no attempt was ever made
actually to write Chinese in it.
Following the short-lived "reform
movement" in the 1890's, during the
last period of the Manchu dynasty,
Chinese scholars began to study the
possibility of introducing the Latin
alphabet for the language. They
devised a number of different systems.
But at that time the majority 'favour¬
ed the adoption of simplified Chinese
characters. After the overthrow of
the Manchu dynasty, a set of 40 new
symbols, based on Chinese characters
and known as the Chu-Yin Tzu-Mu
(Phonetic Alphabet) was ratified by
the government of the day, in 1918.
Up to now these signs have been
printed alongside the characters in
dictionaries and primary school text¬
books to help the students pronounce
the words. Though it provides ade¬
quate symbols for the various sounds
of the language, these are incon¬
venient for reading and writing. The
symbols cannot be joined together in
a flowing script. They would be hard
to adapt for typewriting, typesetting
and telegraphy.
After May 4, 1919, intellectuals
began to consider more seriously the
problem of the reform of the written
language. They knew that popular
education and literature could not
flourish unless the gap between
the written and spoken word was
overcome. They stood for the use oí
everyday speech in writing, instead of
the antique classical style employed
till then in literary prose and poetry,
letter-writing and even the press.
For some years attention was centered
on writing the spoken language with
the old characters. By 1926, a group
of progressive philologists came to¬
gether to make research into ways of
writing Chinese phonetically and
brought out a scheme called Gwoyeu
Romatzyh (Chinese Romanization).
But this did not gain wide popularity.
The most successful and vigorous
efforts to introduce a phonetic alpha¬
bet in this period began in the late
1930's. Impressed by the successful
use of such scripts to provide written
languages and wipe out illiteracy
among some of the minorities in the
Soviet Union, a group of Chinese
revolutionaries, led by the Communist
writer Chu Chiu-pai, set to work in

The Unesco Courier. July 1957
Evolution of the Chinese character ma, meaning "horse".
1928 to devise a phonetic system ior
China. This was introduced in 1933
under the name of Latinxua Sin Wem
(New Latinized Writing). The follow¬
ing year saw the beginning of the
National Salvation Movement against
Japanese Invasion. In this movement
the Latinxua system took hold, and
was widely used.
In the following years, a number of
Latinxua associations were organized
in places like Shanghai, Canton,
Hankow and Hong Kong. Newspapers
and periodicals published articles to
promote it, and textbooks and other
materials were produced. During the
Anti-Japanese War it was taught to
the people of the Yenan area (the
Shensi-Kansu-Ninghsia Border Re¬
gion). It also caught on in the areas
of national resistance founded behind
the Japanese lines in north- and
northeast China and elsewhere, where
soldiers and people learned its use.
Following the deieat of Japan in
1945, the work of spreading the alpha¬
bet lapsed for a while. But those who
had learned the Latin alphabet did
not forget itfor instance, it was
recently found that in one county in
Hopei province, practically all middle-
aged men and women still knew how
to write in it. It continues to be used
for transmitting service telegrams on
all railways in Northeast China.
But even with the Latin alphabet,
there is still a lot to be done
beiore it becomes a workable method
of writing Chinese. One necessary
step already under way for some
time is to popularize what is called
"the common speech", the standard
Peking pronunciation. China has a
number of dialects and people from
different areas often find it difficult
to communicate with one another
orally (though they use the same
written language). To help them
learn a common language in addition
to their own dialect is desirable in
itself; it is essential if a phonetic
language is to succeed. Primary
school teachers and workers in other
educational fields all over the country
are now studying the standard
pronunciation. Radio, theatre and
cinema are popularizing it among the
people at large.
On the technical side, there are
still a number of unsolved prob-
blems concerning such matters
as spelling. Philologists have started
to study the homophones (words dif¬
ferent in meaning but the same in
sound) in the Chinese language so as
to work out a way for distinguishing
between them when written. For
instance fâ %. meaning a tree and
$fc ê] meaning a number are both
pronounced shumu. However, this is
not a very serious difficulty because,
when the words are printed in context,
confusion between them is unlikely.
Clear identification may be facilitated
by varying the spelling or inserting
hyphens in some words.
Another question is how to put
words together. Each Chinese cha¬
racter represents a separate syllable
and may stand by itself or be com¬
bined with one or several others to
form a word. For instance, the word
for a chicken consists oí two charac¬
ters, written ,]-«í% (hiau gi). Shall
it be written as one word or two?
And how shall we spell out numerals
and measurements? The characters
	f'-S-lf^-hiL W kian san
bai liu shi wu) mean one thousand
three hundred and sixty-five. Should
they be run together jikiansanbailiu-
shiwu, or combined by numbers and
units: jikian, meaning one thousand;
sanbai, three hundred; and so on?
These and similar problems, such as
the writing of Chinese versions of
foreign place names, will be settled
through study and trial. Only when
all are solved and the new practice
has won the assent of the public will
it be possible to say that a new
phonetic written language actually
exists. Only then will the new script
be recognized as a standard method
of writing, alongside the old charac¬
ter-method.
Even after the phonetic language
becomes universal for ordinary pur¬
poses, middle school and university
students will continue to study the
traditional Chinese characters, just as
some in Britain and France study
Latin and Greek. At present most
students who have reached university
level can only read works in the
modern literary style, or pai hua
common speech. Those specializing
in history, the Chinese language, and
literature will continue to study wen
yen, or the classical style, which is
widely different.
At the same time the classics will
be translated into plain modern lang¬
uage. This is already being done,
and later they will be transliterated
in the phonetic alphabet. So China's
ancient culture will not be buried.
On the contrary it will be brought
within reach of the whole people for
the first time in our history.
CHOU YOU-KUANG is a member of
the National Committee for the Popu¬
larization of Standard Spoken Chinese,
and also heads the Phonetic Research
Department of the Committee for the
Reform of the Chinese Written Language.
FOUR WAYS OF WRITING A CHINESE SENTENCE
Ideographs:
Wade system (1867):
Chu-in Tzu-mu (1919):
New phonetic
alphabet (1957):
English meaning:
T'ui-kuang p'u-t'ung-hua; chu-pu
*X\«X*. &X¿X¿rXY; 4X-Í7X
Tuiguang putunghua; zhubu
Popularize the "common speech"; gradually
&m #-!- itio
tsai-yung p'in-yin wên-tzù.
caiyng pinjin wenzi.
begin using the phonetic alphabet.
19
