THE FOOD OUR
ANCESTORS ATE
by R. J. Forbes
Nothing is more surprising and more fantastic than the
story of human diet, of what mankind has chosen to
eat and drink throughout the ages.
A mere two hundred years ago we find ourselves
in a world without pressure cookers, without pasteurization,
evaporated foods and drinks, deep-freezing, refrigerators and
canned food. Even the most civilised parts of the world were
then liable to suffer from hunger caused by failure of crops;
the lack of proper and sufficient fodder crops necessitated
the wholesale slaughter of cattle in the autumn and condemned
many to eat salted and smoked meat for months on end.
Another three hundred years back and we are in a world
that had no potatoes, maize, coffee, tea or tobacco nor any
of the foodstuffs and natural products of the Western
Hemisphere or the Far East. Gin and other spirits were only
just coming into general use and the first bye-laws against
drunkenness are evidence of their effect. Only a few
generations later the sailors of the Dutch navy were on the
verge of revolt because gin was substituted for their daily
ration of ale.
Such examples show how difficult it is to appreciate the
tastes and food habits of ancient man; the further we go
back in history, the stranger the
situation becomes.
In the Palaeolithic, food-gathering era
man consumed his food either raw or
roasted. Boiling only became possible
with the advent of heat-proof vessels
and pottery much later. We can obtain
a glimpse of this primitive menu by
studying people like the Eskimos, who
eat most of their animal food raw and
only occasionally resort to roasting
(keeping the inside underdone), but
always consume their food either cold
or lukewarm.
There was, of course, plenty of
vegetable food available, but we have
no idea of the extent of early man's
menu, since most of the remains have
perished and only rarely are well-
preserved bodies found, the contents of
whose stomachs we can analyse. The
Upper Palaeolithic hunter-fishers of
Europe ate the meat of reindeer, wild
horses, bison and hares. They caught
20
the Arctic willow grouse and ptarmigans, salmon, pike, trout
and bream. Further south the red deer, the roe deer, the
wild pig and the aurochs were killed and eaten. Limpets,
mussels and honey were also collected.
The Mesolithic hunter-fishers lived almost exclusively on
the land animals of the forests, occasional sea birds, ducks,
geese and swans. Fishing concentrated on pike, but on the
coast occasional stranded whales were cut up and eaten, and
seals, cod, conger eels, haddock, crabs, bream, ray, skate and
certain types of shark were caught for food. From the few
remains of vegetable food we know that they ate hazel nuts,
water lily seeds, wild pears and^ berries.
The Neolithic settlers had learnt to cultivate cereals and
had begun to breed domestic animals; having pottery at their
disposal, they started the various cooking operations we know
and thus opened up many new ways of preparing food and
making new foodstuffs digestible. They had inherited the art
of preparing soups from earlier generations who could on
occasion heat mixtures of water and herbs by the immersion
of previously heated stones. Now, with cooking pots, they
could make porridges in pots by direct heating over stones.
More durable pastes and doughs were sometimes made from

such porridges and man discovered fermentation and hence the
earliest alcoholic beverages prepared from fruits (grapes),
honey and cereals (barley) containing natural sugar.
After the advent of agriculture, venison gradually
disappeared from the menu and meat was obtained from
domesticated cattle, pigs and sheep. Fowling was still
important as a means of securing oil for lamps, and fish now
also served for the feeding of cattle. Salmon, sturgeon and
eels were caught and smoked or dried for consumption during
the winter.
The Neolithic farmer supplemented his cereal dishes with
acorns, beech nuts, hazel nuts, elderberries, strawberries and
raspberries. The roots of certain reeds, the bog bean and
the water nut were collected and groats (crushed grains) were
prepared from wild grasses.
A similar evolution took place in the ancient Near East,
where records dating from about 3000 B.C., left by the
civilizations of the valleys of the Nile, Euphrates, Tigris and
Indus, begin to shed light on many points which remained
obscure during the prehistoric phase. We find that cereals
were sometimes parched or roasted to
prepare them for milling or to make
them more suitable for storing, an
operation which we should distinguish
carefully from the drying of unripened
grain sometimes practised in prehistoric
Europe with the object of making up
for the lack of sunlight and hastening
the ripening of the grain.
In the Near East animal and
vegetable foods differed slightly from
those of prehistoric Europe mentioned
above. In ancient Egypt cereals formed
a substantial part of the food consumed
and consisted mainly of emmer, barley
and some naked wheat. The Egyptians knew no less than
30 different types of bread, cakes and sweetmeats. Beans,
peas and lentils were eaten except by certain groups of priests
who were forbidden to touch them. Vegetable food consisted
largely of water melons, lettuce, artichokes, cucumber, endive
and radishes. Dishes were flavoured with onions, garlic and
leek, and fruit such as dates, figs, nuts of the doum palm and
pomegranates were available.
There was a variety of vegetable and animal fats and oils
to choose from and the milk and cheese of goats and cattle
were used. Butter was sometimes consumed in the form
of ghee. Meat was obtained from cattle, goats and sheep,
but it was expensive and the poor consumed huge quantities
of pickled and salted fish and all kinds of geese and ducks,
so plentiful in the marshes along the Nile.
In ancient Mesopotamia meat appeared even more rarely
on the tables of the poor, who ate mostly dried, pickled and
smoked fish. Here sesame oil took the place of the olive oil

The ma chine age
rea lly staz ted
in the kite hen
The Unesco Courier. April 1957
used by the Egyptians, for the olive was never at home in
Mesopotamia. However, the "country between the two
rivers" had an abundance of fruit and at an early date the
inhabitants ate the cherries, apricots and peaches which slowly
moved westward but did not reach Italy until the beginning
of our own era.
A large part of the cereals grown was still consumed in
the form of porridges or cakes baked with flour, oil and
honey. Bread of a hard biscuit-like type without leaven was
baked on hot stones or embers or on the previously heated
walls of beehive-shaped ovens. Not until about 2000 B.C.
were such ovens provided with trays to hold the loaves
prepared from dough. Most households had their own clay
cooking ranges with a flat top and circular flue, but sometimes
groups of households shared a communal range in the open
and some of the ancient Mesopotamian towns had large ranges
in the temple annexes on which food could be cooked for
the hordes of servants. The baker of these ancient times was
often also a purveyor of food in general and a cook-shop
keeper who provided food for regular clients.
The ancient kitchen was the origin
of many if not most of our technical
operations. Indeed, the ancient techno¬
logists use culinary terms when they
describe the "boiling" or "washing"
of ores and other industrial materials.
To the kitchen we owe the development
of grinding machinery, the rotary mill
and its descendants, which were develop¬
ed from the quern, a primitive mill
consisting of two circular stones, the
upper one turned by hand, by which the
grain was crushed and ground into flour.
To the kitchen we also owe the mortar
and pestle and the sieve. The latter,
made of rushes, reeds or papyrus, was still a primitive
apparatus with unequal meshes and we need not wonder that
the ancient bread, even in Roman times, was full of grit and
stones which could not be properly removed with such make¬
shift sieves, even with the better Greek basket-shaped sieve.
We must also realize that the bread of the ancient Near
East was mostly unleavened and therefore a hard, gritty,
biscuit-like cake rather than the fluffy white bread we are
accustomed to. Leaven "was known in Egypt by about
1500 B.C. and was used from time to time. The ancient
Greeks and Romans did not use it until the beginning of
our own era, when the Romans got to know it from the
beer-drinking Celts of Spain and Gaul and used it for luxury
bread. This leaven was mostly produced from millet.
Apart from milk, a mild beer prepared from
emmer or barley was the common beverage of
the ancient Near East. Wine was grown but
only the rich drank it. On the other hand
Cont'd
next page
Medieval meals
far from colossal
There ¡s a medieval saying that angels need
to feed but once a day, mankind twice, and
beasts three times or more. The Middle
Ages were reputed to have been a period of
colossal meals washed down with plenty of
wine and beer, but we now know that these
feasts were exceptions and that the diet of
the masses was plain and mainly vegetarian.
Illustrations, taken from a 1 4th century
English book of psalms, show (top of p. 20) a
medieval kitchen staff at work; (far left) pre¬
paring the roast for the table, and (left) a
meal in progress. Guests, seated at a trestle
table, use knives and spoons. In England forks
were first used for eating meat in 17th century.
Figures courtesy of the Trustees, British Museum, taken
from A History of Technology. Clarendon Press, Oxford
21

FOOD OUR ANCESTORS ATE (Continued)
LITTLE MEAT
& NO POTATOES
E5
§mmmß
	mu* AA V. .«»
the Greeks and Romans promoted viticulture and drank wine
generally, though always diluting it with water. They
regarder beer as a barbaric drink, and when they colonized the
coasts of the Mediterranean they imported viticulture and
wine-drinking. It was not until Roman times that Gaul, the
present France, became a wine-growing country. Both in
Spain and Gaul beer was the original drink which only
disappeared in the early centuries of the present era.
The large-scale production of sesame and olive oil and of
fermented beverages led to very important technical
inventions. In order to express the juice of the olive and
the grape, the ancient Near East had invented the bag-press
and the roller-mill. The Greeks added the important lever-
press and the Romans invented the screw-press and the
wedge-press, all of which were used primarily for the
production of oil and grape juice.
The diet of ancient Greece and Rome differed little from
that of the ancient Near East. The primitive cereal, einkorn,
had come to Europe from the East but disappeared as emmer,
naked wheats and barley spread to the West in its wake.
Hardy crops like oats and rye were developed in Northern
Europe but did not come south before the first centuries of
our own era. The classical world depended mainly on home¬
grown emmer and barley but its preference for the naked
wheats resulted in large-scale imports of these grains from
Southern Russia, Egypt and North Africa to supply the cities
which specialized in olive growing and viticulture.
The "corn dole" played an important part in Roman
politics and so did the imports of grain in ancient Athens.
Flour was still mainly produced at home and the professional
miller and baker played scarcely any part before the first
century B.C. Coarse cloth and linen sieves gave a somewhat
better flour than had previously been obtainable. Most of the
ancient flour was simply whole-grain meal; among the sifted
flours an 80% extraction was standard. Bread and groats
were the staple food of Greece and Rome.
A large proportion of this farinaceous food was, however,
still consumed as a porridge, such as the "maza" compounded
of flour, honey, salt, oil and water, and the "turon" consisting
of flour, cheese-gratings, eggs and honey. Such porridges
and broths continued in favour up to the very end of the
Roman Empire. Many Greek dishes were sprinkled with
barley flour before cooking.
Watering down the milk
was an old Greek custom
From the Bronze Age onwards the Greeks had a consi¬
derable variety of vegetables at their disposal; they liked
to season them with all kinds of spices. Mutton and beef
were sometimes added, but they were costly, and only the
rich could afford poultry and game. The normal diet
contained many dishes made with milk and cheese, and fish
and other sea-food was very common. From excavations we
know that apples, pears, plums, pomegranates and almonds
were eaten.
Notwithstanding the Homeric allusions to large quantities
of meat, food was mainly farinaceous porridges of corn flour
and broths of beans and pulses with dried and pickled fish
and vegetables figuring on the table in Homeric times.
Curiously enough, drinking milk as such was considered
intemperate and it was always watered down. Together with
barley water and wine diluted with 1-3 times its volume of
water it was a common beverage.
By the fifth century B.C. bakeries were springing up in the
richer cities and fish was becoming even more common.
Spices such as cumin, coriander, sesame and silphium were
imported. Barley bread was now considered fit for the poor
EARLY ROMAN KITCHEN. The oven is on the right, and ingredients are being stirred into a large bowl standing on it. Carving from
a monument at Ingel, near Treves. Top of page, a Roman baker's oven. Men on right are kneading dough. Part of a frieze from monument
of Roman baker, Eurysaces, first century B.C. Ancient Roman bread, hard cake baked In hot embers, was dipped in milk before being eaten.
From A History of Technology, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
22

only and the richer people indulged in wheat bread. Pickled
sauces such as the "Garon" were very popular; this was
prepared by leaving fish to ferment in a salt brine for some
2-3 months. Cookery books and the earliest writings on
dietetics of the fourth century testify to a great variety of
dishes prepared from the ingredients mentioned. To the
Greek doctor however, "diet" meant only a prescription when
to eat, not what to eat!
The diet of the ancient Roman farmer was very much the
same. His "puis", like the Greek "maza", was a thick
porridge consisting of flour prepared from emmer, barley or
beans and seasoned with salt. Green vegetables were added
and groats were frequently eaten. The flat, hard bread baked
in embers and ashes was usually soaked in milk before being
eaten. Beans, peas, turnips and onions complete the original
vegetarian diet. Apples, plums, pears, pomegranates and figs
were known; garlic, salt and
garden herbs were used to
season the food. Milk,
cheese, honey and olive oil
completed the diet.
About 300 B.C. a change
occured owing to the spread
of Greek civilization from
the South. The taste for
wheat bread developed and
fish became far more popu¬
lar. The specialization of
the Italian farmer in grow¬
ing olives and fruit increas¬
ed the consumption of
almonds, chestnuts, hazel
nuts and walnuts. Oriental
fruits like cherries, peaches
and apricots were introdu¬
ced into Italian orchards
during the first century
B.C., but lemons and oran¬
ges did not come until much
later when the Arabs
brought them to Spain.
Meat also became more
popular as northern Italy
specialized in raising live¬
stock for the markets of
Roman and other large
cities. However, the over-
refined taste of the rich
mentioned by the poets,
satirists and cookery books
of the Imperial period did
not spread to the lower
classes, and the soldier's
diet remained basically the same as that of the sturdy Roman
citizen of old.
The Middle Ages are popularly held to have been a
period of colossal meals washed down with excessive quan¬
tities of wine and beer. Further study of the chronicles
proves that these were exceptions and that the diet of the
masses was plain and mainly vegetarian. In about 1325
Mahaut, countess of Artois and Burgundy, said that one
meal was the rule of angels, two that of mankind and three
or more that of beasts. The many holy days of banquet
repute were counterbalanced by many fast days.
Most of the rich shared the diet of the artisans and
townspeople which consisted of a kind of soup in the morning
and porridge or soup, fish and vegetables in the evening.
Bread and cakes were consumed in large quantities but pastries
only very rarely. Fish, fresh, dried or salted, was eaten
SEABORNE VINEYARD. Archaeology suggests that the vine
was cultivated in the Aegean in the Early Bronze Age. Greeks
were great wine lovers even from the days of Homer. Here,
Dionysus, Greek god of wine, makes his legendary journey.
According to one version he changed an attacking band of pirates
into dolphins, to continue his lonely but festive journey with
drinking horn in hand, the vines happily surviving. Illustration
decorating an Attic bowl, dating from about 500 B.C.
© Prof. Max Hirmer. Munich, From A History of Technology.
The Unesco Courier. April 1957
much more frequently than nowadays, meat being still very
expensive and reserved for the Sabbath. Water and milk
were drunk more frequently than beer and wine. The inven¬
tion of the gutting of herrings by Willem Beukelszoon of
Biervliet (Flanders) in about 1375 was an important addition
to the methods of preserving sea-food, large quantities of
which appeared on the tables of inland regions.
Slices of bread served
as plates and napkins
Bacon, beef, pork, chicken and eggs appeared on the tables
of townsmen fairly frequently and as their wages generally
rose in the course of the Middle Ages we find that they
started to indulge more in wheat bread and such delicacies
as pré-salé, that is mutton obtained from sheep fed on the
drained salt marshes along
the coast, as well as in pork
and goat's meat. Leaven¬
ed bread appears to have
been as common as unleav¬
ened cakes or dumplings.
Only the very poor ate
millet bread or used flour
made from buckwheat or
"sxiracen corn", which was
introduced during the fif¬
teenth century from Slav¬
onic countries. Oats and
rye were often used; cress,
radishes, parsnips and car¬
rots featured on the menus.
Towards the end of the
Middle Ages, Italy produc¬
ed the new types of food
we call macaroni and ver¬
micelli, prepared from de¬
siccated dough of cereals
and rice. It is possible that
these first appeared in
Southern Italy.
Butter, beef fat and lard,
rape seed oil and cole seed
oil were substituted for the
olive oil of the ancients, for
the olive would not grow
in these northern regions.
The only sweetening agent
was honey and this accounts
for the extent of beekeeping
during the Middle Ages.
People liked heavily spic¬
ed dishes; we find herb
gardens in every town and manor to supply these herbs all
the year round, and such Oriental spices as pepper appeared
on the tables of the rich, though few could afford them.
Many of these herbs and spices were eaten because of their
reputed medicinal properties.
Table manners also underwent a change. Food was usually
eaten with knives (of the hunting knife type), spoons and the
hands. Forks were used in the kitchen only. Slices of bread
served both as plates and napkins, but trenchers (wooden
roundels) and bowls of wood were also used. Salt containers,
often in the shape of a boat, were essential since medieval
people used much more salt than we do and added many
spiced sauces to their food. The rich used pewter, but as tin
grew more and more scarce, glazed pottery gradually came
into more general use.
Thus at the threshold of modern times diet was still pre¬
ponderantly vegetarian, fat and meat being used sparingly.
23
