PIERRE LOTI AT EASTER ISLAND
34

The Unesco Courier. August 1957
Photo left (and detail above) ¡s a water colour
painting which Pierre Loti dedicated to
Sarah Bernhardt. Loti wrote under it:
"Easter Island. 7 January 1872, about
5 a.m.; inhabitants watching me arrive."
Apart from giant statues strewn about,
painting shows Easter Island tattooing; a
Janus-headed dance paddle or club; various
hair styles: tuft or pompom arrangement,
and diadem of rooster feathers. Skulls of
former dead are found everywhere on Island
which has been termed a "giant ossuary."
Photo, right, shows five statues atop a large
burial platform made up of four superim¬
posed terraces. Each statue wears a cylin¬
drical turban headdress made of red tufa.
Loti's drawing reveals that, contrary to
even recent reports, all these statues had
not then been toppled from their platforms.
On January 3, 1872, the French
frigate Flore dropped anchor In
Cook's Bay at Easter Island.
Among the men who went ashore
was a midshipman of 22 with a re¬
markable gift for drawing, named
Julien Viaud. Sketch-book in hand
he toured the island and recorded his
observations in notes and images.
Julien Viaud was later to become fa¬
mous for his exotic fiction under the
pseudonym Pierre Loti.
The Flore had stopped at Easter
Island to bring back to France the
head of one of the huge stone statues,
made of soft volcanic stone, for which
the Island ls famed. Loti participated
in the operation, supervising the job
of sawing the head from a long bur¬
ial-platform Image and of transport¬
ing it aboard ship. It is now at the
Musée de l'Homme in Paris.
Because of his skill as an artist he
was assigned to make a series of
drawings of the statues. "It is
amazing," he wrote in his journal,
"how my ability to draw came in
useful and afforded me shore leave to
roam about." Loti executed his draw¬
ings with the eye of a keen observer
and the hand of a deft draughtsman
which already foreshadowed the rich¬
ness of his later literary works. He
sketched not only the statues, "from
every angle" as he said, but the inha¬
bitants, and the various dwellings,
weapons and artifacts they possessed.
Loti made a series of drawings of the
tattoo patterns that made some men's
bodies real works of art. These draw¬
ings represent graphic testimony of
no small anthropological value, show¬
ing Easter Island as it looked In 1872.
In addition, Loti brought back from
the "isle at the edge of the world" a
host of objects of inestimable value:
shark bone earrings, a statuette with
a rooster feather hairdress, and par¬
ticularly, an amazing wooden figurine
of a bird-man 'tangata manu) one of
the predominant symbols of Easter
Island, and two slender huas, Janus-
headed dance paddles, the chief
symbol of the bird ceremony.
Loti made drawings of the two types
of statues found on Easter Island:
the familiar bust type standing on
the slopes of the crater of a volcano,
Rano-raraku; and a long-bodied type
which in the past surmounted the
funerary cairns (ahuß) that fringe
the coast in an almost continuous
procession. It was believed that, as a
result of fierce inter-tribal wars not
a single ahu statue remained stand¬
ing after 1864, and that the last
white man to see them before they
were overthrown was Admiral du
Petit-Thouars in 1838. But Loti's
drawing (bottom left) reveals that
this one group was Intact in 1872.
The publication of Loti's Easter
Island sketches in L'Illustration and
Le Monde Illustré in 1872 marked the
beginning of his eight-year collabora¬
tion with these and other periodicals
in France and England. He became
a roving correspondent - illustrator,
regularly furnishing material on
exotic lands such as Tierra del Fuego,
Nuka-Hiva, Senegal, Guinea, Dakar,
Constantinople and Salonika. After
he gained fame as a novelist, the au¬
thor of Iceland Fisherman ended his
art association with magazines but
continued to sketch and illustrate
several of his own works.
35
