THE FLAG OF SCIENCE
ON THE 6TH CONTINENT
c
1 G. Y. STATIONS
United
States B Chile
es
Great
Britain
Soviet
Union
1*1 Japan
New
Zealandm
ii France i
mm
Norway
FT*
Argentina II Belgium
a« Australia ptfluiiui
MMflllU
Spain
Based on map published in "Natural History" V) I 957
THE 'ICE BOX* OF THE WORLD, as Antarctica has been called,
greatly influences climate of all countries. During I.G.Y. twelve
nations will investigate this mountainous land mass of 6,000,000
square miles (much larger than all of Canada) most of which is a vast
plateau averaging 6,000 feet in height, capped by the world's greatest
ice-sheet. Something like 90% of the total ice-cover of the world
lies on the southern continent. Studies of the possible shrinkage in
the Antarctic ice are of vital interest to mankind for if all this enormous
¡ce-sheet melted it would raise the average sea-level all over the
world by nearly 200 feet. For the first time more than 6,000 men
will be ranging over a continent still no more familiar to us than the
visible side of the moon. Map shows locations of principal I.G.Y.
stations with flags of nations manning them. Objectives of all
nations are the same: to determine how Antarctic influences world
conditions in respect of weather, water balance, glaciers, ocean
currents, etc, and to make joint geophysical measurements with
respect to world's magnetism, cosmic rays, the aurora and
other phenomena of the upper air and of the earth's interior.

SIXTH CONTINENT w
PICTURE FROM THE PAST (below) shows Sir Ernest Shackleton's
expedition ship ( I 908- 1 909) trapped in South polar pack ice. Threat¬
ened by gigantic iceberg pushed by deep ocean currents, ship was saved
by timely blizzard which deflected iceberg's course. Human endurance
and heroism finally triumphed over the white wastes in 1911 when
Amundsen and, 35 days later, Scott, reached South Pole. Right, South
Pole photographed today from plane which carried equipment and
supplies for the scientific observation station that has been set up there.
1957, Pictorial Press Ltd, London US1S
A unique feature of this age, beginning with this Year,
is that one whole continent is inhabited only by
scientists. They came from twelve nations with no
purpose of conquest or possession. They share their data
and discoveries, their equipment and supplies, and
perchance their hardships, with the men from other lands.
Characteristically, for instance, an American, Dr. Gordon
D. Cartwright, is working at the Soviet observatory at
Mirny while on the other side of the continent, a Russian,
V. Rastorgouiev, has a place at Little America. Even the
former tension between Great Britain and the governments
of Argentina and Chile, all three claiming the area between
South America and the South Pole, has now been resolved.
Instead, the three nations are maintaining some two dozen
scientific bases side by side.
Antarctica is as international now as science itself. It
is a true landmark in history as well as in geography.
Indeed its name has become an anomaly. It implies the
opposite to Árctica, which does not exist, for the North
Pole is 10,000 feet deep under the Arctic Ocean. This
magnificent new continent deserves a name of its own.
For the present it is in truth, if not in name, Science Land.
It is new only to man. The great rock shield that
underlies East Antarctica is very ancient. The high
mountains of West Antarctica have been uplifted and
folded through geologic ages. There is coal in some of
their strata to prove that this was tropical swampland at
one time. The continent is a vast area of nearly six million
square miles, approximately circular and 3,000 miles in
diameter nearly twice as large as all Europe, almost as
large as South America. It has majestic mountain ranges
more than 15,000 feet high. The South Pole itself is on a
plateau some 10,000 feet above sea level, the extent of
which is not known because only a small part of it has
ever been seen, even from planes. There is a rugged
mountainous peninsula, nearly 1,000 miles long, reaching
northward toward the Andes of South America and
perhaps an extension of them.
Antarctica has all the variety of any continent but over
it all is the endless monotony of the age-old ice sheet, in
places 10,000 feet thick. The ice covers almost every inch
and extends out to sea. In the great bay that is called the
Ross Sea, the ice shelf is 600 to 1,000 feet thick and extends
400 miles from the shore over an area 500 miles wide. It
10
moves steadily seaward at the rate of about four feet per
day. Beyond this Shelf Ice, pack ice covers the sea for
hundreds of miles in all directions although from the
Pole all directions are north.
Except for the end of the long peninsula that is known
in the British Commonwealth as Graham Land and in the
United States as the Palmer Peninsula, the entire continent
lies within the Antarctic Circle so that for six months of
the year none of it sees the sun and for the other six
months the sun circles around, low in the sky, without
setting. During the dark winter (June and July) the cold
is intense. A record of 83 °F below zero has been measured
on the Shelf Ice but temperature on the high polar plateau
has reached as low as 100°F below zero. Under the steady
summer sun (December and January) there are days when
the snow near the coast becomes wet irom melting.
The short, inadequate summers forbid the growth of
flowering plants. Only two are known and they are rare,
a species of grass and a pink. But the exposed rock areas
are sometimes covered with the browns and greens of
lichen and moss. The lichen is on the extreme limit of
life for it persists in spite of low temperature, can be
thoroughly dried by the cold and yet not die, and it is
almost independent of nutrients from the ground. The
only animal life that such vegetation supports is also of a
low order and includes insects like the wingless mosquito,
midges and mites.
But if the icy surface is a desert, marine life is plentiful.
The cold sea is rich in plankton. Indeed, the Antarctic
has been called the most productive sea in the world,
perhaps because of the continuous upswelling of waters
from the deep, bringing up plant nutrients. Feeding on
the plankton are huge numbers of "red krill", a type of
shrimp that, in turn, is the food for many fishes, for seals,
and for the large population of whales. Both the stately
Emperor Penguin and the smaller, agile Adelie Penguins
dive into the sea for their food but have their breeding
grounds on the ice. They are distinctive of the Antarctic
and fossil discoveries indicate that they may have evolved
from land birds that lived there during the long ages, long
ago, when the climate was mild.
Much remains to be discovered with res- Cont'd
pect to Antarctic life, both plant and ani- on
mal, but it will be incidental to the page 1 3
Year's expeditions. The basic, biological

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
Australian Official Photograph
SECRETS OF ANTARCTICA are now being discovered more ra¬
pidly as Nature's resistance is overcome with aid of modern machines
such as huge ice-breakers, airplanes, helicopters and electric snow
ploughs. Above, Antarctic expedition ship dwarfed by majestic, snow
covered mass of Mount Ohlson. Below, right, helicopters for carrying
personnel and supplies to advanced bases and tracked vehicles for
transporting building materials and instruments have made possible
a new era in polar travel though dog teams (below, left) are still of use.
1957 Roger Kirschner French Polar Expeditions Soviet Antarctic Expedition
British Official Photograph
II

y
1
LIFE AND WORK
IN AN ICE AGE
Australian Official photos
Antarctica is the coldest and windiest region of the whole globefar colder than the Arctic. The
air above it lies over a massive continent, glacier-bound, literally in an ice age; and temperatures of
100 degrees F below freezing can result. Surface winds, funnelled down the glacial valleys from the
interior can beat north at speeds of 1 00 miles an hour . These are the rigorous conditions in which
men who staff Antarctic weather and other observation stations live and work. Above, howling
winds sweep one of research stations maintained on Heard and Macquarie Islands. Below, left,
biologist disects a large, red deepsea crab, and right, meteorologist takes instrument readings.
I 957 Camera Press, London
12

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
SIXTH CONTINENT
(Continued)
ODYSSEYS OF THE WHITE WASTES
problem concerns the adjustment of the animals to the
extreme cold, the adjustment of their metabolism and
the properties of the fats that insulate their tissues. The
breeding grounds of the Emperor Penguin and of the seals
too are unknown. Both the birds and the seals should
be tagged to determine their migrations. Aerial photo¬
graphs are needed to count their numbers. Their diving
habits and underwater life also offer many mysteries. But
the geophysicists will have their eyes on the great drama
of the skies, the forces of nature and the geologic deeps.
The first man to suspect the existence of the great cold
continent was the famous British explorer of the Pacific,
Captain James Cook, but his attempts to penetrate the
barrier of pack ice failed in both 1773 and 1774. He was
within 1,200 miles of the South Pole when he turned
back after sailing completely around the continent. It
was in 1820 that the land was first clearly seen, either
by the American Captain Nathaniel Palmer or by the
British Captain Edward Bransfleld, both of whom,
having sailed south from the South Shetland Islands (500
miles from the tip of South
America), saw the mountains of
the long north-reaching penin¬
sula. Neither landed. In the
same year the Russian Admiral,
Fabian von Bellinghausen, sailed
half-way around the 'continent,
discovered the large Alexander I
Island, and saw vast ice masses WE}
which probably were on the
mainland.
It was not until 75 years later,
in 1895, that anyone landed on
Antarctica and two years later
a Belgian vessel, the Bélgica,
first spent the winter in its ice.
One member of that expedition,
and the first scientist to report
on Antarctic phenomena, was
the American meteorologist
Henryk Arctowski who, at 86, is
still living in Florida (U.S.A.).
But the first extensive
exploration and scientific study was made in 1901 to 1904
by the British National Antarctic Expedition under Captain
Robert Falcon Scott which explored the high plateau west
of the Ross Sea and reached to within 463 miles of the
South Pole. In the same years both a German and a
Swedish expedition made scientific studies near the shore.
In the next year, 1905, the American explorer, Robert E.
Peary, came within 200 miles of the North Pole and on
April 6, 1909, he reached it. But three months earlier, on
January 9, a British expedition led by Sir Ernest
Shackleton, came within only 97 miles of the South Pole,
high on the 10,000 foot plateau, before being forced back
by blizzards and lack of food. His failure and Peary's
success at the opposite pole led to a second British
expedition under Robert Scott which finally reached the
South Pole on January 18, 1912. Scott and his four
companions perished in a blizzard on the way back but
their scientific records and collections were found when
Spring came. They were not the first men at the pole.
That distinction belongs to a Norwegian party, led by
Roald Amundsen, who used dog teams and skis with
Norwegian expertness and made a relatively rapid dash
to reach the Pole on December 14, 1911just 35 days before
Scott's party arrived there.
Both of Scott's expeditions were sponsored by the British
Royal Society and the Royal Geographic Society and
produced volumes of scientific observations which were
more important, in the long run, than reaching the pole.
Simultaneous weather observations were made at widely
separated points, which permitted the first weather charts
of the region. Magnetic and electrical measurements and
the sounding of the upper air also set the pattern for the
intensive work that is now to be done by a broad and
continuing international effort during the Year.
In 1926 the American aviator Richard E. (later Admiral)
Byrd and Floyd Bennett flew from Spitzbergen to the
North Pole and return, a distance of 1,360 miles. In April
of 1928 the Australian, Sir Hubert Wilklns, flew 2,100 miles
from Point Barrow, Alaska, to Green Harbor, Spitzbergen.
They proved that there is no continent in the Arctic but
they also opened a new era in polar studies. On Novem¬
ber 29, 1929, Admiral Byrd and Bernt Balchen flew from
their base at Little America to the South Pole and back.
The airplane had become indispensable for photographic
reconnaissance, for transportation of supplies and person¬
nel to advanced bases and for rescue missions. An Ame¬
rican plane landed and returned from the South Pole itself
on November 1, 1956, and more than 700 tons of supplies
have been landed at the Pole by airliit for the construction
of the South Pole Station. The lowflying and slower heli¬
copter is almost equally valuable when operating from
shipboard to explore paths through the ice and in landing
supplies.
So also the diesel-powered tractor has replaced the dog-
team, the ponies and man-power for surface transporta¬
tion and has made possible the use of immense quantities
of building materials, scientific instruments and supplies
for comfortable and healthy
living. In addition, the power
of the ships that must penetrate
the ice barriers has grown from
the 200 horsepower of Admiral
Byrd's first ship only 25 years
ago to the modern ice-breaker
with ten diesel engines capable
of producing 21,000 horsepower.
Even more striking is the change
effected by radio-communica¬
tion which permits contact bet¬
ween advance parties and their
base, between bases thousands
of miles apart, and even with
the outside world and home by
means of radio-telephone con¬
nections. Finally, the science
of nutrition has made such
advances that scurvy and other
deficiency-diseases, once the
scourge of explorers, are now
unknown. "'The Continent is
rapidly approaching the period when long-term habitation
will become possible", writes Paul E. Siple, the chief
scientist at the South Pole Station of the U.S.A.
Ten nations have established bases on Antarctica:
Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom and the United
States. They are being joined by Belgium, and perhaps
Spain. The greatest concentration of research stations,
primarily devoted to meteorological studies, is on the long
Palmer Peninsula (or Graham Land) which is almost
directly south of the tip of South America and of the
Falkland Islands. Here the United Kingdom has ten
bases, Argentina eight and Chile six, all closely co¬
operating. Just to the east of it is the Weddell Sea that
cuts into the continental shoreline to a depth of some
600 miles and over an east-west spread of nearly one
thousand miles.
On its shores are an Argentine base, one of the U.S.A.,
and the base of the British Royal Society. Almost
opposite the Weddell Sea, and thus south of New
Zealand, is the Ross Sea which, under its ice cover
reaches to within 750 miles of the South Pole. From
it, Scott, Shackleton, Amundsen and Byrd all made
their famous explorations. On its eastern shore is
the main U.S. base, Little America, and to the west, on
McMurdo Sound, is the U.S. Air Supply Base and the New
Zealand scientific station. At Cape Adare, where the Ross
Sea joins the Ocean, is a station that is operated jointly by
New Zealand and the United States. Along the coast at
intervals westward from Cape Adare are the bases esta¬
blished by France at Pointe Geologie; the U.S.A. on the
Knox Coast; the U.S.S.R. at Mirny;
Australia on Enderby Land south of the
Indian Ocean; Japan and Belgium on the
shore of Queen Maud Land south of Africa;
and finally the Norwegian station near the
eastern limit ai the Weddell Sea. The
U5IS

SIXTH CONTINENT
(Continued)
ICE 5,000 FT. THICK, TEMPERATORES 60 BELOW
Soviet Union, France and the U.S.A. have established
stations inland.
The objectives of all the nations are the same: to
determine the influence of the Antarctic on world condi¬
tions with respect to weather, water balance, glaciers,
ocean currents, etc., and to make joint geophysical
measurements from this vantage point at the bottom of the
world with respect to the earth's magnetism, cosmic rays,
the aurora and other phenomena of the upper air and of
the earth's interior.
Ambitious Soviet
polar programme
These objectives are listed in a special report on the
Soviet participation written for the unesco courier
by Evgueni Tolstikov, Deputy Director of the North¬
ern Maritime Route and a Hero of the Soviet Union.
In undertaking the Antarctic studies, Soviet scientists
established a number of projects. Among them are:
1. The study of the influence of atmospheric phenomena
in the Antarctic region on the general circulation in the
world atmosphere.
2. The study of the basic circulation of the Antarctic
waters and its relation to all other ocean currents.
3. Elaboration of the physical geography of the Antarc¬
tic and detailed study of its glaciers.
4. Study of the characteristics of geophysical pheno¬
mena in the Antarctic.
In accord with these projects and in agreement with the
International Committee for the Geophysical Year, the
Soviet expedition is planning a series of researches at the
Observatory at Mirny and at two stations in the interior,
together with two intermediate bases, Pioneerskaia and
Komsomolskaia, and the "'Oasis" station. Researches for
contour mapping will be undertaken by planes and by
tractor trains.
A large group of Soviet scientists and specialists will
take part in the Antarctic researches in meteorology,
atmospherics, actinometry, geology, geography, glaciology,
magnetism, seismology, ionospherics, the aurora, cosmic
rays, earth movements and gravimetry.
Venture to the 'Pole
of Inaccessibility'
Special structures have been built at the Observatory at
Mirny to house modern equipment which will operate
on full schedule for the Geophysical Year. At the
same time major studies will be made in Antarctic waters
by the diesel-electric ship "Ob" and in part by the "Lena,"
which are specially equipped for a great variety of resear¬
ches in meteorology, actinometry, oceanography, hydro-
biology, maritime geology and geophysics.
While these researches have hardly begun, much inter¬
esting information has already been obtained. For
instance, measures of the ice at Mirny have shown a
thickness af 250 to 650 feet. But under the ice there is no
land; beneath is only water down to the sea bottom,
500 feet below sea level. Mirny station is situated partly
on some small islands and partly on the ice. It is interest¬
ing to note that 60 miles south of Mirny where the surface
of the ice sheet gradually rises from the sea to a height of
4,000 feet, the ice has a thickness of 5,000 feet. There too,
under the heavy layer of ice, is the bottom of the sea.
Meteorological observations have shown that the area of
Antarctica, where Mirny is located is characterized by
violent winds. In the course of the year there are 262 days
with very high winds and 23 days when the wind was of
hurricane strength. These storms are especially frequent
14
in winter. Observations at Pioneerskaia, gave us our first
real information on the rigours of the climate in the inte¬
rior regions. The average temperature of the air in the
coldest month is -62°F while that of the least cold month,
December, is -8°F. Since there is never a real calm at
Pioneerskaia and since the average wind velocity is 20 to
25 miles per hour, it is easy to imagine the difficulties
under which the scientists must work in the Antarctic. It
must be said, however, that the difficulties and hardships
of the men will only be compensated when the scientists of
the entire world who are participating in such researches
can combine all their efforts. Those of each country
taken separately, without the data from the observations
of other countries, would not be in a position to solve the
problems that are presented by the International Geophy¬
sical Year.
The Soviet scientists now maintain continuous radio
contact with the Antarctic expeditions of the other
countries, mutually exchange the results of their scientific
observations, and consult each other on the interesting
questions that arise. Such bonds are established with the
expeditions of France, Australia, the United Kingdom and
the United States. (The stations in the interior, mention¬
ed by Mr. Tolstikov, are to be established at two important
points. One is at the South Magnetic Pole which, as in
the north, is many hundred miles from the geographic
pole. The other is at what is now called the "Pole of
Inaccessibility", the centre of the great mass of East
Antarctica, the remotest point, about 1,000 miles from the
nearest coast).
Robot weather station
reports twice daily
The British programme has many aspects. Largest is
the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey which has
been making surveys and polar researches on the
islands south of the Falklands and on Graham Land (the
Palmer Peninsula) for some years and now operates ten
permanent stations in that area. These stations, equipped
for the scientific studies included in the Year and especially
for weather observations, will lay a firm foundation for
the more temporary and often more spectacular ventures
around the rim and in the interior of the continent.
Argentina and Chile, with 14 stations of their own on the
Peninsula, co-operate closely with the British.
Nearer the pole by 600 to 800 miles and on the
eastern coast of the Weddell Sea at Halley Bay, the
Royal Society has established its own observatory, manned
by 18 men, for precision measurements in geophysics and
especially for the study of geomagnetism, electrical condi¬
tions oí the upper atmosphere and radioastronomy. The
station lies close to the belt of maximum auroral activity.
Reminiscent of the heroic expeditions of Scott and
Shackleton will be the British Trans-Antarctic Expedition
and the New Zealand Trans-Antarctic Party, led respec¬
tively by Dr. Vivian E. Fuchs and Sir Edmund Hillary,
conqueror of Mt. Everest. From Vahsel Bay at the base
of the Weddell Sea the British party will climb by track
vehicles and dog sled to the South Pole and, continuing,
will cross the continent at its narrowest point to McMurdo
Sound on the Ross Sea, a distance of about 1,800 miles.
The New Zealand party will travel in the opposite direction
to a meeting point. This mobile expedition is not
primarily scientific, but topographical, meteorological and
geological observations will be made and the ice thickness
will be measured every 20 to 30 miles.
Australia established a base three years ago at Mawson
on the rugged coast directly south of the tip of India. A
staff of 24 men is at work with elaborate equipment for the
measurement of the aurora, cosmic rays, meteor-tracking
to measure winds in the upper atmosphere, geo-magnetic
fluctuations and ice-thickness. Mawson base has two
airplanes to maintain contact with the smaller Davis base,
400 miles to the east where geological and meteorological

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
Soviet Antarctic Expeditions
A MAIN STREET
CALLED LENIN
Soviet engineers have set up a town
site at Mirny ("Peaceful" in Russian)
at the foot of the massive Helen
Glacier which leads into the interior
towards the "Pole of Inaccessibility",
the most difficult part of Antarctica.
Right, N° 5 Lenin Street, as the main
street of the station has been named.
An automatic telephone station has
been installed in the right wing of the
building which is temporarily heated
by metal stoves. Soviet preparations
for the I.G.Y. in the Antarctic have
been going on since 1955 when two
ships arrived at the Mirny site and
disembarked advance party and stores.
measurements will be supplemented by an all-sky camera.
Australia also maintains a station on Macquarie Island a
thousand miles north of Antarctica and south of the Aus¬
tralian island of Tasmania. A robot weather station on
the Windmill islands automatically reports its observations
twice daily by radio to Australia direct.
The United States has established five major stations,
plus the station at Cape Adare operated jointly with New
Zealand and a station for meteorology and air supply base
on McMurdo Sound. The large station at Little America
on the eastern shore of the Ross Sea includes 25 scientists
and serves as a base for two stations in the interior. One
with 9 scientists is at the South Pole; another with 15
scientists is at an altitude aï 5,000 feet in the mountains
of Marie Byrd Land some 650 miles east of Little America,
an 18-day trip by tractor-train. The two others, with 14
scientists each, are on the ice at the base of the Weddell
Sea and on the Knox Coast directly opposite, 2,000 miles
distant. All five stations are equipped for researches in
meteorology, geomagnetism, glaciology, physics of the
ionosphere and studies of the aurora and airglow. All
except the base on the Weddell Sea ice will undertake
seismological research, and the station on the Knox Coast
is a major one for studying cosmic rays.
Extensive traverses totalling nearly 5,000 miles will be
made from three stations for extended measurements oí
the ice thickness and the contour of the rocks beneath,
measurements of ice flow, of the gravitational field, of
magnetic fluctuations and of atmospheric conditions. The
station at Little America "also operates the Antarctic
Weather Central where weather observations are collected
and analyses and forecasts are broadcast ior the use of
all the nations operating on the continent. The station
at the South Pole has been named the Amundsen-Scott
Base in honour oí the only two men who have reached
the pole by surface transport. It was dedicated on
January 24.
France established a station at Pointe Geologie in Adelie
Land, south of Eastern Australia, in 1949-'53 which has
again been occupied during the Year together with a
smaller station some 300 miles inland toward the South
Magnetic Pole.
The Norwegian station east of the Weddell Sea is on the
zero meridian of longitude the meridian of Greenwich
and was established in March 1957.
The Japanese and Belgian stations will be on the relati¬
vely unexplored coast that faces Africa, between the
Australian base at Mawson and the Weddell Sea, and they
complete the ring of stations spaced around the continent.
The materials for Japan's station at Showa were unloaded
under difficult conditions in February 1957. It is the first
Antarctic activity of Japan since 1912 when Choku Shirase
made a voyage of exploration.
Belgium is the most recent participant in the Antarctic
programme and will make its first entry late this year.
The Belgian government has allocated 40 million Belgian
francs to the expedition.
As the sun veers southward in September and reappears
over Antarctica's northern horizon, the springtime of the
epochal Year dawns on the cold continent and a season of
feverish activity begins. Before it sets again in March
much of the mystery of the Antarctic will have been
transformed into sure scientific information and this in
turn will solve many a problem in the understanding of
the forces that govern this mysterious planet.
SNOWED UNDER AT
THE POST OFFICE
Largest part of Britain's I.G.Y. Ant¬
arctic activities stems from the
Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey
which has been conducting both
surveys and polar researches in
islands south of the Falklands and on
Graham Land for some years. It has
ten permanent stations in the area
equipped for scientific studies included
in the Year, but especially for weather
observation. Right, Marguerite Bay
Base at Stonington Island where
eleven British scientists were maroon¬
ed for over two years. Building with
wire-braced chimneys peeping
through snow is party's "Post Office".
C.O.I. London
«r£^-<
15
