The Unesco Courier. January 1957
13

Wçph the approach of the year one thousand, a great
fear gripped Christian Europe. Though not offi¬
cially endorsed by the Church, the belief was
widespread that the Millenium and Judgment Day were
at hand, and that the world was coming to an end. A
wave of' religious fervour and mysticism swept Chris¬
tendom. Pilgrims, who in normal times flocked to the
holy places, found their ranks swollen by thousands of
new followers and new faithful.
But with the passing of the year 1000 the religious
fervour sparked by the '"Great Fear" not only did not
subside but was greatly increased. As never before,
"monks, pilgrims, soldiers and merchants" set out for
one of the great centres of pilgrimage in the far north¬
west corner of Spain where the tomb of the Apostle St
James had been found about the year 800, and which,
as an attraction for pilgrims, was soon second only to
Rome and Jerusalem.
A legend had sprung up that St. James had become the
champion of the Christian kingdoms of northern Spain
which were battling the Moors in an effort to regain the
rest of the country still in Muslim hands. It was re¬
counted that St. James had appeared mounted on a
white horse fighting against the Moors.
To visit the saint's tomb pilgrims from every part of
Europe headed for the Pyrenees in their thousands, using
the stars of the Milky Way to guide them. Both the land
route and the Milky Way. itself became known as the
"Road of St. James" and the centre of pilgrimage was
named Compostela, in Latin, Campus Stellae "the place
marked by the stars" (Today, Santiago de Compostela).
Pilgrims passing through France, where the chief halt¬
ing places were Paris and Vezelay, entered Spain through
Navarre, the central Pyrenees and, in the east, along the
14
Catalan coast. Monasteries with hostels for travellers
and places of worship were built along the route.
Thus the Christians of northern Spain were brought
more than ever before into contact with their neighbours
north of the Pyrenees, who brought with them fresh
customs and ideas, images and manuscripts and a new
form of art then developing in Europe Romanesque art,
later to develop its own distinctive style in Spain.
There still exists an idea, though it is becoming more
and more outmoded, that the Middle Ages represented no
more than a dark interregnum between the Graeco-
Roman age and the "Renaissance" (a term which itself
supports this idea). Romanesque art, born of the new
spirit of Christian enthusiasm, clearly refutes this belief.
The spirit which fed this art was fostered by the mon¬
asteries which grew up all over Western Europe after
St. Benedict founded the Benedictine Order of monks in
526 A. D. With their communities planted in different
countries, the monastic orders were probably the first
international institutions. They were churches, schools,
libraries and hospitals all in one, and the sculpture and
architecture which they helped to develop were embodied
in their abbey churches.
The young and vigorous Romanesque art found expres¬
sion in many fields. The new forms it developed in
architecture were those which finally gave birth to the
Gothic style. Its sculpture was largely architectural in
nature, and its painting and mural decorations, though
at first owing much to Byzantine influence, later developed
along other lines.
Though having a basic unity of style, Romanesque art
developed individual characteristics in different localities
according to the tastes of the craftsmen and the tradi¬
tions they followed. The most important influence was

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
CATALONIA'S ANONYMOUS MASTER PAINTERS
still Roman art, closely followed by Byzantine. Another
element came directly from the Near East through textiles
whose ornamental forms were copied in stone carvings
and on manuscripts. Northern influences Lombard,
Goth, Teuton and Celt were also in evidence.
In Spain, where the Romanesque art penetrated later
than elsewhere, the presence of the Moors and the in¬
fluence of the Orient stamped the new style with Hispanic
features of its own. Soon, Hispano-Romanesque archi¬
tecture flourished in Castile, Leon, Navarre, Asturias,
Galicia and Aragon, though the style imported from
France was modified by climatic conditions.
The proximity of the Moors and the exuberance of their
ornament inspired the carvers to a richer expression.
The capitals and cloisters of the great churches and
cathedrals like those of Santo Domingo de Silos, San
Isidoro at Leon and the "Old Cathedral" at Salamanca
are notable examples of this fusion of two arts. Side
by side with capitals on which biblical scenes are carved
THE VIRGIN AND ST. JOHN. Two 13th century painted statuettes in wood. Though they
are of the same period, there is a striking contrast between the primitive style of the St. Jcr n and
the masterly execution of the Virgin which suggests the style of sculpture of much kter centuries.
with striking realism are others with figures of Oriental
character, Persian motifs or Egyptian ibises. These
buildings and carvings are often the handiwork of Chris¬
tian and Moorish artists working side by side. Thus was
Romanesque architecture and sculpture enriched and
advanced in Spain.
At the same time Catalan painters were making an
important and until recently little known chapter in the
history of medioeval European art. In their cnurches,
chiefly in tiny villages in the Pyrenees, they painted
striking murals in the naves and apses. At first they drew
inspiration from the form and colour of Byzantine
mosaics and from the northern styles, coming from Poi¬
tiers and Toulouse, through the pilgrim routes to Com¬
postela.
Then more and more prolific local adapters changed
the styles and went on to complete church decorations by
painting altarpieces. Under their skill and invention the
painting ceased to be a mere decorative addition to
architecture and sculpture and be¬
came an independent art with its
own rules and standards.
On most of these paintings the per¬
sonality of the artists, or the indivi¬
dual stamps of the schools, have left
their distinctive marks, making it
possible to fix the origins of the works
and the identity of those artists who,
in their local adaptations, worked
with particular techniques and styles.
Their names unfortunately have not
come down to us, but they are iden¬
tified by the places in which they
worked: The Master of Pedret, the
Master of Lluca, the Master of Espi-
nelves, the Master of Soriguerola, to
mention a few o'f the most famous.
All their works were painted between
the 11th and 13th centuries.
For long years these Romanesque
masterpieces were hidden from
the world in the churches and
monasteries of Catalonia and it is
only since the beginning of this cen¬
tury that study and expert assessment
have revealed the full riches of a
school of painting that was almost
entirely unknown to most people.
The Board of Museums of Bar¬
celona which had previously had
reproductions made of the Catalan
murals, decided after the First World
War to remove the original works
from their walls in many cases so as
to save them from the progressive and
Irreparable damage they would
certainly have suffered (they were
usually done in distemper, and are not
true frescoes in the Italian manner).
The region of Catalonia, especially
the museums of Barcelona and Vich,
boasts the richest concentration of
Spanish Romanesque art, and the
collections of altarpieces are probably
the finest anywhere in the world.
The grouping of these works in
museums has aided their study in
recent years and this has been useful
^not only from a local or regional
point of view, but has also extended
the horizon of our knowledge of
medioeval European painting in gene¬
ral. The reproduction of some of
them in the Unesco World Art Series
now brings an idea of their distinctive
style and beauty within the reach of
people in all countries.
15
MAS Archives, Barcelona

THE DESCENT FROM THE CROSS. The 12th century marks
the high point in the development of Romanesque art, particularly
Spanish Romanesque sculpture. The remarkable examples on these
pages show, above, a Descent from the Cross, in wood, now at the
Episcopal Museum at Vich (detail of which is seen top right) and an
ivory figure of Christ from the Museum of San Marcos at Leon. The
similarity of technique used by Spanish Romanesque artists in working
16
ivory and wood is here particularly striking. The Descent from
the Cross is generally considered one of the greatest examples of
Romanesque carvings existing today. Its powerful message Is obtained
with a purity and simplicity only possible from the hand of a
master artist craftsman. The Episcopal Museum of Vich is probably
the richest museum in Spain from the point of view of Romanesque
carvings and its collection of polychrome wooden virgins is unique.

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
Photos MAS Archives, Barcelona
17

v #r *
\m )&.
vT1
iimWi
m
' * * * * * % f * *
./' : ;V..-
< 5l
3

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
THE HOLY SUPPER. Detail from a I 3th century painted
frontal dedicated to St. Michael, by an artist
now referred to as the Master of Soriguerola (the name of
a Catalan village which is close to the French frontier).
2 THE DOUBLE AXE, an international motif of medieval
times, figures in this detail of a decorative frieze of 12th
century murals from El Burgal, Catalonia. The work has
been attributed to the school of the Master of Pedret.
3 ST JULIET'S MARTYRDOM depicted by an unknown
» I Ith century artist. Detail from frontal panel of St.
Quirico and St. Juliet in church of Durro, northwest of Bar¬
celona. The colouring is very bright with black outlines.
4 HOLY APOSTLE, detail from a 12th century mural in
. the church of Ginnestarre de Cardos, on the Franco-
Spanish frontier. This painting and those described above
are now in the Art Museum of Catalonia, at Barcelona.
5 MARTYRDOM OF ST. MARGARET. An episode from a
. twelfth century painting on a wood panel on the frontal
dedicated to the Saint in church of Sescorts, Catalonia. This
work is now preserved in the Episcopal Museum at Vich.
Unesco Album, "Spain: Romanesque Paintings"

CARVED IN EBONY, the "Black Virgin"
of Montserrat, near Barcelona (left), is one of
the finest existing examples of Catalonian
Romanesque sculpture. Many legends have
grown up around the extraordinary site of
Montserrat which is said to have inspired
Wagner to write his opera "Parsifal." Newly-
married couples in Catalonia traditionally
go there on a pilgrimage to seek the Virgin's
blessing, and have a saying: "Those who have
not been to Montserrat are not properly
married." Of the same period as the "Black
Virgin" (12th century), but with an entirely
different expression, is the painted wooden
Virgin (below, left) in the Barcelona Museum).
&
i*!*"
MOUNTED WARRIORS with flying banners
in this detail of a 13th century fresco are
believed to represent the armies raised by
the Kings of Aragon and the Counts of Bar¬
celona to fight against the Moors in Spain.
Formerly in the Royal Palace in Barcelona,
this fresco was saved when the palace was
destroyed by a fire in the 19th century.
20

The Unesco Courier. January 1957
THE CREATION OF ADAM and the temptation of Eve depicted by a Spanish medieval painter
known todayas the MasterofMaderuelos. Originally in Segovia, now in the Prado Museum, Madrid.
MAS Archives, Barcelona
CATALAN AND LOMBARD decorative elements are mingled in the sculpture of the main
doorway to the Monastery of St. Mary at Ripoll, in the Province of Gerona. Ripoll, principal
cultural centre of Catalonia in the I Ith century, has some remarkable examples of Roma¬
nesque painting, sculpture and architecture. A distinctive school of painting flourished here.
21

PERCHED ON A MOUNTAIN TOP, the I Ith century Abbey of Silos near Burgos (north-
central Spain) is one of the most famous sites of Romanesque history. On the ancient Pilgrims'
Road leading to Santiago de Compostela, it became celebrated throughout Europe during the
I Ith century under the rule of St. Domingo. It is today one of the rare places in the world where
the Gregorian chant can still be heard in all its purity. Architecturally, its cloister is considered
a wonder of Romanesque art, the result cf Spanish, Moorish and French artists. Above, left,
the capital of a column adorned with ibises. Right, two griffins in the old cathedral of Salamanca.
MAS Archives, Barcelona
Candido Ansede, Salamanca and MAS archives, Barcelona
THE 'OLD CATHEDRAL' at Salamanca is a marvel of Romanesque architecture whose con¬
struction occupied mostofthe 12th century. Above, interior and exterior views of its famous
"Cock Tower" crowned with an octagonal dome one of the finest of its kind in Spain. Masses
according to the ancient Mozarabic rite once practiced by Spanish Christians living in territories
occupied by the Moors, are still celebrated several times a year in one of the Cathedral's chapels.
22

CATALONIAN ARTISTS working toward the end of the 12th
century produced many masterpieces, hidden until recently in little-
visited churches of the region. The names of few of these painters
have come down to us. The author of this St. John the Evangelist
and the Virgin is simply known as The Master of Valltarga, from
the frontal dedicated to St. Andrew which he painted in the church
of Valltarga, northeast Spain.


r^ir^n ^^ P^ ^^h
1 %- * i jB^
,. »
..
^ * ^i'»pp"
^^" ^^
»Or ^5
won
0^G3L2/A '^r^ '"
Bk ^w^t?C
<<al p^^^HilyP^^è^^*^ Iä^SR
1 1 ^fl KJMMJ^^^Ê^k.
^bbb ^** ^^ril /j ^^Y^ín ==^,<^^y «p u
f/
7
N^B
KING MELCHIOR. Detail (opposite page) of a 12th century
mural from the church of St. Maria de Aneu, northeastern
Spain, depicting adoration of The Infant Christ by the three
Wise Men. This work, now in the Art Museum of Barcelona,
is attributed to the School of The Master of Pedret, a painter
whose style inspired many medieval artists of the region.
ST. MICHAEL WEIGHING THE SOULS. This painting,
a 13th century altar piece from a church in the Ribas Valley,
100 miles north of Barcelona, is by an artist known as The
Master of Soriguerola, one of the most prolific of medieval
Romanesque painters in northeastern Spain. Painting is now
in the Episcopal Museum at Vich, Catalonia.
