MAN-MADE SATELLITE
the first step into outer space
The most ambitious project of the International Geo¬
physical Year and the most imaginative project in
the history of science will reach out into space,
possibly as far as 1,800 miles above the earth's surface,
to observe and report on conditions there. The launching
of a 20-inch sphere, filled with electronic instruments and
transmitters to a total weight of about 22 pounds, and
setting it into an orbit around the earth at a velocity of
approximately 18,000 miles per hour will be an incom¬
parable achievement-^-not because it is spectacular, but
because it is precisely planned, mathematically predicted
in advance, and because it requires the use of many
fabulous devices that have been perfected only recently,
a focussing of many sciences and the integrated co-opera¬
tion of thousands of experts.
No one man will get the credit or make the first voyage
into unknown space, as Columbus did, or Magellan. This
present explorer 'will be a superhuman electronic brain
that will go where no- man can go, yet will do man's
bidding, investigate and report continuously to its creators
LONG-PLAYING ROCKET. Earth satellite tobe launched from the
United States will be used by I.G.Y. scientists in two basic ways. First
it will provide a target to be trackedby radio and opticallyfrom the
ground. Second it will collect, memorize and transmit to the earth
data on the upper regions through which it passes. Opposite page,
(upper photo), cylinder containing electronic equipment is inserted in
outer shell of satellite. Closely packed instruments represent almost
half its total weight of about 22 pounds. These are revealed (lower
photo) as satellite model is lifted out of its plastic shell. In fore¬
ground are removable plastic antennas. Above, the miniaturised ins-
30
USIS photos
truments which will make the first sustained observations in space.
It is for this reason that satellite has been labelled the "long-playing
rocket". (I) Pressure gauge will tell if meteorite pierces metal shell of
satellite. (2) Meter will measure intensity of sun's ultra-violet rays.
(3) Solar cell (on left) will harness sun power to produce electrical
impulse as satellite emerges from darkness into daylight on each succes¬
sive orbit, resetting memory unit that stores data for transmission to
earth. Erosion gauge (right) will record any damage to shining,
golden surface of sphere by meteorites. (4) "Minitrack" radio trans¬
mitter, equipped with mercury batteries, has range of 4,000 miles.

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
and masters far below, glide through silent space for a few
weeks, then end its meteoric career in a brilliant flash.
Why ? Because man wants to know. Every boy in
every land throughout the ages has gazed on the clouds
and blue sky, and on the stars at night, and has wonder¬
ed what is beyond. During the centuries of ignorance
and mysticism men filled the heavens with visions.
Then, with increasing knowledge, the air became a mate¬
rial substance and the blue of the sky lost its reality to
become only an optical effect of refracted light, and
beyond that nothing, cold, empty space interspersed
with remote stars and galaxies. But that was a passing
stage.
Because men have ever wanted to know more which is
their chief distinction from the
animals space is no longer cal¬
led empty. The atmosphere
gradually thins out; it has no
surface like that of the ocean.
There is enough of it even a
thousand miles up to give a
slowing friction to the propos¬
ed satellite. There are enough
particles of solid matter cruising
independently through space to
show the instant flash of a me¬
teor, heated by this friction of
our air and burned to dust,
almost anywhere and at any
hour of night and millions of
them, in all, every 24 hours.
There are the rays called '"cos¬
mic" to imply that they come
from remote regions of the uni¬
verse, though no one knows
from where. They are minute
fragments of atoms, fragments
of atomic nuclei, and "funda¬
mental" particles that are still
smaller, all of them crashing
into the top of the atmosphere
with incredible energy. Then
there are the tremendous
showers of electrons that are
ejected from the sun during its
colossal storms and are pro¬
jected to us across 93 million
miles of space. And there is
sunlight itself. All these im¬
pinge upon the earth in a
constant barrage but only the
dumb, helpless atoms of the
outermost air receive their
impact and message.
The proposed satellite will be
a temporary observatory for
them all, limited in its powers
as in its existence, but far more
than earthbound man has ever
before used. It will police the
topmost sky. What it discovers
and reveals to science will no
doubt be fragmentary, and will
bring more questions than ans¬
wers, but it is an essential step
toward the eventual conquest of
space.
Both the United States and
the Soviet Union have an- '
nounced plans for launching
earth satellites but the United
States has given full detailed
publicity to its programme so that this article is devoted to
the American project. The launching site is at Cape
Canaveral on the long Florida peninsula that extends the
Atlantic coast of the United States into the Caribbean Sea.
The satellite itself is small but the rocket system to lift it
on high and to give it an adequate velocity in its orbit is
massive. Its total length is 72 feet, composed of three
stages. The design, construction arid launching of the
rocket is in the hands of the U.S. Naval-Research labora¬
tory which is spending $110 million on the project. The
large first-stage rocket will have a thrust of 27,000 pounds
and will propel the entire vehicle upwards with a gradual
inclination of the path eastward over the Atlantic Ocean.
When its fuel is exhausted the first-stage rocket will drop
off into the sea and the second-stage motor will be ignited.
This will drive the remaining vehicle to an altitude of
about 140 miles and it will then coast, without power, an¬
other 700 miles on an inclined path to reach the desired
altitude of between 250 and 300 miles. At this altitude
the nose cone that protects the sphere of the satellite itself
will be dropped, a pinwheel array of small jets will spin
the vehicle to stabilise its flight, and then the third-stage
rocket will give another burst of power to propel the
satellite into its desired orbit at a velocity of 18,000 miles
per hour.
At this speed the centrifugal force of Its horizontal mo- .
tion around the earth will be sufficient to counteract the
force of gravity at that altitude so that it will continue to
circle the earth in its orbit exactly as the moon does at a
much greater distance of 250,000
miles. If the satellite were per¬
fectly launched it could attain a
circular orbit. But such accurate
control is not possible and the
actual orbit will probably be an
ellipse and the distance of the
satellite from the earth will
vary from 2-300 miles to 800-
1,500 miles. The orbit will not
be exactly to the east, parallel
to the earth's equator but at
an angle with it so that its
position as it goes round the
earth will vary from 35 degrees
of latitude north of the equator
to 35 degrees south of it. Thus
in its various circuits a band
about 70 degrees wide will be
covered by the satellite and
scientists of a large number of
nations will be able to observe
and measure it.
At a velocity of 18,000 miles, it
will not bè able to encircle the
earth in an hour, for the cir¬
cumference of the earth is
24,000 miles. It will pass
completely around the earth In
approximately one and a half
hours.
The most important informa¬
tion to be furnished by the sat¬
ellite will come from tracing its
orbit. Its position will be
carefully measured and timed
from many points on the earth's
surface and its orbit will then
be precisely calculated. The
first problem will be to find the
satellite in the sky early in its
flight. This cannot be done by
the accurate cameras that will
later fix its position because
such cameras can cover only a
small portion of the sky and
must be aimed in advance at an
area through which the satellite
will later pass. The original
location of the satellite and a
preliminary calculation, of its
orbit will be done by timing of
the radio-waves that are cons¬
tantly emitted from the sat¬
ellite. Radio receiving stations
will be situated along its path
to detect the direction from
which these signals come.
This system is known as Mi-
nitrack. Each minitrack station will have two sets of re¬
ceivers, 200 metres apart on the ground. The difference in
the time required for a signal from the small transmitter
in the satellite to reach the two receivers will give a fairly
accurate measurement of the location of a satellite in the
sky One set of two receivers will measure its position
in the east-west direction and the other set its position
in the north-south direction. Such stations will be located
at Washington D.C. and Savannah, Georgia, in the U.S.A. ;
at Havana, Cuba ; at Antigua in the British
West Indies; Quito, Ecuador ; Lima, Peru ;
Antofagasta, Chile ; Santiago, Chile ; San Cont'd
Diego, California, U.S.A. ; and one in Aus- on
tralia. nixt page
It is possible, however, that the radio-
31

MAN-MADE
SATELLITE
(Continued)
FLYING OBSERVATORY 1 ,200 MILES HIGH
transmitter within the satellite will somehow fail to
operate. In that case the minitrack stations would be
useless. To guard against this contingency large numbers
of volunteer sky searchers, scattered all over the world,
will be on duty with powerful binoculars to locate it.
With groups of such binoculars at many points, a large
region of the heavens can be covered and the satellite can
be kept under observation. Thus the orbit can be approxi¬
mately established even without the radio-transmitter.
When the orbit has been approximately established by the
minitrack measurements of the binocular observers, pre¬
cise observations of its positions will be made by a series
of special "'Schmidt" cameras that are provided with
timing devices so accurate that they will measure the
instant of taking the photograph of the sky within a
thousandth of a second. Such optical observing stations
will be established in New Mexico and Florida in the
U.S.A. ; and Bloemfontein, South Africa ; Mauna Loa,
Hawaii ; Tokyo, Japan ; Curacao, Netherlands Antilles ;
Cadiz, Spain; Tehran, Iran; Arequipa, Peru; Villa Dolores,
Argentina; and in India and Australia.
The reason for the high accuracy of the orbital observa¬
tions and calculations is not merely to establish the
orbit itself but to observe its small irregularities and
changes in the velocity of the satellite. These will give
important further information. A gradual reduction of
velocity is expected as a result of the friction of the thin
upper air. Very little is now known of the density of the
air at that height but the geometry of the satellite's orbit
and observations of its flight will permit calculations of
the air density.
If the composition of the earth were quite uniform its
gravitational . pull, or gravitational field, would also be
uniform. In that case the orbit of the satellite would be
a simple, regular ellipse.. But irregularities in its orbit,
knov/n as perturbations, will undoubtedly be observed by
the use of accurate Schmidt cameras. Such variations in
the orbit will permit calculations of the distribution of
mass within the earth and these, in turn, should yield
information on the composition of the earth's crust. This
may prove to be one of the most valuable results of the
whole project.
But there is more. The earth is not a sphere but is
flattened at the poles into the oblate shape of a spheroid.
The exact magnitude of this distortion needs to be known
to permit accurate determinations of latitude and
longitude. Here too knowledge of the exact path that the
satellite takes will give valuable information.
Finally, the orbital measurements will also give informa¬
tion on the electrical conditions of the upper atmo¬
sphere, i.e. on the number of ions, or electrical charges,
in the air. This requires a double observation of the orbit :
one by the Schmidt cameras, the other by the radio signals
that come from the transmitter in the satellite. If the
upper air were not electrified the radio signals would
come to earth in straight lines. But when they go through
electrified layers they will be bent, or refracted, much as
a beam of light is refracted when it passes from air to
water or passes through the glass in a lens. Thus when
the angle of the radio beam is accurately measured, it will
not be correct, because of this refraction. But light waves
are not bent, or refracted, by electrical charges. So the
altitude of the satellite as measured by the optical cameras,
will be correct. The difference between the optical
measurement and the radio measurement will indicate the
RADIO SIGNALS will be used to track artificial satellite as it sweeps
over the earth at 18,000 miles per hour. Drawing, right, shows
arrangement of supersensitive ground receivers, called Minitrack, which
will be located in a chain in the United States and South America to
pick up signals from satellite's miniature radio transmitter. (See map,
32
VJ wiS
USIS photos
pages 18/19). Accurate tracking of satellite from the ground offers
a unique opportunity for a closer study of the shape of the earth.
Scientists have developed a variety of equipment for launching and
tracking the satellite. Left, telemeter antenna at a satellite launching
area used to monitor test performances of rocket launching vehicles.

The Unesco Courier. September 1957
ELEVEN-TON
ROCKET FOR
22-LB. SATELLITE
The earth satellites In the I.G.Y. pro¬
gramme of the U.S.A. will be launched
from a huge, three-stage rocket called
the Vanguard (upper left), 72 ft. long
and weighing I I tons (satellite it will
carry weighs about 22 lbs). Idea of Its
size is given by human figure drawn in
proportion alongside. Drawing, lower
left, shows the stages in the flight of the
Vanguard rocket vehicle. The first-stage
rocket propels the vehicle from the
launching point (I) to an altitude of
36 miles (2) and then falls away back
to earth. The second-stage rocket now
takes over and carries the vehicle, first
under power and later on coasting flight,
to a height of about 300 miles. The
second-stage separates and the third-
stage now boosts the speed to 18,000
miles per hour at which point the
satellite is launched into its orbit. At
(4) third-stage rocket falls away.
USIS photos
amount of refraction by the electrical ions and will permit
a calculation of the electrical charge characteristics of
the thin air in the ionosphere.
These are all items of information that can be obtained
from the ground by the observation of the satellite's orbit.
But the satellite itself contains instruments for making
observations which will be automatically reported to the
ground by radio while it is in flight. Both the space
inside the small sphere and the permissible weight are
very limited. But among the experiments that the satellite
may conduct are a number that are of great interest to
men of science.
The most important is the measurement of the invisi¬
ble energy that reaches the earth from the sun. It
is not visible to human eyes because the light¬
waves are too short. They are shorter than those of
purple or violet light, hence are ¡known as ultra-violet.
Much of the radiation can hardly be called light at all,
with waves as short as those of the penetrating X-rays.
This radiation is absorbed in the upper layers of the
atmosphere where it is transformed, causes ionization and
the strange luminous effect that is called airglow. Even
tually the energy is either reflected into space or reaches
the lower atmosphere where it affects the weather and
the climate. The satellite gives a unique opportunity
to study this energy at the edge of space, before it has
been absorbed and transformed. What is more, this
flying observatory is expected to stay aloft for at least
two weeks and will measure the variations of the solar
radiation during all its flight. If in this period there
should be a solar flare, a great outburst of energy
from a "sunspot", the data provide by the instruments in
the satellite "would be of the greatest possible scientific
interest", says the U.S. National Committee.
Another primary function of the satellite is to explore
the motion of electrical charges in the air at that height,
and the flow of thin but very large electric currents. It
is supposed that these are responsible for the rapid
fluctuations of the earth's magnetism. Since the satellite
will be cruising over a very large part of the earth's surface
every day and, in its elliptical orbit, will vary in height
from 200 miles to 1,200 miles, it will make
an overall map of electrical conditions and
presumably will furnish clues to the origin
of "magnetic storms." It would be of
great practical value to understand these
storms enough to permit predicting them.
Cont'd
on
33

A GIRDLE ROUND THE
EARTH IN 90 MINUTES
Scientists in the Soviet Union have announced that they will
launch at least one artificial earth satellite during the Interna¬
tional Geophysical Year. Of spherical form, the Soviet satellite
will be carried aloft in the nose of a multi-stage launching vehicle.
Once propelled into its orbit, the satellite will girdle the earth
at altitudes varying between 120 and 300 miles at a speed of
between 15,000 and 18,000 miles per hour. This speed will
bring it around the globe every 90 minutes so that in 24 hours
it will make 16 complete circles. Recording instruments in
the satellite will make observations which will be radioed to
specially equipped ground stations. The rocket which will
launch the satellite into its orbit will be similar to the one
shown here, which has been specially designed for studies in the
upper atmosphere. Left, Soviet rocket being launched and
(below) after its return to earth with parachute still attached.
Official Soviet photos

MAN-MADE SATELLITE (Continued)
Cosmic rays are another mystery which has never been
investigated at a level above the atmosphere where they
are still unaffected by collision with earthly atoms. The
satellite will contain a counter for these rays to measure
their total number. After two weeks of such counting over
a wide area of the earth the results are expected at least
to be of sufficient importance to justify more elaborate
study of cosmic rays by later satellites.
Information on the total heat received from the sun
and on its variation, which is the fundamental factor in
weather phenomena, will also be valuable in an under¬
standing of the major weather changes and possibly in
the prediction of future hurricanes and typhoons. Also
the satellite will observe the cloud cover of the earth
continuously and on a world-wide scale, thus providing
another basis for weather studies.
Finally, there will be many routine observations of minor
significance, such as a microphone system to record the
number of collisions with tiny meteorites, pressure
measurements to record any leakage in case of a puncture,
34
and observations on corrosion and the temperature of the
shell of the Satellite.
The date for the launching of this superb experiment,
this supreme test of man's present command of his world
and its forces, this first small venture to the borders of
cosmic space, has not yet been set. But it will be in 1958,
a year which will go down in history for that reason, just
as 1939 will forever be remembered for the first observed
fission of a few single atoms of uranium in a peaceful res¬
earch laboratory in Berlin. The superhuman but captive
explorer will not survive to be shown to future generations
in a museum of science. In a few weeks two to four
probably, six perhaps the friction of whatever air there
is so high up will slow it down, decrease its centrifugal
force so that gravity will slowly pull it downward, then
faster into thicker air and more friction and higher
temperature until every speck of it is vaporized and burns
into dust. The man-made moon will end as a meteorite
and disappear in a flash of brilliant light, a blaze of well-
earned glory.
