THE CONQUEST OF OUTER SPACE
Official Soviet photos
GIRDLING THE EARTH at a speed of 8,000 metres a second (about 18,000 m.p.h.), "Sputnik" makes a complete orbit in one hour 36 minutes.
Diagram shows the path of the satellite on each of its trips during 24 hours. The satellite's orbit is 65° away from the plane of equator.

o A Soviet Scientist looks at 'Sputnik'
by K. Staniukovich
Member of the Interplanetary Communications Commission
of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union
October 4, 1957, can be considered as
the date marking the beginning of
the era of man's conquest of cosmic
space. A scientific problem of foremost
importance has now been solved but its full
import is not easy to grasp in our time.
The launching of the artificial satellite
demonstrates the progress that has been
made in a number of sciences and techni¬
cal domains. This has resulted in the
achievement of what only recently was
considered to be an unrealizable dream.
The mere perfection of rocket techniques,
however, would not have been enough to
launch artificial satellites with certainty
into the upper layers of the atmosphere.
For that, additional factors were needed:
the development of the construction of in¬
struments, the creation of electronic
calculating machines capable of determin¬
ing the most advantageous trajectory of
the satellite and a high standard of science
and modern techniques generally.
The event of October 4, 1957, is impor¬
tant for several reasons: first, proof has
now been furnished of the possibility of
launching a satellite into a relatively stable
orbit; second, men the world over can
proudly observe that an object now exists
whose movements do not seem to be govern¬
ed by the force of gravity in the sense
that this body will not fall to earth for a
very long period and that its fall will occur
only as result of resistance to the medium
in which it is moving.
As early observations have shown, the
"Sputnik's" period of rotation around the
earth has been reduced by several seconds
in several days. This observation alone
makes it possible to draw many conclusions
of the utmost importance to geophysics.
The density of the air at an altitude of 500
or 550 miles (the height of the satellite at
its furthest distance from the earth) is so
small that it evidently does not exceed 10
to 18 grammes per cubic centimetre.
In this region air molecules must travel
enormous distances of several thousands of
BEEP-BEEP-BEEP of Soviet satellite's radio transmitter signals, varying
around the world. Here is an Oscilloscope trace of "Sputnik's" beeps.
20
n length, frequency and spacing, have been picked up by receivers
Future Soviet satellites will radio reports on meteoric activity.

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
miles before colliding. As the orbit of the
satellite is in the form of an ellipse, it
passes through more dense layers of the
atmosphere at its closest point to the earth.
It is here, where the density of the air is
greater, that the slowing down of the satel¬
lite is chiefly taking place. There may
however, be other causes for a change in
the rotation period of the satellite. One of
these may be the fact that our planet is
not a perfect sphere. When an object re¬
volves around a flattened sphere, its rate of
rotation varies periodically. The uneven
distribution of the masses inside the earth
may also influence the rotation period.
At altitudes of 400 to 600 miles, there
exist large quantities of cosmic dust which
penetrate the earth's atmosphere. Observa¬
tions made in certain countries during the
launching of rockets have shown that the
density of meteoric substances at altitudes
above 120 miles is almost in no way com¬
mensurate with the density of the air. As
a result, collisions with these cosmic parti¬
cles will also slow the satellite. Whether the
earth's magnetic field can serve as another
brake is also a question of interest.
Thus, the observations made from the
earth of the first artificial satellite are
of enormous scientific interest. These ob-
, servations, especially those made by optical
methods, are now being carried out in
many countries of the earth. After careful
comparative analysis, they will give inform¬
ation on the feeble density of the upper
SPUTNIK photographed before take-off.
Facts about it have been given as follows: dia¬
meter, 22.8 In.; weight, 184.3 lbs. A sphere
made of aluminium alloys, it has four metal rods
as antennae, and these are 7.9 to 9.5 ft. long.
layers of the atmosphere including the
cosmic fields, and will also make it possible
to reach scientific conclusions on the form
and structure of the earth's inner layers.
It seems to me that one of the most im¬
portant tasks of astronautics is to undertake
a more precise study of the quantity of
minute meteors and of the number of me¬
teors of larger dimensions cruising through
space. Of great importance, too, is the
study of the speeds at which these meteors
may collide with the body of a rocket.
When a meteor strikes the body of a rocket
or any other object at a speed exceeding
one kilometre (.621 of a mile) per second,
a sharp explosion occurs. The mass of the
rocket is greater than that of the meteor.
At a collision speed of 30 kilometres a
second, calculations have shown that the
mass of the materials in the body of
the rocket is several thousand times greater
than that of the meteor.
. Even the impact of a meteor weighing
only a few milligrammes can therefore be
dangerous for an artificial satellite. True,
the probability of meeting such a meteor is
small but over a period of weeks or months
an encounter may nevertheless occur. By
studying the information obtained as a
result of the launching of "Sputnik" and by
determining the true danger of these colli¬
sions, it will be possible to discover means
of coping with them, such as the construc¬
tion of two or more protective sheaths for
either artificial satellite or rocket.
The quantity of meteoric dust showering
down on to the earth varies according to
the seasons. There, are periods when
meteoric activity is at a maximum and
periods when it is almost completely absent.
In order to observe meteorites and their
collisions, satellites in the near future will
be equipped with apparatus to report on
such phenomena by radio.
Another very important task is the study
of the earth's electro-magnetic fields, the
ionization of the upper layers of the atmo¬
sphere, cosmic rays and cosmic radiation.
Animals, sent aloft equipped with transmit¬
ters, will furnish information on how
creatures are affected by space flight.
Thus, for example, it will be possible to
study the influence upon them of cosmic
rays coming from the sun and not absorbed
by the earth's atmosphere, or the behaviour
of animals in the absence of gravity.
Finish in flame & dust
There is a great deal of interest in what
will become of the artificial satellite
"Sputnik" and of the final-stage
launching rocket which now accompanies it.
It is possible that within a few weeks the sa¬
tellite will penetrate the lower layers of the
atmosphere and will be increasingly brak¬
ed by the air's slowing friction. At this
point, the speed at which it approaches the
earth will increase. At an altitude of about
sixty miles, its speed will be such that its
aluminium body will disintegrate in a burst
of flames and drop into atmospheric layers
in the form of fine dust. The launching
rocket, as its movements observed in the
skies show, has for some time now out¬
distanced the satellite.
Astrophysicists are interested in many
complex problems, -in particular those
connected with the study of the sun. Like
all men on earth, astrophysicists who study
the planets are interested in learning
whether oxygen exists on Mars. Observa¬
tions made on earth have been unable as
yet to detect an oxygen spectrograph line
on the planet Mars, but it is possible that a
very weak line may be absorbed by the
earth's own atmosphere, for there is prob¬
ably less air on Mars than on Earth. It re¬
mains to be seen what the spectrographic
observations of the satellite will tell us.
In a few years, the orbits of the earth's
artificial satellites will approach the moon.
The artificial satellite which will fly to the
moon will be equipped with special appa¬
ratus. This will be the stepping stone for
man's future voyages into outer space. We
are convinced that the launching of artifi¬
cial earth satellites, equipped with non-
military instruments will enable scientists
to serve the cause of peace.
SATELLITE'S ORBIT brings it over a diffe¬
rent part of the globe (due to earth's rotation)
on each of its completed circles. Its orbit is
so steady and it has lost so little speed that
its path in relation to the earth can easily be
computed in advance. These five diagrams
show different orbits, the first being the one
taking the "man-made moon" over Moscow.
21
