UNESCO-Dominique Berretty
A SEARCH OF SCIENTISTS. Some 1,200 scientists from 61 countries took part in the Unesco International Conference on Radio-isotopes, at
the Sorbonne in Paris. Rarely has a congress brought so many branches of science together. This was achieved because, as Sir John Cockcroft remarked
In his preslcential address (above), radio-isotopes hive unique properties as research tools and are applicable to every branch of experimental science.

NEW TOOLS FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
Uses of radio-isotopes studied by Unesco International Congress
Twelve hundred scientists from 61 countries and 25 inter¬
national organizations met in Paris recently at a Unesco
International Conference on Radio-isotopes. For two
weeks they discussed the uses that can be made of man-made
atoms that can "rival atomic power in the benefits they confer
on humanity."
Their discussions ranged over the entire face of nature,
from the structure of the planets in space to mysteries of the
living cell ; from weather-winds to unravelling the secrets of
how plants capture the sunlight and use it to turn carbon- -
dioxide into our essential foods; from what happens in a blast
furnace to the exclusive chemistry of antibiotics. This was
science setting out on many new voyages to make many
new discoveries. And its pilot for all of them was the
radio-isotope.
It was appropriate that the conference was held in Paris,
where Becquerel first discovered radio-activity, and Pierre
and Marie Curie isolated radium, the natural radio-active
element. The roll of participants was impressive. There was
Frederic Joliot, who with his wife, the late Irene Curie, first
produced an artificial radio-active element, and Sir John
Cockcroft, President of the Conference, who with Walton
first split the atom by man-made methods. There was
F. Strassmann, who, with Otto Hahn, discovered uranium-
fission, which made possible chain-reaction and the release
of atomic energy. Four distinguished scientists were Confer¬
ence vice-presidents: Willard F. Libby, member of the United
States Atomic Energy Commission; Prof. Topchiev of the
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.; Prof. Kenjiro Kimura
of Japan and Prof. Louis Camille Bugnard of France. Besides
these there were hundreds of others who are already famous
or are making their names in the new fields of scientific
endeavour that radio-isotopes are opening up.
Rarely does a scientific congress cover such a diversity of
subjects or bring so many branches of science together. The
reason was that they were discussing a laboratory tool, as
common to all of them as the microscope
has been in the past. Cont'd
This was highlighted by Sir John Cockcroft
in his presidential address, when he said:
17

NEW TOOLS FOR RESEARCH (Continued)
"It is not often that a single tool or technique is the uniting
factor to bring together scientists and specialists in such
different fields... The radio-isotopes have achieved this because
they have unique proporties as research tools and are applicable
to every branch of experimental science. That Unesco should
undertake responsibility for organizing and presenting this
conference is a tribute to the international importance of these
new techniques."
The interpreters, simultaneously translating the proceedings in
English, French, Spanish and Russian, were at the same time
wrestling with a new language, the terms of which did not
exist a few years ago, because a new dictionary was born when
the atom was split and new words gain currency almost daily.
The terms were difficult and so were many of the subjects,
but the principle of the radio-isotope techniques is not so difficult.
As a result of atomic energy, there are available to research-
workers man-made atoms which emit particles or rays which
can be detected or measured by various devices. These are
radio-active twins of all elements which exist in nature such as
gold, silver, iron, copper and carbon. Some isotopes radiate
for only a split second; some like radio-aluminium for 800,000
years. The shortlived ones are too ephemeral to be of much
practical use but, with fast aircraft today, useful versions of
most elements can be delivered from the atomic reactors which
produce them to laboratories all over the world.
From cat's whisker to transistor
These man-made versions behave chemically exactly like
their natural twins. They form alloys, combine in chemical
compounds or take part in the living processes of plants,
animals or humans. But, since they are labelled by their detect¬
able rays, they can be followed through those processes so that
scientists can discover exactly what happens in circumstances
which nature has so far kept a close secret.
For example, science and industry have employed catalysts
to speed up the combination of elements in chemical reactions.
The catalyst is another chemical but does not itself combine.
It is like a parson at a wedding, hastening the bonds of matri¬
mony, but remaining a third party. But how? With radio¬
isotopes, as the conference was told, the mechanism is now being
measured and defined.
Or consider the old "cat's whisker" crystal set which preced¬
ed the radio-tubes in the early days of broadcasting. A finger
of wire would seek out some point in the crystal and, somehow,
sounds would be snatched out of the ether. Today, the primi¬
tive crystal has evolved into the transistor, the midget valves
of pocket radios. It is known that the "trick" is to have a
crystal of pure germanium or silicon with an infinitesimal trace
of impurity. In Paris, it was explained how radio-isotopes could
"place" that impurity and measure the behaviour.
Again, consider the human brain and the processes which go
on inside it. What is the chemistry of human thought and action?
Again at this conference there were reports on the "labelling"
of atoms which take part in those processes. It is possible to
track alcohol or sleeping drugs into the brain and measure their
action. That was only one aspect of the brain-chemistry men¬
tioned by the researchers.
The living processes of the plants depend on sunlight, trap¬
ped by the green-pigmented chlorophyll cells and used to convert
the carbon-dioxide of the air and the water and minerals of
the soil into the food which animals and men eat. This is one
of the most important lines of research because it is the basis
of all survival. With radio-isotopes, the complicated and incred¬
ibly fast-moving processes of photosynthesis, this light-induc-
18
A VISIT TO 'SATURN' The major nuclear research centre of the
French Atomic Energy Commission, lo¬
cated at Saclay, near Paris, was visited
by scientists attending the Unesco International Conference on Radio¬
isotopes. Here they inspected "Saturn" (I) as the centre's giant proton-
synchrotron Is called. This powerful generator accelerates electrlcally-
ed chemistry, are being "blue-printed". Chlorophyll (and what
it means when a plant turns green and withers into yellow) is
being studied. So is the carbohydrate cycle and how the plant
turns carbon into sugars and starches. And how the chemicals
are built up into amino-acids and protein.
Scientists have known about photosynthesis for 150 years but
only now, with labelled atoms, are they learning how it works.
The implications are profound because, in the long-run, engi¬
neers-may take over from the radio-chemists and build factories
to reproduce the processes of the living-plant, to make food
from the elements as it does. Meantime, the knowledge will
help plant-biologists to improve the efficiency of plants.
Plants also need minerals from water and soil. Great interest
centred on the discussions at the conference on how the chemi¬
cals were transferred through the roots to the stems and leaves
of flowers. By adding labelled atoms to fertilisers, scientists can
detect the amounts, and movements, of minerals in plants. The
findings are of great importance to agriculture. For example,
it was shown that in cold soils, essential chemicals were not
absorbed by the roots sufficiently, but if fertilisers were applied
to the leaves, they would nourish the plants. This can mean
much in the cold regions where crops have been restricted

The Unesco Courier. November 1957
charged particles which are then directed at a target formed by atoms
being examined. The disintegration of the atomic nucleus under the
impact of the particles enables physicists to study its structure and the
nature of the forces existing within the nucleus. Scientists also inspected
(2 and 3) two of the research laboratories. In laboratory (2) visitors are
supplied with overalls and protective coverings for their shoes. Circular
Photos UNESCO-Dominique Berretty
building (4) houses a nuclear reactor. The reactors or piles at Saclay
are used for many kinds of experiments classed in two major groups
those relating to the constructional features of the piles themselves
(cooling system, arrangement of the uranium bars, etc,) and those to det¬
ermine the effects of radiations given off by the piles (the behaviour of
the structural materials and the reaction of living organisms, for example).
by soil-temperatures. It was also shown that contrary to the
previous belief that the sap-circulation of the plant moved by
-, absorption from the soil and transpiration through the leaves,
without anything equivalent to the heart-pump in the animals
h or humans, there is, in fact some energetic "pumping" system,
still undefined.
'Atoms in overalls' save $406 million yearly
Studies of meteorites, by radio-active tracers, are revealing
new information about the shattered planet from which they
came. The movement of tritium radio-active hydrogen in
the weather system is teaching how the air-currents move and
mingle and how the moisture evaporated from the sea is deposit¬
ed as rain on the land or how much comes from inland waters.
The bottoms of the oceans are being examined. Scientists are
reassessing the age of rocks and re-dating the world. With
radio-active carbon measurements they provide a calendar for
the relics of past civilizations.
So through forty sessions, scientists compared notes. In the
corridors, they "did each other's homework" because, as Prof
essor Bugnard pointed out, the human contacts were as impor¬
tant as the papers or formal discussions. Scientists formed new
friendships and obtained "new tips".
After the scientific sessions, public lectures were delivered
each evening by the leading authorities attending. In those, the
practical applications of radio-isotopes were illustrated.
There are thousands of ways in which those man-made atoms
are being supplied to industry, agriculture and medicine.
Dr. Willard F. Libby reported that a careful review in Novem¬
ber 1956 showed that the savings produced in American industry
by isotopes amounted probably to $ 390 millions a year. By
July 1957 it was $406,000,000 and by 1962 it will be more
than ten times as much $ 5,000,000,000 a year.
All this is a by-product of atomic energy. Sir John Cockcroft
suggested that radio-isotopes would rival atomic power in the
benefits they confer on humanity. These are "the peaceful uses
of atomic energy" which many fear is fraught with hazard. But
Dr. W.G. Marley, the leading British authority on health physics,
said that after a careful review of all the risks and precautions,
the use of radio-isotopes in scientific research, in medicine and
in all branches of industrial technology can be greatly expand¬
ed without risk to the public health.
19
