The Unesco Courier. April 1958
'.«" " .' ' - > *
» ¿33 <*».* i dPS*
- y * : 1?
DROPSICAL-LOOKING native tree of Argentina (above, right) is the paloborracho whose bulging trunk is closely studded with thorns (left).
Advent of European civilization in Argentina created a remarkable change in the country's flora which now includes useful trees and plants from every
part of the world, including, for example, the Australian eucalyptus, planted in many places and thriving on the pampa. Photos of the paloborracho
tree are taken from Ve/fcé Vody Iguazu ("The Big Waters of Iguazu"), a book for children by Jiri Hanzelka and Miroslav Zikmund, published in Prague.
by IV. H. Owens
Forests are one of the world's most valuable primary
resources. Apart from the important raw materials
obtained from them, well distributed woodlands are
essential to agriculture. They protect crop lands by
giving shelter, conserving the soil and its fertility,
regulating the climate and water supply, and controlling
rivers and streams. Wherever trees have vanished from
the scene the soil has been badly impoverished and, in
due time, desert has replaced fertile lands.
The forests of North America, which are today exploited
on a considerable scale for timber and pulpwood, are even
more important for the role they play in controlling the
great watersheds of that continent. There, as in the
U.S.S.R., new forests are being established not primarily
for timber production but as a protective measure, to
increase fertility and assist agriculture on the adjacent
lands.
In past centuries man has recklessly felled the forests,
or allowed them to be destroyed in other ways, without
thought of replanting them. Trees once grew so
abundantly over the earth's surface that it might well
have seemed as if they were inexhaustible. But most of
Europe's primary forests have disappeared, and the only
forests still left virtually untouched in the Northern
Hemisphere are the vast stands in Siberia which are
remote from land communications or the sea.
History can provide many examples of the disastrous
results of forest clearance. The Sahara and other deserts
of North Africa and the Near East were once upon a time
well forested, green and fertile. Of the once-famous
cedars of Lebanon few are left today. The sal forest
along the Jumna River of Northern India where, as
history records, the Emperor Baber hunted jungle beasts
some four centuries ago, has completely disappeared
leaving waterless ravines In its place. Destruction of
forest cover in the Himalayas produced its ill effects
hundreds of miles away.
Today only about one-fifth of the whole land area of
Asia is forest, compared with one-third or more in North
America and the U.S.S.R. and only slightly less in Europe
and Africa. Moreover, Asia's forests are very unevenly
distributed, a fact which has contributed to the low living
standards of its peoples. While Far Eastern lands are
generally well endowed with forest, there are large areas
in the Near East, in China and parts of India and
Pakistan where there is little or no tree growth at all.
Within the last century nations have
come to realise the folly of abusing and
misusing the forests. More timber is being
felled over the world than ever before, but
most countries now have rational forest
policies with the two-fold aim of increasing
Cont'd
on
next page
25

FOREST WEALTH
(Continued)
the yield per acre of forest produce while at the same
time preserving determined areas of protective woodland.
This is achieved mainly in two ways; by the regeneration
of existing forests and by the planting of new ones usually
with faster-growing softwoods that yield the most useful
timber in good quantity. The overall aim must be to
achieve a just balance of the use of land for forestry and
for agriculture and building development. Provided they
are managed with skill and knowledge and over-cutting
is avoided, forests can play their dual roles in perpetuity.
Many Far East countries have well-established and
well-organized forest services. In India and Pakistan,
for example, these were set up in the latter part of the
last century, and though the march of the desert has been
halted, a vast amount needs to be done in those countries
before the wasted forests can be anything like restored.
Since the war a Near East Forestry Commission has been
brought into being by
the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the
United Nations (FAO)
to work out policies for,
and discuss the prob¬
lems involved in, estab¬
lishing new plantations
and ensuring their pro¬
tection in that tree-
starved region of the
world.
If forests are to be de¬
veloped and utilized to
the best advantage in
the future, it is neces¬
sary to obtain a reason¬
ably accurate and com¬
prehensive knowledge of
their resources and how
they change according
to growth and fellings.
Although the forests
have had a tremendous
influence upon the de¬
velopment of civilization,
surprisingly little has
been Iknown in detail of
their resources up to
now. Forest inventories
have been purely local.
The first inventory of
the world's forests was
undertaken in 1947-48 by
FAO, which asked all
member countries to
supply their most recent
available data. Realis¬
ing the need to repeat
such an enquiry at inter¬
vals, the Sixth Session of
the FAO Conference, in
1951, recommended that
the Organization should,
every five years, collect
and publish all the
available information
on world forests. Accord¬
ingly, a second and much fuller inventory was made
in 1953, and the third is now in preparation (1). The 1953
inventory gives the most detailed picture of the extent of
the world's forests ever published, though, inevitably, it -is
still a long way from whatAs desired. It represents a pro¬
gress report on the advances in forest consciousness,
forest management and forest statistics.
Nearly 30 per cent of the world's land surface is
covered by forest, though less than one-third of this is
(1) As this Issue goes to press the FAO has just published "World
Forest Products Statistics, A Ten-Year Summary, 1946-1955." See
opposite page.
26
Official Soviet photo
INCREASING MECHANIZATION Is the keynote of U.S.S.R.'s lumber
industry. Logging operations have been 90 per cent mechanized over the
past decade or so. Here a special auto-loader transports a load of planks
to waiting trucks at a sawmill. Other specially designed trucks and transport
vehicles nowadays carry finished planks to railway stations and canal docks.
being exploited. Present consumption of coniferous or
softwood timber roughly balances the net growth. But
in the case of the broadleaved or hardwood trees only
about 75 per cent of the net annual growth is felled, due
largely to the fact that many species in the tropical and
sub-tropical forests are not marketed. The 1953 inventory
showed that the world's forests are, in the words of that
report, "'theoretically capable of furnishing a plentiful
flow of forest products for a world population much
higher than that of today/'
Nevertheless, timber supply problems arise in various
countries because, as we have seen, forests are not evenly
distributed and, secondly, underdeveloped lands, such as
Africa or Latin-America, have not so far had the means
to exploit their great forest wealth. Good progress is
being made with this last problem, though it is obvious
that its solution must take time.
Meanwhile Africa im¬
ports timber from the
better managed forests
of Europe even though
Europe actually has far
less forest per head of
population than Africa.
In North America the
great progress with for¬
est road building and
up-to-date logging me¬
thods has considerably
enlarged the area of ex¬
ploitable forest, while
the countries of Latin-
America lag well be¬
hind. In Peru, for
example, it is cheaper
to import Douglas fir
all the way from the
Pacific coast of the U.S.
and Canada than com¬
mercial hardwoods from
the much nearer Ama¬
zon and Orinoco valleys.
The great bulk of all
the timber used nowa¬
days is softwood (for
newsprint, carpentry,
etc.), the product of the
evergreen coniferous
forests which represent
just over one half of the
world's exploited forests.
Such forests stretch in a
broad belt right across
the Northern Hemi¬
sphere, from the U.S.S.R.
(containing more than
half of all the coniferous
stands), across Scandi¬
navia, the Baltic coun¬
tries, Scotland and,
beyond the Atlantic
Ocean, across Canada to
the Rockies and then
along the Pacific coast
from Alaska south to
California. Within this great belt are more than 90 per
cent of the world's softwood growth.
The wider distribution of coniferous forests over the
world is needed to solve problems of timber supplies in
the future. This is already being done as, for example,
by the introduction on a large scale of North American
and European species into the Southern Hemisphere which
is so poorly endowed with native softwoods. One species
in particular, the Insignis Pine, whose
natural distribution is confined to the
limited area of the Monterey Peninsula
in California, has been most successfully
introduced into Australia, New Zealand and
Cont'd
on
page 28

FOREST WEALTH (Continued)
South Africa. In each case the Insignis Pine has done
better in its adopted territories than in its native envi¬
ronment.
An outstandingly successful softwood planting pro¬
gramme was undertaken in New Zealand between the
World Wars, when nearly half a million acres of exotic
conifers were planted mainly on the formerly bare
volcanic plains in the centre of the North Island. Those
vast unproductive plains were once a challenge in such a
well cultivated country as New Zealand. The success
with which her forestry pioneers met that challenge is
evident today in the 200,000 acre Kaingaroa State Forest
the largest man-made forest on earth which gave birth
to a great new pulp and paper-making industry.
Climate and soil conditions in New Zealand proved
extremely favourable to the rapid growth of commercial
softwoods. While a variety of conifer species from Europe
and North America went towards the creation of the new
forests, the most successful of them all was the Insignis
Pine. This one species now covers more than 60 per cent
of the total acreage of New Zealand's softwood plantations.
Scientific research, like scientific management, plays a
key role in modern forestry practice. Pre-planting
experiments with soils and seeds in the forest nurseries
make certain that only the types of trees best suited to
local conditions are selected for new plantations. Sample
plot work is vital to the successful establishment of new
plantations with fast-growing- conifers of high timber
yield. Even these trees take a good many years to reach
maturity so the forester must gain advance knowledge
of the kind of stock and cultivation methods that will
achieve the best results. Extensive research is undertaken
also to combat timber pests and diseases, to develop better
methods of fire control in the woods, and to determine
the commercial properties of unmarketed timbers.
The changeover from manual to mechanical methods
of logging, together with the construction of better access
and transport roads, is reflected in the progress of opening
28
up new forest areas in many countries. In the five years
between the first and second FAO inventories, the
accessible forest area in Ghana, Nigeria and Thailand, for
example, was increased by one-fifth; in Austria, British
Honduras and Greece it was up by about one-tenth. In
the U.S.S.R. logging operations have been 90 per cent
mechanized over the past decade or so, and it is estimated
that more than half the huge forest area of the Soviet
Union is now accessible and can be economically exploited.
In a Far East country such as Malaya, where the forests
.are a repository of great material wealth, a major obstacle
to development has been the lack of roads. This made
the removal of felled timber from some of the best areas
a difficult and costly operation. The Malayan Forest
Department, like similar forest services in many parts of
the world today, therefore has built up an effective
mechanized road-making unit which now operates widely
over the Peninsula.
The exploitation of Latin-America's rich forest resources
requires the development of road and rail communications
and the introduction of modern logging and milling
techniques. This, in turn, calls for trained forest workers
and managers. Progress has certainly been made in
recent years to establish forestry as a progressive
economic activity in Latin-America. There, as in other
underdeveloped regions, the U.S. Technical Assistance
Programme is co-operating with the United Nations
development programme. A definite step forward was
taken in 1948 when a Latin-American Forestry Commission
was set up. Schools of forestry have also been established
at universities in Chile and Venezuela.
In the years ahead the enormous wealth of the forests
in South America will surely not only be utilized to meet
the timber requirements of that continent, but will
contribute generously to the needs of distant and populous
lands which are deprived of such valuable resources.
No other region in the world offers such unlimited
opportunities for forest development in the remainder of
this century.

The Unesco Courier. April 1958
I ;i^TifiMrriii
British Official photos, Crown Copyright Reserved..
TIMBER HARVEST, increasing in all parts of the world, reflects transformations that have come in the exploitation of "green gold." Change¬
over to mechanical methods of logging and construction of roads giving access to forests have led to opening up of new areas. More than half the
huge forest area of the Soviet Union Is now accessible and can be economically exploited. Top photo, logs from the Carpathian forests of the Ukraine
awaiting transport by rail. Much of the wood is beech, greatly in demand for the manufacture of furniture. Scientific research, like scientific manage¬
ment, plays a key role in modern forest practices. Above, left, pine seedlings from the Philliplnes and British Honduras are grown under glass in
tests by Malayan Forest Research Institute, to determine whether this species can be propagated in Malaya. In Institute's Wood Technological Section,
a botanist, (above, right) compares specimens of foliage. Something like 2,000 different species of forest trees have been identified in Malaya.
29
