WHY JAPANESE GIRLS
WON'T MARRY FARMERS
Last year in some 40 villages around the cities of Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya, people gathered
around newly-installed TV sets to watch a programme entitled "Why do girls dislike marrying
farmers?"one of a series of 13 telecasts on the theme "For the progress of farming
villages". These programmes marked the launching in Japan, under UNESCO sponsorship,
of the community tele-club movement, first developed in France and later in Italy with
UNESCO support. By evoking basic problems of rural life, the Japanese telecasts aimed
to show village people how they might improve their living conditions and rural amenities
in general. On the following pages we reproduce two of the TV scripts"The Life of
Japanese farmers" and "Why do girls dislike marrying farmers" (an audience survey
showed that this second programme made the greatest impact of all). Although great
changes and improvements in the status of women have come about in recent years in
Japan, the TV series reveals that much can still be done to improve the condition of women
in farming areas where changes have come more slowly and are often slower to be accepted.
At present, we hear various rumours about farming
villages in Japan. Some say that farmers are very
rich and can buy such luxurious things as auto-
tricycles, electric washing machines, mixers etc. while
others report that farmers are compelled to live just as
miserably as before, and sometimes forced to sell their
daughters to prostitute dealers.
Now setting aside these rumours, we should look into
the real life of the Japanese farmers.
We shall start from the centre of Tokyo. About half
an hour's drive by motor car takes us into the suburb
district, and soon the rural areas spread out before us.
Okagami is one of the rural villages not very far from the
centre of Tokyo. It consists of 83 families wholly engaged
in farming. The area of arable land per family is one
and a half acres.
It is already late autumn and the farmers' busy season
will soon be over.
We can see a few farmers using small-sized cultivating
machines, but most of them" are cultivating with hoes as
their ancesters did. Human body and cattle back are
the most familiar instruments for transportation. Motors
are not sufficiently introduced. This village being
situated near the city of Tokyo, arable land is specifically
utilized for vegetable-growing. But transportation and
fertilization are entirely dependent on human power.
Rich farmers sometimes engage in dairy or poultry-
farming on the side. Persimmon trees, mandarins for
flower arrangement and other heritages from the
ancestors also bring about some side income to villagers.
Most of the farmers have sewing machines, but the
insides of the houses have scarcely changed since the
days of their parents and grandparents. The old-
fashioned paper sack of patent medicine from Toyama
is a symbol of conventionality. The kitchen remains
dark and the toilet as unsanitary as of old. The branch
school for lower-grade children is provided With neat
establishments for food supply, but the ground is narrow
and muddy. Children's paradise is the precincts of a
temple called Tôkôin. Here, a sand bed and a library
for children are provided by the chief priest. But boys
and girls cannot spend much time at the temple precincts,
because as soon as they come back from school they must
go to help their parents working in the fields.
As in the case of the farmers throughout Japan, vil¬
lagers of Okagami return from the fields after dark.
^
^
10

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
UNESCO photos
FARMER'S WIFE in Japan is usually the busiest person in the family. As well as looking after husband and children she often
has to take care of silk raising, lend a hand with wheat harvesting and rice-planting and do other heavy chores. Above, with
youngest child riding pick-a-back, farmer's wife returns from far-off well with drinking water. Opposite page (bottom, right)
drawing water from a community-built tank in a mountain village (Japanese telecasts have stressed the need for collective
action in villages); left, stone wall cultivation of strawberries and their preparation for market are jobs for women workers.
After feeding the cattle, they sit at a table for supper.
After supper they engage till late at night in the packing
of vegetables to be transported to the market the
following morning.
Mr. NINOMIYA, CHAIRMAN: The above is the real
situation of Okagami Village. Now, what do the villagers
think about their life? Let us hear some frank opinions
from Mr. Yamada, one of the conscientious farmers, and
Mr. Kaji, one of the leaders of a 4H club.
Mr. YAMADA: I have eight family members to support,
and three daughters are salary earners. Only three of
us are wholly engaged in farming. I have 3.5 tan
(0.85 acres) of paddy fields and 8 tan (2 acres) of farms.
They say we had a good harvest last year, but so far as
our village is concerned, it is not true. When I was young,
farmers had to work from early in the morning till late
at night. The situation has very much improved, it is
true, but owing to the advance in the standard of living
we must work as much as we did twenty years ago.
Mr. KAJI: I cultivate 2.4 tan. (0.6 acres) of rice fields
and 7 tan (1.5 acres) of field with three other family
members. Four other family members are salary earners.
I admit that farmers must work very hard, but in my
opinion farmers too have the right to live an ordinary
cultural life.
Mr. YAMADA: Young men want to lead an easy and
luxurious life, and somehow lack the will to work.
Consequently they venture on a large-scale management
without concrete plans and sufficient funds only to face
miserable failures. Studies of agricultural experimental
stations and other institutions seem so impractical to us.
Mr. KAJI: in my opinion, to consider cultural life itself
as a luxury stems from an inferiority complex of tradi¬
tional farmers. I don't want to lead an easy life but I
wonder whether farmers must work as if they were horses
or cows. I want to be a farmer who can use his own
brains. Farmers in future should be well-acquainted
with the progress of agricultural techniques and carry
out scientific management. Of course, the improvement
of living conditions is important but it must be
accompanied by the improvement of agricultural man¬
agement.
In our previous programme we took up the problem of
whether Japanese rural villages should stay as they
are. Concerning this problem we have received
various reactions. Especially young men and women have
sent us various opinions. The following is the opinion of
a young woman who lives in a farming village.
"I don't agree with adults who think that
farming villages have been much improved.
As long as the farming villagers remairi as
they are, I feel disinclined to marry a
Cont'd
on
next page
II

JAPANESE
FARMERS
(Continued)
Td rather marry a salaried man'
farmer. Marrying a salaried man even if he earns a small
income seems to be happier than that to a farmer."
This is rather a bitter opinion, but many young women
share the same view. Let us now begin by listening to
what women think of rural life today. Mrs. Yokota and
Mrs. Ebizawa will speak from the viewpoint of housewives
and Miss Yamada as a young woman. All three ladies
live at Okagami Village.
MISS YAMADA: My parents are farmers but I have a
job at a cinema-house in the neighbouring town. So, I
do not help on the farm even on holidays. I am of the
same opinion as the writer of the letter you have just
read,
Mr. NINOMIYA: Of the factors which make girls dis¬
like marrying farmers, such as feudalists family system,
structure of house buildings, severe labour, rare oppor¬
tunity for amusement, etc., which Would you say is the
strongest reason for your disinclination to marrying a
farmer?
MISS YAMADA: What makes me disinclined most is the
fact that farmers still regard the wife as a kind of
instrument of farming. And While the man is taking a
rest with a newspaper in his hand, the woman must work
hard in such jobs as cooking, washing, infant rearing,
and so on. The other day I saw a picture entitled
"Record of a Mother" in which the hard, back-aching
work of the farmer's wife was shown very realistically.
(The film is projected on the- TV screen.)
Dawn to dusk work & mother-in-law's moods
Announcer: Most of the farmers in the Ina Valley
along the River Tenryu are pursuing silk-raising as
a side job. Slopes of the hills are covered with
mulberry-trees. Dwelling-houses are built very large
because silkworms are raised in them.
This is Mr. Miyazawa's house. His family is made up
of seven people in all. His eldest daughter works at the
filature factory in the town. He possesses only 1.6 acres
of land 0.5 acres of wheat-field 0.5 acres of rice-field.
The income from silk-raising is therefore very important
to Mr. Miyazawa. June is the busiest month when both
silk-raising and rice-planting require many hands. The
mother is the busiest person in the family and she is
obliged to have her supper after the rest of the family
have finished theirs. The business of silk-raising is
mainly left to the house-wife, but at the busiest season,
the school is closed to allow schoolchildren to help the
family. Mr. Miyazawa raised 40 grammes of silkworms
this year. Silk-raising is not as profitable nowadays
because of the development of the nylon industry.
Excrements of silkworms are important as they are used
for fertilizer.
After taking care of the silkworms the mother goes to
help in the wheat-harvesting. She goes on reaping, never
taking a rest. The former land-owner comes to ask for
help. Mr. Miyazawa cannot refuse it because of his
former relations with him, and he and his sons go to till
the land-owner's fields. The mother, left alone, fertilizes
the rice field. It begins to rain. Wet mulberry-leaves
make silk-worms ill, and so the farmers gather them in
in all haste.
12
A letter has come from the eldest daughter who ia
working at the filature factory, she says, "T hear mulberry-
leaves are suffering from noxious insects and I wonder
if you have enough leaves. How about the price of
cocoons? I am thinking of mother who must be working
very hard." Indeed, mother is working very hard from
morning till night. She also has to humour her mother-
in-law's temperament.
The shortage of mulberry-leaves has proved real, as
expected. The agricultural cooperative union buys
mulberry-leaves through the intermediaries on behalf of
the farmers. It is very clear that the raising of silkworms
with purchased mulberry-leaves does not pay, but the
farmers have no alternative.
Town girls are unfit for a farmer's life
Voice of the Daughter: My mother was born in a
farmer's family, and, when young, worked at a
filature factory. She has been working all her life.
Will my married life be like my mother's? Nevertheless
mother looks very calm...
Mr. NINOMIYA: What do you think about the mother's
life just introduced in the film? And what is your opin¬
ion about Miss Yamada'á view against the marriage to
a farmer? Lastly, what type of a girl do you want as
your son's bride? ^
Mrs. EBIZAWA AND Mrs. YOKOTA: The mother's life
introduced in this film is very much like ours. We can
understand the sentiment of rural girls who dislike
marrying farmers. We hope they will not suffer from
such a miserable life as we have led in the past.
But as to our sons' Wives, town girls are unfit for a
farmer's life. We want girls born in the farmer's family
as our son's wives.
Mr. NINOMIYA: You want, on the one hand, your
daughter not to marry a farmer, and on the other hand,
you want a girl from a farmer's family as your son's wife.
These two desires seem to contradict each other,
nevertheless it seems reasonable in the present case.
Wanted ! cheerful & comfortable villages
N ow let us listen to the opinion of Mrs. Sue Sumii, a
writer, who has a profound knowledge of farming
life.
Mrs. SUMII: These two desires, which seem to contra¬
dict each other, in a sense, seem to be the products of a
mother's love for her son and daughter. At the bottom
of these desires, lies the farmer's miserable life. If the
farmer should get rid of the poverty, such contradiction
will naturally disappear. Farmers must try to heighten
their productive capacity and also hasten the rationali¬
zation of consumption. Reorganization of life must first
start from renewing of ideas. Construction of cheerful
and comfortable villages and homes by farmer's own
hands may be the surest way to make girls willingly
marry farmers.
Mr. NINOMIYA: We have indeed many problems to
consider, all of which are difficult to be solved at once,
but I hope you will study and discuss with each other
these problems conforming to the actual situation of your
own villages.
