GYPS
WANDERERS E
THOUSAND
by Gerald Barry
Photos © Paul Almasy
A MYSTERIOUS PEOPLE, untamed and
nomadic, the gypsies have wandered to almost
every country in the world. Most of those
who still lead a wandering life have kept the
same physical characteristics as the early
tribeswavy dark hair, large black or brown
eyes and dark skin, but the settled tribes have
gradually come to look more like the people
of countries where they live. It has been said
that in music the soul of the gipsy has found
its fullest expression. From their ranks, too,
have come writers, philosophers, poets, dan¬
cers and artists. But for the vast majority
the call of the open road is irresistible. Photo,
right, shows gypsy entertainers in a cabaret;
far right, widow and son (sitting on steps) of
Django Rheinhardt, the gypsy guitarist who
became one of the greatest names in Jazz.
n a hot, dusty August day, in
the year 1427, a band of
extraordinary-looking foreigners
was gathered at the Porte
d'Orléans, Paris gateway to the
pilgrim route of St. James of
Compostella, clamouring for
admission. The men were
slight, agile, tawny types; the
women were slim and sinuous.
All had shining blue-black hair
and flashing penetrating- eyes set deeply in high-
cheek-boned faces of dark olive complexion. Against a
ringing of bells and a whirring of brightly coloured
revolving wooden clappers, they all seemed to be shouting
at once in a strange unknown tongue. The leaders were
richly dressed in scarlets and crimsons slashed with
brilliant emerald greens. Their gloved hands flashed with
barbaric jewels. Brocaded cloaks fell from their shoulders
which were "decorated all about .with great silver
buttons."
In a kind of pidgin Latin-French they made themselves
understood by the guards. They announced themselves
as, The Right Honorable Lord Panuel, Duke of Little Egypt
and Thomas, Earl of Little Egypt together with their
companions, bodyguard and servants to the number of
one hundred and twenty. They carried with them Letters
of Credence from His Holiness Pope Martin V, addressed
to His Most Christian Majesty Charles VII, King of France.
There was no doubt of the validity of the Fisherman's
Seal on the Apostolic document they presented. The
guards admitted them to the city and the court. The
Gypsies had arrived in Paris.
The story they told the King was one which they
recounted during the next ten years in practically every
court in Europe. It is known historically, even among the
Gypsies themselves, as "The Great Trick". The story ran
that when The Holy Family fled to Egypt from the fury
of King Herod, they pleaded for shelter and help from
the Gypsy tribes. All help was refused for fear of
offending the Pharaoh. Whereupon God sent a terrible
curse upon the whole of their race and condemned them
to wander forever, despised and hated.
They said they had recently been driven out of their
country of Little Egypt (it is strange that no-one ever
seems to have questioned the existence of this fictitious
country) by the Saracens and had roamed through
Bohemia and Germany and finally thrown themselves on
the mercy of the Pope who had given them absolution
and ordered them to do a penance of seven years, visiting
all the major shrines in Europe. This penance they were
now performing. The King having heard their story
could but give them the benefit of the doubt.
They received the "safe-conduct" and the city was
opened to them. Alas not for long. Their depredations
into the citizens' chicken-coops and general petty
thievery soon aroused the wrath of the Parisians. This

The Unesco Courier. April 1958
was, however, slightly mitigated by the rumour that these
strange people possessed wonderful powers of divination.
Indeed the Parisians flocked to the Gypsies in such
numbers that exactly one month later, the Archbishop of
Paris preached a solemn public sermon denouncing "these
sorcerers and fortune-tellers", excommunicated the whole
band and had them driven from the city. He then
thundered a further Edict of Excommunication on all who
had consulted them.
The Gypsies fled.. .for the time being A few weeks later
they turned up in Amiens, where they were given eight
golden livres and a safe conduct pass. Three years later,
we learn 'from a document conserved in the Archivo
Histórico Provincial of Huesca, that they were in Spain in
considerable numbers and had received a joyous and
hospitable welcome with almost undreamt of privileges
from the King of Spain.
It is only as the result of very recent scholarship that
we know with any certainty who and what these
mysterious people are. The Gypsies have always been
considered an almost complete ethnic puzzle. They were
thought by some to be Egyptians or Bohemians from
Centra] Europe or even a lost tribe of Israel; others
thought they were an offshoot of Manichean Persians, in
fact everything short of the reality. Yet each story had
something of the truth, reflecting the wanderings of these
peoples over the last two thousand years.
Recent university expeditions to Karakkorum, a region
lying between the south of the western Himalayas and
the western branch of the Kunlun range to the north
have established the existence of the fabulous tented
empire of Karak-Khitan in India. It has been discovered
that scattered Indian tribes still speak an almost identical
language to that of the purest Gypsy tribes. It is a
Prakritic branch of the Sanskrit tongue and here a
fascinating feature forces itself on our attention. At the
beginning of the first century A.D., there took place a
complete and absolute reformation of the Sanskrit
language, yet in the speech of the Gypsies, properly called
Romane (from "rom" the name of the whole collective
race, which is also the nome simply for "man"), there is
no trace of this reform.
It is this, above all, which confirms the scholars in their
conclusion, that at the time of the Mongol invasions, this
race cut itself off from the rest of the Sanskritl-speaking
people and emigrated in two main waves to Persia.
They were a low-caste race, but renowned as musicians,
mighty trainers of horses and as workers in gold and
silver. In Persia they were welcomed at first, particularly
as musicians, and were called Luri. Today in Iran they
are still -known by this name. The length of their stay
in Persia seems to have been very consi¬
derable, where apart from their musical
gifts, their ability to train horses and their
skill as metal-workers made them welcome
refugees.
It is generally agreed that it must have
Cont'd
on
next page

GYPSIES
(Continued,)
HAS THE MODERN
WORLD A PLACE FOR THEM?
been during this period that the nature-worship they
brought with them from India became transformed by
their contact with Manicheanism. This would be the key
to much of the incomprehensible duality of their moral
and religious attitude today. The Tarot fortune-telling
cards which they introduced into Europe in the four¬
teenth century are full of pictorial Manichean symbolism.
It would seem that during this long sojourn in Persia,
the race became hardened into five main tribes. In spite
of more modern nomenclature, this division has been
maintained up to our day.
In the course of time, fresh waves of persecution led to
a further mass exodus. Those we now know as the Rom,
Manouche and Sintis the metal-workers, the musicians
and straw-weavers, and the trainers of animals went up
through Syria into Armenia. Here they separated. One
group went up through the Caucasus into Georgia and
Russia. Another wended its way through Anatolia into
Turkey where again a further split occurred. A large
group pushed northwards into Rumania, Hungary and
Bohemia; the second group crossed the sea to Crete and
settled in Corfu. According to the contemporary
Franciscan chronicler, Simeonis, this latter immigration
took place at the beginning of the fourteenth century.
The early Czech Chronicle of Dalimil, written in 1360,
specifically mentions their strange language and curious
begging formula. In Greece they were and are still
known as the "Acingani" from which would appear to
derive the Italian form of Zingari and the better
known Hungarian name of Tzigane. An early Georgian
manuscript mentions a strange band of sorcerers called
Atsincan, whom the Byzantine emperor Constantine
Monomachus (reigning from 1040 to 1055) sent to
Constantinople, to destroy the wild animals who were
devouring all the game in the Imperial hunting preserves.
About the same time as the first big exodus from Persia,
a second group, made up of the tribes who now call
themselves Gitans and Kales, went down through Arabia,
up along the shores of the Red Sea, through Palestine
into Egypt where they remained for a considerable time.
Later driven out by Moslem invasions, they crossed
through Libya along the North African coast into Spain.
They arrived in England about 1490. One band crossed
to Ireland and another headed by John Faw, who also
called himself Earl of Little Egypt, was received by King
James IV, of Scotland. The King empowered him by
Royal Writ, dated 1504, to exercise full authority over all
his Gypsy subjects. By the opening of the sixteenth
century the Romany race was established in every country
in Europe. From 1555 to 1780 a tremendous wave of
persecution, branding them as heretics and sorcerers,
swept through Christendom. They nevertheless survived
with their language, customs, taboos and trades intact.
The Emperor Joseph II, abolishing serfdom, gave them
freedom to wander wherever they wished, after his mother
Maria-Theresa had failed to settle them in villages. In the
last century the Emperor Francis Joseph I of Austria,
not only entertained them at court but compiled a very
complete Gypsy Grammar and spoke Romane .fluently.
Obviously as nationalistic segregation hardened in
Europe, the Gypsy's complete disregard for frontiers raised
almost insoluble political problems. By the early part of
the 19th century they had penetrated into North America.
An interesting feature of their large settlement in the
State of Pennsylvania, is that these people speak the
purest of all the Romane dialects of which there are
now fourteen. Numerous tribes settled in all the South
American republics.
During the last war, more than five hundred thousand
of them perished in gas-chambers and concentration
camps. Those who escaped often fought with conspicuous
bravery and ingenuity with the Allied partisan forces.
It is interesting to recall at this point that because of the
enemy-occupying forces' almost superstitious dread of
these people, they were able to help hundreds of Jewish
victims in French concentration camps to escape into
neutral zones, under the clandestine leadership of a bril¬
liant Jesuit priest from Poitiers. For his work in this
connexion the Reverend Father Fleury, S.J. was appointed
at the end of th# war, to be Chaplain-General of all the
Gypsies and Nomads of France.
This outstanding and erudite churchman and many of
his confreres as well as a growing body of judicial and
administrative leaders are rightly concerned about the
future of the Gypsies of today. By the very historical
circumstances of their survival they are confirmed as a
nomadic people. Is there in our modern civilization a
place for these people? Since there are between five and
six million of them in the world, an answer is required.
With understanding and sympathy for their difficulties,
acknowledgement of their contribution and needs, there is
undoubtedly a solution to their problems. Like the wind
that carries the pollen and seeds of strange plants and
trees, to give variety and strength to the indigenous flora,
so these people have preserved in their racial memory,
various forms of behaviour, folk-lore, music and perhaps
most important of all, an intuitive sense of the forces of
nature that we, in our urban conception of life, are in
danger of forgetting and losing.
All great Hungarian musicians have' confirmed that the
Tzigane though not necessarily contributing an original
© Paul Almasy
WAYFARERS OF THE WORLD, the gypsies can be found on the
roads of Europe and Asia and the flames of their campfires light up the
night in Africa and in far-off Australia. Those who settled in Pennsyl¬
vania in the USA speak the purest of all the Romane dialects. In cara¬
vans, on the backs of mules and donkeys (photo, above, was taken in
Murcia, Spain) they roam the world's highways and by-ways. But once
each year many of them come together at the famous pilgrimage of
Stes-Maries-de-la-Mer, in southern France.. They come here to pay
their respects (opposite page) to the Marys of Bethany, and to St. Sara,
the Patron Saint of Gypsies whose shrine is in the local church.

The Unesco Courier. April 1958
R.T.F., Paris
musical idiom, have nevertheless preserved by their very
traditionalism, essential Magyar musical forms which the
people themselves had forgotten. In the United States,
according to Duke Ellington, Django Rheinhardt, the fa¬
mous Gypsy guitarist, did more for the universal dissemi¬
nation of valid Jazz as a musical form than perhaps any¬
one else. Since the eighteenth century the Gitanos have
re-vivified Spanish music and have inspired composers
such as de Falla, Albeniz, Granados and Segovia who have
taken their places as the genii of Spanish musical culture.
This is but one sphere in which they have made useful
contributions. The late Tikno Adjams of the University
of Louvain was not only a great philosopher of the school
of Bergson but a very fine poet, yet he remained always
one with his people.
Since 1930 the Soviets have produced a Gypsy newspaper
called, not unsurprisingly, O Nevo Drom. (The New Way)
and have discovered many able writers among the nomads.
The Gypsy Theatre in Moscow was certainly the most
popular form of all entertainments for Muscovites during
the war (1). Between the wars, a famous Gypsy School for
boys was founded at Uzhord in Ruthenia, conditioned to
the particular needs of its pupils and later a similar
scheme was put into effect in Kygor in South Moravia.
Here a secondary schoolboy has recently written an ex¬
tremely able history of his people and has since (walking
in the footsteps of George Borrow, the first man to trans¬
late the Bible into Romane) helped with a new translation
of the Bible in the Gypsy tongue.
In France modern sociologists have taken into account
the devastating effects of forcing the nomad into an urban
sedentary life where he degenerates rapidly into a de¬
plorable type. The Rev. Father Fleury hit on the idea of
transforming large motor coaches into travelling schools
following in the wake of the caravans, which are now
mostly motorized. Certainly without attempting to change
the essential pattern of the life of these people, it
(1) Under a decree promulgated by the Praesidium of the
Supreme Soviet in October 1956, the last wandering gypsy bands
in the Soviet Union are gradually to be settled in places of
their choice. Each of the Republics is individually working out
the best ways to enable gypsies to tfke up fixed occupations.
. should be possible with an intelligent grasp of their prob¬
lems to find young educationalists who are willing to
travel and adopt the principles of modern educational psy¬
chology to their different needs.
Living and working with them, deeprooted prejudices
fall quickly away. Too often the petty dishonesty, the
lack of hygiene is conduced by the long-standing effects
of oppression. A small example of the attitude towards
hygiene can be taken from the above-mentioned travelling
school. Freed for once from oppressive laws and able
to camp freely by river or lakeside or even village pumps,
the youngsters with no compulsion would stop, strip and
bathe every day regardless of the temperature. Consider¬
ing their ages ranged from 13 to 18 they were at least
as hygienically-minded as the inmates of similar age in
many "prep-schools" on either side of the Atlantic.
Those who would like to see firsthand as many of the
varied aspects of the Gypsy tribes as possible cannot do
better, if in Europe, than visit the annual re-union of the
Romany from all over the world, which takes place once a
year between May 24 and 26, in the wild Camargue country
in Southern France. A few miles only from Aries, the
famous Pilgrimage of the Stes.-Maries-de-la-Mer is
marked by great devotion. Here they all arrive to pay
their respects to the Marys of Bethany and to St. Sara, the
Patron Saint of the Gypsies, who has her shrine in the
curious and mysterious mithraic crypt of the ancient Ro¬
manesque church. Here you will meet them all: Circus
millionaires and lawyers, poets, artists and artisans, musi¬
cians and dancers, be they Rom or Manouche, Sinti, Gitan
or Kale with all their differences and all their similarities.
They come from every part of the globe, from across the
Atlantic or from Eastern Europe for here cross the Gypsy
caravan routes of the world. Here too you will meet a
new generation of the young, who deprived of their tradi¬
tional trade as horse-dealers have become automobile
mechanics of no mean ability.
This is the great gathering of the "Rom", a people who
are vital, sometimes unthinkingly cruel, great lovers of
children, too often light-fingered by lack of education but
impulsive and capable of tremendous devotion to their
friends be they gageo (white men) or not. It is a friend¬
ship worth the patience and effort of winning.
