GUATEMALA'S PICTURE HOSPITAL
by Bertha Gasfer
Not much more than a bus ride out
from the busy modern capital of
Guatemala, some eight or nine miles
over the mountains as the crow flies, lies
a ghost town. For over two hundred years
Antigua the Old Town was capital
of the Spanish captaincy-general of Guate¬
mala, second in its time only to Mexico
and Peru. In the eighteenth century it was
the most populous city in Central America;
its university was third on the American
continent, its printing-house second ; and
the great bells rang unceasingly over the
city from more than a hundred imposing
churches and convents.
All this pride and magnificence came to
a sudden end one afternoon in lune 1773.
A catastrophic earthquake destroyed the
town, and reduced most of the buildings to
rubble. With the removal of the capital
to Guatemala City, Antigua fell into decay.
For a long time it was left to the poorest
elements of the population to eke out a
bare living in hovels among the ruins, until
coffee-growing restored a modest prosperity.
Today pretty little houses in ice-cream
pink and green stand side by side with Ba¬
roque facades in its cobbled streets. Glimp-
32
ses of tiled patios can be seen from under
the crumbling arcades. And everywhere,
in abandoned gardens and over alley walls,
drip yellow jasmine, white and golden
roses and the scarlet hibiscus, as the old
town drowses its past away in the siesta
hour.
Attempts to preserve something of that
past for future generations have been going
on for a considerable time. Several of
the ruined facades of ancient mansions
have been restored, and sculpture and
carvings retrieved. On a sunny day in
December 1956 in the ancient cloisters of
Capucine convent the only one to sur¬
vive the earthquake comparatively un¬
touched specimens of another aspect of
that past had been gathered together.
Propped against massive pillars, exposed
on easels, lying on trestle tables, were a
number of paintings. Many of them were
religious pictures of Madonnas and Magda-
lenes and other Biblical subjects which had
been hanging in the churches of Guatemala,
some of them from the ruins of Antigua.
Others were portraits of bygone dignitaries
of the Spanish colonial era, or nineteenth
century generals and personalities of the
young Republic. All of them were in bad
condition, discoloured, peeling, some of
them still showing the rents and slashes of
the 1773 earthquake.
Four men were looking at them, moving
them to the light to inspect them, examining
the torn canvas and peeling paint. The
chief among them, Helmut Ruhemann, was
one of the best known experts on picture
restoration in the world. Originally in
charge of restoration work at the State Art
Galleries in Berlin, and later consultant to
the National Gallery in London until his
retirement two years ago, Mr. Ruhemann
has restored paintings by Leonardo da
Vinci, Rembrandt, Bellini and many other
famous artists, besides devising methods
and techniques of restoration, and training
students in their use. This was for him
the beginning of a three months' mission
for Unesco, under its programme of aid
to member states, to make a survey of
colonial paintings in Guatemala, and help
the country to preserve these records of its
historical past.
The three people with him, one a youth
of sixteen, followed his every move with
closest attention. For Mr. Ruhemann was
there not only to survey the paintings, but

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
also to train a small number of Guatemalan
artists in the technique of restoration, so
they could carry on the work after his
return to England. There had been many
applicants, but there was not work to justify
the selection of more than three, and Carlos
Morales, Luis Alvarez and his son Alberto
Luis Alvarez were the ones chosen.
The work of restoring the pictures select¬
ed was carried out in Guatemala City,
with the assistance and support of the
Ministry of Fine Arts and the directors of
the national museums and art schools, and
with equipment and material provided by
Unesco. Theoretical exposition and prac¬
tical training went hand-in-hand. "There
is no secret in modern restoration techni¬
ques", Mr. Ruhemann stressed, "but
without a thorough knowledge of correct
methods there is great danger of damaging
old pictures, and in fact, many great works
of art have been injured this way."
Mr. Ruhemann's three pupils followed
him step by step through the different pro¬
cesses. They were taught the first stage of
preservation, pasting tissue paper over the
canvas to hold the loose paint. Then the
picture was "lined", stuck to a new canvas
with the aid of a thermostatically controlled
electric iron. Afterwards it was cleaned
with a small swab on a stick, with a mix¬
ture of strong solvent and non-active diluent.
'"One of the trickiest jobs in my career",
recalled Mr. Ruhemann, "'was the task of
cleaning several Renoirs. It was risky too.
You' had to handle your swab in a certain
way or you ran the risk of removing
paint when you cleaned them." Old paint¬
ings in fact, declared Mr. Ruhemann,
presented a much less serious problem.
"The straight oil or egg paints used by the
masters of the Renaissance are much easier
to clean. From the eighteenth century on,
painters added soft resins to their colours
and the cleaning of their work was much
more delicate."
Finally came the re-touching. Most of
the pigments used to-day are the same as
those used in former times, and present
little difficulty. "But you have to be a
good painter for this stage of the work,"
said Mr. Ruhemann. "That is why you
have to choose your picture-restorers from
professional artists. Both M. Morales and
M. Alvarez were good painters. M. Al¬
varez in fact had been restoring paintings
for the Archbishop before I came, and his
son had been working with him on panel
work and gilding. I hope it is going to be
possible to arrange to send two of them
to Florence or London to complete their
training."
At the end of his stay in Guatemala, Mr.
. Ruhemann organised a small exhibition in
the School of Plastic Arts of the pictures
on which they had been working, to
demonstrate the techniques of restoration,
and the work achieved. An interested
public were able to see untreated pictures in
perfect or bad condition hung beside others
in various stages of restoration, repaired
but not cleaned, half-cleaned, and finally
completely restored, such as a picture of
the "Magdalene" dating from 1703. The
exhibition was a demonstration of what had
been achieved, and the training of three
restorers an assurance that the preservation
of Guatemala's historical and artistic past
in religious and secular painting would
continue.
The whole project has aroused such
interest that there is now some question of
a refresher course being organised in Ha¬
vana, where a magnificent new museum has
been built, to afford students from all the
South American and Central American
countries an opportunity of taking part.
Colonial art of Gua-
tamala is being
brought to light and
restored since Unesco
sent Helmut Ruhe-
mann, an expert res¬
torer, to this Central
American Republic.
During a three
months' mission
Ruhemann surveyed
colonial paintings, res¬
tored some of them
and prepared a train¬
ing programme for
Guatamalan restorers.
Left, student restorer
uses a special Iron to
transfer an old paint¬
ing to a new canvas.
Standing by easel, Hel¬
mut Ruhemann su¬
pervises cleaning of
18th century paint¬
ing of The Virgin
(the work also shown
on opposite page).
After preservation
techniques the next
process is to remove
the all dirty varnish
(opposite page). This
is cleaned away with
a swab dipped In a
mixture of acetone
and turpentine. Any
cracks or slashes are
filled in with putty
and retouching be¬
gins. Because a high
standard of painting
is needed, restorers
are usually chosen
from ranks of pro¬
fessional artists. Left,
Ruhemann, who has
restored many master¬
pieces, including da
Vinci's Virgin .of the
Rocks, gives a Guate¬
malan artist a les¬
son in retouching.
A pause for discussion
between Helmut Ru¬
hemann and his three
Guatemalan assistants
who followed him
step by step through
the restoration pro¬
cesses. (The youth
seated on left and the
man standing on right
are father and son.)
The work was carried
out in Guatemala City
with equipment and
materials provided by
Unesco, and the res¬
tored paintings were
later exhibited. The
portrait on the easel
is of Colonel Modesto
Méndez, the discove¬
rer of the great Maya
remains at Tikal.
UNESCO-Gay Grüner
33
