FROM THE NECK UP
The Art of Decorating Ourselves
by Professor Harry L Shapiro
American Museum of Natural History, New York
There used to be a theory, current
at the turn of the century, that
Art began with primitive man's
habit of adorning his body. Nowa¬
days we are less certain of this. But,
nevertheless, if we grant that the
practice may be a form of self ex¬
pression and if its universality is any
criterion of its antiquity, we would
still be obliged to consider it one of
the most ancient of arts.
One can, I admit, find some rare
communities where personal adorn¬
ment seems to be so little valued
that the body is left completely un¬
derrated and, where the climate
permits, even naked. But it is always
astonishing to encounter such a
complete lack of interest in. personal
embellishment, for among all kinds
and conditions of men and women it
is as prevalent as we can expect any
custom to be. Arid this suggests that
it satisfies some deep-seated psycho¬
logical need, a need so spontaneous
and strong that in the few religious
sects where it is vigorously . disap¬
proved, stringent rules must be en¬
forced to suppress it. Most cultures,
however, recognize that adorning the
14
body is a natural form of behaviour
and accommodate it within their
social patterns.
Some scholars, speculating about
the origin of personal embellishment,
have given it a sexual basis. While
the use of such decoration for sexual
attraction can scarcely be gainsaid, it
appears in so many contexts where
sexual attraction is not the dominant
factor that a broader interpretation is
called for. Perhaps there are clues
for one in the behaviour of little
children who pleased by the pattern
or colour of an object will seize and
treasure it.
Sometimes they attach these pleas¬
ing bits to themselves merely for the
pleasure it gives them. And their
joy is increased if they become, as a
result, a focus of attention. "Look
at me" they cry, as they exhibit their
new found decoration, not yet having
learnt to . conceal their desire for
approbation or to adopt subtler
methods of achieving it. The child
is thereby distinguished, becoming an
object of envy and approval. As a
psychologist might put it, personal
ornamentation provides ego-enchant
ment. This aspect is especially noti¬
ceable when children deliberately put
on even strange or unusual, not
necessarily pleasing, objects in order
to evoke attention from their mates.
The purpose obviously is to draw
admiring or favorable attention, not
ridicule or disdain.
As a general thing, we all like to be
noticed and admired. Some of us
can achieve such a desirable condi¬
tion by one means or another: by
words, by special skills, by physical
prowess, or by beauty, but nothing
is so universally available or so
widely used as the adornment of the
body. For our bodies, particularly
our heads and faces, are what the
world sees of us and on what, for
better or worse, first and often
enduring impressions are based.
What depths of meaning and judg¬
ment are embodied in the countless
phrases that sum up such impressions.
Thus art steps in to improve on
nature. And even objects of utility,
like clothing or spectacles, become
media for the decoration that we
hope will win approval for ourselves.
Decoration however, need not be

IMPROVING ON NATURE
Few forms of behaviour are more common than
the urge to improve on nature by adorning the
bodyparticularly from the neck up. Bodily
decoration has taken an amazing number of forms:
body and face painting, ornaments, headdress and
vast arrays of jewellery, flowers, hats, clothing and
shoes. Contrasts in facial decoration depict (from
left to right) Tsimshiam Indian with green face
paint and copper appliqué ornaments representing
the raven ; Charoti Indian, South America ; Arunta
man of Australia with face covered by feathers and
blood for a ceremonial ritual ; Modern Theatrical
make-up, by Del Russo of Prince Matchabelli ; Mask¬
like effect of face paint which is used by tribes¬
men in New Guinea on ceremonial occasions.
ALL PHOTOGRAPHS PAGES 1 4 TO 19,© AMERICAN
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, NEW YORK
only in terms of beauty. And we
may seek approval by other routes
than aesthetic adornment. The body
can also be the shield on which we
display symbols of various kinds
whether they are beautiful or not
may be beside the point. If they
mark their bearers as persons
of distinction, that is enough.
Thus we wear status symbols like
jewels, honour decorations, or organi¬
zational badges because in our society
their possessors are admired by those
whose admiration is sought and the
wearing of them accomplishes that
purpose.
Women who frequently declare
they dress for other women are often
right. The cherished elegance of
detail that is lost on most men
carries a special meaning to women,
so that only women can fully
appreciate the artistry of another
woman's attire and envy or admire
her for it. Thus the sources for the
custom of decorating ourselves range
from aesthetic pleasure to status
symbols, but the positive purpose is
to attract favourable notice. In cer¬
tain age groups and under certain
circumstances, the notice most desired
may be strongly affected by sex, but
this does not mean that the practice
of personal adornment either origi¬
nates in sex or is primarily devoted
to its service.
There is also a negative aspect to
all this. Standards of adornment
become so fixed in many societies
that a failure to con¬
form tends to draw un¬
favourable notice or
ridicule.
It takes a very strong-
Cont'd
on
next page
DOG'S TEETH in a bristling circlet, surmounted by a basketry cap adorned with feathers and
bone hairpins worn by principal wife of Mayogo chief, northern Ituri District, Equatorial Africa.
IS

FROM THE
NECK UP
(Continued)
We are all slaves of fashion
minded woman to appear in plain day
clothes at a formal evening party
and to face the mingled pity, shock,
amusement or disdain she would
expect to encounter. And not so long
ago very few men of substantial posi¬
tion would have ventured into public
view without a cravat neatly tied
under the collar. There surely\ were
some women in pre-War Japan who
would gladly have given up the beauti¬
ful, but uncomfortable, obi or would
have welcomed a release from the
tedium of their elaborate coiffures if
the consequences in social disapproval
were not too great to outweigh the
personal relief they might have
attained.
Slave of fashion is more than a
mere phrase. Not only do we adorn
ourselves because our cultural con¬
ventions require it, but we do so in
strictly regulated ways that are
characteristic of our culture. An
extended lip surrounding a large disc
would obviously be rejected by all but
Ubangl women to whom, on the
contrary, its absence would be
embarrassing. Such a mutilation
would have appeared as a disgusting
disfigurement to European women
of 1900 or to contemporary Mandarin
women; yet the former were willing
to distort their hips to the point of
caricature and the latter were proud
to hobble on feet folded and bound
to keep them small.
If it takes a certain kind of courage
to abstain from any of the con¬
ventional adornments of one's own
society, it takes an equal amount of
perhaps another kind to adopt those
of another culture. Some borrowing
is permitted if there is already a
certain degree of acculturation in
style. For example, the Indian sari
and the diamond stud in the nostril
are acceptable and even chic in some
circles of Western society. But on
the whole, style or fashion in adorn¬
ment is generally fairly rigid and too
great a deviation is not likely to be
acceptable.
Rather be dead than demode
But fashions and styles change.
They do so in most areas, with
the notable exception of the
West, without conscious planning.
Nevertheless the "drift" or evolution
of style seems to some students to
follow certain regularities. Even in
16
Western countries where styles in
clothing and ornament have become a
business and are artificially developed,
Kroeber claims that predictable cycles
exist. Other students have gone
farther and have linked styles in
clothing with broad cultural trends.
One of the strangest aspects of
fashion is its capricious tyranny.
What is most desirable and sought
after, today may be completely
démodé tomorrow. It is not only the
lady of fashion who would rather be
dead than to be seen in last year's
hat, but her sisters and brothers
everywhere who share this distaste
for a recently abandoned style.
Nothing seems more comic.
There are only two ways of altering
the body to improve on nature: one
is permanent, the other temporary.
Each has its own advantages and
TATTOOED DESIGNS that covered men
of the Marquesas Islands entranced early
voyagers In the Pacific. Above, drawing of a
young Nukahivan from the Marquesas, covered
almost from head to foot with tattoo designs.
drawbacks. Under the former, we
may list tattooing, scarification, head
deformation, piercing and enlarge¬
ment of lips, nose and ear lobes, foot
binding, tooth evulsion or filing, the
amputation of fingers, and various
deformations and mutilations of the
sex organs.
. Designs and modifications of this
kind need no refurbishing. The
elegant tattooed designs that covered
the Marquesan males from head to
toe in delicate patterns that entranc¬
ed the early voyagers would have
been far too laborious, if they were
impermanent, to apply for anything
but rare and special occasions. To
achieve these remarkable effects,
however, the Marquesans had to
endure a long series of painful
sessions with the tattooing comb.
And once committed to a particular
pattern, there was no provision for
a change. Similarly, the bound foot
of the upper class Chinese lady, or
the flattened head of a Northwest
Coast Indian, became unchangeable
features of the anatomy. Such modi¬
fications of the anatomy were a
long, often painful, process that
began in infancy and required res¬
tricting bandages.
Wearing a small fortune
Although the temporary forms of
decoration involve constant
upkeep and attention, they
leave room for change. This type of
embellishment covers an enormous
range of styles and material: body and
face . painting, ornaments, headdress,
a vast array of jewellery, flowers, hats,
clothing, and shoes. Although some
ot these items, like flowers, are ephe¬
meral and may be had with little
effort, others represent great wealth
and a considerable investment of
capital. The jewels worn by Oriental,
as well as European, women often
amount to a fortune. Perhaps most
tedious are the elaborate coiffures
and make-ups. Japanese women
used to devote much time to their
hair-do's, and the enamel-like make¬
up of the ladies of the Chinese courts
must have consumed hours. Even in
simpler cultures, great pains may be
taken to produce such elegant
patterns as the hair dressing of many
African cultures.
Frequently the styles of adornment
and even the materials used were
regulated by class distinctions or were
used as insignia of status and posi¬
tion. In this category we find the
tribal scarifications of Africa and,
perhaps, the caste mark in India.
The illustrations shown here repre¬
sent only a small fraction of the
range of material and manner that
people have adopted to embellish
themselves. But they demonstrate
how ingenious are the means em¬
ployed and how few the opportunities
overlooked. They also remind us
that man is the only animal that
tries to improve on what nature has
provided.

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
FURS AND FEATHERS FOR The ingenuity and fancy shown by both women and men in their hairdress and headgearare depicted in thesestyles
HATS AND HAIRDRESSES. from North America and Central Asia. (I) Fur and silk hat from Mongolia. (2) Iroquois (New York State) man
wearing dyed deer hair roached headdress, face paint, silver, crescent-shaped earrings and bear-claw necklace. Type of headdress worn 300 years ago by
Indians of New York State and New England. (3) Woman's red silk hat from Tibet. (4) Hopi Indian (Arizona, U.S.A.) headdress worn by unmarried girls.
17

18

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
19
