Science has the answer
WHAT IS THE CAUSE
OF TIDAL WAVES?
by Gerald Wendt
The primary causes of tidal waves are large earthquakes.
Out at sea such waves are hard to detect because,
though they travel at a speed of about 400 m.p.h.,
they are only a few feet high. The distance from the crest
to the trough is some 15 miles long, and the wave period
takes several minutes to pass by. When the tidal wave
reaches the shallow Water near a land mass, however, the
front is slowed down and the fifteen miles of water piles
up to form a steep-fronted surge that can wreak
tremendous havoc as it hits the land. \
In the Krakatoan earthquake, which occurred between
Java and Sumatra towards the end of the 19th century,
there were enormous casualties because the earthquake
took place in shallow water close to the land and waves
as high as 100 feet piled up and swept inland.
In the Pacific area where tidal waves cause tremendous
havoc, ordinary earthquake phenomena are not easy to
observe since many parts of the ocean are extremely deep.
But a series of seismograph stations set up to detect
'quakes in the area can give advance warning of tidal
waves.
The sound waves produced by earthquakes travel
through the ground at a speed of about 5 miles a second
that is, much faster than tidal waves. When seismograph
stations record large 'quakes, the exact arrival time of
the beginning of the ground waves are compared, and
from these the position of the earthquake can be calcul¬
ated. Since tidal waves travel at roughly 400 miles per
hour, it is relatively easy to predict their time of arrival
at places where damage may be expected.
Why is sea-water salt and how does it retain its saltiness ?
When the hard rooks of the earth's crust are thrust
up to form mountains they are exposed to the
weather and thus to the chemical action, of water,
oxygen and carbonic acid from the air, and to alternate
heating by the sun and cooling by frost and ice. They
slowly crumble, which speeds the chemical action and
permits the atta&k by plants also. The result is disintegra¬
tion into gravel, sand and ultimately soil. Most of the
products of this decomposition are solid materials that
remain near by or tumble down the brooks and rivers.
But others dissolve in the rain-waters and remain invi¬
sibly in the waters of the rivers. Thus all "fresh" water
except pure rain-water contains a small but definite
quantity of these dissolved '"salts". Water that is called
"hard" contains relatively large quantities.
All rivers run to the sea and carry the salts with them.
In the course of the millions of years of geological time
the salt has accumulated in the sea because evapora¬
tion 'from the surface takes only pure water and leaves
the salt behind. As- the rain falls and returns to the
sea in rivers it brings more salt with each cycle. Thus
the saltiness of the sea is slowly but steadily increasing.
The fresh water from the rivers does not dilute the ocean
and make it less salty because just as much water
evaporates as the rivers pour in.
The level of the sea remains constant and so the salt-
content slowly increases in the course of the centuries.
At present the salt content of sea-water amounts to 35
parts per thousand. This means that one metric ton
(2,000 pounds) of sea-water contains 70 pounds of salts.
With only minor variations due to local conditions, it is'
the same in all the oceans, the world over.
Why does the moon exercise an influence on phenomena of life on earth ?
The centrifugal force of the moon is just sufficient to
maintain it in its orbit and at a distance of about
two hundred and fifty thousand miles from the
earth. But neither the moon nor its centrifugal force
have any direct influence on any phenomena of life on
earth.
However, the moon and the sun, too have a direct
and important bearing on the various "tides*' which occur
on our planedthe movements of the magma, or fluid
strata under the earth's crust, the tides of the oceans,
seas and lakes, and also the atmospheric '"tides" which
cause variations in height of the ionosphere. All these
tidal movements have different but very indirect conse¬
quences on earthly phenomena. Another, and by no
means negligible contribution on the part of the moon
is that it periodically lights our night sky.
But apart from this the moon plays no part in any
phenomena of life on earth. And all theories tending
to prove that its rays influence the destinies of human
beings are without foundation, for no such mysterious
radiations have ever been detected by astrophysicists.
What would happen if the earth's ice caps melted completely ?
It is a fact that glaciers are receding in all parts of the
earth, which indicates a slight warming of the average
temperature. But it has not yet been established that
the polar ice-caps are also melting. This would require
an extended series of measurements of the thickness of
the polar ice, which have not been made. But this is one
of the objectives of the present International Geophysical
Year.
The thickness of the ice on the Antarctic Continent is
especially important since about 90 per cent of all the
earth's snow and ice is there. It has been estimated to
be between 2,000 feet and 8,000 feet thick on the average.
At some points it is certainly 10,000 feet thick. If all this
30
ice should melt, the level of the ocean would rise at least
85 feet and possibly 400 feet, which, would indeed submerge
most of the great seaport cities.
A Californian expert, Professor Robert P. Sharp, has
estimated for the American Geophysical Union that the
average of the Antarctic ice is in excess of one mile'
and that its complete melting would raise the sea-level
all over the earth toy 200 feet. He calls this ice "something
of a Sword of Damocles hanging-over the' heads of all
peoples living close to the sea." However, he also advises
a relaxed attitude toward this possibility. It cannot
happen fast. "Conceivably1", he says, "it might happen
in 10,000 to 20,000 years."'
