NATURE'S BEST FRIEND: THE SCHOOLCHILD
by Pierre Vernier
Whatever befalls in accordance with Nature should be
accounted good", wrote Cicero in the first century
B.C., while sixteen hundred years later Francis Bacon
remarked that "Nature, to be commanded must be obeyed."
But throughout recorded history, and probably long before,
man has been tampering with Nature, upsetting the delicate
balance which governs all natural life by destroying useful plant
and animal species without any forethought for compensating
the upset by readjustments.
In most cases, destruction was unwanton: King Solomon, and
many others after him, could not have known, for instance,
that untimely deforestation causes erosion, and that, in cutting
down the cedars of the Lebanon, the soil would be swept away
and the hilltops would eventually become bare rock.
And it is one of the ironies of Australian history that the
first settlers in Botany Bay rejoiced that five rabbits had sur¬
vived the long journey to Australia in 1788. Another is that
in 1859 a man was fined £10 for shooting a rabbit on the
property of one John Robertson of Glen Alvie, Victoria. Within
a few years, the same Robertson had spent £5,000 in an
unsuccessful attempt to exterminate rabbits on his property. In
a few short decades, the rabbits had invaded and "conquered"
the whole Australian continent.
These and other examples were cited recently by Mr. Tracy
Philipps, Secretary-General of the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, as instances of
man's unthinking or untimely interventions in nature's affairs.
Plant a tree & grow up with it
Visiting Paris to attend a meeting of the International
Advisory Committee on the School Curriculum, spon¬
sored by Unesco, Mr. Philipps stressed that the
problem of nature conservation had become increasingly
serious and urgent since the development of modern indus¬
trial society :
"In the world's two temperate zones", he said, "in highly
industrial and densely populated countries like Britain and
Japan, whole new towns are necessarily being created, and
houses and streets, industrial fumes and pollutions are invading
nature and food-producing land and waters. In new surround¬
ings and in new balances of life and nutritions, new viruses and
new epidemics are coming into existence."
To combat unwanton destruction, Mr. Philipps stressed, peo¬
ple must be made aware of the gravity of the problem. "They
must be shown how the earth and the direct or transformed
products of soil and water and trees are our capital, our capital
asset, at the base of the balance of our nature, of our daily
life, of our nutrition and our health.
"This can best be done by starting in the schools. It can
be demonstrated by first-hand observations and such convincing
lessons as, for instance, the treeplanting projects now carried
out by many schools, where each child plants and, so to speak,
"grows up with his tree", learning its nature, its role and its
soil-and-water value for his own life and his community's.
"Our aim and it has been one of the main aims of the
Union since its foundation in 1948 on the initiative of Unesco
and the French Government our aim is that the child should
be made aware of the nature of his relations with his physical
and natural environment which exercises such a powerful in¬
fluence on all living beings, including man. Every child should
learn to recognize those elements in nature which he can accept
and those which he should be afraid of. It is these simple
things, things which he sees every day on his way to and from
school, which should be included in the curriculum and made
to tie up with lessons on hygiene and nutrition."
A start has been made in this direction. Mr. Philipps ex
plained that some, though still inadequate, elements of this
teaching have already been incorporated through the efforts of
the Union and private initiative in the school syllabuses of
nearly thirty countries from Mexico to the USSR, from
Morocco to Malaya, from Germany to the United States and
Venezuela. In most cases, material prepared by the Union in
the form of picture panels and mimeographed "broadsheets"
containing the outline of simple lessons, is distributed to the
schools through the Union's member societies in widely vary¬
ing countries,' in agreement with the educational authorities.
But, as Mr. Philipps stressed, methods and content of the
teaching programmes must depend on the conditions prevailing
in each country. "These conditions," he said, "vary enormously.
For instance, they are very different in a tropical country, where
nature often remains the prime enemy, from, say, New York
where most children are more familiar with automobiles and
washing machines than with wildlife and plants.
"Children need to know that such is the unerring balance
that the extermination of insect-eating birds or of pollinating
bees or even of forms of life which superficially seem harmful,
can strike back and weaken man or expose him in the tropics
to epidemic attack by his ever-threatening enemies, the denuda¬
tions and impoverishment of soils by himself and floods and
fires, and by increase of insects and viruses."
It is therefore left to the teachers in each country to give
their own illustrations of basic principles in examples taken
from local life and problems already familiar to children. In
French West Africa, for example, a lesson-summary prepared
by the local educational authorities on the basis of the Union's
broadsheet explains that in many parts of the territory wind
is a major enemy, "an enemy which dries up the topsoil, and
carries it away to other regions. Plants wilt, they are smothered
or uprooted, and the desert takes over where once man tilled
fertile fields."
Many simple questions are put to the children, such as these
taken from an Italian lesson: "Have you stopped to think what
substances go into the making of the things you use every day?
The bed you sleep in, the toys you play with, the house you live
in, the clothes you wear, the food you eat?" And the answers
bring home the lesson that nature provides all the raw materials,
that natural resources are a capital which must be carefully
tended and preserved now world population is rapidly growing.
'Cherish the hand that feeds us'
ON the request of the UN Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion, the Union has just produced a booklet on the
techniques of nature conservancy for use in schools in
the South and East Mediterranean area, including countries in
the hinterland of these regions. There will be separate editions
for each country, with local examples. The booklet, which
has been asked for by FAO's international commission of the
Arabic-speaking areas, will include an introduction and a pre¬
face contributed by Unesco's Departments of Education and-
Social Sciences, which have had valuable experience in this
field, particularly through the work of the Fundamental Educa¬
tion Training Centre at Sirs-el-Layyan, operated jointly by
Unesco and the Egyptian Government.
Visual media are also used by the Union in its educational
programme. For instance, "See-at-a-Glance" panels for schools
are now touring France, and have already been requested by
the authorities and organizations in Czechoslovakia, Britain, the
United States and Poland, while one of the Union's main picto¬
rial exhibitions was used in a recent Youth Festival in
Moscow.
And the Union's filmstrips "Cherish the Hand that Feeds
Us" and "Precarious Balance" produced with the aid of
Unesco, are being used increasingly by teachers in many lands
as valuable aids to classroom instruction.
16
