HEALTH NEWS
FROM AROUND
THE GLOBE
The year 1957 was a bad one for
smallpox with about 120,000 cases
reported (of which 70 per cent were
in Asia) compared with about 85,000
in 1956. The world has seen worse
outbreaks with many more casualties,
but the disease has not lost its ability
to travel and to attack unsuspecting
persons who are not protected by
vaccination. Today smallpox persists
in many areas of Africa, Asia and
South America, but it is in countries
outside such areas where it has
become practically extinct that out¬
breaks are becoming more likely to
occur. One reason is that because of
its rarity it is not almost immediately
recognized; another is that in many
countries people are less protected by
vaccination than at any time in the
past century. Smallpox is not defeated
and as long as it persists anywhere
in the world, health authorities every¬
where must be on the alert.
Europe's bloodthirsty roads
The risk of death on the roads of
Europe, for a given distance, is ten
times that involved in travel either
by train or aircraft. In 1955 the
number of fatal road accidents in 14
countries of western Europe reached
a total of 35,000 and well over 600,000
people were injured. Since then the
number of vehicles on Europe's roads
has been rising by 12% each year.
Recent figures for every 100 millions
of kilometres travelled by road
vehicles were: 18 people killed in
Western Europe, 10 in Great Britain
and less than 5 in the U.S.A. Accident
responsibility on the roads of Europe
has been apportioned as follows:
Faults of motor vehicle drivers: 20
p.c.; faults of cyclists and pedes¬
trians: 5 p.c.; faulty vehicles 5 p.c.;
faulty roads : 70 p.c.
Air travel and health
Last year 90,000,000 people travelled
by air scheduled flights throughout
the world compared with 2,500,000 in
1937. During 1958 the figure is expect¬
ed to reach the 100,000,000 mark.
This tremendous increase in air travel
may soon overtax the facilities at
many international airports and not
least of all with regard to sanitary
conditions. The problem was discuss¬
ed recently by the Who Expert Com¬
mittee on Sanitation of International
Airports, at its first meeting in Gen¬
eva. International Sanitary Regula¬
tions already set up by Who deal
with quarantinable diseases such as
smallpox, cholera, yellow fever, etc.
30
WHO-INCAP
CIRCLE = GOITRE. Six countries of the AmericasCosta Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Panamacombined, with the help of WHO and the Kellogg Founda¬
tion, to attack their nutrition problems by setting up the Institute of Nutrition of Central America
and Panama. Since INCAP came into existence over eight years ago It has made possible preven¬
tative measures, on an international scale, against endemic goitre, and has attacked the problem
of undernourishment by finding inexpensive means of improving local diets. Above, the circle
being marked on the throat means the child has goitre. Photo was taken during a survey which
revealed endemic goitre as a grave public health problem in INCAP countries. One of the
ways in which it is being tackled is through the iodization of salt for all human consumption.
and such questions as safe water sup¬
plies, disposal of waste, control of in¬
sects, rats and other disease carriers.
What do doctors die of?
The life expectancy of physicians
corresponds to that of the population
as a whole according to a recent study
in the United States. However, there
is a striking prevalence among
doctors of cardio-vascular diseases,
which cause the death of two doc¬
tors out of three, while the rate
for the male population in general is
one to three. According to the study,
cancer is the second largest killer of
American doctors, causing one death
out of every six.
Perils of air pollution
With industrial growth, more and
more gases, vapours, fumes, dusts and
other impurities are poured into the
air we breathe. This increasing
pollution of the atmosphere must be
prevented if our health is to be
safeguarded from its disastrous
effects. Some cases of air pollution
in Europe: Harmful effects on animal
and plant life have been reported
near aluminum factories in Swit¬
zerland and on plant life in Sweden
through gases from shale-oil factories,
iron works, phosphate factories and
other works. In Germany animal
losses have occurred near plants
releasing arsenic compounds into
the air. A recent study of air
pollution in Paris showed that motor-
traffic accounts for 30-40% of the
total pollution and domestic heating
for about 50%. Who has set up an
Expert Committee on Air Pollution
which groups medical and public
health specialists from Africa, Ame¬
rica, Asia and Europe.
Occupational hazards
The prevalence of peptic ulcers
among business executives over 50
years of age was 78.43 per cent.,
compared with 23.56 per cent among
other employees of the same age,
according to a recent study in the
U.S.A. In another study on 5,000
executives chosen from 30 American
companies, large and small, it was
found that 51.3 per cent, betweeen
the ages of 40 and 65 suffered from
either hypertension, organic heart
disease, overweight or such serious
conditions as diabetes,, prostatitis,
hernia, blood deficiencies etc. Yet
more than half of the executives
examined had previously shown no
symptoms and expressed no
complaints.
Deathtraps in the home
Accidental death is nowadays of
increasing concern to public health
authorities. Among children and
adolescents it often ranks as the

leading cause of death, primarily
because preventative medicine has
succeeded in lowering the loss of life
which previously occurred through
infectious and parasitic diseases.
Forty per cent, of fatal accidents
which happen to children between
one and four years of age take place
in and around the home. Pills con¬
taining dangerous substances, but
sugarcoated to make them palatable
are often left lying around. Some¬
times children chew cigarettes imi¬
tating their elders smoking, and get
nicotine poisoning.
The snail menace
One of the most difficult diseases
to fight is being tackled with the help
of Who in various countries today.
It is snail fever (medical term:
schistosomiasis or bilharziasis) and
it is estimated that 150 million people
are menaced by it in Asia, Africa and
Central and South America. It is
caused by the presence in the human
body of parasitic worms which feed
on the blood. Water snails help to
transmit the disease because embryos
from eggs laid by the worms use
them as hosts while reproducing
about 200,000 larvae which attack
humans by penetrating the skin.
For centuries snail fever has been a
scourge. Eggs have been found in
Egyptian mummies dating back to
2000 B.C. Egyptian medical authorities
say it is "the most serious and ruinous
disease" in their country.
'Harmless' little house-fly.
House-flies are, far and away, the
most numerous of all insects which
live close to man. They have fan¬
tastic powers of reproduction with
all the dangers that this implies in
the spreading of many diseases. It
has been calculated that one single
female house-fly laying 120 eggs on
April 15, could theoretically, by Sep¬
tember 10 have been responsible for
a "family" of no fewer than 5,598,720
million adult flies. Another estim¬
ation was that one pair of flies
could produce in a single summer,
325,923,000 million descendants. In
one single fly 100,000 bacteria origin¬
ating in human excrement have
been found. Few realize the losses
caused to the dairy industry by flies.
In U.S. tests during the fly season
insecticide-treated beef cattle gained
an average of 50 lbs more in weight
than those heavily infested by the
biting horn- fly.
Puzzle for pathologists
A puzzle has been set for patho¬
logists in a Who study which
compares mortality from various
types of cancer occurring in different
countries, and shows that a malignant
tumour of a kind which is particularly
fatal in one country may be relatively
much less so in another. It shows
that by far the highest death-rate
from cancer of the respiratory
system in men occurs in England
and Wales (45.5 per 100,000). Japan,
where the death rate from this type
of cancer is lowest (6 per 100,000) has
the highest rate of deaths from
cancer in the digestive system in men
(98.2- per 100,000).
The Unesco Courier. May 1958
WHO
what it stands for
The creation of the World Health Organization in 1948 was the
culmination of a long series of efforts made over the centuries
to prevent the spread of disease from one continent to
another and to achieve international co-operation for better health
throughout the world.
After the Second World War, when the Charter of the United
Nations was drawn up in San Francisco (1945), Brazil proposed that
health should be included in the U.N. Charter as one of the vital
factors for the stability and wellbeing essential for world peace.
The World Health Organization was set up the following year
in New York, at an international conference called by the United
Nations. It gradually absorbed the existing international health
organizations (Office International d'Hygiene Publique, Health
Organization of the League of Nations, Unrra Health Division).
The Pan-American Sanitary Bureau retains its name and indivi¬
duality while acting as the Who Regional Office for the Americas.
In April 1948 sufficient countries had ratified their membership
to enable Who to come into official existence, and in June 1948
the World Health Assembly met for the first time.
By 1958, its tenth anniversary year, Who had grown from the
26 states who were members on April 7, 1948 to 88. Ten years
ago its budget, contributed by Member States, was less than
$5 million; in 1958 it is $13,500,000.
In 1948, direct assistance to national governments in the form
of international staff and field projects was a new and almost
revolutionary idea. Today the World Health Organization has
over 500 professors, doctors, nurses and other health personnel in
the field, and in one way or another is assisting 700 health
projects in 120 countries and territories.
To enable it to adapt its programme to varying and evolving
needs, Who set up six regional organizations with offices: for
Africa at Brazzaville, French Equatorial Africa; for the Americas
at Washington D.C.; for South East Asia at New Delhi, India; for
Europe at Copenhagen, Denmark; for the Eastern Mediterranean
at Alexandria, Egypt; and for the Western Pacific at Manila, Phi¬
lippines. These regional offices maintain close co-operation with
national health services "to assist public health administrations
everywhere to take the next feasible step in their development."
In Geneva, a true nerve centre of international health work,
regional programmes are co-ordinated in a single programme
of Who activities with accompanying budget, which are studi¬
ed, discussed and approved by the annual World Health Assembly.
Types of assistance which Who has given during its first ten
years include: strengthening of national health services; establish¬
ing and maintaining epidemiological and statistical services;
controlling epidemic and endemic diseases; maternal and child
health services; promotion of mental health; improvement of sani¬
tation and preventative and curative medical services.
Who Member States benefit from its technical services (epide¬
miological intelligence, international quarantine, statistical, stan¬
dardization of therapeutic substances, technical publications) and
from its training programmes and fellowship awards (6,396
fellowships given to health personnel from 149 countries).
The day-to-day work of Who is carried out by a Secretariat of
about 850 international officials (54 different nationalities) either
at headquarters in Geneva, at Regional Offices or with field
projects. First Director-General of the Who was Dr. Brock
Chisholm (Canada) ; present Director-General is Dr. M.G. Candau
(Brazil) .
