WATER COLOURS
ON Ä GRAND TOUR
by Herbert Read
STILL LIFE WITH PIPE, by the Italian painter, Gino Severini (born 1883). New York Graphic Society.
Great works of art are notoriously bad travellers.
Not so their sturdy stand-ins, the high quality
reproductions that make up the Unesco Tra¬
velling Art Exhibitions. These intrepid voyagers
pass happily from continent to continent, from hot climate
to cold, from green lands to desert, giving the great
masterpieces of the world a previously inconceivable mobi¬
lity and universality.
The first exhibition was assembled in 1949 from fifty
quality reproductions of the work of artists from 1860 to
the present time. Five sets were made and the object was
to send them to stimulate interest in world art in countries
that have little economic possibility of obtaining significant
collections of their own. Brazil was host to the first dis¬
play. After an astounding success in Rio de Janeiro, the
exhibition toured the smaller towns. It was then scheduled
to go to adjacent lands in Latin America, but the Govern¬
ment of Brazil set a precedent, and thereby started an
26
unthought on sideline, the selling of exhibitions, by asking
Unesco for permission to keep the collection. The same
fate awaited many of the others, which have found perma¬
nent homes in countries, not necessarily culturally im¬
poverished, who have realised that the exhibitions fill a
gap in their artistic life.
Since these early days five further exhibitions have gone
on their way and been enjoyed by some 74 countries. The
themes dealt with are: Paintings Prior to 1860, The Works
of Leonardo da Vinci, Japanese Woodcuts, Two Thousand
Years of Chinese Painting and Persian Miniatures.
A seventh Exhibition is now ready. It consists of 20
identical sets of 72 framed reproductions of water colours
dating from the 4th century onwards. It already has world¬
wide bookings. On the following pages we publish an arti¬
cle on the water colours specially written for the exhibition
by the noted British art critic, Sir Herbert Read.

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
In a general sense, water-colour is one of the most
ancient methods of painting it was used in Egypt in
remote times for the decoration of papyrus rolls, and
in a similar way the sacred books of the Middle Ages in
Europe were illuminated with pigments mixed with
water and gum. Such early forms of the art, however,
have very little in common with water-colour painting
as it has developed in Europe since the eighteenth cen¬
tury. More comparable, from a technical and aesthetic
point of view (the aesthetics of the art, as we shall see, are
inseparable from the technique), is the early development
of the art in the Far East. The art cannot, of course, be
older than the invention not only of paper, but of the
soft-hair brush (camel hair or hare's fur) and tradition
attributes this invention to Mêng T'ien, who died about
210 B.c. Paper was not invented until about three cen¬
turies later. A scroll in the British Museum, The admoni¬
tions of the instructress, bears the signature of Ku K'ai
Chih (circa a.d. 344-406) and may be a Chin dynasty copy
of an earlier painting. One scene from this scroll illus¬
trates a hunter in a landscape and this particular
painting may be regarded as the prototype of the art as
it was to develop in Europe many centuries later.
Chinese water-coulours always remained strictly sub¬
ordinate to calligraphy even Confucius lays down
a law on this point ('Applying colours comes after
the groundwork'). In Western terminology most Chinese
paintings on paper should be classified as tinted drawings
rather than as water-colour paintings. But the modern
European tradition developed from the tinted drawing it
was the practice of painters from the fourteenth century
onwards to make preliminary sketches in ink, reinforced
by washes (usually of the same colour). An early example
is a wash drawing in the Louvre by Taddeo Gaddi (circa
1300-1366) which is a preliminary study for the fresco of
The presentation of the virgin in the Baroncelli Chapel,
Santa Croce, Florence, For the next four centuries the
technique remained ancillary to the arts of tempera and
oil painting, and though such artists as Rembrandt and
Rubens produced water-colour drawings of great beauty,
it was only Dürer who used the medium as an end in
itself his landscapes in tinted water-colour anticipate
the fully developed art of the eighteenth century.
The art of water-colour as we ¡know it had an inde¬
pendent origin, as a miniature art within the capacity of
travellers, topographers and illustrators of books on
natural history. Pisanello's studies of birds (second quar¬
ter of the fifteenth century) may be taken as an early
prototype and these are scientific records rather than
works of art. Then in the sixteenth century the medium
began to be used to record the discoveries of the early
explorers John White, who sailed with Raleigh, drew
Indians in their various occupations, birds, plants and
fishes. There were other topographical artists of this
period in France (Jacques Le Moyne, for example) and
in the Netherlands. An artist of this ¡kind, Wenzel Hollar,
came from Bohemia to England in 1635 and began to
make tinted drawings of scenes in London and its neigh¬
bourhood. Hollar inspired Francis Place, a native of
York, to make similar drawings of his city and its sur¬
roundings, and from that moment we can trace the conti¬
nuous development of the English water-colour school
a tradition of landscape based on topography, from Hollar
and Place through Samuel Scott and the Sandbys, Rooker,
Hearne and Dayes, to Girtin and Turner.
The medium was also used skilfully by the Tudor and
Stuart miniature portrait painters, notably by
Nicholas Hilliard (1537-1619) and Samuel Cooper
(1609-1672). But here again the European artists had
been anticipated by the Chinese artists as we may see in
the portraits by Yen Li Pen and Liang K'ai included in
the exhibition.
From the middle of the eighteenth century water-colour
painting became the most characteristic art of England,
and even this country's greatest oil painters, Gains¬
borough, Constable and Turner, found in it an essential
medium of expression. This efflorescence of the art lasted
barely a century, but in that relatively
short period artists like J. R. Cozens, Fran¬
cis Towne, Thomas Girtin, J. S. Cotman,
Peter de Wint and David Cox gave to the
art, not only its highest perfection, but also
a distinct aesthetic.
GENTIL BERNARD and ROUSSALKA, by French
painter Georges Rouault (1871-1958). Guy Spitzer, Paris.
Cont'd
on
next page
-27

WATER COLOURS
ON TOUR (Continued)
PORTRAIT, a work by the French
painter Jacques Villon (born 1875).
Daniel Jacomet et Cie, Paris.
KINGDOM OF THE BIRDS,
by the Swiss painter Paul Klee
(1879-1940). Benteli Verlag, Berne.
An art can have a distinct aesthetic only if it has
distinct materials, a distinct technique and a distinct
aim. The materials of water-colour painting are trans¬
lucent pigments, applied with a soft brush to a ground
of white paper. Each of these materials has its special
characteristics the colours must be pure, the brush
must be well-made of the finest hairs, the paper must
have its own-sensuous quality, for very different effects
can be obtained according to its roughness or smoothness,
its degree of permeability and its whiteness. The tech¬
nique of applying the colours to the paper will vary
from artist to artist, but as compared with tempera or
oil painting, great sureness and precision is required, for
there is no possibility of overpainting or retouching. The
art gets its most distinctive quality from its necessary
spontaneity, and in this respect may be compared with
the calligraphic art of the Far East. The aim, as in any
other type of painting, is to create a harmonious compo¬
sition in colour on a two-dimensional surface, but until
comparatively recent times the medium has been applied
almost exclusively to the depiction of landscapes. This
is because the subtlety of the medium allows for the
rendering of nuances of tone and colour beyond the
range of tempera or oil.
Amateurish blots, clots & speckles
This capacity of is brought out in remarks
of Ruskin on one of the later masters of the English ,
water-colour school, Copley Fielding: "Water-
colour, under the ordinary sketcher's mismanagement,
drops and dries pretty nearly to its own fancy, slops over
every outline, clots in every shade, seams itself with unde¬
sirable edges, speckles itself with inexplicable grit, and
is never supposed capable of representing anything it is
meant for, till most of it has been washed out. But the
great primary masters of the trade could lay, with unerr¬
ing precision of tone and equality of depth, the absolute
tint they wanted without a flaw or a retouch ; and there is
perhaps no greater marvel of artistic practice and finely
accurate intention existing, in a simple kind, greater than
the study of a Yorkshire waterfall, by Girtin, now in the
British Museum, in which every sparkle, ripple, and cur¬
rent is left in frank light by the steady pencil which is at
the same instant, and with the same touch, drawing the
forms of the dark congeries of channelled rocks, while
around them it disperses the glitter of their spray.
"Then further, on such basis of well-laid primary tint,
the old water-colour men were wont to obtain their effects
of atmosphere by the most delicate washes of transparent
colour, reaching subtleties of gradation in misty light,
which were wholly unthought of before their time. In
this kind the depth of far-distant brightness, freshness,
and mystery of morning air with which Copley Fielding
used to invest the ridges of the South Downs, as they
rose out of the blue Sussex champaign, remains, and I
believe must remain, insuperable, while his sense of
beauty in the cloud-forms associated with higher moun¬
tains, enabled him to invest the comparatively modest
scenery of our own island out of which he never travel¬
led a charm seldom attained by the most ambitious
painters of Alp or Appenine."
This remarkable passage manages to detail, not only
all the characteristic virtues of the water-colour medium,
but also its characteristic shortcomings. There is no
doubt that the English school, particularly in Girtin and
Turner, reached a perfection in this art which has never
been excelled, and Ruskin, in Modern Painters, extolled
the art with an insight and an eloquence that also have'
never been excelled. But Turner, by his technical virtuo¬
sity and overwhelming achievement, virtually brought the
art to an end only Cotman, seven years his junior, was
strong enough to maintain an independent style: one
might say, to maintain the tradition which Turner was
destroying. For Turner, in his last phase, left far behind
the topographical aims with which the art had originated.
Always, as Ruskin had noted, primarily concerned with
the light and colour of the scenes he depicted, he now
28

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
became absorbed with the elements themselves, freed from
their incidental relation to physical objects. Writing
about the late transparent water-colours of Venice and
Switzerland, Laurence Binyon says truly that "the ele¬
ments, in their energy and radiance, mean more and more
to Turner, the works of man less and less. At first sight
it is the miracle of the colour, the luminousness, the
indescribable delicacy, that holds one ; but soon one mar¬
vels more at the amazing science behind it, the evocation
of complex forms, however submerged in aerial hues, the
fullness of the distances. It is the same with the alpine
scenes, where the mountains retain their sculptured
form yet seem built of light and air ; the lakes are unfa¬
thomable, the valleys recede into an infinite distance. The
design is all in depth ; whorls of curving cloud lead the
eye on and on into a vibrating mystery of light, which
unifies the whole fabric of earth and air and water.
Never, had painting communicated with such subtlety and
power the sense of infinity. For it is not merely the sense
of infinite recession that it gives, the attraction of a final
peace, such as we find in the Umbrian painters ; it is space
conceived as something living, as a power which draws
our spirits into itself but also wells out in impalpable
radiance from the picture and absorbs and envelops our
minds."
Turner : unrivaled by latter-day artists
When we survey the century that has passed since
Turner's death, we can discern no use of the
medium by any painter of any country in the world
that can compare with such intensity of vision and mas¬
tery of expression. Only Cézanne comes into comparison,
and Cezanne's water-colours are essentially preparatory
exercises for his paintings, quick notations of form and
contour of great delicacy that perhaps express an ideal
which he had hoped to achieve in his oil paintings. But
from his letters it is evident that he never regarded water-
colour as more than a convenience ; only towards the
end of his life, when he was finding the effort demanded
by oil painting too exhausting, did his water-colours
become a self-sufficing medium of expression.
Apart from Cézanne, there have been perhaps only two
significant developments of the artone which might be
said to exploit the freedom of Turner's last phase, without
his sense of infinity; the other using the medium in a
manner which would never have occurred to Turner or
any of his predecessors to convey symbolic images. Gau¬
guin, with some help from medieval illuminations and
Japanese coloured woodcuts, might be said to have revived
the symbolic mode, and he has been followed by Kan-
dinsky, Klee and Miró. The other mode, which we now
call expressionist, has had a continuous development
beginning with Van Gogh and extending to Nolde,
Kokoschka, Rouault, Soutine and Sutherland. There are
several artists who do not fit into these general categories
impressionists like Jongkind, Steer and De Pisis who
continue the tradition of Constable or Girtin; and others,
like Turner himself, who transcend all categories nota¬
bly Picasso. The art has lost what gave it its distinctive
aesthetic its desire to render the subtlest effects of atmo¬
sphere; but what it has lost in subtlety it has gained
in power. But this power, in a Rouault or a Nolde, usually
demands the addition of body colour, and once the
translucency of the medium is sacrificed, the medium
itself has been transformed. Artists like Klee and Miró
have used the medium for new effects, subtle in a psycho¬
logical rather than an atmospheric sense ; but finally it
is an essential attitude of mind or spirit that is lacking
in the modern artist the quality which in Chinese
aesthetics is called Ch'i yün. "Ch'i yiin", explained the
eighteenth-century painter Chang Kêng, "may be express¬
ed by ink, by brush-work, by an idea, or by absence of
idea... It is something beyond the feeling of the brush
and the effect of ink, because it is the moving power of
Heaven, which is suddenly disclosed. But only those who
are quiet can understand it."
29
