PUTTING MIGHTY
RIVERS TO WORK
MODERN VOLGA
'BOATMEN'
The Soviet Union is today the top-
ranking country of Europe and the
second in the world in the production
of hydro-electric energy, according to
the most recent survey, published in
July, by R.P. Nossov, head of the Soviet
Hydro-electric Construction Department
of the Ministry of Electric Stations.
With more than a million and a half
miles of rivers and waterways Soviet
energy potential exceeds that of all the
countries of Europe, the U.S.A. and
Canada combined, Mr. Nossov reports.
In the past ten years, dam construction
in the Soviet Union has been proceeding
at a colossal scale. Last year, the most
powerful dam in the world, with a capa¬
city of 2,100,000 kilowatts, went into
operation at Kuibychev on the Volga
river. The dam (shown on opposite
page) raised the level of the Volga by
1 00 feet and has an average annual
output of I 0,700 million kilowatt-hours.
This autumn an even more powerful dam
will go into operation when the first
turbines are installed at the Stalingrad
station with a capacity of 2,3 I 0,000 KW.
In the Ukraine, large hydro-electric
stations are being built at Kremchug and
Dneprodzerzhinsk. Seven dams are un¬
der construction on the Neman, the
largest river of the Baltic, while in
the Transcaucasus mountain rivers are
being harnessed.
But it is in Siberia and in Central Asia
that the most impressive work is now
in progress. Gigantic stations are going
up at Bratsk on the Angara river and at
Krasnoyarsk on the Yenisei, each of
which will produce 3,200,000 kilowatts.
The mighty Angara is the only outlet for
Lake Baikal, the deepest fresh-water lake
in the world and the world's second
largest in volume of water (23,000 mil¬
lion cubic metres). On the Yenisei,
another huge dam is now planned, the
Yeniseiskaya hydro-electric station, which
when completed will have a total capa¬
city of six million kilowatts.
Between 1959-1965, the Soviet Union
expects to complete its unified energy
system for the European part of the
USSR bringing its total electrical capa¬
city to 50 million kilowatts, while a
further 20 million kilowatts are foreseen
for eastern and western Siberia.
Photo alongside shows assembly of turbo¬
generators at Novosibirsk station, Siberia.
Soviet Information Bureau, Paris

The Unesco Courier. August 1958
Rivers have tremendous power
for good or for destruction.
Uncontrolled, their recurring
floods lay waste the lands and cause
soil erosion, water pollution and often
widespread disease and famine. All
through the centuries large areas of
the world, in Asia especially, have
been impoverished in this way. Even
today more than one-fifth of the
human race is still subject to the
sudden and devastating onslaughts of
river flooding.
Yet when harnessed by modern en¬
gineering skill, the power of great
rivers can change the lives of whole
communities, turning scarcity into
plenty and creating virtually unlimit¬
ed opportunities for economic and so¬
cial progress. The multi-purpose de¬
velopment of river basins is making a
most important contribution towards
better living standards for millions of .
people. It provides for irrigation,
flood control and soil conservation,
electric power for industry and agri¬
culture, and improved navigation all
under one comprehensive scheme.
The benefits are permanent and may
be steadily extended ower a consider¬
able area.
There is now a world trend towards
this new concept of development as
a means of utilizing unproductive
lands, exploiting natural resources
and distributing population. Scienti
fic irrigation and flood control makes
agriculture on a hitherto unimagin-
ed scale practicable. Soil erosion is
halted by reafforestation schemes. An
abundant supply of hydro-electric
power attracts industry to undevelop¬
ed areas which may be rich in min-
rals or other raw materials. New
employment is created not only for
local communities but also for the
surplus populations of overcrowded
cities.
Multi-purpose river development is
by
W. H. Owens
practised on a large scale in the
U.S.A., where it has helped to open
up great areas of arid but otherwise
fertile lands. The huge Grand Coulee
Dam, centre of the Columbia River
Basin Project, is the key to future
industrial and agricultural progress
in the North-Western United States.
Its hydro-electric plant is able to
generate enough electricity to supply
the whole needs of a city of four
million people; its irrigation facilities
range over more than one million
acres. Regional population has in
creased twenty-fold since the scheme
began operating in 1941.
The world famous Hoover Dam
(formerly Boulder Dam) on the Colo¬
rado River, between Arizona and
Nevada, is another spectacular exam¬
ple of American multi-purpose river
planning, and is a vital factor today
in the development of the vast agri¬
cultural and growing industrial areas
in Southern California. Millions of
people and thousands of square miles
of fertile land are dependent on im¬
ported water. Giant conduits, cross¬
ing hundreds of miles of rugged
mountainous and desert country,
supply a thousand million gallons of
fresh water daily from the Colorado
River to between sixty and seventy
communities in the South California
Basin.
Nowhere in the world, perhaps, does
such imaginative utilization of rivers
promise greater rewards than in
countries like India and Pakistan,
and other regions of the East where
climate and uncontrolled water
courses have been a great hindrance
to human progress. The river valley
projects now under way or planned
will increase production and raise
living standards to a
far greater extent than
any other form of deve¬
lopment. Two of In¬
dia's largest power and
Cont'd
on
next page

RIVERS
AT WORK
(Continued)
GREATEST SINGLE FACTOR
IN INDUSTRIAL GROWTH
irrigation schemes are the Hirakud
Dam in Orissa and the Bhakra Dam
in the Punjab. These are among the
modern engineering marvels of the
East and the most important of a
number of similar undertakings due
for completion in the course of the
Second Five Year Plan. They sym¬
bolize the new India and her deter¬
mination to make her rivers the basis
of future well-being and prosperity.
The Hirakud Dam, three miles long
and flanked by thirteen miles of pro¬
tective dikes, is a triumph of Indian
hydraulic engineers over the twin
scourges of flood and famine which
have been Orissa's burden down the
ages. Its 232,500 kW. generating ca¬
pacity will bring heavy industry, such
as steel-making and chemical plants,
to a State that has much unexploit-
ed mineral wealth.
Bhakra Dam is the keystone of the
Bhakra-Nangal Project that will
transform the Punjab into a great
food-producing and industrial area.
The massive 760-foot reinforced
concrete dam wall actually exceeds
that of the Hoover Dam in America
by 34 feet. The Damodar Valley Cor¬
poration Project, in Bihar, has been
modelled on that of the Tennessee
Valley Authority (U.S.A.) to develop
the very promising lands of a great
river basin near Calcutta.
Pakistan has comparable river de¬
velopments in her important foreign-
aided Karnafuli (East Pakistan) and
Warsak (West Pakistan) schemes.
The Warsak Project, which is being
financed largely by Canada, has spe¬
cial significance because it will bring
stability and purpose to the lives of
the tribal communities in the tradi¬
tionally unsettled region of the North¬
west Frontier. The irrigation part of
this scheme, extending over 120,000
acres, will increase food production
by at least 60,000 tons a year.
One of the most far-reaching deve¬
lopments of this kind in the world is
foreshadowed in the bold plan to
harness the mighty Mekong River of
South-East Asia. The Mekong flows
down from the remote, snow-covered
mountains in the heart of Tibet to
the South China Sea, a distance of
about 2,600 miles. The lower river
basin passes through four under¬
developed countries Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand and South Vietnam each
of which would benefit enormously if
the Mekong's power were controlled
and put to work for the good of the
inhabitants.
Towards the end of 1957 a United
Nations Survey Mission made an
extensive study tour through the
Mekong basin area. Members of the
Mission travelled nearly 2,000 miles
by road, river and air (making use of
helicopters in the remoter districts)
to study the natural features and
characteristics of the river, and to
investigate possible sites for dams,
barrages and so on. Their very detail¬
ed Report, published in January, 1958,
was favourable towards the multiple
development of this four-nation
watershed, and recommended a five-
year programme of investigation and
planning.
In many countries, especially where
coal resources are poor or lacking
altogether, the harnessing of water
power has been the most important
single factor in the growth of indus¬
try. Japan, for example, has insuffi¬
cient coal for her needs, but she has
become highly industrialized through
exploiting her abundant water power
to the fullest degree. Good rainfall
and a large number of swift-flowing
mountain streams provide the Japan¬
ese with ideal conditions for inten¬
sive hydro-development.
Similarly in Europe, Sweden and
Norway get more than 95 per cent
of the electrical energy for industry
from water power. Lacking coal of
their own, the Swiss have yoked their
mountain rivers and falls to the elec¬
trified national railway system and
most of their manufacturing indus¬
tries. Water power is also becoming
increasingly important to the nation¬
al economies of France and Italy.
The U.S.S.R., which has rich coal
deposits and other sources of power
besides, contains also more than a
third of the world's total water power
resources. Most of this lies in Asiatic
Russia and is for the greater part as
yet undeveloped though many im¬
portant power projects in the far east
of the Soviet Union have been under¬
taken in recent years. In the Euro¬
pean part of the country, more than
half the hydro power is located in the
Caucasus, and it has been extensively
developed.
Russia's famous Dnieper hydro¬
electric station, in the Ukraine
(restored since its destruction in the
second World War) was the most
powerful on earth when originally
opened in 1932. This huge project,
planned to meet the growing needs
of heavy industry in the Ukraine, was
designed also for irrigation purposes
and so was one of the prototypes of
multi-purpose river development out¬
side the U.S.A. Hydro-electric deve¬
lopment has naturally taken a promi¬
nent place in the recent Plans of the
Soviet Union. Last year, the giant
two-million kW Kuibychev Station
was put into operation. (See p. 4.)
In the next few years such major
projects as the large Stalingrad sta¬
tion on the Volga will be completed,
while a number of others along this
river and also on the Dnieper are in
progress.
Important hydro-electric stations
being constructed in Eastern Siberia,
a land of powerful rivers, include
those at Irkutsk, on the Angara, and
Krasnoyarsk, on the Yenisei. These
places are centres of heavy industry
supplying equipment for mining, agri¬
culture and railway and water trans¬
port in the far east of the U.S.S.R.
The immense water-power potential
of the Angara and the Yenisei will
be harnessed under a combined long-

The Unesco Courier. August 1958
^
m
3,000 foot drop
in ten miles
When the Lusitania was torpedoed in 1915,
among the 1,195 persons who perished was
an American engineer, Frederick Pearson, who
pioneered an audacious water power enterprise
in Mexico. At the start of the century, Pear¬
son heard of a tremendous waterfall, called
Necaxa, I 00 miles east of Mexico City, where
the river fell 3,000 feet in 10 miles in a series
of three gigantic steps. Pearson installed a power
plant at the foot of the first step; he built a
dam across the top of the fall, diverting the
water through pipes down 1,450 feet to a turbine
below. This involved the construction of what
was then the world's largest earth dam and the
longest transmission line in the world. Rather
than lead his water pipes down the mountain
side, Pearson dug a shaft straight down through
the mountain rock to its base. This shaft,
1,600 feet long, equipped with a cable car,
is still the only means of access to the power
plant below.
Pearson's death prevented him from exploiting
the two other falls. This was left to his succes¬
sors. Today power plants stand at all three falls.
" There can be few places in the world, "
official recently wrote, "where a given amount
of waterpower is so fully exploited. The quan¬
tity of water involved is very small... but the
total electrical energy it produces annually
already totals more than 7 50 million kilowatt-
hours in the three power stations. Mexico has
lost its Nexaca waterfalls, but it has gained the
sinews for its economic development."
Photo shows workmen waiting to descend to
station at second waterfall, 700 feet below.
mmmmWBSSBSm
term project for the exploitation of
Eastern Siberia's vast natural wealth.
Output of electrical energy in the
U.S.S.R. has grown impressively since
the last war, and is now second to
that of the U.S.A. On the outbreak
of World War H the total output of
all Soviet power stations, thermal and
hydraulic, amounted to about 50,000
million kW 25 times as much as in
1913. By 1955 it had more than
trebled again to 170,000 million kW,
and this figure is expected to be
almost doubled by 1960.
Canada provides a very striking
example of how a vigorous young
nation has built a flourishing indus¬
trial economy based on water power.
Her industries have grown up simul¬
taneously with the harnessing of just
a part of the virtually unlimited
power resources invested in the coun¬
try's innumerable lakes and rivers.
The gigantic power of the Niagara
Falls, for example, nowadays runs a
large part of industry in Ontario, the
most highly industrialized province
in Canada. Since the early part of
this century hydro-electric capacity
in Canada has increased more than
one hundred-fold, the most rapid pro¬
gress having taken place within the
last fifteen years. Even so, the coun¬
try's water power potential is still less
than one quarter developed.
In the heart of tropical Africa, too,
water power is beginning to be
exploited on a large scale to serve
new towns and new industries in
what was nothing but primitive
wilderness not so many years ago.
On the great Zambezi River, which
the explorer Livingstone reached just
over a century ago, a 420-ft. high dam
is now under construction to create
the world's largest man-made lake
(See page 10). Power generated at
this dam will be carried by overhead
transmission cables to many areas of
Central Africa where new economic
developments are under way, and in
particular to the important copper
mines on the frontier of Northern
Rhodesia and the Belgian Congo. The
output of these African copper mines
is at present exceeded only by that
from the copper deposits in Chile.
With the new power supplied by the
Zambezi scheme they are capable of
great expansion.
The advantages of producing elec¬
tricity by hydro methods are long-
term cheapness and dependence on
no raw material other than water,
which is unfailing. Capital costs are
certainly heavy at the outset, espe¬
cially for countries which are as yet
in the early stages of development.
But placing of an initial invest¬
ment ensures abundant supplies of
low-cost power over a wide area for
an indefinite period. Once the capital
charges have been worked off, the
actual cost of running a hydro plant
is considerably lower than that of a
fuel plant.
Moreover, as has been shown, the
same dam works provide the means
for such other purposes as irrigation,
flood control, and water supply for
local or distant towns and commun¬
ities. Nor is that all. The multi¬
farious benefits of comprehensive river
development range beyond the utili¬
tarian and may include the establish¬
ment of national parks for recreation
and wild life preservation.
