Meet the women of Ghana
by Victor Akinyele Williams
ççrr%His is the Ghana Broadcasting System. The
I time is now half past three... Here is the Ewe
Woman's Half Hour Programme." How often
on tuning in their radio receivers have listeners in
West Africa heard the familiar tones of this woman
announcer. And travellers coming over into Ghana
by plane hear the sweet voice of the air hostess
announcing their time of arrival at Kumasi airport.
These are two of the many evidences of women's
emancipation in Ghana. Women now hold all sorts
of public appointments formerly held by men. You
buy your stamps from a woman clerk behind the
post office counter, and it is now a familiar sight
in Accra to see a woman police officer shepherding
a child across the street, while almost every mail
boat that arrives from abroad brings more Ghanian
women who have gone abroad for further study as
social welfare officers, nurses and for other posts.
Women compete vigorously in all fields of learn¬
ing With men. There are now women doctors,
opticians, physiotherapists and dieticians. There
are women lawyers too, and several Ghanian women
hold high posts in the Civil Service, While those
with academic degrees work as lecturers in institu¬
tions of higher learning.
But what of the ordinary housewife? Like
women everywhere she has her share of domestic
chores and troubles cooking, nursing, laundry and
generally looking after the home. She has her
headaches too, but she keeps cool and level-headed,
for she is not possessed by that demon of the modern
world worry. She is seldom bored because she is
too busy to worry over petty things and she enjoys
her Work.
Triumphantly and good-naturedly the housewife
of Ghana combines the tasks of looking after her
home and bread-winning, helping in this way to
supplement the family budget.
How does she do it? Well, let's start the day with
an average housewife in Accra. She gets up earlier
than any other member of the family, usually about
5 a.m., makes the fire and puts a big pot of water
to boil. While the water is heating, she busies her¬
self, sweeping the compound and cleaning the
rooms. Within a half hour the Water is boiling and
with it she prepares starch for the laundered
dresses, cooks the breakfast for the family, and uses
the remainder for the children's bath.
Loves pomp, pageantry & colour
By 7 a.m. everything is ready for breakfast. The
children and their father eat theirs and go off
to school and the office. But the housewife
does not breakfast along with the rest. She washes
and starches the dresses which she has soaked over¬
night, and bathes her baby one of the highlights
of her day, for children are adored in Ghana.
By 10 a.m. she is off to the market with her
baby cosily wrapped on her back. First she does
her own domestic marketing, and then branches out
to buy supplies for her "work" banana, yam, fish
or whatever her edible merchandise may require.
Some women sell tinned provisions and cigarettes.
In this case let's assume that our friend the house¬
wife sells tataye (fried plaintain). On her return
from market, she makes two fires. On one she pre
pares the family lunch, and on the other she fries
tataye, fish and probably yam. Soon schoolchildren
from the neighbourhood come streaming into her
compound with their ha'pennies and pennies for
their midday meals. Workers from offices, too,
send messengers for her delicious tataye and fish,
both having been fried to a golden brown colour
with coconut oil. By half past one the tataye is
exhausted and the family cooking is ready. Our
housewife can take a short nap while awaiting her
husband and the children.
Jack of all trades? Maybe, but she is master of
them all. She works hard but she plays hard too
for she believes that "'all Work and no play makes
Jack a dull boy".
She loves pomp, pageantry and colour. The
gorgeous multicoloured kente dresses are admirably
suited to her plump figure (one rarely sees a thin
woman in Ghana), her attractive, ebony black
complexion, ivory White teeth and large expressive
eyes. She is fond of the gold jewelry for which
Ghana is famous and on festivals and other special
occasions displays heavy rings, bangles, bracelets,
necklaces, brooches for the hair and dress, ear-rings
~>d sometimes gold bangles round the ankles.
The 'Rock'n' Roll' of West Africa
She loves dancing and singing and, at least once
a week, usually on Sunday, she spends the
evening at her local club. Besides folklore and
tribal " dancing, our housewife and her friends
indulge in a special kind of music called "'High Life"
with lots of rhythm and a quick tempo, that is very
popular not only in Ghana but all down the coast
from Dakar to Douala. "'High Life" is the "Rock'n'
Roll" of West Africa.
Dancing is the number one programme of any
great occasion: a Wedding celebration or anniver¬
sary, the birth of a baby and funerals are all
celebrated with much dancing.
At the theatre and the cinema you will see a host
of women with their families. And on the last
Week-end of each month Accra's places of amusement
are thronged with happy married couples. The
same is true of a host of other towns all over the
country Tamale, Kumasi, Cape Coast all celebrate
the month-end with much felicity.
Do not think for a moment that I am talking
about the sophisticated women of Ghana only. No,
I am talking about people from all walks of life,
rich and poor, educated and uneducated (who still
constitute but increasingly less so the majority of
the Womenfolk of Ghana). They all dance away
their cares with the result that they become care¬
free, but, mind you, not irresponsible. Though
placid and serene in their outlook on life they are
not unambitious. They are keeping up the struggle
to reduce the gap between themselves and their
more advanced sisters in other lands. In a few
short decades education has brought the women of
Ghana out of the misery of illiteracy and supersti¬
tion into a fuller and richer life. Today, girls study
not only at the co-educational school at Achimota,
but also at the Kumasi College of Arts, Science and
Technology and the University of Ghana, Accra.
Now, the parliament and not merely the kitchen is
their goal.
32
