Non-governmental organizations and...
THE RISE OF THE NEW 'ELITES'
by Alfred Métraux
This is an era of great upheaval where
whole societies and deep-rooted
customs are being transformed at a
dizzying pace and in which countless
groups and organizations are at work to
forge a better world for tomorrow. Among
these is a vast array of several hundred
institutions which, though working quietly
and without fanfare for nearly a century,
have achieved remarkable results in the
field of international co-operation and un¬
derstanding.
Known as the international non-govern¬
mental organizations (abbreviated ngos)
they have mobilized enthusiasm and devo¬
tion at the grass-root level, and have built
an immense network of individual bonds
and contacts reaching across one nation to
another around the world. Since the
creation of the United Nations and its Spe¬
cialized Agencies the ngos have thrown the
full weight of their millions of members
behind the cause of peace to which the
U.N. is dedicated.
The objectives of the ngos are almost as
varied as their numbers are great for they
reach out to unite workers in factories and
fields, students in schools and universities,
scientists in laboratories, women in the pro¬
fessions and in the home. Many are con¬
cerned with education; other are devoted
to the struggle for certain human rights;
still others seek to unite the efforts of men
and women in improving the social and
economic conditions of underprivileged
communities.
Thus the non-governmental organizations
have become one of the great instruments
in fostering international understanding.
Through their study groups, their seminars
and international congresses they have
made it possible for large numbers of
people to become active participants instead
of just idle spectators in the great move¬
ments of our time. In a sense, I would
compare the role of the ngos today to that
played by many private organizations early
in the 19th century in the formation of the
Confederation of Switzerland when it was
as divided as are the great States of today.
Anthropologists who have made a study
of the cultural changes taking place in the
so-called underdeveloped countries have
pointed to the highly important and even
paramount role played by religious missions
and organizations in the transformations we
are now witnessing. It is to these missions
in many cases that we owe the first intro¬
duction of modern technology which was
to modify the economy of entire regions,
and the early education and training of
local '"élites" who were later to become
the leaders in the forefront of their
country's progress.
Similar work has been done by many
non-governmental organizations. With the
means at their disposal in their different
domains the ngos too have made their con¬
tribution to the efforts being made for the
rapid industrialization of the lesser-
advanced, poverty-stricken lands. But
anyone who has had anything to do with
technical development programmes be he
an educator, a doctor or an engineer
sent into the field by a government agency
or an international technical assistance ser¬
vice knows that all these efforts will be
wasted time and money unless local men
and women are trained in the areas assisted
so that they are equipped to take over and
to continue the job begun.
This is the real crux of the problem of
technical advancement in the underdeve¬
loped countries. The training of local
leaders in underdeveloped areas is one of
the sine qua non conditions for progress.
No economic aid or education campaign by
itself can raise the standard of living in
these countries unless an opportunity is
provided at the same time for leaders to
emerge from the great mass of the popu¬
lation so that a new "élite" can be formed
alongside the old one still clinging to
traditional ways.
In 1954 Unesco launched the first of a
series of large-scale enquiries into the
problems faced by new African "élites" in
the regions south of the Sahara. These
investigations continued for a period of
four years, until 1957, and have been
followed with deep interest by the non¬
governmental organizations, particularly
those which have leader-training pro¬
grammes for underdeveloped countries.
The emergence of a class of professional
people and technicians in lands which only
a few years ago were qualified as
"primitive" or "archaic" is a social and
cultural phenomenon of paramount im¬
portance. So much so that all studies
made of the social effects of industriali-
AROUND THE WORLD in commu¬
nities which are undergoing industria¬
lization, people are being selected
and trained as leaders. Many of the
non-governmental organizations colla¬
borating with Unesco are helping to
train these new "élites." Right, con¬
gress attended by members of the
C.V.T.C. (A confederation of Christian
Trade Unions in Vietnam, with some
600,000 members). The C.V.T.C. pro¬
vides its members with fellowships
to complete their training in foreign
countries, and is affiliated to the Inter¬
national Conferation of Christian Trade
Unions, a non-governmental organiza¬
tion which has consultative arrange¬
ments with Unesco. Far right, a
lesson for the village elders in West
Africa. An African forest ranger gives
them advice on how to make better
use of trees and local forest products.
C.I.S.C

zation and urbanization have highlighted
the preponderant role played by this new
group. And there can be no doubt that
the ultimate success of programmes of
fundamental education, aiming to achieve
the general raising of living standards in
an area, hinges directly on the efforts of
those individuals who make up the "élite".
I should point out that the use of the
word "élite" has been the subject of criti¬
cism in certain circles. It seems to conjure
up the notion of an exclusive, clannish
"club" which has voluntarily set itself apart
from the rest of the population. To the
sociologist, however, the word has a diffe¬
rent meaning. It has none of the deroga¬
tory connotations some people give it; on
the contrary, it suggests not only the
positive idea of excellence or merit in a
specific field of endeavour but also the
capacity to exert influence and encourage
emulation. The word is applied to people
who, because of the position they hold,
lead the community to which they belong
onto a well-defined road of action. It is
thus often synonymous with the word
"leaders" or the French term "cadres".
Lost love of the soil
Many international organizations are
eager to train leaders who will be
equipped to work for the goals they
have set themselves. But such training
poses numerous problems. In February
1947 the non-governmental organizations
(with help from Unesco) began an inquiry
in which all ngos were asked to des¬
cribe their methods of recruiting, the type
of training offered, and particularly the
problems and difficulties encountered.
(The findings of this inquiry are to be re¬
ported to the next conference of ngos in
June)
Some of the difficulties already noted
by the ngos are well known to those who
have had experience with the transition of
a people from one form of culture to
another. When an organization recruits
men or women to be trained as future
leaders of their community, it is quickly
confronted with the great differences noted
in the cultural background and schooling
of candidates. Once this hurdle is over¬
come and the organization arranges to
provide a candidate with the best possible
training (usually at great cost) the student
very often refuses to return home, prefer-
ing the new environment into which he has
become assimilated.
Then there is the problem of readjust¬
ment at home. A young man (the same
holds true for women) who has gone
abroad with the aid of an organization,
finds on his return that he no longer fits
into his community and has become an
"outsider". Sometimes the mere fact of
bringing villagers to a big city spells the
end of their interest in the soil, and is
enough to make them look down their
noses at anything that smacks of village
customs. Whereas many organizations, in
training persons from the underdeveloped
countries for a fuller and richer life, do so
with the idea that the knowledge gained
will be used by these persons for the
greater good of their countrymen, they
find instead that promising leaders quickly
disappear into administrative offices, poli¬
tics or ordinary business concerns.
This problem is considered in many ngo
reports which recognize of course that it
is hardly unnatural for a young person
trained for leadership to feel strong twinges
of anguish at the thought of "burying"
himself in tribal or village work. This
demands an idealism and missionary spirit
that is obviously a rarity. Various solutions
have been put forward as a remedy. One
proposes that better material conditions and
advantages be made available to native-
born leaders ; another perhaps more
important, that continual and closer contact
be maintained by sponsoring organizations
with leaders in order to bolster the morale
of those disheartened or ready to abandon
their work.
It has been observed that leaders trained
in their native country usually prove better
adapted to their missions than those sent
abroad. Then, too, it has been found that
persons who have experienced life in the
industrial world are often inclined to be
British Official Photo
The Unesco Courier. February 1958
much more severely critical and contemp¬
tuous of their own people than strangers.
Hence a special effort is needed to instil in
them patience and tolerance toward their
countrymen.
It is not surprising that many of the
ngo reports received by Unesco speak of
conflicts that have arisen between different
generations, to the dismay and consterna¬
tion of many leaders. The rift between old
and new ways of life is the source of deep-
drawn differences between members of the
same family. Young women in many
countries of the Orient, for instance, today
work in factories but their mothers still
go outdoors swathed in their veils. Many
international organizations are conscious of
this problem and hope to solve it with
tact and patience.
A lesson of real democracy in action
emerges form the replies to the ngo enquiry
into their work with the new "élites".
One ngo states: "Our relations are founded
on mutual understanding and the desire to
face up to the needs of the local environ¬
ment." A women's association in West
Africa reports how both White and Negro
women have joined efforts to work for
healthy surroundings and a richer home
life, and that between its members of
different races there is complete co-opera¬
tion with no trace of any feeling of su¬
periority or inferiority.
The non-governmental organizations have
an immense educational achievement to
their credit. Everywhere schools, study
groups, seminars, have been set up for the
free exchange of ideas and the widening
of mental horizons. Thousands of students
from the less favoured nations have been
educated in Western schools and universi¬
ties, »thanks to their aid. By breaking
down the barriers which formerly prevented
contact between people with sharply differ¬
ing backgrounds, the non-governmental or¬
ganizations are participating actively as well
as effectively in the vast undertaking now
commonly known as Technical Assistance.
Sceptics scoff & shrug
There are sceptics who like to shrug
their shoulders and scoff at what
they consider the naive enthusiasm of
the men and women working for these or¬
ganizations. They have apparently for¬
gotten that it is this same faith in humanity
and in the value of education that has
helped to change the face of the earth. The
industrialization of Africa, of Asia and of
vast regions in the Americas cannot be
achieved in a vacuum. It is precisely be¬
cause this is so that so many international
organizations have set out to prepare the
people of these areas for the new technolo¬
gical age which will soon be upon them
(with all that this implies), so that they are
not crushed by the force of its sudden im¬
pact.
It would certainly be useful if the non¬
governmental organizations one day prepar¬
ed an account of their contribution to the
development of these new societies. They
would no doubt be surprised themselves to
discover the large numbers of leaders of
every kind indebted to them and the scope
of the great changes in traditional life for
which they have been responsible. But no
such survey is likely to be forthcoming in
the near future. Most of the ngos are
more concerned with the work ahead of
them than with a retrospective self-pat-on-
the-back. Such a survey of their achieve¬
ments will probably have to wait until a
historian or sociologist undertakes the job.
