SINGING SANDS
A strange concert heard in the desert
by E.R. Yarham
Two explorers, Bertram Thomas and H. St. John
Philby (1), who crossed the Great Desert of the so-
called "'Empty Quarter" of Arabia, both describe how
they were startled by a phenomenon known as "Singing
Sands", the mechanism of which has long been discussed.
Thomas and his party were in the heart of the desert,
floundering through heavy sand dunes, when a loud
droning like a musical note broke the silence. One of
his Badu companions pointed to a steep sand cliff about
200ft. high and shouted, "Listen to that ridge of sand
bellowing!" All that Thomas could see was a filmy
wisp of sand being carried up the gentle windward slope
to spill like smoke over its top. On another occasion,
he was similarly startled by a curious note emitted from
the sand as his camel trod on it, but the tribesman at
his side, a Murri who was familiar with the phenomenon,
could only give as an explanation that it was some acti¬
vity in the uppermost of the seven underworlds. The
Arabs, in fact, believed the sounds to be the spirits of
the sand dunes talking.
In Thomas's experience, the note continued for about
two minutes, ceasing as abruptly as it had begun. When
Philby noted a similar phenomenon a few months later,
it was set up artificially and unintentionally. He, too,
was in the heart of the Empty Quarter, and he heard
(1) Bertram Thomas's book, Arabia Felix, describing his jour¬
ney in 1930-31, was published by Jonathan Cape, 30 Bedford
Square, London, in 1932 ; H. St. John Philby's account, The
Empty Quarter, being a description of the Great South Desert
of Arabia, known as Rub'all Kbali, was published by Constable
& Co., 10 Orange St., London, in 1933.
u. N.
the noise in the afternoon, at about the same time as
Thomas had. He was resting in his tent when he heard
a deep, musical, booming sound. Looking out, he discov¬
ered that it had been set up by one of the party walking
up the steep sand slope of the dune encircling the camp.
His description is worth quoting:
"Quite suddenly the great amphitheatre began to boom
and drone with a sound not unlike that of a siren or
perhaps an aeroplane engine quite a musical, pleasing,
rhythmic sound of astonishing depth... The conditions
were ideal for the study of the sand concert, and the first
item was sufficiently prolonged it lasted perhaps about
four minutes for me to recover from my surprise and
take in every detail. The men working at the well
started a rival and less musical concert of ribaldry
directed at the Jinns (desert spirits) who were supposed
to be responsible for the occurrence... I realized that the
key to the situation was Sa'dan, seated on the top of the
slope. It was evident that the music was being engen¬
dered by the sand sliding down the steep slope from
under him.'"
Philby followed Sa'dan's example and found that he,
too, was able to produce the same sound by setting masses
of sand in motion down the side. The noise commenced
with a grating sound and increased gradually to a musical
booming, which just as gradually decreased and died
away. He experimented by pushing a bottle into the
singing sand, and as he withdrew it there followed a wail
like that of a trombone. At another time he plunged
into the moving mass of sand half-way down the slope,
and it appeared to throb beneath him like a great organ.
The singing sands of southern Arabia have become
26

known to science only during the present century. But
the phenomenon was known to the Chinese at least a
thousand years ago. One of their writers left an account
of an area in the province of Kansu where it had been
noted in the ninth century. He described the "Hill of
Sounding Sand", which was 500ft. high in places and
possessed strange qualities: "Its peaks taper up to a point,
and between them there is a mysterious hole which the
sand has not been able to cover up." The writer said
that in the height of summer this hill of sand gave out
sounds by itself, but if trodden by men or horses, the notes
could be heard for long distances.
The same scribe described a custom which was followed
to induce the singing: "It is customary on the "tuanwa
day" (the Dragon Festival on the fifth day of the fifth
moon) for men and women from the city to clamber up
to some of the highest points and rush down again in
a body, which causes the sand to give forth a rumbling
noise like thunder. Yet when you come to look at it
the next morning the hill is found to be just as steep as
before. The ancients called this the Hill of Sounding
Sand: they deified the sand and worshipped there."
Two missionaries in inland China, Miss F. French and
Miss M. Cable, have also recorded their observations of
the phenomenon in Chinese Turkestan. The City of
Sands (Tunwang) takes its name from the ranges of sand
dunes that lie to the south, stretching out into the great
desert of Lob. These sand hills possess the property of
"singing" when the sand is moved. Before a desert gale
blows, a sound like the rattle of drums is heard, but at
any time the hills can be made to "sing" by climbing to
the knife-like edge of the highest point and sliding down.
The great vibration then produced seemed to spring from
the very centre of the dune.
'Iron Swiss' heard
drums of the dead
Tschiffely, the "Iron Swiss" (2) who rode on horse¬
back from Buenos Aires to Washington, records an
experience on the Peruvian coast. He fell asleep
one night on a sand hill, but was awakened several times
by a noise like, the beating of drums or like a motor
launch travelling on a river. As he could see nothing, he
went to sleep again.
The next morning he noticed that he had been sleeping
near a gentilar, as the ancient Indian burial grounds are
called. He was asked by the Indians if he had heard
the manchang. This sounded rather like Chinese to
Tschiffely, and he asked them what it meant. They
explained that the sand hill was haunted and that every
night the dead Indians of the gentilar danced to the
beating of drums. In fact, they told him so many blood¬
curdling stories about the hill that he began to consider
himself lucky to be alive. He heard later that the
explorers, Baron von Humboldt and Raimondi believed
that the sounds heard so often during the night from
this hill were due to underground waters that moved as
the temperature changed. Another theory is that sea
breezes blowing from a certain direction hit the sandy
ripples on the slopes of the hill to produce this strange
sound.
Although it is to the deserts that one must turn to hear
the finest exhibitions produced by singing sands, a
somewhat similar phenomenon has been reported from
beach sands. An example, unique along the west coast
of Scotland, is afforded by the singing sands of the Bay
of Laig on the little island of Eigg in the Hebrides. The
first such discovery in England appears to have been made
by C. Carus-Wilson, who about 60 years ago found singing
sands at Studland Bay on the coast of Dorset. They
have been recorded also on the coast of North Wales; and
in the United States two observers have reported them
at seventy-four places on the Atlantic Coast alone.
Beach sands "sing" differently from desert dunes. The
beach sands are best described as "whistling" or
"squeaking," according to R.A. Bagnold, who summarizes
existing knowledge in the final chapter of his book The
Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes. The squeak
or whistle is produced, he explains, by any rapid distur¬
bance of the dry top layer, especially just above the high
water level when the sand has recently dried out after
a shower. It is produced when the palm of the hand is
(2) Aimé Felix Tschiffely made his great ride "Southern Cross
to Pole Star", from the Argentine to the United States, on two
native horses, Gato and Mancha.
The Unesco Courier. June 1958
swept across it quickly or when the sand is given ajlight
stab with end of a pencil. When the sand is removed
from the beach, it does not long retain its sound-
producing quality. Grains of singing beach ," sand
examined were rounded, but not markedly so, and were
fairly uniform in size.
In contrast to the whistling of the beach sands, "the
great sound which in some places startles the silence of
the desert" is quite a different noise, according to
Bagnold, who wrote:
"I have heard it in south-western Egypt 300 miles from
the nearest habitation. On two occasions it happened
on a still night, suddenlya vibrant booming so loud
that I had to shout to be heard by my companion. Soon
other sources, set going by the disturbance, joined their
music to the first, with so close a note that a slow beat
was clearly recognized. This weird chorus went on for
more than five minutes continuously... Native tales
have woven it into fantasy; sometimes it is the song of
sirens who lure travellers to a waterless doom; sometimes
it is said to come upwards from bells still tolling under¬
ground in a sand-engulfed monastery..."
The sounds produced by desert dunes certainly vary;
travellers have compared them to a ship's siren, a
throbbing organ, the beat of a drum, a trombone, and the
twanging of a monster harp. In some instances, it
seems that the softer tones are missing; others say that
standing on the sand when it is singing is like resting
on a huge stringed instrument while a bow is being drawn
slowly across it. The note emitted by the desert sand
is much lower than that of the beach sand and at a
distance of 600 yards has been likened to thunder.
Writing from Egypt some few years ago, Lieutenant-
Colonel de Lancey-Forth spoke of the following experience
in the great sand-dune country to the south of Siwa:
"I found, after a strong westerly wind had blown
throughout the day and banked the fine drift sand high
up on the knife-edged tops of the dunes, that sometimes
in the evening, when the wind had died away, leaving
a deep stillness in the air, this fine drift sand slid down
in streaks over the coarse big-grained red sand which
forms the steep slopes of the solid part of the dunes,
and the friction of the one rolling over the other gave
out a noise like distant rumbling thunder with a deep
musical note as that of a cello in it."
Forth's reference to the evening is parallelled in Philby's
account. When he was listening to the singing in the
afternoon, one of his men (referring to the desert spirits)
said, "You Wait, just wait till the evening and you will
hear them letting off their big guns."
Beaches that 'whistle'
and 'booming' deserts
Bertram Thomas, too, noticed the noise late in the
afternoon, when the heat of the day was fading
Apparently, another factor also favours the close of
day. During the day the wind blows the fine drift sand to
the tops of the dunes, and toward sunset, when the wind
usually dies down, it begins to roll down the slopes.
Dryness seems essential, for the ancient Chinese
manuscript states that the Hill of Sounding Sand gave
out noises only at the height of summer; and H. St John
Philby, the explorer already referred to, likewise reported
that early in the morning, when the air was cool and the
sand somewhat moist, he failed to elicit any response
from it. And a few weeks later when there had been
a little rain, there was no music in the sands.
Examination of the sand has not revealed any
peculiarity linking the whistling sands of the beach with
the booming sands of the desert. Samples from the
dunes do not reveal any distinguishing features. The
grains are no more uniform in size than those of many;
silent sands; and though clean sand sometimes seems'.
to sing best, Bagnold heard it in a desert region where
the sand was dirtier than usual and was wetted
appreciably only once or twice in a decade.
Physicists are generally agreed that the sounds are
caused by the rubbing of grains against each other, but
as yet there is no real explanation of the mechanism by
which they are produced. When further critical studies
are made, the answers may be forthcoming. Meanwhile,
when you are in the desert, keep an ear open for one
of the strangest concerts ever to come from nature's
versatile music box.
27
