The Unesco Courier. January 1958
LASF-RtFUGE
National Parks Association of Japan
IDEAL BREEDING PLACE for the birds, provided on the
rugged seashore in the Sanriku National Park, north-east
Honshu (main island of Japan), attracts great flocks of seagulls.
In almost all countries, there are areas which the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
calls "The Last Refuges". They are tracts of land which have
been set aside for many different purposes: to prevent the
countryside being spoiled by technological developments and so
losing its true character; to provide places where people can relax
in healthy surroundings; to preserve sample areas for scientific
research; to ensure the survival of rare species of fauna or flora
which would soon die off outside their own environment; or finally,
to keep certain natural beauty spots intact. On the following
pages are several examples of typical reserves in various parts of
the world and some of the rarities of Nature which they protect.
I. U.C.N.
THE ORIGINAL 'TEDDY BEAR' is the koala, a gentle
little animal that lives in tall eucalyptus trees. This marsupial,
was once hunted for its fur and decimated, but is now protected
in Australia, in particular within the sanctuary which has been
established at Philip Island, about 75 miles from Melbourne.

STRANGE 'FRUITS' & RARE PLANTS. Unusual-looking objects
hanging from a tree (right) in the Rancho Grande Reserve, Venezuela,
are nests of the turpial, a kind of sparrow and a common bird in this
National Park. The Reserve, to the west of Caracas, the capital, has a
three-fold role as a scientific research area, natural protection zone and
centre for educational visits. Rare silversword flowers (below) bloom
among cinders of the Haleakala Crater in Hawaiian National Park
on the island of Maui, one of four main islands of Hawaiian group.
.U.C.N, and U.S. Department of the Interior photos
Photos © B. Schocher, Kontresina
ROYAL EAGLE (right) is not only protected in the Swiss National
Park, where this photo was taken, but throughout Switzerland. Young
one shown here is preparing to fly from the nest. The Swiss National
Park covers an area of about 40,000 acres in the Engadine Valley.
Because all birds of prey are protected here it was feared that they
might increase excessively and decimate the population of smaller
animals, but such has not been the case. Alpine marmots (above),
rodents related to ground squirrels, are also "boarders" in the Park.
10

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
NO FEAR OF MEN
There is no doubt that the largest variety
and number of animals are to be found
on the continent of Africa. Today,
however, these animals are increasingly
concentrated in reserves which govern¬
ments, alarmed by the steady disap¬
pearance of certain species, have set up.
In French African territories, vast regions
have been turned into reserves. A famous
one is that in the Nimba Mountains on
the borders of Liberia and French West
Africa. Madagascar has twelve strictly
protected reserves.
National Parks of the Belgian Congo are
among the finest in Africa and remarkable
scientific studies are being made in them.
The wonderful Albert National Park
(more than 3,000 square miles) was
reserved in 1925 to protect the gorilla and
other rare animals that inhabit it.
South Africa's nature reserves are espe¬
cially popular with tourists. Here, freed
from the threat of being shot or trapped,
animals have in many cases practically '
lost their fear of man. Among the best
known reserves in British African territories
are the Queen Elizabeth in Uganda, the-
Nairobi National Park in Kenya, the
Serengeti in Tanganyika and the extensive
ones in the two Rhodesias.
STRIPED FOR CAMOUFLAGE in forest
shadows but easily seen in the open, the zebra
usually grazes with wildebeests and gazelle
that warn it of danger. Zebras shown here,
with wildebeests in the background roam
the Kafue National Park, Northern Rhodesia.
©Northern Rhodesia Information Department-N. Watt
FASTEST ANIMAL known for running short
distances, the cheetah is a large catthree to
four feet highof the plains of Africa and
Asia. It has been tamed and used for hunting
in India. This specimen was photographed
in the Serengeti National Park, Tanganyika.
© I. U.C.N. Collection
'RIVER-HORSE' is what the name Hippo¬
potamus means, but this African animal is
really related to the pigs, and shares honours
with the rhinoceros as the largest land mammal
next to the elephant. These animals abound
in South Africa's Kruger National Park, an
immense reserve of 8,800 square miles.
© Kruger Park-W. Schack
II

*
Official Soviet photo
STAMPEDING ACROSS THE SNOW as
the photographer's aircraft swoops over them,
wild reindeer on the Lapland Reserve round
Lake Imandra, U.S.S.R., cast long shadows in
the light of the low-hung Arctic sun. Here
live the remains of herds of wild reindeer,
once widely distributed in northern Europe.
E.N.A. photo-archives, U.S.S.R
VALUABLE FUR-BEARERS such as the
beaver were widely distributed in the forests
of Russia two centuries ago, but as there was
little or no control of hunting, some species
were eventually exterminated. The beavers
themselves were almost wiped out. Today,
however, the stocks are being rapidly res¬
tored through the work of national parks.
The reserve in the Voronezh Region (where
these photos of beavers were taken) in parti¬
cular has played an important part in the
recovery of the animals, and has supplied
them to other parks situated in 29 different
regions of the U.S.S.R. The research carried
out in the Voronezh reserve has made
possible the successful breeding and raising
of beavers in captivity. Thus alongside the.
beavers living in their natural habitat there are
others born and raised in the "beaver farm"«

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
RESERVES IN
U.S.S.R. COVER
6,000,000 ACRES
Today there are sixty nature reserves in
the Soviet Union with a combined
area of over six million acres, rep¬
resenting every kind of countryside in the
U.S.S.R. In the North, for example, there
is the Kandalaksha Reserve (including
islands in the White and Barents Seas)
where there is an abundance of eider,
famed for its down, as well as other
valuable birds. To the east, the Pechora-
Ilich Reserve (along the upper reaches of
the Pechora River) contains a complete
cross-section of the rich vegetation found
in this area. This park is the scene of a
remarkable migration each year when
hundreds of elk pass through, in winter,
going south, and in spring returning to
the north. Naturalists here have success¬
fully domesticated the elk.
The sable, prized for its fur, had at one
time become very rare in Russia because
of uncontrolled trapping. Some twenty
years ago the annual number of pelts
brought in had fallen to about 10,000.
Thanks to protective measures, about a .
hundred thousand sables are now being
trapped each year. The Barguzin Reserve
on the northern shores of Lake Baikal has
done- much to revive sable stocks.
Other reserves in the forest zone have
also been instrumental in preserving and
increasing the country's wild life. One
example is the Voronezh Reserve which is
noted for its beaver.
The Khoper Reserve, situated in the
lowlands around the Khoper River (central
area of Russian in Europe) abounds in the
Russian desman, a mole shrew. The
Khoper and Oka Reserves are now helping
to stock other areas with this animal.
There are also several desert reserves.
One, the Badhiz Reserve in southern Turk¬
menistan, has 150 to 200 of the now rare
kulans (wild asses). "
Extensive forest areas are included in
the Tigrovaya Balka Reserve at the
confluence of the Vaksh and Pyandzh
Rivers, to the north of the Afghanistan
frontier. Many Bokhara deer are found
there and sometimes tigers now rare in
Central Asia come from Afghanistan.
At the Crimean Reserve which has an
area of some 75,000 acres, there are over
1,500 red deer. The large concentration
of deer, however, is beginning to have
adverse effects on the rejuvenation of the
forest in this area, for the animals eat the
young saplings.
The Caucasian Reserve, where there are
many chamois, has done much to restore
the Caucasian aurochs which became
extinct locally in the first quarter of this
century. At the Black Sea Reserve near
the mouth of the Dnieper, there are many
species of local and migratory birds.
These are simply a few examples of the
different types of reserves found in the
Soviet Union. Proposals have been en¬
dorsed by the Presidium of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences to increase the
reserves to about one hundred.
The above facts are taken from a text
prepared for The Unesco Courier by
L. K. Shaposhnikov, General Secretary of
the Commission for Nature Protection,
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences.
Photo © Dragesco
THE CAMARGUE, a triangular area covering some 60 square miles in the south of
France, is bounded by the delta of the River Rhone and the sea. It is hemmed around
by dikes built a century or so ago in the hope of making possible the tilling of the
marshy soil, at that time criss-crossed by the many arms of the river. Now flooded,
now rising again above water-level, it is a flat, salt-caked expanse, parched and dried,
which attracts multitudes of water fowl and other migratory birds. Two hundred
different species cross it every year, often making stops between the breeding periods
(104 species build their nests there). Hundreds of thousands of birds fly over it on
their way south. In the Camargue there are the nests of two to three thousand pink
flamingos (below). The white egret (above) the heron and the delightful avocet, are
also found there, and migratory aquatic birds of North Europe are frequent visitors.
Photo © Le Campion
13

LAST REFUGE (Continued)
I. U.C.N.
SEA PARROTS, as puffins are sometimes called, are among the many types of sea birds which find sanctuary in north-west France, on the Seven
Islands Reserve which lies at the entrance to the Channel. A careful watch is kept on this sanctuary and as a result birds have been encouraged to
flock there in large numbers during the mating season. Unusual species which make their homes there besides the puffins are the Bassan gannets.
The idea of preserving the wonderlands
of nature for the benefit bf all is an
American inspiration. The United States
set the example by establishing the first
national park in the world, the Yellowstone
Park. Today the U.S. National Parks
System protects an area of over 24 million
acres, including 28 national parks and
79 natural monuments. The parks are
equipped with excellent touristic facilities
and are visited each year by more than
50 million people in search of tranquillity
and relaxation, which means, in some cases,
the parks are suffering from an excess of
popularity. Even in a country which is
fully aware of the value of its great natural
sites, constant effort is required to protect
them. Control of other areas, such as the
national forests and animal sanctuaries
(National Wildlife Refuges) is exercised in
a well-balanced way so as to ensure
rational use of the resources. In the latter,
wildfowl are given every facility to multiply.
Canada was quick to follow the lead of
the United States and it was one of the first
countries to set up a national parks' system.
The oldest Canadian National Park, Jasper,
covers about 4,200 square miles. The pro¬
vincial parks are as rich, and often as
large, as those administered nationally.
Among Latin America's outstanding
reserves are the Rancho Grande National
Park of Venezuela, the Nahuel Huapi Park
in Argentina and the Barrow Colorado Park
in Panama. Mexico is now making
strenuous efforts to prevent its natural
beauties from being despoiled. Reserves,
varying in size and degree of protection,
exist in nearly all the Latin American
republics, including the countries of the
Caribbean region.
Among the best-known reserves and
national parks of Asia and the Pacific area
14
are two concerned almost exclusively with
protecting a single rare species threatened
with extinction: Oedjong Koelon, in In¬
donesia, for the protection of a few dozen
surviving specimens of the one-horned
rhinoceros of the Sunda Isles; and the
Kasiranga reserve in Assam, India, for the
protection of the Indian counterpart of this
rhinoceros, of which less than 500 specimens
still remain.
Japan protects its spectacular national
sites; Hawaii, its exotic vegetation and
fantastic geological formations; Australia,
its remarkable natural features and its
marsupials kangaroos, koala bears, Tas-
manian wolves and devils, and the curious
duck-billed platypus, an aquatic egg-laying
mammal; New Zealand, its rare birds and
magnificent natural scenery, and what
remains of its ancient forests after the havoc
wrought by mammals imported into this
country, where none originally existed.
Despite its small area, Belgium has
several nature reserves chosen to preserve
different kinds of countryside from sand
dunes to the mountain scenery of the
Ardennes as well as a number of bird
sanctuaries.
The Dutch have always been in the
vanguard where the protection of nature is
concerned. Art and nature are combined
in the "'Hoge Voluwe", where the fine Van
Gogh museum stands in about 15,000 acres
of cultivated parkland, with stags, deer and
sheep roaming freely. In other places,
dunes and wooded slopes are conserved and
bird sanctuaries are maintained.
The United Kingdom has both national
parks open to visitors and strict nature
reserves intended primarily for scientific
research. These are used as open-air
laboratories by teams of biologists studying
problems relating to soil and water
conservation, agriculture or pasturage.
In the Federal Republic of Germany,
reserves total between 345,000 and 395,000
acres. The Saar alone possesses over 700
natural sites and nature monuments. The
German Democratic Republic has 210
nature reserves, 350 protected sites designed
mainly for tourist interest, and 10,000
classified monuments.
The problem of preserving the natural
beauties of their lands has for long been a
preoccupation of Poland and Czecho¬
slovakia. Their many nature reserves
include the Tatra Mountains national park,
lying on the borderland between the two
countries.
The Swiss tradition of nature protection
goes back to the Middle Ages; as early as
the 13 th century steps had already been
taken to preserve certain forests, and the
first game preserve dates from 1542. The
Swiss of today regard their National Park
as a heritage which they hope to keep
intact. It was in Switzerland that the idea
of nature protection on an international
scale was first conceived.
Italy has the splendid Gran Paradiso park
boasting a magnificent herd of ibexes.
Wild goats are protected in Spain's reserves;
in Greece men are striving to protect the
former reputed haunts of the gods.
Yugoslavia has set up an impressive
number of protected areas and the
Scandinavian countries are now wisely
planning to safeguard some beauty spots
which, though not in immediate danger,
may eventually suffer from the effects of
population growth and expansion.
