POSTAGE STAMPS HELP
TO FIGHT
rtA¿jtjmuft fay&ndn/
by C.W. Hill
MEM
Peru is carrying
out a National
Education Plan
one of whose most
important as- ,
pects is rural
ed ucation . As
sixty-fou r per
cent of the popu¬
lation is rural,
the Government's
efforts are direc¬
ted towards the
inhabitants of the
sierra and the
montana rural
children, adoles¬
cents and adults,
in the school, the
home and the community. Compulsory tax
stamps, like the one shown here, help to pay
for these Peruvian educational campaigns.
H'l'l*M'h1M#li7Jii
[ÄMPÄHHÄdeEDUEÄCAOdeADULTDS f
Carrying out large-scale campaigns for adult
education is no easy task in a country like
Brazil where there are immense tracts with a
population of about one per square mile. But
this is what the Government has been doing
since 1947 after statistics revealed that over
50 per cent of the adult population was illiterate.
Deciding on a mass solution, the Government
initiated a plan for opening 10,000 even¬
ing schools for adult and adolescent illitera¬
tes. Stamp symbolizes light of education.
CORREOSOELECUADOR
AEREO
S/2
Stam p from
Ecuador, show¬
ing an Indian
being taught the
alphabet, recalls
that the coun¬
try's lite racy
efforts are d i-
rected specially
towards Andes'
villages where
most of Indians
(about 55",, of
country's popu¬
lation) live. In
1942 journalists
launched a na-
ri tion-wide fight
against illiteracy ,
using press and radio to give campaign wide
publicity. Two series of stamps were issued
to support the scheme. A 1950 census reveal¬
ed encouraging progress in literacy rates.
Removing the bandage of illiteracy
symbolizes, on this Mexican stamp,
the large-scale educational effort
made by Mexico in recent years.
One of the most remarkable achieve¬
ments was the nation-wide cam¬
paign initiated and developed bet¬
ween 1943 and 1946 by Jaime
Torres Bodet. Minister of Education
who later (1948-53) became Direc¬
tor General of Unesco. (See page 22)
CRRPRHfl HRCiOWRL PRO RLFRBETIZR£
CORREOS O
MEXICO Z
TALLERES OE IMP OE EST Y VALORES
££r-***-*ï he postage stamps of a nation are a picture gallery of its glories. They
I depict in miniature its famous men and women, the great events of its
history, its organizations, its industries, its natural wonders", writes
Mr. Arthur E. Summerfield, Postmaster-General of the United States of America,
in his foreword to a booklet published recently by the American Post Office.
With this assessment of the general educational value of postage stamps there
can be little quarrel, and it is therefore not surprising that stamps should also be
used for purposes even more precisely educational in character. Among such
purposes have been the raising of funds for schools and universities, the dissemina¬
tion of road safety propaganda, the encouragement of friendly correspondence
between young people of different countries, and, perhaps most important of all,
the attack on illiteracy.
In Mexico, 43 % of all men, women and children over six years of age are illiter¬
ate. Because of the increase in her population the number of Mexico's illiterates
was reduced only imperceptibly in forty years, from 7,636,000 in 1900 to
7,544,000 in 1940. Immediately after the Second World War the Mexican Govern¬
ment began a new attack on this recalcitrant problem and one of its first steps
was to issue, in November, 1945, a series of twelve postage stamps, all in the
same striking design. Inscribed Campaña Nacional pro Alfabetización the
stamps showed hands removing the bandage of illiteracy from the eyes of an adult.
Quitemos la venda! exclaimed the slogan at the top of the stamps. A year
later a single Mexican issue celebrated the progress of the campaign, its design
showing a man, no longer blindfold, learning the alphabet.
Brazil is another country where illiteracy among adults is an urgent problem.
In 1900 over six million Brazilians above the age of 15 could neither read nor
write and in 1940, because of the increase in the country's population, the number
of illiterates had risen to over thirteen million. As part of its plan to reduce
illiteracy among adults Brazil issued in 1949 a 60-centavos stamp inscribed
Campanha de Educaçâo de Adultos, and symbolizing the light of education.
Among other South American countries which have issued stamps to help in
the fight against illiteracy is Ecuador, whose 1953 series depicted various educa¬
tional activities among children and adults. In Peru a special 3-centavos stamp
was issued in 1950 in aid of the National Education Fund. Its design symbolized
the light of knowledge, and the use of the stamp on all mail was made compulsory.
Certain countries have considered that a simplification of their alphabet would
reduce illiteracy by making reading and writing easier to learn. Thirty years ago
Kemal Atatiirk adopted a Latinized alphabet for Turkey and a series of stamps
was issued in 1938 to mark the tenth anniversary of the change. Their design
portrayed Kemal Ataturk himself teaching the new alphabet, an action which may
have to be emulated in other countries before illiteracy is vanquished.
Ataturk, founder of the Turkish
Republic, initiated a striking edu¬
cational reform in I 928 when he
introduced the Latin alphabet
into his country to replace Arabic
script. On this stamp Ataturk
Is depicted teaching the new
alphabet. Within a short time
over two million more people
had learned to read and write.
Since then Turkey's efforts to
vanquish illiteracy have been con¬
centrated in its 40,000 villages.
29
