THE DAYS OF CULTURAL
TRIBALISM ARE OVER
K.L.M., Amsterdam
by Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Vice-President of India
he days of cultural tribalism are over;
we no more have separate cultural
universes. East and West have come
together, never to part again, and they
must settle down in some kind of
peaceful coexistence which will eventually grow into
active, friendly co-operation. That is essential for the
future of the world, the welfare of the world itself.
There are many ideas about East and West which are
somewhat misleading in character. There are some
people who argue that the East is mystically minded and
the West is empirical in its outlook, one is more religious,
the other is more scientific, but these distinctions have
arisen only in recent times. China has contributed to us
many great scientific inventions: the compass, vaccination,
paper, printing silk. India has contributed logic, meta¬
physics, grammar, mathematics. It is in the last three
hundred years that the Asian countries lagged behind,
and Western nations made spectacular achievements in
science and technology, so that the contrast is emphasized
by the material backwardness of the Eastern nations and
the progressive character of Western nations.
This is true only for a few centuries; I remember a
great statement made by Lord Acton who tells us he who
looks at the last three hundred years overlooking the last
three thousand has no proper historical perspective. East
and West are not categories indicative of different forms
of consciousness or" different systems of culture. They
are aspects of every human being religious and scientific,
spiritual and rational. These represent two sides of
human nature, but sometimes the emphasis is more on
the religious side, sometimes more on the scientific side.
The distinction is only one of distribution of emphasis.
We have great traditions of Idealism from the time of
Socrates and Plato down to our own day, and we have
also great scientific achievements made by Eastern
nations. We should not therefore look upon these
expressions, these large generalizations, as more than
working hypotheses.
Asia is awake, Africa is on the move
But now the East is in ferment; Asia is awake, Africa
is on the move. They both wish to throw off the dead
hand of the past and join in the stream of human
progress. There have been political and economic revolu¬
tions and also revolutions of awakened desires, of roused
hopes. If these longings are not satisfied, if we are not
able to bring about at least a partial fulfilment of these
very legitimate aims that Eastern nations today have,
there will be no security for peace in this world. If we
want to have enduring peace it is essential for us to
emphasize the desirability of satisfying these aspirations
of the nations of Asia and Africa.
I am glad to note that Unesco has contributed a great
deal by way of giving scientific advice and technical
'assistance to the nations who are demanding develop¬
ment. Yet the difficulties are there, and greater atten¬
tion will have to be paid if this Organization is to be
global in its character not merely in its name but in its
content. This global character will have
to be reflected, at all levels, in all matters
major and minor.
There is another project: the extension
of education in Asian regions. Literacy is
Cont'd
on
next page

^D^^HMMMHW| A work of art is
the messenger of
the hidden lotus
perfume, the in¬
visible flowering
of the spirit
from a Sanscrit text
In the ruins of religious edifices and
sometimes In museums, like the one
(left) at Pnom-Penh, Cambodia, flow¬
ers, fruit or incense are placed
in pious homage before statues,
fragments or even empty pedestals.
Werner Bischof © Magnum Photos
essential, we must acquire knowledge, we must learn how
we can keep ourselves healthy, literate, modernist and
progressive. We suffer from disabilities, but I should like
to stress that merely to attain literacy is not enough.
Plato said in Charmides: "It is not life according- to
knowledge which makes men act rightly and be happy,
not even if it be knowledge of all the sciences, but one
science only, that of good and evil". Science and techno¬
logy, medicine and surgery, industry and commerce will
provide us with the framework of our society, but without
the knowledge of good and evil they will fail us. That
knowledge is the science which enables us to take interest
in the pursuit of truth and in curing the ills of suffering
humanity.
One man's suffering is all humanity's
Our intellectual achievements are great and our tech¬
nological advance has been outstanding, yet we live
on the brink of fear, at the edge of a precipice and
in perpetual fear of falling over it. We do need therefore
that this Organization should give ampler meaning to
certain common concepts which belong to all traditions of
the world the dignity of man, the need for compassion,
understanding.
We constantly speak of the inward presence of the
divine in the human being, and all the great religions are
an invitation to human beings to grow and change their
nature; though our nature may be limited, we are capable
of intimate unlimited developments. They tell us that
human nature need not be what it happens to be at the
present moment. . There is a capacity for self-renewal in
the human being. This assertion of the spirit in man
is the hope of the world.
Have we not rid ourselves of many pestilences which
devastated humanity, of cannibalism and head-hunting?
There was a time when we thought that God would be
pleased if we sacrificed children on the altar. We thought
religion would progress and expand by massacres and
inquisitions. We have grown out of all those ideas, so
also the idea that War is essential is something that we
can outgrow. There is no doubt that if human nature
asserts itself, that if the spirit in man is given scope, this
greatest pestilence of all ages will also be driven out by
human effort.
Man is invincible if his spirit asserts itself. He has
endurance and the capacity for compassion. He can
stand up and say, '"I will not bow down to the cir¬
cumstances, I am more powerful than the material forces
which confront us". Man is higher than the forces which
overwhelm him. If this principle of the inward presence
of spirit is taken by us as an assertion of human dignity,
we will realize the interwovenness of human life. We will
take seriously the Christian injunction to bear one an¬
other's burdens.
If one man suffers, the whole of humanity suffers, for
all humanity has become one today. It is to the develop¬
ment of the oneness of mankind that We must make the
great contribution. We are passing through trying times,
our civilization is being tested; it may be destroyed or
renewed. What will happen to it depends on ourselves,
not on our stars nor upon the impersonal forces which
surround us. It depends on the spirit of man, on the will
of man to take these things seriously. I have no doubt
that we shall march forward and that Unesco will
contribute to that cultural solidarity which is the
essential basis of enduring peace.
