THE ROOTS OF PREJUDICE
How children come to have racial bias
by Arnold M. Rose
(3)
In this issue we continue ihe serialization begun in June of "The Roots of Prejudice",
published by Unesco in its series "The Race Question in Modern Science". (See
bibliography page 35). In this article, Professor Rose discusses transmission of prejudice
to children, and the "Scapegoat" theory which he compares to the desire to kick a
chair on the part of people frustrated or stopped from doing something they want to do.
It is customary in countries where racism prevails to
assume that it is natural and inevitable that one group
should disdain or look up to another. We have already
seen that prejudice is frequently & result of deliberate
propaganda: yet the fact that it is often found in fairly
young children gives rise to the incorrect assumption that
it is inborn. Actually, prejudice is learned. Studies show
that it can be learned by children as young as four years
old.
The teaching of prejudice takes place in the same
informal manner in which other aspects of non-material
culture are taught. Children may be taught prejudice by
their parents, their teachers, their friends, their Sunday
school teachers. Parents are the most important
influence. While some parents do not want their children
to be prejudiced, others teach prejudice to their children
because they themselves grew up to believe that it was
proper and natural. Parents teach prejudice to their
children by their own behaviour, by their expressions of
disgust, by forbidding certain associations, by their choice
of observations, by their indications as to what is humo¬
rous or degrading, and so on.
Sometimes older people will even make fun of children
to get them to be prejudiced. But much of the time older
people do not realize that they are teaching prejudice
to children. At the dinner table, while the children are
listening, a mother will tell her husband about her
troubles with the Negro or Polish maid. Not only do the
children absorb this, but they also come to imitate her
behaviour towards the maid, which unconsciously
expresses her prejudice in almost every act.
At church or Sunday school, Christian children may
learn from the Bible story that "the Jews" killed Christ.
Biblical scholars point out that only a few Jews were
against Jesus, and that most of them thought He was a
good religious teacher. It was the Romans who punished
people at that time and they believed He was dangerous
to their government. But Sunday school teachers do not
always point out these facts.. To make matters much
worse, they sometimes identify the people of ancient
Palestine with the Jews living in present-day Europe and
America; and transfer the blame for a crime that hap¬
pened two thousand years ago on to people who are living
today. Other religious and folk teaching has similar
myths which promote prejudice in children.
Some school text-books help to create prejudice. Sur¬
veys in several countries have revealed that text-books,
especially history books, give derogatory descriptions of
people of other nations and disparage minority groups
within the nation itself. An immigrant group, for
instance, is not usually described in terms of what its
members hold dear and consider proper. Rather, the
immigrant group is judged by the standards of the
majority group. People may be loyal, hard-working,
kindly and ambitious, but if they are poor and ignorant
and have not yet learned the customs of their adopted
nation, they are looked down on in some text-books as
well as by most of the native-born people.
24
Older children teach prejudice to younger ones.
Children quickly develop rules about all sorts of things,
and each member of the neighbourhood gang is expected
to follow the rules. If prejudice is one of the "rules" in
the community, older children are sometimes even more
forceful than parents in teaching prejudice to younger
children. Sometimes they make up stories about how
dangerous or stupid members of minority groups are.
These stories are imaginative child's play, but their effect
can be very powerful in determining future attitudes.
One study of prejudice among adults showed that quite
a number of people claimed that their prejudice arose
from bad childhood experiences. But when the stories
were examined more closely, it Was found that the
incidents were not known to have actually happened, but
where mostly scare stories circulating among the local
children. The number of crimes committed by Negroes,
Mexicans, and other minorities is actually much smaller
than many people think.
Like games, swear words,
and good or bad manners
Thus we see how children, and adults, learn prejudice.
Like most other things, they learn it from * each
other, and especially is it true that the. old teach the
young. As it passes on from generation to generation, it
changes a little. It comes to be applied to new minority
groups, and once in a while it ceases to be directed at
what were formerly minority groups. . Sometimes it grows
stronger and sometimes it gets weaker. But it is always
taught in the same 'way as games, good manners, swear
words, or anything else in the non-material culture.
The teaching of prejudice is, of course, not inevitable.
Some parents, even those who live in dominantly prej¬
udiced cultures, bring up their children to be broad-
minded and free from prejudice. Also, children and
adults who have been taught prejudice can un-learn it.
Wise parents, teachers, friends, and books can explain
the errors and dangers of prejudice. General education
or a religious or humanitarian impulse can lead to a
self-examination which sometimes dissolves prejudice.
Thus far we have been considering prejudice in its
rational aspects as serving a certain purpose, or as a
result of ignorance or as a kind of tradition which is
learned. There is also an irrational function which it
fulfils, for it apparently satisfies a psychological need.
This is a very important factor, for without it prejudice
might die a natural death after a few generations, if
people realized that they were dupes of a few persons
who exploited prejudice or that they were blind followers
of a harmful tradition.
People have different theories as to what constitutes
the psychological basis of prejudice. Some of the theories
have been disproved by scientific studies by psychologists
and sociologists, yet are still believed by many people.

One such idea is that prejudice always arises instinc¬
tively against people who are different. This may be
called the "dislike of differences" theory. When some
people are asked why they dislike Negroes, they will say
it is because Negroes are so black and dirty, or because
Negroes are dangerous. Others will say they do not dis¬
like Negroes, but that you cannot treat a Negro as you
can a white man, because a Negro is like a child or an
minimal and cannot act like a man. All these statements
are expressions of prejudice. They assume that there is
something about the minority group which naturally
causes the majority group to regard it as inferior.
There are several things wrong with the "dislike of
differences" theory:
It does not explain the stereotyping that goes with
prejudice. Many Negroes are no more dangerous or
¿iirty than many white men. Most Negroes are not
even black, and a few are so light-skinned that they
can pass as whites. If Negroes do not always behave
like fully responsible people, that in itself is partly
due to prejudice. Even if the prejudiced person main¬
tains that most Negroes have these undesirable traits,
he will admit that -there are exceptions. Yet he is
prejudiced against the exceptions too.
There are a lot of differences among people against
which there is no prejudice. And there are many
places in the world where people of different races and
religions live together without prejudice. Red hair is
just as striking a characteristic as dark skin, and yet
few people have prejudice against people with red hair.
The "dislike of differences" theory does not explain
the fact that prejudiced people make contradictory
statements about those against whom they are prej¬
udiced. Prejudiced people say they dislike Jews
because the latter are "always trying to push them¬
selves into places where they are not wanted", and
also because "Jews are clannish; they keep to them¬
selves". Prejudiced people observe that "Negroes are
lazy, and have no ambition" and yet they are the first
to strike down a Negro who tries to secure education
or a better job or home.
Another largely fallacious, theory of prejudice is that
people become prejudiced because of unpleasant exper¬
iences with members of minority groups. It is true that
bad experience with a person can make one dislike
that person ever afterwards. But- why should the dislike
be turned to all people with the same colour of skin or
same accent? If a fat person does one some harm,
one does not forever thereafter hate all fat people. If one
has a quarrel with a member of the Baptist church, one
does not feel the need to fight all Baptists. Obviously, a
lot more is needed to explain prejudice.
Kicking a chair in anger,
or the 'scapegoat', theory
One of the most important steps in understanding
prejudice was taken when the psychologists develop¬
ed the "frustration-aggression" theory. In simpler
language this is called the "scapegoat" theory. It is based
on a great deal of sound scientific knowledge. Studies of
human behaviour have shown, that some people are
steadily prevented from doing the things they want to
do and are consequently not happy. This is called
"frustration". Then they are likely to strike at something
or try to make somebody else unhappy. That is, they
become "aggressive". When, as often happens, a person
cannot hit back at the specific thing that makes him
unhappy, he finds a substitute. . Among the ancient
Hebrews, there was a periodical ceremony of driving into
the desert a goat "burdened with the sins of Israel" to
perish there. We still use the term "scapegoat" to refer
to an innocent substitute who gets punished for someone's
troubles or anger.
Everyone uses a scapegoat. An occasional action, when
we are stopped from doing something we want to do or
become angry for some reason, is to kick a chair or other
convenient object or throw something on the floor. Small
children do this frequently. Little harm is done if the
scapegoat is not a living creature, but sometimes a man
will beat a dog or a child, not so much because of what
the dog or child did as because the man is angry about
something else. One who is reprimanded by his employer
will sometimes come home and pick a fight with his wife.
The Unesco Courier. August 1958
He cannot talk back to his employer so he vents his anger
upon his wife. The dog, the child, and the wife are
scapegoats, and they suffer because they are scapegoats.
Occasionally a whole group of people, perhaps a whole
country, feels frustrated. Perhaps such people do not
know what the trouble is, or perhaps they do know but
there is nothing that can be done about it. They may
feel frustrated by bad economic conditions, unemploy¬
ment, low pay, as many Americans in the Southern
States have been for a long time. Or they may feel
frustrated by failure to become the leading nation of the
world, as the Germans were after losing World War L
Nothing they do seems to bring prosperity or glory to
their land, and so they take it out on a scapegoat. It
is frequently a low grade politician who says "Here is
your scapegoat. It's the cause of your trouble. Kick it
and you'll feel better." According to the theory we are
considering, this is why there has been so much prejudice
and violence against Negroes in the American South, and
against Jews in Nazi Germany.
Learning to put up with
inevitable frustrations
In any country, some people feel more frustrated than
others. Some people are unable to earn even the
basic necessities of life. Others get these, but fail to
achieve higher ambitions. Some children are frustrated
by not doing well at games, or by not getting enough
affection or support from their parents. Some children
feel that they are unfairly treated by teachers. There are
various ways of meeting frustrations:
By trying to eliminate the frustrations.
By keeping away from the things that are frustrating.
+ By understanding the inevitable character of the frus¬
tration and deciding that it is necessary to put up
with it, at least for a while.
By refusing to realize the cause of the frustration, and
taking it out on some scapegoat.
Certain politicians benefit by leading people to scape¬
goats. One thing that helped Hitler to secure power in
Germany was his persuading the German people that the
Jews were the cause of all their troubles. In South Africa
politicians are sometimes elected to office after a cam¬
paign devoted merely to raising white people's fears about
Negroes. Some writers and radio speakers become popular
and wealthy by telling people to hate the bankers, or the
English, or the Jews. This may sound odd to anyone who
looks at the situation objectively; but it does not sound
odd to people who have troubles and do not know what
to do about them. They feel a little better by having a
scapegoat, just as each one of us feels better by kicking
or pounding something when we are angry.
Thus, people often follow the politicians who make
them feel better. But having a scapegoat does not really
solve any problems. In fact, people are steered away
from the solution of their real problems when they have
a scapegoat. The only one who benefits is the politician
or the writer, as he gains power over the whole people by
being the leader in kicking the helpless scapegoat.
During times of business depression, when many people
are unhappy and frustrated, there is an increase in
violence against Negroes in the Southern States of the
United States. The big depression of the 1930s saw the
birth, in the United States, of 114 organizations which
spent their time and money in spreading hate against
Jews. Similar organizations were started by pro-Germans
in all the free countries of Europe some of them by
agents of Nazi Germany, and others by people who hoped
to benefit by German domination of the world.
The leaders of these organizations hoped to get control
of the governments of their countries by following the
anti-Semitic propaganda- that had been so successful in
Germany. They did not achieve all their aims Hitler
was finally defeated but they did succeed in creating
hatred and fear of Jews. It is known that many of these
same people are now waiting for the next depression or
the next war to come along so that they can finish their
work. They know how to use frustrating conditions for
their own advantage.
To be continued next month
25
