T NATURE
by Maurice Burton
A Belgian meteorologist reports an
increased electrical conductivity
of the atmosphere around his
laboratory at Liège, and suggests that
this may lead, among other things, to
a lessening of atmospheric nitrogen
fixed by lightning flashes, thus depriv¬
ing the earth of one of its natural
fertilizers. This has occurred simul¬
taneously with the testing of atomic
weapons. If his worst fears are realiz¬
ed, then we have added, and quite
unexpectedly, yet one more blow at
the fertility of the soil.
Truly, the conservationists are
fighting a losing battle. Already we
have polluted the rivers, cut down
the forests, cast unwelcome oil on the
waters of the oceans, reduced to dan¬
ger point the number of whales in
the oceans, and brought to a ludicrous
remnant one of the living marvels of
the world, the African Big Game. To
name these is merely to abstract a
few from the long catalogue of blows
which we have irresponsibly aimed at
the thin skin of soil covering the
land-masses, upon which the survival
of the human race is dependent.
One of the suggested palliatives to
offset this catastrophic series of
events is to convert the teeming mil¬
lions of people to eating plankton.
Even Nebuchadnezzar was not brought
so low as this.
To many of us, enjoying the high
standards of living in Western Eu¬
rope, North America and elsewhere,
this may appear to be a picture
unwarrantably overdrawn. Time
alone will prove whether or not it is
correct. If it is not, then the victory
will be owed in great measure to the
small band of conservationists, in
every country, who are fighting this
losing battle, refusing to admit defeat.
And if final victory is won it will add
yet one more instance to the annals
of history of desperate rearguard
actions, with small local successes,
leading eventually to total victory.
It may not be unprofitable at this
point to ask: What does conservation
mean? With it are linked two other
words that are becoming increas¬
ingly heard, "protection" and "pre¬
servation". It is, perhaps, in some
ways unfortunate that these two
words should be better known to the
general public than "conservation",
for they tend to imply restriction of
liberties, prohibition or inhibition of
the rights of the individual to inter¬
fere with the land, and its products,
which history has shown belong first
and foremost to anyone powerful
enough to take them.
Conservation, in its wider view,
means making the best use, by wise
management, of all natural resources.
Expressed thus, the plea for conser¬
vation would be readily accepted by
all but the hopelessly selfish and pur¬
blind. The difficulty arises, as usual,
in the application of the principle,
for where a natural source of wealth,
be it a forest, a species of animal,
a source of water or the use to which
an area of land shall be put, is in
question, there are, and always will
be, conflicting interests. These are of
many kinds, and their impact varies
from one part of the world to an¬
other. The more important are econo¬
mic, political and religious, with sport
as a close fourth. They all have
the advantage of tradition, and they
all offer the prospect of immediate
gain, as against the long-term pro¬
fits, which is very nearly all that a
policy of conservation can offer. The
world is not yet on the verge of
starvation, so it is difficult to argue
anything but the seemingly doctri¬
naire view that the ground is being
cut from under the feet of genera¬
tions unborn. And this, against the
powerful arguments of present gain,
is as the proverbial voice crying in
the wilderness.
Even if it were untrue that the
stakes are as high as world-wide
malnutrition, they would still be
high enough. The present trend in
technology is towards a, higher stan¬
dard of material comfort at less cost
in working hours. Such an end
cannot be other than wholly desir¬
able; but if the leisure so gained is to
be spent in a world bereft of its
amenities we shall have gained the
world but lost the soul thereof. Under
the heading of amenities we have at
the moment a fair yardstick by which
to gauge what it is we stand to lose.
One of the social phenomena of today
is that, as the wild fauna and flora of
the world are shrinking before our
eyes, we see an unprecedented popu¬
larity for films, television and sound
broadcasts, books, lectures and news¬
paper articles on animals and travel.
If the present trend goes on unchecked
the time cannot be far off when there
will be no conspicuous wild animals
to see, and no travel worth the while.
It may be that this very contradic¬
tion is itself symptomatic, that deep
down in the intuitive mind of the
mass of the people is an uneasiness
that something is going from the
world. It may not be an exagger¬
ation, perhaps, to suggest that the
very popularity of these two subjects
arises from the feeling that here is
something that must be enjoyed
before it is too late. If this interpret¬
ation is Incorrect, then we have only
one other to postulate: that people
with leisure find wild life, plant or
animal, or in the form of scenery, a
most desirable asset. Whichever way
we look at it, therefore, there is
potent argument in favour of seeking
to conserve these amenities.
There is, also, in this contradiction
a measure of hope, for it connotes a
PRIMITIVE PEOPLES depended on animal
life for their livelihood but as their weapons
did not have the killing capacity of modern
firearms, the biological balance between man
and his prey remained unbroken. When
reservoir of support for the efforts of
the conservationists, if the means can
be found for rallying it. Already,
throughout the world, governments
are being made more alive to the need
for conservation, although all too
often their pre-occupation with pre¬
sent expediencies precludes their
wholehearted support. Often, too,
the clamour from conflicting interests
deafens them to what, under other
circumstances, would be the clear
voice of reason. For the most part,
then, such victories as have been
gained have been' as the result of
pressure by the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature or by
national or local organizations. These
flourish or wilt according to the
degree of popular education achieved
in any nation, region or local area.
In this education, three things
more especially must be stressed:
1) that the losses among the wild
fauna and flora have been accelerated
within the last century, and that
this acceleration is increasing; 2) that
fundamentally the problem of con¬
servation is biological, using this
word in its widest sense; and 3) that
with the exploration and application
of biological principles loss can be
turned into profit and, what is more
Important, it is possible to have your
cake as well as eat It.

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
3 v Í /
I.U.C.N.
hunting becomes a slaughter, however, It
threatens to upset the delicate balance of
Nature. Zebras and antelopes have been
shot down In wholesale numbers in Africa
(above) to the point where certain species
have become extinct. Two examples are
Burchell's zebra (the last one died In London
in 1909) and the Quagga, another member
of the zebra family, striped only on the head
and neck. Quaggas were hunted by the Boers
In South Africa, first for sport and later to
provide' meat for export, and the last one died
In Amsterdam in 1883. The problem is still
with us. In 1953, 380,000 antelope skins
were exported from the Ivory Coast alone.
Within the space available here, it
is not possible to do more than illus¬
trate, in the barest terms, these
three points, as, indeed, it is not
possible to speak except in the mini¬
mum, and probably inadequate, terms
of so vast and deep a problem as
conservation. To do the second of
these in a way that would convey a
real sense of the problem involved
would take us into consideration of
soil erosion and the creation of dust
bowls, the loss of forests and its effect
on the rainfall and water tables, over¬
grazing, over-fishing, as well as the
more localized effects of introducing
alien plants and animals, the killing
off of predators, ill-advised methods
of pest control and the like. On the
three main points upon which the
world as a whole needs instruction
and information, single examples
must suffice.
The first of these can be best ex¬
pressed in the simple arithmetical
expression put forth by Harper and
Allen on the vanishing animals of the
world. They show that during the
last two thousand years, 106 large
mammals have become extinct. Of
these, 33 were lost during the first
1,800 years. During the next 100 years
33 more were lost, and during the last
50 years 40 have been destroyed.
Even this does not take account of the
very large number now either on the
verge of extinction or surviving in
drastically reduced numbers. And it
takes account only of the mammals.
The second illustrates what is
perhaps the greatest difficulty
in conservation, that in dealing
with living organisms, whether plant
or animal, and of whatever size, any
interference produces a chain reaction
the effects of which are difficult to
appreciate except as the result of long
and tedious study. The killing off of
crocodiles seems on the face of it a
desirable thing, and their skins make
a marketable leather. Yet as Cott
has now shown, the repercussions are
likely to be adverse and widespread.
The hippopotamus, also, seems to
serve little purpose, except that of
interest in a large and curiously-built
animal, until we realize that its
excrement, by a chain of ecological
reactions was responsible for the rich
populations of fish in the African
rivers. All these, and many besides,
could be quoted to show how indiscri¬
minate killing, either for commercial
gain, or for the mere lust of slaughter,
is depriving us of amenities or, more
important in the practical values of
the future, of essential food supplies.
The normal effects of human settle¬
ment, make enough inroads without
our adding to them unnecessarily.
For the third point, one cannot do
better than quote what must now be
a familiar example, the story of the
Pribilov seals. These, formerly teem¬
ing in their millions in the North
Pacific, were reduced by sealing to a
dangerously low point. The zoolo¬
gists discovered, in studying the
breeding habits, that each old bull
gathered around him on the beaches
a harem of cows, while the young
non-breeding males gathered in se¬
parate groups at other points on the
beach. There they made a nuisance
of themselves, by fighting and by
challenging the old bulls, causing
casualties among themselves and
among the new-born pups. It was
recognized then, that by thinning out
these bachelor bulls all the skins
necessary for the trade could be
obtained, with an actual benefit to
the species through obviating the
casualties caused by the bachelors.
Today, the Pribilov seals are back to
their former millions and at the same
time a rich crop of furs is being har¬
vested. It should not be impossible
to find similar solutions to other
problems of conservation.
