NEW ART
BIT I T T\ ¥ TiT f**
U 1 Jj .D 1 N \J>
The visitor who stands at the foot of the Conference
Building at Unesco's new headquarters in Paris
finds himself facing a Wall of folded concrete unlike
any other a wall which, if one must find comparisons,
suggests the large surfaces that the Egyptians designed for
the sun and our modern builders of dams design for the
waters of rivers. And when he turns to the Secretariat
building he must sense in the double row of its supporting
concrete pilotis the power of the thrust that lifts the
building high into the air.
Here, on the left bank of the Seine, an international
team of architects, artists, industrial designers and
builders has conceived and wrought a work whose style
springs directly from the heart of the materials and
techhiques exclusive to our age.
In erecting its headquarters, Unesco sought a functional
solution that could be carried out as economically as
possible rather than the erection of a sumptuous building
designed purely for purposes of prestige. Thus it chose
as basic element the most inexpensive and widely used
of modern building materials^reinforced concrete.
The builders made full use of its essential quality,
plasticity, to devise structures most appropriate to the
functions of Unesco. These are spread over two buildings,
the Secretariat and the Conference building, which are
joined by a broad, low lobby. Third unit in this
architectural ensemble is the building for permanent
delegations.
The Secretariat building presents a striking variation
of a construction technique that has become a standard
one ever since the age of supporting arches and walls
was superseded by the age of structures with supporting
posts and beams. The architects took advantage of the
freedom this allows to use a Y-form with curved prongs
that made it possible both to complete the empty half of.
the semi-circular Place de Fontenoy and to arrange the
offices in simple linear_succession. The common
circulation and service facilities^ (lifts, stairways, wash¬
rooms) are grouped at the meeting-point of the prongs
of the Y.
The chief problems raised by the Conference Building
(to be used for meetings and discussions) were acoustical.
Sound had to break constantly against the surfaces of its
large walls. The solution chosen was a system of walls
and roofing of folded concrete, a material whose plasticity
has made possible a complex set of emergent and re-
entrant angles, which create a succession of folds such as
might be obtained with a metallic sheet. The walls, which
are of unequal height and slope outward, support the
extremities of the roofing. This sloping roofing, set on
two asymetrical levels, rests at its centre on a row of
concrete pillars.
Thus, the plasticity of concrete not only plays a role in
the choice of structure, but also makes for a greater
freedom (of which modern architecture often fails to take
sufficient advantage), and reveals itself in the fashioning
of these buildings, in the forms given to their elements.
The folding of the concrete, the contour of the pillars,
whose forms defy description, appear as unhampered
variations on a material of which anything can be
demanded. The 72 pilotis of the Secretar¬
iat which lift the building five metres
from the ground and create' a marvellous
sweep of space, are' like something out of a
dream; thin and elliptical at the base and
slanting inward, they are extended at the

The Unesco Courier. November 1958
© von Werthern

Ä NEW ART
OF BUILDING **_«
top by consoles, which pair them in veritable porticos.
Following on the aesthetic reaction, a closer study
reveals that these forms in no way represent a striving
for effect. They are the mathematical expression of the
smallest quantity of material to be employed for the
effort required. Indeed, it is the portico structure, applied
to pilotis, that makes it possible for the shafts to be so
slender, and if the ellipse of their base has been placed
perpendicularly to the axis of the upper pillars, this was
done in order to ensure the transversal rigidity of the
building. This dynamic arrangement also made it
possible to set the pilotis six metres apart and thus to
serve aü a proportional unit for the entire building.
In the three buildings, the principle of economy of
material makes for complex forms. Thus, the chief
girders of the Secretariat, like metallic girders, taper at
their extremities in a slope that expresses the falling-off
of the load; the thickness of the slabs which they support
is similarly reduced on the cantilever surface of the
offices, so that the ceilings of these rooms are not
horizontal but slope upward, heightening the effect of
the glass surfaces of the facades.
Flights of fancy for
down-to-earth reasons
Similarly, the pillars of the Conference Building whose
splendid cement shafts justify their comparison to
the columns of antique structures are the result of
strict calculations which required a circular section at
their base and a rectangular one at the apex in order to
ensure the longitudinal rigidity of the edifice.
Moreover, the corrugations in the concrete of this
building have more than an acoustical function. In
stiffening the thin, 35-centimetre wall, they also resist
the static stress of the roof.
All of these forms, whose diversity and elaboration seem
to be the product of flights of imagination, are really the
result of strict economic logic. The inside of the buildings
is a reflection of the outside, for there too the concrete
structures are quite bare, as is testified by the walls of
the conference rooms, by the columns of the delegates'
lobby, or by the lift shaft, which acts as a support in the
central core of the Secretariat building.
The expressiveness of the handsome structural forms
has been enhanced by a metamorphosis of concrete, which,
though used in its crude form, has been raised by skilful
and ingenious techniques to the level of the finest of
materials.
In the case of the girders and pillars, a striated texture
that catches the light was obtained by the use of a
prepared shuttering. The once formless and lifeless
matter was shaped and quickened by the regular outline
of the woodwork. The walls of the Conference Building
are crossed horizontally and vertically by grooves which
divide them into separate elements, and they are
perforated with circular holes. The grooves and holes are
traces of the operations performed at each pouring to
ensure the homogeneity of the concrete and to avoid
distorting the form-work. These markings were not only
willingly accepted but even exploited to bring life to the
characterless surface of the concrete, by testifying that
this was the work of human hands.
What materials were chosen to go along with the rough
concrete of^the structures? Firstly, glass was used as a
thin insulating skin on the principal façades, then Wood,
being inexpensive, was employed for the entire window-
casing (except that of the ground floor, which is of
HOUSE OF GLASS. Between April 1955 when ground was first
broken on the seven-and-a-half acre site of Unesco's new headquarters
and July 1956 when the basic construction work was completed two
striking buildings rose to join the Paris landscape. The Secretariat
aluminium), and finally, travertine, a handsome Italian
stone which offers a contrast in texture and colour with
the concrete. . It was chosen to cover the outer and, in
many cases, even the inner, non-supporting masonry
surfaces. The primary function of the travertine is not
to provide decoration but rather to emphasize the
framework elements, to outline and point them up by
means of contrast. For example, the hollow-brick filling
that closes each of the- side walls of the Secretariat is
faced from top to bottom with a thin layer of travertine,
which is cut' horizontally just above the pilotis, thus
emphasizing the graceful slope and dynamic significance
of the pilotis.
Interplay of light on
vast, glassed facades
In the Conference Building, the role of the two non-
supporting façades is expressed by a facing of tra¬
vertine which, in certain places, reveals the concrete
structural elements. The contrast between the struc¬
tural and non-structural elements is heightened here by a
gap which completely dissociates the folded concrete roof
from the façades, to allow for continual movements of
expansion and contraction of the concrete.
The interiors, which are a counterpart of the façade,
offer the same contrasts. In the lobby of the Secretariat,
the concrete pilotis are enhanced by a grey Norwegian
quartzite floor, and in the large conference hall the same
contrast of colour is provided by the ebony of the
speakers' platform. Rough concrete posts and travertine
walls set each other off on the seventh floor of the

The Unesco Courier. November 1958
M|H
building might well be called the "House of Glass" with its 1,068 win¬
dows set in their array of concrete supports. Glass surfaces on the
three buildings at the headquarters cover a total area of nearly five
acres, the weight of the glass amounting to 175 tons. Photo on right,
Secretariat while the uniform grey of the offices stands
out against the whiteness of the accoustical tiles on the
concrete ceiling.
A tracery of horizontal and vertical lines has brought
intense life to the vast, glassed façades of the Secretariat
Building. This result was achieved except in the case of
the north façade by elements that give the window-
structure a three-dimensional effect, thereby creating
new volumes. Wooden window-frames are kept in place
by a system of prefabricated posts fixed at intervals of
three metres; every second post is set off by a thin vertical
slab of travertine joined at each extremity to louvered
elements of prefabricated concrete sun screens that
extend the cantilever of the floor slab.
The light can in this way play in and out between the
concrete vanes in a myriad fashions and create various
patterns of shadow among this network of interstices,
thus giving an intense animation to the whole. The
combinations of light are made even more complex by the
alternation of the travertine slabs on each floor. The
alternating arrangement practised here is the only
variation on the north façade, where the face not the
edge of the slabs is visible. On the south and east
façades sun filters of tempered grey glass attached to the
concrete elements create a third level in depth.
The same animation has been achieved in another way
by the treatment of stairways and porticos. One example
is the outside stairway of the east façade which is for the
use of firefighters. It is made entirely of identical parts
prefabricated in concrete forms. The fantastic upward
winding of this stairway, which is joined to the building
at each floor, gives a kind of rapid synthesis of curves,
straight lines and diagonals that vie with the harmony
of the façades.
Photos © von Werthern
taken during construction period, shows north-east facade of Sec¬
retariat building (446 feet long). In centre is firefighters' stairway
(see also page 2). Some of the 72 pilotis, set in pairs 20 feet apart,
on which building rests are seen through ground floor windows.
Similarly, on the large piazza of the Avenue de Suffren,
a canopy made up of two curved surfaces rests its
imposing cantilever on two small concrete masses and
continues, on an ampler scale, the themes of the right and
acute angles and of the sweep of the façades.
Vying with the boldest
creations of plastic arts
The architecture of the new Unesco Headquarters is
marked by a freedom, expressed in a wealth of
forms in which functionalism does not' exclude
poetry. The stairway of the east façade and the folded
walls of the Conference Hall have the quality of fanciful
images or of the boldest creations of the plastic arts. It
is also characterized by the attention it pays to a strict
economy of material, which bases its forms on closely
observed calculation and makes them a direct expression
of a dynamic plan. Finally, it is distinguished by its
frankness, which makes for an immediate "readability",
and by its uncompromising employment of materials and
constant use of emphasis and contrast. It is indeed, the
brilliant manifestation of a style.
