THE GENTLE LITTLE GOAT:
ARCH DESPOILER OF THE EARTH
Whenever specialists meet to
consider the question of soil
erosion and its effect on food
production the talk always comes
round to a familiar, domesticated
animal the goat. You might well
wonder what connexion there could
be between such an unremarkable
animal and great world problems like
soil erosion and famine.
Consult an encyclopaedia and you
will probably read: "Goat. A ru¬
minant quadruped of the genus
Capra. The common goat is found
in all parts of the world ; it is easy
to feed and valuable for its milk and
meat. Goat-hair is used for weav¬
ing." At first sight the goat seems to
be an outstandingly useful animal,
making an important contribution to
world food supplies.
Now consult some specialists in the
field of natural resources in particu¬
lar those from Unesco, the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the
International Union for the Conserva¬
tion of Nature and Natural Resources
(I.U.C.N.) and ask them their opin¬
ion of the goat. Their unanimous
conclusion : The goat is man's worst
enemy.
It is largely due to the goat that
the whole of the Mediterranean basin
has been stripped of trees. Not
content with grazing the grass, the
goat tears it up by the roots and does
the same with the seedlings of trees
and shrubs, which never have a
chance to grow and spread.
Worse still, the goat will stand on
its hind legs to get at any low bran¬
ches it can reach and even manages
to climb some trees. No hillside is
too steep to daunt this prodigiously
agile creature, and no seedling, even
if hidden under a small stone,
escapes its voracious appetite. By
thus destroying every trace of vegeta- '
Belin-I. U.C.N, photos
THE DESERT MAKER. It is largely due to the goat that the whole of the Mediterranean basin
has been stripped of its trees. Not content with grazing the grass, the animal tears it up by the
roots and does the same with seedlings of trees and shrubs, which never have a chance to grow
and spread. North Africa in particular has suffered from the goat's insatiable appetite. In the
Atlas Mountains its destruction of trees has exposed the earth to erosion by rain and wind.
by
Raymond Furon
Assistant Director,
Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris
Member of the Académie des Sciences
d'Outre-Mer
tion the goat exposes the naked soil,
especially on hillsides, to rain and
sun which quickly cause violent
erosion.
Much of Spain has been stripped by
flocks of goats and sheep which of
the two animals was the greater
culprit and did the most damage will
never be known and much the
same can be said for the entire
Mediterranean area. Already in Ro¬
man times flocks of sheep and goats
were driven up seasonally into the
wooded mountains, which Were
gradually deforested. In the second
century B.C. no less a thinker than
Cato wrote : "If, owing to lack of
water, you have no natural grass-
grown meadow land, prepare some
dry grazing-ground on the steepest
possible slope." This bad advice was
followed and resulted in the dis¬
appearance of the holly-oak forests
which steadily receded as the ever-
increasing flocks climber higher.
In North Africa the final ruin of
the Berber country was brought about
by the introduction of great flocks of
goats. In Morocco the cedar tree is
now rare, and no young cedars have
been growing up since goats were
established there. In the Western
Sahara the Moors cut down the
mimosas to provide easy feeding for
their goats. A leading botanist, Au¬
guste Chevalier, has described how
these animals, not content with
destroying the vegetation, "literally
graze the soil, to get at the seeds of
grasses and other plants which have
been scattered over the surface and
which might have sprouted during
the next rainy season." The whole of
Africa, from North to South, and
including Madagascar, has experienc¬
ed the same misfortune. In Asia the
limestone mountains of Syria, the
30

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
Lebanon and Israel have been laid
bare by goats whose ravages can be
traced as far as China.
When expressed in general terms
the tremendous damage done by
goats is always received with a certain
amount of scepticism. Some people
defend the goat and call for an in-
dictement of other guilty parties such
as sheep, rabbits, opossums and all
animals which can do serious harm to
vegetation.
Naturally it is difficult to produce
figures which reveal the damage done
by goats alone, since the process has
been going on for centuries. But, in
the most suitable places for in¬
vestigating the disastrous work of
goats islands we find damning and
irrefutable evidence.
Fodder for the sharks
We know that when the old-time
navigators sailed away in
search of virgin lands and
unknown islands, they always took
with them some domestic animals,
especially goats, and that they left a
few pairs in each newly-discovered
territory. In uninhabited or sparsely
inhabited regions these animals, once
they managed to acclimatize them¬
selves, ended by multiplying beyond
measure. Outstanding examples are
the horses of South America and the
rabbits of Australia. Even more
striking is the story of the goat.
The island of St. Helena, in the
middle of the Atlantic, was discovered
in 1502. It was entirely uninhabited
and covered with forests. In 1513
the Portuguese brought goats there.
Two centuries later these animals
had almost completely destroyed the
vegetation. In 1745 the Governor of
the island complained of their de¬
vastations, forseeing the disappear¬
ance of the last patches of forest and
in particular of a special ebony-tree.
His complaint went unheeded and no
action was taken until 1810, when
the Governor had every goat on the
island destroyed. By then it was too
late ; for lack of protective vegetation
the fertile soil formed from the
volcanic rock had been swept into the
sea by erosion, leaving a naked,
sinister crag.
Charles Darwin in the 19th century
reported that the Juan Fernandez
Islands in the Pacific (from 1704
to 1709 one was the home of a ship¬
wrecked Scottish mariner, Alexander
Selkirk, on whose experiences Daniel
Defoe based his story of Robinson
.Crusoe) had formerly been covered
with sandalwood trees. These had
now nearly all been destroyed by
goats, the only remaining trees being
on some uninhabited islets. The
situation on these islands is today so
serious that when the I.U.C.N. met in
Caracas in 1952 it asked the Gov¬
ernment of Chile, to whom the
islands belong, to protect the re¬
maining vegetation by destroying
all the goats.
In Cyprus the goats carried on the
work of destruction on whatever
remained of the forests after the
depredations of the Phoenicians and
those who followed them.
In the Hawaiian Islands goats have
become such a scourge that children
AGILE AND VORACIOUS, the goat will not only stand on its hind legs to get at any low branches
it can reach, but even climbs into a tree of the right shape and devours its leaves. In Morocco
cedar trees are now rare and no young cedars have been growing up since goats were taken there.
organize drives in which the animals
are chased down to the beaches to be
killed and thrown to the sharks.
All these are specific and document¬
ed examples which admit of no
argument. These are well-known
islands arid their vegetation has been
destroyed by goats and by goats
alone.
Man is also to blame
Responsible people long ago realiz¬
ed that the goat was a dan¬
gerous animal. In 16S6 the
Parliament of Provence in France
decreed that goats were no longer to
be allowed to enter the woods, which
had already suffered heavily. But
public resistance was so stubborn that
the act of Parliament was repealed
in 1731 and replaced by another law,
far less stringent and therefore
ineffectual.
The solution to the problem is a
very simple one: the complete exter¬
mination of goats in the most seri¬
ously threatened districts and the
proper supervision of flocks in areas
(if any still exist) which can still
sustain them without danger.
Many specialists would like to see
the goat become extinct, except in
zoos. This, the ideal solution, is in
fact unattainable because it fails to
take account of certain facts.
The goat behaves not only in
accordance with its nature, but is
also a domestic animal, belonging to
man and wreaking destruction wher¬
ever man leads it. A goat tied to a
stake in the ground can do little or
no harm. A flock of goats in a valley
meadow will do scarcely more damage
than a flock of sheep. But a flock of
goats roaming freely over a mountain
district where the vegetation has
already suffered will end by ruining
it completely. So a way must be
found to limit the rights of the owner
of such a flock and prevent him from
maintaining it at a cost which spells
ruin for the land.
The obvious answer would seem to
be a law or regulation to fit the case.
Laws do in fact exist in some coun¬
tries but are generally not respected
and goats thus ravage the countryside
without any official
efforts being made to
prevent them.
In North Africa, in
the Sahara and in the
territories south of it,
31
Cont'd
on

GENTLE LITTLE GOAT (Continued)
flocks of goats are still destroying
vegetation, including new plantations
made by the Forestry Departments.
To bring all the culprits to book would
call for legal action on such a vast
scale that the Administration has had
to forego imposing penalties.
Highlighting the facts about erosion
and the part played by goats has
made no impression whatever on the
people it primarily concerns whether
they be goat-owners, politicians or
senior government officials. From
Madagascar come these striking offi¬
cial figures. About 1936 the Adminis¬
tration introduced Mohair goats into
the south of the Island. There were
a thousand of them in 1937, 23,000 in
1946, 147,000 in 1948, 203,000 in 1949
and 276,585 in 1950. Already the
goats have transformed a number of
areas into desert.
Thrice-proven guilt
What proof do we have that the
extermination of goats would
be a beneficial thing? The
same question has been asked about
the rabbit whose ravages have been
widely verified by agricultural and
forestry experts. When myxomatosis
suddenly reduced the number of
rabbits, the I.U.C.N. made a survey
(Edinburgh, 1956) which proved quite
definitely that vegetation had im¬
proved since their numbers had
declined. In the case of the goat,
three equally convincing experiences
can be cited in Cyprus, Venezuela
and New Zealand.
In Cyprus, at the request of the
Forestry Department, the local Gov¬
ernment passed an "Anti-goat" law
which came into force in 1914 after
its purpose had been widely explained
to the population.
There was no question of exter¬
minating goats by official decree, so
the people were consulted. The Gov¬
ernment promised to pay for the
goats and to provide cultivable land.
In any village where at least ten
owners of land and goats favoured
slaughtering the animals, the local
leader called a meeting of all goat-
owners, explained matters to them
and asked them to vote for or against
the destruction of the flocks. When a
majority agreed, the number of goats
was reduced and the remaining ones
were kept tied to stakes. During the
Second World War submarine action
in the Mediterranean menaced food
supplies by sea and the island had to
become largely self-supporting. The
anti-goat law was strictly enforced
despite many protests. Its good results
are now self-evident. Reafforestation
is proceeding normally and the re¬
duction in cultivable land has halted.
Venezuela's example comes from
the area of the Tacagua river-bed,
which runs between Caracas and La
Guaira. This was once a prosperous
district as can be seen from the ruins
of many farms and mills. In 1934
it had lost all its inhabitants and the
forests had disappeared from its
hillsides. By 1947 the situation was
catastrophic and natural balance had
been completely destroyed. As Pro-
32
fessor Francisco Tamayo explained to
the I.U.C.N. congress in Caracas in
1952, for three quarters of a century
the goats had been at work destroying
everything that had survived the
woodcutters.
Then the Venezuelan Forestry De¬
partment set up an experimental sta¬
tion in the area and began reaffores¬
tation. Its first demand was that all
goats should be banned from the area,
and a law was passed prohibiting the
presence of flocks on any land with a
slope of more than 1/7, and prescrib¬
ing heavy fines and imprisonment for
recalcitrant goatherds.
The Government agreed to buy up
the goats and between 1948 and 1952
it paid for some 16,000 belonging to
77 families living in the area. In
three years there was a great im¬
provement, thanks to reafforestation
and the re-growth over the area of
self-seeding grasses which were no
longer devoured by the herds.
In a report from New Zealand,
written in 1954, Mr. G.G. Atkinson
describes how the Mount Egmont
National Park was invaded around
1920 by goats which farmers had im¬
ported ten years earlier to destroy the
brambles which hindered crop cultiva¬
tion. Campaigns to wipe out the
goats went on from 1926 to 1943 and
altogether over 15,000 were slaughter¬
ed in the National Park. To put an
end to any further danger the farmers
also killed off their goats. Mr. At¬
kinson declares that even a single
goat left at liberty is a national dan¬
ger. Following similar ravages in the
Kermadec Islands ¡(which belong to
New Zealand) the Royal Society of
New Zealand intervened to demand
the extermination of the goats there.
World panic would help
I have said enough to show that
goats are a great danger because
they are one of the chief destroyers
of vegetation and therefore the cause
of soil erosion which threatens man¬
kind with famine. Experience shows
however that efforts to convince
people of this fact have met with no
success. When pressure has been put
on them the reaction has been so
strong that governments have been
forced to give up this method too.
Mr. Tracy Philipps Secretary-
General of the I.U.C.N., has reminded
us that the word "panic" derives from
the name of Pan, the Greek mytho¬
logical goat-legged god of flocks and
shepherds, who it was believed, ran
through the countryside at night,
spreading terror. It would be a good
thing if the people of today (all three
thousand million of them) became
panic-stricken just at the thought of
goats.
I myself believe that our main
effort to arouse people to the danger
of the goat should be made in schools
for here young people do believe what
they hear from their teachers. Thus,
in a few years' time, young men and
women, more aware of realities than
their parents, will be ready to pro¬
pose or accept stringent laws for the
extermination of the goat.
