A SCIENTIST LOOKS AT
PROBLEMS OF AGING
by Prof. R.E. Tunbridge
The increasing proportion of the elderly and the
diminishing proportion of children are creating a
new form of society in the countries of Western
Europe and North Aemrica. By 1980 the over-sixties in
Sweden and Great Britain will constitute nearly one-third
of the voting power. If intellectual, emotional and per¬
sonality changes are a feature of increasing years, what
is to be the pattern of society? Such thoughts suggest
that a study of those who seem to have reached successful
old age is essential. Undoubtedly a man with many and
wide interests and with full retention of his faculties is
the one most likely to achieve a successful old age. In
the United States much thought has been given to prepar¬
ing people for old age and to advise for retirement. Other
countries are following the American lead, and there
would certainly seem to be a place for such programmes.
If senescence is a biological process, it may be necessary
to devise a new pattern of living, responsibility and
leadership being confined to the period of peak per¬
formance, with subsequent adjustments for the later
years.
The advances of medical science have led to a marked
increase in the expectancy of life at birth, particularly in
the countries of Western Europe and North America.
Medical science has not yet solved the problem of
senescence. Many of the disabilities associated with aging
are the result of disease, so that it is impossible as yet to
answer the fundamental biological problem.
The magnitude of the medico-social problem, however,
demands the provision of an increasing proportion of
national and international resources for research on aging
and into the causes of the degenerative diseases which
contribute so largely to the frailty of the aged. Lack of
health, mental and physical, is the major cause of the
disabilities attributed to aging.
A full and immediate understanding of the sociological
factors consequent upon a decline of the physical and
mental processes due to aging is essential if the elderly
are to be incorporated into the life of an aging society
instead of being rejected. Rejection could only lead to a
complete disruption of community life.
To sum up: aging therefore has scientific, economic,
social and political significance for the community as well
as for the individual, andwith all its ramifications
justifies consideration as a major biological problem of
the second half of the twentieth century.
R. E. Tunbridge is Professor of Medicine at the University of
Leeds (England) and a specialist in gerontology, the new science
of old age. He was chairman of tha Organizing Committee of
the Third International Gerontological Congress, and is à mem¬
ber of the Executive Committee of the Council of International
Organizations of Medical Sciences, the centralizing agency for
medical sciences set up jointly in 1949 by the World Health Or¬
ganization and Unesco.
The problems of aging are not new phenomena.
Throughout history man has been aware that both he
and the animals he hunted or kept in domesticity had a
limited existence, and that with the passage of the years
a decline in activity, strength and fertility would occur.
Strictly speaking, aging denotes merely the passage of
years, but it has come to have a sinister meaning and to
imply the deterioration that so frequently accompanies it
and is perhaps best referred to as senescence.
Historical records relate the existence of men still
distinguished in their 60's, 70's and even 80's. In the
Bible there is the record of Methuselah which, even
allowing for literary licence and a method other than
ours of estimating time, would suggest that he attained
what we* would call a ripe old age!
The comparative scarcity of true veterans until recent
times has meant that nearly all the descriptions of the
elderly have come from the pens of young men. Senes¬
cence, or the evidence thereof, has entered so early and
so untimely into human experience that almost all studies
of the phenomenon have been confused with the
associated metaphysical problems.
Greek thought has influenced western philosophy so
profoundly that it is not surprising that the Grecian
attitude to age has in part been adopted by western civili¬
zation. The Greeks certainly paid lip service to the aged,
and whilst octogenarians figure amongst" their great
philosophers, it was youth that for them was the age of
perfection. Sophocles, referring to old age, says: "The
understanding is quenched, what is done is unprofitable
and thereby griefs are vain." Aging was something to
be dreaded because of the physical disabilities and
deterioration that accompanied it.
Not all Greeks held disparaging views about aging. In
Sparta the constitution of Lycurgus provided a three-tier
structure of government; the kings, the five ephors, and
the Gerousia. The latter consisted of 28 men over the
age of 60, who were elected by popular ballot, having
previously indicated their willingness to stand for election.
The power of the Gerousia was, however, restricted. They
could not elect a president from their own number, one
of the kings acting in this capacity, and they could only
be convened by the ephors. They were in fact an
advisory body, but they held a privileged position in the
society of Sparta, which may account for the Greek
proverb: "Only in Sparta is it- good to grow old."
The abhorrence of age was a feature of other commu¬
nities, and in many nomad and hunting tribes the elderly
men, once they became unable to defend themselves, were
killed or were isolated from the tribe. Among the Gran
Chaco Indians it was considered the son's duty to kill his
father as soon as he was unable to keep up
with the tribe.
In contrast to most other communities,
the Chinese have revered old age from the
earliest days of their history. "And what is
your honourable age"' is one of the polite
Cont'd
on
next page
II

SCIENCE
& AGING
(Continued)
WHAT IS SENESCENCE?
questions asked on paying a call. This veneration of the
elderly was advocated by Confucius as an ethical duty,
but this ethical aspect assumed a more mystical signifi¬
cance through the linkage of Confucianism with Taoism.
The Chinese, however, despite their reverence for the aged,
were not oblivious of the physical and mental incapacities
of the aged, and some of their poems reveal perhaps the
greatest insight into the significance of aging to the aged.
Increasing years should benefit the animal's chance of
survival, for with greater knowledge and experience it
should be able to avoid some of the hazards of life and,
as a result of wider contacts, develop a greater degree of
immunity to infections. This could be true for man, but
because of the associated disabilities that accompany
chronological aging, the word has become synonymous
both in literature and science with senescence. Man has
always been interested in the cause of senescence. Is it
a state of physical exhaustion, a matter of wear and tear,
a genetically determined phenomenon, the result of
environmental stress, the accumulation of toxic sub¬
stances, the breakdown of a metabolic cycle, a lack of
enzymatic action, the failure of a specific organ or organs,
or a natural event ? These and many other theories have
been propounded and still have their exponents. The
surprising feature is the lack of variety in the theories of
aging. The same themes recur throughout history,
suggesting that the metaphysical concepts of society with
regard to aging have also influenced the scientists, with
a consequent lack of, and search for, objective data.
The use of special functions, such as fertility, as a
measure of senescence demonstrates admirably the diffi¬
culties of the subject. Eckstein cites the comparison of
one year in the life of a mouse, a dog and a human being:
"At its end the mouse has passed through puberty,
delivered probably most of the young it is likely to, and
has at most another twelve months to live. The bitch is
then sexually mature, but will probably not have produced
its first litter, while the human being is only just
beginning to walk and has not even thought about
reproducing itself."
Eating one's way to the grave
In some animals sexual maturity is almost synonymous
with the onset of reproduction, but in others, such as
man, several years what we term puberty may
intervene. Man is one of the few animals in which we
have knowledge of life after the cessation of the repro¬
ductive cycle. Farmers and stockbreeders are not
interested in prolonging the life of animals when their
stud activities are over, so that reliable data concerning
the duration of life in domestic animals after the cessation
of reproduction are not available. There is evidence that
reproductive exhaustion produces senescence in mono-
carpial plants and in fish, but such evidence hardly
justifies the widespread human belief that sexuality has
its price.
Another recurrent theory of senescence is that of the
accumulation of toxic products, perhaps most vigorously
expounded by Metchnikoff with his concept of intestinal
poisons and the need to change the bacterial flora.
Carrel records in Biological Time that he was able to
maintain the heart of a chicken beating for twenty-five
years, by immersing it in a suitable nutrient medium,
which was constantly changed to avoid the accumulation
of metabolites and was accurately controlled for temp¬
erature and oxygen content, and for the avoidance of
bacterial contamination. Many of the theories of nutri¬
tional influences on longevity are related to the concept
of the toxic effect of excessive food intake. McCay has
demonstrated that undernutrition will delay the growth
and prolong the life of rats if the undernutrition is begun
before the onset of the reproductive cycle.
Undernutrition after the development of
maturity did not prolong life.
The tissue changes reported by many
workers Cowdry, Lansing, the present au¬
thor and his group are certainly a feature -
Card games in a sheltered corner of the groundsa favourite dis¬
traction for the inhabitants of Copenhagen's Old People's Town.
"J.K.", aged 78, once had a prosperous tailor's shop in Copenhagen.
He is long-since retired, but still keeps active in his small workshop.
Concerts which are given benevolently by orchestras, singers and solo
musicians are a much looked-forward to divertissement each week.
12

SCIENCE
& AGING
(Continued)
No 'natural' death according
to latest scientific studies
of the aging animal, but whether they are cause or effect
remains unanswered and thus does not permit of any
generalization as to the mechanism of senescence.
Wear and tear is probably the most popular view of the
cause of senescence; but the very complexity of the
human organism with its different times for the attain¬
ment and for the duration of certain functions illustrates
still further the difficulty of using any single test of
function to assess what we mean by senescence. The
only mathematical formula one can apply to the study of
senescence is the actuarial life-table, which is really a
measure of the likelihood of dying. Many assumptions
are made in the construction of actuarial tables, i.e., that
there is no allotted span of life such as the psalmist's
three score years and ten, and that there are no gross
differences in the human stock used in compiling the
tables. Despite these and other difficulties, the actuarial
tables do provide information of value both to the
biologist and to the sociologist.
Biblical choice of three score & ten
Death in man is, in fact, accidental. There is no evi¬
dence for the view that natural death is due to the
gradual atrophy of the organs until they can no
longer provide the momentum for life. Vischer reported
the death of two centenarians who were apparently healthy
right up to the onset of their terminal illnesses, yet careful
examination of their organs after death revealed changes
which might have led to death at any time in the previous
thirty years. The experimental study of duration of life
in animal colonies has been vitiated by the incidence of
disease. Lack, however, has shown that the mortality of
wild birds is, after the first few months, independent of
their age. It would thus seem that there is no evidence
for the view that death is natural or that, even if we
could shield man from environmental hazards both
internal and external, he would survive to, say, 100 or 120
years; nor is there any other than biblical authority for
selecting three score years and ten as the natural span
of human life.
The changes in the age distribution of the population
have made senescence a topical problem. The discoveries
of medical science have increased the life expectancy at
birth. Many factors have contributed to the reduction
in infant mortality, but undoubtedly one of the most
important has been the development of the chemother-
apeutic agents the sulphonamides and the antibiotics.
The life expectancy at birth in the United States of Amer¬
ica was 351 years in 1789, 40 years in 1850, 50 in 1900,
55 in 1920, 60 + in 1930, and today it is nearly 70 years.
Similar changes have been reported in most of the
countries of Western Europe and North America. In
Switzerland in 1876-80 the expectation of life for men
was 47 and for women 51. In 1929-32 it Was almost 68 for
men and 70 for women. In Great Britain the expectation
at birth at the turn of the century was just over 50 years,
while today it is 68 for men and 70 for women.
Percentage
of sexage¬
narians
France Sweden England
and Wales Germany Italy
8 1790 1850 1910 1911 1860
10 1850 1882 1925 1925 1908
12 1875 1912 1931 1937 1952
14 1931 1940 1938 1951 l 1964
16 1950 1955 1952 1959 ' 1972
18 1964 1965 1962 1964 * 1988
(1) Western Germany only after 1945.
Sauvy in the above table shows clearly the increase in the
proportion of the population over the age of 60 in some
of the Western European countries. In the United States
of America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the white
population of Africa trends are similar. It is impossible
14
to forecast beyond 1980 because we cannot accurately
foretell the birth-rate. In the United Kingdom an unex¬
pected prolongation of the customary , post-war increase
in the birth-rate has occurred, making it impossible to
indicate anything more than trends. A position of bio¬
logical equilibrium, where the birth-rate just ensures the
replacement of one generation by another, with the
maintenance of life expectancy at the same level as it is
today, would mean that approximately 24 per cent of the
population in Great Britain would be sexagenarians.
In the United Kingdom today approximately 14 per cent
of the population are of pensionable age, that is to say,
men over 65 and women over 60, or, to put it in another
way, 2 out of every 15; and 1 out of every 15 is over the
age of 70. In 25 years' time 3 out of every 15 will be of
pensionable age, and 1 out of 9 will be over the age of 70;
in other words there will be approximately 5 million people
over the age of 70.
These population trends have considerable political and
economic significance, since the countries with a low (2-3
per cent) proportion of aged people are the so-called
underdeveloped countries, e.g. the countries of the Far
East and of Eastern Europe. Similar changes are taking
place in these latter countries, but at a much slower rate
owing to the continuing high birth-rate. In the more
developed countries those of Western Europe and North
America; the aging tendency of the population will grow
rapidly even if the downward trend in the birth-rate
ceased, because there is already such a large proportion
of the population in middle life progressing towards old
age.
Further, the advances in medical science have been
effective against infectious diseases, particularly those
affecting the young. The diseases of the second half of
life heart disease, renal disease, vascular degeneration,
cancer are usually insidious in onset, and it would take
several years before even rapid advances in therapy could
influence current trends. Ultimately, such discoveries
might completely alter the age distribution of the popu¬
lation by enabling man to overcome the major known
killing diseases and thus to live longer, 100 or more years
becoming the normal expectancy.
Executives' ulcers & miners' arthritis
Although life expectancy at birth has greatly increased
in the last 100 years, life expectancy for the middle
aged has changed very little. In 1901-10 the
expectation of life for a man aged 60 in the United
Kingdom was approximately 131 years; in 1950 it was
15 years, an increase of li years. The most recent returns
(1955) indicate a slightly more favourable outlook for the
present day, the increase being of over 3 years instead
of li years. The major change, however, remains the
increased expectancy at birth rather than in middle life.
The popular concept of aging is one of deterioration;
old age is the period of the wig, the ear trumpet, the
spectacles, the denture, the artificial leg, and the silver
wind pipe. Undoubtedly many of the disabilities of
advancing years result from the stresses and strains of
life, and from the effects of illness. The miner is more
liable to osteoarthritis of the knees than the clerk. The
business executive and those in positions of authority are
more liable to coronary disease, hypertension and peptic
ulceration. These effects of environmental stress are
becoming recognized, though we have not yet devised a
satisfactory way of living to avoid their deleterious
influence.
The different functions of the body do
not attain their point of maximum effi¬
ciency simultaneously, nor, having attained
their peak, do they lose their prowess at a
constant rate. Acuity of hearing and vision
attain their maximum before the age of 10,
Cont d
on
page I 6

The Unesco Courier. October 1958
Camera Press, London
PEACE AND CONTENTMENT are vividly expressed in pose and expression of this venerable old Japanese enjoying a game
of "Go" (Japanese checkers) and a cigarette in the Atami Old People's Home, near Tokyo. In the past decade, Japan has opened
numerous homes for its elderly folk, including this one with accomodation for 900 people at Atami, a resort noted for its hot springs.
15

SCIENCE
& AGING
(Continued)
Great octogenarians
& their achievements
and yet it is not until the majority of adults reach the age
of 50 that they require glasses for reading. By the age
of 60 they are willing to move to the front of the church,
the theatre or 'the lecture hall, their hearing being not
quite what it was. In their sixties, especially their late
sixties, they are aware of their lack of mobility, of their
joints stiffening, and they avoid hurried movement. It is
also at this age that it becomes obvious that they are
shrinking in stature due to the narrowing of the interve-
tebral discs of the spine. In their early seventies mental
changes become obvious to their friends, though not
necessarily to the aged themselves.
Considerable differences of opinion exist as to the
nature and extent of the mental changes which come
with advancing age. It is often said that the elderly pass
through a stage of second childhood when certain peculiar
traits are accentuated, while many of the more pleasant
features disappear. Attempts have been made to assess
SOPHOCLES
lived to be 90. He wrote
Oedipus Rex when 75 and
Oedipus and Colonus at 89.
At the age of 83, he orga¬
nized defence of Athens.
the changes in intelligence, perception, memory and
mental efficiency brought about by age. It has long been
said that there is a marked deterioration in intelligence
in old age, but recent studies would suggest that there is
nothing more than a slow but steady decline from the
age of 20 to 60, with a slightly increased rate of decline
after 60.
Many of the tests used for children are quite unsuitable
for adults, and the conclusions drawn from such tests
must be treated with reservation. The question which
remains unanswered is whether the rate of decline is in
any way affected by the degree of attainment. In other
words, is the rate of decline constant, and therefore so
comparatively slight in a person of great intelligence that
even at 60 he still appears to be an intellectual giant?
Birren, using the Wechsler Bellevue scale, felt that it was
possible to assess four mental factors in the elderly and
to compare the results with those obtained from younger
age groups. The four factors were verbal comprehension,
non-verbal organization of visual perceptual material
(also called matrix test, which does not involve any writ¬
ing or speech and where people have to match patterns
and designs), memory, and induction.
What is so difficult in all testing is the fact that
memory tests are influenced by intelligence and habit
patterns. The complete lack of longitudinal studies has
been stressed by Lewis, and until we have had extensive
longitudinal studies it is dangerous to generalize about
the mental changes associated with age. The Rorschach
Test, which is known to have the risk of personal bias,
has tended to show that features of aging are: a reduced
responsiveness to emotional stimuli, an inability to use
new resources, difficulty in forming satisfactory social
relationships, and lessened instinctual control.
On the contrary, history is full of examples of men who
have written masterpieces or performed extraordinary
intellectual feats when in their late seventies and eighties.
Goethe completed the second part of Faust, Verdi compos¬
ed Falstaff, and Humboldt wrote Kosmos, when in their
eighties. In the past decade, also, almost every branch
16
of knowledge, science, music, art, literature, philosophy,
and even politics, has had outstanding men who were still
active and productive although nearly octogenarians. If
this is an indication of trends, the outlook for the future
is hopeful.
All the disabilities mentioned ahove would seem to be
the normal lot of man, but in some men they occur sooner
than in others. The effect of disease is often to hasten
the development of what one must call the normal dis¬
abilities. From the medical standpoint, therefore, the
increasing age of the population means that an increas¬
ing proportion of it will be limited in their capacities
unless new discoveries and appliances, similar to hearing
aids, glasses, dentures, enable the disabilities to be mini¬
mized, if not entirely removed. These disabilities, which
may be said to be normal in old age, lead to the problem
of the frail ambulant, when they are more severe.
There is the still more serious medical burden which
results from the nature of the diseases most likely to
affect the middle aged and the elderly. The prevalent
diseases of the second half of life are the degenerative
diseases, all forms of vascular degeneration including
hypertension, coronary, artery and renal disease, cancer,
chronic bronchitis, osteoarthritis, mental disorders and
diabetes mellitus. All are progressive diseases for which
at present we have no certain cure. Some, such as bron¬
chitis, may be largely environmental in origin, and the
removal of smoke and of the atmospheric pollution from
modern industrial processes would do much to minimize,
if not abolish, the condition.
The disorders named above, however, tend to run
protracted courses, often with recurrent periods in hos¬
pital, a high proportion of the patients ultimately becom¬
ing chronic invalids. The cost of medical care already
the most expensive of the social services is likely to
increase very considerably as the result of the altered age
distribution; it may be noted that more than half the
patients in the mental hospitals in Great Britain are over
the age of 60.
Pneumonia, in one form or another, and bronchitis used
to be very frequent causes of death in people over the age
of 50. Today antibiotic therapy enables many such
patients to overcome the infection; but they are left
physically enfeebled and succumb readily to a further
infection, often entering hospital for a period of six to
eight weeks several times a year. This problem has been
referred to as that of "medicated survival".
TITIAN
was 95 years old when he
completed his masterpiece,
The Battle of Lepanto, and
97 when he began to work
on a Descent from the Cross.
Health is almost the most important asset in the life
of a man. It is ill-health and the impairment of function
which cause the majority of the social problems of aging.
Great Britain has been the pioneer in the development of
the social survey technique. Charles Booth's famous
survey of life and labour in London was the first great
survey of what is now called the social science field.
Seebohm Rowntree, by his well-known studies of the City
of York has contributed greatly to our knowledge of living
conditions in the United Kingdom during the past 50
years; he Was also chairman of the first Nuffield
Foundation report, Old People.

During the last 20 years social surveys on different
aspects of the life of the community have been made in
almost every country. Reference can only be made to a
few of them. The surveys by Seebohm Rowntree three
during the present century have provided invaluable
data concerning the development of the social pattern in
Great Britain as regards work, housing and poverty. The
last of the three surveys concluded that the two major
causes of poverty in the United Kingdom in 1950 were
chronic sickness i.e. where the bread-winner was off
work for more than six months on account of sickness
and old age.
Two surveys, by Dr. Sheldon, of Wolverhampton,
England, and by van Zonneveld of Groningen, Holland,
have produced valuable data on the medical and social
problems of an aging community. Dr. Sheldon visited a
sample of the population of Wolverhampton of pension¬
able age in their own homes. Wolverhampton is a town
of 150,000 inhabitants situated in the centre of England,
in the industrial belt. The sample was obtained by taking
1 in 30 of all the ration cards at the time of the survey
GOETHE
giant among thinkers and
poets completed the last part
of his monumental Faust
only a short time before his
death at the age of 83.
rationing was in force in Great Britain and provided a
valuable register of the population. From this sample
the names and addresses of men over the age of 65 and
women over the age of 60 were selected. The sample
comprised 593 individuals; for 552 of them a complete
form concerning the social history was obtained, and
Dr. Sheldon was able to complete the medical enquiry in
477 cases.
Rather less than a third (29 per cent) were receiving
medical attention at the time of the survey, and more
than a third (44.2 per cent) had received medical attention
during the previous three years. The assessment of the
physical state revealed that malnutrition was uncommon:
24.5 per cent of the group were classified as normal plus,
46.2 per cent as normal, and 29 per cent as subnormal.
These figures relate to an overall assessment and mask
an important difference between the sexes. The men were
more active and contained a significantly higher propor¬
tion of those who were in the normal plus group; in fact,
the men seemed to fall more into the extreme groups
than did the women; the majority of the women had
some disability, although not necessarily a severe one.
Sheldon comments on the different medical problems
that arise after the age of 70. Up to 70 the prevalent
illnesses and disabilities are those which are the common
lot of man, but after 70, weakness, vertigo, spondylitis,
difficulty in facing traffic and loss of confidence become
increasingly prevalent and affect most profoundly the life
and movement of this age group.
Reverting to the group of men over 65 and women over
60, two point five per cent were confined to bed, 8.5
per cent were confined to their own homes, and 22.5 per
cent has limited mobility, being able to walk only to the
end of the street. A third of the sample therefore was
severely restricted in mobility. A further analysis of the
figures into the different five-year age periods demonstrat¬
ed an even more marked increase in the percentage of
individuals suffering from restricted movement after the
age of 70. There were, of course, many factors contribut¬
ing to the impaired power of locomotion, such as defective
vision and pain in the feet. The latter could often have
been cured by chiropody, which would have considerably
increased the possibilities of a fuller life.
The mental state was classified as normal in 81.8 per
cent of cases and only slightly impaired in a further 11.2
per cent, the remainder being divided almost equally into
those who (were difficult to live with, and those in whom
there was evidence of mental disorder.
The Unesco Courier. October 1958
The incidence of sickness amongst elderly persons living
in their own homes is considerable. Sheldon found that
more than half of the group had experienced, after the-
age of 60, illness requiring a period of rest in bed. Most
of the married men were nursed by their wives, whereas
the women were dependent on the help of a neighbour
or relative. Sickness amongst the women interfered more
seriously with family life than did sickness amongst the
men, and often necessitated the absence from work of a
daughter of near relative, or the making of demands upon
the statutory services.
Periods in bed, if prolonged, or for other than minor
illnesses, place great strain on otherwise independent
couples, who manage together for everyday things so long
as there is no sickness. In 7.7 per cent of the sample the
physical burden of sickness was assessed as causing a
severe physical stress on the next generation. In a further
15 per cent, sickness interfered considerably with the
lives of near relatives, often to the extent of preventing
them from getting away and even of spending their holi¬
days with their own family.
Van Zonneveld carried out a similar survey in Holland
at Groningen, a town of 140,000 inhabitants and reached
almost identical conclusions. Once again there was a
higher proportion of women in the group with a moderate
degree of impairment of health. Some 40 per cent of the
sample group were in receipt of medical treatment at the
time of the inquiry or in the three months prior to the
onset of the survey. Ignoring the personal opinions and
the material circumstances of the group, Zonneveld estim¬
ated that for every 1,000 of the population over 65, 4.3
required accommodation in hospital, 34 in special nursing
homes or mental institutions, and 153 in residential homes.
A recent survey in Sheffield, England, a large industrial
city of over 500,000 inhabitants, by Hobson and others,
added few fresh data to those already obtained from the
excellent surveys by Sheldon and van Zonneveld, except
that the former were able to undertake physical examina¬
tions and to obtain from the participants blood and
other samples for laboratory investigations. In the
Sheffield survey 40 per cent were receiving regular medical
attention at least once every three months. The percen¬
tages of bed-ridden, confined to home, and With limited
VERDI
lived till the age of 88. He
composed the opera Othello
when 73, at.80 he complet¬
ed Falstaff, and at 85, wrote
the score for a Te Deum.
outside activities were very similar to Sheldon's findings.
One of the most interesting features of the survey was
the discrepancy between the patient's and the physician's
estimate of fitness. The physician found that 26.2 per
cent of the men could be considered fit, as opposed to the
men's personal estimate of 64.1 per cent. In the case of
the women, the physician estimated that 23 per cent were
fit, whereas '48.7 per cent of the women considered them¬
selves so.
Dr. van Zonneveld is now engaged in organizing a
complete survey of the elderly population in Holland, co¬
operating with the family doctors. This thorough and
important social survey will also include a careful survey
of mental health.
Sheldon found that in Wolverhampton 98 per cent of
all old people lived at home and only 2 per cent in
institutions. The latter percentage is today probably an
underestimate. Of the people living at home, 44 per cent
were married, a third of them living without and the other
two-thirds with their children. Another 44
per cent were either widows or widowers,
the latter tending to live with relatives,
whilst the former lived in their own homes.
It is of interest that more than half of
those living alone had children or near
17

The Unesco Courier. October 1958
SCIENCE
& AGING
(Continued from p. 17)
Striking findings from
recent national surveys
relatives living either next door, within a short distance,
or who visited regularly.
The analysis of the health of an aging population in
the middle of the twentieth century reveals the extent to
which ill-nealth and disability increase the dependence
of the elderly upon the family, or upon the community,
be it good neighbours or the state. The fundamental
problem, as already stated, is not new; but the changing
social pattern and the increasing number of individuals
involved are necessitating a different approach. The
changing concept of family life is throwing more respon¬
sibility upon the community, whether it be the voluntary
or the statutory authorities.
In an underdeveloped and rural community, the centre
of social life is the family. Several families may unite in
a common task, such as farming or fishing; such com¬
munities will remain small, comparatively self-contained,
and with the family atmosphere dominant. They will
share a common mode of life and common culture, and
even in the next stage of development the head man or
leader will still assume a paternal position of authority
in relationship to the group. Such a family group must
utilize the skills and abilities of all its members, so that
work is required from both young and old, according to
their skill and capacity. There will be variety of company
for the elderly, and the doting grandparent to comfort
the disappointed child. Such a community will not be
able to understand the problems of pensions and taxes
and of divided responsibility.
The advent of the industrial age altered the life of the
communities, both geographically by demanding greater
mobility of labour, and also culturally because the
members of the family often followed different trades and
occupations. Furthermore the scattering of the family
lessened the paternal authority of the home and accen¬
tuated the individuality of the different members. The
development of wealth, centred upon minerals and manu¬
factured articles, necessitated new methods for safe¬
guarding estate and property other than land. The result
was the development of insurance to provide security for
the individual and his dependents against the hazards
of life.
Loneliness & insecurity
The diminishing size of the family has accentuated the
loneliness, sense of insecurity, feeling of uselessness
and of dependence that were already evident in the
early industrial period, and had led to the present phase
of organized society, commonly referred to as the welfare
state. It would be wrong, however, to assume that lone¬
liness, insecurity, a feeling of unwantedness and depen¬
dence amongst the elderly are something new that did
not exist in primitive communities; it is rather that the
evolution of the social pattern, through the breaking up
of the family, has accentuated these difficulties.
Disability and ill-health amongst the aging members of
a community obviously affect its productive capacity and
therefore its ability to maintain its standards of living.
Present population trends in Western Europe indicate that
the percentage of dependents children under 15 and
adults over 65 is likely to remain constant during the
next 20 years, the decrease in the percentage of children
under 15 being counterbalanced by an increase in the
percentage of adults over the age of 65. The economic
problem is whether it will prove more costly to maintain
the elderly than to rear the young. If full activity could
be maintained despite increasing years, no problems
would arise. Increased productivity could likewise coun¬
terbalance the cost of maintenance of the elderly, so that
undue despondency concerning the economic position may
prove unjustified.
The needs of the elderly in modern society have been
met in two ways by the provision of pensions or by relief
funds, dispensed either by voluntary charitable organiza
tions or by governmental agencies. Pensions are of two
kinds: the voluntary schemes subscribed to by individuals
or firms on behalf of their employees, and those provided
by state departments and state insurance schemes. Indi¬
viduals enter into agreement with insurance companies,
the policies really forming a variant of normal life
assurance. Many firms now have schemes to cover their
administrative, clerical, and skilled staff, and a few firms
cover all grades of staff. Such schemes are in the main
financed by the firm, the employee making some contribu¬
tion in the majority of cases. In state departments a
percentage of the salaries is deducted yearly, and pen¬
sions are usually based on the income during the last few
years before retirement and on the length of service.
Oldest ages = lowest incomes
State insurance pension schemes for all citizens usually
provide for a flat rate of benefit for all persons fully
insured on the attainment of a fixed age, on condition
that they are not earning more than a certain amount
per week or per month and have no private savings in
excess of a stated amount. These pensions are often
looked upon as a right, although they are more in the
nature of insured relief and are provided by contributions
from the employee, the employer and the state. The
amount of the pension varies considerably in different
countries, and in the past, rates have normally been below
the minimum wage that could be earned by an unskilled
worker, so that the pension should not be an inducement
to idleness. In recent years some countries have adopted
the principle that need should determine the rate- of
pension. Lord Beveridge, in his report on Social Insurance
and Allied Services 1942, advocated this principle, and his
idea has been largely incorporated into recent British
legislation.
That need exists has been shown by the analysis of
incomes of the elderly. Estimates of the incomes in 1949
in the United States of America showed the average
yearly incomes in the different age groups as follows:
35-44, $2,591; 45-54, $2,751; 55-64, $2,366; and 65 plus,
$1,016. The Federal Security Agency enquired into the
source of income of 11.5 million individuals over 65 in
1949 and found the sources of income to be as follows:
Per cent
Employment	 3.8 millions 33
Social insurance and related
programmes 3 . millions 26.1
Old age assistance	 2.1 millions 18.3
Other sources, including no income 2,6 millions 22.6
The Institute of Life Insurance in 1950 listed sources of
income for persons over 65 as follows:
Employment 34 -
Pensions 18
Private assistance	 17
Investments 9
Public assistance '. 	 22
Further analysis by the Federal Security Agency, using
a different method of computation (spending units),
revealed that approximately 75 per cent of persons over
65 had no income from investments or work, and that
28 per cent received no pension or allowance. Thus, even
in a wealthy country such as the United States, a
considerable proportion of the population over 65 are
unable to support themselves or are without relatives to
provide for them.
The pensions schemes have to be supplemented by
public or national assistance.
In Switzerland there is a national
pensions scheme, the Federal Old Age and
Survivors Insurance, which came into force
in 1948, but full annuities will not be
available until 1968. The rates are low, 720
to 1,700 Swiss francs per annum for a
Cont'd
on
next page
21

GRANDMA A CHAMPION BOWLER
Women members of the Worthing Bowling Club, England Camera Press, London
SCIENCE & AGING (Continued)
single person, 1,160 to 2,720 Swiss francs for a married
couple. Single men or women can draw their pensions
at 65; married couples get the full pension when the
husband reaches 65, and the Iwife 60. Supplementary
pensions and assistance are however necessary, and these
are the responsibility of the cantons.
In Denmark the social insurance scheme is a mixture
of insurance and national assistance. The benefit for a
married couple is approximately 45 per cent of an
unskilled worker's wage in Copenhagen. Some 60 per
cent of the population eligible are in receipt of such pen¬
sions. In the United Kingdom the position is very similar.
Approximately 60 per cent of all persons eligible on
account of age draw their pension, and over the age of
70 approximately one half require supplementing from the
National Assistance Board.
It will be seen therefore that in all the countries
considered the existing pensions schemes are inadequate
to meet the financial needs of the elderly. Furthermore,
private pensions schemes, although more likely to be
related to the retiring salary of the participant, depend
for their real value on the maintenance of a constant
value of the currency. In times of monetary stability
such schemes are excellent, but during periods of inflation
they are inadequate.
How to adjust pensions to provide reasonable financial
security for everyone is a major problem of the welfare
state. The enormous financial burden of an adequate
pensions scheme for everyone after the age of 65 raises
therefore the question of employment for the elderly.
Until the last war unemployment was a serious feature
of the life of industrialized countries. The guilds, and
later the unions, tried to combat unemployment by
restrictive practices^ a fixed rate for a fixed job, by
delaying the age of entry and fixing a retiring age. There
22
was also the fear that the older workers might work for
lower rates, their needs being more modest. The intro¬
duction of pensions schemes has had the effect *of
increasing the frequency of retirement at a certain age.
Retirement at 65 is four times greater in firms with
pensions schemes than in those without such schemes.
Further, smaller firms tend to retain the services of
workers beyond the retiring age more than do the larger
firms, i.e. the firms employing more than 500 workers.
Compulsory retirement at a specific age has adminis¬
trative advantages. It is uniform in application and easy
to administer, enables management to plan ahead to
anticipate replacements, and enables the worker to
prepare for retirement and to make alternative
arrangements.
Another reason for the tendency to fix a retirement age
is related to the problem of promotion. The younger
employees of a firm often feel frustrated if there is not a
reasonable opportunity for promotion, and retaining
employees beyond the normal retiring age undoubtedly
interferes with promotion. Union opinion is sensitive in
this matter as the unions tend to lay great stress upon
seniority. In the management of their own affairs, the
unions before World War II tended to demand that their
executive officers retire at 60, or in some cases even
at 55.
The heavy cost of pensions which is likely to increase
in Western Europe because of the aging of the popula¬
tion is an economic reason for recommending abolition
of a fixed age for retirement. Other factors must however
be considered. For instance, would postponement of
retirement be in the interests of the health of the
Individual? Is it fair and reasonable that a man should
work until he drops? Does the capacity for work
diminish with age? Does this capacity for work depend
upon the nature of the work? Should there be different
grades and different hours of work for the older
employee?
Analysis of the length of unemployment periods in the
different age groups, both in the United States and in the
United Kingdom, show these periods to be longest in the
55-64 age group and the 65 plus age groups. Pension

The Unesco Courier. October 1958
AND AN INTREPID SAILOR
m\'-*+-
Oakland Women's Rowing Club, California, U.S.A. Globe Photos, New York
schemes here have an adverse influence because insurance
companies usually demand a higher premium for older
workers; workmen's compensation rates are also usually
higher for the elderly. It is often stated that the older
workers are less efficient, less adjustable to new ideas,
and more difficult to train, and that they have a higher
accident and sickness rate. These comments from
employers are misleading and are not entirely borne out
in practice, since most firms like to retain their elderly
skilled craftsmen.
Experience gained during World War II, when labour
was at a premium, and also the findings of the University
of Illinois survey, revealed that there was less absenteeism
among older workers. Although their rate of work
was slower than that of the younger age groups, they
were more reliable; the numbers of articles rejected were
smaller, and the damage to instruments and machines
much less than with younger workers. The sickness rate
for minor illnesses of less than five days was lower than
for the younger age groups, though there was a greater
incidence of long-term chronic illnesses which often
necessitated a few of the older workers being absent for
long periods, thus making the overall loss of time for
sickness greater than in the younger age groups.
Le Gros Clark has recently analysed the age of men
employed in 32 occupations in Great Britain, involving
4,004,700 men, or 25.6 per cent of the total males occupied.
The number of men over 65 in these occupations was
17,400, or 25 per cent of the national total of occupied
males over the age of 65. Using "'survival rates" the
percentage of the total numbers of men known to have
reached their mid-sixties and still at work in their
normal job, maintaining a reasonable degree of
efficiency Clark was able to compare employment rates
of the elderly in the different trades. The results were
influenced by the introduction of pensions schemes, by
changes in the manufacturing process, and by changes
in market and consumer demands.
Clark concludes that a considerable number of workers
today will have to be found alternative jobs in their early
or mid-sixties if they are not to be forced into premature
retirement. There is evidence that some men are already
making this transition to lighter and less exacting work,
often 'within their own industry. Reviewing the results
collectively, Clark estimates that 30-40 per cent of the
men could not be expected to carry on with their normal
jobs after their mid-sixties, and that alternative work
would have to be found for them if they were not to retire.
He assumes that 10 per cent would be in such a state of
impaired health that no question of any work would arise,
but provision would be necessary for at least 20 per cent.
In 1951, the year of the analysis, there were 2,072,100 men
in the age group 55-64 in the United Kingdom. This
would mean that 400,000 would require alternative
employment over a period of ten years, or 40,000 a year.
This raises the problem of the type of alternative work
to reserve for the elderly and of the question of training
for alternative work. Experience in the placement of
disabled persons, and the introduction of a quota system
where all employers must employ a certain percentage
of disabled persons, have shown that such methods do not
solve the problem. Firms would naturally reserve the
special appointments for their own staff and would not
readily take on elderly staff who had not previously been
employed by them.
A special experimental unit sponsored by the Nuffield
Foundation in the University of Cambridge, England,
under the direction of Sir Frederick Bartlett and A. T.
Welford, have been studying experimentally the effect of
age on skill. They have concentrated on the earlier age
groups, 45-65, with a view to determining trends rather
than to solving the problem of the 65 plus group alone.
They found that there is a slowing of skilled actions in
the late twenties, followed by a considerable degree of
recovery; then there comes a return of the slowing in
the late thirties and middle forties, followed by the a
further period of improvement, before the onset of a
more progressive slowing in the middle or late fifties.
These conclusions apply to rapid skilled
work not involving heavy muscular effort.
Where moderate or heavy muscular work
is involved, there is a marked decline after
the middle forties.
The changes described are not so much
Cont'd
page 25
23

Veterans of France
Henri Cartier-Bresson © Magnum Photos
OLDEST
LIVING
FRENCHWOMAN
The oldest living Frenchwoman,
Madame Louise Blanc, made her
first trip by air from Paris
recently to visit her birthplace
at Puylarens, near Toulouse, in
southern France. Aged 105,
she can still remember the last
time she travelled thereby
stagecoach, which was then the
only transport available. The
modern way, she declares, is
far more comfortable. At the
start of this century, when she was 47 years old, Madame Blanc's chances
of living to a ripe old age were, statistically speaking, very poor. The
average life expectancy in France was then about 45 years of age. By 1938
it had risen to 58 and today it is 66 double that of a century ago. In
France, as in other countries, there are more women than men in the
older age groups. In I 957 there were 1,550,000 Frenchwomen between
the ages of 70 and 80 compared with only 930,000 Frenchmen.
S Universal Photo, Paris.
24

The Unesco Courier.
SCIENCE
& AGING
(Continued)
October 1958
Reti remen t a re effects more
damaging than beneficial?
in the effector as in the receptor mechanisms. An
analysis of the processes shows that the most variable
element in any skill requiring a series of accurate
adjustments to changing stimuli is in the interval
between an adjustment in one direction followed by an
adjustment in another direction. Older people look more
carefully at what they are doing and at the signals
necessary for the next stage. They are therefore suited
for work demanding a high degree of accuracy, especially
if they are able to ¡work at their own pace, but are much
less suited for belt work or processes where the rate tends
to be geared to suit the younger worker.
Welford and others have also found that older people
are less receptive to theoretical instruction. They often
prefer written instructions which they can study at their
leisure rather than group demonstrations. They learn new
processes which are based on their past experience with
comparative ease, but are much slower in adapting
themselves to fundamentally new or different ideas. It
is necessary to break down a new process into component
movements, which allow the elderly person to build up
the process more slowly. Younger people seem to exhibit
less delay in anticipating the next move. These valuable
experiments indicate the complexity of the problems; yet
they offer hope that, with further development and
extension of the study to job analysis in industry, it
should be possible to find suitable jobs for the aged.
For 'dream house' read 'nightmare'
But apart from the economic implications which
employment of the elderly has for society, there is the
importance of employment to the individual himself.
Undoubtedly many men and women continue working
after reaching retirement age because of financial need.
To many, work is purely a means of earning enough to
live, the work itself being without interest. But the fact
that the proportion of the self-employed and the skilled
craftsmen who remain at work until well into their
seventies is higher than in other categories of workers
shows that they have more than a mere financial interest.
Work is an important factor in their lives; it affords a
means of self-expression and makes them feel that they
are useful to society. Retirement is a serious break for
most men. It means loss of invaluable associations, it
brings a feeling of unwantedness, of dependence on, and
uselessness to, the community. For the man with few
interests, retirement often means that his world suddenly
becomes very limited.
Another important problem for the aged is accommo¬
dation. Many people save, often at great personal cost,
for their retirement. They select a site, quite likely build
a house but how rarely do they anticipate their real
accommodation needs ? The survey at Wolverhampton
by Sheldon emphasized some of the physical problems
of the elderly, their dislike of stairs, their tendency to
falls, and their immobility. The elderly adapt slowly to
changes of light intensity, and therefore require good and
even lighting, they also like warmth, and the provision of
central heating is desirable in accommodation specially
designed for them.
Many countries have paid special attention to the
designing of houses, bungalows, and flats for the elderly.
Such special accommodation should be planned in small
groups, preferably not in isolated communities, so that
normal housing which permits young relatives to live
within easy access is near at hand. The amount of
special accommodation for the elderly is nothing like
adequate. In Great Britain between the two wars over
3,150,000 houses were built1,440,347 by local government
and the remainder by individuals or private firms; yet
only approximately 1 per cent of all this building was
specially designed for the elderly.
Immediately after the war the building programme
concentrated upon houses suitable for young married
couples with children, and very little accommodation for
the elderly was constructed. This is now being corrected,
but there is considerable leeway to make up. Some 5-7
per cent of all new building in Great Britain during the
next 10 years would need to be allocated to old people if
most of them are to be housed in suitable accommodation.
It is recognized that there is a stage at which the
elderly, though they may be able to dress and attend to
personal details, are unable to look after themselves; yet
they do not require nursing or hospital care. The Salva¬
tion Army was the first organization to provide
accommodation for this category when they established
their first Eventide Homej in Norway in 1910. In Great
Britain today there are nearly 2,000 homes, or hostels,
caring for nearly 60,000 elderly people. One-third are
run by voluntary organizations and two-thirds by local
government. The majority house 30-35 elderly persons,
usually of one sex only, although an increasing number
are being planned for both men and women. In Swit¬
zerland 25,000 persons over the age of 65 are living in
public or private hostels. In the United States 217,000
persons over the age of 65 are housed in public or private
institutions primarily designed for the aged. Accom¬
odation of this kind is undoubtedly necessary, especially
nowadays when families are small and such a high
percentage of the frail ambulant individuals are without
relatives.
Collectives homes and hostels, however, do not afford
the ideal solution. Transference to such homes affords
security and, for many, eases the loneliness of old age.
On the other hand, for those with active minds and wide
interests, this kind of home can have a restricting
influence, and limited contacts with the outside world
often makes the inmates uninterested, quarrelsome and
unhappy. The aim when providing accommodation for
the elderly should be, whenever possible, to maintain the
elderly in their own homes. Grouping of bungalows or
flats so that a warden can be appointed to keep an eye
upon a group of elderly persons and, if necessary, to
provide a midday meal, is not only valuable in allowing
the elderly person to remain a member of the community,
but is often a more economical way of solving the problem
of care of the elderly.
'Pot & Pans' Service in the home
The provision of domiciliary services can do much to
help the elderly, particularly the frail, to retain and
live in their own homes. Many voluntary and charit¬
able organizations, the Churches, and Government De¬
partments play an important role in this respect. The
extent of the help varies according to districts and to
needs. It may include special nursing, provision of special
apparatus, the adaptation of the household fittings to
special needs, laundry service, a meals service. In
addition, a visiting service is often arranged. It may
consist merely of a regular friendly call, but may extend
to reading to the old person, looking after the garden,
undertaking shopping expeditions, the writing of letters,
a "pots and pans" service, and occasionally to the provi¬
sion of more comprehensive help the so-called Home
Help Service.
Special services, such as chiropody and physiotherapy,
are also organized for old people in their homes. For
the more active, the club movement with its discussion
groups, hobbies, talks, competitions, provides the opportu¬
nity to make friends, and minimizes the extreme
loneliness, which is probably the greatest single problem
of the elderly today. A certain degree of dependence
and an inhability to contribute actively to the life of the
community can only accentuate this problem.
Medical care is the most expensive of the social services,
and the high proportion of the elderly who require
hospital attention both for mental and physical illness
provides the hospital administrator with his biggest and
most costly problem. Special units, called geriatric units,
are being developed in the Scandinavian countries, in
Great Britain, and the United States to foster a more
progressive and active attitude of mind towards the care
of the chronic elderly sick.
25
