THE LANGUAGE OF COLOURS
MYTHS AND SYMBOLS
by Roger Bastide
What's in a colour? The answer is, sometimes a great
deal. Down the centuries particular colours have
been used to signify certain qualities or conditions.
Crimson was the imperial colour of the ancients, just as
today yellow is the imperial colour in the Far East.
Among English-speaking people blue often stands for
wisdom and spiritual truth and red for courage. Colours
are often given spiritual or religious significance.
Although this symbolic significance is generally recogniz¬
ed the symbolism itself gives rise to some controversy.
Some people among them Frederic Portal, author of a
well-known book, Les Couleurs Symboliques, published in
Paris in 1938 maintain that colours have the same
meaning for all peoples and at all periods of history;
that white, for instance, is always the symbol of divine
wisdom and red that of love. Yet a study of Portal's
book shows that all the examples he gives are taken,
with very few exceptions, from the same cultural region.
If the inquiry was extended to other parts of the world
should we come across the same tradition or find different
symbolic meanings?
Why paint fathers blue
and cypress trees red ?
Furthermore, are such systems based, in the final
analysis, on actual observation? In other words is
there any real basis for the symbolism of colour, and,
if so, should it be sought in outward, visible things or in
man himself? Should we attribute the significance of red,
for example, to the fact that this is the colour of blood
or instead, to the stimulating effect red-coloured objects
are known to produce on the human nervous system?
Psycho-analysts have recently taken a hand in the
solution of this problem and they have tried to combine
the individual symbolism of colours with their traditional
symbolism by a theory of the collective libido [the energy
or motive force, either so far as derived from the sex
instinct (according to Freud) or as derived from the
primal and all-inclusive instinct to live (according to
Jung).]
It is certainly no accident that Leonardo da Vinci,
depicting a snake biting the belly of a woman, employed
exactly the same colours as those used long, before by
Indian artists in Mexico painting a similar scene; in both
cases the colours represent and express the same impulses
of the sub-conscious.
Certain aspects of nature, such as the blue of the sky
or the green of grass and trees, obviously tend to arouse
in all human beings, whatever their racial origin or
culture, identical feelings which may produce the same
kinds of symbolism. It has also been shown that the
various wave-lengths of light have similar effects on all
nervous systems, and, applying this knowledge, doctors
sometimes use red in the treatment of smallpox, or blue
bandages for patients who have just had an operation.
Psychiatry has confirmed these facts. Havelock Ellis,
the British psychologist, observed that green is the favour¬
ite colour of homosexuals, and studies of the painting
of mental patients reveal that the colours used correspond
to changes in the patient's emotional behaviour and that,
in cases of periodic psychosis, dark and light periods
alternate (1).
(1) R. Volinat, L'Art psychopathologique, P.U.F., Paris, 1956.
24
However, neither nature nor emotions can do more
than suggest things to the mind; they do not offer a
basis for a coherent system of symbols. Psycho-analysis
may attribute a certain variation in the significance
attached to colours to the fact that human feelings are
ambivalent; thus red can express both love and hate;
yellow, the mystic impulse and deceit; and green, hope
and perversity. While these extremes may explain certain
traditional systems of symbols, where yellow, for instance,
can stand equally for God the Omnipotent, for strike¬
breakers and for a cuckold, they cannot account for a
whole series of facts emerging both from the paintings
of great artists and from those of mental patients. Here,
the symbolism is an individual one, and not that of a
group and this becomes clear when either painters or
patients are questioned when they are asked, for exam¬
ple, why they have painted their fathers blue or cypresses
red. And when individual and group symbolism tally,
it is not because psychological factors explain sociological
features, but because, on the contrary, outward civilization
imposes its standards and traditions on the individual,
even though he may be mentally ill.
Colour as the expression of certain emotional reactions
must therefore be dissociated from the problem of colour
as a symbol. The physiological impressions of our sense
organs, which cause us to talk of stimulating or depress¬
ing, cheerful or gloomy colours, may well, like the un¬
derlying impulses of the libido, converge with the cultural
symbolism of colour; they may also oppose it or even
ignore it completely. The cultural symbolism of colour
must, therefore, be considered independently of physio¬
logy or psycho-analysis.
Every civilization has its system of symbols. Historians
of mediaeval art come across many examples. At that
time the church laid down the colours that artists were
to use for the figures in religious paintings: the Virgin
Mary had to have a blue robe and Christ, who is also
attired in blue during his period of preparation, is clad
in black during the temptation in the wilderness, and
in white or red after His resurrection. The reason for
the blue garments is that the Virgin Mary and the Mes¬
siah come from heaven, black represents the encounter
with the prince of Darkness, and white and red stand
for the two aspects of God's nature, His wisdom and His
love.
Red for love (or hate)
Black for the devil
The real question, however, is whether or not the same
system of symbols recurs in all civilizations. So far
it has been the practice to compare the use of the
same colour in a number of entirely different countries or
during periods of history as distant as possible from one
another. We might take as an example, Bacchus' red
cloak, the crimson robe of the priest of Eleusis, the red
mantle donned by Mohammed on Fridays, the garments
of the Roman Emperors, the robes of Roman Catholic
cardinals, and so on, and seek the same significance in
things which may have a variety of meanings. (To find the
real meaning, one really needs to study colour in every
historical or cultural context and, above all, to consider
all the uses made of red: for example the practice of the
Amerindians who smeared their bodies with annatto before
going off to hunt or to do battle although this may have
only prophylactic significance or the use of the red

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
palanquin at Chinese weddings, which is connected with
the dualism of yin and yang (2).
Research on the symbolism of colour is within the
sphere of ethnography and, before using the comparative
method, one must first make a study of each of the
various systems of myths, proceeding slowly from one
cultural area to the next, or following the routes of the
great proto-historic or historic invasions. If we take two
African systems as examples, we shall see that colours
have a given significance only within certain contexts.
For the Dogons, the Blacksmith, who is to fashion men
and their society, comes down to earth on the rainbow
and takes its various hues to colour the stones from which
the limbs of men are to be wrought, the various human
organs, the seeds of plants and the compartments of the
celestial granary. However, although this system is coher¬
ent, it would be very difficult to establish a link between
the black of the left leg, the red of the left arm, or the
white of the right arm and the Western tradition of
black for the devil, red for love (or for hate) and white
for innocence. The significance of the colours depends
upon the myth as a whole; in another myth, they would
have a different meaning (3).
When Ogoun, the god
of war, turned crimson
The Dogon system is very familiar to Africanists, but
the Yoruba system is less well known, at least in this
particular connexion, so I shall describe it in rather
more detail. Every god has his own special colour: Oshala
(the sky-god), white; Shangô (the thunder-god), red;
Oshossi (the god of hunting), green and yellow; Oshoum
(the goddess of fresh water and love), yellow, and so on.
It is easy to understand how this classification of colours
originated; white is reminiscent of the dazzling bright¬
ness of the sky, red of the fiery thunderbolt, green and
yellow of the forest, and Oshoum's yellow of the muddy
water of the rivers.
After that, however, the system runs on by itself, that
is to say, any god, even if his powers or sphere of
action do not suggest any colour, has one attributed
to him in order that there may be no gap in the series. The
history of the gods also connects further colours with
them; for instance, because Shangô carried his father,
Oshala, who could no longer walk, in his arms, white is
henceforth added to his red, although white has nothing
to connect it in the first instance, with the thunder-god.
It is the myth which creates the symbols and not the
existence of symbols with constant and previously fixed
meanings which explains the myths. Moreover, as Oshala
is white and it is he who created the first man and
woman, white becomes the symbol of birth, and young
women who enter a "convent" for initiation ceremonies
that is, to be reborn wear white, even if they are
subsequently to dedicate themselves to some other god,
whose symbolic colour they will then wear.
Another example is provided by the chief wife of
Shangô, Yansan, who, as she steals the '"magic" of light¬
ning from her husband, also takes on his two colours, red
and white, while his two other wives or concubines keep
their original colours. Here once more the colour owes
its significance to the myth, or, in other words, it is the
god who transforms it into a symbol.
The example of the Yoruba is interesting from another
point of view: the Negroes of that nation, borne off to
America as slaves, took with them their own symbolic
classification of colours, which there, clashed with another
classification, that of Christianity. This is proof that each
civilization attributes different meanings to colours.
Oshun, for example, whose daughters wear yellow, was
assimilated with one of the forms of the Virgin Mary,
whose children are dressed in blue.
As time passed, however, in Rio de Janeiro the African
system began to show the influence of the Christian
(2) Terms of a dualism which runs through much of Chinese
philosophy, folklore, divination, religion, medicine and magic.
The yin is the female, negative, dark, evil principle as con¬
trasted with the yang, the male, positive, bright, beneficent
principle.
(3) Marcel Graule, Dieu d'Eau, Ed. du Chêne, Paris, 1948.
system and certain gods, like Ogoun, the god of war,
changed their colour. He took on the red of Shangô,
while Shangô's sons .wore white and Oshala added yellow
to his white. The reason why Ogoun became red is that,
for Western people, red is one of the symbols of war'
(when angry, we "'see red"), and Oshala added yellow
to his original colour because golden-yellow is the symbol
of the supreme Being. However, as one realizes on reading
the books published by the leaders of Umbanda Spiritism
(this being the form which the African religion takes in
Rio), the symbolism and the myth are so closely linked
that, in changing colour, the gods also change their
personality.
An interpretation of colour systems should be under¬
taken with reference to an interpretation of cultures, and
it would then become obvious that certain patterns can,
in fact, be distinguished. There is, for instance, the
dualistic pattern, which need not necessarily be white
and black; in China, it is red and green and, among
the Etruscans, it was red and black. There is also the
cosmic pattern, based on the cardinal points or the
different directions in space, which, of course changes,
in passing from one hemisphere to the other, if the colours
are linked, as they are among the Mexican Indians, with
the seasons, winds, forms of vegetation and natural
elements.
The problem of symbolism is not only of theoretical
interest; it also has practical implications. Although we
may not believe that the system of accepted symbols
depends wholly or mainly on feelings, we do believe, on
the other hand, that the opposite is true and that symbols
may influence feelings in certain ways. There is not only
colour symbolism: there is also colour prejudice, which
is affected by the symbolism. Examples might be taken
from Ancient Egypt, where the classification of beings
was reflected in the order or colours, or from India, where
each caste has its own colour. We need only consider
the forms of colour prejudice at present existing among
white men.
We have inherited from the Greeks and Christianity
the two extremes of white and black, representing purity
and evil. There is the example of Theseus, using the
black sail to symbolize failure, and the white sail success,
when he returned from Crete to Greece. In Christianity,
the chosen ones wear white tunics, and devils are black.
And this dualism can be seen even in our playing cards!
Colour prejudices: Negro
with a 'white man's' soul
Although we do not realize it, this association of
black with hell, death, the shades of night and sin,
inevitably influences the European view of Africans,
as if the colour of their skin had laid a curse upon them.
This is so true that when someone white is speaking of a
Negro Whom he admires or of one who has become in¬
tegrated into the white civilization, he may say that the
person in question may be a Negro, but he has the "soul of
a white man," as if, in order to make him acceptable, he
must at all costs discover something white in the Negro.
Similarly, in the system of colour symbols, grey is to
some extent ambivalent, being regarded either as
white tinged with black or as black tinged with white;
and in the same way attitudes towards half-castes tend to
be unfavourable or favourable, according to whether they
are seen as a travesty of white (white tinged with black)
or as an approach to white (black tinged with white).
Hence the existence of two contrasting forms of prejudice
among white people who thus may be prejudiced to a
greater or lesser extent against half-castes than against
Negroes.
It certainly cannot be said that colour prejudice is based
solely on such symbolism, but the latter definitely has an
influence, even among well-meaning white men. To re¬
cognize the relativity of systems of symbols may therefore
be an effective aid in eradicating race prejudices (both
against Asians, whom an Occidental may tend to consider
untrustworthy or hypocritical because he has been told
at school that they are yellow, and against Africans) and
of doing away with ethnic stereotypes two of the great
tasks that Unesco has set itself.
25
