'THE EARTH
AS A PLANET'
Since July 1, 1957, scientists of sixty-five nations have
been taking part in the International Geophysical
Year an organized global campaign to observe and
measure features of the earth and its vicinity that have
hitherto been beyond man's reach. (See The Unesco
Courier, September, 1957.)
It is to this unprecedented, concerted and concentrated
research effort that Unesco has dedicated its sixth
Travelling Science Exhibition, "'The Earth as a Planet",
which was shown in Paris from December 10 to January 17.
Among the most striking of more than 100 items of
scientific equipment are models of artificial satellites, two
French "Véronique" rockets (see this page) and the nose
cone of a U.S. Viking N° 9 rocket, recovered after a 135-
mile flight into the upper atmosphere.
Miniature radiotélescopes show how the sun's rays can
be observed, and other instruments demonstrate how
scientists study cosmic rays and measure the magnetic
field of the earth. Visitors can reproduce, by means of a
special lamp, the green and red rays of polar lights.
Such practical demonstrations as these and some thirty
exhibition panels bring home to the average man what is
meant by the science of geophysics. In addition graphic
illustration is provided of how the scientists of 65 countries
are collaborating in the work of the IGY, through a
demonstration of the system used to alert stations all
over the world by electrical relay, so as to ensure the
simultaneous observation of phenomena such as solar
flares.
Altogether, fourteen countries have provided the collec¬
tion of apparatus, instruments, photographs and other
illustrations.
This extensive exhibition is divided into seven sections:
solar activity, the earth as a magnet, the upper atmosphere
and the transmission of radio-electric waves, the lower
atmosphere and meteorology, auroral phenomena, cosmic
rays, and IGY research.
Following its showing in Paris, "'The Earth as a Planet"
will shortly begin a tour of some of Unesco's European
Member States.
'VERONIQUE', a French research rocket (right) on view
at Unesco's "The Earth as a Planet" Exhibition, in Paris,
is being used by scientists during the International Geophy¬
sical Year to study the upper atmosphere. A total of twelve
"Véronique" rockets will be launched, five of them during
May, from the research station at Colomb-Bechar in the
Sahara. This long, slender rocket (length 32 ft.; diameter
22in.) weighs 2,960 lb. (with a payload of 132 lb.) when
ready for launching, and 784 lb. after the propellant has
been burned. In its vertical trajectory, the rocket is guided
for the first 200 ft. by cables which are then automatically
detached. In 49 sec. the rocket attains its maximum velocity
of 6,233 ft. per second and reaches a height of 18 miles.
At the end of this powered flight the rocket continues to an
altitude of 136 miles (a total flight time of 250 sec. has
elapsed since takeoff). At this point the nose section separ¬
ates from the body of the rocket and is parachuted back
to earth (at a speed of I 64 ft. per second or 26 ft. per second,
depending on the type of equipment used). Data obtained
during the rocket's flight is either recorded by instruments
which are later recovered from the nose section after this has
been parachuted down, or is transmitted by radio during
flight and picked up by ground-based telemetering devices.
UNESCO - Bablin
24
