DENMARK'S
CITY NAMED
'GAMLES BY'
Main entrance to Old People's Town. High
wall hides a haven where life moves more
slowly than in bustling city of Copenhagen.
People are only allowed to take up residence
¡n "De Garnies By's" pleasant ivycovered flats
when they have reached the age of sixty-five.
Old age is relative and depends not on years but on com¬
panions. This is the way of thought in a special community
in Denmark where sixty-year-olds are regarded as young¬
sters and those in their seventies as at the "Prime of Life".
This is not a Hans Christian Andersen story, though it is a kind
or fairy tale ending for the lives of the old folks of Denmark.
Situated in the midst of busy, bustling Copenhagen, "De Garnies
By" which translated means "The Old People's Town" has an
existance of its own geared to the needs, capabilities and interests of
its inhabitants, none of whom are under sixty-five and some of
whom are in their late nineties.
A high wall separates "the town" from other parts of the city,
not to confine the inmates but to keep the outside world from
pressing too closely on this haven where life moves more slowly.
"De Garnies By " was built by the Corporation of Copenhagen
to provide a home for old people, incapable of looking after them¬
selves completely, yet still able to have semi-active lives. It can
accomodate some 1,560 occupants and was planned for the dual
purpose of giving the old folks a reason for living and at the same
time freeing hospital beds of patients who were only there because
they had no place else to go.
"The town" is divided into two sections the old buildings and
the new. The former are mainly occupied by pensioners, who each
have a bedroom of their own, share a communal recreation lounge
and take their meals in a central dining hall. Their pensions,
2,200 crowns per year for a single person and 3,500 crowns for
a couple, are paid into a central fund for their care and mainte¬
nance. They each receive 30 crowns a month as pocket money.
As the standard of meals is very high and costs more than could
be afforded by the communal fund, the deficit is met by City of
Copenhagen and the State. (A crown is about l/-or 15 cents.)
In the new section, the old people have small, but comfortably
furnished one or two-room apartments for a rental of some 35 to
46 crowns a month. These houses offer complete privacy and a
custodian, who is also a nurse, visits each home every day.
To take care of the bedridden, a special infirmary is attached
to the home and special attention is given to rehabilitating the
patients, so that, if possible they can look after themselves once
more the height of well-being and ambition of the aged.
Though basically an institution, every effort is made to give the
inhabitants as great a degree of independence as their strength
will allow and to maintain a close proximity to every day normality
in the activities of the-home so much so that even marriages take
place. But funerals are frequent, giving a constant reminder that
these old people are nearing the end of their life-span.
The old folks, however, do not have time to meditate on such
things. Flowers have to be tended, vegetable gardens weeded, baby
clothes knitted to welcome a great-great-grandchild, song parts
studied for the next meeting of the choir, library books to be
borrowed and the news of the day to be talked over not to
mention appointments to be kept with friends for card games or
draughts. And so life goes on at De Garnies. By.
U*X+m~ +*+
Veteran choir of 25 entertains fellow citizens. Added together mem¬
bers' ages total 2,000 years. Some citizens are in their late nineties.
"Municipal Library" is one of the most widely-used facilities. It is run
by a 72-year-old librarian, who was formerly a textiles manufacturer.
13
