ILLITERACY
AND NATIONAL INCOME
How is a country's level of literacy related to its
wealth and prosperity as a nation? To this question
there can be no simple, straightforward answer.
The relationship between literacy and national income is
complicated, because the level of national and per capita
Income in a country depends not only on the technical
skills of its people, but also on its capital assets and
natural resources.
Moreover, figures for literacy are not very good measures
of all the skills that go into the operation of a modern,
industrialized economy. Some of these skills and techni¬
cal abilities may be the result of generations of experience
and cannot be reflected by literacy rates. In general a
country's capital assets are created through a long, for¬
mative process often lasting decades or even centuries.
We cannot then assume that a close relationship exists
between literacy rates and the level of national income,
though there are, nevertheless, sound reasons for consider¬
ing that they are to some extent related.
The United Nations' Preliminary Report on the World
Social Situation includes a table of the 1950 per capita
income of 75 countries and territories. This shows that
25 countries had per capita incomes equivalent to 300 U.S.
dollars or over, 10 countries between 150 and 300 dollars
and that 40 countries were below the 150 dollar level. By
dividing the countries into two categories at the 300 dollars
per capita income level and separating the adult illiteracy
rates of the countries at three levels high (50 per cent or
more), medium (20 to 49 per cent) and low (less than
20 per cent) we arrive at some idea of the association
between these two factors.
Taking figures for adult illiteracy rates and per capita
incomes of 41 countries in 1950 we find that 12 of
them which had high illiteracy rates also had rela¬
tively low per capita income. Of 16 countries with low illi¬
teracy rates, all except Japan had relatively high per capita
income. As regards the 13 other countries, with illiteracy
rates between 20 and 49 per cent, all except twrj Puerto
Rico and Venezuela had per capita incomes of less than
300 dollars.
From these general figures let us go on to examine the
development of per capita income in four specific coun¬
tries, in relation to the level and trend of their illiteracy
rates, starting with the United States of America. Here
the illiteracy rate declined from 20 per cent in 1870 to
10.7 per cent In 1900 and continued to fall after the
beginning of the century until by 1950 it had dropped to
3.2 per cent.
Expressed in terms of the 1929 dollar, the per capita
gross national product had increased from $268 in the
period around 1870 to $542 in the period around 1900.
Thereafter it continued to increase (except during the
depression years around 1930) until it reached a high level
of about S 1,200 in 1953. In other words, the per capita
income more than doubled in the 50 years after 1900.
At the same time it will be seen that the United States,
around 1870, started at a relatively high level of literacy.
While the country's rapid rise to prosperity was due to
many factors, including the discovery of natural resources
and the high annual rate of accruing capital, the evi¬
dence nevertheless shows a parallel development in the
reduction of illiteracy and increased per capita income.
In Norway, the rate of increase of the gross annual
product (in terms of 1938 prices) was greater than that
of the United States150 per cent, or from less than
1,000 kroner per capita at the start of the century to over
2,500 kroner in 1953. Data on illiteracy rates are not
available for Norway, but the high proportion of children,
aged from 7 to 14, attending school from at least 1875
16
justifies the assumption that the country had reached a
very high level of literacy at the beginning of the century.
(The percentage of school attendance was 84.3 per cent in
1875 and had risen to 91.4 per cent by 1940. Here again,
then, we find an indication of the association between the
educational level of a people and its productive capacity.
The example of Italy shows a rise in national income
at a slower rate than that of either the United States or
Norway. At the beginning of the century, the per capita
Income, in terms of 1938 prices, was around 2,300 lire.
By 1954 this had increased to about 3,500 lire a rise of
50 % in half a century. Italy's population was about
50 per cent illiterate in 1900, though the rate has declined
considerably since. (Around 1950 adult illiteracy was esti¬
mated to be between 10 and 15 per cent.)
The trends in Spain have been somewhat similar to
those in Italy. On the basis of 1929 prices, the per capita
income level rose from about 850 pesetas near the start
of the century to about 1,200 pesetas in 1953 something
less than 50 % over a half century. Spain entered the
20th century with an illiteracy rate even higher than
Italy, though today it may be considered among the rela¬
tively more literate nations with less than 20 per cent illi¬
teracy in the population 10 years old and over as of 1950.
The educational development of a country is perhaps
related to the distribution of income within it even more
closely than to the level of per capita income. Where
Income is more concentrated in a small proportion of the
population, education tends to be the privilege of the few,
and a large part of the people will remain illiterate. On
the other hand, as literacy skills and education in general
become more widespread, the gap between the high-
income and low-income groups will be reduced, and the
nation's total income will become more evenly distributed.
However, statistics on income distribution are only avail¬
able for a few countries, and are hardly comparable be¬
tween countries.
In the United Nations' report, already mentioned, the
example is cited of four countries Ceylon, El Salvador,
Puerto Rico and Italy where, around 1950, one-third or
more of the total income was received by the richest tenth
of the population. In five other countries Canada, Den¬
mark, Sweden, United Kingdom and the United States
the upper tenth accounted for less than one-third of the
total income. It should be remarked that the countries
in the first group all have higher illiteracy rates than
those in the second group. Furthermore, in the United
Kingdom and the United States, for example, the trend
towards less concentration of income in the upper
brackets, as compared with an earlier period, can already
be seen.
Another aspect to consider is the proportion of na¬
tional income devoted to educational expenditure. A
recent Unesco study (Public Expenditure on Educa¬
tion, Paris, 1955) shows that total expenditure on education
about 1950 by central and local governments varied from
less than 1 per cent to more than 5 per cent of the nation¬
al income of each country. If we separate the countries
according to whether they spent more or less than 2 per
cent of their national income on education, and relate
them to their adult illiteracy rates, we find in general
that those countries with high rates of adult illiteracy
spent a small proportion of national income on education.
A study of the statistics available shows, however, that
some countries with relatively low national income spent
a relatively larger part of it on education. Of course, the
absolute amounts of expenditure may still be very small
in such countries, as compared with the educational
expenditures of the more prosperous ones. Moreover, in
the latter countries, many other items of government
expenditure are also likely to be large, thus keeping down
the percentage expressed by educational expenditure.
