BERTRAND RUSSELL,
KALINGA PRIZE
WINNER FOR 1957
Bertrand Russell the British philo¬
sopher, scientist and writer, who has
been awarded the Kalinga Prize for
1957, was born in 1872, and in the course
of his long career he has written more than
40 books, many of them dealing with
philosophy and mathematics.
In 1950 he received the Nobel Prize for
literature "'in recognition of his many-
sided and significant authorship, in which
he has constantly figured as a defender of
humanity and freedom of thought."
Perhaps his greatest and possibly his most
enduring book is the Principia Mathematica
(1910), in which he collaborated with the
late Alfred North Whitehead (afterwards
professor of philosophy at Harvard
University). Most of Bertrand Russell's
works have been widely translated. In
addition he has contributed to books edited
by others and has written numerous articles
and essays.
In 1944, returning to England after
living for several years in the United States,
he completed the book which has been
described as his "philosophical testament",
Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Its
Limits. Remarking on the enormous sweep
of this work, one critic observed: "All the
central issues in contemporary philosophy,
from the theory of meaning to the nature
of space-time are discussed with... char¬
acteristic incisiveness, technical skill and
imagination."
Lecturer at many universities he began
at the London School of Economics and
Political Science in 1896 Bertrand Russell
has captured the interest and admiration of
audiences from China to Chicago and from
Australia to Uppsala. He has received
awards from many learned societies,
including the Sylvester Medal of the Royal
Society and the Nicholas Murray Butler
Medal of Columbia University. In 1949
he was awarded the Order of Merit (an
exclusive British order, the ordinary
members of which do not exceed 24).
As mathematician and philosopher, he
developed an early interest in interpreting
science for general readers. One of his
earliest books was Essay on the Foundations
of Geometry. In 1903 came his first
important book, The Principles of Ma¬
thematics; in 1919 he published Introduction
to Mathematical Philosophy and in 1923,
The ABC of Atoms. Others of his books
to read: The ABC of Relativity, The
Analysis of Matter, The Prospects of
Industrial Civilization and A History of
Western Civilization.
His radio and TV broadcasts on
philosophic and scientific questions have
added greatly to the wide audience reached
by his writings. It was on one of these
occasions, which also marked his becoming
an octogenerian, that he declared
expressing the outlook of a man who has
spent his life in the search for truth
"I think one of the troubles of the world
has been the habit of dogmatically believing
something or other, and I think all these
matters are full of doubt and the rational
man will not be too sure he is right. I
think that we ought always to entertain our
opinions with some measure of doubt."
The Unesco Courler. February 1958
PREVIOUS AWARDS
1952 Louis de Broglie (France)
First winner of the- Kalinga Prize was Professor Louis de
Broglie, an internationally-famous figure both for research
in theoretical physics and for pioneer achievements In the
popularization of science. A Nobel Prize winner In physics
(1929) and permanent secretary of the French Academy of
Science, Louis de Broglie Is the discoverer of the fundamen¬
tal principles of wave mechanics. Among his books on
science which exist In English: Matter and Light, the new
physics; An Introduction to the Study of Wave Mechanics; The
Revolution in Physics, a non-mathematical survey of quanta.
1953 Huxley (United Kingdom)
Julian Huxley, who won the Kalinga Prize in 1953, was
Unesco's first Director-General (1946-48). He has been
an interpreter of scientific subjects through books, articles,
lectures, radio and films. As secretary of the London Zoolo¬
gical Society (1935-1942) he encouraged educational visits.
He has lectured widely on evolution, the biology of sex, the
social relations of science, and on zoological questions. Books
of Huxley's to read: The Individual in the Animal Kingdom, The
Stream of Life, Essays in Popular Science, Evolution and Ethics.
1954 - Waldemar Kaempffert (U.S.A.)
Winner of the Kalinga Prize in 1954, Waldemar Kaempffert
was for nearly 30 years science editor of The New York
Times, during which time he wrote his Influential two-
column Sunday feature, "Science in Review". One of the
organizers of the National Association of Science Writers, he
had both a profound influence on the quality of science
reporting in the U.S. and on the extensive use of specialized
science writers by American newspapers. He died last year.
Popular books of his to read: The ABC of Radio, Invention
and Society, Science Today and Tomorrow, Explorations in Science.
1955 Pi y Suñer (Venezuela)
An eminent scientist whose works and research in physiology
have won him honours in many countries, Dr. Augusto Pi
y Suñer held the chair of physiology at the University of
Caracas, Venezuela, and was Director of the University's
Institute of Experimental Medicine, when he was awarded
the 1955 Kalinga Prize. A firm believer that scientific
progress must be brought within public understanding,
Dr. Pi y Suñer has devoted many books and lectures to
the popularization of science. Two of his books in
English are: The Bridge of Life and Classics of Biology.
1956 George Gamow (U.S.A.)
A nuclear physicist, George Gamow is known both for his
studies in the field of theoretical physics, particularly In the
application of nuclear reactions to the evolution of stars
as well as for his books for the general public. His special
contribution to the non-scientific world has been through
books in which cosmology and nuclear physics have been
made Intelligible and absorbing to the layman. A trilogy
Birth and Death of the Sun, Biography of the Earth, and
Creation of the Universe brings to the reader in rich prose
and exciting narrative knowledge which the physicists
have discovered of the nature and origin of the universe.
UNESCO Photos
