MESS AGES
FROM SPACE
WITH SOLAR
JS A«, JL JL Its j\ JL £a kl
Soviet Sputniks and American satellites are trans- :
mitting important data on conditions in space as
well as in the upper reaches of the earth's atmo¬
sphere thanks to power picked up directly from the sun.
Unlike the earlier artificial satellites, the latest ones
launched during the International Geophysical Year
are now equipped with solar batteries which means
that scientists now have an efficient means of receiving
information from the satellites for years to come.
Though the life of these solar batteries has not yet
been determined, some scientists believe that they will
last about ten years, others hint that they may be
charged indefinitely by the sun.
The first Soviet and American Sputniks were
equipped with standard, though specially sensitive
batteries (working on a mercury principle) to supply
the needed electricity for their transmitters. But after
several weeks their power was exhausted and they
ceased operating. Thus one transmitter of the second
U.S. satellite faded out in less than three weeks.
Both the American and Soviet solar batteries now
hurtling through space consist of wafer-thin silicon
cells smaller than the size of common razor blades.
(The cells in American batteries are l/400th of an inch
thick). Each cell contains two layers of silicon of
different electrical properties so that when sunlight
strikes a cell, electrons move from the first layer
(positive) to the second (negative), creating an electric
current.
The second U.S. satellite, launched on March 17,
1958, has six solar batteries spaced on its surface
' (diagram below) so that at least one of them is in
direct sunlight except when the satellite finds itself
in the earth's shadow. (Because of its distance from
the earth, it is estimated that it will not be in the
shadow period 85% of the time).
The third Soviet satellite, sent up on May 18, 1958
(it carried a ton of scientific equipment and measuring
instruments) has nine solar battery sections Four are
installed on the front end plate, four on the side
surface and one on the back end plate. This arrange¬
ment ensures normal working irrespective of the
Sputnik's orientation in relation to the sun.
SECTION "A-A*
BATTERY-POWERED
TRANSMITTER
INSTRUMENTATION
PACKAGE
BATTERIES
CRYSTAL
-SOLAR -POWERED
TRANSMITTER
17
