THE ROOTS OF PREJUDICE
Racism, or the 'superiority complex'
by Arnold M. Rose
(2)
In this issue we continue the serialization begun last month of "The Roots of Prejudice,"
by Arnold Rose, Professor of Sociology at the University of Minnesota, U.S.A.,
published by Unesco in its series "The Raqe Question in Modern Science". (See
bibliography page 35). In this article, Professor Rose discusses ignorance of other
peoples and the "superiority complex" as causes of racial prejudice and shows how
prejudice harms those who indulge in it as much as those against whom it is directed;
Prejudice is nearly always accompanied by incorrect or
ill-informed opinions regarding the people against
whom it is felt. Many of the false beliefs take the
form of what social scientists call "'stereotypes'". These
are exaggerations of certain physical traits or cultural
characteristics which are found among members of the
minority group and are then attributed to all members of
the group. When stereotypes exist, an individual is
judged, not on the basis of his own characteristics, but on
the basis of exaggerated and distorted beliefs regarding
what are thought to be the characteristics of his group.
All members of the group are falsely assumed to be alike,
exceptions being ignored or their existence denied.
Stereotypes take strange forms. They are usually un¬
favourable to the subordinated group, but not always.
Stereotypes about Negroes in South Africa and the United
States, for example, depict them as brutal, stupid, and
immoral, but also as happy, generous and faithful. This
pattern makes sense in terms of the effort to use Negroes
as servants and unskilled workers, because the "good"
traits seem to justify their treatment as childlike subor¬
dinates and to indicate their satisfaction with this treat¬
ment.
A stereotype applied to one group of people at one time
may be applied to another group at a later time. In
England during the seventeenth century the Scottish Low-
landers were stereotyped as coarse, cruel and animal¬
like people. By the nineteenth century, this stereotype
was applied no longer to the Scots, but to the Irish.
Stereotypes can change very rapidly: in Western countries
before 1940, the Japanese were thought of as sly but weak,
rigid and unimaginative. After the outbreak of war with
Japan in 1941 the stereotype of the Japanese still included
slyness, but shifted to include toughness and resource¬
fulness as well. After the victory over Japan in 1945, and
the beginning of a successful occupation, the stereotype
dropped slyness and substituted gullibility.
A stereotype applied to a group of people in one country
may not be applied to that group in another country, but
rather to another minority group. The stereotype about
Jews in Central Europe includes a belief in their strong
sexuality and tendency towards sexual perversion. This
is not the case in the United States, where, although there
are other stereotypes regarding Jews, the sexual stereo¬
type is applied rather to Negroes, especially in the
Southern States.
The ' ignorance which supports prejudice has a great
range. It may take the form of false information about
people's physical characteristics, cultural practices, or
beliefs. It may take the form of myths about superhuman
powers or childlike weaknesses. The prejudice of Germans
about other peoples included sterotypes about the French
as immoral degenerates, about the British as bumbling
fools, about the Americans as narrow-minded wastrels,
about the Russians as stolid and stupid ignoramuses, about
the Jews as scheming perverts. This is just an illustra¬
tion of the astounding range of ignorance that can occur
in one modern country.
20
Stereotypes and other incorrect beliefs about groups of
people are not necessarily least frequent when there are
many members of the minority group about, who, through
their appearance and behaviour, disprove the false beliefs.
The strongest prejudice and the largest number of false
beliefs about Negroes are to be found among the whites
of South Africa, who live among a black population which
outnumbers them by four or five to one. There are many
more stereotypes about Negroes in the Southern States
of the United States than in the Northern States, although
Negroes form a much higher proportion of the population
in the former than in the latter area.
But no generalization can be made in the opposite sense
either: areas with a small minority group are not necessar¬
ily freer of stereotypes about their members than are
areas where they exist in large numbers. In Germany after
World War I there were proportionately few Jews living
in Bavaria. Yet there were apparently many more false
beliefs about Jews in Bavaria than in cosmopolitan Berlin,
where there were more Jews. Until a few decades ago
there were more false beliefs about American Indians in
North America, where they were few in number, than in
South America, where they are much more numerous.
These and similar facts disprove the Widely held opinion
that prejudice is strongest where minority races are
largest.
One of the requirements for ignorance about a group of
people is social isolation, which can occur even where
there is considerable contact. People can live next door
to each other as neighbours, one person can even work in
another's home or shop, but still they will not necessarily
get to know each other as human beings. Both physical
and social segregation usually accompany prejudice: they
are among its effects, but also among its causes, as they
promote ignorance and ignorance bolsters prejudice.
Ignorance opens the way
for racist propaganda
Ignorance among the mass of people enables the propa¬
gandist for economic exploitation or political domina¬
tion to gain his ends more easily. II one group of
people knows nothing about another group or has false
beliefs about it, it is susceptible to the camouflaged
demands of the exploiters. People can even be misled as
to who their real enemy is by a propagandist who plays
on their ignorance.
It is apparent from this brief discussion (a) that igno¬
rance takes the form either of absence of knowledge or
of false belief; (b) that ignorance itself is not so much a
direct cause of prejudice as it is a pre-condition or bolster
of prejudice. In the latter capacity, ignorance is a more
important factor in prejudice against some groups than

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
it is against other groups. Where it is a significant factor,
information which fills gaps in knowledge or contradicts
false beliefs can be a valuable weapon against prejudice.
Not only does such information weaken directly one of
the supports of prejudice/but it partially nullifies the pro¬
pagandist's attempts at exploitation.
The problems of intergroup relations may be classified
according to three types. One kind is political in motive.
This intergroup tension is based on a struggle for power.
Such rivalries have been frequent in international rela¬
tions, and a modern example of them may be found in
the long-standing hatred between France and Germany.
Sometimes one country may contain two groups struggling
against each other for political power. Much of the vio¬
lence, discrimination, and prejudice that has divided the
Serbs and Croats in Yugoslavia was of this nature.
A second class of intergroup tensions arises from
differences of religious belief. The history of the West
was marked for many centuries by violence between
Christians and Muslims and later between Catholics and
Protestants. Part of the modern conflict between
Fascism , Communism, and democracy is caused by a
difference in belief, although most of it is based on a
struggle for political power. Belief differences between
groups frequently involve the notion that nonbelievers are
agents or advocates of sin, heresy, corruption, or some
other. form of evil. To persecute them is to do justice or
perform a service for the Lord.
Grading men like animals
into higher or lower races
Belief differences are especially associated with preju¬
dice when one group has. a strongly developed con¬
viction that its own beliefs are superior to all others.
Such an ideology has been more strongly developed in
connexion with the Jewish, Christian, Muslim, and Shin-
toist religions than with the Hindu, Buddhist, Confu-
cianist, and most- forms of pagan religion. It is perhaps
for this reason that prejudice is more frequently found
where followers of one of the former religions are domi¬
nant. This- is true even though some of these religions
consider unfairness and violence to be abhorrent.
Whereas intergroup tensions based on the struggle for
power or on differences- of belief have existed since the
beginning of recorded history, the third type racism
seems to ' be largely a modern phenomenon. It was at
least rare until its modern development less than two
centuries ago as a perversion of early biological science,
and it still has not spread much into cultures other than
those of the West. .
That there were physical differences among people had
always been obvious, of course. Some individuals of
ancient and medieval times regarded individuals with
different physical features as obnoxious (although others
considered such physical differences to be especially
interesting or desirable). Yet all men, whatever their
physical traits, were regarded as human beings (or at
worst fallen angels), quite different from the creatures
called animals.
When the natural historians of the eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries were classifying and describing
species, they introduced the notion that men were to be
classified into five races, which could be graded like
species of animals, into higher and lower. Scientific
biologists soon corrected this early error by showing that
mankind was of one origin and that racial differences
were later developments, so that no one race could be
ranked higher than any other. Nevertheless, the concept
of races was seized upon and elaborated into a whole
new basis for intergroup antagonism which is now called
racism.
Racism is a set of popular beliefs which includes the
following elements:
1. The differences between groups differences in body
and in mind are all due to hereditary biology, and
nothing can change them. According to this theory,
for example, if Negroes are, on the average, not as
intelligent as whites, this is due to their heredity and
can no more be changed than their skin colour.
2. A second part of this theory is that habits, attitudes,
beliefs, behaviour and all the things we learn are
determined for us before we are born. For example
according to this popular theory, Jews are born to be
sharp businessmen and Japanese are born to act in an
insincere manner.
3. All differences between a minority group and the
majority group are thought to be signs of inferiority.
For example, according to this popular theory, Jewish
religion, Catholic religion, and the Negro's expression
of religion are all inferior to the white Protestant's
religion.
4. If there should be biological crossing of the groups, the
children will be more degenerate than either of the
parent groups. Civilization including family life,
religion and morals will disappear and men will
become savage animals.- The details of what would
happen if there were "intermarriage" are usually left
to the imagination, and. just the ugly word
" mongrelization" is used to suggest the results.
Because of this, everything must be done to prevent
the two groups from having easy social relations with
each other. For example, if parents allowed a Jewish
boy to. "'date" a Gentile girl, the two might want to
get married, and the children of such a marriage
. would be "lost" according to this theory. Another
example: if Negroes were allowed to eat in the same
restaurants as whites, they might become so bold as to
ask whites for their daughters' hands in marriage
according to the racist theory.
These racist beliefs have become so widespread, so
unconscious, and so traditional among many peoples of
the West that racism may be regarded as an independent
cause of prejudice today. Some social scientists consider
it to be the only really important kind of prejudice
between peoples, and they use the term "'race prejudice"
to refer to all the things we are considering in this
study. Where racist beliefs occur they apply as much
to religious groups, national groups, or groups of other
types as to the strictly racial groups defined by anthro¬
pologists.
To understand better how racism has become a root of
modern prejudice, it is important to examine its history
in several countries. One of the first countries in which
it developed was the United States. At the beginning of
the nineteenth century Negro slavery was well established
in the United States. Little attempt was made to justify
it, however, except on the grounds of economic conve¬
nience and the fact that it had existed for a long time.
Many people, including large slaveholders, were in favour
of abolishing it as incompatible with the growth of
democracy. Prejudice was not particularly associated
slavery, since white people accepted freed slaves on
their own merits and since many wealthy white people
allowed their slaves to go free. Certainly there was no
prejudice against Negroes on any of the racial grounds
we have just examined.
Unpleasant jobs to be done
were good enough for slaves
About that time a great new profit was discovered in
slaves: the invention of the cotton gin and of a
process for extracting sugar from cane, coupled with
new facilities for international trade, made the Southern
States a region of great potential wealth. This required
cheap labour that could be held to the unpleasant task of
growing and picking cotton and sugar cane. Not enough
free people would do this work; not even immigrants from
Europe, brought over especially for the task. So, many
more Negro slaves were brought in (although this was
now illegal); the area of cotton growing was greatly
extended; many people grew wealthy rapidly; and the
South maintained a precarious dominance of power in
the nation as a whole because of its wealth.
During this period pressures were exerted
to abolish slavery: other countries were
abolishing slavery, it was, now considered
to be immoral and barbarous; and some of
the poor whites of the South did not like

THE ROOTS OF
PREJUDICE
(Continued from page 21)
Boomerang victims
HOISTED WITH THEIR
OWN RACIST PETARDS
a system which gave all power to the wealthy slave owners.
In this setting, the concepts of racism served perfectly
as a justification. The Negroes were declared to be a
childlike race, which must be directed in work for its
own good and which must be kept inferior to the poor
whites for the good of civilization. Prejudice of the racist
variety took hold of the South and has remained there to
the present day.
In Western Europe during the first half of the
nineteenth contury, racism was a doctrine elaborated only
by a few writers. This does not mean that there was no
prejudice, but simply that prejudice was then religious
and cultural in character rather than racial. At first,
racism had little popular appeal, as democratic and
humanitarian ideology was generally dominant over the
older aristocratic ideology. By 1870, however, the aristo¬
crats, in a desperate search for tools and allies to support
their waning power, seized upon racism as a useful
propaganda device. In Germany two groups of poli¬
ticians discovered that by building up anti-Semitism, then
a weak remnant of an ancient religious antagonism, they
could also build their own political strength.
One of these groups was led by court chaplain Stoecker
and other "romantics", who wanted to create a new
kind of reactionary social order much like modern
Fascism. The other group Was led by Chancellor
Bismarck who was trying to maintain himself in office
against the opposition of the growing Liberal and
Socialist parties. The latter had Jewish leaders, and
anti-Semitism seemed a useful policy even though Bis¬
marck was not personally anti-Semitic. His successors in
the German Government continued to use anti-Semitism
until it became part of the popular tradition.
In Russia, the corrupt and inefficient Tsarist govern¬
ment also sought to gain political support by adopting
racism. In 1880 the Tsarist police began a programme
of propaganda against Jews Which was racist in tone, and
instigated the first of a series of pogroms against them.
The device did help to divert the peasants and some city
workers from their real troubles for a number of years,
but nevertheless the Tsarist government ultimately fell.
In France there was the famous Dreyfus case, in which
anti-Semitism was used as a political weapon.
Racism was thus a body of traditions some general,
some specific that became part of the popular culture
of some Western countries but not of others. Where it
was accepted, it influenced people to think in terms of
biological race superiority and to act in a violent and
prejudiced manner towards certain minority groups.
Wherever it has existed it has superseded, or at least
become interwoven with, all other bases of group
antagonism.
TEN EVILS OF PREJUDICE
Many people believe that the harmful effects of preju¬
dice are felt only by those against whom it is indulg¬
ed. There can be no doubt that restriction of job
opportunities, lack of access to facilities (both publicly and
privately owned) that are meant to serve the population
in- general, the presence of bias and antagonism in law
enforcement officials, and many other manifestations of
prejudice, are directly harmful to those people whom they
affect. But it is not so obvious that those Who feel the
prejudice, and who enforce the discriminations which are
its visible manifestations, are themselves victims of their
own attitude and behaviour. This misunderstanding
might itself be regarded as one contributory root of
prejudice, since few people would so strongly maintain a
kind of behaviour which they considered to be harmful
28
to themselves. It is therefore necessary for us first to
examine the ways in which prejudice is harmful to the
prejudiced.
Loss of manpower & productivity
mm In the first place, there is the direct economic waste
m^ entailed by failure to use the full productivity of
manpower and the fullest demands of the market. In
so far as people are kept unemployed because of
(prejudice, or are employed at lower tasks than they
are capable of handling, there is waste. Every
employer loses by not hiring the most efficient workers
available, and every consumer loses by having to pay
higher prices for his purchases.
The loss is most serious and most obvious during
periods of manpower shortage, but it can be demon¬
strated to exist at other times also. It usually takes
an indirect form, and thus is not readily apparent to
most persons. Also, as we have seen, some people
benefit directly from prejudice, and so are especially
' unlikely to notice the indirect loss.
While prejudice is just one among many sources of
loss, it is seen to be a significant one when We note its
connexion with low standards of living in several parts
of the world. In such regions, even if natural resources
are abundant and there is no overpopulation, prejudice
keeps productivity per person low. The Southern
States of the U.S.A. offer an obvious example of this.
Increases in sickness and crime
m% A second type of economic cost of prejudice is that
u^ which arises out of social problems Which are
aggravated. Much of this cost is borne by a govern¬
ment budget. Where prejudice creates social problems,
the government must control. or alleviate them. Even
a government run by the most prejudiced people finds
it imperative to' control communicable diseases and
epidemics, maintain a police and jail system, offer
some protection against accidents, and provide a
minimum of direct relief so that starvation will not.
be too obvious. The costs are frequently more direct.
The bad health of a group of people kept down by pre¬
judice creates an unhealthy environment for the pre--
judiced. The costs of crime are met not only by the
government but also by the criminals' victims.
Waste in time, talk & money
n A third group of costs is to be measured in terms of
time wasted before being translated into terms of
money. A casual inspection of the front pages of the
world's newspapers would indicate that the people of
countries where prejudice prevails spend much time in
discussions on how to treat minority groups. Only in
prejudiced countries are congresses and parliaments
frequently engaged in debate and legislation concern¬
ing minority groups. Many of the private organiza¬
tions ranging from businessmen's groups and unions
to sports groups and social clubs in these countries
find it necessary to take time to consider how and in
what degree to apply their prejudiced policies in
specific cases. In terms of the primary aims of these
congresses and organizations, such activity is a waste
of time. The group could turn its attention to matters
more directly connected with its own well-being, or
it could release its members sooner to pursue their own
interests.
Then, too, the existence of more laws and rules

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
creates more opportunities for litigation and for
contesting the rules. Give people a grievance and an
enormous amount of time will be spent in indulging
it. The prejudiced peoples of the world impose on
ithemselves a huge burden simply by obliging them¬
selves to decide how and to what extent in specific
cases they shall hold down the people against whom
they are prejudiced. This burden has to be measured
in terms of time and mental energy.
Undermines international goodwill
| A fourth cost of prejudice is seen most clearly in the
relation between nations today. Each nation is
anxious to gain the good will or respect of other
nations, whether its ultimate aim be peaceful accom¬
modation or domination. Diplomacy, international eco¬
nomic assistance, participation in world organizations,
and all other governmental activities directed towards
other nations, are aimed at acquiring prestige and
influence. These efforts on the part of some nations
are partially nullified by acts of prejudice within those
nations. Few people will regard with complacency
acts of violence and discrimination against members
pf their own race or nationality in another country.
And many other people wonder whether an ally is to
be trusted if it engages in acts of prejudice against
minority groups. While prejudice is only one factor
among many, a survey of international attitudes today
would show that there is no complete trust or respect
for nations in which prejudice prevails.
The diplomatic efforts and goodwill activities of
these nations cannot have their full influence. This
is especially true when the diplomats themselves
manifest prejudice against their allies.
Fully two-thirds of the people of the world today
are members of races towards whom much prejudice
has been shown. Some of these people have now
formed important nations, and others show signs of
developing in that direction. It is these peoples espe¬
cially which regard prejudice in other nations as part
of the foreign policy of those nations. Much of the
rational and expensive efforts in the diplomacy of the
latter nations is thus wasted by prejudice.
Builds barriers to knowledge
) Thus far we have been counting the measurable eco¬
nomic waste caused by prejudice. There are also psy¬
chological forms of waste that cannot be easily trans¬
lated into money, time or effort, although their effects
may be more devastating in the long run. Our fifth
damaging effect of prejudice on the prejudiced arises
from the fact that it creates barriers to communica¬
tion. A great deal of knowledge and culture is lost
to prejudiced people, because they will not meet and
talk with those who have this knowledge and culture.
There is little realization on the part of the preju¬
diced of how much they miss in this way, but the
lack of recognition does not alter the fact. As the
hitherto subordinated peoples have secured indepen¬
dence, they have turned particular attention to learn¬
ing and science. Though they have a great deal of
lag to make up, some of their developments in this
field are already approaching those of the hitherto
dominant peoples. Thus the barrier to communica¬
tion created by prejudice is having an ever-increasing
damaging effect on the prejudiced.
Useless outlet for frustration
i Prejudice serves as an outlet for frustration, as we
shall have occasion to emphasize later. A number of
studies have shown that the presentation of a frustrat¬
ing situation will, in most circumstances, increase
prejudice towards any group that happens to provide
a convenient outlet. Since the prejudices we are
concerned with are manifested by whole groups of
people, the frustrations which give rise to them must
(be extensive and serious ones. Such frustrations arise
from external circumstances such as economic depres¬
sions, lack of satisfaction in family relations, and so
on. These are admittedly difficult problems. But
prejudice does not solve them. At best it can tempo¬
rarily relieve the feeling of frustration. This tempo¬
rary relief is harmful, since it prevents the search
for, and action towards, the real solution of the
frustration. This point will be given fuller attention
in a later section.
Closes the door to progress
Recent researches have shown the correlation between
prejudice and other kinds of rigidity and narrowness,
at least in Western culture. While the cause is not
(yet clear, the connexion is so strong that it may fairly
be inferred that the maintenance of prejudice will be
accompanied by a closed mind towards anything new
and an inability to accept and reciprocate fully any
human relationship. Clearly, anyone who has these
personality defects is missing much of what life has
to offer.
Breeding ground for terrorism
I Prejudice is partially characterized by fear and
anxiety in relation to the groups against which it is
directed. In Europe during the Middle Ages, many
people terrified themselves, and their neighbours with
beliefs that Jews were agents of the Devil and that
they engaged in ritual sacrifices of Gentile children.
Many of the minor Nazis of modern Germany were
convinced that Jews were engaged in an international
plot to enslave their country. Prejudiced people every¬
where exaggerate the numbers and power of the mi¬
nority groups in their home areas. These and other
facts indicate that a feeling of terror is a motive for
an act of terrorism. The fears and anxieties are
based on false beliefs, but the psychological pain they
cause to those who feel them is real enough. Preju¬
dice thus contributes to unhappiness.
Can spread like a contagion
| When prejudice is part of the culture of a people, it
can shift its direction from one group to another.
The history of countries where prejudice has existed
shows that different minorities have been the objects
of prejudice at different times. The objects of preju¬
dice are not as stable as is commonly thought. The
immigration of a new nationality group to a country
where prejudice is entrenched as of Indians to
South Africa or of Chinese to the United States can
be the basis of a new focusing of prejudice which had
previously been directed to another group. The devel¬
opment of tensions between governments as between
France and Germany in 1914 and 1938 or as between
the Vatican and Germany in the late 1930s can
become the basis of popular false beliefs and discri¬
mination against peoples or religious groups. No
group of people is safe from prejudice when any other
group is already its object.
Ultimate effect: violation of the law
J Closely associated with prejudice is disrespect for law
and unwillingness to settle disputes peacefully. When
one group of people is prejudiced against another
group, it is generally unwilling to apply the usual laws
and standards of behaviour to the persons who are
objects of prejudice. Violation of the law when
it is to be applied to such persons is one of the most
typical forms of discrimination. In many countries
of the world it has been found that unchecked violence
and deprivation of civil rights directed against one
group can easily spread to all other groups. When
laws are misused or ignored, they become weakened,
and illegality becomes part of the entire culture.
Where a dangerous cultural practice exists, any person
or group may become its victim.
Yet there can be little doubt that prejudiced people
believe that prejudice cannot be directed against them
or that it has no harmful effects on them. If they
understood the consequences of their own attitudes and
behaviour, they could at least question their own preju¬
dices. This has not only been demonstrated logically,
but also empirically, by direct questioning of prejudiced
people. Even when aware of the action of prejudice on
minority groups, they are not aware of the reaction of
prejudice on themselves. Ignorance of the full conse¬
quences and repercussions of prejudice is thus a pre¬
condition or necessary cause although not a sufficient
explanation of prejudice.
To be continued next month
29
