by
J. Alun Thomas
Few men have accomplished more in their span of life
than a humble Welshman by the name of Griffith
Jones. He was born in 1683 in Penboyr, one of
several parishes lying on the delightful uplands above
Tivyside in South Wales, a land distinguished not only for
its compelling beauty, but also for its rich literary culture
and for the fiercely independent nature of its people.
Griffith Jones was a man of the people and his earliest
years were spent in helping the shepherds and in learning
the trade of woodturning. It is true that he spent a few
years at the Carmarthen Grammar School but he never
went to a university nor to one of the well-known aca¬
demies of the period; yet this man who had scant sym¬
pathy from the Church leaders of his day, this humble
country parson, was almost solely responsible for teaching
most of his fellow-countrymen to read and, almost
without realizing it himself, he became one of the pioneers
of adult education. Before we explain how he succeeded
in his task let us take a brief glance at the state of Wales
in the days of his boyhood, round about 1700.
The people were generally poor and though the popu¬
lation of the whole country was well under half a million,
yet it proved an almost intolerable strain on the agri¬
cultural technique of the time which, like most other
things, lagged well behind whatever progress was achieved
in England. But neighbourliness and sociability reached a
high level and there was little actual want.
An attempt at popular education had been made by
the Commonwealth Government in 1650 with its "Act for
the Better Propagation of the Gospel in Wales". About
60 free schools, mostly of the grammar school type, were
founded, but the Restoration of 1660 dealt a fatal blow
to the movement.
A considerable step forward in the education of the poor
was the extensive work of the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge (s.p.c.k.) founded in 1698. At first
confined mainly to London, its influence spread rapidly
into the rest of England and Wales.
The society proved an admirable friend to Wales, and
large quantities of Bibles, prayer books and religious
classics in both English and Welsh entered the country
and were either distributed free or sold at very small
cost. Through its correspondents in all parts of Wales
the society set up nearly 100 schools, and so infectious
was its enthusiasm for spreading knowledge that several
20
hundred more schools of the same simple pattern were
set up in all parts of Wales, and by 1714 as many as 12
diocesan and parish libraries had been established at
suitable centres to aid necessitous clergy and others.
These schools, though as a rule free, were in some places
fee paying; the three R's were again in evidence with the
pleasant addition of singing (which was not included in
the English schools) and some simple needlework for the
girls, the full course taking about four years.
Enfant terrible among the clergy
But the fine and consistent effort of the s.p.c.k. was too
limited in scope, too inadequate in conception, to
meet the needs of the people, and even by the third
decade of the century the country's condition was appall¬
ing, groaning as it was under the heavy burden of illi¬
teracy and vice. Could the illiterate masses ever be taught
to read and think? One man, Griffith Jones, a country
parson in South Wales, felt sure that he had the answer to
the problem. Rector of Llanddowror, and a brother-in-law
of Sir John Phillips, noted educationist and friend of the
Wesleys and of Francke, Griffith Jones was a brilliant
and persuasive preacher whom thousands of people would
walk miles to hear. An enfant terrible among the clergy,
honoured as a saint by his hearers, condemned and
insulted by his enemies, this man found an answer to
the grave problem of the times, and by his devotion and
persistence brought about a national revival.
The fiery preacher realized by 1730 that an illiterate
people could never be saved by the pulpit alone. Edu¬
cation there must be, free, simple in its aim and method,
and education in the language of the people. He had
already played his part in the s.p.c.k. school movement
and the society was to help him in his new project that
of the Circulating Welsh Charity Schools.
His plan was to train schoolmasters in his parish at
Llanddowror and send them itinerating from one parish
to another at the invitation of the incumbent, the school
in any one place remaining for about three months and
held generally in the winter months when the farmers
were not busy. They had to be entirely free so that even
the poorest of the poor could benefit, and adults as well
as children were invited to them.
The Dean of Bangor, Dr. John Jones, a man who had

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
already given practically all his fortune to educate the
poor, describes the poverty of the people in the Bangor
diocese in a letter dated 20 June 1716 : "It is impossible
in those parts to fix the poor children constantly and
regularly at School, because they must ever and anon beg
for victuals, there being no poor rates settled in those
parts. In harvest the poor parents take them out of
School, and declare they had rather they should not be
taught at all than be debarred the use and service of
them."
The reformer set to work on his great task in 1737 and
neither the death of his patron, Sir John Philips, in that
year nor the jibes and jeers of envious critics deterred
him from consecrating all his energies to the realization
of his vision.
There were encouraging signs, too, for a number of
clergy declared solidly for Jones and assisted him gener¬
ously in his appeal for funds; squires with Methodist
sympathies, and scientists and clergy in England, were to
prove strong financial supporters. But the reformer's
greatest gain was to have at his side for the best part of
20 years a collaborator of energy and ability in
Madame Bridget Bevan. Handsome and accomplished, she
stood by Jones' side right through to his death.
What were the schools like? Let Jones speak for
himself as far as their working was concerned: "Where a
Charity School is wanted and desired, or like to be kindly
received, no pompous Preparations or costly Buildings are
thought of, but a Church or Chapel, or untenanted House
of convenient Situation, is fixed on; and publick Notice
given immediately, that a Welch School is to begin there,
at an appointed Time, where all Sorts that desire it are
to be kindly and freely taught for Three Months; (though
the Schools are continued for Three Months longer, or
more, when needful; and then removed to another Place
where desired.)"
Masters toiled for three or four hours every night or
evening and instructed at that time from two to three
times as many as were taught in the daytime. Three
months was the time allotted for learning to read
and to understand the Catechism the three R's were
absent from the circulating schools. In his annual report
for 1745-1746 Jones writes: "We do not meddle with
teaching any of them Lettering or Cyphering, which
would require more Time than their Circumstances
and more Expense than my little Cash can afford."
The reformer was eminently practical; Instruction was
given in the language of the people, and the Welsh
language had an overwhelming preponderance at the
time. There is no scholar yet who has toiled patiently
through the manifold reports who has not been amazed
at the sweeping success of the schools. One village after
another was cured of illiteracy. Slowly but surely
darkness was being eliminated from the land. The
demand for schools far exceeded the supply of teachers
and books available. The people as a whole began to
show zeal for learning to read, and to think. As often
as not, the Bible itself would be their reader, the alphabet
and simple word constructions being printed on the fly¬
leaf; there, indeed, was infinite material for the learners
to ponder over. How was it that illiterate adults were
able to read in so short a time? One answer lies in the
fact that in its spelling the Welsh language is regular
and phonetic.
'Seventies' rush to buy spectacles
Griffith Jones' methods were rough and simple by
modern standards, but nevertheless the people's
interest and keenness were thoroughly aroused. In
some parishes the school would remain for one, two or
even three quarters of a year, moving from one place to
another in the parish. Much depended upon the keenness
of the local incumbent and upon the supply of funds avail¬
able. The enthusiam aroused among the masses can be
gauged by the heavy demand for spectacles so that the
older pupils, many of them septuagenarians, could benefit
from the instruction.
Apart from malicious attacks by his greatest detractor,
John Evans, Jones experienced some trouble with some
of the masters, particularly those who were inclined to
Methodism, a movement which was much to the dislike
of the clergy. But he strove to exercise discipline in this
as in other matters, and in his voluminous correspondence
he shows great sagacity and common sense. Though a
loyal priest of the Church who never neglect¬
ed his flock and taught the Church's doc¬
trine ¡wholly, there is plenty of evidence
that he was sympathetic at heart to reform¬
ation within the Church, and we have no
Cont'd
next page
Welch Piety:
OR, A ft- PLVUL.
COLLECTION
Of the fe-raal
ACCOUNTS
Of ihr CtRtl'tATISG
Welch Charity Schools,
From their Firft Rise, in the
Year 1737, to Miclxirlmai, 175^.
4e, t'orne iveriim' icvnocmpcPrsno atiô
jli fiuuikn lu Î-whî}*?* u.ifi Ïm foç)?ffaii->
>ri-f-Y AtCVtbtttQ {oJllCV.tif $ TOPIr» 'IU{> ^
lUtcli ifar nuïÂw /Wjtiiltï i -Vft-Wl^rwWÎéO-
emb k hkt béfete (fo tmruffi étjutAom cm
/? h - mux
EDUCATION BECOMES
A FAMILY AFFAIR
In the first half of the 18th century
Wales became a vast "classroom" and
education a family affair as old and young
alike flocked to the circulating schools
of Griffith Jones. An enfant terrible
among the clergy. Griffith Jones was a
pioneer of adult education. His circulat¬
ing schools were the most important
experiment in religious education in the
18th century, not only in Wales but in
Britain and her dominions. Photos show:
Opposite page, portrait of Griffith Jones
now in the Museum of the Carmarthen¬
shire Antiquarian Society; Far left,
fascimile of title page of Welch Piety,
a collection of several accounts of the
circulating schools from their start in
1737 until 1753. (It bears the auto¬
graph of Bridget Bevan, the greatest
collaborator of Griffith Jones; Left,
Llanddowror Church, of which Jones was
Rector for 45 years (1716 to 1761).
Photos courtesy National Library of Wal«
21

THE MAN WHO TAUGHT HIS
NATION TO READ ^t^;
record of his being hostile to churchmen with Methodist
leanings.
His schools were badly equipped and much of his time
was taken up with appeals for new impressions of the
Welsh Bible and suitable books for instruction. What was
available for him was hardly better than the English
"battledores" of the period, and in themselves they were
of very little help. For this reason the careful selection
and training of the masters was all-Important.
By modern standards the contribution of Griffith Jones
to national education looks very slight, but in its day it
fulfilled a truly national demand and that is why the
schools were so well attended.
Between 1737, when he began the work, and 1761, the
year of his death, no fewer than 3,495 schools were held
with 158,237 scholars attending them. When we re¬
member that most of the masters had many more pupils
attending in the evening than in the day classes, it is fair
to compute a grand total of at least 350,000 to 400,000
scholars, a figure that is accepted by the best authorities.
When !we consider that the whole population of Wales in
the middle of the eighteenth century was about 400,000,
the figures go to prove beyond doubt that this remarkable
pioneer working almost singlehanded, realized his dream
of teaching a whole nation to read in his own lifetime.
Lonely pioneer of adult education
When we consider the far-reaching scope of the ser¬
vice given, for every county in Wales was amply
catered for; when we note, too, the administrative
difficulties, the constant appeal for books, the raising of
funds, the training of teachers, the handling of endless
correspondence, the publication of the well-documented
annual reports, it is difficult to realize that all this was
planned and carried out by a man racked with asthma
who had already passed his fiftieth year at its inception.
His faith, ardour and courage are almost Pauline in their
grandeur. Unaffected by cynical enemies, undeterred by
the coolness of those in high places who should have been
among the first to help him, this lonely pioneer tolled on
and almost single-handed saved a nation and its language
from perishing. It was his achievement to bring into the
homes of the people the power to benefit by the rich prose
of Bishop William Morgan's translation of the Bible. In
a letter to a fellow-clergyman, December 24, 1744, he
reveals his passion for his native language:
"I was born a Welshman, and have not yet unlearned the
simple Honesty and Unpoliteness of my Mother Tongue;
nor acquired the oiliness of the English Language, which
is now refined to such a degree, that a great Part of it
is near akin to Flattery and Dissimulation." As David
Williams has rightly pointed out in his recent book, The
History of Modern Wales "it would be difficult to
exaggerate the greatness of Griffith Jones' work. His
conception of education was admittedly narrow, but he
should be judged only on the basis of his motive, which
was to save men's souls. Nor did he show any great
originality in ideas. His greatness lay in his remarkable
powers of organization and in his ability to translate his
purpose into practical form on a grand scale. He helped
to make the Welsh a literate nation, and his circulating
schools were the most important experiment in religious
education in the eighteenth century not only in Wales but
in Britain and all the British dominions."
We can go further and claim for him a place as an
honoured pioneer of adult education. His schools catered
for all ages. Before the end of the century Wales had its
own peculiar Sunday Schools which to this day are for
adults as well as children; such were the humble nurseries
which provided a strong and abiding framework for the
development of adult education throughout the land.
