THE ROOTS OF PREJUDICE
Eight practical steps to reduce intolerance (bias)
by Arnold M. Rose
(4)
In this issue we conclude the serialization begun in June of "The Roots of Prejudice",
published by Unesco in its series "The Race Question in Modern Science." In the present
article Professor Rose explains how prejudice arises from imaginary fears in the minds of
certain people. He then goes on to examine prejudice particularly in its more extreme
forms as the "expression of a warped personality." The author concludes with a list of
eight practical steps that can be taken to help reduce prejudice.
© by UNESCO. Unauthorized reproduction prohibited.
Frustration explains the force behind prejudice. But
it does not explain why certain minority groups are
chosen as scapegoats. To explain this, psycholo¬
gists help us out with another theory the "symbolic"
theory. This theory is based on the important fact that
one thing can stand for something else in the uncons¬
cious mind. People often find themselves liking some¬
thing, certain foods or some scenery, for example,- without
knowing why. If such feelings could be traced back
to their origin, it would be found that these new foods
or new scenery "remind" people of some pleasant expe¬
rience in their past. There need not be any real
connexion at all. The unconscious mind is always
making connexions so that one thing will substitute for
another.
There can also be substitutes, or '"symbols" as the
psychologists call them, for things disliked. Probably
everyone has. had the experience of disliking semething
at first sight, without any reason for doing so. The
unconscious mind made a symbolic connexion there, too.
Now, the question is: why are certain minority groups
disliked by so many people? Obviously, they must be
symbolically connected with something very important to
many people. Such things would include an interesting
life with new opportunities, money, a belief in being
kind and just to others, family life and sexual satisfac¬
tion, good health, and so on. Toward all these things
most people have mixed attitudes; we like them, but we
also dislike them. We may be a little afraid of some of
these things, or we may wish to rebel against them. But
we cannot say so: it is not proper to dislike these
important things. So the dislike becomes unconscious,
and can be expressed only through a substitute. Minority
groups become substitutes for important things in the
culture with which they have deep psychological and
historical connexions.
What man fears he hates
Let us take an example of how this works for one type
of case. All of us have had the experience once in
a while of disliking a thing that is good for us. Most
of us have kicked up our heels at our parents, at our
church, at practices that are said to be healthy and so
on. That seems to be a natural human way of behaving,
if it happens only once in a while. But some people will
not admit that they would like to rebel, and these are
usually the ones who would most like to do so. They
pretend that they adore their parents at all times, that
they always have "pure" feelings about sex and religion
and so on. Since this is not really the case, they have
to give vent to their, rebel feelings in some way. And they
do so by having prejudices against minority groups.
It is not only a matter of disliking the objects of pre¬
judice; it is also a matter of fear. When people hate
something strongly, they are usually also afraid of it. It
is of course sensible to hate and fear certain things, but
24
when the danger is imaginary there is something wrong
with the person who hates and fears. That is the
situation when there is prejudice against minority groups.
Most of the fears connected with prejudice are imaginary,
even though they seem real enough to those who have
them.
Take, for example, the fear of large numbers. Many
people who are prejudiced against Negroes, or any
other minority group, say that there are so many
Negroes. They are afraid they are going to be "over¬
whelmed" or "dominated" by Negroes. If these people
are asked: "'What percentage of the people in this
town are Negroes?" they usually give a falsely high
number. The real facts are available to them if they
wished to know them. But prejudiced people seem
to wish to hold on to fears about the large numbers of
Negroes.
Another fear is that minority groups have too much
power. Prejudiced people say that Jews own the big
banks and run the government. Even a little investi-»
gation will indicate that this is not so. As a matter
of fact, in some countries Jews are kept out of the
banking business and out of many government posts
because of prejudice. There are no Jews in many of
the biggest and most powerful industries.
There is the fear that members of the minority many
be spying for foreign governments. For years before
the World War II many Americans were afraid of Japan¬
ese spies. When the war came, hundreds of Japan¬
ese-Americans were arrested because they were sus¬
pected of spying. There were many rumours of
various kinds of secret work for the Japanese Govern¬
ment. But when it was all investigated, not a single
Japanese-American was discovered to have been help¬
ing the enemy. The Japanese Government knew about
Americans' prejudice and hired only white Americans
as spies.
It is wise to be afraid of some things. But the fear that
goes with prejudice is always harmful, because it is a fear
of something imaginary.
We can now bring together the ideas dealt with in this
section: Why do people learn prejudice and hold it so
strongly that they do not wish to give it up?
It is not because people naturally dislike any person
who looks different, behaves differently, or speaks in
a different manner from themselves. In fact, people
pay attention to differences only when they have pre¬
judices first. Then they hold themselves apart and
despise or hate the differences of the other people.
It is not because prejudiced people have had unplea¬
sant experiences with minority groups. Some have,
and some have not. Those who have had unpleasant
experiences with minority groups have also had un¬
pleasant experiences with other people. They remem¬
ber some unpleasant experiences because they are
already prejudiced.
In part, people have prejudice because they are frus-

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
trated and unhappy in a general way. Depression,
unemployment, and low wages are among the main
causes of frustration for a country as a whole, but
there may be other causes. There are many things
which cause fear and anxiety among large numbers of
the people. When people do not understand the cause
of their frustration, or feel that there is nothing they
can do to stop it, they look for a scapegoat. Certain
kinds of politicians gain popularity by naming the
Negroes, the Jews or some other group as the scapegoat.
People are willing to use these groups as scapegoats
because the groups have become symbols of other
things they dislike. They cannot openly show their
dislike of these other important things, since they
would regard that as improper or foolish. Also, they
like or admire the other thing at the same time as
they dislike it. So they switch all the dislike over to
the symbol the minority group.
Fear of imaginary dangers is an important part of
prejudice. One of the reasons why prejudiced people
dislike or hate minority groups is that they imagine all
kinds of fearful things about them.
A number of students have sought to explain prejudice
as a type of mental disease. Some mental disorders can
be traced to inadequacies in personality development, and
prejudice is regarded under this theory as resulting from
a particular kind of mis-development. Prejudice arising
from this source is quite non-deliberate and cannot be
eliminated by rational appeal or the application of laws.
Most studies of this aspect of prejudice take the form of
a comparison between groups of prejudiced and unpre¬
judiced persons, based on a number of questions about
personality characteristics and personality development.
The items where significant differences appear are then
integrated into a clinical picture of the "prejudiced per¬
sonality".
One study, by Frenkel-Brunswik, Sanford, and others,
at the University of California, is based on a detailed
comparison between the personality traits of known anti-
Semites and the personality traits of known non-anti-
Semites. By comparison, the typical anti-Semite was
found to be a compulsive conformist, exhibiting anxiety
at the appearance of any social deviation. He appears to
be a person with little insight into himself, who projects
his own undesired traits on to other people, so that he
blames people against whom he is prejudiced for traits
which are characteristic of himself. He has a tendency
toward stereotyped thinking and is unimaginative. He
tends to-, have unconscious inferiority feelings centering
mainly in a feeling of sexual inadequacy. He expresses
strong filial and religious devotion, but unconsciously
manifests hatred of parents and indifference to moral
values. He exhibits an aversion for emotionality but
unconsciously has a feeling of inferiority toward it. He
is prone to aggressive fantasies.
Anxiety, insecurity breed anti-Semitism
Another study was conducted in New York City by
Jahoda and Ackerman. They secured detailed reports
on 50 patients who had expressed anti-Semitism
while undergoing psychoanalytic treatment, and tried to
determine what role, if any, anti-Semitism played in their
unstable mental make-up. It appeared that anti-Semitism
resulted from some distortion in personality structure and
fulfilled certain needs. Anxiety and lack of security in
group membership are among the principal traits of anti-
Semites. Fearing attacks on their integrity as individuals,
these persons counter-attack against Jews, the hand¬
iest object. The anti-Semitic personality type in
this study, too, has an overwhelming desire to conform, to
appear '"respectable" and to attach itself to dominant
organizations, and is characterized by outward submissi-
veness and inward aggressiveness.
Hartley made a study among college students of the
personality traits of the prejudiced person. His summary
of the characteristics of the intolerant personality fol¬
lows: "unwillingness to accept responsibility; acceptance
of conventional mores;, a rejection of serious groups; re¬
jection of political interests; a desire for groups formed
for purely social purposes and absorption with pleasure
activities; a conscious conflict between play and work;
emotionality rather than rationality; extreme egotism;
compulsive interest in physical activity, the body and
health. He was likely to dislike agitators, radicals, and
pessimists. He was relatively uncreative, apparently
unable to deal with anxieties except by fleeing them."
These studies of prejudice as the expression of a warped
personality have certain weaknesses when considered by
themselves. But when taken in connexion with other
factors underlying prejudice, they add much to our under¬
standing. They probably are most useful in explain¬
ing extreme case of prejudice.
Shatter stereotypes with facts
We have thus seen that prejudice is indeed a complex
thing. There are background factors and immediate
factors which account for its presence in any
individual or group of people. This complexity makes it
difficult to eliminate prejudice, as action taken against
one root does not necessarily affect the other roots.
Perhaps we can best summarize our findings by suggest¬
ing what .kinds of action will contribute toward a reduc¬
tion of prejudice. These are not listed in order of import¬
ance but simply according to convenience of presentation.
1 One thing would be an intellectual appreciation by
prejudiced people of the fact that prejudice harms
them, financially and psychologically. Involved in this
is a recognition that the gains that seem to come from
prejudice are to some extent temporary and illusory.
These gains, which can be classified as economic, politi¬
cal, sexual and prestige, sometimes divert the preju¬
diced person from more satisfactory and more perma¬
nent gains. Prejudiced people need to be shown how
they are exploited because of their prejudice.
2 A second activity helpful in diminishing prejudice
would be the provision of accurate information about
the minority groups against which there is prejudice.
This should include facts which break stereotypes, and
explanations of the causes that give rise to differences
between minority and dominant groups. Facts of this
type are learned not only through books, newspapers
and speeches, but through personal contact on a
friendly and equal basis.
3 One of the most important traditions to combat is that
of racism. This can be attacked not only when it is
applied to minority groups, but also whenever biological
explanations are applied to any social phenomenon.
4 Legislation which penalizes discrimination reduces the
occasions on which prejudice is made to seem proper
and respectable, as well as eliminating some of the
worst effects of prejudice. Legislation against dis¬
crimination is thus one of the most important means
of breaking traditions of prejudice.
5 A tradition on which prejudice is based can be main¬
tained only by being transmitted to children. If the
transmission of prejudice through the home and play
group can be counteracted by the school and church
while the child's mind is still flexible, prejudice cannot
long survive. Also, if the public can be led to consider
that manifestations of prejudice are shameful, many
parents will refrain from displaying their prejudice in
front of their children. Where this happens, children
are less likely to acquire prejudice.
6 Direct efforts to solve major social problems will not
only divert people from prejudice, but will remove some
of the frustrations that create a psychological tendency
towards prejudice. The most important single step of
this type is the provision of economic security.
7 Demonstration that many of the fears about minority
groups are imaginary might help to dispel those fears.
There is probably a need to inculcate a more thorough
understanding of the fact that fear or hatred of a
minority group is a mere substitute for real or hatred
of some other object, towards which people are unwill¬
ing to express their true attitude. A general program¬
me of mental hygiene needs to be developed to get
people to be honest with themselves.
8 Any effort to develop healthier and saner personalities
will diminish prejudice. Such efforts usually require
the guidance of psychiatrists.
A concerted programme which included all these acti¬
vities would, in a generation or two, at least greatly reduce
prejudice. But many of these activities are difficult to put
into practice. Further scientific research is needed to
indicate just how important each of these factors is, and
how they can be manipulated most easily. Both re¬
search and action aimed at diminishing prejudice are un¬
der way in several countries. The future, is hopeful if
even a small group of people in each country is organized
to eradicate this most serious blight on all civilization.
25
