MY LATEST WORK
-A WALL
by Joan Miro
IN HIS STUDIO at Gallifa, Spain, José Llorens-
Artigas (on right) prepares one of the 585 tiles
used in making the two surrealist ceramics:
Wall of the Sun" and "Wall of the Moon".
All photos UNESCO-Català Roca
In 1955 Unesco asked me to take
part in the decoration of its new
headquarters buildings, then
under construction in the Place Font¬
enoy, Paris. Ttvo perpendicular walls
one 24J feet long, the other 50 feet
long near the Conference building
were put at my disposal. My idea
was to decorate them with ceramics,
in collaboration with Llorens-Artigas,
using the same sharp fire process
we had recently used to make over
200 works which were later exhibited
at the Maeght gallery in Paris.
Once my proposal had been adopt¬
ed, I began discussions with the ar¬
chitects. I wanted to work closely
with them so as to be quite sure that
my work would integrate as perfectly
as possible into the architectural
scheme. The art of mural decoration
has nothing in common with the
creation of works "in isolation"; while
retaining its individual characteris¬
tics, the work must also become an
intimate part of its surroundings.
So I went to the site to look for
ideas and it was there that my plan
was conceived and developed. I was
given a room near the architects'
office; I talked with the architects
and with the engineers and workmen;
I studied' models of the structures,
and I meditated before the concrete
walls, surrounded by piles of building
material and the hustle and bustle of
the operations, and from all these
things I drew inspiration.
The design and colouring for the
walls I was to decorate were suggested
by the shapes of the buildings
themselves, their spatial structure,
and the play of light. I sought to
incorporate my wprk in the whole by
making it provide a contrast with the
architecture.
Thus, as a reaction to the huge
concrete surfaces around the larger
wall came the idea of a large, vivid
red disc. Its counterpart on the
smaller wall would be a blue crescent
to accord with the more confined area
it was to occupy. I could see these
two shapes in powerful colours and
JOINT CREATORS of the two Unesco ceramics, Joan Miro (right) and Llorens-Artigas discuss
their work in front of a small-scale preliminary painting of the smaller work: "Wall of the Moon".
34
given still more force by incised work.
The chessboard compositions and the
forms of the human figures were
inspired by details of the building,
such as the design of the windows.
I aimed at a crude and forceful
expression in the large wall and at
something more poetic in the smaller
one. I also Wanted to provide an
element of contrast within each
composition itself, and for this reason
I conceived harsh, dynamic outlines
side by side with restful coloured
shapes, in flat-tinted or in check
design.
These first compositions were
considerably altered when I trans¬
ferred them to larger sketches.
Indeed, modifications were made at
every stage in the work, a good many
changes being needed both in form
and colour, in order to adapt my
work to a larger scale and to transfer
my ideas from the paper to the clay.
The second stage in the task was
to study with Artigas how my plan
in ceramics was to be carried out.
No ceramist had ever before been
faced with an undertaking of this
scope. Besides this, as both walls
were to be in the open air and un¬
protected, we had to keep in mind the
extent to which the materials used
would resist differences in tem¬
perature, humidity, and the sun's
rays. There is no doubt that Artigas
was the only person capable of solving
these extremely difficult problems.
Modern techniques concentrate on
the production of earthenware or
stoneware. The former would not
stand up well to the.Parisian climate,
and the latter is unsuited to my
palette. Artigas adopted a combined
process he used fire-clay covered
with a white slip, the whole being
fired at a temperature of 1,000 de¬
grees; after this the background
was laid on in coloured sandstone, a
different colour being used for each
square, and this was fired at a
temperature of 1,300 degrees. Next
came the firing to apply the decora-

The Unesco Courier. November 1958
tion, at a temperature of 1,000 de¬
grees, in enamel and colour. Wood
was used for the firing of the whole
work, since it gives effects that are
not obtainable with gas, charcoal or
electricity.
Thus, Llorens-Artigas sought, like
an alchemist of old, the type of earth,
the sandstone enamels and the
colours that he Would use. It was
true creative work, starting from
natural products feldspar from Pa-
lamos, clay from Alcaniz, sand from
Fontainebleau, and metal oxides,
copper, cobalt, uranium, etc., from
every sort of place. The amounts and
proportions in which they were used
are age-old secrets once lost, but
now rediscovered thanks to the know¬
ledge and intuition displayed by Arti¬
gas. Meanwhile, working with Joan
Artigas (the ceramist's son), I trans¬
ferred my plan to a fullsize .charcoal
sketch on paper and coloured it in
gouache. Now the preparatory stage
was ended and we were ready to
begin the actual work.
MIRO'S UNESCO MURALS
WIN INTERNATIONAL
PRIZE COMPETITION
Joan Miro has been named the 1958
winner of the S 10,000 Guggenheim
International Art Award for his two
ceramic wall designs at Unesco's new
headquarters. This awardprobably
the largest in the artswas established
by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foun¬
dation in 1956, and is granted every
two years. This year I 14 artists from
twenty-two countries participated.
It was then that we suddenly decid¬
ed to visit Santillana del Mar to have
another look at the famous cave
paintings of Altamira and gain
inspiration from the world's earliest
mural art. While we were in the
"Collegiata," the old Romanesque
church at Santillana, we were deeply
moved by the extraordinary beauty of
the material used on an old wall,
rotten with damp. Artigas made
notes about it for the purpose of his
backgrounds.
Having made our journey to the
fountain-head, we thought we should
also go where we could feel the in¬
fluence of the Catalan Romanesque
artists and of Gaudi. The Barcelona
museum has wonderful Roman¬
esque frescoes, which have inspired
me since I first began to paint. I hope
their inspiration has not failed me
now; the rhythm of the larger wall in.
particular, I think, owes much to
them. Finally, we visited Gaudi's
work in the Guell park; and here I
was struck by the sight of an enor¬
mous disc set into the wall, revealing
the bare rock. It bore a strong re¬
semblance to the disc which I had
intended to carve and paint on the
larger wall in Paris, and this coincid¬
ence I took both as confirmation and
as encouragement of my purpose.
We went back to Gallifa, the old
village With its stone houses and its
greenery, where Artigas had set up
his kiln and his workshop. The
village is dominated by a great
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
35

UNESCO Cátala Roca
BOLD SOLUTION chosen by painter Joan Miro in executing large forms and lines requiring single brush strokes was to
use a long-handled brush of palm fibres (above). A single mistake could easily have ruined months of preparatory work.
amphitheatre of rocks; these replac¬
ed, for me, the towering concrete
walls of the Unesco building, and I
considered my larger sketches in
relation to them. . It was vital for me
to be able to test the effect of the
sketches against the grandeur of this
background, and I made various
alterations as a result. The surface
of my plan Was divided into equal-
sized rectangles to correspond with
the slabs that now had to be modell¬
ed in earth,, dried and fired for the
first time, with simply a layer of
sandstone to strengthen this "biscuit"
or unglazed work. I then had to
apply . the sandstone enamel in
colour, for the second and last firing.
After Artigas had completed the
firing of 250 slabs in 33 batches he
told me that he was not confident of
success. He was not satisfied with
the basic material we were using and
he feared that the geometrical re¬
gularity of the tiles might harm the
feeling and "life" of the work. He
realized that it was his own technical
skill which had led him to go so far,
and that the backgrounds he had
produced, remarkable though they
were, were not what was needed.
36
Then he remembered the wall of
the Collegiata, and succeeded in
reproducing, in his tests, the
wonderful depth of feeling we had
found there. In much the same way,
the sight of the walls of the old
chapel at Gallifa, with their irregular
courses, was a revelation to us. We
saw that, in deciding how to divide
up the surface we were to cover, we
should think of the "throbbing"
irregularity of the stones at Gallifa.
We had to begin again, using slabs of
different sizes.
Now that we had discovered how
to arrange the slabs and the base, the
first firing gave no trouble whatever.
Now it was up to me to reproduce
my plan and to apply the enamel
colouring to the material spread out
on the ground. Here again, my
shapes were altered. As for the
colouring, I had to rely on Artigas'
knowledge for the enamel only
assumes its true colour after it has
been fired. No matter what pre¬
cautions are taken, the firing is the
decisive factor; its action is unpre¬
dictable, its decision final. This, I
think, is what gives this form of
artistic expression its value.
One more difficulty lay ahead the
large size of the surface I was to
paint. If some of the shapes and
lines were to retain their original
form and spontaneity, they would
have to be made with single brush
strokes. For this purpose I used a
long-handled brush made of palm
fibres. Artigas held his breath when
he saw me take the brush and paint
in shapes of five or six metres. One
mistake could have ruined the work
of several months.
The last firing was on May 29, 1958.
It was the thirty-fifth of the whole
series. We had used 25 tons of wood,
4 tons of earth, nearly a quarter of a
ton of enamel and 15 lbs of colouring
matter. We had only seen the pieces
that composed our work lying on the
ground there had been no opportuni¬
ty to see the whole from a distance.
We were therefore waiting anxiously
and impatiently, to see both walls
erected in the setting, and in the
light, for which they were designed.
Reproduced from "Derrière le Mi¬
roir," numbers 107, 108 and 109,
1958, by courtesy of the publisher,
C. Maeght.
