Dr. VITTORINO VERONESE (LEFT), CONFERING WITH Dr. L. EVANS DURING UNESCO'S RECENT GENERAL CONFERENCE.

Dr. VITTORINO VERONESE
NEW DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF UNESCO
The General Conference of Unesco at its 10th session
held in Paris in November has elected Dr. Vittorino
Veronese, of Italy, Director-General of the Organi¬
zation in succession to Dr. Luther H. Evans. He is
appointed for six years and. assumed office at the close of
the General Conference on December 5.
Dr. Veronese was elected by 55 votes for, 20 against,
with four abstentions. His election marks the first time
that the post of Director-General of one of the agencies
of the United Nations has been entrusted to a citizen of
Italy.
Born in Vicenza in 1910, Dr. Veronese brings to Unesco
a distinguished career as a leader in cultural affairs and
as an administrator and promoter of international co-op¬
eration, particularly in social and economic matters. Doctor
of Law, barrister and then professor at the Institute of
Social Sciences at the Athenaeum Angelicum in Rome,
Dr. Veronese became Secretary-General of the Catholic
Institute of Social Work in 1944 and later its president.
Before this period he was associated with a group of
democratically-minded university men and intellectuals
who had come together in a review entitled "Studium" of
which Dr. Veronese later became editor. It was this group
(which included men like De Gasperi, Gonella and Vanoni)
which in 1943 elaborated a manifesto of social action
(Codice di Camaldoli) inspired by the principles of demo¬
cracy. At this time he became the Central Secretary of
the "Catholic Movement of University Graduates" which
rallied university circles to the cause of freedom and human
dignity.
Since 1944 he has held a number of high posts in his
country, including those of President of the Italian "Catho¬
lic Action", member of the Governing Board of the
Foundation "Premi Roma" for youth, President of the
Association of Refugee Intellectuals in Italy, President of
the Italian Central Institute of Credit, President of the
"Consorzio di Crédito per le Opere Pubbliche" and member
of the Executive Committee of the Italian African Institute.
His association with Unesco dates from 1948, when Italy
became a member of the Organization. Since that time he
has attended all Unesco General Conferences as a member
of the Italian delegation. As a member of the Social
Sciences Committee of the Italian National Commission
for Unesco he has promoted many Unesco activities in
Italy. In 1952 he became a member of the Unesco Execu¬
tive Board of which he was elected Chairman in 1957.
As a member of the Executive Board he initiated a series
of discussions and meetings which led to profound changes
in Unesco's programme, including the introduction of the
"Major Projects" to which Unesco is now devoting a large
part of its resources.
33
