ARIZONA
BUILDS
Ä ÇOT. HP
HOUSE
Not so many years from now, houses around the world
may be heated (or cooled) by a furnace situated
some 93 million miles away. Scientists have already
demonstrated convincingly that practical, full-scale sun-
heated houses can be built and made to work successfully
both in hot-weather countries and chillier northern climes.
For example, a pre-view of the comfortable existence
that awaits people when central heating will come by
courtesy of the sun has been provided since last April at
a house built in Phoenix, capital of the sunny state of
Arizona, in the U.S.A.
Outwardly the house doesn't look too different from
ultra-modern styled dwellings (in a fairly high price
range) that are being built in many parts of the U.S.A.
today. But there are plenty of new notes and new ideas
in the internal construction.
Its completion this year climaxed a project which began
when the Association for Applied Solar Energy and the
Phoenix Association of Home Builders planned an archi¬
tectural competition for the design of a new and unique
solar house which was to provide three things: archi¬
tectural distinction, a solar energy collection area suf¬
ficient to meet all the heat requirements of the house and
its swimming pool throughout the year, in the kind of
weather normally experienced in Phoenix and, finally,
sunshine control to reduce the amount of energy needed
to cool the house in the summertime.
In this competition, architects and designers throughout
the world (126 entrants from 13 nations finally competed)
set to work to solve the problems of "living with the sun",
including summer cooling as well as winter heating.
Winner of the competition was an architecture student
at the University of Minnesota, Peter R. Lee. The entire
project, from the mailing of the competition programme
to some 1,600 architects in 42 countries to the opening of
the completed house, built to Lee's designs, was carried
out in only eleven months.
Solar heated houses have been built in various places
since about 1939, but their designers have been beset by
two problems: How to compete economically with conven¬
tional heating systems, at least in installation costs ; and
how to provide heat when the sun doesn't shine.
Methods used in the past to provide solar house-heating
have ranged from the simple installation of a large
window wall facing south (to give supplementary heat)
to installing large collectors on the roof for heating water
in a conventional central heating system with circulation
through pipes and radiators. The storage of collected
heat has also been accomplished with pebble beds or by
the use of certain chemical salts that absorb heat when
changing from a crystal to a liquid state.
The Phoenix house shows a new trend and a new idea
in solar heating. The trend is to use water both to
transfer the collected heat to a storage tank and also
as the medium to retain the heat. Water is the lightest
of the heat storage materials so far- employed. Its heat
storage capacity ranks between rocks or pebbleswhich
are the lowest and salts, which hold the most British
thermal units per cubic foot.
12
An outstanding architectural feature of the house and
a new idea in solar heating design is its energy collection
system. This is composed of a series of 68 louvers, or
aluminium shells, mounted in 17 parallel rows between the
steel roof beams.
Resembling the wings or control surfaces of an aircraft,
these aluminium shells are covered with fibre for insu¬
lation. Blackened copper tubes set in a blackened copper
sheet are placed over the fibre. The copper absorbs heat
from the sun and transfers it to water which circulates
through the tubes. Transparent sheets of plastic are
placed over the copper and these allow the sun's energy
to get through, but prevent the long heat waves from
radiating back out to be lost. This is the same princi¬
ple on which a greenhouse operates.
All the heat collectors are arranged louver style over
the house's patio and central court. They are rotated by
a clock-operated motor to face south during daylight
hours in the heating season (in Phoenix, October to mid-
April) and can be adjusted so that they are always nearly
perpendicular to the sun's rays. During the summer, the
collectors are flipped over so the aluminium shells reflect
SUN SAND AND SKY set the decor for the Solar House built at
Phoenix, Arizona. Nearly 600 yards of material were used to curtain
the extensive glass areas (as in living-room, above, left) which form two

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
AIR RETURN DUCT
AIR SUPPLY DUCT
WATER PUMP
STORAGE TANK
CROSS-SECTION THROUGH THE SOLAR HOUSE
USIS photos
heat away from the house and provide shade below.
Fifteen of the seventeen rows of collectors are used to
provide heat for the house and swimming pool while two
rows are reserved to heat the domestic water supply,
which is stored in a 50 gallon tank apart from the house
heating system.
Water, warmed in the copper pipes concealed in the
roof heat collectors, is carried to a 2,000 gallon storage
tank. When this water is needed it circulates through
the coils of a forced-air system, warming the air in the
house. The system in the Phoenix House does not make
use of an auxiliary furnace to provide heat when the sun
does not shine. Instead, it makes use of a heat pump an
air-conditioning device which can extract heat from the
outside air when there is not enough solar heat.
Thus, if the water in the storage tank cools after several
sunless days, the heat pump comes into action to warm
the house air. The residual warmth of tank water is
used to pre-heat air round the heat pump's external coil.
In other words, these pumps need electricity to operate,
but obtain their heat from the warmth remaining in the
storage tank and the swimming pool. When cooling in
summertime, the heat pump reverses itself and acts like
a conventional air-conditioner. This time, water from
the storage tank, cooled by the aerated swimming pool, is
used to precool air round the pump's external coil.
Cost of the Phoenix solar heating equipment is esti¬
mated to be about #4,000 more than conventional heating
equipment would have cost. However, the cost of heating
and cooling the house (close to 2,000 square feet) is placed
at $450 a year, compared with $1,000 when using conven¬
tional equipment.
The purpose of the Phoenix Solar House is to stimulate
public interest in the use of the sun's energy for man's
benefit in his living conditions. The lessons learned from
its operation will be useful in designing houses of every
price level and for more northerly areas, where the sun
can supply only a part of winter heat requirements.
Proof that such systems of solar house heating are
practicable in cooler climates than that of Arizona has
been given by a series of experimental houses erected by
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The latest
of these was completed at Lexington in March. (See
following pages.)
I I III
_wU-wL-wl_pl--
ljlj!|!||
sides of virtually every room. Concrete masonry screen walls to
shade the sides of the house <Vom the sun are seen (centre photo)
flanking oneof the two patio"outdoor living rooms". Ultramodern kit-
Photos © Almasy, Paris
chen has an "island" containing sink and dishwasher(located to command
a view of the nearby mountains) and its equipment includes an electronic
oven, a built-in refrigerator and electric cooking range (above, right).
13

HOUSES HEATED
(OR COOLED) BY
THE SUN'S RAYS
Earlier this year a team of archi¬
tects and engineers from the
Massachusetts Institute of Techno¬
logy, in the United States, put the
finishing touches to a unique full-
scale sun-heated house at Lexing¬
ton, near Boston. This sleek,
two-storey, three-bedroom
house is officially called "M.I.T.
Solar House IV" for it is the
fourth in a series that M.I.T. has
built over the past 20 years to
study ways of obtaining practical
house-heating from solar energy.
Using the results of this research,
M.I.T. built the latest house to
demonstrate that enough facts
and equipment are now available
to combine a reliably engineered
solar heating system with a house
designed for comfortable sub¬
urban living in a northern clime.
The entire solar heating system
is thermostatically controlled and
completely automatic in opera¬
tion. The house owner simply
has to visit the basement instru¬
ments room (right) twice in the
year (in the spring and autumn)
and turn the valves (at right) either
to provide cold air during the
summer or to obtain warm air in
the winter. (Instruments on left
are solely for engineers who will
take data from the house). Pro¬
fessor Anderson, chairman of the
committee under whose auspices
the house was built, calls it "the
wedding of the special engineer¬
ing requirements of a reliable
solar heating system with the
architectural demands of modern
living". Top photo, corner of the
living room in "Solar House IV".
Behind sloping wall at left is 640
square-foot solar heat collector.
Photos : Office of Public Relations,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
14

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
COPPER TUBES UNDER
BLACK- SURFACED
SHEET ALUMINUM
CLASS
vXX COLLECTOR
¡N\ FACE
TANK
COIL ^ATER
co.l'Co^'t.om1Nc FuRnace
M.I.T. SOLAR HOUSE
SNOW-COVERED ROOF
SUN-WARMED PARLOUR
Most striking feature of the M.I.T. Solar
House In Lexington is the solar collector
with which the sun's energy Is trapped
for heating use. Photo, above, shows
this collector, a sloping roof wall consist¬
ing of 640 square feet of glass, two layers
thick, over a similar area of thin alu¬
minium sheet, painted a heat-absorblng-
black. While the aluminium sheet ab¬
sorbs the solar energy, the glass works
as it does in a greenhouse It lets in the
sunshine, but keeps the longer waves
of heat energy from escaping again. To
store this energy for use, water Is circu¬
lated through copper tubes attached to
the aluminium sheet and is thus heated.
This hot water is stored, in turn, In a
1,500 gallon basement tank. To heat
the house, water from this tank Is
pumped through a heat exchanger,
which functions like an automobile
radiator, to transfer heat from the water
to a stream of air. This warm air is
then forced through ducts to heat the
living spaces. (See diagram, left). A
small auxiliary oil furnace is used for
heating if a series of sunless days occurs.
In summer, water in the basement sto¬
rage tank Is refrigerated so that forced-air
system can be used to cool the house.
Photos Office of Public Relations,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
15
