A phenomenon of our time
THE DIVORCE
OF SCIENCE
& 'CULTURE'
by Bertrand Russell
There was a time when scientists looked askance at
attempts to make their work widely intelligible.
But, in the world of the present day, such an
attitude is no longer possible. The discoveries of modern
science have put into the hands of governments
unprecedented powers both for good and for evil. Unless
the statesmen who wield these powers have at least an
elementary understanding of their nature, it is scarcely
likely that they will use them wisely. And, in democratic
countries, it is not only statesmen, but the general public,
to whom some degree of scientific understanding is
necessary.
To insure wide diffusion of such understanding is by no
means easy. Those who can act effectively as liaison
officers between technical scientists and the public
perform a work which is necessary, not only for human
welfare, but even for bare survival of the human race.
I think that a great deal more ought to be done in this
direction in the education of those who do not intend
to become scientific specialists. The Kalinga Prize is
doing a great public service in encouraging those who
attempt this difficult task.
In my own country, and to a lesser degree in other
countries of the West, "culture" is viewed mainly, by an
unfortunate impoverishment of the Renaissance tradition,
as something concerned primarily with literature, history
and art. A man is not considered uneducated if he
knows nothing of the contributions of Galileo, Descartes
and their successors. I am convinced that all higher
education should involve a course in the history of science
from the seventeenth century to the present day and a
survey of modern scientific knowledge in so far as this
can be conveyed without technicalities. While such
knowledge remains confined to specialists, it is scarcely
possible nowadays for nations to conduct their affairs
with wisdom.
There are two very different ways of estimating any
human achievement: you may estimate it by what you
consider its .intrinsic excellence; or you may estimate it
by its causal efficiency in transforming human life and
human institutions. I am not suggesting that one of
these Ways of estimating is preferable to the other. I am
only concerned to point out that they give very different
scales of importance. If Homer and Aeschylus had not
existed, if Dante and Shakespeare had not written a line,
if Bach and Beethoven had been silent, the daily life of
most people in the present day would have been much
what it is. But if Pythagoras and Galileo and James Watt
had not existed, the daily life, not only of Western
Europeans and Americans but of Indian, Russian and
Chinese peasants, would be profoundly different from
what it is. And these profound changes are still only
beginning. They must affect the future even more than
they have already affected the present.
At present, scientific technique advances like an army
of tanks that have lost their drivers, blindly, ruthlessly,
Wadington Studios Ltd., London
without goal or purpose. This is largely because the men
who are concerned with human values and with making
life worthy to be lived, are still living in imagination in
the old pre-industrial world, the world that has been made
familiar and comfortable by the literature of Greece and
the pre-industrial achievements of the poets and artists
and composers whose Work we rightly admire.
The separation of science from "'culture" is a modern
phenomenon. Plato and Aristotle had a profound respect
for what was known of science in their day. The Re¬
naissance was as much concerned with the revival of
science as with art and literature. Leonardo da Vinci
devoted more of his energies to science than to painting.
The Renaissance architects developed the geometrical
theory of perspective. Throughout the eighteenth century
a very great deal was done to diffuse understanding of the
work of Newton and his contemporaries. But, from the
early nineteenth century onwards, scientific concepts and
scientific methods became increasingly abstruse and the
attempt to make them generally intelligible came more
and more to be regarded as hopeless. The modern theory
and practice of nuclear physicists has made evident with
dramatic suddenness that complete ignorance of the
world of science is no longer compatible with survival.
The above is the text of the address (with minor deletions)
delivered by Bertrand Russell, on receiving the Kalinga Prize, at
Unesco House, on January 28, 1958.
