EPIC OF MEXICO'S
GREAT FAR WEST
The northwest coast of Mexico runs
from a point on the Pacific
Ocean west of Guadalajara all the
way to Arizona, for the most part bor¬
dering the shores of the Gulf of Cali¬
fornia. Along most of this coast exten¬
sive flat plains rise abruptly to the foot¬
hills of the great Sierra Madre. The
winter snows on its peaks and the rains
in the wet season flood down across the
coastal plain through more than 25 riv¬
ers rivers whose courses are short and
swift and whose water is usually exhaust¬
ed in flash floods within a few days or
weeks.
Until recently, cultivation was confin¬
ed to small areas in the immediate vici¬
nity of the river valleys. There were
large ranches in the foothills of the
Sierra but the coastal plain itself for
most of the year was a hot, arid land of
cactus and brush. No one could have
predicted that this largely desert region
would come to bloom like a rose.
Sitting ducks
for bandits
It is here that the story of the Paci¬
fico Railway takes place a railroad
which after one life of 70 years was
reborn in November 1957 to meet the
challenges of a new world.
The first rail outlet for Mexico's
northwest was completed in 1882. The
line ran . 250 miles northwards from
Guaymas, a port on the Gulf of
California, to the Arizona border near
Tucson, transporting mainly cattle and
hides from the extensive ranching
country.
Over the years the railway crept
southward, first from Guaymas to Cu-
liacan, then down to the Pacific port of
Mazatlan. The many bridges on the
coastal plain were an invitation to ban¬
dits during the years of revolution and
counter-revolution between 1910 and
1920. A sure way to make the train a
sitting duck was to blow a bridge behind
it and another in front of it. Then it
could be looted at leisure. Further ex¬
tensions had to await more peaceful
times.
To add to the difficulties, the next
stage, from Mazatlan southwards, meant
leaving the flat coastal lands and climb¬
ing abruptly through the mountains to
Tepic. In this section the track climbs
3,000 feet in less than 30 miles. It was
not until 1927 that the final stretch to
Guadalajara was opened; it was one of
the world's most difficult railroad
construction operations, for it includes
25 tunnels in 20 miles of track. And
when there were no tunnels to dig the
line had to be thrown across chasms a
14
by George R. Young
thousand feet deep to regain a foothold
on the mountainsides.
With all these difficulties, the railroad
was the principal means by which Mexi¬
co's west received its main shipments of
American equipment and machinery in
the first half of this century. The re¬
turn traffic came gradually to include
more and more agricultural produce as
the irrigation possibilities of the coastal
plain were slowly explored. The real
surge forward came after World War II.
Indeed, people say that there has been
more development on the northwest
coast since 1950 than in the previous
300 years. Irrigation was intensified.
This was pump irrigation which requir-.
ed larger quantities of electric power
and more elaborate transmission sys¬
tems. The World Bank, through a loan
of $29.7 million helped to provide the
extra power. Large storage dams were
built. There are now eight of these on
the northwest coast and plans are ready
for five more. These in turn will be
followed by yet another seven.
One way or another the cultivated
area of the Mexican northwest coast was
lifted from a total of half a million acres
in 1925 to three million acres in 1957.
Where only a few years ago the arid
plain stretched to the sea, there is now
mile upon mile of crops growing like
the patches on a quilt cotton, maize,
sugarcane, vegetables and fruit.
This is the new granary of Mexico.
But it is more than a granary; it is also
becoming an important industrial area.
The city of Guadalajara, the southern
terminus of the Pacifico Railway, al¬
ready has 750,000 inhabitants and is the
second city of Mexico, with industry of
all kinds being established around it.
Obregon, halfway between Guadalajara
and the U.S. border, had not a single
cotton gin in 1950. Now it has about
50 and five cottonseed oil plants. Gay-
mas has seen great development as a
port since it is from there that the cotton
bales are shipped to foreign markets.
Huffing & puffing
choo-choo trains
All this development came at a bad
time for the railroad. The lo¬
comotives were all steam engines
of ancient vintage and in such bad
condition that they frequently had to be
changed four times in a hundred miles.
The track, laid many years before with
rail too light for modern heavy opera¬
tions was worn out to the point where
derailments were of, daily occurence..
Bridges were in an advanced state of
disrepair and fell easy prey to flooding
rivers. In fact, things were so bad that
in May 1952 it took, on an average, 29
days for a freight car loaded with copper
from the mines of Cananea to reach
Guadalajara, 1,170 miles away.
It was at this point that negotiations
were completed for the transfer of the .
Pacifico Railway (from an American
company which held the lease) to the
Mexican Government, for 12 million
dollars. Ferrocarril del Pacifico, as the
new line was renamed, then embarked
on one of the most spectacular railroad
rehabilitation operations of this century.
Spectacular
'face lifting'
As a first step in 1952, a New York
firm made a complete survey of
the needs of the railroad on which
was based the rehabilitation programme,
including track, bridges, locomotives,
rolling stock, and communications. The
programme was estimated to need four
years to complete at a cost of about
80 million dollars.
A number of short-term loans were
obtained, but it was clear that the task
called for long-term financing. The
Mexican Government approached the
World Bank. After thorough investiga¬
tion, the Bank, in August 1954 made a
15-year loan to the Pacifico Railway of
61 million dollars.
One of the first and largest contracts
financed out of the Bank loan was for
2,000 miles of new rail from a Canad¬
ian company. Nearly 1,000 steel box¬
cars were ordered from a Mexican com¬
pany. Large numbers of diesel locomo¬
tives, freightcars and other equipment
were purchased in the United States.
The work on the track had to be car¬
ried out quickly and while the line was
in daily use by traffic. The rails had
to be replaced along the entire 1,100
miles of the track. Three and a half
million wooden ties had to be renewed,
and new ballast applied to the roadbed
throughout its entire length. During
the most intensive periods of this work
there were 1,825 men engaged in recon¬
struction, in addition to the 2,000 em¬
ployees of the railroad who also partici¬
pated. Bridge and trestle repairs were
another large task, and permanent struc¬
tures had to be built to replace the tem¬
porary sections in the
bridges over several of
the largest rivers.
By the end of 1957
this work was virtually

The Unesco Courier. August 1958
Running like a worn-out thread over a thousand miles from Guadalajara in the south to the U.S. border near Tucson, Arizona, Mexico's Pacifico
Railwaylifeline of the nation's swiftly expanding northwest regionwas in a precarious state only a few years ago. On long stretches, the tracks had
buckled and tie plates were lacking. Most of the embankments were washed out or had simply disappeared, locomotives and rolling stock were sadly
outmoded, and train schedules were chaotic. Thanks in part to a S 6 I million loan from the. World Bank, the Pacifico stands today as one of the most
striking railroad modernization operations of our century. While the line was in daily use, the rails were replaced along the entire 1,1 00 miles
of track, four million wooden ties were renewed, and new ballast applied to roadbed throughout its entire length. A thousand boxcars and sixty diesel
trains were purchased. Below, line being relaid and re-located to do away with extreme curves Above, tracks before modernization.
Photos World Bank
15

In one mountain section near Guadalajara the Pacific Railway track climbs 3,000 feet in less than
3 0 miles, penetrates 25 tunnels in 20 miles and crosses chasms a thousand feet deep. Building the
line in this terrain was one of the world's most difficult railroad construction operations. Above,
train crosses newly-built trestle bridge. Below, workmen replace wooden bridge ties.
Photos World Bank.

fl
EPIC OF MEXICO'S
GREAT FAR WEST
(Continued from page 14)
complete. In addition, an entirely new
communications system had been install¬
ed throughout the length of the railroad,
with automatic telephone offices at the
main centres.
But re-laying the track and providing
the necessary communications was only
half the battle. The railroad also need¬
ed new equipment. The decision to
transfer from steam to diesel elec¬
tric locomotion was taken early,
and the transfer is now complete.
Most of the old locomotives have al¬
ready been broken up and sold as scrap
to the steel mills, but there are still one
or two graveyards of these rusty monsters
to be seen awaiting breaking-up in the
maintenance workshops. Altogether, 64
new diesel locomotives were purchased,
1,644 steel boxcars, and 78 passenger
and mail cars were added to the rolling
stock.
A new artery
for new wealth
Copper from Cananea now reaches
Guadalajara in eight days. Agri¬
cultural produce which took
49 days for a journey in 1949, takes
three days in 1958. In 1952, a merchant
shipping goods on the Pacifico railway
would take out a 30-day shipping credit
from his bank to finance him until the
goods reached their destination. As the
end of the month drew nearer and
nearer, he would be on the telephone to
the railroad several times a day seeking
information about his shipment, and
often in vain, for headquarters probably
did not even know where the shipment
was. ' i ". '
Railroad officials now take gleeful
pleasure in the fact that they mail the
invoice to the shipper as soon as they
receive his freight, for shipment, and
very often they have to telephone him
to collect his goods from their destina¬
tion, more than a thousand miles from
the departure .point, even before the
invoice has reached him in the post.
When the World Bank loan to the
Pacifico Railway was signed in 1954 it
was the largest that the Bank had made
up to then for a single project! Three
years later the railroad was rebuilt and
operating on a commercial basis. Meas¬
ured in concrete terms, this is one of the
most striking success stories associated
with a World Bank loan, in Mexico
or anywhere else.
For the Pacific Railway is no less
than a new artery for Mexico, an artery
along which can flow a stream of new
wealth for which few in the country
would have dared to hope.
16
