A modern dilemma:
TRANQUILLIZER IN ONE POCKET;
'PEP' PILL IN THE OTHER
by Ritchie Calder
On July 19, 1957, letters went off from the Mental
Health Section of Who to eminent experts in Cana¬
da, Denmark, France, India, Nigeria, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States,
inviting them to meet in Geneva to consider the use and
abuse of drugs in the treatment of mental conditions.
The letter said:'"The Organization realizes the problems
likely to be presented, and even created, by the ever-
widening use of psychotropic agents..."
"Psychotropic agents!" The "tranquillizer" in one
pocket; the "pep" pill in the other. Drugs to dispel
nightmares; drugs to invoke dreams; drugs to escape
from reality into fantasy or from fantasy into reality.
Even Alice-in-Wonderland drugs by means of which
adults can shrink back into childhood.
That is the caricature of one type of Modern Man,
harassed by headlines; tortured by the ticker-tape;
tormented by the telephone; as "'manic-depressive" as his
sales-charts; wakeful when he should be asleep and
drowsy when he should be awake; worrying about his
blood-pressure and nursing his duodenal ulcer; driving
himself like a highspeed car through dense traffic, braking
or accelerating in turn, running away from himself and
taking himself with him. He has 2,500 million neighbours
in the wider world; he is alone in that private world
himself.
There are still other types those whose . tensions
become intolerable through being chained to piece work
machines, white-collar workers dogged by economic
worries and "wife trouble," hungry and miserable peasants
driven to take hashish for solace.
An exaggeration? But also a symbol of the anxieties and
tensions and stresses which deny countless millions that
"complete physical, mental and social well-being" which
Who defines as health.
In fighting diseases and promoting conditions conducive
to health, Who is trying to fit the environment to man.
In its mental health activities the increasing problem is,
How to reconcile man and his environment?
Revolution in psychiatric treatment
The decade in which Who has "grown-up" has seen
the development of drugs which have revolutionized
psychiatric treatment, until some authorities make
bold to claim that the practice, once routine, of sending
disturbed patients directly to a mental hospital is "against
good medical practice." Instead, with drugs as the first
means of attack against acute psychosis, patients could be
cared for at home or, if home conditions Were unsuitable,
at general hospitals, even on an out-patient basis.
In the United States where the care of mental patients
costs $1,000,000,000 a year, there was in 1956 a
reduction, for the first time in 184 years of U.S. mental
institutions, in the total number of hospitalized mental
cases. Instead of the predictable 12,000 increase, there
This article is taken from "Ten Steps Forward", a book
describing the battle for world health between 1948 and
1958, written by the British science writer, Ritchie Calder,
and published by Who's Division of Publication Informa¬
tion, Geneva (Price: £0.50 ; Sw. fr. 1.50 ; 2s6d). The texts
published on pages 26. and 28 are also taken from the
Ritchie Calder book, courtesy of Who.
was a decrease of over 8,000. Nearly 20,000 fewer patients
meant a saving in treatment and hospital construction of
$200,000,000. With the advent of the new drugs into
psychiatric practice, the use of electric shock treatment,
insulin coma therapy, packs and tubs, physical restraints
could sometimes even be replaced by sedatives and
tranquillizers.
. In the hands of psychiatrists, the new drugs have thus
beneficial potentials, not only in the clinical management
of psychotic patients but also in other respects. It has
become possible to relate certain drug-induced mental
phenomena to psychoanalytic theory and to examine their
implications for individual and group psychotherapy.
It is also necessary to know the mode of action of the
drugs the "'psychophysiological '"' correlates," as the
experts would call it; and to classify them. With the
growing experience in the use of the drugs, an appraisal
of the effects on the patient under treatment and of the
general atmosphere and future functioning of the mental
hospitals should be made. Other questions are how far
such drugs can safely be used in general practice and,
most important, whether "self-medication" is permissible.
Fantasy drugs of the priest-physicians
Such problems came under review by the Who study
group which met in Geneva in November 1957. But,
included in the group, were those who could contri¬
bute something over and beyond the pharmacological, or
clinical, or psychoanalytical approach, because they
belonged to cultures still "unpressurized." One of the
items on the agenda was: "Differences in the effects of,
and need for, psychotropic drugs in different cultures."
In a way, the contribution of those experts is a kind of
reverse "lease-lend." Advanced pharmacology, in the
shrunken world of modern communications, will almost
certainly be reflected in the new medical practices of
older cultures, but experience is usually a good substitute
for experiment and these tranquillizing and hallucinatory
drugs have, apart from modern synthesis, a tradition
which goes back to time immemorial. In the history, and
prehistory, of ancient cultures they played a part.
Rauwolfia, the natural basis of synthetic "tranquillizers"
such as reserpine, rescinnamine and deserpidine, is a plant
from the foothills of the Himalayas which figured in
Aryan-Dravidian medicine and the ancient Ayurveda of
the Indian sub-continent. Medical historians are just
beginning to learn the extent of mushroom-lore and its
relationship to the hallucination-producing drugs used by
the priest-physicians in older civilizations. Moreover
cultural "conditioning" can produce strangely differing
psychiatric reactions to such drugs and, as in so much of
the experience of Who in other fields, may indicate the
hazards of transplanted practices. These are question-
marks which give wise men cause to reflect and pose the
problems which can only be resolved by shared
knowledge on a world scale.
Apart from the advances made in clinical treatment
of mental illness in the past ten years the attitude
towards the mentally sick and the "misfits" has changed.
Gradually the recognition, which it is Who's policy to
encourage, has grown that mental illness is something
as matter-of-fact as physical illness and not something
unnatural or supernatural which must be whispered
about in shame or treated in secret. There is the reali¬
zation that the demands of society can be over-exacting
22

for certain individuals, who are just as much social-
casualties as the traffic-cripples.
More and more, Who has been emphasizing the social,
as well as the medical, approach to mental health and
encouraging the examination of causes rooted in the
social structure. Who studies of the "deprived child,"
who becomes the social misfit, have stimulated new
thinking and new attitudes. The clinical psychiatrist
sees the end results; the social-psychologist sees the
family, the group, and the social relationships which
produce these results. Mental health predicates preven¬
tion, not cure.
Similarly in the studies of, and the campaign against,
alcoholism Who's attitude is that the chronic alcoholic
is not a drunken reprobate but a sick person, to be
regarded sympathetically and to be medically treated.
The drink of good-fellowship, when it is socially sanction¬
ed, may relax other people but for him it becomes the
escape-route from his private jungle of emotions and
frustrations and psychological malaise, and some who
have reached this stage become chronic alcoholics. Such
an attitude towards the alcoholic does not condone excess
nor encourage drunkenness, but it calls for a rational
approach to a growing problem the increase of chronic
alcoholism as a symptom of the stress-diseases of today.
The growing incidence of mental illness in the advanced
countries is a public health problem of the first magnitude,
but Who with its world-wide responsibilities to all peoples
and to governments has to anticipate the extension of
The Unesco Courier. May 1958
the problem, as changing conditions and the spread ol
technology bring new stresses to bear on peoples whose
cultural patterns 'are being drastically modified. Indus¬
trialization, automation, atomic energy and increased
productivity, which can bring prosperity and material
well-being to many countries, have their psychological
hazards which Who is seeking to examine. Even the
lengthening of the span of life, the fruit of medical
progress, brings its problems. Who is directing attention
to the mental health aspects of the care of the old.
Thus, in its tenth decade, the World Health Organization
is opening windows and broadening the horizons on prob¬
lems which themselves are opportunities and which, only
a few years ago, would not have been popularly regarded
as its function. But they have been since its inception
because, by definition and by charter, it is a health
organization and health is not just a question for doctors.
It is bound up with the whole social process and with
each individual who is involved in that process.
No international agency, no government and no society
can provide health but only the opportunities for the
person to enjoy it.
Just as modern medicine accepts the fact that body
Reacts on mind and mind on body, that mental and
emotional stresses produce organic disorders and organic
disorders produce mental and emotional stresses, so the
concept of world health recognizes the reciprocity of the
individual and his environment and the ideal of The
Whole Man in the Whole World.
THE INCREASE IN MENTAL ILLNESS:
RESULT OF FASTER LIVING
The problem of mental illness is one which
affects particularly the economically well-de¬
veloped countries. It has been estimated that
in these countries there is an insanity rate of some¬
thing like 20 people per thousand. Yet in most
countries of Europe the number of mental hospital
beds ranges only from one to four per thousand of
the population.
In the better-off countries, moreover, there is
also a rate of neurosis defined at the level of par¬
tially-disabling illness of about 10 per cent.
During World War II (to August 1, 1945) 18 per
cent of the nearly five million Selective Service Re¬
gistrants in the U.S., aged from 18 to 37, had been
rejected because of mental disorders. In addition,
large numbers were discharged for the same reason.
These figures, of course, are not a measure of the
incidence in the general population, since the
stresses of military life are exceptional. However,
it has recently been reported that of the men pro¬
cessed by the U.S. Selective Service for the Armed
Forces pre-introduction examination, 20 per cent are
classified as unavailable because of psychiatric
disorder.
With regard to serious mental disease in the
more developed countries, there is some pro¬
gress. Until a few decades ago many of the
patients occupying beds in mental hospitals remain¬
ed chronically ill and in need of care for the whole
of their lives. Of those who did recover many later
relapsed and had to go back to hospital for a further
period. However, new methods of physical treat¬
ment insulin therapy, electro-convulsive therapy,
and the use of drugs such as chlorpromazine have
led to a more optimistic outlook in the therapeutic
field and to the possibility of permanent cure for
many patients whose prognosis formerly offered no
hope.
Growing evidence of the influence psychological
factors can exercise on these patients has drawn
attention to the role of unfavourable psychological
states and emotional influences in the etiology of
their disorders. An individual, for instance, whose
personality development has been weakened in child¬
hood may fall into a state of permanent ill-health
when faced with some unaccustomed stress. There
is clinical evidence that a large number of neurotic
breakdowns take place in response to stresses which
would in healthy people create no more than a tem¬
porary disturbance.
Interest has thus been aroused in the possibility
of measures to mitigate stress situations that
may impinge upon basically weak personalities.
There seems no doubt, also, that many cases of
schizophrenia and melancholia can be prevented by
mental hygiene methods, particularly through the
prompt handling of emotional disorders brought
about by immediate environmental stresses.
In European communities many patients have
physical symptoms without signs of mental disorder.
Such patients can often be shown to be suffering
from a prolonged emotional state which either
causes, or contributes to, what is essentially a neu¬
rotic condition. The trouble can frequently be trac¬
ed to unfavourable attitudes developed in early
childhood within the familly. The numbers concer¬
ned are so vast, however, that a wholesale attack
on the problem would require an expenditure of time
and money which could not readily be made avail¬
able.
We can nevertheless hope to mitigate certain
forms of ill-health and reduce their incidence
through the protection of persons at periods of
stress ; and we can, through existing medical ser¬
vices, make earlier treatment available.
23
