UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION
OF HUMAN
RIGHTS
Art. 6-8, 10... Equality before the law. All drawings by Heiri Steiner
PREAMBLE
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity
and of the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family is the foundation
of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human
rights have resulted ¡n barbarous acts which
have outraged the conscience of mankind, and
the advent of a world in which human beings
shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and
freedom from fear and want has been pro¬
claimed as the highest aspiration of the com¬
mon people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be
compelled to have recourse, as a last resort,
to rebellion against tyranny and oppression,
that human rights should be protected by the
rule of law,
Art. I... Equal rights for all.
6
Whereas it is essential to promote the
development of friendly relations between
nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations
have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in
fundamental human rights, ¡n the dignity and
worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and have determined
to promote social progress and better standards
of life ¡n larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged them¬
selves to achieve, in cooperation with the
United Nations, the promotion of universal
respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these
rights and freedoms is of the greatest Impor¬
tance for the full realisation of this pledge,
Now therefore
The General Assembly proclaims
This Universal Declaration of Human
Rights as a common standard of achievement
for all peoples and all nations, to the end that
every individual and every organ of society,
keeping this Declaration constantly ¡n mind,
shall strive by teaching and education to pro¬
mote respect for these rights and freedoms
and by progressive measures, national and
international, to secure their universal and
effective recognition and observance, both
among the peoples of Member States them¬
selves and among the peoples of territories
under their jurisdiction.
Article I
All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. They are endowed with
reason and conscience and should act towards
one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Article 2
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without
distinction of any kind, such as race, colour,
sex, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status. Furthermore, no dis¬
tinction shall be made on the basis of the
political, jurisdictional or international status
of the country or territory to which a person
belongs, whether it be independent, trust,
non-self-governing or under any other limi¬
tation of sovereignty.
Article 3
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and
security of person.
Article 4
No one shall be held ¡n slavery or servitude;
slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited
in all their forms.
Article 5
No one shall be subjected to torture or to
cruel, Inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment.
Article 6
Everyone has the right to recognition
everywhere as a person before the law.
Article 7
All are equal before the law and are entitled
without any discrimination
to equal protection of the
law. All are entitled to
equal protection against any
discrimination In violation of

UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION
(Continued)
this Declaration and against any incitement
to such discrimination.
Article 8
Everyone has the right to an effective remedy
by the competent national tribunals for acts
violating the fundamental rights granted him
by the constitution or by law.
Article 9
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest,
detention or exile.
Article 10
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair
and public hearing by an independent and
impartial tribunal, in the determination of his
rights and obligations and of any criminal
charge against him.
Article I I
(1) Everyone charged with a penal offence
has the right to be presumed innocent until
proved guilty according to law in a public
trial at which he has had all the guarantees
necessary for his defence.
(2) No one shall be held guilty of any penal
offence on account of any act or omission
which did not constitute a penal offence,
under national or International law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a
heavier penalty be imposed than the one that
was applicable at the time the penal offence
was committed.
Article 12
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary Inter¬
ference with his privacy, family, home or
correspondence, nor to attacks upon his
honour and reputation. Everyone has the
right to the protection of the law against
such interference or attacks.
Article 13
(I) Everyone has the right to freedom of
movement and residence within the borders
of each state.
Art. 12... Protection of the law.
(2) Everyone has the right to leave any coun¬
try, Including his own, and to return to his
country.
Article 14
(1) Everyone has the right to seek and to
enjoy ¡n other countries asylum from perse¬
cution.
(2) This right may not be invoked in the case
of prosecutions genuinely arising from non-
political crimes or from acts contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Article 15
(1) Everyone has the right to a nationality.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of
his nationality nor denied the right to change
his nationality.
Article 16
(1) Men and women of full age, without any
limitation due to race, nationality or religion,
have the right to marry and to found a family.
They are entitled to equal rights as to mar¬
riage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered Into only with
the free and full consent of the Intending
spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental
group unit of society and is entitled to pro¬
tection by society and the State.
Art. 16... To marry and found a family. Art. 1 8/ 1 9... Freedom of thought & religion.
Art. 14... Right to asylum.
Article 17
(1) Everyone has the right to own property
alone as well as in association with others.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his
property.
Article 18
Everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion; this right includes
freedom to change his religion or belief, and
freedom, either alone or in community with
others and ¡n public or private, to manifest
his religion or belief in teaching, practice,
worship and observance.
Article 19
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion
and expression; this right includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference and to
seek, receive and impart Information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers.
Article 20
(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly and association.
(2) No one may be compelled to belong to an
association.
Article 21
(1) Everyone has the right to take part ¡n the
government of his country, directly or through
freely chosen representatives.
(2) Everyone has the right of equal access to
public service ¡n his country.
(3) The will of the people shall be the basis
of the authority of government; this will shall
be expressed In periodic and genuine elec¬
tions which shall be by universal and equal
suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or
by equivalent free voting procedures.
Article 22
Everyone, as a member of society, has the
right to social security and
is entitled to realization,
through national effort and
international co-operation
and ¡n accordance with the
Cont'd
on
next page

UNIVERSAL DECLARATION (Continued)
organization and resources of each State,
of the economic, social and cultural rights
indispensable for his dignity and the free
development of his personality.
Article 23
(1) Everyone has the right to work, to free
choice of employment, to just and favourable
conditions of work and to protection against
unemployment.
(2) Everyone, without any discrimination, has
the right to equal pay for equal work.
(3) Everyone who works has the right to just
and favourable remuneration insuring for
himself and his family an existence worthy of
human dignity, and supplemented, if neces¬
sary, by other means of social protection.
(4) Everyone has the right to form and to
join trade unions for the protection of his
interests.
Article 24
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure,
including reasonable limitation of working
hours and periodic holidays with pay.
Article 25
(1) Everyone has the right to a standard of
living adequate for the health and well-being
of himself and of his family, including food,
clothing, housing and medical care and neces¬
sary social services, and the right to security
in the event of unemployment, sickness, disa¬
bility, widowhood, old age or other lack of
livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.
(2) Motherhood and childhood are entitled to
special care and assistance. All children,
whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy
the same social protection.
Article 26
(1) Everyone has the right to education.
Education shall be free, at least ¡n the elemen¬
tary and fundamental stages. Elementary
education shall be compulsory. Technical and
professional education shall be made generally
available and higher education shall be equally
accessible to all on the basis of merit.
(2) Education shall be directed to the full
development of the human personality and
to the strengthening of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall
promote understanding, tolerance and friend¬
ship among all nations, racial or religious
groups, and shall further the activities of the
United Nations for the maintenance of peace.
(3) Parents have a prior right to choose the
kind of education that shall be given to their
children.
Article 27
(1) Everyone has the right freely to participate
in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy
the arts and to share ¡n scientific advancement
and its benefits.
(2) Everyone has the right to the protection
of the moral and material Interests resulting
from any scientific, literary or artistic produc¬
tion of which he is the author.
Article 28
Everyone is entitled to a social and Interna¬
tional order in which the rights and freedoms
set forth ¡n this Declaration can be fully
realised.
Art. 20/21... To participate in government.
Article 29
(1) Everyone has duties to the community in
which alone the free and full development of
his personality ¡s possible.
(2) In the exercise of his rights and freedoms,
everyone shall be subject only to such limita¬
tions as are determined by law solely for the
purpose of securing due recognition and res¬
pect for the rights and freedoms of others
and of meeting.the just requirements of mora¬
lity, public order and the general welfare in
a democratic society.
(3) These rights and freedoms may in no case
be exercised contrary to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
Article 30
Nothing in this Declaration may be Interpreted
as implying for any State, group or person
any right to engage ¡n any activity or to
perform any act aimed at the destruction of
any of the rights and freedoms set forth
herein.
Art. 26... Right to education.
10
Art. 27... To share ¡n cultural life.
