SOLAR
ENERGY
TODAY &
TOMORROW
by Prof. V.Â. Baum
Head of the Solar Energy Laboratory,
G.M. Krzhizhanovsky Power Institute,
USSR. Academy of Sciences
POWER STATION IN THE DESERTSoviet
scientists believe that solar power stations can
be used to create oases in the desert. They plan
to install one In a valley near Erivan, capital of
Armenia (drawing, right). It consists of a boiler
on top of a 13 0-foot tower heated by the sun's
rays focussed on-to it by- 1,3 00 mirrors on con¬
centric railway lines at the base of the tower.
These five acres of mirrors will generate 2,500,000
kilowatt hours of electricity annually. Power will
be used to drain valley's swamps, to irrigate its
desert area and to supply electric current for
the use of local farmers. -¿(See article, page I 0.)
U.S.S.R. Official
The great problem of transforming the energy of the
sun's rays into other forms of energy for practical
use has interested humanity for a long time.
Scientists have calculated that the world's resources of
fossil fuels would be exhausted within one or two hundred
years if they were to remain the basic power source.
However, if the growing demand for energy could be
supplied from new, additional sources, first of all, solar
radiation, they could last several thousand years. At
first, solar radiation could serve as an auxiliary source of
energy in districts with a large number of sunny days per
year, and then, given certain conditions, it could become
the main source.
The problem must be tackled by seeking ways of exploit¬
ing this eternal, inexhaustible source of energy, tens of
thousands of times more abundant than current demands.
In ten days, for instance, the earth receives as much
warmth from the sun as we could get by burning all the
known reserves of organic fuel within the earth! However,
this enormous energy has not been exploited directly until
now. Due to uncontrolled natural processes, it is
transformed into low-potential warmth difficult to employ
technically, and is lost in space without working for us.
Only a comparatively insignificant portion of the stream
of radial energy is transformed into the energy of falling
water, wind, or chemical plant energy. It can be said
that so far man only uses these secondary resources,
while direct radiation is only used- in cultivating plants.
This radiation is of very high quality due to the great
temperature of its source, and it can be transformed to
advantage into other forms of energy, such as mech¬
anical, electrical and chemical. Besides, scientists,
engineers and inventors in several countries have built
many experimental solar appliances which have been
tested in operation. Some of them are already profitable
and are being used.
In the past, attempts to use the energy of solar radia¬
tion were made by individual enthusiasts, but in the last
two decades, planned work has been conducted by large
groups of specialists and even by entire laboratories.
Leading scientists have joined this work, the grandiose
prospects of which are so fascinating. Results are discuss¬
ed at regional and international conferences, and exhibi¬
tions of operating solar appliances are arranged.
There have been five national heliotechnical conferences
in the U.S.S.R. since 1939. Heliotechnical conferences
have been held annually in the United States since 1950;
some of them were international in scope. In 1954, there
was an international conference in India, sponsored by
the Indian Government and Unesco. It discussed the use
of wind and solar energy for arid and semi-arid zones. In
this article it is impossible even to list the countries where
such investigations are taking place. It is indicative of
the interest in the problem that more than one thousand

The - Unesco Courier. September 1958
^^Ët+F* ^frfoM
USIS
An example of a photochemical process is natural photo¬
synthesis, a process of green plant growth, which from
the energetic point of view consists of a transformation
of solar radial energy into the potential chemical energy
of plant matter. By arranging optimal conditions for
plant growth, the harvest can be greatly increased. There
have been interesting experiments in the United States,
Japan, Italy, and other countries in artificially breeding a
mono-cellular alga, Chlorella, with very high yields,
constituting a prospective source of food, and perhaps of
energy fuel.
So far, matter or systems of matter with sufficiently
high energy efficiency of photochemical processes have not
been formed artificially. Their efficiency is incomparably
less than what could be achieved from plants. If work
in this sphere succeeds, it will solve the problem of
accumulating energy.
Boons to power-poor areas
with a surplus of sunshine
What are the prospects of using solar radiation, and
what part will it play in the near and the distant
future among other sources of energy? It is diffi¬
cult to answer. In a rationally organized economy, each
source will be applied in the sphere most convenient and
profitable, since each has its advantages and shortcomings.
It can only be said with certainty that in the near future
solar radiation will satisfy most demands for energy in
the home as well as for small motors and possibly lighting
in rural communities sparsely inhabited districts where
there are small-scale consumers.
The amount of energy consumed by the population of
the world is enormous. However, it is chiefly expended in
the large cities and industrial settlements, while the rural
population often does not have the possibility of
satisfying its most elementary energy requirements.
The shortage of energy is felt especially in arid and
semi-arid areas, though they have a surplus of solar
energy. Conditions in these areas could be improved
immensely right now by supplying them with such solar
appliances as kitchens, boilers, distillers, and driers. A
solar kitchen, for instance, with a light metal mirror about
one square metre in size, is equal to a 600 watt electric
heater. Food and boiled water could be kept warm for
many hours in thermos vessels. These areas also need
refrigerators operating on solar energy, but available
models must be simplified and lowered in cost.
It might prove expedient in supplying energy to large
oases in desert districts to build large solar heat and power
stations like the one designed at the Helio-laboratory of
the G.M. Krzhizhanovsky Power Institute under the direc¬
tion of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences.
The solar photocells now manufactured in the U.S.S.R.,
the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Japan, and other countries are still expensive, and can
only be employed when there are no other means of
getting electricity, and if their cost is no concern. Still,
they are very promising. If their price could be lowered
sufficiently, that would solve the problem of lighting for
most of the districts of the globe. Photocells on 5% to
10% of the surface of a rural roof would light up the
house for an average of six hours daily. This is possible
with the photocell efficiency already achieved.
In the very near future, one-kilowatt solar thermo¬
electric generators will be more profitable than steam
power-and-heating appliances of the same capacity.
They would be of tremendous importance for water pumps
in arid and semi-arid zones. They would release many
people from exhausting, monotonous, and inefficient irri¬
gation labour.
Throughout history, people have been working to
transform nature and improve their conditions.
Transformations are becoming more and more tre¬
mendous. Man advances from small problems of separate
enterprises on a small scale to larger, multi-purpose tasks
of greater and general interest. Doubtless, some time will
be necessary to solve such problems on a cosmic scale.
This will require enormous amounts of power, which
cannot be supplied by any known energy source but that
of the sun.
