Masterworks of Japan's
Stone Age Art
by Seiroku Noma
The history of Japanese art stretches far back into
the mists of antiquity possibly some 6,000 years.
To most ol these six millenia from the time when
the earliest inhabitants settled in the Japanese islands,
between 4,000 and 6,000 years ago, to the dawn of Bud¬
dhism, which was introduced in 552 A.D. the Japanese
have given the name Joko Jidai (The Ancient Age).
There is no historical record of this period since there
was no system of writing, but archaeological studies have
reconstructed for us an image of the early Japanese peo¬
ple and their way of life in the Stone Age.
These men were hunters and fishermen. They gather¬
ed wild fruits and shellfish and used stone tools and
implements. Their era is known as the Period of Jomon
(rope-pattern) Type Pottery Culture as their civilization
is represented by crude earthenware with surface decora¬
tions of impressed patterns like those produced by pres¬
sing the clay with rice-straw rope or matting. The peo¬
ple lived in primitive houses which were no more than
pits dug in the ground (hence known as pit-houses) with
hearths in the centre and tent-like roofs. Excavations
from the remains of their dwelling places have produced
not only pottery but flint arrowheads, hatchets and dogu
(clay images).
These clay figurines or human figures of the Stone Age
are the oldest existing works of sculptural art in Japan
and together with the later Haniwa figures form the two
characteristic kinds of sculpture of Japan's pre-Buddhis-
tic period.
Just as the human f at first presents a grotesque
shape, so is the embryo of sculpture always bizarre, and
the clay figurines of early Stone Age Japan, with their
squat bodies and flattened heads, are no exception to
this rule. Most of them are about fifteen or twenty
centimetres in height, though there are some as small as
five and others as large as thirty centimetres high. They
have been found in the centre and north of Japan.
How old is this sculpture? Until recent times archaeo¬
logists have been reluctant to make precise asser¬
tions. Of the 200 or so clay figurines so far discov¬
ered, most appear to date from the Middle or Late Jomon
Period.
Recent radio-carbon tests for dating ancient objects
now enable archaeologists to divide the Jomon Culture
into five periods, the first beginning roughly 5,000 years
before the Christian Era and the fifth and last period
ending towards the first or second century B.C. (1).
The distribution of these clay figures shows that they
began to be made in the Middle Jomon Period and became
conventionalized as they came to be more fashionable.
Later treatment of exaggeration and ornateness was prob¬
ably an attempt to break through the conventionalism.
Why did these ancient people make such figurines?
Like the many primitive clay figurines of similar fantas¬
tic shapes which have been excavated in Central Europe
and Siberia, many of the Japanese figurines represent
pregnant women with swollen breasts and bellies. It is
(1) See La Culture Préhistorique du Japon by Yukio Koba-
yaschi, in the Journal of World History, Vol. IV, N° 1, 1957, a
quarterly review published under Unesco's auspices.
14
therefore presumed that men prayed to these symbols of
fertility that their families might multiply and prosper.
The fact that there were figures other than those of
pregnant women is not hard to explain. Once man has
learned to make a figure as an object of prayers, he can
go on to make figures symbolizing other wishes and desires.
The clay figurines then were a kind of icon, but most
likely they were not for community use, but were worship¬
ped in houses by individual families, for they have gen¬
erally been found in groups numbering several scores.
Their small size (mostly about 15 cm. high) suggests that
they were kept in the "'pit-houses", and they must have
been hung, for they are unstable in shape and some have
perforations on the shoulders.
The expression of these figurines is strong and vigo¬
rous. They were made by the same craftsmen who
produced the Jomon Type Pottery and who possessed
a fine formative talent rarely found among primitive men.
Their earthenware pieces, which were food vessels for
daily use, were also ornaments to enrich their lives, and
these reveal most strongly the pleasure and pride the
makers took in producing them. While the Jomon Pot¬
tery pieces were utilities of daily life, the clay figurines
were made on rare occasions.
Following the clay figurines in ancient Japanese sculp¬
ture come the Haniwa, quite different from the figurines
in age and location. Produced in about the third and
fourth centuries A.D., these belong to a different culture.
The term Haniwa means wa (circle) of hani (clay), that
is, clay objects arranged in a circle or circles. They
are so called because they were set up in a circle or
concentric circles on the slopes of burial mounds which
began to be built in Japan in about the third century
A.D., a custom which continued until the second half of
the sixth century when the introduction of Buddhism
brought the cremation system.
The Haniwa or terra-cotta tomb figures or posts can
be classified into two groups: (1) those in the shape of
simple cylinders placed around a mound to border the
tomb compounds or along the foot of the mound to pre¬
vent the earth crumbling down; (2) those in the shape
of men, animals, houses, furniture and other objects
dedicated to the persons buried there. While clay figur¬
ines are found in Japan's eastern regions, Haniwa are
discovered chiefly in the west, although some have also
been unearthed (like the clay figurines) in the Kanto
District. But in all cases they have been excavated from
ancient burial mounds which shows their purpose was
different from the clay figurines.
There is an old legend relating to the origin of Haniwa
recorded in the Nihon Shoki (Japan Chronicle) a book of
Japanese history completed on Imperial order in the year
720. This records that when a prominent person died
it was customary in Japan for his or her servants to be
buried alive in the same tomb. However, on the death
of the Empress Hihasuhime-no-mikoto, consort of the
Emperor Suinin (c. 3rd century), the bene¬
volent Emperor had pity on her followers
and asked his advisers how this cruel
custom might be replaced. The solution
was found by the courtier Nomi-no-sukune
Cont'd
page 20

DANCERS IN THE MOONLIGHT. Arranged in circles around the burial mounds which began to be erected in Japan in
the 3rd century A.D., archaeologists have found clay sculpture in the form of human figures, animals and objects. Named
"Haniwa" from wa (a circle) and hani (clay) this ancient sculpture has chiefly come to light in western Japan. Largest in number
among the Haniwa figures are men and women, some in armour, others dancing and singing. Those shown here are Haniwa
dancers, the larger one (thought to represent a woman) being 18 in. high and the smaller (a man) I I in.. Tops of these
cylindrical figures are modelled into faces with large eyes and noses, and despite their simplicity the figures have a lively, joyous
air. Looking at them, says Seiroku Noma, one might well imagine men and women of antiquity dancing in some moonlit field.
15

STONE AGE ART (Continued)
SCULPTURE BY
JAPAN'S FIRST
CRAFTSMEN
This clay figurine, dating from the
Stone Age, is an example of the oldest
existing sculptural works of art found
in Japan. These are presumed to date
from the early part of the Neolithic
Age in Japan during what is called
the Period of Jomon Pottery. The
name "Jomon" means "rope pattern,"
as the crude earthenware of this period
has surface decorations of impressed
patterns likethose produced by pressing
the clay with rice-straw or matting.
Figurine shown here, which lacks the
right arm and the lower part of the
body, dates from the Middle Jomon
Period (between 2000 and 3000 B. C.)
With the exception of the shoulders,
which are black, it is coloured brown.
Its present size of I 0 in. shows that
the complete work was larger than
the average among such figurines.
One of the "hill-shaped" figurines,
so called because their heads are shaped
like gently sloping hills. They have
broad, raised shoulders and stout legs
and wear waistcloths resembling tight
shorts. Figures ofthis type are believed
to date from the Late Jomon Period,
(about I 000 B. C.) as they have been
unearthed along with earthenware
pieces identified as belonging to
this period. Jomon Period figurines
have chiefly been found in the
central and northern parts of Japan.
Photos and documentation on pages I and
I 4 to 23 are from "Japanese Sculpture-
Archaic Period" by Seiroku Noma, repro¬
duced by courtesy of the publishers,
Bijutsu Shuppan-Sha, Tokyo : Photos
by M. Sakamoto. All rights reserved.

GOGGLED FIGURE. Figures with faces like this have been named "goggled" figurines
on the assumption that a kind of protector like those employed by the Eskimos to guard
their eyes against snow glare was also in use in the northeastern part of Japan. Clay
figurines of this kind were venerated and hung in the primitive homes of Stone Age Japan,
called "pit-houses" because dug in the ground. Many figurines represent pregnant women
to whom, it is believed, men prayed that their families might grow and prosper.
17

STONE AGE ART (Continued)
HAIRSTYLES
AND BEAUTY
1,500 YEARS
AGO
HEAD OF A GIRL. The
top of this Haniwa figure
probably formed a large hair-
dress, but most of it is now
missing. The delicate curve
from the forehead to the nose
and the expression of the eyes
which have not been perfor¬
ated at right angles, but
obliquely, with a spatula, are
admirably life-like. Other fig¬
ures of the 5th and 6th cen¬
turies reveal the different
hairstyles and modes of dress
of both men and women.
18

SAD-FACED WOMAN with
a large hairdress. In general
the eyes of the Haniwa heads
are most expressive. They
are generally almond-shaped,
but slight differences in the
shape can be used to express
dignity, joy or sorrow. Here,
the sculptor has represented
the ears by two simple rings
of clay applied to the head.
Haniwa figurines show women
wearing jewellery round their
necks, on their wrists, and
sometimes round their ankles.
19

STONE AGE ART (Continued)
ANIMALS JOIN
THE FUNERAL
PROCESSIONS
TETHERED HORSES were
most common of Haniwa ani¬
mal figures. In the one shown
here the form and the trap¬
pings have been executed with
great skill. It has a saddle,
ring-shaped stirrups, tethers,
and a bit in its mouth. Pen¬
dants hanging from the tethers
are "horse-bells." One inter¬
pretation of Haniwa works
is that they were inspired
by ancient Chinese custom of
burying pottery funeral figures
in the tomb for the comfort
of "life beyond the grave."
who called a hundred haji or clay workers from Izumo
Province and had them make clay figures of men, horses
and other things which he set around the grave of the
dead Empress in place of the real persons.
But this is only one of the ways in which the origin of
the Haniwa have been interpreted and it is generally
regarded as more legendary than real, for the Haniwa are
primarily terra-cotta cylinders and could not be consider¬
ed as symbolic substitutes for human victims. Another
theory is that these original cylinders enclosing the burial
mounds first came to have human faces on top and
gradually developed into full figures. A third interpreta¬
tion is that they were inspired by the Chinese custom of
burying pottery funeral figures in the tomb for the
comfort of "life beyond the grave".
Whichever of the theories is correct, it seems likely that
they were indeed intended to be part of a funeral pro¬
cession. Largest in number are those of men and
women, some in armour, some dancing or singing or en¬
gaged in other activities. Some are smiling, others are
weeping or have angry expressions. Most of the animal
figures are horses in full trappings, though the sculptors
have also depicted dogs, monkeys, boars and deer. The
fact that there are swords, shields, desks, chairs and
other objects as Well as houses of various type may be
taken as a token of the influence of the Chinese Ming-
chi'i (Pottery figures of men, birds, beasts and objects
placed in ancient Chinese tombs and mausoleums to be
of eternal service to the dead).
Haniwa figures were made for the huge tombs of men
of rank from the fourth to the sixth centuries. (Perhaps
the most impressive of the mounds is the Emperor Nintoku
Mound in Osaka which covers an area of about 5,000,000
square feet). On the death of one of these men the work
20
of "mass producing" the Haniwa began, the greatest
number required being cylinders to surround the burial
mound. They were erected in many circles" so that hun¬
dreds and sometimes thousands were needed. They were
made rapidly by haji and other clay workers normally
engaged in making earthenware vessels, helped by other
workers in the community.
Human figures, animals and other shapes were made
amidst the bustle and rush of this large-scale activity.
It should thus be remembered that Haniwa figures were
not made by sculptors working intently from models, but
by craftsmen reproducing forms they carried in their
minds. Elaborate treatment of details was not required
as they were intended to be set up on a mound and looked
at from a distance. Yet though they are not refined in
style they are full of fresh vigour.
The process used in making Haniwa figures was to
knead clay into the form of a rope, then to cut it into
pieces of suitable length. These were then piled up to
form the rough shape and this in turn was smoothed with
the hands to its final form before being heated. Ordi¬
narily the figures were between 50 and 100 cms. in height,
the largest being the figure of a man found in the
Mushashi Province, which measured 124 cms. They were
made hollow for the economy of clay and to lessen the
weight, as a large number had to be made at the same
time. Had they been solid they would not have dried
quickly and would have cracked while being heated.
The clay figurines of the Jomon Period and the Haniwa
figures, which have come to light only recently after being
hidden underground for many centuries, have a remark¬
able freshness. Innumerable others are probably still
waiting to be discovered.

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
WILD BOAR has body and legs
modelled from cylinders. Though
horses in full trappings make up
the greater part of animal figures,
the Haniwa sculptors modeled many
other familiar animals such as dogs,
birds, monkeys and deer. In earlier
periods, hunters used crude wooden
bows and stone-tipped arrows.
Those who lived during the Hani¬
wa era employed iron arrow-heads.
DOMESTIC FOWL illustrates the origi¬
nality of Haniwa sculpture which lies in its
vivid representation within simple forms.
The skill of this particular craftsman is seen
in his treatment of the well-rounded belly,
the powerful feet and the delicate change
of the sweep from the belly to the neck.
Until the fifth century A.D. dogs and fowls
were Japan's only domesticated animals.
21

STONE AGE ART (Continued)
22

PORTRAITS
IN CLAY
IRON-CLAD WARRIORS. These two
ancient warriors are among the finest of
Haniwa figures. The one on the left is
wearing full armour and a "peach-shaped"
helmet. He carries a quiver on his back
and a bow in his left hand, the right hand
holding the hilt of his sword. Below, a
warrior wearing a cuirass and a necklace
and with a sword slung at his side.
POWERFUL PEASANT. This Haniwa
figure of a man with powerful, vigorous
body is presumed to represent someone
in the prime of life who does heavy work
such as farming. The cheeks are painted
red and the ears are indicated by two large
perforations. Holes also exist in the arm¬
pits, but these were probably made to pre¬
vent the figure being cracked in firing.
23
