THE NEW
FACE OF
LEPROSY
Adama, the young African
woman (right) has just
learned that she has lep¬
rosy. Her situation Is tra¬
gic, but not hopeless.
Medical science now has
new drugs to arrest and In
some cases to cure leprosy.
For centuries this has been
hated and feared as the
most hideous of man's
afflictions and Its victims
called "unclean". But to¬
day more and more are
being treated in colonies
like the one at Schwebo,
Burma (opposite page)
where there is a commu¬
nity life and, after the day's
work, singing, dancing
and plenty of laughter.
Photos © by Pierre-André
Pittet and Ernest Scheidegger
18

w
The Unesco Courier. May 1958
One wet, warm day in July 1950, an eight-year
old little girl named Ma Boka Sone was brought
to the Mission Institution in Kemmendine, a
suburb of Rangoon. It seemed unlikely that she would
live very long, for she was in an advanced stage of
leprosy. But within three years little Ma Boka Sone
had made a remarkable recovery thanks to treatment
with sulphone drugs. By 1955, she was entirely free
of symptoms and without deformity. Two years later,
she Was again living happily with her family.
Maung Bone, a youth of some 20 years, is another
example. He went to the Htaukkyan sanatorium near
Rangoon in 1953. Apart from other symptoms his face
was a mass of unsightly "bulbous" tumours. He, too,
has hopes of rejoining his family this year. And yet
a third case, Tun Myint, still receiving treatment at the
Kemmendine Mission, is another Burmese child who is
being saved from a life of pain, unhappiness and
ostracism by sulphone treatment.
Burma is typical of many countries, especially in the
Far East, that have seized eagerly upon the new
techniques made available by the advances of medical
science for the relief of leprosy victims. In 1952, with
the help of the World Health Organisation, Burma
lunched a country-wide anti-leprosy campaign using
mass sulphone treatment. Not only had medical
science provided a new treatment to arrest and, in
some cases, cure leprosy but it was encouraging an
entirely new outlook toward the leprosy sufferer: the
concept that leprosy is no more contagious than, for
instance, tuberculosis and is, therefore, a disease for
which treatment should be sought in the normal way.
To encourage such thinking was progressive, but to
translate it into action was another matter. Down
the centuries, leprosy has been feared and hated as
the most hideous of all man's afflictions and the
"leper" has been ruthlessly cast out from
the society of his fellow men. Thus the
leprosy sufferer has, from necessity,
sought to conceal his disease, considering
it a disgrace. When the fatal marks
could be hidden no longer, the victim
Cont'd
on
next page

LEPROSY
(Continued) No longer a disease apart
was either driven out or allowed to
leave "voluntarily", to live alone,
hidden from view, or to join the bands
of wild and homeless beggars roam¬
ing the countryside and cities.
When the campaign first started,
Rangoon alone had some 6,000 cases
on record and preliminary estimates
put the total number of leprosy
sufferers in Burma at around 100,000.
Today, as more and more people
come forward for treatment, this
estimate has been revised to nearer
200,000 cases. This means that the
prevalence rate of leprosy in Burma
(over ten cases of leprosy per
thousand population) is twice that in
India or Thailand and is, therefore,
the highest among the larger
countries of S.E. Asia.
The campaign was based on the
new theory that only a small
proportion of leprosy patients
represent a danger of contagion for
their families or for the community.
The great majority can safely be
given "ambulatory" treatment at
newly-established outdoor clinics
while continuing their normal occu¬
pations and living at home. (They are
taught, nevertheless, elementary pre¬
cautions.) These patients are given
modern sulphone treatment which
not only arrests the disease but
reduces infection. (This means that
the reservoir of infection eventually
will be reduced and the spread of the
disease checked.)
The programme required five
phases of implementation: train¬
ing, propaganda, case-finding, mass
treatment in the capital and mass
treatment in the provinces. The
first need was for specially trained
leprosy inspectors who could travel
the country "screening" and treating
cases, visiting leprosy colonies and
sanatoria and organising as many
treatment points as possible. Some
elementary training in the diagnosis
and treatment of leprosy was also
given to some 250 health assistants
village workers posted in areas where
qualified doctors are unknown.
Today, there are some 30 leprosy
inspectors at work in Burma.
During the coming year, it is
hoped to increase their number to 36.
The leprosy assistants and inspectors
also played a large part in the propa¬
ganda programme. Wherever they
travelled they talked to the people,
explaining to them that "leprosy is
nothing to be ashamed of and that
effective treatment is available." The
co-operation of the religious leaders of
the villages contributed in no small
way to the successful course of the
campaign.
Training was mostly given in
Rangoon, where the first clinics for
ambulatory treatment were opened.
To emphasise that leprosy is just a
disease like any other, the site chosen
for the main centre was next to an
out patients' clinic at Rangoon
General Hospital. The Prime Minister,
His Excellency TJ Nu, who took a keen
interest in the launching of the
campaign, personally recommended
this central situation. To avoid the
stigma that superstition had attached
to the words "leper" and "leprosy,"
it was called the "'Special Skin Clinic."
Auxiliary clinics were opened in the
city's outskirts and an existing clinic
connected with one of the old-style
leprosy asylums was brought into line
with the new programme. By 1954,
24,000 people were receiving am-
WHO photo by Ernst Scheidegger
SPECIAL COLONIES for tempe nry isola¬
tion of leprosy sufferers have been opened In
Burma where so far 200,000 cases have been
reported a prevalence rate which is the
highest in South East Asia. Above, drugs are
distributed to patients at the Schwebo colony.
bulatory treatment and some 3,000
patients living in Rangoon were
attending the clinic regularly.1
For those suffering from the
disease in its dangerously contagious
stage, special colonies and sanatoria
for temporary isolation are still ne¬
cessary. But gone is the "Abandon-
hope-all-ye-that-enter-here" atmo¬
sphere of the old leprosy asylums.
The Schwebo colony is typical of
those in rural areas. Patients are
encouraged to do productive work
and to live a community life with, in
most cases, the knowledge that they
will return to normal life as useful
members of the community when the
period of contagion is over. Near
Rangoon, at Htaukkyan, a state
sanatorium has been built with acco¬
modation for 500 advanced cases.
The main buildings face a busy
highroad and bear, for passers-by to
see, the name: "'State Sanatorium for
Special Skin Diseases."
An important part of " the pro¬
paganda campaign is not. only to
break down the deep-rooted belief
that leprosy is a disease apart and
that nothing can be done to arrest
its course, but to encourage the pub¬
lic to assist patients after discharge
from leprosy institutions (in the past
many ex-patients, though fully cured,
have been shunned by family and
neighbours) and to help the depend¬
ents of patients hospitalized or un¬
employed on account of their
sickness. In rural areas, leprosy
relief associations have been formed
and are widely supported.
Like all serious illnesses, leprosy
still brings tragedy to many homes
mothers with the disease in its
contagious stage must leave their
husbands and children for what may
still be a long period of treatment in
a special colony or sanatorium;
fathers, too, often must be separated
from the families they are supporting.
By the end of June 1957, 42,000
cases had been registered and 33,500
were receiving treatment. In 1954,
the Dutch leprologist assigned by the
World Health Organisation to help
the Burmese Government get the
programme under way in 1952, moved
to another project and the Burmese
Ministry of Health carried on the
campaign. This year, with renewed
Who and Unicef assistance, it is
hoped that the number of cases
receiving treatment can be increased
to 50,000 by the end of 1959.
Among the thousands finding new
hope who, in former days, would
have been condemned to live as
outcasts, there are innumerable human
stories. Maung Tun, for instance, a
former government official, could no
longer stand the disgrace of being a
helpless burden to his wife and
children. He left home to become a
beggar, until rounded up by the police
and sent to a sanatorium for treat¬
ment. One of many "'success" stories
concerns Ma Khin Nyunt, a girl who
is now in her late teens. She was
turned out by her stepmother several
years ago when the neighbours realiz¬
ed that she had leprosy.
Frightened, she carried her sleeping
mat and little bundle of belongings
to the "Special Skin Clinic" in
Rangoon, crying only for a corner to
sleep. She is now a pupil nurse in
the hospital ward of the New State
Sanatorium for Special Skin -Dis¬
eases.
As more cases are discovered and
treated and the reservoir of infection
is reduced, children now growing up
will be less and less liable to contract
leprosy. Dr. TJ. Tha Saing, Assistant
Director of National Health Services,
who is tireless in his campaign to
bring a better understanding of lep¬
rosy and easy access to treatment
for people in all walks of life, looks
forward with confidence to the day
when this age-old scourge will be
conquered once and for all.
20
