THE UNITED
NATIONS IN
BRUSSELS
Under a concrete cupola the
largest ever built in Europe
without central supports is
housed the most international of all
the pavilions in the Brussels World
Fair the United Nations Pavilion.
Formally dedicated on April 26, an¬
niversary of the opening of the San
Francisco Conference which drew up
the United Nations Charter, the U.N.
Pavilion brings together under one
roof all the members of the United
Nations family.
The exhibits of the U.N. and the
specialized agencies have a common
theme: the challenge which the
modern world presents to man and
how each member of the U.N. family
is working to help meet that chal-
30
lenge. Striking displays demonstrate
examples of work done by the diffe¬
rent agencies in their special fields:
the International Labour Organiza¬
tion shows its work for social deve¬
lopment in the Andes; the Interna¬
tional Civil Aviation Organization has
maps demonstrating air traffic control
over the North Atlantic; the World
Meteorological Organization exhibits
facsimile equipment for weather fore¬
casting; typical of the projects aided
by the International Bank is one
illustrated by a miniature dam in
operation.
Unesco has several stands dealing
with some of its most important pro¬
jects: Orient-Occident cultural inter¬
dependence, elimination of racial
prejudice, education, arid zone prob-
United Nations
lems and their solution, promoting
the free floW of information.
A special set of sixteen stamps
commemorating U.N. participation in
the Exhibition is on sale in the Pavi¬
lion. The stamps, ivalued at the
equivalent of $2, are only valid for
letters posted on the spot.
A United Nations week was held
from June 23 to June 26, during
which debates were held on subjects
connected with the U.N. family. One
of the principal speakers in this pro¬
gramme was Dr. Luther H. Evans,
Director-General of Unesco. June 26,
anniversary of the signing of the
United Nations Charter (at San
Francisco, in 1945) was marked by a
special ceremony attended by leading
U.N. officials.

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
United Nations
GLEAMING ATOMIUM (left) dwarfs visitors
to the Brussels World Fair. In background
(arrowed) is U.N. Pavilion. Above, entrance,
and below, interior of U.N. Pavilion whose con¬
crete cupola is the largest ever built in Europe
without central supports. Right, a Unesco stand,
"People Have the Right to Information". This
exhibit illustrates Unesco's campaign to bring
press, radio, television and cinema facilities
within reach of all. (See The Unesco Courier,
July I 957, special issue on the Brussels Exhibition.)
31
