The Unesco Courier. January 1958
Photos © Eibl v. Eibesfeldc
REPTILIAN AGE seems to have returned to the earth in these photos of sea ¡guanas basking in
hundreds on the rocks and cliffs of the Galapagos Islands (below). These iguanas, quite unknown
elsewhere In the world, grow to more than three feet in length. Above, a bloodless ''combat" during
the breeding season. Loser (left) adopts submissive posture while victor remains in threatening one.
GALAPAGOS
Enchanted Islands'
CHATHAM-
\jyeafiwatcr Bay
ROUTE °f the "NOMA"
IN THE -.
GALAPAQ05 ISLANDS /^>cCHARLES
191-W. |8Q°W
© 1924 G.P. Putnam's Sons, New York
'GALAPAGOS: WORLD'S END' was the title given by the American scientist and
author, William Beebe, to the account of a two and a half months' trip he made in I 923
to one of the least-visited corners of the world. This map, taken from his book, shows
the position of the island group in relation to South America and route around the Gala¬
pagos Archipelago followed by the yacht Noma in which Beebe and his party travelled.
In December 1831, the naval vessel Beagle left England for a five-year surveying
expedition to South American, Australian and New Zealand coasts and
islands. On board was a young man, just one year out of university,
serving as unpaid naturalist to the expedition. Charles Darwin little guessed, as
he sailed away, that he would bring back scientific material for a theory that
would rock the world. Darwin devoted special study to the animals he found
on remote islands, and on the Galapagos Islands, 600 miles from the coast of
Ecuador, he made some remarkable discoveries. He noted, for example, that
half the plants and birds were different from species in other parts of the world.
About a third of the shore fish and nearly all the reptiles also differed. These
variations helped to suggest to Darwin the theory of evolution set forth in his
Origin of Species. The Galapagos Islands, which proved so fruitful for this
research, had been discovered in 1535, and named from the Spanish word galápago
"tortoise" because of the giant turtles found there. Since 1832, renamed Archi¬
piélago de Colon, they have belonged to Ecuador. The Galapagos are still a
Noah's Ark of strange and unique forms of life, but because these are threatened
by man and his domestic animals, the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature has proposed that one island be set aside as a reserve and that a permanent
station of biological research and conservation be established. Last July the Union
and Unesco jointly sent Dr. I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt, of the Max Planck Institute für
Verhaltens-physiologie, at Seewiesen, Germany, to investigate conditions in the
islands. On the next page, Dr. Eibl-Eibesfeldt describes some of the amazing
birds and animals found on this unique group of "Treasure Islands for Science".
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
19


Wonders of a Noah's
Ark off the Coast of Ecuador
by /. Eibl-Eibesfeldt
Max-Planck Institut für Verhaltensphysiologie
Sewiesen-Starnberg, Federal of Germany Republic
L
IFTING its gaunt, grey lava
ridges and peaks out of the
Pacific, some 600 miles from
Ecuador, is a group of islands
whose shores are inhabited by some
of the strangest animals in the
world. They are creatures which
have contributed more to the
development of the natural scien¬
ces than all the rest of the fauna
of Latin America put together.
In 1835 they provided Charles
Darwin with many of the facts
from which he drew the ideas
which he later presented in The Origin of Species.
The numerous islands, islets and reefs of the Galapagos
archipelago have a total area of about 3,000 square miles.
All of them were spewed up by volcanic activity and the
highest of their volcanic cones tower over 5,000 feet above
sea level. The flanks of these cones show gaping fissures
from recent eruptions and are seamed and furrowed with
dried-up streams of black lava. The sun-baked lowlands
(the archipelago lies directly astride the Equator) are
covered with a desert growth of cactus and thorn trees
and only in the uplands is found the refreshing sight of
green vegetation.
The Galapagos Islands were never linked to the
continent of South America and all their plants and
animals must originally have drifted to their shores or
been driven there by great storms. On the basis of
existing fauna, this is the only possible explanation for
the scarcity of species on the islands. For example there
is only one species of land snake and only two land
mammals a rat and a bat. If the islands had ever been
connected with the mainland, so rich in animal species,
the situation would certainly be different (1).
Those animals which succeeded in establishing
themselves, developed, for the most part, into highly
individual types and species which are found nowhere
else in the world. Seventy-seven of the eighty-nine
species of birds which breed in these islands are in¬
digenous. The islands are the unique home of sea iguanas.
These creatures, more than three feet long and looking
like prehistoric "dragons,"' lie out in the sun in hundreds
on the spray-blown cliffs and rocks. Among the colonies
of iguanas, flightless cormorants hatch their eggs and
penguins and sea-lions fish busily in the cool waters.
Here, the extraordinary sight of penguins (of Antarctic
origin) and iguanas (denizens of the tropics) living side
by side seems to be the most natural thing in the world.
But what surprises a stranger to the islands most is the
amazing tameness of the animals. Thrushes will fly to
him and alight at his feet, and a hawk, out of mere
-curiosity, will drop down on a nearby boulder, so close
that he can reach out and touch it. None of the
cormorants, sea-lions or sea iguanas show any signs of
fear probably because no large beasts of prey exist.
Certain parts of the island ceased to be like the Garden
of Eden as soon as the most dangerous of all living
creatures man set foot on them. In past centuries
buccaneers and whalers carried away whole shiploads of
Galapagos, as the Spaniards called the giant tortoises,
(1) Readers' attention is drawn to the 1953 Norwegian archaeologi¬
cal expedition to the Galapagos Islands, and the study published
by Thor Heyerdahl and Arne Skjolsvold entitled "Archaeological
Evidence of pre-Spanish visits to the Galapagos Islands", published
in 1956 by the Society for American Archaeology Editor.
20
which soon became a rarity on most islands and in some
places completely disappeared. The arrival of settlers
during the last century only made matters worse, and the
destruction was completed by cats, dogs and pigs that had
run wild. In 1934 the Ecuadorian Government passed a
law forbidding the capture of indigenous animals, and
some islands were selected as sanctuaries. But laws are
of little use unless they are enforced.
In 1954, twenty years after the enactment of these laws,
I visited the islands with an expedition led by Dr. Hans
Hass, of the International Institute for Submarine Re¬
search. I saw what wonderful possibilities the islands
offered for biological research, but I was dismayed by the
amount of damage that had been done to the animal
population, which represents a unique scientific heritage.
I reported the situation to the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
(I.U.C.N.) and suggested, among other things, that a
Biological Research Station be set up, thus ensuring the
presence of an official supervisory body which alone could
stop the destruction of the animals.
The I.U.C.N. showed great interest in the project (as did
several American institutions) and it approached the
Ecuadorean Government. The Ecuadorean authorities
approved the scheme and asked
I Unesco to send out an expert to
choose a site for the Biological
Station, to make a preliminary
"census" of the animal population
and to suggest any new protective
measures that might be required.
I was entrusted with this mission
and when I left for the Galapagos
Islands in June 1957, I was
accompanied (thanks to the
support of several U.S. organiza¬
tions such as the Pan-American
Section of the International
Committee for the Preservation
of Birds and the New York Zoological Society) by
Dr. Robert Bowman of the University of California and
also by a photographer and artist from "Life" magazine.
In Ecuador we were given every facility by the authorities,
including air transport to the Galapagos group, and the
use of a naval patrol boat. This enabled us to visit
nearly all the islands during our four months' stay.
The first and foremost fact we were able to verify was
that good specimens of every characteristic species of the,
Galapagos Islands still exist. On James Island (also known
as San Salvador, most of the islands having both English
and Spanish names) we discovered a large colony of fur
seals which were said to have become almost extinct. On
Barrington Island, Narborough Island and on the southern
of the two Las Plazas Islands We found large numbers of
land iguanas. We even discovered some on Indefatigable
Island where they were thought to have become extinct.
But on Seymour Island we found no evidence that they
still exist. This island was used as a military base during
the war and the once numerous land iguanas were prob¬
ably exterminated.
The giant tortoises, to which the Archipelago owes its
name, are now extremely rare on most
islands. It is worth noting, however, that
on Chatham an inhabited island a few Cont'd
have survived despite the fact that they on
were thought to have become extinct here paee 23
fifty years ago. We only came across larger

The Unesco Courier. January 1958
GALAPAGOS
(Continued,) Giant lizards clash
in chivalrous trials of strength
colonies of tortoises on Albermarle and Indefatigable
Islands.
Our excursion to the tortoise country on the second of
these two islands Was an unforgettable experience.
Setting out With a local guide We first made our way
through the cactus belt. Prickly pears as high as trees
and giant cacti bordered our path. Then at 300 feet above
sea level the vegetation began to change; the cacti be¬
came fewer and fewer and were replaced by trees and
shrubs. Finally we came to luxuriant, damp woods where
there were Scalsia trees With green leafy tops crowning
their straight, slender trunks, and Pisonia trees Whose
reddish trunks were overgrown With fern. Everywhere,
long dark green tufts of moss hung from the branches,
and the wet and slippery soil was covered with ferns. The
Galapagos Islands certainly offer a variety of contrasts.
I know of no other place where a difference of a few
hundred feet in altitude brings such a radical change in
the landscape. A march of
several hours brought us from
the forest belt into a more open
region. Fresh green meadows
with clusters of trees stretched
before us, and there in the
twilight we came across the first
. bleached shells of tortoises that
had been killed.
The Galapagos Archipelago is historically of
great scientific importance, since it was its
fauna and flora which more than anything else
convinced Charles Darwin of the fact of evo¬
lution.
Next morning when we set out
in search of the tortoises we
discovered the track made by a
giant one quite .close to our
camp. It led to a shallow pool
where we found the beast lying
in the water. It was a remark¬
able size some eight feet
around the body and so heavy
that four of us were unable to
lift it. Then we found others,
and at the same time we saw
traces of the hunters who come
here regularly for the sake
of the tortoise fats. However,
tortoises are now so plentiful on
Indefatigable Island that their
future seems assured. When the
time comes for them to lay their
eggs they move down to the
coastal regions, and in the arid
belt, a few miles from the sea, I found young tortoises,
between four and six inches long. Unfortunately these
young ones are an easy prey for the wild pigs which
abound here.
From the zoological point of view and also that of
scenery the most interesting of the Galapagos Islands is
Narborough. Our experiences here made a vivid im¬
pression on our minds. The island has a giant volcano,
its sides marked by flows of lava from recent eruptions,
which rises steeply out of the sea to a height of 5,000 feet.
There is a central crater several miles across, whose sides
plunge steeply to a blue-green crater lake in which a
second volcano in turn enshrines a lake.
But for zoologists the chief attraction is the coastal zone
which is the home of the largest colonies of sea iguanas
anywhere in the islands. Coming across these huge
lizards sunning themselves in hundreds on the cliffs, the
visitor feels he has been miraculously transported to the
reptilian age.
These sea iguanas are only found in the coastal region.
At ebb-tide they climb down from the cliffs and feed on
the sea-weed uncovered by the receding tide. During the
mating season, when the males become aggressive, their
haunts are the scenes of the most curious fights. The
males choose small areas where they Uve with a few
females. If a rival approaches any of these reserved
areas the male "owner" tries to intimidate him, first by
It provides indeed one of Nature's most
clearcut experiments in evolution, and for this
reason, and as a memorial to Darwin's great
achievement, its flora and fauna should be
studied, preserved and safeguarded.
In addition, a great deal of research remains
to be done on the ecology of the archipelago
and on the details of evolutionary change on
its various islands, and any results would be
of outstanding interest, Accordingly, I hope
very much that a permanent Biological Station
may be set up on the Galapagos with a view
to the scientific study and active conservation
of their native animals and plants.
Julian Huxley
erecting his crest and opening his jaws, then by stalking
round his adversary and repeatedly bobbing his head. If
the rival does not withdraw a strange battle begins.
The two opponents rush at each other with lowered
heads and, skull to skull, try to push each other out of
the way. As soon as one of them finds the other is
stronger he gives in and lies fiat in front of the victor in
a submissive posture. The other simply maintains a
threatening posture until the loser retreats. It is like a
knightly tournament of old, the two animals measuring
their strength, but not harming each other at all. In
behaving this way, they must be guided by an instinct for
preserving their species, for if they were really to fall on
one another with their sharp jaws, they would almost
certainly be seriously injured. As it is, the Weaker of the
two animals, usually a young male, thus has the chance
to mature. Chivalrous fights of this kind occur among
many vertebrates.
It is also on the shores of
Narborough Island that the two
rarest birds of the Galapagos
the flightless cormorant and the
Galapagos penguin are found.
The flightless cormorant is the
largest cormorant to be found
anywhere in the world. Its
wings are stunted, showing that
on islands where there are no
enemies, a function can be lost
without detriment to the species.
Similar examples were provided
by the dodo and the great auk.
Now that these birds are extinct,
the flightless cormorant is one
of the few remaining examples
of this phenomenon. I sat for
hours beside the nesting hollows
watching the parents taking
turns to feed their young. The
procedure was always the same:
the bird which went to catch
fish returned with the bunch of
seaweed in its beak and gave it
to the parent on the nest, this
bird greeted its partner by
raising its beak and uttering a
special cry.
Narborough really seems like
an untouched island. Land iguanas swarm in the interior
and because there are none of the domestic animals
which laid waste the other islands, the giant tortoises
have survived here in great numbers. It is therefore vital
that this island be declared a sanctuary, for even short
visits by settlers or fishermen are likely to change things.
For instance, on the small Las Plazas Islands, I myself
found six sea-lions with battered skulls. Those who kill
these tame animals do so for sport.
Apart from supervision, which would be an essential
part of a conservation programme, education is the other
main hope of remedying the situation. This seems likely
to succeed," judging by the reactions of people with whom ,
we came in contact. They were all proud of their islands
even though they did not realize what extraordinary
animals they had around them. For instance, they had
no idea that the iguanas, which to them were such
commonplace animals, were only to be found in these
islands. When such things were explained to them, they
were willing to learn more and seemed ready to help in
the task of preserving these precious species.
The Ecuadorean Minister of Education has promised
his support, and if the Biological Station can be set up
soon, there is every reason to hope that the islands will,
at least in part, be preserved in their natural state.
This article is copyright and may not be reproduced without permission.
23
