BOOKS FOR THE NEW READING PUBLIC
by J.Ë. Morpurgo
Once the reading-interest of a newly-literate person has
been aroused, the production of suitable follow-up litera¬
ture becomes the key to his development as a useful citi¬
zen. This is the concept behind an important UNESCO project
to encourage the production of reading materials for a tremen¬
dous area containing about 500 million people in South Asia.
Under this programme, Initiated in 1955 and now being put
into practice In countries like Burma, Ceylon, India, and Pakis¬
tan, research studies have been made, model books for new
literates prepared, authors and editors have been awarded
training and study fellowships and regional meetings of book
production specialists have been held. The most recent of
these was a "workshop" seminar in Rangoon which gave writers,
illustrators and printer-publishers a chance to discuss their
individual yet Interlocking problems. Mr. J. E. Morpurgo, Direc¬
tor of the National Book League, Great Britain, who was director
of the Seminar, discusses below some of the problems involved
In providing the right books for a vast new reading public.
The struggle to bring about the state of health which
Is literacy by ridding the world of the disease called
illiteracy has been going on for centuries. What is
new is the geographical spread of the wish for literacy
and the inevitable impatience with the methods of long-
drawn therapy.
I write as one who is not at all certain that it is possible
to abandon the patient processes which move a nation
generation by generation nearer to complete literacy. I
have my doubts as to whether it is possible to cut short
the centuries-absorbing business of improving education
and of making it available to all, of developing a tradition
of sound book publishing and bookselling and of creating
the political and economic atmosphere in which publish¬
ing and bookselling can survive. I feel that the desire
to read must be created and with it the opportunity. I
am almost certain that to provide the opportunity it is
necessary to work towards an Improvement of public and
school library services.
There is an argument at least, and one held in quite
responsible circles, that the whole fashionable business of
concentrating on the new literates and new readers is a
mistake, even for the new literates and new readers
themselves, and that it is only by ensuring the easy use
of books by those who are already attracted to books that
one can hope to improve the general standard of literacy
in the nations. This argument has as part of its justifi¬
cation much of the evidence in the history of Western
Europe, where it has been the improvement of facilities
for reading among the middle classes which has ulti¬
mately brought about complete literacy.
All these arguments for gradualism sit easily, I admit,
on one who comes from a country which (in census
terms at least) has achieved universal literacy; for
countries where the will to literacy is growing it is ne¬
cessary to look for abbreviations of the historical process,
even if it is essential to guard carefully the view that
there are some parts of the process which cannot be aban¬
doned.
It is not enough to teach a child or an adult to read
would seem obvious. Without the will to read and
the chance to read, the mere mechanical ability to spell
out words slips back into uselessness and may vanish
altogether. Even in those countries which have healthy
literacy statistics a considerable proportion of the func¬
tionally literate are emotionally illiterate. They glean
no advantage from their ability either in ideas, practical
improvement, image or pleasure, because, although they
can read they never do read. Worse still and more damning
for the literacy campaigns, there is in many countries a
considerable relapse into functional illiteracy even among
those who have just completed schooling or adult literacy
classes because so many who have acquired new skills do
not have the will or the chance to practise them.
26
On my recent tour through Asia and especially at the
Unesco Regional Seminar ön the Production of Reading
Materials for New Literates and the New Reading Public
(Rangoon, November, 1957), I gathered the impression
that among those primarily responsible for grasping and
holding the attention of the new public authors, publish¬
ers, illustrators there is a majority which would share
my view that the principal requirement for books for the
new reading public is that they should be attractive in
subject matter, style, production, quality and price.
Any sympathy which these book-professionals felt for
the prevalent view that it is necessary to combine the
task of creating readers with the task of enlightening
those readers on matters of policy or social education
vanished before their conviction (which I share) that even
the most sophisticated reader must be bullied before he
will read books about smallpox or drainage, and that the
first task of any reading materials project is to persuade
people to read and to hold them reading without slipping
sideways and even backwards into other forms of social
improvement.
All accept that it is possible to write a book on
smallpox which rings with the magic of art and
excitement, but it is extremely difficult, and to the diffi¬
culty is added the unattractiveness of the subject matter.
Would it not be better to trap readers with materials
which they are likely to find seductive? The range of
subject matter must vary from country to country. In
Asia I would venture that it would include religion, legend,
adventure, love-stories (as everywhere else in the world!)
and practical farming tips.
To produce these attractive books it is necessary to
train and encourage good professional publishers,
printers and illustrators. To bring them to the public
it is essential that we should find methods of creating pu¬
blicity, distribution outlets and sales points which do not
exist in many parts of the world. Again I would venture
a personal opinion which has the support of many who
were with me at the Rangoon Seminar: giving away
books or pamphlets is very often equivalent to wasting
them. The reading habit is not firm in the individual
until he learns to work for his reading, either in terms
of having to pay for it, or at very least in terms of having
to look for it on library shelves.
I know that in many countries wage levels are low and
the chances of working up much spending on an "essen¬
tial luxury" such as books small. Unfortunately it is often
these same countries which have a small public purse, but,
with most of my friends who came to Rangoon, I would
urge that it is as important to .spend the limited public
funds on providing free school books, on building up
school and public libraries and on publicizing the advan¬
tages of reading, as to go in for production programmes
which too often involve large-scale investment.
The book has come in quantity to many parts of the
world at about the same time as other and easier forms
of communication. Radio, the cinema, the television are
not enemies of the printed word indeed they are allies
but I would urge that they lack the timelessness and the
universality which give the book its peculiar virtue. It
is not possible to turn back a radio set or to read a film
at your own speed. The thought and the skills of all the
nations cannot penetrate so effectively into all corners of
the world by any other means than by the printed word.
To provide the printed word in sufficient quantities for
the new public demands active professionalism and it is
perhaps comforting that the Unesco Regional Seminar at
Rangoon, saw as the greatest need of the countries of
Asia not just more books but better training facilities for
publishers, printers, authors, illustrators and book distri¬
butors. Without these training facilities it is unlikely
that we will be able to provide the right books for the
new audience.

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
de :
FABLES
!NOS VILLAGES
O
mm.mi in-.i,ii t in. i.i Toii.k
Uipnillf fljmen Mu»)
V |II7 I.'tit.-. I'fV.
AFTER CARE of newly literate people must include a steady supply of graded, Interesting and attractively-presented reading material. This is an
Important part of the work of "literature bureaux", the specialized central agencies which more and more countries are setting up (often with assist¬
ance from Unesco see opposite page) to deal with all aspects of teaching, research and book production. Above, front covers of some publications in
different languages produced In Asia, Africa and Latin America: (I) Hindi (2) Burmese (3) Spanish (4) FrenchBelgian Congo (5) ArabicThe Sudan.
27
