SCHOOL FOR BALLET
Soviet youngsters follow
a great tradition
by E. Souritz
Tamara Karsavina, one of the
greatest of Russian ballerinas,
called her Memoirs Theatre
Street formerly the name of the
street where the Leningrad School of
Ballet is located. This school also
figures in the Memoirs of Anna Pav¬
lova. More recently, Galina Oulanova
gave the title, "The Ballerinas'
School" to the story of her artistic
career , and although she used the
word "school" in a wider sense, mean¬
ing the experience gained by an artist
throughout her career, she too re¬
ferred to the years she had spent at
the Leningrad School of Ballet.
School certainly plays a more im¬
portant role in the life of a dancer
than in that of any other kind of
professional artist. Ineluctably, the
unique road leading to a ballet com¬
pany starts from a dancing school.
Entering the choreography classes
about the age of nine or ten, the
future ballet dancer spends the rest
of his or her childhood there and not
until the age of 18 does the student
enter a ballet company.
In the early Autumn just before
the school term begins, boys and girls
(boys are usually a minority) invade
il Soviet photos
PRIMA BALLERINA. Anna Pavlova, one of the world's most admired dancers, was trained
at the oldest of Russian ballet schools in Leningrad. The uniform she wore as a student in the
last decade of the I 9th century (top of page) resembles those worn by today's pupils (above).
the corridors of the oldest ballet
school in the Soviet Union. Some
girls are still wearing their light
summer dresses; others have put on
their school uniforms (only children
who have already attended school for
three years can be accepted as can¬
didates). All the girls are excited and
nervous as they wait their turn to be
examined.
The first hurdle is the medical
examination. Only children with
sound hearts and healthy lungs can
hope to stand up to the many years
of hard physical effort that lie ahead.
Weak eyesight can also be an obstacle
to a ballerina's career; a poor ear
for music is an even greater one.
Finally a committee of teachers from
the school judges each child's apti¬
tude for dancing.
Eventually the children complete
their entry examinations. The doctor
has found them physically fit, the
music master has judged that they
have a good ear for music and a
sense of rhythm, the teachers are
satisfied with their aptitude for danc¬
ing, and they have passed the educ¬
ational tests. As pupils in the School
of Ballet they now begin a new life
"a life of hard work and suffering",
as Anna Pavlova called it, but also
one filled with the joys of creative-
ness. The unwavering rule is the
daily exercise, "the lesson", as danc¬
ers call it. "For a dancer every day is
a working day," writes Oulanova, "in
summer, on holiday, work is still
indispensable."
Schools reopen throughout the So¬
viet Union on September 1. On that
day a small pupil in the beginners'
class, wearing a white starched dress,
white stockings and slippers, enters
the large, bright classroom for the
first time. On the teacher's command
she goes over and
stands beside "the
bar" the practice rail
running the length of
the wall. From this
moment, unfailingly,
Cont'd
next page
31

Official Soviet photo
NURSERY OF THE BALLET : Young pupils at the Leningrad School of Ballet practise in the classroom where some of the greatest names in
ballet received their training. Many changes have taken place In the organization and programme of the school since its foundation 200 years ago.
right to the end of her career, the
dancer will begin the day with this
rite, continuing to do the same move¬
ments she learned in her childhood.
Many changes have taken place in
the Leningrad School during the two
centuries since it was founded. Once
it was a boarding school for 100 pu¬
pils and much of the building was
taken up with dormitories, bathrooms
and dining rooms. Now there are four
times as many students, and the
building has had to be enlarged. So
today most of the students live
outside, and only those from other
parts of the country are boarders.
The present school not only trains
artists for the Leningrad Ballet, but
also for those of many other Russian
cities. To the different national
groups of the school come youngsters
from republics all over the U.S.S.R.
They arrive too from foreign coun¬
tries, Rumania, for example, and even
from as far away as Mexico, Cuba
and Indonesia. To ensure that they
shall all have a solid educational
background, they are taught the
same subjects as children in normal
secondary schools. The future balle¬
rinas do geometry problems, perform
chemistry and physics experiments
and study geography and natural
sciences. Seven years of secondary
education are followed by three years
of literature, history, foreign langua¬
ges, and studies of the history of the
theatre, the ballet and music.
The life of the school is fuller, freer
and more active than it Was 50 years
ago. Yet inside its walls the new and
the old mingle as nowhere else. In
its corridors the past seems to live
again and the ancient traditions are
in evidence imprinted on a modern
backcloth. Faces of famous ballerinas
who were once pupils look down from
photographs on the walls. They too
worked at the same practice rails.
They too walked, somewhat sedately
in double files, along these vaulted
corridors, followed by the swish of
their long skirts. The marks made
by their tiny feet can still be seen in
the worn, tiled floors of the landings
where today little girls wearing the
red neck-ties of Pioneers are playing.
Yet, these same little girls will
greet a grown-up with a deep curtsy,
following a tradition still maintained
in schools of ballet.
Another tradition handed down
from the past is the performance
given at the end of each school year.
Over a century old, the custom con¬
tinued during the days of Pavlova
and Fokine and also when Oulanova
completed her training, and so it goes
on today. But changes have come in
the repertoires of these shows. Nowa¬
days the pupils draw inspiration from
the heroes of classical literature.
They have based performances on
Till Eulenspiegel by the Belgian writer
Charles de Coster, on Gogol's Christ¬
mas Night and on Pushkin's The
Postmaster.
They also look for ideas in modern
events. Last year, for example, the
school presented a new ballet, The
Girl of the Snows, based on a popular
Soviet novel which tells of life in
Russia's far northern territories.
They draw too on their country's rich
folklore, and on those of other lands.
In the remotest republics of the
Soviet Union dancing is taught ' by
teachers trained in the Leningrad
School of Ballet and by their pupils.
In Europe, America, Africa and Aus¬
tralia dancing is taught by the pupils
of the former ballerinas of St Peters¬
burg. The traditions of the School
continue today as little girls from all
over Russia practise in the same
large, bright classroom of the build¬
ing in "Theatre Street", where Anna
Pavlova, Fokine, Karsavina and Oula¬
nova began their careers.
32
