Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, New Delhi


FIRST HIGHWAYS for manthe riverswere the gifts of Nature, and they are still widely used as roads and dwelling places
by those peoples who continue to live in rhythm with Nature. Above, early morning on the Jhelum River, near Srinagar,
Kashmir. Kashmir is celebrated for its houseboats (above) often used by visitors to travel through the grandiose scenery.
UNESCO'S EAST-WEST MAJOR PROJECT
by Jacques Havet
The march of history has reduced physical distance,
multiplied the exchanges between peoples and the
opportunities for useful communication, but it has
also increased the risks of tragic misunderstanding.
Oriental and Occidental people now belong to the same
world, and this evolution must lead to solidarity.
But the West does not yet know the East. The studies
of Eastern civilizations made by scholars through cen¬
turies have too often escaped the notice of the general
public. The basic culture of the man of the West
remains centered on a limited heritage. Prejudices and
erroneous ideas continue to circulate.
The East, thrust daily into the presence of the West,
too often sees only an incomplete and distorted image.
The conventional picture that the cinema, press and
radio offer is added to the image left from the times of
trading and colonialism. Unavoidably, the picture of the
West that predominates Is that of a technology, detached
from its intellectual and spiritual bases.
In November 1956, Unesco's General Conference meeting
in New Delhi decided that the Organization should con¬
centrate important resources during the next ten years
Jacques Havet, French philosopher and writer, is the co-ordinator
of Unesco's East-West Major Project.
20
on activities that would contribute to a closer relationship
between the East and the West. The entire Organization,
including groups working with it in each country, would
participate in this common enterprise. This appeal for
concentrated and continuous action is the meaning of
Unesco's "Major Project for Mutual Appreciation of Cul¬
tural Values of East and West".
For Unesco, three important points emerge from the
conclusions submitted by an international advisory
committee Which was set up to give guidance in the
implementation of the major project. Firstly an effort
must be made to eliminate prejudices and replace them
with knowledge of established historical and sociological
facts. Secondly an understanding of the spirit of each
culture, the way of life and the manner of thought and
feeling of each people must be promoted by presenting
facts in the perspective of history, geography and social
and economic conditions. Finally, more ways must be
developed to inform the general public in each country
about the most remote cultures.
In this ten-year programme, the spreading of factual
knowledge of all the cultures plays an important role.
But there can be no substitute for direct contacts between
human beings, the actual experience of meeting and
talking together; only that can bring about, in the words

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
of the advisory committee, a "new spirit" in relations
between the peoples.
This programme involves, first of all, the basic studies
and research needed for a proper understanding of the
meaning of East-West rapprochement; the investigation
of certain obstacles impeding mutual understanding; and
an elaboration of the cultural values of different peoples
so as best to interpret them to the general public in other
lands.
Plans already under way include international talks,
social science studies related to the evolution of the
modern East, fellowships for study and research on
various civilizations, and listing of the principal reference
works encyclopedias, histories, etc. of greatest use
to the layman. Later, new activities will be added: a
survey of the teaching of Eastern and Western literatures,
fellowships to train more translators capable of present¬
ing to the Western public the great representative books
of the East, the development of university institutions
for the study and presentation of cultural knowledge of
different regions and the organization of exchanges
between them.
The education of children, whose minds are still unpre¬
judiced, is an important field for long-term action.
Curricula, textbooks and other teaching materials, and
teaching methods, must be revised and adapted to that
objective. Unesco distributes materials, makes sugges¬
tions and organizes teachers' conferences to this end.
In many countries "associated schools" serve as a test¬
ing ground for the principles developed by Unesco. These
will continue, on an experimental basis, to help in
improving the teaching of cultural values. Member Sta¬
tes will be asked to produce books about their cultures for
use in the schools of other countries. Unesco will publish
brochures for the use of teachers and pupils.
Groups concerned with adult education and youth activ
ities are receiving help and suggestions from Unesco for
meetings and study courses among their leaders, for the
preparation of material on cultural values; for the devel¬
opment of exchanges among their members, activities
which may help to introduce into the life of a given
community some of the cultural riches from other areas.
For the general public, a programme for translating
the great works of modern and classical literatures of
East and West is now being developed; albums are pub¬
lished to spread knowledge of little-known masterpieces
of art, travelling exhibitions of art reproductions in
colour, are circulating in Member States. The most
recent one shows water colours of both East and West.
Unesco is to publish materials for projection, and inex¬
pensive volumes to give the public easy access to this sort
of material. In 1959, two parallel series of popular works
will be undertaken, in which each book will present a
historical panorama of the art or literature of one
country of the Orient.
Articles and sample broadcasts are being provided for
journalists and radio producers of East and West. Unesco
promotes co-operation and exchanges between them, pro¬
duces programmes of comparative music and documentary
film. Unesco is compiling lists of films for public screen¬
ing or TV, classified according to their cultural values.
These are the principal aspects of a co-ordinated effort
which should provide a basis or an example for activities
by Member States either in their own countries or on an
international scale.
Unesco's project is a long-term enterprise, but there is
already progress which promises well for the futurethe
development of new habits, the broadening of public
awareness of the need for better understanding between
East and West, an increase in cultural materials that can
lead to a genuine knowledge of the values of East and
West, and a weakening of the most dangerous prejudices.
NEW SKYWAYS are today opening up areas of Asia which only a few years ago were isolated or even inaccessible. Asian
countries are planning and building railways, roads, canals, harbours and airfields for exploitation of natural resources, the
setting up of factories and the development of home and overseas trade. Below, plantation in Indo-China with its own airstrip.
Werner Bischof© Magnum Photos
21
