MOROCCO ANSWERS
A ROYAL CALL
TO THE CLASSROOM
Wherever you travel, in Morocco you come across a poster showing the
country's ruler, King Mohammed V, his arms outstretched, calling the
people to attend literacy classes and, below, a small schoolhouse to which
men, women and children are flocking. The poster, displayed in even the
tiniest villages, launched Morocco's first national literacy campaign after it had
been heralded by the distribution of three million leaflets and announcements
through loudspeakers and loudspeaker vans.
This national literacy campaign was organized by the Moroccan League for
Fundamental Education and Literacy Work, founded in 1956, and to whose
appeal, teachers from State and private schools, as well as students, trades¬
people, workers and craftsmen responded with enthusiasm.
The League began its work by producing a literacy handbook, giving the
rudiments of reading, writing and arithmetic. The results of this handbook
exceeded all expectations, and soon, two more editions had to be printed. When
the campaign opened on April 16, 1956, 350,000 men and women applied for
enrolment in the schools, and nearly 10,000 men and women teachers had to be
recruited.
The thirst for knowledge and the general enthusiasm were such that every¬
where groups of people were to be seen reading through their lessons
together in shops, booths, offices, workshops and even at street corners. In
Casablanca grown-ups often tried in vain to force their way into the already
overcrowded classrooms. On its side, the League put everything it could into
the campaign and even arranged classes in prisons and for patients in hospitals.
A few months after the end of the 1956 literacy campaign, the Fundamental
Education Department instituted a term of revision to allow new literates to
consolidate the knowledge they had gained. Now, the Department proposes to
start a fresh campaign with a second series of courses to bring all the new
literates up to the level of the Primary Education Certificate.
In the early days of the first national campaign, the inexperienced voluntary
teachers ran into various kinds of difficulties which the League helped them
to overcome by organizing guidance courses in the schools or over the radio.
At a later stage other problems arose concerning the provision of reading
materials for adults at a very elementary stage of learning. The League there¬
fore decided to bring out a special weekly publication written in a simple, easily
comprehensible style, which it named Manar El Maghrib (Lighthouse of
Morocco).
Ir is also in Morocco that a new method for printing Arabic has been developed
which will bring newspapers and books within the range of thousands of
«newly-literate men and women. The inventor is Mr. Ahmed Lakhdar, Gene¬
ral Secretary of Morocco's National Commission for Unesco and head of the
Fundamental Education Section of the Ministry of Education.
The problem was this: although the Arabic alphabet contains 30 letters, some
475 to 800 typesets are needed for printing texts with the vowels. Mr. Lakhdar
has managed to reduce the number of typesets needed for printing Arabic with
vowels to a basic 87, thus making it possible to adapt the system to standard
typewriters and type-setting machines. When applied to the printing of news¬
papers and periodicals, the new system will provide an immense stimulus, by
encouraging new readers to continue their studies, and persuading illiterate
adults to join in literacy campaigns. Mr. Lakhdar 's system has been adopted by
the Moroccan Government, and it was studied with interest by National Com¬
missions for Unesco from eight Arab States which met in Fez, Morocco, in
February.
The Moroccan League has decided to extend its field of action and to set up
fundamental education centres all over the country. It feels that its work will
not really be completed nor its aims achieved until illiteracy is eradicated and
the Moroccan people as a whole have realized their civic responsibilities.
The measure of this task can be seen in figures given in the Unesco study,
World Illiteracy at Mid-Century: Around 1950, out of Morocco's population of
8,800,000,- 5,100,000 were adults aged 15 and over. Between 85% and 90% of
these were illiteratea total of between 4,300,000 and 4,600,000 people unable to
read or write. Despite the progress made since then, it is certain that the
proportion of adult illiterates in Morocco is still extremely high.
14
y
at'
t
Ç. \
WmWt'
ENRICHING EDUCATION in Morocco is
the work of the "Service of Youth and Sports ".
It organizes courses in subjects not sufficiently
covered by normal "schooling" and makes

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
chem available to educationally "underpri¬
vileged" sections of the community. Photos
show activities in centres created by the
Youth Service in all parts of Morocco. (I)
Young people express themselves and develop
artistic talent in drawing and painting classes
at Rabat. (2) Lino-engraving calls for a sure
hand and plenty of concentration. (3) One
Photos g) Gerda Böhm. Rabat
of Morocco's traditional crafts: carpet-weaving
in a girls' centre at the "Bidonville" (shanty
town) of Casablanca. (4) Captivated audience
watches a young actor at the Salé centre.
15
