22
Louis Braille
Louis Braille unlocked the door to
education for millions of blind men
and women throughout the world
when he invented his simple "touch"
alphabet of raised dots. The son of a
French sadler, Braille was born near
Paris in 1809 and lost his sight at the
age of three. In his day the lot of the
blind was almost as tragic and hopeless
as it had always been in the past.
One mark of progress, however, had
© Association Valentin Haüy, Pans fo^ the opening of the world's first
school for blind children in Paris in 1784. Braille went there as
a pupil and eventually became a teacher (he also became one of the
best organists in Paris). At the school a system of embossed
letters was used to teach the children to read. Then came the
revolutionary idea of a French army officer, Charles Barbier
de la Serre, to represent letters by raised dots. But Barbier's
system was complicated (it was a code and had to be deciphered)
and it occupied too much space. So Braille reduced this system
of 12 dot squares to six dots which could be felt by Ithe finger tip
at one go, and he dropped the cipher, working out various combi¬
nations of dots to form the alphabet. When Braille died in 1852
he had no idea that his system would be universally adopted by
blind people, and he even had difficulty in getting the method
accepted as the official medium of instruction in his own school.
Yet today, without the Braille system, the world's 7,000,000 sight¬
less would undoubtedly be deprived of the most powerful key
to human freedom and scholarship ever devised for the blind.
Jaime Torres Bodet
When Jaime Torres Bodet became Di¬
rector-General of Unesco, in 1948, he
had already behind him a distinguished
career as poet, novelist, essayist, edu¬
cationist, diplomat and international
statesman. One of the high points of
his career and certainly one of the
most brilliant phases in the history of
Mexican education was the period
(from 1943 to 1946) when he served as
his country's Minister of Education
and initiated and developed a nation- unesco
wide campaign against illiteracy. No campaign of such scope or
originality had ever before been undertaken in Mexico. Torres
Bodet appealed to all educated Mexicans to become "emergency"
teachers for at least one of their illiterate countrymen, and he
toured towns and villages arousing and inspiring the people. Soon,
over 60,000 collective teaching centres were organized and lawyers,
doctors, business men, industrialists, farmers and landowners led
by the President of Mexico, Avila Camacho, and his wife, joined
in as teachers to make the campaign a success. Special wall
newspapers were printed and over 10,000,000 elementary reading
books and primers began flooding the country. For those of
Mexico's Indians who did not speak Spanish, Torres Bodet had
special primers prepared in their languages and where these lan¬
guages had never before been written down he called in teams of
linguists to do this. When the results were tabulated after only
two years of work, it was found that over 1,200,000 Mexicans had
been taught to read and write. The successful campaigns encourag¬
ed other Latin American countries to adopt similar methods.

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
Domingo Faustino
Sarmiento
Official Argentine photo
Domingo Faustino Sarmiento was one
of the best-known of Argentina's 19th-
century writers, but his great life-work
was the creation from practically noth¬
ing of a national school system which
laid the foundations of all education in
his country and made it literate. A clear
and able writer, Sarmiento was above
all a prolific essayist and pamphleteer,
though he is also known for longer
works such as Facundo and Recuerdos de provincia (published in
French in the Unesco programme of translations of Representative
Works). As a youth he felt the urge to teach and when he
was 20 he opened Argentina's first school for adults, at San
Francisco del Monte. Because of his political activities he was
several times forced into exile in Chile. Here, as in his own
country, he steadfastly kept up his educational work, setting up
schools to which workers came in the evenings and on Sundays.
This resolute educator was convinced that for his people the true
path to freedom lay in the alphabet : "A literate people is the
strongest rampart against dictatorship," he said. Towards the end
of his long life (1811 to 1888) Sarmiento, who had fought fiercely
against the regime of the Argentine dictator, Rosas, found himself
elected President of the Argentine Republic. He summed up the
entire purpose of his life in one phrase when he declared : "We
must lay the foundations of the Republic, the government of
tomorrow and there can be but one base for this the school."
James Yen
During the first World War a young
Chinese volunteer student-teacher came
to France to work as an interpreter
among the 200,000 Chinese workers
serving with the Allied armies and in
war production. He found they were
completely isolated, unable to write to
their relatives or read the newspapers.
So he started literacy classes. That
was the beginning of the Chinese
Movement for Mass Education. When
The Press Association inc. the young teacher, James Yen (he
later became popularly known as "Jimmy") went back to China
he put his experiences in France to use when he set out to
"create citizens through education." He launched a "basic
Chinese,*" reducing the 40,000 or so characters in the Chinese
language to some 1,300, and the leaders of his movement worked
hard among the people to create what they called "a climate of
willingness to go to school.*" To supervise its programme of
one hour's lesson each day for four months, the movement even¬
tually had a service of 100,000 teachers, all unpaid volunteers.
It constituted a veritable revolution in China for it broke down
the thousand-year barriers and brought together coolies and
scholars. In 1930 it centered all its efforts on a county of
400,000 people, it opened demonstration schools and it went on to
use newly-discovered literacy to attack the fundamental evils of
sickness and poverty. The action of this pioneer movement gra¬
dually spread throughout China and paved the way for the Gov¬
ernment's adult education or rural reconstruction movement.
Frank C. Laubach Manoel Lourenço Filho
Standing in a jungle clearing and sur¬
rounded by some 40 or 50 people, a
tall man unrolled one of several charts
he held under his arm. The faces of
people lit up with anticipation.
They had come to hear a man who
said he could teach them to read. The
man was Frank C. Laubach. The
place was Ethiopia, but it could just
as well have been any of the more
than 60 countries where Frank Lau¬
bach has been combatting illiteracy for
more than a quarter of a century. Born in Pennsylvania, U.S.A.,
and trained as a sociologist and as a missionary, Frank Laubach
found his life's work while living in the Philippines. He discovered
that the Moro tribesmen of the interior had never had a written
language and so began his work of organizing a simple system
of charts and key words, teaching methods which would enable
people to learn their own language. Since then he has, as he
puts it, '"made lessons" in over 239 tongues and dialects. On
large charts he prints a phonetic alphabet having a symbol for
each sound of the language he is teaching. Key syllables and
words are visualized by pictures. Wherever he goes, Frank
Laubach enlists the aid of local teachers and linguists. Once he
has developed materials and helped launch the campaign, the
people themselves carry it forward. Having learned to read, most
persons are anxious to teach others. Laubach has dramatized this
technique with the phrase "Each one teach one", and this has
become a method which has helped his campaigns to win millions
from illiteracy in Asia, the Middle East, Africa and South America.
Brazil began a full-scale attack on illi¬
teracy in 1947 by launching a nation¬
wide adult education campaign. The
country's tremendous and sparsely
populated area and an adult illiteracy
figure of over 55 per cent created
problems whose solution called for bold
conceptions and methods of fundamen¬
tal education and for vigorous leader¬
ship. The man who gave leadership
and driving force to the campaign
was Manoel Lourenço Filho. One of unesco
Brazil's leading educators, author and professor of psychology,
Lourenço Filho had already devoted his efforts for more than
a quarter of a century to the cause of education in his country.
The cost of the first three years of the adult education campaign,
100 millions cruzeiros (55,000,000), was justified by the results.
In 1947, there were 10,416 "Campaign" schools in operation;
in the following year, 14,300, and in 1949 the number reached
15,300. In the first three years about 2,000,000 adults and
adolescents enrolled and more than 1,000,000 people were taught
to read and write. Brazil's approach to fundamental education
problems was watched with interest in other countries: the careful
balance maintained between school and adult education; the
building on a solid basis of statistical fact and the linking
together of the varied interests of communities in literacy, better
health and farming. Lourenço Filho's successful leadership of
the campaign won him international recognition, and at the 1949
Inter-American Seminar on Illiteracy and Adult Education, he was
hailed as El Maestro de las Americas (Teacher of the Americas.)
23
