Bride meets groom
in historic Japan
In the West love usually precedes
marriage, but in traditional Japan it came
after marriage. It was, and sometimes
still is, considered dishonourable for a
young person of either sex to select a life-
mate. According to a feudal idea, a girl
married more into the family of the bride¬
groom than to the young man, and in
the past if a boy and a girl got married
through mutual love their union was
considered a "free marriage" and condem¬
ned. In modern Japan, however, with
the increased independence of women,
love marriages are now more common and
accepted occurrences.
Hierarchy is basic to Japan's whole
notion of traditional social relations.
Hierarchy is observed above all in family
life. The Japanese family is a tightly-
knit social unit. The sense of belonging
to a family, of acting in the family name,
of defending family honour, is extremely
powerful, particularly in rural regions.
Authority is vested in the father (or the
grandfather, if he is alive). Immediately
after the father in seniority comes the
eldest son. Within the family, rank is
determined by age and by relationship to
the head of the family. The head of the
family's wife, in particular, has authority
8
over the other women and is entitled to
special respect from the younger men.
In ancient times young men and women
were to a large extent free to choose mates
for themselves, and as a rule all the parents
had to do was agree. In feudal Japan,
marriages were usually arranged by the
families concerned without consulting the
wishes of the future couple. Although
this custom has not completely vanished,
it has been replaced in recent times by
two other ways of arranging a marriage :
1) the type of marriage in which the
wishes of the couple concerned are exclu¬
sively the deciding factor. 2) a type of
arranged marriage in which both the
interests and preferences of the two fami¬
lies and the wishes of the prospective hus¬
band and wife are taken into account.
Negotiated marriages are arranged in
Japan by a match-maker, known as a
Nakodo (literally, go-between) who may be
a close friend or a relative. Originally,
go-betweens did not seek payment for their
services but simply the happiness of the
married couple and the maintenance of the
two families' lineage. In modern times
not a few go-betweens perform their func¬
tion for the sole purpose of making money.
The main function of the go-between is to
find suitable candidates, act as liaison
between the families by providing photo¬
graphs and curriculum vitce of the young
persons, and especially to arrange an inter¬
view (miai) between the prospective bride
and groom and to carry out an exchange
of gifts between their families.
The wedding ceremony is called San-san-
kudo (literally 3-3-9 times), for the bride
and bridegroom exchange rice-wine cups
3x3 = 9 times, i. e. they drink nine sym¬
bolic cupfuls from a set of three lucky
wine-cups beautifully lacquered with lucky
designs painted on them.
A Japanese bride of old wore a raw
cotton hood to hide her face at a wedding.
Modern brides have a piece of paper called
Tsuno-kakushi (horn hider) over their
dressed hair. It is proverbially said that
a jealous woman has horns and her ima¬
ginary horns are thus symbolically hidden
by the headband. According to Onna

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
Daigaku (Women's Great Learning), a
17th century book which a Japanese bride
in feudal days put in her trousseau,
jealousy was included among seven causes
for which a wife could be divorced.
(Among other causes formerly accepted as
justifying divorce : disobedience to her
parents-in-law, talkativeness and indiscreet
speech for which '"she shall leave lest she
should cause discord among the relatives
of her husband or discord in her home.").
Today Japanese wives are recognized by
the law a human beings with the same rights
as their husbands. "'Marriage shall be
based only on the mutual consent of both
sexes, and it shall be maintained through
mutual co-operation with the equal rights
of husband and wife as a basis," says the
Japanese Constitution. If a wife owns
property in her own right her husband
cannot take it from her. And if the
worst comes to the worst she can apply
for a divorce. Japanese women were
granted the right to vote in October 1945,
and exercised this right for first time in
the general election held on March 11,
1946, when 13,767,300 women (67% of
those eligible) went to the polling stations
and elected 39 out of 82 women candidates'
to the Diet.
RICE WINE TOAST
TO THE NEWLYWEDS
In Japan, most weddings are celebrated according to the Shinto ritual.
The ceremony usually takes place in a special marriage room or at home.
Once all the guests have been seated by ushers, robed musicians sitting
cross-legged (far left) begin to play wind instruments. This is a signal
for the Shinto priests in full regalia to enter with their attendants.
Then begins a solemn service during which many prayers are offered
at the altar, cups of rice wine (omiki) are exchanged between bride and
groom and a toast is drunk (left) to the future happiness and longevity
of the newly-weds. The couple then proceed to the altar, renew their
pledges to the gods and offer branches of the sacred sakaki tree. Western
style weddings are also popular in Japan. In photo below, bride and
groom are seated at far right, with bride wearing a white robe and veil
and her husband-to-be in frock coat and striped trousers. (Even in
traditional Japanese weddings, however, it is usual for the groom to
wear Western dress). Although a Japanese officially reaches his
majority when he is 20, the traditional line of demarcation between
adolescence and adulthood is generally considered to be marriage.
Photos by Takamasa Inamura and Nakada. ® Camera Press Ltd.
