ORIENT-OCCIDENT
What are the chances of real understanding?
by Georges Fradier
Creation,
not possession
Action,
not gain
Self-mastery,
not conquest
Lao Tsé
Karl Machatchek, Paris
eople often hear "the East" spoken of as an infinitely complex enigma which only specialists can
attempt to decipher. It seems to be made up of vast continents unknown seas and enormous
nations which used to be little heard of, especially as they were often considered merely vague
and picturesque provinces of empires whose capitals lay in the West. In it live an incredible
number of extremely varied peoples, speaking a multitude of languages (which are printed in incompre¬
hensible characters). These strange inhabitants are. steeped in philosophic, religious and literary tradi¬
tions which are at the same time quite ancient, and yet curiously alive.
When Westerners were at school, all they were taught about these religions and cultures was the fact
of their existence, and even this was usually brought in merely as a footnote to a chapter of ancient his¬
tory or elementary philosophy. Monuments had been photographed. Statues and paintings had been
brought to Western museums and shops. These objects might be regarded as curious or moving; they
Cont'd on next page

Work is love
in visible
form
Khalil Gibran
Throughout Asia, the artisan
has always been an artist,
and the same trades have
been handed down from
father to son for generation
after generation. The article
wrought by skilful hands
whether fabric or pottery,
garment or jewel, is fashion¬
ed with great respect for
the material used, with a
love of form and with a
profound grasp of techni¬
ques. Streamers floating in
the wind (photos right) are
silk strips drying after being
dyed, near Kyoto, Japan.
Werner Bischof © Magnum Photos
might even be admired. But they were considered part
of the past, and of a rather abstract past at that.
The history of these peoples? Western schoolbooks
rarely mentioned it except in relation to the West. The
Arabs, for instance, appeared just in time to invade
Spain and fight the Crusaders in the Holy Land, after
which they left the stage and went back into the void.
India emerged from a long, legendary, fairy-tale night
to be exploited from the sixteenth to the eighteenth
centuries by a number of trading companies. China escap¬
ed from its dreary isolation to welcome the "civilizers"
of the Opium War; and Japan, symbolized for two cen¬
turies as an armoured Samurai killer of Portuguese
monks, was given two paragraphs under the date 1853.
Thus our Ignorance can often be explained or excused.
But it can no longer be tolerated. It appears dangerous
at a time when real politics are planetary, when the
words "fate of humanity" are no longer used exclusively
by moralists but are common in the newspapers in which
the conscience and the anxiety of our time are expressed
to a greater or lesser degree.
Where does East end & West begin?
Everyone knows, everyone senses, that peace, general
progress and world prosperity may depend to a large
extent on the development, the decisions and the
accomplishments of certain countries that many of us
still locate rather vaguely "in Asia", or "in Africa", but
that no one any longer dares call exotic. The profound
solidarity of all peoples has become a truism; and even
if one thinks chiefly of economic solidarity one feels the
need to know more about one's neighbours, near or far,
than just their industrial and commercial status. Many
are Wondering: "What are they really like, these nations
with whom we are henceforth linked for better or for
Georges Fradier, a French author and Journalist and a staff member
of Unesco, has for several years made special studies of the problems
of East-West understanding.
8
worse? What may be expected of them? How do they
look at the world?"
But this last question implies a far deeper curiosity
than that aroused now and then by casual newspaper
reading or concern for the future. To wonder about the
views and opinions of a people is to want to know the
broad lines of its history, its living conditions, its social
structures, its religious attitudes, its aspirations.
It would be an exaggeration to say that the varied
peoples who make up the West know one another really
well. Their misunderstandings have often been deplored,
and, when it comes to culture, they are likely to show a
provincialism which leads them to be rather neglectful
of their neighbours' values. Yet these peoples never
consider themselves very distant from one another;
within Europe or the Americas they see no cultural barrier
difficult to cross if they will take a little trouble.
But when these Westerners who so strongly sense their
own basic unity turn toward one or another of the peoples
of the East, they are completely at a loss. All the keys
they have to open doors inside their own West seem
useless where the lands of Africa or Asia are concerned.
Over there, as they see it, the languages, beliefs, customs
and races have the peculiarity of being "Oriental"which
must mean that they have nothing in common with the
West, that they stem from absolutely different human
themes. To learn anything about them one would have
to start from zero, to set out on a long road of hard study.
To these Westerners, the East is another world. It is
another blocnot hostile, certainly, but radically diffe¬
rent, closed, mysterious. They know that it is possible
to stay there for a long time without understanding
anything; certain travellers have furnished the living
proof of this. The realization that more than half of
all human beings are Asiatic, Oriental, is not always an
encouragement to pierce the mystery; on the contrary,
it may have the opposite effect.
East and West are vague terms. Where does one end
and the other begin? Yet the words must have some reality,

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
- -
Oliver G. Wackernagel, Basel
at least in people's minds, since they have been used for so
long without being worn out, since the "East-West prob¬
lem" has existed. But if we admit that they evoke basic
differences, and that very often we can say, "This is
Oriental, that is not," then We must name the criteria
for our judgements. At least five criteria come to mind:
geography, races, languages, religions and social forms.
Bengali not more Oriental than Gaelic
We must not put too much trust in "natural" or "ideal"
frontiers. The difference between East and West
is certainly not a question of a few degrees of
longitude east or West of any particular meridian. From
the point of view of an Italian, Marrakesh is certainly in
the East, Sydney in the West. "Natural frontiers" shift
like the others. To Athenians of the fifth century b.c. the
East meant Asia and the Persian Empire. A thousand years
later Athens itself, and Byzantium and Alexandria, had
become part of the East. As for the Persians, they continu¬
ed, as for centuries past, to deal with Turkish horsemen
and Chinese traders: to them, these were the Orientals.
Shall we say that today "Eastern" means essentially
"non-European?" Hardly, for the connotations generally
linked with the term "Eastern" would not exist in most
of Africa except those parts where the Moslem religion
is dominant or the Arabic language is spoken; and
"Eastern" certainly does not include the territories occupi¬
ed by the American Indians or the Polynesians although
these are "non-European." In general, we must admit
that The East includes Asia and North Africa, without
stopping to wonder why this Asia includes the Celebes
and not Madagascar and especially without supposing
that a Syrian, a Kirghiz, a Javanese or a Tibetan feels
himself a member^of a tight "Asiatic" or "Oriental"
community.
Races? There is one called yellow, rich in varied
families, which has always lived principally in Asia and
the Far East. Beyond this we cannot be specific: it is
clear that races are as inextricably mixed in Asia as in
Europe. Furthermore, the same races may often be
found in both continents. Anthropologists talk about
Mediterraneans, Caucasians or Malays; they measure
skulls and separate curly hair from straight. What
conclusions may be drawn from these uncertain classi¬
fications? That the fishermen of Latakia resemble those
of Barcelona, and the peasants of the Punjab are much
like the Serbs? And that in the picturesque field of
appearance, bearing, gestures and costumes the differences
are much more striking between North and South than
between East and West? Questions and speculations like
these will not get us very far.
There are also languages proper to Asia: Chinese, Japa¬
nese, the Tibeto-Burmese group, the Dravidlan group,
and also Turkish and the Semitic languages, if you will,
though they are not confined to Asia. But from Lake Van
to the Deccañ Plateau, more than three hundred million
persons speak languages classified as Indo-Iranian or
Indo-European, related to all the Latin, Slavic and Ger¬
manic idioms. The East therefore cannot be defined as
the territory of Oriental languages; our languages, from
Greek to Gaelic, have no more and no less Oriental an
origin than does Bengali; and two old nations of Europe
which speak idioms known as Finno-Ugrian, as un-Aryan
as possible, are no less Western for that.
As for beliefs, it is not superfluous to mention the
spread of a religion which defines itself as universal, a
spread which sometimes preceded, sometimes accompanied
European commercial or colonial expansion in the East.
It is clear, nevertheless, that in so far as religious tra¬
ditions model the culture of peoples and the face of
nations, the presence of several million
Christians does not prevent Japan, China,
India, Viet-Nam or Indonesia, for instance,
from being countries of "Oriental"
religions.
Furthermore, the most venerable beliefs,
Cont'd
on
next page

the most deeply rooted cults, do not necessarily confer
an exceptional character on countries situated in a larger
cultural ensemble: an Adriatic country may have a
majority of Moslems without belonging to the East for
that reasonjust as Lebanon, for example, derives a
special personality from its Christian majority, but a
personality which manifests itself in an Arab context. As
for small minorities, fervent and influential though they
may be, it seems impossible nowadays for them to change
perceptibly the climate of a civilization. If there were a
million English Buddhists in Great Britain, that Would
not make one Oriental the more.
On the other hand, everyone remembers that Christian¬
ity was in the beginning just as "Eastern" a religion as
Islam or as Judaism, source of both the others. It is
obvious that the faith which was gradually to animate
a new Europe seemed at first, to the conscious citizens
of the Roman Empire, simply one more exotic cult (incom¬
patible, furthermore, with wholesome traditions) among
all those that exalted Orientals were coming to preach in
the West.
It may be replied,, not without reason, that in the
twentieth century th'e Christian churches consider their
doctrines radically different from the beliefs most gener¬
ally held, let us say, in India, Tibet or Ceylon. But it
should be added that the same position would also be
affirmed, in the very same terms, by the Moslems. It is
likewise true that if a Japanese speaks of Oriental reli¬
gions he is probably not thinking of Islam any more than
of Christianity.
All in all, the criteria on which We presume to found
so many judgements seem somewhat confused. There
remains one, however, which is sometimes presented 'as
surer or more tangible: that of social progress, generally
linked with industrial progress. If this yardstick were
applied, the East would be a vast realm of under-indus¬
trialized nations in which agrarian civilizations and
feudal or patriarchal societies still prevail. And this,
incidentally, is why we see so many generous persons, in
Europe and still more In America, explaining to Easterners
the advantages of modern techniques and the virtues of
democracy. It would seem, however, that these lessons
are addressed to a global, abstract audience, and never to
one particular people or another. For if there still exists
a very small number (among the weakest) whose system
of government does not correspond to accepted popular
norms, there is almost no country that has not been
touched or permeated by an industrial revolution which,
in some cases, took place a long time ago.
Nobody is entirely unaware of the production of the
Japanese or Chinese steel works, or of the textile factories
of Egypt or Pakistan. But in the imaginary portraits
most Westerners have of Eastern nations, these industrial
realities seem to count for less than the relics of legend
and the survivals of the past. On the road to Trombay,
the Indian centre for nuclear research, a tourist Will
photograph buffalo carts. On his return he will describe
the buffalo carts, going into ecstasies over their poetic
antiquity. He will forget the atomic reactors; he has
reason to suspect that it is not feudal obeisance and
caste taboos that make them work. In a word, they do
not fit in with his picture of "eternal India."
Thus the economic lag of certain Asian countries (and
not of all) takes on enormous proportions in the picture
we habitually paint for ourselves of the East. This exag¬
geration flatters the good conscience of a West proud of
its technical advances, and likewise flatters certain of
its sentimental tastes which are also nourished by novels
and films.
A great many Westerners have an avowed or secret
hankering for a peaceful rural society, for human contacts
without clashes or surprises within the reassuring frame¬
work of village harmony and family hierarchies for a
simple life, slow and regular, with deeprooted customs and
unchangeable beliefs. Not finding this idyllic existence
at home, they are prone to look for it in a legendary
East; and the contradictions that a real East would
oppose to them might only disturb their dreams those
dreams that are also called prejudices. So in their nostal¬
gia for some kind of antique purity, quite honest travellers,
even men of science, cannot always resist the temptation
to identify the East with a patriarchal handicraft system.
If the latter has disappeared from a country, the whole
nation seems to have betrayed them to wallow in mercan¬
tile regimentation.
From the great discoveries
to the time of disenchantment
Since the "great discoveries," the rise of seafaring
nations and conquering commerce, and the power¬
ful European expansion in the Atlantic as well as
in central Asia and the Indian Ocean, contacts bet¬
ween East and West have become a daily affair. On May
29, 1453, the Turkish power was installed in Europe for
more than four centuries, and on May 18, 1498, Vasco de
Gama landed in Calicut. Peoples, rather than individuals,
were mutually to discover one another. The West arrived
in more and more numerous successive or permanent
delegations, with differing methods but with curiously
similar aims. In its Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, British,
French or Russian species, persons in Ormuzd, Goa,
Manila, Delhi, Canton, Rangoon, Jakarta and Peking
watched the advance of Europe.
In most cases, these mass revelations were terribly
disappointing. As the peoples involved discovered their
diversity, they saw their differences through a magnifying
glass but denied all justification for these differences;
each met the other and was exasperated to find him
"other."
The merchants, missionaries, soldiers, contractors and
judges who landed from Europe were in a hurry; impa¬
tient to buy, to sell, to build, to preach, to sign and to
make others sign. To understand? That takes patience.
In the eyes of the Indian or the Malay, these agitated
to
and enterprising Westerners had not come to understand
or appreciate. They seemed to be overly aware of the
differences' in his customs, his clothes, his beliefs, his food,
but were not the slightest bit interested in the reasons
for this way of life, this religion in his reasons no more
than they were in his language, his songs, his books. On
the contrary they preferred, from the start, to teach him
their practices and their doctrines all beautiful and good
things, no doubt, but which had an unfortunate tendency
to be imposed in the name of one or another far-off
monarch, or as a clause in a doubtful contract, and in
a spirit devoid of tolerance.
Under these conditions, there was room for negotiation,
astuteness, political or military solutions, but not for the
understanding of cultures. It was precisely the cultures
the art, the intellectual traditions, the history, the
spiritual life that the visitors refused to consider except
in the most superficial fashion, so that they might call
them unintelligible.
There were some outstanding exceptions, of which the
most notable, up to the nineteenth century, were probably
certain Catholic missionaries. Every time the Jesuits
could accomplish their work freely in India, for example,
or in China, and more briefly in Japan real human, and
fruitful, relations were established. These Italian, Ger¬
man or French priests knew how to make an honest

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
w>|
W
hi
i
iff*.
In Asia, individualism finds expression '
mainly in the higher planes of spiritua- L
lity, religion and thought. In everyday P
organization the dominant element is a I
profound awareness of group solidarity. I.
Here, workers devote their free -day P
without pay to public work near Pekin. I
(¡5 Fernand Gigon, Geneva I
effort to understand the refinements of the Chinese and
Japanese civilizations, and the elevation of Hindu thought.
They conceived their mission not as that of masters, but
as that of collaborators, seeking to adapt the moral riches
of Christianity to the old traditions of their new lands.
In India certain of them wrote works in Marathi or
Tamil which still figure among the classics of Indian
letters. In China their scientific contribution was parti¬
cularly valuable, and while Japan was still cloistered,
in the beginning of the nineteenth century, its astrono¬
mers secretly imported the mathematical treatises that
these Jesuits had composed in Chinese in their Manchu
observatories. Only in a very recent period Was this
collaboration renewed and developed, thanks especially to
the rise of the studies in philology, history and philosophical
criticism carried on by the scholars known as Orientalists.
Among the European and American students Who
harnessed themselves to the essential task of exploring
the literary patrimony of the peoples of the Eastin
whom most of their compatriots were interested only
through a desire to exploit material wealth several
became celebrated and exercised an immediate influence
on the poets and philosophers who read their work. They
revealed forgotten eras, treasures of thought and lyricism
whose existence had never been suspected before.
But in spite of the admirable work of the Orientalists,
in spite of the new horizons they opened to cosmopolitan
culture, Europe did not seem in the least to believe that
their studies had given it any more understanding of the
contemporary Hindus, Iranians or Chinese.
Yet we must remember that it is probably impossible
to penetrate the literature, art and culture pf a people
whose values one denies from the start, and to whom one
hardly concedes the right to affirm its personality on any
plane. Under such conditions a people can be observed
only as an object; one can only stare with curiosity at
its peculiarities or mysteries. The political and economic
relations of the West with Asia and Africa were such,
for 150 years, that it was rarely possible to talk on those
terms of brotherhood and mutual esteem which are
essential If understanding is to be reached. The youth
of Bengal, Teheran or Sumatra studied in the Western
fashion; they learned that not only mathematics and
chemistry but also all contemporary literature, all modern
thought, were Western. A few Europeans delighted in
The Tale of Genji, but millions of Japanese read Shakes¬
peare, Gibbon, Goethe, Dickens and Zola.
And yet Japan had never lost its freedom. Many other
peoples, living under various regimes that were dependent
in law or in fact, felt that in matters of culture as well
as of government they were denied the right to speak.
They were encouraged to learn (sometimes); they were
never asked to teach, never asked to explain themselves.
The most they could do was to give information to such
Investigators as deigned to ask them questions. For the
rest, specialists would marshal all the resources of
Western erudition to study their jargon, their folklore
and their old monuments. Then in the end, in spite of
so many efforts, functionaries high and low, tourists and
novelists would complain that they could not understand
these people sometimes refined, sometimes backward,
always secretive, dissimulatlve, suspicious.
Any Easterner who might read these lines would see
certain quite concrete historical situations reflected in
them. Many Westerners, too, know that such situations
were at the origin of a great number of resigned judge¬
ments on "psychological barriers" and on the "impene¬
trable threshold" of various "Asian mentalities."
This time of disappointment has not been entirely for¬
gotten. Yet the men of our century have generally recog¬
nized a simple truth often neglected by their fathers:
that peoples, like individuals, can understand one another
only as equals.
II

B Not-so-secret passages
of art, music and letters
!n the effort at understanding to which Unesco invites
us an educational enterprise in the broadest sense of
the word there is no place for mirages. What we are
trying to know and understand are cultural values,
and these values belong to nations, not to blocs. That is
why it is wise to begin by dismissing the idea of an
"East" which prevents us from seeing the real countries,
the living peoples of Asia and Africa.
To the degree in which we are the heirs of past gene¬
rations, histories and history books are inevitable. Good
works of reference can serve to fill the gaps in incomplete
or badly balanced teaching. But such books cannot
replace more modest volumes Written by nationals of the
countries in question. While it is useful to know the
broad lines of the history of China as it unfolded in the
framework of a universal evolution, we need also to learn
something of the history of China as the Chinese them¬
selves see it, and as they present it to others. For past
events, however important they may have been, count less
than the memory of them which has been kept, or
rediscovered, and less than the interpretation given by
the guardians of that memory. In this sense, "historical
heritages" mean nothing except in a popular perspective.
As for the great religions which, by definition, address
themselves to men and women of all times, no one would
think of questioning them through the intermediary of
informers without authority. Obviously it is not neces¬
sary to be a Christian or a Buddhist to describe a
ceremony at Lourdes or Bangkok, or to analyse St. Paul's
Greek or the Pali of the Buddhist canon. But neither
Dominique Darboiç (Q Dalmas Pans
In Muslim, Hindu and Buddhist Asia, music, singing and
dancing are chiefly ways of attuning oneself to the rhythm
of the worl d and the music of the spheres. The theatre of
12
the Orient may well be compared with the Christian mysteries
for both have a religious setting and both relate the divine saga
of beings whose sacred character is thus indefinitely renewed.

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
reporting nor literary criticism can presume the right to
penetrate the spirit of a cult, of a faith, of a church.
And here again, one can really understand only from the
inside. The sacred books of Buddhism and of Islam are
easy to find. Furthermore, Buddhists and Moslems of
our day frequently compose, for the benefit of outsiders,
the sort of commentaries and biographies which Western
writers used to undertake.
For Hinduism, the documents are still more abundant,
in varying degrees of popularization. Among them, one
may easily surmise that it is often advantageous to
choose works by Hindu authors, who generally do not
pretend to reveal mysteries or advise practices in the
inspired tones which certain of their European proselytes
used to adopt. Fortunately the best Orientalists today,
on both sides of the Atlantic, are conscientious translators
and faithful interpreters Who do not believe themselves
either superior or inferior to the spiritual groups they
are presenting. It may be regretted only that their
works reach so few readers.
The situation is the same where philosophies and
mysticisms are concerned, if one distinguishes them from
religious teachings properly speaking. Whether one is
interested in Confucian thought or Taoism, the Vedantic
theses of Shankara or Nimbarka, the metaphysics of
al-Farabi or the visionary accounts of Avicenna, the
basic texts exist and are within the comprehension of
Werner Bischof © Magnum Photos
Werner Bischof © Magnum Photos
In Japan, writes A. Coomaraswamy, the distinguished Orientalist, the
art which seems the most spontaneous to the eye is the product of
the most meticulous and formal techniques... perhaps It is the pro-
foundest inspiration that ¡s not merely most at home with the most
precise forms, but actually needs them. Above, Japanese flute players.
Westerners; they are no more or less hermetic than the
writings of Malebranche, Berkeley or Hegel.
Novels, poetry and the drama obviously present fewer
obstacles. Today as yesterday, every time a Western
reader has been able to acquaint himself with authentic
texts, he has drawn joy and profit from them. Unfortu¬
nately good translations are still all too few, and despite
some real commercial successes, like those of the works
of Arthur Waley (1), those which do exist are rarely
published in a format and at a price which would make
them popular. But several publishers are at present
making notable efforts in this respect, and the field Is
one in which Unesco is playing an important role through
its Collection of Representative Works; an effort is being
made to enrich the Oriental series of this collection as
rapidly as possible.
Doors to Japan's literary treasures
It is a mistake, then, to give up the search for good
translations while comforting oneself with the thought
that in 10 years the literatures of Asia will be more
easily accessible than they are today. There are so many
readers who are hardly beginning to be concerned with
these literatures that it would be superfluous to pity them
for lacking the necessary books.- To take a single
example in a language reputed to be difficult, and which
translators began to tackle only in a relatively recent
period, Japanese poetry, drama, essays and novels are
really at the disposal of millions of Westerners who do
not even seem to suspect it.
In English, French and German and to a lesser degree
in other European languages these Westerners may read
the principal anthologies of poetry, from the Man'yoshu
to the Six Collections; the novelists and memorialists of
the Heian period (Murasaki Shikibu, Sei Shonagon); the
story-tellers and essayists from Kamo No Chomei to
Yoshida Kenko; the great writers of the seventeenth
century; novelists like Saikaku; poets like Basho; dra¬
matists like Chikamatsu Montaemon;
curious writers, of the eighteenth century
like Uëda Akinari, and so on. As for
contemporaries, several poets have been
presented in the West; there also exist
translations of several plays and some
twenty novels.
Cont'd
on
next page
But whereas the mysteries were tied tothethemeofthe Passion,
Asia's theatre finds inexhaustible inspiration in its mythology.
Above, left .Chinese actress ; right, gong orchestra of Indo-China.
(1) Arthur Waley's work on the Tao T? Ching, The Way and its Power,
has just appeared in the United States in a paper-backed edition published
by the Grove Press (Unesco Collection of Representative Works).
13

With a son, one
conquers the three
worlds. A grandson
is the key to eternity.
Mahabharaya
TWO FACES OF ASIA. When life is good
the smiles of mother and child reveal a joy
that words can never express. Around the .
world human needs are Inexorably alike-
love, food, clothing, work, sleep and relaxa¬
tion. When these are met, life is indeed
good. But Asia also shows the twisted, pain¬
ful face of hunger. Only a decade ago ¡t was
found that one-third of mankind was con¬
suming three-quarters of the world's food
production. Asia, with 55% of the world's
people, only disposed of 1 7%. Since then
food crops have increased but so have popu¬
lations. Famine is still a grim reality.
Victor Sassoon, Bangkok
It must be admitted that these publications are
insufficient and it should be noted in passing that they
far from equal in number the Japanese translations from
the literatures of Europe- and America. But what should
be emphasized is the resources that they already offer,
since this quickly-jotted-down list contains key works
that a Westerner has the right to demand if he is not
to "ignore Japan."
It must be agreed that the best-beaten route to the
cultures of the East, as to those of the West, remains the
path through books, even though works of art, song and
the dance would speak a more direct and more attractive
language where many people are concerned. In spite of
the great ease of travel of which the twentieth century
is so proud, theatrical companies do not move about
much and, like musicians, hardly visit any foreign cities
except the capitals. And in spite of the progress of
photography and electronics, good reproductions of paint¬
ings and sculpture in the field of Asian art are as rare
commercially as are good recordings of classical Oriental
music.
Aside from such material obstacles, though, is it really
more difficult to become interested in Chinese painting
than in the Chinese novel, in Turkish ceramics than in
Turkish poetry? Does it take more effort to acquire an
Introduction to the music of Eastern peoples than to learn
something about their literary works? Those Westerners
who have made up their minds to listen to Indian, Bali-
nese or Near Eastern music, instead of lolling in lazy pre-
14
judlces about "monotonous chanting" and "strange quar¬
ter-tones," perceive that they are entering a musical uni¬
verse which though it is certainly not that of Mozart, has
beauties which are no harder to appreciate than those of
Pierrot Lunaire or the Marteau sans Maître. Once the
threshold has been crossed, no one will find insurmount¬
able difficulties in obtaining the best records produced
in Benares, Cairo, Istambul or Rabat pending the greatly
increased number of concerts which are to be organized
in the West by the Association for Oriental Music and
the International Council of Music.
' On the other hand, it is doubtful if any similar
society will succeed in making known and appreciated to
an equal degree the innumerable masterpieces which
sculptors, painters, architects, engravers, weavers, potters
and goldsmiths have piled up through the centuries from
Korea to Morocco. Yet many of these treasures enrich
the great museums of Europe and America; several
Western capitals have even housed them in special insti¬
tutions Where the public may go at leisure to study six¬
teenth-century Persian tapestries or Afghan ivories or
Tibetan painting.
But the public does not rush to get in. The audience
that would be reached, even in small towns and villages,
by unambitious exhibitions particularly of good repro¬
ductions of paintingswould be more numerous; and, as
experience has shown, it would generally be enthusiastic.
In this field there is a great task to be undertaken by
universities, museums and youth movements; we must

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
Suml Janah, Calcutta
hope that the publication of reproductions and inexpen¬
sive albums will be further developed, and that the prac¬
tice of holding travelling exhibitions may become general.
But we may conclude, even now, that although the
avenues leading to a knowledge of the arts of the East are
not so broad as those which lead to its literatures, they
are not, any more than the latter, closed or secret.
Even if he consents to identify his values with those of
his nation, no man confines himself to those expressed in
the works and the monuments of the past. He may
respect these latter, cite them very frequently or vene¬
rate them, without, for this reason, regarding them as
the total explanation of his acts or the inspiration of his
whole life. So for anyone who wants to understand the
peoples of the East to about the same degree as he
understands his neighbours, a knowledge of their cultural
history is indispensable. Yet a knowledge of their con¬
temporary development is no less necessary.
In other words, Asia and Africa are situated in time,
and we are now in the second half of the twentieth cen¬
tury. Up to a certain point the prestige of ancient litera¬
tures, the silhouettes of mosques, pagodas, Angkors and
Boro Budors form a screen between the Western observer
and the modern countries which nevertheless live on
other things besides these books and these edifices. This
word "modern" shocks people who prefer to imagine an
East opposed to machines, one which is becoming indus¬
trialized in spite of itself under the influence of
Westerners of the atomic age.
The reality Is very different. Certain countries of the
East have a great lag to make up; but already their
progress is much more rapid than the experts were pre¬
dicting ten or fifteen years ago. In this field, changes
hardly obey cultural imperatives; they follow the rhythm
of investments. On the. other hand, it is true that all
the countries of the East do not enjoy the techniques and
the social advantages which characterize "twentieth-cen¬
tury civilization". But in varying degrees one may say
the same of all the .countries of Europe and America,
without exception. Even the richest and best equipped
have their forgotten lands, their anachronistic survivals
or their underdeveloped classes. And if we are talking
about the atomic age, no nation lives in the atomic age ;
none yet possesses the new installations or the equality
in abundance that ought to accompany this age of
human maturity.
Westerners know perfectly well that Tokyo, Delhi,
Peking, Cairo, Singapore and Karachi are living in the
same century as New York, London and Berne. It is not
sure that they like to think of these poetic-sounding capi¬
tals as cities as proudly modern as their own sometimes
as sadly modern, depending on the hour of the day and
the particular neighbourhood. Yet no
country has a monopoly on reinforced
concrete, colossal hotels, traffic jams, neon
signs or Industrial suburbs. But must we
depend on our imagination to know what
Eastern cities are like? How can we guess
Cont'd
next page
15

what Chinese metal-workers of Japanese salesgirls do
after work? What kind of homes do they go back to?
What kind of hopes?
How can we see this total present-day picture: urban
and industrial life, customs, street scenes and family
gatherings, fields and workshops, popular fairs and nation¬
al holidays, the atmosphere in temples and schools?
Unless we are to set out on a ceaseless round of travel,
we have to depend on the mass information media, espe¬
cially the press and the cinema; and it seems certain
that we shall be able to count on them to fulfil this
essential task.
Newspapers publish articles on one Eastern country or
another, and many of these reports are excellent: they
provide a wealth of detail set in an intelligible whole;
they furnish valuable information concerning living con¬
ditions, political opinions, economic prospects. Illustrat¬
ed magazines have published admirable portraits of a
family, a village, a countryside. Unfortunately these
successes cannot erase the memory of other writings, too
brilliant to be honest, whose authors Were obviously less
anxious to inform than to please. In these cases only
the strangest and most exceptional characteristics of a
people, or a city, hold the limelight; the authors seem to
fear that they would bore their readers if they used the
more subdued colours which generally convey the ordi¬
nary existence of people and countries.
Troops of bagpipers & Cossack choirs
Sometimes those who want to understand the East
even need to be warned against certain documen¬
taries which are both fascinating and scientific:
ethnographic films whose character is likely to be sadly
misunderstood by the public. For the average cinema-
goer may have no way of knowing that the Bedouins in
their tents do not represent "the Arabs", or that the tiger-
hunters of Assam do not represent India any more than
the luxuriously armed tourist they are escorting repre¬
sents the United States of America. On a less scientific
level, the folklore of many a pleasant short fllm may
suggest nations peopled exclusively by young temple
dancers or tambourine players to spectators who would
feel indignant if Scotland were symbolized exclusively by
a troop of bagpipers or the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics by a Cossack choir.
Western countries never appear either very distant or
very self-effacing to the inhabitants of Eastern cities
endowed with American automobiles and enriched with
products of the mechanical, electrical, chemical and tex¬
tile industries of most of the countries of Europe. In so
far as the Asian and African nations are in process of
development, and count on foreign aid to hasten their
economic equipment, they unleash intense competition
which, needless to say, goes far beyond simply mercantile
aims; there is no exporting nation which does not shower
them with more or less discreet publicity, or provide them
with goodwill ambassadors or technical missions, some¬
times in impressive numbers. The inhabitant of an
Indonesian, Thai, Indian, Persian or Arabian city may
thus have the feeling that the West is With him every
day, garish or raucous, on posters, on the roads, in the
shops, in the cinema. To him the idea of studying this
West more closely may seem faintly amusing.
It is clear that trade, consumer goods and even propa¬
ganda do not in any case embody the essential of cultural
values. But to the man In the street, this truth does not
always appear to be self-evident. Cultivated people, on
the other hand, will admit it willingly that goes without
saying and yet their difficulties are none the less great.
Some of them, who have studied in secondary schools
16
and universities of a purely Western type, and Who are
as familiar with Western civilization as with their own
country, have trouble realizing that they are, after all,
exceptional, and that the problem of the appreciation of
foreign cultures has not yet been touched where most of
their compatriots are concerned. Others seem to feel
that they know the West thoroughly because they have
learned a European language. Almost all meet discourag¬
ing obstacles in the history of Wars and colonization: it
is sometimes hard to distinguish between the themes of
politics and those of culture, and there are in all longi¬
tudes people who prefer to close their eyes and ears to
the literature or the arts of a nation of whose government
they disapprove.
Oriental serenity vs. Rock 'n* roll
Such factors explain a certain self-satisfaction, a cer¬
tain attitude of ironic retreat. Intellectual curiosity
regarding the West is surely not the most prevalent
virtue in all Eastern circles. The consequences of this
may be noted in the sweeping judgements Which, for
example, condemn the "Western spirit" whose notorious
materialism is assumed to characterize Europe and the
Americas from end to end. To materialism a scandalous
sequence of other "isms" is usually added: imperialism,
alcoholism, and so on. A West full of unemployed workers,
brash militarists, juvenile gangsters and adulterous wives
surely cannot have much to teach.
If a man thinks he knows everything about the Wester¬
ners' will to power and their basic anxiety, he does not
ask whether something more than mere appetite does
not lie at the origin of this fever, this spirit of conquest.
If he identifies the West with its industrial techniques, he
supposes that it will go on producing machines and more
machines useful, dangerous or amusing; he does not
stop to consider that intellectual, social and even spiritual
discipline may explain a scientific progress that has been
developing, after all, for 400 years.
In other words, to the naïve ignorance of many Wester¬
ners concerning the East there corresponds, where more
than one Easterner is concerned, a partial acquaintance
with the West, insufficient to prevent serious errors as to
cultural values. Certain critics, for example, cannot
In many parts of Asia, the transformation of
the economy, which in Europe was spread
over two centuries, is being effected in the
space of a few years. Photo shows integrated
metallurgical combine operating at Kusniets.

The Unesco Courier. December 1958
resist the temptation to oppose the serenity of the Chi¬
nese peasant to the vogue for rock'n' roll, a venerable
swami to Hitler, the atomic bomb to Iraq's sanctuaries of
Kerbela. It may be hoped that the cultivated public in
the East will feel more and more called to explore and
appreciate the deeper realities where the Western peoples
are concerned a history, a life of the mind which are
not revealed either in propaganda or in the export trade.
If Europeans and Americans may be advised to try to
understand a young and lucid East, stripped of its pictu-
resqueness and "immobility", then Easterners might well
take as a temporary theme a mysterious West, charged
with ancient contradictions and often fonder of pure
research than of wealth and comfort. It is not a
question of substituting one cliché for another, but of
looking for the almost secret truths that are hidden
under apparently incontrovertible appearances. Thus,
for example, a man who thinks he has an adequate pic¬
ture of the United States would do well to forget
Hollywood for a moment and turn his attention to Ame¬
rican poets and American monks; the number of the first
as well as the second may seem surprising. From an¬
other point of view, an Easterner will doubtless find it pro¬
fitable to try to find out what romantic German music
means to the millions of men and women, from Moscow
to Buenos Aires, who listen to it with such tireless fervor.
In the West as in the East, everyone educated enough
to measure the extent of his own ignorance ought to be
able to replace accepted ideas with the personal study
that is in every case deserved by other peoples... their
books, their paintings, their music, their systems of
thought, their ways of living. Schools, publishers, and
various national and international organizations will
doubtless be called on to furnish the means and the
opportunity for this study. Naturally, each of us will
remember that it is always Wise to suspend judgement
on men and on cultures until one has read, seen,
listened and understood.
One final question: If We follow Unesco's suggestions if
we try to see the nations of the East in their historical
reality, and to understand their cultures as broadly as is
possible for a non-specialist who is simply curious about
the works and the ways of his fellows if we do this, what
will we have achieved? What will be the result of these
explorations?
One might solemnly reply that we Will have contributed
to the coming of a peaceful civilization, global, and fra¬
ternal. That is possible, after all. But it is more certain
that there are some very simple qualities to be acquired,
some virtues which are not so common: modesty, for
example, and tolerance. No one is so vain of his nation¬
al culture as he who knows no other; conversely, it is
difficult not to respect a people whose masterpieces one
loves, whose joys and sorrows one senses.
To know the literature,, the arts, the thought of a
nation, to know its traditions, its teaching methods and
its social problems, its costumes and its cooking none of
this necessarily brings about any practical consequences.
Ordinarily these studies have the effect of refining the
intelligence and sensitivity. They teach that men must
not remain strangers to men. They lead one to realize
that there is a human unity, rich in numerous forms
which struggle against monotony. They lead one to per¬
ceive this unity in the highest works of peoples, and not
only in their elementary needs.
The people of a country, a city and even of a street
are extremely varied and unpredictable; we shall never
really know them. Yet knowing what they admire, what
is recited, read or sung around them, we are not ignorant
of them either. Furthermore, we will judge them the
less summarily as we know these things a little better.
To esteem is not always to judge. The cathedral of
Chartres and the tragedies of Corneille, Hamlet and the
Novum Organum, the Well-Tempered Clavichord and the
Critique of Pure Reason do not permit us to judge the
French, the English of the Germans of today; and one
would generally be Wrong to judge Westerners by their
poems or their theologies.
Yet these works, these monuments, these revelations
are the patrimony of Westerners; if not examples and
terms of reference for them, at least living and fruitful
images. It is worth the trouble to familiarize ourselves
with the corresponding images which inspire the peoples
of the far-off East, in order to understand them and
know what aims these peoples set for themselves. Per¬
haps We shall then understand that this patrimony
belongs to us too, and that these aims are in reality
our own.
Condensed from "East-West Towards Mutual Understanding," a
new booklet shortly to be published by Unesco and prepared by the
Department of Mass Communication of Unesco as a contribution to
East-West mutual understanding.
17
