LUNAR LANDSCAPE OF
PINNACLES & TOWERS
Strangely-shaped rock towers and pinnacles stud countryside around
Mount Argaeus, Asia Minor's highest peak, which rises 12,848 feet
on the Cappadocian Plateau of Central Turkey. In prehistoric times
the mountain erupted, spewing ash and lava hundreds of feet deep
across the land. Rains and melting snows created valleys and river¬
beds, and wind and water slowly carved the volcanicdebris intothousands
© Marc Riboud-Magnum Photos
of pyramids and cones. For thousands of years men have made their
homes in these rock shapes. Macan (above) is one of half-a-dozen
villages half-hidden in this lunar landscape. First cone dwellers hacked
out homes from the soft rock. Many carved entrances high above
ground to protect themselves from attack. Double towered cone
(opposite page), no longer inhabited, has many rooms on different levels.
18 19


STONE CAPS WORN
AT RAKISH ANGLES
The whims of nature have rarely produc¬
ed stranger sights than those in the
cone-land of Cappadocia. As wind and
water have carved out valleys and river
beds, they have also left cones and
pyramids standing in space, sometimes
with stone caps of a different, more
resistant material. (I) Rock hats on
these cones, already at a rakish angle,
will one day tumble off and the un¬
protected cone will crumble away.
(2) A two-storey dwelling, now un¬
inhabited, whose weather-worn walls
have opened up like a honeycomb.
(3) A cloistered community grew up in
Cappadocia between the fifth and
twelfth centuries. Holy men excavated
tombs, shrine and even large churches
out of rock. Farming family now lives
in this mushroom-shaped cone which
Christians of medieval times used as a .
chapel. Columned room (on right of
dwelling) is thought to have been
carved as a tomo. (4) Rock pyramids
in the Goreme Valley stand in serried
ranks like some army poised to strike.
(5) Towering spires dwarf a farmer's
wife and her donkeys near one of the
oasis-like cultivated patches which dot
the floor of the valley near Urgup.
© Marc Riboud-Magnum Photos
20

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
.? C> >V tÂ
"ji**
ttÛi
'isflP^' '
VaWn't
*«-
" ._JÎ
"-Vfc.'
U* *
*$¿¿ V
21

CAPPADOCIA: COUNT R Y
OF THE CONE DWELLERS
rrrr-i AKE the first turning on the left, pass two mina-
I rets and a tower, go round the pyramid on the
right and make straight for the cone with the
stone cap leaning to the left." This is the type of street
direction a visitor would need to find his way around
ürgüp, a Turkish village set in one of the strangest
landscapes this side of the moon.
For ürgüp is in the heart of a country of volcanic
towers, a fabulous land of some two or three hundred
thousand stone cones, in the centre of the Cappadocian
Plateau of Turkey. Kayseri formerly Caesarea, a com¬
mercial centre from Roman times is the nearest town.
Ankara is some 200 miles to the northwest. Here nature
has taken a fling at proving that anything is possible
and man has countered by demonstrating that no matter
what nature contrives, and however improbable, he can
make some use of it.
This is the situation today. But the beginning of the
story of Ürgüp is in prehistoric times when Mount Argaeus
(Erciyas Dagi), the biggest mountain peak in Asia Minor
exploded violently covering a forty-mile area around its
base with ash and lava hundreds of feet deep. At first
the triangular volcanic plateau was a smooth molten mass
but as the lava cooled, large cracks, fissures and ravines
appeared, and the process of erosion began.
Melting snows, rains and wind then took a part in
sculpting the weirdest landscape the human eye has ever
seen outside of the lens of a telescope focussed on the
moon. Pyramids, towers, spires, cones, minarets and
needles of rock in a brilliant phantasmagoria of colours
ranging from blinding white to bright yellows and softest
rose were left jutting skywards in haphazard confusion.
Handiwork of a drunken architect
Some towers, polished smooth by grit-laden winds, stand
so high that they have as many as ten floors; others
are man-size. Some have comical caps of rock
substance, more resistant to the weather than the main
cone, which sit coquettishly on top. Others have been
worn down to the shape of a Cleopatra needle. And lest,
if even in this, there might be some semblance of- sym¬
metry, the hand of some drunken architect seems to have
pushed this one slightly left, that one over to the right,
placed these cones leaning towards each other like people
in deep conversation and set these others standing stiffly
apart.
If the first tribes wandering across the desert land saw
this strange incomprehensible rockland as a challenge
they also seized on it as an opportunity. For more cen¬
turies than are recorded in history, men have made their
homes in this woodless land by digging into the rock
shapes and enjoying the safety offered by dwellings with
a life span beyond human reckoning. Yet even the rocks
do not last forever because once the caps fall off, the
shape of the cone starts changing, giving a constant
impermanency to the bizarre skyline.
What is known of ürgüp has been compiled from what
the previous generations have left behind them. Some
time about the 4th century A.D., a community of Cénobite
monks discovered the advantages offered by this rock
land for the preservation of the seclusion demanded by
their order. Side by side with the humble farmers who
tilled the valleys, they established themselves in the cone
village of Goreme a few miles from ürgüp.
With considerable ingenuity they dug out living quar¬
ters, sometimes at ten different levels in the same cone,
reaching the entrances by rope ladder or by a central
inside chimney niched to provide hand and footholds.
22
Ground level doorways they sealed with large stone wheels
which rolled on carefully cut grooves.
These monks left a rich heritage for the archaeologist.
They built dozens of small chapels in the cones, mainly
following the Byzantine form of architectural construc¬
tion and covered the walls and ceilings with brilliant
paintings depicting the iconography of the Christ, Mary
and the Saints. In the earlier chapels probably built
about 400 A.D. the paintings were done in simple wash
on the stone face.
Kilroy was herein 1650
More elaborate work was done from the 8th to 11th
centuries when artists had learned the art of using
tempera which is more resistant to the ravages of
time, though not, unfortunately, to the vandalism of
sightseers. Thus many of the paintings have been
mutilated almost beyond recognition by visitors who,
wishing to leave their mark on time, have scribbled their
autographs on the walls. One autograph defacing a
well-nigh priceless fresco has been identified as dating
back to 1650.
The departure of the monks, following the decline in
the Christian monastic communities in the 14th century,
brought another era to the rock country. The villagers
were not slow to put the former chapels and living quar¬
ters to practical use. Windows were walled up and former
sanctuaries became pigeoncotes so that there would be a
, reliable supply of guano to supplement the chemicals of
' the volcanic soil. Cells became store-rooms, and, not to
be outdone by the monks in artistic effort, the villagers
decorated the outside of crofts and barns with figures of
animals and geometric patterns.
Blessed with an abundance of food products grapes,
melons, apricots, pears, apples, walnuts and certain types
of cereal all grow in profusion the villagers of the cone
country have little reason to go far afield. Their main
product is a sweet wine absorbed easily by the surround¬
ing provinces, though ürgüp itself has vats that can
hold up to 3,000,000 litres (790,000 gallons).
As a result, changes have come slowly to this outlandish
place. Though thé richer members of the community
sometimes build housefronts and install wooden doors to
give the appearance of ordinary dwellings, they show no
desire to alter their cave houses behind, and a step over
the threshold is a step back across the centuries.
Spring-cleaning with hammers
While the people of Urgüp may now wear Western
dress in their homes probably the same shelters
their ancestors carved out of the untouched rock
the stairways, floors, ceilings and walls are of stone. The
divans they sit on and probably sleep on, are of stone,
and the fireplace without a flue is of the same basic
material.
When spring-cleaning time comes round, the women
use hammers to chip off the accumulation of grime
incidentally enlarging the chamber each time and then
complete the annual renovation with whitewash applied
With a twig brush.
Should the family needs change and living space
become cramped, one can always cut out another room
and if the cone is not large enough to allow this, then
there is always another round the corner. And who could
wish for more than a home that is cool in summer, warm
in winter, rent-free and well-nigh indestructible.

The Unesco Courier. September 1958
Josephine Powell, Rome
TROGLODYTE HOMES OF THE 2 0TH CENTURY
In cave houses of Cappidocian villages like Uchisar (below) stairways, floors and even divans are of stone, but one advantage of these modern troglodyte
dwellings-is that they are cool in summer and warm in winter. Smoke from their flueless chimneys blackens the rooms, so once a year the people
chip away the begrimed layer on ceiling and wallsthus enlarging the room each time. A coat of whitewash then completes the "spring cleaning."
Below, left, a young woman, balancing atop a woven basket, uses a bundle of twigs to whitewash the ceiling. Above, view through window space
shows thickness of cave house walls. Women are busy at their looms, weaving carpets. Some carpets take as much as two years to complete.
© Marc Riboud-Magnum Photos,
