à
IDEAS HIDDEN
IN ROOTS AND
BRANCHES
by Georges Fradier
With pieces of leather, straw, felt, etc. Mrs. Arjun Ray has created
strange pictures, statuettes, which at first seem to be made of porce¬
lain, but which are really shells... and especially pieces of wood, the
most beautiful of all her work. You cannot really call it sculpture.
The sculptor chooses his medium, then, after a good deal of effort, he
creates a form. No one save he can foresee what its shape will be;
he aleone decides. Here, on the contrary it is the wood which decides.
A wealth of forms and patterns lie hidden in these twisted roots and
dead branches. The artist has merely helped to bring them to life.
A few years ago, when a collection of essays, richly
illustrated with children's drawings and paint¬
ings, was published by Unesco under the title, Edu¬
cation and Art, a schoolteacher friend from the Alps
wrote to me to say how absorbing he had found this
beautifully presented volume. "But let us not fool our¬
selves," he added at once. "I have nothing against
children dabbling with paints and having fun expressing
themselves freely. The trouble is that by the time they
reach ten or eleven it's all finished. Their feeling for
colour and their imagination have flown out of the
window.
"I admit that it's not the same in the big cities where
children can get a fresh start at that age. They have big
museums they can go to and, provided someone is in the
least bit interested in showing them, they can be in¬
troduced to the world of art and its pervading atmosphere.
But where I live there is just nothing that even faintly
resembles the world of painting or sculpture.
"And I don't think that people are born with such a
thing as an artistic sense. At any rate the old people up
here, who have never had any initiation into art, spend
their whole life without ever noticing the majestic beauty .
of our scenery. When I point out to my pupils how beau¬
tiful the pine trees are they merely shrug their shoulders
and say : 'Yes, but with the cost of transport timber is
hardly worth selling any more'."
I have waited until now to answer my friend's letter.
Not that I have discovered any new method of solving his
problem that would be hailed by educators and art autho¬
rities. It is simply that I have met an artist who, I think,
could inspire even the most rough-and-tumble child with
a feeling for beauty and taste for creative work.
This artist is a woman, and she is a practical person
not a theorist. She has neither degrees nor diplomas.
She is the wife of an important Calcutta architect, with
children of her own and a large household to run. When
she speaks of her work it is in a shy, diffident manner :
"I don't even know if it's worth anything," she says.
By "it" she means strange art objects made of leather,
straw, felt or cloth, figurines which at first seem to be
made of porcelain but which are really shells... and espe¬
cially pieces of wood, the most beautiful of all the works
produced by Mrs. Arjun Ray. Sculpture is really not the
word for them. The sculptor chooses his medium himself
and after a good deal of work creates a form, which only
he decides on and elaborates, Here, on the contrary, it
is the wood which decides.
A twisted root, a dried-up branch. In each of these a
form and pattern liées hidden. One needs only to spot it,
and then help it a little so that it springs to life.
One figurine is called "After Me Cometh One." Mrs. Ray
did not get up one morning saying "I'm going to do a
statuette of St. John the Baptist." She found a branch
lying on the grass split at one end and shaped like a
trident at the other. She picked it up, and saw in it the
image of an ascetic prophet, arms raised skyward. Some¬
one else probably would not interpret it in the same way
as she did. At any rate, on returning
home, Mrs. Ray scraped off bark in places,
removed a knot in the wood, deepened
a notch and accentuated the outline. And
there, suddenly, was the prophet, clad in a
goat skin, "crying in the wilderness."
Cont'd
on
next page
31

Polished, varnished and impregnated with oils (to pro¬
tect them from insects and humidity) but never painted,
the pieces of sap-wood, bark or root, become true works
of art once mounted on a base.
Anyone, irrespective of his age or educational back¬
ground, will recognize them as '"living" shapes:" two
wrestlers struggling desperately together, a screaming
monster, the great hand of Peace. Yet without Mrs. Arjun
Ray these same persons would never have seen anything
more than twisted roots and brambles and branches of
deodar, cedar and gardenia.
It seems to me that my teacher friend might draw a
useful lesson from the work of the lady in Calcutta.
I repeat, there is nothing novel about what she has done.
But a lesson need not be an original revelation to be
useful. A sense of form stems from things seen rather
than from notions acquired. Or to put it another way,
sense and taste for form depend first of all on knowing
how to look at things. Paul Valéry once wrote: "Examine
all things on earth as though you had never seen them
before." Mrs. Arjun Ray sees a frail dancer in a broken
twig which a dozen people have passed by without a
thought. In much the same way a painter sees limitless
patterns of shape and colour in a simple composition
of objects which the layman vaguely describes as "a
window, a table and a flower pot."
Where is there a child between four and six who does
not inspect everything around him with infinitesimal
attention and interest? Not of course in as sophisticated
and learned a fashion as does the painter, but the con¬
ception at least is the same. All children are sensitive to
the suggestion of form, and their world is rich in images
and metaphors. A pebble is always something more beau¬
tiful than a pebble ; a leaf is like silk, or like a face, or
like a butterfly. The child collects scraps of old paper or
old buttons just as he does sea shells or birds. Gravely
and matter-of-fact, grownups put everything into cate¬
gories and classes: "This is mineral so and so, that is
mountain so and so. This is clean; that is dirty". But
the child's mind says: "It's like..." A lion. An angel. A
shoe "It's like...": the very first beginnings of graphic art.
And one might well ask oneself whether the role of the
teacher in this field only, obviously should not be to
permit their 10- and 12-year-old pupils to continue their
game of make-believe by permitting them to go on search¬
ing for images without shame. Let them keep their vision
of a world which is profoundly fascinating because of its
infinite variety, and because everything around us is worth
seeing, and each thing in turn suggests another, indeed a
thousand other things. To allow children to escape for
as long as possible from the impoverishment which
characterizes adults whose view of life is limited to things
useful, conventional and efficient is to remain an artist.
By learning to see, to feel and imagine, children learn
to detach things from their surroundings. The strollers
who did not notice the twig from which Mrs. Arjun Ray
produced the figure of a dancer cannot fail to recognize
the finished work: the dancer stands gracefully poised,
ready to spring to life. True the artist has added a few
touches to the guava branch, revealing what she could
already see. But what really brings the dancing girl to
life is that she stands out alone on an empty background.
To use a rather worn simile: on a wall covered with pic¬
tures, each one is invisible.
I suggest, therefore, that my friend from trie mountain
school should get his pupils to display in class once or
twice a week the natural "treasures" picked up during a
walk, polished and "brought to life" by some minor altera¬
tion. At first they will believe that the form or pattern
is due chiefly to chance. But, gradually, they will come to
understand that no thing of beauty whether it be a
branch, a fir tree, marble or precious stone is really
beautiful until our eyes have "learned to see" it. There
is enormous scope for children in this "game".
Mrs. Arjun Ray does not work only with dead wood.
She uses feathers, shells, and even pieces of coal; a touch
here, a slight twist there and the image springs to life.
And she marvels: "What a wealth of ideas, forms and
shapes lie hidden amid the trees and shrubs around us !"
32
