THE MAKIOKA SISTERS
A great contemporary novel that
shows how a Japanese woman
finds a husband
gives an 'inside' picture of
day-by-day life in Japan by Irving Jaile
ow does a Japanese woman find a husband ? What
J~l are the important factors governing her choice:
romantic love, money, physical attraction, the
man's health, family, social position ? The answer, as
revealed in a newly-published translation of a famous
Japanese novel The Makioka Sisters is: all of them
but least important of all, perhaps, at least for girls of the
upper middle classes, is romantic love.
Although Japan, unlike many other Asian nations, has
long been prominent on the international scene, most
Westerners know little about, her life, customs and tradi¬
tions. An increasing number of sociological, historical
and literary studies devoted to Japan is available to
Western readers. But important as such studies are for
a comprehensive knowledge of the country, none of them
perhaps can give us the intimate "feel" of day-by-day life
in Japan that is provided by this work of fiction.
The Makioka Sisters represents the culmination of a
life-long intellectual and artistic evolution by the author,
Junichiro Tanizaki, who is generally regarded as Japan's
leading contemporary novelist. In his earlier days, under
the influence of such Western writers as Poe, Baudelaire
and Oscar Wilde, TanizaM wrote bizarre, sometimes gro¬
tesque stories, often dealing with aberrations in human
behaviour.
In his more mature years, Tanizaki acquired a growing
interest both in the traditional Japanese esthetic as
evidenced by his modern-language translation of the
early eleventh century Japanese classic novel The Tale of
Genji and in the unfolding of ordinary Japanese lives.
Novel born of war & peace
As a high point in this development, The Makioka
Sisters is ideally suited to take us "inside" the Japan
of the recent past and of a certain milieu: the
immediate pre-war Japan of the upper middle classes in
the Osaka-Kyoto region where something of the tradi¬
tional Japanese ways and douceur de vivre still exist.
Begun toward the end of the war, The Makioka Sisters
(published in Japan as Sasame-yuki) was completed in
the early post-war years. Recommended for translation
by Unesco and the Japanese National Commission for
Unesco, as representative of Japanese culture, it has now
been published in four countries in a strikingly readable
English translation by Edward G. Seidensticker (1).
Structurally, the novel, with its lack of any strong plot
or dramatic climaxes, its up-in-the-air ending, may dis¬
concert the Western reader. But this very absence of a
"story" structure, this meandering through all the details
of daily living, produce a fidelity to life which is highly
informative to the foreign reader.
With infinite patience, Tanizaki threads his way
through some five years immediately preceding Japan's
entry into World War H in the lives of the four Makioka
sisters, members of a respected merchant family which is
gradually declining both in wealth and in social standing.
Tanizaki has said he tried to confine himself to "what
was attractive" in the graceful pre-war life, "but I was
not able to withdraw completely from the enveloping
storm. This was the necessary fate of a novel born of
war and peace."
Retiring Yukiko & rebellious Taeko
The main theme of the novel is the series of repeated
failures in the family's attempt to find a socially
acceptable husband for the third sister: silent, mild-
mannered, retiring Yukiko, the most '"traditional" Japan¬
ese of them all. The impact of the modern world on
traditional Japanese ways, and the disturbances this
causes, are reflected in the hectic life of the bright,
modern, independent and somewhat rebellious youngest
sister, Taeko, Who finally is excluded from the family
circle.
Yet no ultimate, irretrievable tragedy befalls any of the
main characters: life just goes on. Yukiko finally finds
a husband, and Taeko ends up as the wife of a bartender
but, even here, it is clear that the bonds of affection
and loyalty between Taeko and her sisters will endure
despite official ostracism.
The main interest of the novel for Western readers lies
in the wealth of intimate detail about Japanese life
glimpses both of thoroughly modern daily life and of
ancient customs which, even though some of them are
undoubtedly on the decline in present-day Japan, show
us a side of life which still persists.
The flashing beauty of a night-time fire-fly hunt and
(1) "The Makioka Sisters": New York - Alfred A. Knopf; London -
Seeker and Warburg ; Tokyo - Charles E. Tuttle ; Toronto - McClelland
and Stewart. "The Makioka Sisters" is one of the works whose
translation has been sponsored by Unesco under Its "Translation of
Representative Works" programme.

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
Photo by Takamasa Inamu'ra © Camera Press Ltd.
the serene and timeless quality of the annual cherry-
blossom viewing take their place in Tanizaki's novel along
with close-up views of Japanese homes, offices, hospitals,
and innumerable other scenes of daily life.
We see the unfolding of family relations in all their
subtleties, both the formal relations between the house of
the head of the family and related households, and the
interplay of individual personalities, the intricate match¬
making négociations, and the traditional miai ceremony
in which prospective bride and bride-groom meet in the
presence of family members and go-betweens.
The vivid description of a flood is followed by an
account of the Japanese at the mercy of violent typhoon
winds in their frail wooden houses which almost literally
burst at the seams.
The Western reader is struck, perhaps above all, by the
pervasive presence of the West in the midst of traditional
Japanese life the co-existence of Western and Eastern
elements in virtually all aspects of daily living, as evi¬
denced, for example, by the Japanese practice of furnish¬
ing some rooms in their homes in Western style and
others in traditional Japanese fashion.
One is tempted to see in Japanese life as portrayed in
Tanizaki's book a new synthesis between Oriental and
Western ways, just as, in the literary field, Donald Keene,
a leading student of Japanese literature, sees in The
Makioka Sisters evidence of a new period in which
European literary influences may "have finally been
absorbed into the native tradition, and techniques evolved
with which we are as yet unfamiliar."
When we realize that the tradition of the novel in
Japan dates back to the tenth century, the literary as
well as the intensely human interest of The Makioka
Sisters to the Western reader becomes very evident.

JAPAN (Continued)
All photos by Takamasa Inamura. © Camera Press Ltd.
METAMORPHOSIS FOR MARRIAGE. A modern Japanese girl, Noriko Kamimura (above left), aged 20, becomes a
beautiful bride garbed in the ancient and traditional style. First change comes (above, right) when her permanent is hidden
under the elaborate taka-shimada coiffure, worn exclusively by brides. Wigs of different sizes for this coiffure are seen below,
left. Below, right Noriko, looking almost doll-like, is ready for the ceremony. White turban worn round coiffure is called
tsuno-kakushi, literally "to hide the horns", a decoration based on the superstition that brides have horns of jealousy.
