SCOTLAND YARD OF EPIDEMICS
Broadcasts the daily health
bulletin of the world
On February 18, 1948 the following signal went out
from Geneva to the health authorities of the world:
"'Egypt now declares whole country free from choi¬
ra Epidnations."
The doctors in the public health administrations could
now relax, after four anxious months; to them, it was as
though a major war had been averted. Once again, the
"West Wall" in the defences against Asian cholera had
held, as it had done for thirty years but not without heavy
casualties. The Egyptian death-roll had been 20,472.
The outbreak began at El Korein, on September 22, 1947.
The merchants had gathered from all the Egyptian pro¬
vinces for the annual date fair at this centre on the
eastern edge of the Nile Delta, close to the Sweet Water
Canal, which provides the drinking water for the cities
and villages of Suez. Besides the traders, there were 6,000
workmen engaged on construction work nearby.
Three labourers contracted cholera, from a source never
officially established; but it must have come from one of
the areas of the East where cholera persists. The sick men
carried it into the crowded billets of the workers and,
before quarantine measures could be established, the
transients, the hired labour and the merchants, panicked.
So great is the dread of cholera that, as throughout his¬
tory, they fled from El Korein.
Instead of escaping the disease, they took it with them.
Within three days, cases had appeared in Cairo. Within
four, it had spread to Ismailia. By October, the whole
of Egypt was involved and 33,000 cases of cholera had
been discovered.
Vaccine flowed to Cairo
Within a few hours of cholera being recognised in El
Korein, Epidnations had warned the world that
cholera was on the march. Epidnations is a code
name which, since 1923, has been impressively familiar to
public health administrators in all countries. Throughout
the entire existence of the League of Nations; throughout
the war, with the concurrence of the belligerents; during
the transfer from the League, through the United Nations,
to the World Health Organization to this day, Epidnations
has been the password on the picket-lines of disease. It
stands for the Section of International Quarantine.
When cholera broke loose in Egypt, the World Health
Organization did not yet officially exist; it was still an
"Interim Commission". That did not hamper action in
an emergency of this seriousness. In those hectic first
hours, telegrams went out from Geneva to vaccine labor¬
atories in several countries, including the Pasteur Insti¬
tute in Paris, the Lister Institute in London and the
Haffkine Institute in Bombay, asking how much cholera
vaccine they had available; how much they could produce
within a week and how quickly they could get it to Cairo.
The response was immediate and ungrudging.
This was followed by the "'Cholera Air-lift" which made
medical history. In America, stocks of vaccine were
rushed to the airport with motor-cycle siren escorts to
clear the traffic. The Russians dispatched supplies.
From India, where cholera is still persistent, succour
was sent to the Egyptians. Crates converged on Cairo,
until there were 20,000,000 doses enough to vaccinate
every man, woman and child in Egypt. A third of the
supplies were gifts.
The ship nobody wanted
Within the first fortnight, a group of experts assem¬
bled in Geneva. They included authorities on the
disease and on quarantine methods, and the doctor
who had diagnosed the first cases. They re-examined
cholera quarantine regulations which had been made 20
years before and found them adequate for the emergency.
One country which had prohibited entry to anyone coming
from Egypt had to be reminded, sharply, that this exceeded
the International Sanitary Conventions and was putting
the clock back a hundred years.
At that time (in 1848) cases of cholera were discovered
on board the Matteo Bruzzo, out of Genoa with 200 passen¬
gers. Country after country on both sides of the Atlantic
refused to allow the ship to dock or the passengers to
land. For four months they were kept at sea before being
disembarked at Leghorn, 78 miles from where they start¬
ed. This and many other incidents, in which the dread of
cholera and other pestilential diseases had frightened
countries into excessive quarantine measures, led the
mercantile nations of the world into international co¬
operation. Cholera, it has been said of that period, was
the founder of the public health services, and this is
indeed true of many countries.
When, with material help from outside and prodigious
efforts by its own doctors, Egypt quenched the epidemic
of cholera, the disease had once again served as a salutary
reminder. In September, when it broke out, only 19
countries had ratified their membership of the World.
Health Organization, which could not formally exist
until 26 states had done so. Before the "All Clear" was
sounded, ten more had ratified and all was set for the
First World Health Assembly to meet on June 24, 1948.
For all practical purposes, and despite this dilatoriness
of governments, however, Who had existed since 1946.
The United Nations had inherited the functions of the
League of Nations, including Epidnations,
the epidemiological control. An inter¬
national Health Conference had been
held and the need for Who had been
wholeheartedly endorsed. An Interim Com-
Cont'd
on
page 28
26

The Unesco Courier. May 1958
PATIENT FROM A
COUNTRY OF
JAGGED PEAKS
A Moslem priest, or Mullah, was troubled by a cough and
fevers, and decided to travel the 200 miles from his home
In the solitude of the Hindu Kush mountains, a gigantic
"cactus hedge" of jagged peaks, in northern Afghanistan, to
the Government's Tuberculosis Control and Training Centre
in the capital, Kabul, for advice and treatment. This centre,
which also serves to train health personnel, was started in
I9S3 with the aid of WHO. Left, arriving at the centre,
the Mullah waits for his examination card to be filled in.
Below, a miniature X-ray is taken of his lungs. It has been
estimated that there are some five million active cases of
tuberculosis in Asia. The disease is treacherous, highly
communicable and hard to cure. Even so, the outlook is
today more promising, and if it does not worsen, medical
authorities believe that this disease can be brought far down
the list of Important enemies within the next 25 years.
WHO photos by Marc Riboud
27

SCOTLAND YARD OF EPIDEMICS
(Continued)
mission had been set up and with money advanced by
the United Nations and funds from Unrra (United Nations
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration), it had begun
operations, manning the defence lines of health in a.
world ravaged by war and menaced by pestilences which
are the campfollowers of wars. , ,
Epidnations, which had acted so swiftly and thoroughly
when cholera appeared in Egypt, was itself the product
of the diseases which ran amök after the first World War.
Then, in Eastern Europe, there were at least twelve and
a half million cases of typhus, spread by the lice infesting
broken armies and wandering refugees. To prevent its
spread westwards a "'Cordon Sanitaire" a health fron¬
tier was established from the Baltic to the Black Sea. To
assist the control, epidemiological centres were established
by the League of Nations in _ Moscow and Warsaw, in
January 1922. The collection and dissemination of infor¬
mation by those centres were so effective that the system
was extended to the whole world in 1923.
Pestilences have no politics
Since then, despite political upheavals and total war,
the epidemiological services have continued without
interruption: pestilences have no politics and even
belligerents can recognize a common enemy. In 1948, the
World Health Organization improved and extended the
system and speeded up the exchange of information. Its
radio network, based on Geneva, was expanded to cover
the whole world a necessary measure when carriers of
disease can travel with the speed of the fastest aeroplane.
A typhus louse or a plague flea brushed off the rags of a
beggar in an Eastern bazaar can be in Tokio or Oslo, New
York, Moscow or Sydney, within a few hours.
Today, a daily epidemiological bulletin is broadcast on
eight wavelengths from the transmitters at Geneva-
Prangins. The information is relayed by stations through¬
out the world. Public health authorities, seaport and air¬
port medical services and ships at sea, monitor those
broadcasts as a fixed routine. The main concern is still
with the quarantinable diseases smallpox, cholera,
typhus, plague, yellow fever and relapsing feverbut
information is also given about other diseases, like the
sudden emergence of Asian influenza in 1957.
With such information, the authorities can apply qua¬
rantine or medical inspection measures immediately to
any ships or aircraft coming from danger areas or suspect¬
ed of having cases on board. They can also relax those
measures immediately the danger has passed just as
important, in these days when people travel fast about
their business, and when keeping a ship idle in quarantine
costs a fortune each day. By common consent of all
governments, this network of defences has been spread
around the world. As long as such diseases persist
anywhere such constant vigilance is necessary. The world
is not yet rid of them.
Nevertheless progress has been made. While smallpox
infection is still widespread in many areas of Africa, Asia
and South America, the other quarantinable diseases are
entrenched in "'plague spots". But is was possible to say
in 1958 that, during the past 10. years, not one case of
quarantinable diseases except for smallpoxhas been
brought into a country from abroad by ship or plane, and
given rise to secondary cases.
R. C.
28

