THE LABYRINTH
OF
MODERN DRUGS
On May 19, 1950, the Third World Health Assembly
formally approved the publication of the Pharma¬
copoeia Internationalis, the first volume of which
was ready for the printer.
Nobody paid much attention. It will not be found in
the headlines of the day and historians will not consult
that volume to find, on page 11, acidum acetylsalicylicum
as the cure for the political headaches of that moment.
Nevertheless it was topical and it was historic.
Doctors, who knew, sensed the urgency. Medical science
was advancing rapidly and pharmacologists were moving
even faster than the doctors themselves. Patients,
encouraged by newspaper discussion of "miracle drugs"
sulfa compounds, like sulfathiazolum; antibiotics, like
penicillin; and hormones, like cortisone were expecting
"White Magic" from the practitioners.
Here was a drastic new departure. Every culture,
throughout history and from prehistory, has had its
traditional drugs. Many countries have had their phar¬
macopoeia, assemblages and assays of drugs. Four thou¬
sand years ago, the Chinese produced the Neiching, the
Canons of Medicine. The Ancient Hindus, the Babylo¬
nians, the Egyptians, the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans,
the Arabs, the American Indians and the apothecaries of
medieval Europe, had contributed their herbáis and
métairies. By observation and experience, they had mea¬
sured their values and dispensed their virtues.
In the first half of this century, the advance in
knowledge of the behaviour of germs within the body
made possible vaccines, sera and antitoxins, to help the
human system to repel infections. Understanding of the
endocrine glands had produced biological extracts, like
insulin for diabetes. The discovery of vitamins had
placed a new range of substances at the disposal of the
doctors. Ehrlich had discovered that certain dyestuffs
had an affinity for specific organisms and his salvarsan
against syphilis began a new era in chemotherapy drugs
could be "tailormade" in the laboratories.
The big breakaway, began around 1935, when the
discovery of the sulfa drugs underlined ' Ehrlich's
principle that specific germs could be attacked
within the body, enabling doctors to treat causes instead
of just relieving symptoms. Then came penicillin and
other antibiotics again drugs to attack specific causes.
When the Second World War finished, medical science
and the chemists had produced an armoury of new phar¬
maceutical weapons. This new-found mastery over man's
invisible enemies was a gratifying achievement, but the
multiplication and world-wide use of the new drugs
involved hazards. They replaced traditional drugs, the
production and use of which had the safeguards of long
experience.
They were adopted and manufactured in many different
countries, and standards and assays varied. They were
placed in the hands of doctors and pharmacists who had
to accept them at their face-value.
That was why an International Pharmacopoeia became
essential. Many attempts had been made during the
preceding century to produce such a work. Limited
agreements had been reached about certain potent drugs
and methods of assay and dispensing, but there was

The Unesco Courier. May 1958
CODEX
MEDIC AM ENTARIUS.
S F. U
PHARMACOPPA
PARISIENS1S.
EX KANDATO FACULTATIS klEDICINyC
I^iifuiilu in luccm ..lui,
M.JOANNE-BAPTISTA-THOMA
M ART 1 NEN Í, Dtuvt.
Editio juilior A eincndjrior.
P A R 1 s 1 1 S,
Apud GUILLELMUM CAVELIER, Pitrtm.vU
Ucobzî , fub infigne Lilii AurcL
M. DCC XLV1II.
CVM VlIVll&CIO R&Clt.
WHO photos
ROW UPON ROW of jars, each Inscribed with the Latin name of Its contents, still give some chemists' shops (centre) the traditional appearance
of the old apothecaries' establishments. But there is as great a difference between the skill and knowledge required by the modern druggist and
that of his predecessors as there Is between the International Pharmacopoeia recently published by the World Health Organization (photo, left-
French edition cover) and the two centuries' old volume Codex Medicamentarius seu Pharmacopoeia (right) which came out In Paris In 1768.
nothing comprehensive. True, excellent national phar¬
macopoeias were available but there were variations in
national specifications and, in a world of fast travel, a
patient's prescription could mean many things in different
countries, and drugs acceptable in one. country would be
rejected by another. Nomenclature varied and proprie¬
tary names added to the confusion.
The World Health Organization ventured into this dif¬
ficult field. Apart from national susceptibilities,
pharmaceuticals had grown into a vast industry and
firms were naturally suspicious and sensitive about inter¬
vention which might impugn their products or restrict
their freedom of action. Even in laboratory terms, the
assaying, checking, counter-checking and defining of basic
substances and the application of standards with respect
to the safety, purity and potency of biological, pharma¬
ceutical and similar products was a major undertaking.
What was made abundantly clear from the outset was
that Who had neither the power nor the intention to
impose this pharmacopoeia. It was designed to be a
basic document, the recommendations of which govern¬
ments, or the national pharmacopoeia commissions, could
either adopt, or reject.
The first volume included a greater proportion of tradi¬
tional drugs than of new drugs; the second included more
new drugs than traditional ones; and the supplement to
both dealt preponderantly with innovations. Modern
drugs wax and wane in medical popularity. A new
discovery, or a fresh variant, will prove more effective, or
safer, and will displace predecessors.
Another cause of uncertainty and confusion was the use
of proprietary names, in addition to the introduction of
trade names. It was soon apparent that international
usage must find non-proprietary names which could have
universal validity, and now the object is to provide a
proposed non-proprietary name in advance. Again, this
has no legal sanction. Yet the practice works smoothly
through the goodwill of governments, of pharmacologists
and of manufacturing concerns. The doubts and suspi¬
cions of ten years ago have long since disappeared. Over
40 leading pharmacologists in various parts of the world
have placed themselves and their laboratories freely at
the disposal of Who, and the misgivings of commercial
concerns have given place to full co-operation.
In the public interest, it is well that this is so. A Who
Study Group of Experts, meeting in December 1956,
pointed out: "It has been estimated that several hundreds
of new medicinal substances are being introduced into the
materia medica every year. This large number of new
substances presents a certain hazard to public health,
especially considering the relatively short time between
the production of a new substance and its use. Twenty
years ago, this interval may have been five to ten years.
Today it may be as short as six months."
As a further safeguard, Who arranged, in May 1957, for
a chemical reference centre to be established in Stockholm.
There, authentic chemical substances are held by the
Apotekarsocieteten ready for distribution to governments
and manufacturers for comparative assays.
That was one more addition to the Who international
reference centres, which already dealt with biological
standards, blood-groups, salmonella, shigella, escherichia,
poliomyelitis and influenza viruses. And these world
centres are only part of the network of co-operating
laboratories which has grown up. There exist six regional
laboratories for polio inquiries, six stations for rabies
research and 57 centres in 46 countries for the constant
checks on influenza.
By 1957, with the completion of the Supplement to the
two volumes of the first edition of the International
Pharmacopoeia, the World Health Organization had
to consider a new approach to the problem of multiplying
drugs. Printed volumes take time to prepare, especially
when every detail has to be checked and checked again by
references to forty experts in all parts of the world. As
the 1956 Study Group pointed out, in certain cases,
by the time of publication, the actual use of a preparation
may be already . diminishing or may have practically
disappeared.
To meet this situation, it was proposed that the Organi¬
zation should compile information sheets on new products
which, on the best advice available, would provide accurate
appraisals of new preparations and methods of assay for
the use of doctors and pharmacists everywhere.
All this is possible only because of the earnest goodwill
which experts everywhere have shown towards the Orga¬
nization. It now maintains close and active collaboration
with nearly 1,800 scientific institutions and laboratories,
all over the world. The great majority of these work
voluntarily, solely in the interests of scientific progress
and for the benefit of mankind. In the same spirit, more
than a thousand scientists are on call for service on the
expert advisory panels.
Thus, in the first ten years of its existence, the World
Health Organization has established mutual confidence
among those engaged in this work and, by providing
services, can command disinterested service.
R. C.
29
