ROBERT OWEN: VISIONARY
OF A NEW SOCIETY
by Peter Michaels
ÇÇ~T do not think that Napoleon was more untiring in his
_£_ perseverance, or that Swedenborg had a more im¬
plicit confidence in himself; and to this was joined
a temperament so sanguine that he was unable no matter
what rebuffs he met with unable, even as an octo¬
genarian, to conceive the possibility of ultimate failure."
So runs a tribute by Robert Dale Owen, U.S. Congress¬
man and later American ambassador to Naples, to his
famous father, Robert Owen, Who died a century ago.
It is one of many pronounced by his contemporaries on
the character of a self-made Welsh boy Who rose to a
commanding position in industry before he Was 25, became
perhaps the most enlightened employer of his day, a
pioneer in education, the father of trade unionism and the
co-operative movement, who founded a Utopian socialist
community in Indiana and ended as a spiritualist preach¬
ing the moral re-generation of mankind.
As the son of a tradesman in the Welsh marketing
village of Newtown, Robert Owen (1771-1858), received
little formal education. He left school at the age of nine
and was apprenticed to drapers in London and Manches¬
ter Where, at 18 and on borrowed money, he associated
himself with a mechanic to produce textile machinery in
a small way. Soon he became the manager of a firm of
yarn-makers but, baulked of the eventual prospect of
partnership in the firm, left to establish a business of his
own, Which prospered and soon gained a wide reputation.
In 1799, Owen bought the New Lanark mills in Scotland
from David Dale, whose daughter he married, and laun¬
ched himself on a spectacular career which brought him
international fame as a humanitarian and a social re¬
former decades ahead of his time.
Children's 1 3-hour working day
New Lanark was a typical village of the early industrial
era, built around the factory upon which depended
the livelihood of all its 2,500 inhabitants, directly or
indirectly. Conditions were deplorable: the working
day, even for children, was 13 hours long or more, there
were few educational facilities, much drunkenness,
insanitary housing, and wages were practically at starva¬
tion level.
Against the vigorous opposition of some of his partners,
Whom he was forced to change frequently until he ended
up in 1813 in association (with William Allen, the Quaker
philanthropist, and Jeremy Bentham, the leader of the
Utilitarian school of philosophy, Owen set about to make
it into a model community. He encouraged order,
cleanliness and sobriety and cut down working hours,
but his most remarkable venture was the so-called
Institute for the Formation of Character, a centre
containing schools, communal halls and a "play-ground"
or kindergarten.
in 1816, the Institute was run according to
principles set out by Owen in his book New View of Society
or Essays on the Principle of Formation of Human
character (1813) where he argued that man's character
is an inevitable product of his environment. "Any general
character, from the best to the worse, from the most
ignorant to the most enlightened, may be given to any
community, even to the world at large, by the application
of the proper means; which means are to a great extent
at the command and under the control of those who have
influence on the affairs of men", Owen wrote, and
proceeded to put his ideas into practice.
The children of New Lanark were put to school between
the ages of one and ten or twelve. They were not set
to learning passages of books by heart, which was the
conventional method of instruction then, but were taught
by means of lectures and what today we call teaching
aids (maps, charts, pictures, field excursions and so on,)
on the principle that education should be both spont¬
aneous and enjoyable.
Dancing & drilling to pipe-bands
There were neither rewards nor punishments and if
the curriculum was a little deficient in such subjects
as literature and the arts, of which Owen himself
knew little, it included physical exercise for both boys and
girls who danced and were drilled military fashion, to
the accompaniment of pipe-bands. In the kindergarten,
which was especially admired, toddlers were given no
toys to play with but were expected to create their own
diversions. There was a rule that they must never be
chastised or treated unkindly in any way.
The New Lanark schools created a considerable stir and
became a tourist attraction for visitors to Great Britain.
Over 20,000 people called to see them in 10 years, including
the Grand Duke Nicholas, son of the czar of Russia, who
was so impressed that he offered to take Owen and up to
two million of Britain's surplus population and establish
them on sufficient land in Russia to continue experi¬
mentation on a larger scale. Others criticized the schools
for the lack of religious instruction and were scandalized
by the freedom the children enjoyed. But in the opinion
of a modern writer, "one of Owen's wisest insights into
the nature of education was his grasp of the truth that
education has to do with the whole of life and the whole
of a human being, and not only with intellectual
processes".
By 1815, Owen, turned his attention to national affairs.
"Every step of my experience forced me more and more
strongly to feel the necessity of preparing governments
and people through a persevering system of new instruc¬
tion, to fit both for the change which I had
in view." Britain was at that moment under¬
going a severe depression following the end
of the Napoleonic wars, and Owen was cal¬
led upon to suggest remedies for widespread
Cont'd
on
next page
31

ROBERT OWEN
(Continued)
Advocate of a Universal Education
distress and unemployment. He proposed the setting-up of
co-operative villages which would be largely self-support¬
ing and his 1817 report to the House of Commons on the
Poor Law is widely considered to contain his first embryo¬
nic socialist ideas, amplified in 1821 in his report to the
County of Lanark. At the same time, Owen proposed a
factory bill which was to regulate hours and conditions of
work. It was finally passed as Peel's Act in 1819, in a
much watered-down form disowned by its originator.
Disappointed by his lack of success in England,
Owen left for the United States in 1825 to found the
Utopian settlement of New Harmony in the wilds of
Indiana. The experiment collapsed due largely to a lack
of realistic foresight strange in a man of proven practical
capacity, and cost Owen some four-fifths of his consid¬
erable fortune. He then returned to England only to
discover that, during his absence, a number of trade
unions and co-operative societies had sprung up, more or
less directly inspired by the ideas he had publicized after
1817. Though he had had little hand in their actual
organization, these bodies looked to Owen as their natural
leader and he found himself at the head of a movement
which seemed to be gathering force. When the parlia¬
mentary reform bill of 1832 proved to bring little relief to
workers, Owen thought it opportune to found the Grand
National Consolidated Trade Union (1834), an ambitious
venture intended to serve as a rallying-point for a nation¬
wide labour movement but which turned out to be
premature and unwieldy and soon sank into oblivion.
From sordid present to radiant future
By 1836 and with the publication of the Book of the
New Moral World, Owen embarked upon his purely
cultural campaign for the reform of society which
was to be the last major phase of his career and also the
least effective. As an attempt to apply an essentially
home-spun philosophy to the complex business of
changing the human character by changing environment,
it was impeccably high-minded but hazy. For Owen
was neither an original nor a particularly profound
thinker. His writings are repetitive and, it must be
admitted, often tedious: they reveal a mind much
impressed by a few simple, basic ideas Which never really
blossomed into a coherent system, nor changed greatly
as Owen's experience widened.
Robert Dale Owen shrewdly put his finger on some of
his father's most serious intellectual shortcomings: "His
specific plans, as a Social Reformer, proved, on the whole
and for the time, a failure; and this, for lack of cultivated
judgment and critical research, and of accurate know¬
ledge touching what men had thought and done before
his time; also because he strangely overrated human
progress; but more especially, perhaps, because, until late
in life, he ignored the spiritual element in man as the
great lever of civilized advancement".
The early Utilitarian philosophers, Jeremy Bentham,
James Mill and Francis Place, were those Who most
directly influenced Owen. He rejected religion and
wished to replace it by What, in company with many other
18th and 19th century thinkers, he hoped would turn out
to be the universal appeal of reason. He had great faith
in the power of persuasion and believed that people
could be brought to see the error of their ways by
argument and by example. The more subtle laws of
32
economics or psychology escaped him and he saw little
difficulty in expanding a limited experiment, such as the
one at New Lanark, to a national or even a world-wide
scale.
At the same time, and no doubt under the spell of his
own successes -and the rapidly changing nature of the
evolving industrial age in which he lived, Owen expected
to make the most far-reaching innovations in hardly
more than a generation. To him, very little really stood
between a sordid present and a radiant future, and what
little there was he proposed to sweep away, if not single-
handed then with the help of an ever-swelling number
of devoted disciples.
Monument to inspired common-sense
Yet when all wise and critical hindsight is done, Owen's
pioneering in education remains a monument to
inspired common-sense mixed with a much less
common and humble love of his kind, not collectively and
in the abstract but individually and in day-to-day contact
'with those around him, especially With children. After
a short trial, he discarded for ever the "monitorial"
system, very popular in his time and evolved by Dr.
Andrew Bell and Joseph Lancaster, Which was a
solution to the problem of a single teacher having to
deal with a large class and consisted of selecting the
brighter pupils, giving them concentrated lessons to learn
by heart, and then setting them to repeat these lessons
to groups of other pupils.
Owen rightly recognized that this Was mere instruction,
and that education must properly be much broader in
its scope. The same objection also underlies his suspicion
of books Which he regarded as too dry and abstract for
use by young children, though in this respect he was
perhaps led to exaggeration by the poor quality of the
textbooks and school manuals with which he had become
acquainted. By a remarkable instinct, however, Owen
anticipated views now largely accepted as valid by
modern educators, psychologists and social scientists,
particularly in respect to the spontaneous element in
learning. His humanitarianism told him that children
ought to be happy; his rationalism convinced him that,
in order to make for happy adults later and 'or a good
society, education must; be universal and useful knowledge
must be acquired.
A revolutionary ideaenjoy school
Realizing that, in order to reconcile these general
imperatives children must enjoy school and acquire
a taste for the accumulation of knowledge in a form
palatable to them, he reacted sharply from strict discip¬
line and the kind of compulsion which, in his day and for
many decades even after his death, Was still widely judged
to be the only way of getting youngsters through thé
painful process of education. How difficult it was to
implement such ideas in 1816 is shown by the fact that
Owen could find no teachers prepared to instruct in his
schools and therefore himself trained the first two an
unemployed handloom weaver and a village girl. With
this pair, and others, who followed in their footsteps,
Owen achieved what '"might almost be regarded as an
epitome of the progress made in English education during
the following 100 years".
