AN ILLITERATE IN PARIS
In countries where free and compulsory education has been applied for generations, Illiteracy
is no national problem. Yet in all countries, even the most advanced, a small residue
remains of adults who, for one reason or another, have never learned to read or write.
At mid-century, the majority of the countries of northern and western Europe had illiteracy
rates ranging from one to three per cent. However, statistical trends also show that with
each passing decade the number of illiterates In these countries is steadily dropping. Thus,
the latest (1946) survey carried out in France revealed an illiteracy rate of 3.3 % but also
showed that between 1901 and 1946 illiteracy had decreased each ten years by 30 per cent.
Assuming the same rate of progress since 1946 as in the past, illiteracy in France today
could be estimated at not more than two per cent. But what is the position of the few
who have somehow slipped through the network of compulsory education? What does it
mean to be an adult illiterate in a society where life is organized on the assumption that
everybody can read and write? Recently a French journalist decided to find out and finally
managed to discover a middle-aged woman factory worker living at Romainville, a suburb of
Paris, who could neither read nor write. The answers she gives in the interview published
below reveal the poignant drama of an illiterate person living in a modern world capital and
the tragedy of being cut off from the written communication we take so much for granted.
"A
re there any words which you can recognize
even though you cannot read them?"
"'Yes, three words. The names of the two
Underground stations on the line I take every day:
'Lilas' and 'Chatelet' and my maiden name."
"Could you pick them out from a group of other
words?"
"I could recognize them from about a dozen others,
I think."
""What do they look like to you... like drawings?"
"'Yes, like pictures, if you want. 'Lilas' is a tall
word it's almost as tall as it is wide and it's pretty.
The word 'Chatelet' is too long, and it's not so pretty.
When you see it, you know it's not the same as the
word 'Lilas'.-"
"When you tried to learn to read, did it seem diffi¬
cult to you?"
"'You can't imagine what it's like. It's terrible."
"'Can you give me an idea of what you mean
exactly?"
"I don't really know. Maybe because everything is
so... so small. I'm sorry, I'm not very good at explain¬
ing things."
"'It must be quite a difficult thing for you to live in
a city like Paris and to get around from one place to
another without being able to read."
"Oh, if you've got a tongue in your head you can
get anywhere you want."
"How do you manage exactly?"
"Well, I do a lot of asking. And then I use my head.
It's funny how quick you pick up things and remem¬
ber what you see. Much quicker than other people.
It's like a blind person. There are places where you
know where you are. Then, I ask people."
"'Do you have to stop and ask your way often?"
"'Oh, about ten times when I come into Paris from
Romainville on an errand or something. There are
all those Underground station names. They mix you
up. You have to take another train back, ask again...
and then there are the names of the streets, the shop
names and the numbers."
"'The numbers?"
"I can't read them. When I get my pay or go
shopping, I can count the figures in my head, but I
can't read them."
"Don't you ever tell people that you can't read?"
"No, never! I always say that I forgot my glasses."
"But there must be times when you can't avoid it?"
"'Yes, sometimes. When they ask me to sign my
name at the factory or in the Town Hall. But I go red
when I have to say it. If you were in my shoes you'd
know what I mean."
"How do you manage in your job?"
"When I'm being hired, I keep it to myself. And I
always hope to get away with it. It works most of
the time, except when there are time-slips to fill in.
The rest of the time I make believe I can read."
'"Everywhere?"
'"Yes, everywhere. In the factory, in the shops I
look at the labels and the scales and make believe
that I'm reading them. I'm so afraid that people are.
cheating me, too. I'm always suspicious."
"'Does it bother you in your work?"
"'No, I'm a good worker. I've got to be more care¬
ful than the others. I use my head and I'm careful.
I don't have any trouble there."
"'What about your shopping for food and things?"
'"I know all the colours of all the brands I use.
When I want to change a brand I ask one of my
friends to come with me. After that I remember the
colours of the new brand. You've got to have a good
memory if you're like me."
"'What do you do for amusement? Do you like
the cinema?"
"No, I don't. It's too fast and I don't understand
the way they talk. The pictures always start with
a lot of writing. People read letters and you see it
on the screen. Then they look sad or happy and I
don't know why. But I do go to the theatre."
"Why the theatre?"
"You've got time to listen. They tell you every¬
thing they're doing. There's no writing. They talk
slow. I understand better."
'"Any other amusements?"
'"I like to go to the country and I like to watch
sports. You know I'm no more stupid than anybody
else, but when you can't read you're like a child."
"'When certain people talktake the radio for in¬
stance does it bother you in any way?"
"Yes, it does. It's like the pictures. They're always
using words they find in books. I'm not used to hear¬
ing these people and the words they use. Somebody
has to explain it to me all over again so as I under¬
stand.
"'Do you ever forget that you can't read?"
"No, I can't. As soon as I walk out of the house I
think about it all the time. It tires you out and
makes you waste time. You never want people to
notice it... that's what you think about all the time.
You're always afraid."
"Afraid?"
"I can't explain it. I think people must be able to
see it. You can't hide it."
Interview by Marguerite Duras. Reproduced by permission
of France-Observateur, Pons.
13
