Science has the answer
SOME ANIMALS SLEEP ALL WINTER-
HOW DO THEY LIVE WITHOUT EATING?
by Gerald Wendt
The ability to hibernate is a peculiar one, shared by
only a few mammals, and two species of birds. It
involves much more than just a long sleep from the
first cold of the autumn to the first warmth of spring.
The animal's body temperature actually falls to within a
few degrees of freezing point. Yet the heart continues to
pump blood through the arteries and veins, although the
human heart ceases to function when it is chilled. The
animal is nourished by its body fats even at a temperature
such that the fats are hard and immobile. The unusual
physiology of the true hibernators is under study at Har¬
vard University (U.S.A.) by Dr. Charles F. Lyman.
His experiments were made with the golden hamster a
species of rodent. Other animals that go into this
profound state of depressed existence for the winter are
the hedgehog, marmot, woodchuck, the dormouse, the
European and. the Arctic ground squirrel, a few varieties
of bats and, among birds, the hummingbird and the whip-
poorwill.
Eight heart beats per minute
The hamster enters this state at any time of the year
when he is kept in a room at 41 "F. His own body
temperature goes down to about a degree above the
room temperature, his heart beat is reduced to eight or
nine per minute, he takes less than 10 breaths per minute,
his blood pressure is extremely low and his rate of meta¬
bolism (using nourishment to maintain life) drops to 3%
or even 1% of normal. He is, of course, unconscious and
in a state of extreme torpor. But if the temperature of
the room drops below freezing point his metabolism in¬
creases three or fourfold so that he manages to keep his
body temperature at 37.4°F.
At this low temperature the hamster's nerves still
function although the nerves of a non-hibernating ani¬
mal, such as the rat, are insensitive and useless when
they are cooled below 50°F. Thus the little animal can be
wakened by prodding him with a finger or a stick of wood.
But it takes about three hours for him to awaken fully.
After about an hour he takes about 35 breaths per minute
and his body temperature has gone up to 50°F. Within
two hours he breathes over 100 times a minute, his pulse
is up to 550 beats per minute and his body temperature is
86°F. At this point he begins to try to stand but he can¬
not yet control his muscles. After two and a half to three
hours he is at last at a normal temperature of 98°F. and
is normal in behaviour.
Very fat before hibernating
By testing the cortex of the animal's brain, Dr. Lyman
showed that its activity ceases When its temperature
drops below 68°F, although its sensory nerves are
alert far below that point. This explains why muscular
control is lost early in the process of falling asleep and
returns only in the last stages of awakening. Another
mystery in hibernation is the ability of the hamster to
change his solid body fats into other forms that are semi-
liquid, like butter, when the body temperature is near
freezing point. Without this ability hibernating animals
would not be able to maintain themselves on their body
fat in place of food. Many of them beconie very fat before
they go to sleep. The hamster does not, but wakes several
26
times during the winter in order to eat from the stores
accumulated in the burrow with the approach of winter.
More and more use is being made in the kitchen of
soapless determents. Why do these detergents wash
cleaner than soap?
Instead of the old-fashioned bar of soap and the scrubb¬
ing board, modern housewives now use soap powders
(still based, as for centuries, on chemically-treated ani¬
mal fats or vegetable oils), but more frequently they use
detergents.
Let us be quite clear, however, when speaking of deter¬
gents, that soap itself is a detergent. That is, it removes
dirtwhich is what "detergence" means. Strictly speak¬
ing, therefore, these new chemicals should be called
"soapless detergents". They were made by nature millions
of years ago, and come from mineral oil, deep in the heart
of the earth. They are produced during the distillation of
petrol or gasoline. Their commercial use has developed
since the Second World War, and their development was
encouraged by the shortage of fats and oils during and
immediately after the War. But they are not just sub¬
stitutes for soap. They have scientific values in their own
right. They make water wetter.
Secret of detergents water
Water, in order to dissolve or remove dirt, has got to
permeate it. It has got to wet it. But oil and
grease repel water that is why a sheep's fatty
fleece acts as a waterproof. And that is why water runs
off a duck's oily back. If you were unkind enough to
wash a sheep or a duck with chemical detergents, the
sheep's fleece would no longer waterproof and the duck
would sink because its feathers would become waterlogged.
Now why does this happen? To understand the action
of detergents you have to know something about what is
scientifically called "surface tension". To make "surface
tension" very simple, one might think of a globule of oil
or a blob of grease as a tiny balloon. Just as the balloon
has a thin rubber coating, so the oil or grease has an
invisible skin which prevents the water from penetrating.
What the detergent does by its chemical action is to
destroy that skin remove the surface tension so that
the water, being now wetter, can dissolve the oil or grease.
So a greasy plate, or an oily cloth, is properly cleaned by
a detergent.
This, of course, has very important uses in industry as
well as in the home, and there are some medical scientists
who hope that the detergent action may even be of some
value within the human body. One of the things which
cause diseases of the arteries and the heart is the clogg¬
ing of the blood vessels with fat like the furring of a
waste pipe with grease and the doctors are looking for a
detergent which, carried by the blood stream, would
prevent this clogging of the blood vessels. But they
know they have to be very careful. Mineral chemicals of
this kind are always liable to have injurious effects on the
body. That is why it is advisable to wear rubber gloves
when washing with detergents in the kitchen sink or in
the washing machine.
