) Prof. Vitale Valvassori, Milan
AIR PHOTOS PIERCE
NATURE'S CURTAIN
Dead for nearly two thousand years,
swallowed up in the swamplands of the Po
Delta, the once-flourishing port and city of
Spina has now been brought to light by the
patient questing of scientists and archaeolo¬
gists, and in particular through excavations
directed since 1953 by Professor Nereo
Alfieri. Mobilized with other instruments
and techniques in the search for the hidden
city was the all-seeing eye of the aerial
camera. Air-photography revealed Roman
remains (above) in the area. Light-coloured
strips forming geometrical patterns mark
emplacements of walls where little or no
vegetation grew. Long diagonal strip, to
right of shadow cast by photographic plane, is
a modern canal. Spina itself (right) has both
modern drainage canals (light-coloured) and
ancient ones (darker-coloured from more
luxuriant vegetation growing in the fertile
soil). Light-coloured rectangles bisected by
the old canals mark the ancient "city-
blocks" of the Etruscan port. Top of opposite
page, treasure trove of objects found in
Spina's burial grounds. Each tomb has
something to tell of a people whose culture,
art and customs have in turn astonished the
most cultured nations of every epoch.
10

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
© Angelo Frontoni,
by Angelo Frontoni
© 1958. Reproduction prohibited
ne of the strangest and most
I puzzling stories of all the
peoples of the Ancient World is
that of the Etruscans. For centuries scholars and
archaeologists have tried in vain to clear up the mystery
surrounding this "riddle race" which, after rising to
prosperity and power on the Italian peninsula, vanished
completely from the stage of history, leaving unsolved
many problems concerning its origin, civilization and
language and its incomparable art.
The history of the Etruscans is like a book which has
been written and then erased." A brilliant and industrious
people, they left evidence of an advanced and flourishing
civilization in many areas of Italy between the plains of
the River Po and the Campagna, dating from before the
rise of, Rome to the early days of the Roman Republic.
Yet our. knowledge of them is still no more than
fragmentary.
Most historians think that the Etruscans originally
came from the East (from Lydia the ancient name for a
district on the West coast of Asia Minor). According to
Varro, the Roman author and antiquarian of the 1st
century B.C., the Etruscans arrived in Italy in the 11th
century B.C., but how they did so is not definitely known.
Those who favour, the theory of their Eastern origin point
to the fact that the oldest of the artistic remains they left
in Italy are in the Oriental style while those from their
middle period show a Greek influence.
The Etruscans, who called themselves Raseni, were
known to the Greeks as Tyrrhenoi (Tyrrhenians) . At first
they were ruled by kings (lars) but they later formed
three great confederations, each governed by a lucumon.
Their principal cities were Arezzo, Bolsena, Cerveteri,
Chiusi, Cortona, Perugia, Roselle, Tarquinia, Veio, Vetulo-
nia and Volterra. When they made their appearance in
Tuscany in the 8th century B.C., the Etruscans already
possessed a rich culture, a fully-developed and expressive
language, and their own philosophy and religion. Their
decline began in the 5th century B.C.; they were defeated
in a great sea battle by the Syracusans in 474 B.C., the Po
Confederation was occupied by the Gauls and the
Campagnan by the Samnites. The battle of the
Valdimonian Lake (309 B.C.) finally extinguished Etruscan
independence.
Since then, the task of tracing their origins, both
geographical and cultural, has been a challenge to men
of science and letters. From early times stories have been
told of a seaport named Spina once the metropolis
of art and culture in the ancient Etruscan Empire. Down
the centuries the greatest of scholars and archaeologists
have searched unsuccessfully for the site of
this city somewhere in the Po Delta on the
Adriatic. Recorded in the literature of Clas¬
sical Greece are references to Spina which
is pictured as a powerful and prosperous
Adriatic port in the days of the old empire
Cont'd
next page
I I

SPINA (Continued)
SUNK WITHOUT TRACE
BENEATH A LAGOON
For centuries archaeologists and scholars searched
vainly for the lost city of Spina. In 1956 it was
finally located some three miles to the West of
Comacchio in the Province of Ferrara. In pre-
Roman times part of the land here was above the
level of the Comacchio Lagoon. Later it subsided,
taking with it the remains of the Etruscan city.
and recognized as a significant factor in the Etruscan
influence on Greek art.
Finally, in 1922, searches in the Po region revealed the
existence of a Graeco-Etruscan burial-ground along the
course of the Trebba in the Comacchio lagoon. This in
Itself was a discovery of immense value and it at once
raised hopes that the remains of Spina might also be
unearthed. Excavations in the Trebba Valley continued
until 1935, but although 1,250 tombs were uncovered, no
trace was found of the elusive city. Then, partly because
of the difficulties of working in this muddy, swampy
terrain, operations were halted.
Following the reclamation of the Po region work began
again in 1953 under the direction of the Italian
archaeologist, Professor Nereo Alfieri. Convinced that
Spina had actually existed, he made the search for the
hidden city his life's work. Methodically he followed the
course of the Trebba and then searched in the adjacent
Pega Valley Where he eventually came across another
Etruscan cemetery. This was located on the far side of
a silted-up waterway which had once probably been the
branch of a river perhaps Spina's actual harbour.
This second discovery encouraged Professor Alfieri to
extend his operations around both cemeteries, for the
ancient peoples always fixed their burial-grounds within
sight of their dwellings. . Thus, when the cemeteries were
found to date from the same period the arrangement of
the tombs, the funeral rites and the decorations were
identical in both places the search for the city itself was
pursued with growing optimism.
The discovery of the Pega Valley burial-ground had been
a rich recompense for Professor Alfieri's efforts. But his
ultimate goal was to find the dead city of Spina soothe
search continued.
This tenacity of purpose was rewarded in 1956 when
workers uncovered the first traces of a prize which had
eluded searchers for 2,000 years one of Spina's palafittes
(dwellings built on piles). Professor Alfieri was thus able
to determine the site of the lost city, of which practically
nothing was known, except through casual references to
it by Pliny and Strabo, and whose very existence had so
often been denied. He was also able to fix the age of
this first palafitte (6th century B.C. or somewhat earlier)
from a vase found inside it of unmistakably 6th century
B.C. origin. To uncover the whole of this fabulous city
will take at least twenty years.
As an Adriatic port on the Po delta, Spina was a gateway
to the whole of the then known world. To its quays came
amber, brought down by river from the Baltic lands; it
received and transhipped to the Orient the products of
the flourishing Etruscan metal industry while in return
it received cargoes of Attic pottery, cloth, Oriental
products of all kinds, rare woods from Egypt, perfumes,
rich Phoenician textiles and oil from Palestine. Spina
was a great port and warehouse, the "Genoa" or "Mar¬
seilles" of an increasingly prosperous and flourishing
empire, and a door through which passed the Greek
influence on Etruscan art and culture. Relations between
these two peoples were close and friendly: Greek artistic
influence is manifest in the objects found in Spina's
burial-grounds just as Etruscan Influence on the Greeks
is visible in the examples of pure Etruscan art discovered
in Greek cities in Southern Italy and in Greece itself.
The port of Spina was originally only about two
miles from the sea and was reached by a navigable
channel formed by an arm of the Po, known as the Spineto
or Spino. But the forward advance of the shoreline, by a
process of sanding and silting up, progessively increased
the distance between city and sea. In the 4th century
B.C. they were already 20 stadia apart (three and a half
km., or nearly two and a quarter miles,
working on the Attic stadium of 177.5
metres) and by the Augustan Age (roughly
the start of the Christian era) the village
built over the ruins of Spina was 90 stadia
(16 km. or 10 miles) inland. Pliny the

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
PUMPING OUT TOMB 67
Excavating the tombs in Spina's burial-
grounds has been a difficult business because
of the water-logged state of the soil in this
recently drained swampland. Excavating
teams now work inside open metal caissons
which are sunk around the tombs and then
drained by constantly working pumps (photo,
opposite page). Above, in "Tomb 67" a
broken vase is recovered from its shroud
of mud. The Ancients believed that after
death the soul travelled far through the
underworld and they therefore provided
their departed with all they would need on
the journey. Left, restoration work on
objects found in the tombs. From finds
at Spina, the National Museum at Ferrara
has assembled the most comprehensive
existing collection of Attic black-and-red
pottery from the 6th to the 5th century B.C.
13

SPINA (Continued)
DRINKING GOBLET (Cratère) of a style known as "Upper Adriatic"
and dating from the first half of the 4th century B.C. Like all objects
shown on these pages and on pages 16 and 17, it was found at Spina.
'MODERN ART' some 2,400 years old. The form of this wine vessel
(Oinochoe) and the portrait decorating it might easily be the work of a
modern ceramic artist, not one who lived nearly twenty-five centuries ago.
DUCK-SHAPED FLASK (ASKOS) DATING FROM THE 4TH CENTURY B.C. WINGED FEMALE FIGURE DECORATING IT IS
14
"LASA"
© Angelo Frontoni.
AN ETRUSCAN DIVINITY.

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
) Angelo Frontoni
BRONZE DANCER HOLDING CASTANETS SURMOUNTS THIS 5TH CENTURY B.C. ETRUSCAN CANDELABRUM. ETRURIA BOASTED A THRIVING METAL INDUSTRY.
ANIMAL-SHAPED FLASKS (ASKOI), USED TO STORE PRECIOUS BALMS AND OINTMENTS. ARE EXAMPLES OF THE POTTER'S ART DATING FROM THE 4TH CENTURY B.C.
IS

SPINA (Continued from page I 2)
FREED FROM A SHROUD OF MUD
Elder, who lived four centuries after Spina's greatest
prosperity, had provided a clue to the location of
the vanished city when he recorded that the most
southerly channel of the delta, the Euridano (Vatrenus),
had also once been known as the "Spinetice".
The discovery of Spina is one of the great triumphs of
modern archaeology. It has, for example, provided
confirmation for theories which were largely speculative.
Moreover, the discoveries have dealt a serious blow to the
views of certain archaeologists who declared that the
reason why no Etruscan temples or palaces had been
found was that they were built of wood and terracotta
and their carvings executed in sandstone all of these
being materials unlikely to resist the ravages of time.
The Etruscans were, in fact, great builders (as proved by
the ruins of their massive stone constructions) and they
were the first people in Italy to use the arch, the vault
and the dome.
. The story of Alfieri's search for and discovery of Spina
is one of a never-ending struggle against two stubborn
elements of nature: earth and water. Over the years the
waters had drowned the city and silt had buried it;
nature, with man's help, had also advanced the delta
several miles towards the sea. But as time goes on and
men dig away Spina's muddy shroud, the secrets hidden
In the city for more than 2,000 years will gradually be
revealed. Meanwhile the excavation of its graves enables
us to picture its people and to understand their mode of
life, for each new tomb discovered has something to tell
us of a people whose culture, art and customs have
astonished the most cultured nations of every age.
Daily life is mirrored
in every ancient tomb
Daily life is mirrored in the darkness of the graves
because of the Ancients' belief that death entailed a
long journey by the soul through the underworld.
Thus, even the tomb of a poor man contains some modest
furnishing for the journey in the other world, be it no
more than a bowl for food and drink. Those of the
wealthy are rich with precious urns, offerings and means
of distraction such as dice. In others tools and working
implements reveal the professions or trades the dead had
followed in their lifetimes. There are tombs of great
ladies with trinkets of amber and ivory, mirrors, and vases
of delicate colour and design; children's tombs full of gifts
and toys, including clay dolls with jointed arms and legs.
Through all these relics of the dead we can almost
picture Spina as it once existed alongside its channel to
the sea, its ships, their sails filling to the wind, outward
bound with rare and precious cargoes for the fabulous
city-ports of the East, for Venetia, Umbria, Phoenicia and
Greece. Here are objects evoking the glorious days of
the empire, when Etruria was mistress of the seas, with
a trade so rich that some of its profits were used to build
á splendid treasure-house at the shrine of Delphi in
Greece. Then Spina was abandoned by its citizens* in
their headlong flight from the Gallic invaders, and when
our own era began, Spina's glories had perished; there
remained only a humble village.
Perhaps the secret of the people who gave so much
remarkable art and culture to the ancient -world is waiting
to be discovered in Spina. Many riddles indeed await
solution. For example, small progress has been made in
interpreting the Etruscan language, little of which came
down to us through Greek or Roman writers. Though an
abundance of funerary inscriptions exists (some 800), it
has only been possible to understand the meaning of a
few words. After a great effort, the alphabet written
from right to left, and derived, like all the Italic alphabets,
from the Greek was reconstructed, but we know nothing
more of this language that could tell us about the people
and its civilization so obviously advanced, yet so shrouded
in mystery. Already though, the burial grounds of Spina
have opened our eyes to a vision of art and culture which
have survived the years and even the efforts of man and
nature to efface them from history.
16
ATHLETIC FIGURE, crowning a bronze
candelabrum, carries a discus in the left hand
a work by a 5th century B.C. craftsman.

