ï
MODEL FOR A
PARIS MODEL
Photo left, shows part of a preparatory model
which was used by the designers and cons¬
tructors of the Lilliput Paris which is to tour
the world. A careful study of perspective
was made so that visitors will get a truly
realistic impression of the Paris panorama.
To obtain this effect, buildings have been
given different scales according to their
distance from viewers. Monuments in the
front of the model, such as the Eiffel Tower,
the Institut de France, and the Bastille Column
(not seen here) are reduced to l/IOO of
their true size. Those in the middle distance,
are 1/250 life-size and the Church of the
Sacred Heart, crowning the hilltop of Mont¬
martre is smallest of all 1/500. Thus the
final impression will be comparable to the
photograph (above right) taken with tele-
photo camera from Mount-Valérien, some
six miles to the west of Montmartre.
18

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
LILLIPUT PARIS
ON A WORLD TOUR
S.F.O.M., Rueil-Malmaison (taken with tele-photo lens F.2440 mm.)
by Paul Almasy
The city of Paris will soon be off
on a world tour. Its famous
buildings and landmarks will
be packed up in cases and loaded into
railway waggons now being specially
adapted for the job, including one to
house the Eiffel Tower and the Notre
Dame Cathedral.
The Paris which will set off on this
tour early next year is, of course, a
miniature one on which work is now
being completed at Montreuil, a sub¬
urb of the French capital. For the
past year, five model designers and
artists have been working to repro¬
duce a Lilliputian version of the
familiar outlines of the City of Light.
Their finished work is something
of a large size in models for it weighs
about 20 tons and will cost the Paris
Municipal Council and the city's
Photos ©, reproduction prohibited
Chamber of Commerce some $25,000
to produce. So as to be able to repro¬
duce the most famous buildings on a
sufficiently large scale, the designers
have limited their work to the central
Paris area a triangle running north
from the Eiffel Tower towards the
Church of the Sacred Heart on the
hilltop of Montmartre and from there
southeast to the former site of the
Bastille.
The model, built under the direc¬
tion of designer René Poirot from
plans by architect Jean Leblanc, Will
show both the daytime and night¬
time faces of Paris. Lighting has been
installed so that the famous build¬
ings can be illuminated just as they
are in reality.
From the centre of the model will
sprout a steel column, some 12 feet
high. On it will be mounted a large
disk acting as the revolving stage of
a theatre in miniature. The stage will
be divided into 18 scenes depicting a
day in the life of Paris. It begins by
showing the bustling early morning
activity of the Halles, the central
food markets, takes the audience
through the highlights of the Paris
scene, and ends the following morn¬
ing with a ride on the last Metro
train. One scene will show celebra¬
tions of the T4th of July. Four hun¬
dred spectators will be able to see
each of these ten-minute shows.
Sweden will be the first country to
welcome Lilliput Paris in the city of
Gothenburg. After several weeks in
Sweden, Paris will go to London and
from there it will leave on an exten¬
sive world tour lasting several years.
19

LILLIPUT PARIS (Cont'd)
,20

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
REPLICAS IN
INIATURE
Replicas in miniature fill the workshop (above)
as Lilliput Paris takes form. The Cathedra!
of Notre-Dame (centre) is just over 3 feet
high. This building and others such as the
Institut de France and the dome of the Inva¬
lides, where Napoleon is buried, have been
given l/l 00 their true size. "Model for
the model" of Paris is placed on trestles to
the right. Houses in photo on opposite page,
looking like some Paris version of the Tower
of Pisa, will form part of the Montmartre
Hill. Their bases have thus been given an
inclined angle. Left, a coat of paint for the
Genius of Liberty (scale: 1:100) surmounting
the Bastille Column. Lilliput Paris is built of
plywood, lime and poplar wood, the separate
pieces being glued, nailed or fitted into place.
Photos !ç> Almasy, Paris
21

LILLIPUT PARIS (Cont'd)
PARIS IN
THE ROUND
On the preparatory model of Paris (above)
the city curves from the Bastille Column
(right background) to the River Seine (fore¬
ground) and to the Arc de Triomphe (rear
left). Other famous monuments seen here
include the hilltop Church of the Sacred
Heart (rear centre) ; place de la Concorde
(centre left); the Place Vendôme and the
Opera (just above the Place de la Concorde),
the Louvre (centre, bordering the Seine) and
the island of La Cité where Paris was founded.
Size of buildings for the final model can be
judged in comparison to that of boy placing a
flag on the dome of the Invalides, right.
Behind him- are the Pantheon (where France's
famous men are buried) and the Eiffel Tower.
22

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
EIFFEL TOWER
TEN FEET HIGH
The Eiffel Tower (just under I O feet
high, 77 I bs in weight) and the Cathe¬
dral of Notre Dame, seen here in a
workshop, will be travelling companions
in the same specially adapted railway
waggon during their world tour.
Photos © Almasy, Paris
23
