WE'LL BAKE A CAKE*, announces the teacher, "because Pierre and Robert are five years old today."
She writes the names of the ingredients and the quantities on the blackboard and explains what she has written, because the
children cannot yet read or write. Supervised by the teacher, Jean has lit the stove and now he stirs the mixture
in a saucepan over the gas. For the first time in France, children in a Paris nursery school are learning housekeeping.

IT'S NEVER TOO EARLY
LEAR
All photos © Gisèle Freund
Three hundred French children, aged from three to
six, are having the time of their lives in a Paris school.
They don't know it, of course, but the eyes of many
educational authorities are watching them closely because
they are taking part in an experiment whose success may
bring a new note to. the whole problem of nursery school
education.
These youngsters are proving every day that "it's never
too early to learn."' In a spacious kitchen and an adjoin¬
ing bedroom they apply themselves earnestly to their
roles as cook or housewife, mother or father. They cook
simple dishes, wash clothes, do housework, make the beds¬
it is all a far cry from the "make believe" of games or
the symbolism, so often unsatisfying, of toys.
The children work in teams of twelve boys and girls.
For a week each team becomes a "family" and takes pos¬
session of the special experimental classroom "apartment"
in miniature. In the kitchen whose walls are painted a
daffodil-yellow, the gas stove is only 18 inches high and
the two sinks for washing have been constructed in such
a way as to render any accidents unlikely. In the second
big room stands a row of small beds where the "older"
children learn the proper way of getting the three-year-
old "babies" to bed.
In this way the children in this nursery school are not
only brought into direct contact with, and have the chance
to handle, real life objects chosen of course with a view
to the height and physical capabilities of the pupils but
the way is also open for them to accomplish all sorts of
home-making and family activities, thanks to their spon¬
taneous urge to imitate their elders and enter the world
of grown-ups.
This is the over-riding purpose of the experiment, and
the French Government is backing the project for a very
good reason: most of these children come from workers'
families in which they have to help mother from a very
early age.
Very few mothers, or, for that matter, even teachers,
realize the extent of the deep-seated changes that take
place in the child during his years in the nursery school
years when his progress
in growth, speech and
vocabulary and control
over his physical actions
is strikingly evident.
When a child enters a
nursery school the only
environment to which he
is accustomed is his home,
his family and friends.
Being plunged into an
entirely new situation
upsets and bewilders him.
If however, the difficul¬
ties of this period can be
smoothed out and the
anguish of separation
overcome, this will be the
starting point of his entry
into the world around
him. The new relation¬
ships he makes will help
him in this period, and
if he is given the right sort of understanding aid he
will begin to grow to adulthood in line with the society
in which he lives.
Thus, the kitchen and the bedroom in the nursery school
are "half-way houses" in which the child is not entirely
in a school atmosphere and where, though removed from
the house where he lives, he nevertheless finds himself in
a family environment which helps him to become one of
the group.
This family atmosphere created in school aims to pro¬
vide the children With an experience in which each new
event is a revelation or source of self-discovery. This is
not a form of "apprenticeship" and the children are not
necessarily expected to retain the things they have learn¬
ed; they may forget them temporarily, only !to reconsoli-
date this knowledge later in the normal course of their
development.
Instead, they have here an entry into the world of
adults, statisfying an urge to be "grown-up", a desire for
independence and a sense of accomplishment. Praised for
his achievements, a child will be helped along the road of
intellectual growth and towards the development of a
healthy personality. This is the atmosphere which the
nursery school kitchen and bedroom seek to create.
Children who have experienced this kind of education
show unbridled confidence and lose such traits as anxiety,
timidity and shyness, aggressiveness and deceitfulness.
Integration into constructive situations forming part of
group activities has led to many cures and a drop in the
incidence of unhealthy symptoms.
The teacher has a vital part to play in a class conceived
on these lines. She must be a highly qualified person,
fully aware of the educational results that are expected
of her and stimulated by the boundless possibilities of an
experiment which throws new light on to the desires, psy¬
chological problems and deep-seated attitudes of children.
What is needed is not a fully-qualified domestic science
teacher, but a good all-round nursery school educator.
The kitchen-classroom, considered as an essential cog in
the educational policy of integration now being developed,
is only one aspect of a form of educational initiation which
stimulates in the child the urge to enter fully into the
world of people and things.
Here is a direct preparation for life... Shall we soon be
seeing six-year-old girls giving advice to their mothers as
they market together? It would not be surprising, and
certainly nothing to complain about.


The Unesco Courier. April 1959
arning the
grown-up' way
Each week a "family" of twelve little
boys and girls takes possession of
a special classroom "apartment" in
a Paris nursery school. Here some
things are made on a miniature scale,
but in detail and use correspond
exactly to the real thing. However,
the aim of this experimental pro¬
gramme is not to turn out young
housekeepers, and the children are
not expected to remember the things
they learn. Instead they find them¬
selves in an atmosphere and among
surroundings in which elements of
school and home are combined.
Here they can give full play to their
imitative desires and their urge to
join in the world of adult things.
Top left, Jean beats up the eggs
while René weighs the flour. Above,
the cakes are ready and Pierre tries
to blow out the five candles with
one puff. Right, five-year-old Chris¬
tine maternally cuts the cake for her
neighbour. Left, a carrots. and pota¬
toes cleaning session in progress.

The 'Big Ones' Learn Baby Care
n a large room whose walls are decorated with colourful
children's paintings stands a row of small beds where the
"older" children learn the proper way of getting a boisterous
three-year-old into bed. (Photos above and below.) Photo
left shows Giselle giving the "baby's" diapers a good washing.
