THE BLUE
SCAR by
Bertha Gaster
Two men were standing outside the local pub in a
small Yorkshire village. Inside could be heard the
clinking of glasses and a calling of toasts in broad,
Yorkshire dialect, interspersed with voices speaking some
foreign tongue. The two men stood there smiling in an
embarrassed manner at each other. Suddenly one of
them an elderly Yorkshireman of stocky appearance
rolled up his sleeve and pointed to a spattering of tiny
blue scars on his forearm. A warm grin of comprehension
slid over the younger man's face as he promptly pushed up
his own sleeve and displayed identical scars. A second
later both hands had met in a hearty clasp.
"Don't matter if they can't talk each other's language,"
grunted an old chap looking on. "Yon blue scar that's
coal dust the miner's mark the world over." By this time
the younger of the two had taken a small badge off his
coat and was pinning it to the coat lapel of the
Yorkshireman. He was a member of a group of Polish
miners paying a visit to British mines and mining
establishments at the invitation of the National Union of
Mineworkers (NUM), and the tiny badgea copper pin of
two crossed hammerswas the emblem of the Polish
miners' union.
Such exchanges of miners, railwaymen and other trade
union groups between different countries have been going
on for some time. "We had a French party down our pit
last week-end," said one of the Yorkshire miners, "and
early last week a German group came round." He might
have added that this type of group exchange has also been
organized. by Unesco since 1952, with the help of workers'
organizations, as part of its work for international
understanding and co-operation. The Polish group was
one of many which have taken part in study tours abroad
with the aid of a Unesco grant. In this case the Polish
miners were the guests of the NUM during the whole of
their stay in Britain, the Unesco grant covering return
travel from Warsaw to London. (See page 33 for news of
Unesco's workers study tours in 1959.)
By the time the fifteen members of the Polish group
had arrived in Yorkshire their heads and their notebooks
were full of the things
they had seen and done.
They had been taken on
a swift whirl of London
sights the day after
their arrival, ending with
a concert at London's
newest concert hall, and
followed the next day by
an expedition to the
National Coal Board's
Research Establishment
at Isleworth and a dis¬
cussion with the Presi¬
dent of the NUM, be¬
fore they all set off on a
four day tour of Scot¬
land which included a
visit to a colliery, to
local industries and to
miners' welfare homes,
with a day's tour of
Edinburgh thrown in.
One of them, a Pole
born and brought up in
France, who had return¬
ed to Poland with his
wife and children seven
years before, remarked
on the wide difference
between the very up-to-
date workings they had
POLISH MINERS don this tra¬
ditional costume on special occa¬
sions. The crossed hammers worn
on the plumed headdress and on
the collar are also the official
emblem of the Polish miners' union.
16
Photos: Polish Information Office, Paris, taken in the mines of Upper Silesia
seen in Yorkshire and the rather primitive mine they had
visited in Lanarkshire. "But they told us it was a very old
mine, and will be closed in some years' time."
They were all, of course, interested in the differences
between British mines and their own, and between one
British mine and another. "There's so much to see and
learn," said Wladyslaw Pelczynski, the leader of the group,
with a sigh, "a fortnight's far too short." "Don't ask us
our impressions," added another. "We've had to make
notes of so many thingson, people, and sights, and little
habits, and the way ordinary things are done they're
going to ask us all sorts of things when we get home, and
we simply haven't had any time to sort them out."
"What did I find most exciting?" said Jozef Mikolajczyk.
"On one of our journeys in Scotland we were driving by
the Firth of Forth and we saw as we passed the new
experimental drilling tower for undersea mining, sticking
up out of the water. It's the first of its kind, you know,
and I had read about it in our papers back home, but
never in my life had I expected to see itand here I was,
actually looking at it!"
"Back home" to these men meant the Polish mining
districts of Upper Silesia, Lower Silesia and Cracow. With
the exception of Wladyslaw Pelczynski, formerly in the
pits and now a trade union official, and another who was
a mining engineer, all the others were working miners,
straight from the pit face, and proud of their mining
ancestry.
Jozef Mikolajczyk had followed in the footsteps of his
father and grandparents in the pits of Upper Silesia.
Jozef Mikula, the Pole from France, who had been a miner
in the Pas-de-Calais, had gone back to the Polish
mines where his father and grandfather had worked
before him. But his son, he said, was planning to be a

The Unesco Courier. > December 1959
doctor. "Must break tradition sometimes, mustn't we?"
he said with a smile. A young man spoke with pride of
his father: "Fifty years in the pitscould retire any day
he liked with the maximum pension but no, says he's
still good for a day's work."
Part of the tour laid on for them by the Yorkshire area
of the NUM was a day's trip to Blackpool, the famous
holiday resort for the north of England. The day's events
included a presentation of gifts from the NUM, an English
shirt for each man, a luncheon party at one of the big
hotels, a visit to the Lytham Convalescent Home for
Miners, run by the NUM where the whole party sat down
firmly to watch television and an evening at the circus.
The way to the convalescent home led down Blackpool's
famous Golden Mile of esplanade, elaborately decorated
for the summer season with Chinese ship and dragon
motifs. The Polish interpreter, Henryk Ostrowski, who
had come with the party from Poland, was kept busy
translating and explaining as the charabanc drove past
the gypsy booths, waxworks, fun fairs and whelk stalls
that lined the route, and the two enormous piers
stretching out to sea. Suddenly his face lit up, and he
pointed: "There's the old windmill!" he cried delightedly
"Still there!"
Interpreting from Yorkshire dialect
For Henryk Ostrowski it was a return trip. England
had been home to him in those years 'from 1940 to
1945 when so many Poles ¡had no home. The "Virtuti
Militari" medal which he wore proudly displayed on his
breast had been awarded for the six German i planes shot
down when a pilot in a Polish night fighter squadron in
England during the war. "I was stationed here in Black¬
pool part of the time," he said, "and in Bath and Exeter.
There's a family in Bath who 'adopted' me, just like a son,
during the war. I'm hoping I shall be able to stay an
extra week or so to go and see them again, and all the old
friends from war days. I was in Yorkshire, too, in Church
Fenton," he added. "That's why Yorkshire dialect doesn't
baffle me."
His familiarity with the Yorkshire speech was more than
put to the test the following morning, when the group
were present at a meeting of the local NUM branch of
Wombwell Main, the second oldest pit in Yorkshire. It
was held, according to common practice in England, in
an upper room of the local pub, and the fifteen Poles,
ranged along one side of the room, were welcomed in a
short speech by the chairman before the business of the
meeting began. It was the usual trade union meeting
known all over England, and beyond minutes, corres¬
pondence, executive report, branch business, local pit
questions, national questions of wages and policy, vigorous
debate from the floor, friendly interjections, hands raised
for voting for or against all in the broadest Yorkshire,
and the Polish miners shifted their chairs nearer and
nearer to the interpreter, anxious to follow as closely as
possible.
'English' Poles meet Polish counterparts
One particularly intent on missing nothing was young
Janusz Malecki, from the Ludwik pit at Zabrze, who
was full of questions when the meeting ended and
Yorkshire and Polish miners adjourned to the bar below
for exchanges over glasses of beer. "Your trade union
meetings are run quite differently from ours," he said.
"For instance, I noticed that a decision on various current
demands was taken on a delegate basis. Now we would
have had a popular meeting in the pit first to discuss it.
One of the last items on the agenda in Yorkshire was
another meeting but a meeting of a different kind. This
time it was not with Scots or English miners, but with
former countrymen of their own, some of the Poles who
had stayed on in England after the war and were now
working in English mines. A fair number of them still
lived in the hostel a disused army camp not far from
Barnsley where the meeting took place; but most of them
were settled in homes of their own by now, many with
English wives and children, and several of them came
from six or seven miles away to meet their compatriots.
The group had brought with them a fine vellum-bound
edition of the famous Polish classic "Pan Tadeusz" by
Adam Mickiewicz which was presented to the Polish
miners in Barnsley as a gift from the Polish miners'
union; in no time at all small groups were scattered all
over the big living room, exchanging information and
asking question with the interpreter this time taking a
well-earned rest from his duties. The "English" Poles
were eager to know about conditions and life in Poland
to-day, and quick to answer similar questions about Eng¬
land asked in turn by members of the
visiting party.
Two men suddenly smiled with
joyful . recognition at each other.
"He's from my village", cried the
"English" Pole, a burly laughing
fellow. "No, we never met, but you
know how it is in a small place, we've
passed each other in the streets a
thousand times when we were boys,
we both knew each other's face. He's
been telling me all the news the sort
of things one wants to know what
happened to old Teresa, and that the
shop at the corner has changed hands
you know."
As the talk slackened, someone
began to sing a mournful, haunting
melody. Another voice joined him,
then another, and soon the whole
room was singing together. "It's the
'Song of the Mountain Dweller',"
explained one of them, "one of the
best known and best loved songs of
the mining district."
The sound of the motor coach
starting up outside brought the sing¬
ing to an end. It was time to go.
There were hearty handshakes, last
minute messages called aloud, and
the coach drove away, rounded the
corner, and disappeared the begin¬
ning of the road back to Barnsley, to
London, to Poland a coachload of
miners going home to tell their pit
mates of things seen and heard, of
new ideas and experiences, and of the
friends and fellow miners they had
found over the sea.
17
