HOW MANY POSSIBLE HANDS IN BRIDGE?
53,644,734,400,000,000,000,000,000,000
One of our readers, Mr. K. Geisen-
berger of Tunis (Tunisia) writes: "Your
February issue described the prodigious
powers of a new electronic calculator,
the 'flying brain'. This prompts me to
request that you ask the machine the
following question: How many possible
hands are there in the game of Bridge
played with a Si-card deck? By
'hands' I mean (1) the possible distri¬
bution of cards to the four players;
(2) the possible distribution of 13 cards
to one player."
The Unesco Courier has asked
M. lean Besse of Switzerland to answer
this question. M. Besse is a noted
mathematician working with Unesco's
International Computation Centre lo¬
cated in Rome. He is also a well-
known bridge champion of international
standing. Here is his answer:
The amazing results achieved thus
far by the great modern calcula¬
tors, and the staggering possibi¬
lities that the machines promise for
tomorrow have aroused the enthusiasm
of not only the scientist. As a result
of the many articles (more or less docu¬
mented) which have appeared in the
popular press, these new machines have
captured the imagination of the general
public as well. But this is one of the
subjects on which some of the most
fantastic and often erroneous notions are
in circulation as far as the ordinary
layman is concerned.
The fantasies of science fiction, the
exaggerated deluge of publicity, the
highly suggestive but questionable term
"Electronic Brain" all these have
brewed a fog of confusion which has
engendered the layman's notion of a
Robot, part demi-god, part superman.
Though no less wonderful, the reality
is closer to the human measure.
Let us, as our reader suggests, ask an
electronic calculating machine how many
possible hands there are in Bridge. It
will be stone deaf to the question. First,
because the machine does not know
what you are talking about. Second,
since it has no intelligence of its own
(and that is why the term "brain" is a
misnomer) it is quite incapable of posing
a problem, much less of studying one.
To pose a problem and elaborate a
method leading to a solution these for
the moment, remain the exclusive do¬
main of the human brain.
On the other hand you can very well
ask a mathematician how many possible
hands there are in Bridge. After a few
moments' thought, he will tell you that
the problem is one of calculating the
permutations of 52 objects (the cards)
distributed in four groups (the "hands")
of 13 objects, the permutation of the
by Jean Besse
objects within each group being imma¬
terial.
In mathematics, the notation 3!
(known as factorial three) is the result
of multiplying 1x2x3. Likewise
4! = 1 X 2 X 3 x 4; and 5! =
1x2x3x4x5, and so on. The
mathematician will tell you that the per¬
mutations of 52 objects is equivalent to
52! (that is, the product of multiplying
1 X 2 x 3 up ,to 52). But we must
also divide this number by the permu¬
tations within each of the four groups
of 13 cards, that is 13!, since the per¬
mutations within each group are imma¬
terial. The number we are looking for
is therefore:
52
N
13! X 13! X 13! X 13!
The mathematician is now satisfied.
He will add, perhaps (if he is in a good
mood) that since 52! is of the order of
1065 and 13! of the order of 1010 the
number N is of the order of 1025, that is,
it would be a number of about 25 digits.
As the precise calculation of this .number
would be a tedious job, the mathemati¬
cian would not go to the trouble of
doing it (mathematicians, do not like
tedious jobs).
At this point, and at this point only,
one could turn to the Electronic Calcu¬
lator. There are a hundred tedious
operations to be done.
The machine is there just for that.
But it is necessary to tell the machine
precisely what is expected of it. For
this a detailed "programme" must be
worked out and recorded (assimilated)
by the machine. ' After that you simply
press a button and the result comes out
a few seconds later. That is the mira¬
cle. There is nothing supernatural
about it, but it is a sensational accom¬
plishment of technology.
For the problem we are considering,
I prepared a "programme" for the'new
Computer, Gamma Tabbour Bull, built
in France (See The Unesco Courier
February 1959, p. 13), which took me
one hour to work out (1). The printed
answer emerged about a second after the
button had been pressed. The number
of possible hands in Bridge:
53,644 quadrillion
Spelled out, this figure (precise only for
the first nine digits) is written:
53,644,734,400,000,000,000,000,000,000.
As for the second question, "the possi¬
ble distribution of 13 cards to one
player", the calculation is simple and
can be made "by hand" with pencil and
paper in five minutes. The answer:
635,013,559,600 hands of 13 cards.
To "programme" this calculation and
pass it through an Electronic Computer
would be a waste of time. It is not
worth the trouble to ask the machine to.
do a job that is too simple. Just as it
is pointless to use a jet aeroplane to
cross the Champs-Elysées.
(I) While it may be true that the "programm¬
ing" time is quite long, perhaps even excessi¬
vely long, it should not be overlooked that,
once prepared, the "programme" can be used
afterwards to solve hundreds of similar pro¬
blems in split seconds.
