(1) Atomic energy has proved to be an amazing
tool for medical research, diagnosis and treatment.
In the U.S.A. alone more than 2,000 hospitals and
physicians use radiation for the benefit of more than
one million patients per year. Here, a U.S. surgeon
(on right) implants radio-active pellets of yttrium-90
in the pituitary gland of a cancer patienta method
used to destroy those cancers susceptible to hor¬
monal alteration. Assistant (left) watches an ampli¬
fied image of the patient's skull on a TV screen and
guides the operation, which is performed quickly
and only requires the use of a local anaesthetic.
(2) New equipment for treating brain tumours being
demonstrated at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. In an adjustable bed the patient can be
raised to the desired position directly under the
ceiling vent ready for release of the beam from the
Institute's new reactor. (3) People who are hard of
hearing can thank this strange looking headgear and
the scientists who invented it for constant impro¬
vements being made in hearing aids. It enables
scientists to make a rapid check on the efficiency
of different types of earphones. (4) Doctor at the
Moncorvo Filho Hospital, Rio de Janeiro, uses a
scintillation probe to measure. the amount of radio¬
active iodine which has been secreted in a young
boy's thyroid gland, following an injection of this
radio-active isotope. Using the probe, the doctor
can determine how well the gland is functioning.
I, 2, 3) USIS. - 4) UNITED NAT.jONS.
14

THE MEDICAL
REVOLUTION
IN THE FIELD
OF NUTRITION B. HOUSSAY
Medicine was really born with the first man. Since
then it has passed through widely divergent stages.
From being the prerogative of priests and magi¬
cians it became empirical and finally scientific. In the
early stages, priests or wise men tried, by exorcism, to
drive out evil spirits or to invoke the beneficent inter¬
vention of the gods. Later, as men found that obser¬
vation yielded better practical results, empirical medicine
came into being. A body of scientific data was slowly
amassed down the years and in the 19th century, following
the great advances made in the natural sciences biology,
chemistry and physics medicine adopted the scientific
method and, above all, the method of experiment.
It was the experimental method which brought about
such far-reaching changes in medical science. The dis¬
covery, for instance, that some diseases were caused by
microbes made it possible to take precautions against and
to combat several kinds of infections, and also to ward off
or to arrest the course of the great pestilential epidemics
which used to take such a heavy toll of human life.
In our own time another great revolution has taken
place in the field of nutrition. Although it is perhaps
not yet understood by the general public, this is perhaps
the most important. We now know man's needs for
proper nourishment through the discovery of vitamins
and our understanding of the role of proteins and min¬
erals in human diet. This has been responsible for a
tremendous improvement in human health.
Even a few facts show this trend. Infant mortality
was once extremely high; one child in three died before
its third birthday; nowadays, in countries with high
living standards infant mortality has dropped to one out
of 15 or even 20. In many countries at the beginning of
this century, average life expectation was 40 years; today
it is now anything up to 70.
Longer life and a lower death rate have had many
other effects. The increased number of old people
has made it necessary to give attention to geronto¬
logy which concerns the medical care and health problems
of the aged. Infectious diseases have undoubtedly been
fought and conquered, but as the average expectation of
life increased, man was found to be suffering from diffe¬
rent ailments. The arteries, the joints and the heart were
affected by age, and this made new research necessary.
Other diseases have abruptly increased, among them
cancer. This can be treated to some extent, although the
real goal should be to attack the disease in all its forms.
The discovery of hormones, which play such a great
part in therapeutic medicine, deserves mention as does the
discovery of insulin. What used to be pernicious anaemia
no longer merits the use of the adjective pernicious;
people who would once have died of it can now be cured.
In recent years, much important research has been done
on nucleic acids. You' can prepare nucleic acid and store
it in a jar; then one day a few drops of this preparation
given to a plant will cause the pl'ant to catch a disease
which can be transmitted to others; this crystal therefore
propagates a disease, as with a living being. Even more
strange is the fact that it has been possible to modify the
chemical molecule of these nucleic acids and thus produce
mutations. Thus, diseases can also be changed in form.
One of the great biochemists working in the U.S.A. has
found a way of synthesizing enzymes, which in turn can
synthesize nucleic acids. The way is thus open to the
production of many things viruses, genes and so on. A
whole new world is opening up before us.
15
