ELECTRONIC TRANSLATORS WITH
BUILT-IN DICTIONARIES
by Emile Delavenay
The idea that an electronic machine should be able
to do automatically all or part of a translator's
consult a dictionary or translate a written
text from one language into another may seem fantastic
at first sight.
Yet the idea has been gaining ground ever since it
was first put forward by an Englishman, A.D. Booth, in
1946 ; and today the goal is almost in sight for the many
British, American and Soviet scientists who have been
working on this problem for the past twelve years.
Automatic digital computers were invented to carry out
at high speed sequences of arithmetic operations which
would have been too time-consuming for human beings
and which involved too great a risk of error. They have
proved that they can solve problems of industrial and
business management which, in addition to automatic
computing, call for certain logical decisions.
In both cases scientific calculation and business
management (of which operational research is one aspect)
the machine receives two typea| of information: nume¬
rical information in digital form, and alphabetical infor¬
mation i.e. words in current use fed in as letters of the
alphabet. It automatically converts both types of infor¬
mation into a code suited to the particular operations it
has to perform.
These include, for example, the logical identification of
a quantity or a word with its equivalent stored in an
electronic memory; automatic computation; the shifting
of partial results from one memory to another; the selec¬
tion of instructions depending on the type of result
obtained; and lastly, the "output" of the final result,
which may be in typewritten form. The most important
feature of these machines is their breath-taking speed:
some operations are performed in a millionth of a second.
Automatic translation could be envisaged as the follow¬
ing sequence of lightning operations without human inter¬
vention: feeding of a word into the machine, looking up
and identification of the word in the electronic dictionary,
simultaneous identification of the word's equivalent in
the second language, and finally typing of this equivalent.
The electronic dictionary is therefore a bilingual dic¬
tionary like those used for ordinary translating but
recorded in a magnetic memory.
This series of very simple operations is only suitable,
however, for words recorded in the dictionary in
the same form as they appear in the sentences i.e.
Invariable words and which, moreover, have only one
meaning. Special problems are raised by variable words,
by those having several different meanings, and also by
the word-order, and by idioms, or expressions whose
general sense is different from the sum of meanings
conveyed by the individual words.
In Britain, the United States, the TJ.S.S.R. and Japan,
research has therefore concentrated for a number of years
on the problems raised by the variable forms of words,
by syntax, idioms and words with multiple meanings.
Russian, English, German, French, Hungarian, Norwegian,
Arabic, Chinese and Japanese have been analyzed for the
purpose of reducing all the facts and rules of each lan¬
guage to algorithms, or numerical systems enabling the
machine to translate sentences from language A into
language B.
Highly complex programmes have been worked out
which may involve up to ten thousand logical operations
for the translation of a twenty-word sentence. Yet even
so, the speed of the machine is such that the process
is faster than ordinary translation. Just as the digital
computer consults tables of logarithms or of functions,
so the automatic translator will consult grammatical,
morphological or syntactical tables in addition to its
electronic dictionary. It scans tables of prepositions,
tenses of verbs, declensions or conjugations doing in fact
the same work as the translator has to do when deci¬
phering a text in a complex foreign language. These
tables and the dictionary are made up of series of digits
representing the algorithms of the input and output
languages.
Before the facts of language could be reduced to algo¬
rithms, it Was necessary to discover certain rules over¬
looked in the old type of grammar, because these grammar
books were written for thinking human beings and not
for unconscious machines which can only recognize explicit
signals.
Thus research to put translation on an automatic
basis is opening up new vistas for the linguist. It
is leading to various kinds of studies on "signalling"
systems of spoken and written language. Each language
is being studied scientifically, in the minutest detail, and
valid mechanical criteria are being discovered for the
understanding of sentences a field in which intuition
might Well have been thought the only possible guide.
The day of the translation machine is not far off,
but much still remains to be done. Electronic machines
can translate, but men have not yet learned to exploit
their amazing potential. It is now up to the linguists
those of today who can and must adapt themselves to
the new world of electronics, and those of to-morrow
who, with the help of machines, will extend the scope
of linguistics to cover all languages and all aspects of
language. For the linguistic research required to perfect
a translation machine is impossible without the aid of
ultra-rapid new machinery.
The future belongs to the linguists and mathematicians,
the "'programmers'", who can grasp the behaviour of words
in a sentence, as well as language statistics and the work¬
ing methods of computers. As in automatic computing
and in management by computer, the machine can only
perform automatic and repetitive operations. All the
creative work, the most important task, will devolve upon
man; he must use his imagination and judgement to
work out programmes which the machine will then per¬
form blindly and unconsciously.
For all sorts of reasons, scientific texts are the first
which can and should be submitted to the special analysis
required for automatic translation. Up till now, research
by American, British and Soviet scientists, has been con¬
cerned with texts dealing with mathematics, chemistry,
electronics and plant genetics. The need for scientific
translations is such in all countries that we cannot even
begin to solve this problem without the help of machines.
But will machines ever be able to translate "literary"
texts? The more optimistic research workers are begin¬
ning to hope so, and already have notions of the way to
set about it. When this day comes, when all prose works
can be translated automatically at scarcely believable
speeds (there is talk of 20,000 Words an hour), the peoples
of the world will truly be able to learn about one another
and appreciate each other's scientific and literary riches.
21
