WHAT TIME IS IT?
A fictitious sun gives us the answer
by David Gunston
Since the very earliest times man has always been
aware of the passing of time. It is something
fundamental in life which, like space, we feel we
understand but cannot easily define. Pulse beats, the
movements of sun and moon, day and night, the tides, the
changing seasons, youth and age all these gave even
primitive man this feeling of time's existence.
But although as we know from the evidence of the first
sundials and the Egyptian water-clocks, he has long been
interested in measuring the passage of time, human life
got by quite well for many centuries without feeling the
necessity of having a standard universal time. Cave men
adjusted their lives according to the sun's movements, and
so, basically, did civilized people until after the middle of
the last century. Local time was all that mattered to the
vast majority of the human race long after the perfection
of mechanical timekeeping.
It was the development of railroad communications in
North America that really led to the adoption of the
universally recognized time system we know today. In
Europe, English trains began to run to Greenwich time,
French trains to Paris time, German trains to Berlin time.
Local communities kept to their own mean sun time, and
for a while it all worked fairly well.
But it was hardly to be expected that railroads extend¬
ing their services over the Middle and Far West would
adopt Washington time, which frequently differed by
several hours from the local time of the regions they
served. Owing to the vast E-W size of the American
Continent the moment at which the sun appeared to pass
immediately overhead at the meridian (noon) differed
considerably in places of different longitude. So railroads
in the United States actually started their own time, o
with the longer lines, their own time zones.
As the system grew and more folk wanted to travel, this
of course led to much confusion, especially at change-over
stations, and it became obvious that a better solution
would have to be found. The whole question of a
standardized time-keeping system was discussed in
conferences by the principal countries of the world during
the years 1870-1880. Thanks primarily to scientists Char¬
les F. DOwd in America and Sandford Fleming in Canada,
a workable scheme was put forward and, after much
debating, was finally adopted by the railroad companies
of North America and eventually, in 1883-1884, by almost
the entire civilized globe.
Stepping over a line
makes today tomorrow
The idea, like most good ones, was basically simple.
There were to be accepted for the whole earth 24
standard meridians each 15° apart in longitude, for
this purpose a meridian being taken to be an imaginary
line circling the earth and passing through the poles. The
prime meridian (0°), from which these were to be calculat¬
ed was, by arbitrary agreement, that running through
Greenwich, on the eastern fringe of London. Greenwich
was partly chosen by Way of international recognition of
the importance of its famous Royal Observatory's contri¬
butions to astronomy and nautical science since its foun¬
dation by King Charles II in 1675.
Each longitudinal meridian was to be the centre of the
one of the 24 fixed time zones each changing by one hour
in passing to the next, back for westward from Greenwich,
on for eastward. This also meant that at longitude 180° E.
longitude 180° W. was also found, and so arose what is
now known as the International Date Line and the
convention of jumping a whole day of 24 hours when this
point is crossed, gaining it in one direction and losing It
in another. In practice, today, the Date Line does not
keep strictly to, the meridian, but curves round the
Aleutian Islands and Fiji to enable the people of these,
and neighbouring islands, to have the same day.
The advantages of this standard system were
immediately obvious and now almost everywhere zone time
based on Greenwich Mean Time (G.M.T.) is the rule.
G.M.T. is kept all over Britain, and other countries have
long adopted time zones corresponding to the selected
meridians. Thus much of Europe keeps to Continental
Time, 1 hour fast on Greenwich, while in North America
the five time zones are used Atlantic, Eastern, Central,
Mountain and Pacific, respectively 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 hours
behind G.M.T. If New York preferred to adopt G.M.T.,
the sun would not be overhead until 5 p.m. Thus the
system of "'five hours back" is the answer. Certainly it
is infinitely better than the chaos of 80 years ago, when
there were almost as many time meridians as there were
railroad companies.
Modern time begins
at the G in G. M.T.
So, in the strictly practical sense, Greenwich is the place
where modern time begins. In point of fact, the Royal
Observatory has now moved to the village of Hurst-
monceux (pronounced Hurst-roon-soo) near Eastbourne,
Sussex, on the South Coast of England, but as this place
is close to the Greenwich meridian and allowance is made
for the difference, the change in no way affects the
validity of Greenwich Mean Time.
So far, however, we have been concerned with what is
termed the mean solar day based upon arbitrary
meridians. This would be completely accurate and useful
if the earth and the sun were bodies rigidly accurate in
their motions. But things are not quite so easy as that.
The earth itself is tilted on its axis at an angle of 23 i °
from vertical, and its path round the sun is elliptical, not
circular. What, then, are the basic concepts for the
measurement of time?
All our sense of time is bound up with some movement,
whether it be the sun in the sky or the hands on the face
of a clock. But movement requires space, so it is evident
at once that time and space are closely related, though
of course if measuring time is one thing, defining it
precisely is quite another. Indeed, the world's meta¬
physicians are still not entirely agreed upon a definition
of time, which may therefore be long delayed.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

WHAT TIME IS IT?
(Continued)
On the scientific level, however, all our measurements
of time depend primarily on the movement of the earth
spinning round on its axis, and round the sun the first
enabling us to count off successive days, the second
successive years. Thus we see clearly why time-measuring
has always been an important part of practical astronomy.
Why, in fact, what we call "'the right time" is originally
given to the world by observatories and not by railroad
stations or shipping offices.
To tell the time of day We need first of all a moment
at which we consider each day to begin. Whereas for
civil purposes in our daily lives this point is taken to be
midnight, the natural day commences at noon that is,
when the sun crosses the meridian. But the intervals
between successive noons throughout the year as measur¬
ed by this method are far from equal, because of the
eccentricities of the earth's behaviour in space. The
daily errors mount up, and clocks set solely by the sun
would be hours wrong within months. The sun is, in fact,
not a particularly good timekeeper.
If instead of using the sun we measure time by the
apparent daytime movement of the stars no such
inequalities are noticeable. Star time, thus obtained, is
called Sidereal Time and for strictly scientific use, as in
astronomy, it is the only true time. Why should this be
so? When compared with our sun the stars are infinitely
distant, and even when the earth moves round the sun
for say six months to occupy a position in space which has
changed by nearly 200 million miles, the apparent position
to us of the stars has changed only by amounts too
inflnitesimally small to affect earthly calculations to any
important degree.
So, aware of these basic errors in solar time, the system
of Mean Time had to be introduced, which is based on
the movements of a fictitious sun which gives us every
day of exactly the same length and equal to the apparent
length of the solar day. Mean Time can best be defined
by the going of a perfect clock which is so set that, in
the average (mean) of the whole year, it shall be as much
ahead of solar time as behind it.
Most accurate 'clock' gains
twelve hours in six months
The greatest difference between clock and sun would
then be about 16 minutes, occurring in one direction
early in November and in the other about the middle
of February. This vital difference is called the Equation
of Time, and it represents (from a highly accurate
astronomical point of view, only roughly) the difference
between apparent solar time and G.M.T. This data is
given for each day in Nautical and Domestic Almanacs,
thus enabling domestic clocks and ship's chronometers to
be set by the sun. Wherever reasonably exact time is of
importance, a similar system to this is in use.
For the astronomer, Sidereal Time is of the utmost
importance. He reads it by measuring the daily motion
of that point in the equator from which the true right
ascension of the stars is reckoned what he calls the
vernal equinox. Two upper transits of this over the same
meridian determine a sidereal day, which is actually
shorter than a mean solar day:
1 Mean Solar Day = 24 hrs. 3 mins. 56.5554 seconds,
sidereal time.
1 Sidereal Day = 23 hrs. 56 mins. 4.091 seconds, mean
solar time.
When he is about to make time observations the
12
astronomer sets his telescope at the proper angle to watch
the passage of the star across the meridian. His instru¬
ment has between 5 and 11 spider-lines ruled across its
glass, the centre one set on the meridian. He records
on a chronograph, or highly precise stop-watch, the star's
transit over each line by interrupting his electric circuit
with a hand-held key, which itself is connected
electrically to the chronograph and on which a break-
circuit chronometer is making a continuous record. The
chronograph sheet can afterwards easily be interpreted,
and Sidereal Time calculated. A sidereal clock, however,
is useless for ordinary day-to-day timekeeping, since it
gains 12 hours on an ordinary clock in 6 months.
Ordinarily speaking, we must still live our lives by the
sun, getting up around sunrise and going to bed when
darkness has fallen. So we must have a practical system
based on the sun, and the thing works better if we
replace the unreliable real sun by this imaginary (mean)
sun, which crosses the meridian at uniform intervals and
goes round the equator at a fixed rate adjusted so that
the real sun and itself each take exactly one year to make
the circuit.
Quartz crystal clock keeps
time to 1/ 1,000th of a second
This man-devised compromise brings us back to Green¬
wich and its long-proved Mean Time, which is actual¬
ly the Greenwich Hour Angle of the mean sun, plus
12 hours to make the day begin at midnight. And as such
it meets all the needs of the ordinary world though of
course under zone time systems the true (sun) time is
applicable only exactly on the meridians, which however
causes little inconvenience in practice.
The famous old Royal Observatory at Greenwich
suffered some bomb damage in World War H, but it was
moved from London chiefly because that city's brilliant
street-lighting (unknown in Charles II's day) had made
night-sky observations and long-exposure photography
practically impossible. The move to Hurstmonceux Castle,
"the most perfect example of the mansion of a feudal lord
in the South of England," and built in 1446, is now almost
complete, but the new Observatory still retains its ancient
description of Royal Greenwich Observatory.
Six telescope domes one for the new 100-inch "Isaac
Newton" and modern office blocks now ring the Tudor
turrets, but all the old work of time-keeping and
astronomical observation continues and is expanding in
ideal surroundings and with up-to-date equipment. The
well-known Greenwich Time Signal, or "pips," is still
broadcast to the world every 15 mins. from an astronomical
"Regulator" radio clock governed by a quartz crystal clock.
This is constantly checked and compared with the time
signals of Paris and elsewhere, so that it and all the
Observatory clocks keep time to within l/l,000th of a
second per day.
Before the telegraph was invented, observatories gave
their time signals by bell-ringing, whistle-blowing and the
dropping of elevated time-ball signals on their towers,
but nowadays G.M.T. is relayed by radio continuously all
over the globe for the benefit of other observatories, radio
stations, ships and aircraft. Any individual or traveller
with suitable radio receiving equipment can receive a time-
signal over the ether correct to within l/100th of a second,
but in general it is the ordinary broadcasting stations
which perform the most public service by regularly issuing
time checks. The U.S. Navy Observatory at Georgetown
Heights, Washington, however, accepts no responsibility
for tirrie signals other than its own, and every day at noon
still uses a time-ball, as well as automatically correcting
all the clocks in the Government Buildings there.
As you will have seen, time-keeping is a trickier business
than it at first seems, but it has now been perfected as
much as is humanly possible. It's not often science's
fault' if you are late for an appointment!
