The mental health of college and university students
has attracted growing attention in the past three or
four decades. This has come about in part because
of growing awareness that many students fail to complete
their academic studies even though they have superior
intellectual capacities. In some institutions the frequency
of student suicides has caused much concern. Progress
in meeting the needs of students with emotional disturb¬
ances has been very uneven in the different parts of the
world.
In an attempt to bring together the current ideas on
this subject from a wide variety of sources, the World
Federation for Mental Health and the International
Association of Universities sponsored an international
conference on student mental health in Princeton, New
Jersey, in September 1956. This was the first of its kind
ever held.
Dana L. Farnsworth and Henry K. Oliver are both of Harvard
University, where Professor Farnsworth is Director of the Uni¬
versity Health Seroices. This article is condensed from the
current issue of Unesco's quarterly International Social Science
Journal, Volume XI, n° 1, 1959, devoted to Social Aspects of
Mental Health; pnce $2.00 ; 10/-stg ; 600 FF.
22
Opinions were expressed by all delegates that mental
health problems were the most serious faced by students
in their respective countries. However, in two of them
(France and the Netherlands) tuberculosis had only
recently ceased to occupy first place. Conflicts affecting
students were usually expressed in terms of environ¬
mental factors such as fear of examinations, poor housing
conditions, or unsatisfactory relations with faculty
members in some countries, such as Australia and France;
while in the United States, internal or intrapsychic
conflicts were most often regarded as the primary cause
of disturbance. Students in Mexico and some of the Far
Eastern countries exerted more influence on the faculty
and administration than in other countries, often through
strikes and riots. Suicide was a problem everywhere.
Universities in the Netherlands and in France do not
use screening procedures for admission; hence large
numbers of students unable to keep up with the standards
of the institution are dropped as failures. The use of
stimulants before and during examinations was reported
as common in most countries. The Philippines have many
more graduates of universities than opportunities for
them to use their, professional skills, thus causing much

The Unesco Courier. May 1959
frustration. Courses in mental health were quite
successful in Costa Rica, but were used less frequently
elsewhere.
Mental health problems of students differ in various
countries, depending upon how many people go to college.
College attendance ranges from extremes of one in 60 of
the population in the United States to one in 640 in
England. This has quite naturally resulted in contrast¬
ing attitudes toward college in these two countries. In
England college attendance is considered a privilege; in
the United States it is considered a right.
In the United States, the country in which the mental
health of college and university students has thus far
received the most attention, mental health programmes
have been organized in about a hundred colleges. Most
of these have a part-time psychiatrist in charge some¬
times assisted by a clinical psychologist, or more rarely
a social worker. In a few universities full-time
psychiatrists are on the staff; the total number of such
individuals does not exceed 40 at the present time.
At the first meeting of the American Student (now
College) Health Association in 1920, Franfcwood Williams
urged that colleges develop mental health programmes
for the following reasons:
1. To conserve the student body, so that intellectually
capable students may not be forced unnecessarily to give
up a college career.
2. To forestall failure in the form of nervous and men¬
tal disease, immediate or remote.
3. To minimize partial failure through mediocrity,
inadequacy, inefficiency, and unhappiness.
4. To make it possible for each individual to use more
fully the intellectual capacity he possesses, through
widening the sphere of conscious control and thereby
widening the sphere of social control.
Shortage of psychiatric services
Practically all psychiatrists who have had extensive
experience in working with students agree that about
10 per cent of the members of any institution of
higher learning are likely to have emotional problems at
some time or other during each year which interfere
seriously with their work. Very few institutions have
sufficiently well-developed psychiatric services to deal
with that number of students. In fact, the upper limit
of psychiatric consultations and therapeutic interviews
in colleges and universities at the present time is
determined, not by need, but by the number of hours of
psychiatric time available. Thus the lack of financial and
professional resources has so far prevented any definitive
demonstration of the full extent of emotional illness in
any student body.
Unofficial surveys in some schools have indicated that
the amount of emotional illness, and the extent of psycho¬
therapy for it, has been far greater than we had previously
been led to believe. It seems quite likely that not only
college students, but many students in graduate schools,
have serious and unresolved emotional problems that
greatly impede their professional development.
It has been found that in almost all instances of emo¬
tional disturbance in students the ultimate causes spring
from conditions in the families, communities, and social
environments from which students come. Sometimes a
contrast between the values and customs in a college
and those in the community from which a student comes
contributes to illness. It is rare that conditions in
a particular college are solely responsible for serious
mental illness.
Among the unfavourable conditions frequently encoun¬
tered in students who have emotional conflict are parental
discord, emotional rigidity, intolerance and prejudice In
parents and older associates, lack of emotional warmth
in parents and teachers, absent or inconsistent discipline,
and other negative psychological or environmental
influences.
Those students who come to psychiatrists or other
counsellors for help may do so because of apparent
scholastic failure, apathy, depression, excessive anxiety,
compulsive behaviour, obsessive thinking, physical symp¬
toms (psychosomatic disorders), and various types of
behaviour which are unacceptable to associates or to the
community. Severe psychoses occur in most institutions
at an average rate of about two for every thousand
students enrolled per year. Institutions which have
more than an average of one suicide for every 10,000
student-years might well look to unfavourable conditions
within the university or to the lack of effectiveness of
their treatment facilities.
Causes of academic failure
Several trends suggesting future progress seem to be
discernible today. College presidents, deans and edu¬
cators are taking a greater interest in making
available to faculty members ¡knowledge and Insight
concerning those emotional factors that accelerate or
impede learning. There is increasing dissatisfaction with
reliance only on types of counselling that are confined
largely to course information, career choice, and testing
for aptitudes or intellectual capacity, even though these
activities are valuable and necessary. The need for apply¬
ing the ¡knowledge gained from the newer studies in
personality growth and development, as well as a
consideration of the factors which cause students to
become ill and ineffective academically, is becoming
apparent to many educators. But how to apply this know¬
ledge still remains an unsolved problem.
The development of training programmes for young
psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, and social workers
who wish to enter the field are urgently required. Train¬
ing programmes in advanced centres would probably not
be very helpful to persons from countries where there are
very few psychiatrists. A more promising idea is to
develop programmes in the countries where they are
vitally needed, utilizing professional skills that are
available there, and possibly having occasional consul¬
tations from psychiatrists or psychologists from the larger
centres. A person trained according to a large programme
with comparatively adequate facilities would probably
find it very difficult to adapt what he has learned during
his training to conditions in his own country which
might be quite different.
No undermining of authority
Delegates to- the International Conference on Student
Mental Health all agreed that mental health is not
characterized by adjustment under all circum¬
stances, nor by freedom from anxiety and tension, nor
by freedom from dissatisfaction, nor by conformity or
constant happiness. Furthermore the possession of
mental health does not imply the absence of personal
idiosyncrasies, a lessening of accomplishment or creativ-
eness, or the undermining of authority, and it is in no
way opposed to religious values.
Among the recommendations or resolutions of the confe¬
rence were the following: ^3
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ONE STUDENT
IN TEN
(Continued)
KEY PROBLEM ON THE CAMPOS
a) The promotion of mental health In universities is
the concern of every person connected with the institution.
It should be seen as part of the general problem of a
student's health and part of the picture of the student's
welfare. It is not enough to provide counselling and
psychiatric services; attempts should also be made to
develop to the maximum extent those factors within a
university which allow each student to reach his greatest
potential growth, both academically and as a human
being.
b) A mental health programme should be geared to
the normal educative processes of the institution.
Programmes in different institutions in various parts of
the world, and within particular countries, should take
a variety of forms appropriate to the local situation.
Experiments are desirable, even in institutions with very
limited resources.
c) Colleges and universities should provide opportun¬
ities, either by teaching courses or other means, for
students to obtain instruction in marriage and family
life. This instruction should be considered in the context
of general mental health. It is particularly important
in schools of medicine, theology and education, graduates
of which are expected to guide not only their own
families' lives but those of others as well.
' d) Educational administrators, faculty members and
students should have some awareness of the kinds of
alteration in behaviour and thought in any given society
or culture which indicate serious emotional disturbance
requiring professional attention.
e) Students should be given as much responsibility as
possible, within limits, for their own education and moral
development. The views of students on university policy
and curriculum planning should be known and taken
into consideration by faculty and administration. With¬
out good relations between students and staff misunder¬
standings are bound to arise.
/) Special attention should be given to the lonely
student; although the student who prefers solitude is not
necessarily a proper object of concern. Orientation
programmes at the beginning of a college course may
be helpful and should be widespread.
g) Since marriage during college is becoming increas¬
ingly common, the needs of married students and their
dependents call for special attention and study.
7i) Proper housing and other environmental conditions
of students are appropriate subjects for consideration by
college and university planners.
¿) Conference delegates deplored the development of
curricula so crowded by formal studies, particularly in
pre-professional courses and in professional schools, that
insufficient time is left for leisure, recreation, and
participation in activities that contribute to a well-
rounded educational experience.
j) It is an important principle of mental health that
all human beings, regardless of sex, race, colour or
religion, should be treated with equal dignity. Total
oUscrimination on the basis of race, colour or religion
injures both those rejected from and those accepted In¬
to the institutions that practise such policies.
k) Severe overcrowding of college or university premises
produces serious psychological problems in many students.
This is a very delicate problem, but a rapidly growing
one in nearly all countries.
From all these considerations, it is clear that efforts
designed to promote mental health in colleges and
universities have been relatively slight. It is equally
clear that the need is very great. If the mental health
of college students everywhere can be improved, however
slightly, the students in turn may be expected later to lead
more effectively in mental health promotion in their own
communities, thus spreading human friendship.
DAZED YOUTH ADRIFT
IN A STORMY WORLD
It cannot be denied that youth is severely tried by the
impact of all the noise and violent music, aggressive adver¬
tising, screen thrillers, unhealthy literature, sensational,
alarmist news, to which it is subjected.
What is the effect of these constant impacts ? Obviously,
much overfatigue, a state of daze and considerably reduced
resistance and stamina; but there is also marked nervous ten¬
sion, increased aggressiveness and a love of violence even, at
times, contempt for life. Those who are continually being hit
want to hit back; those whose life is constantly subject to
attack treat life as valueless.
The world today is shaken and stormy; young people can
find no safe anchorage in it and this at the very time when,
only too often, the family is no longer playing its full part.
it is not surprising that the number of maladjusted young people
is constantly increasing. Society has not only to cope with the
havoc wrought by juvenile delinquency, but has further cause
for concern in the growing signs of social maladjustment among
normal young people. Serious problems are arising in the
schools ; special classes and special institutions have to be pro¬
vided. A new profession has come into being that of the
teacher of maladjusted children. It is a difficult calling, and
one that requires all the fine self-abnegation of young men and
women.
VITTORINO VERONESE.
This text is from an address on "Youth in the World Today"
given recently at the Sorbonne, Paris, by Mr. Vittorino Veronese,
Director-General of Unesco.
24
