ART AND THE TROUBLED
by Enrico Fulchignoni
Since the dawn of civilization, man has looked upon
the arts not only as a decorative element in life but
also as a consolation for his afflictions. It is no
accident that Apollo, who reigned over the flowering of
the arts, was also considered the god of healing, equi-
. librium and serene harmony.
The relation between artistic creation and the working
of the mind has also been the subject of considerable
discussion for many years. At the end of the 19th century
the theories of Cesare Lombroso and Max Nordau, who
strove to establish a relation between genius and dege¬
neracy, were very much in vogue. This negative approach
was to retard research into the inner significance of Works
of art for many years, and more important, was to prevent
all study of the possible "therapeutic" effects of artistic
creation until relatively recently.
Today the therapeutic effects of artistic creation are
accepted by contemporary science as a result of the pro¬
gress made in psychology and psychiatry^ Psychologists
now see mental illness as a "cause of worry" which can
ultimately lead to mental self-improvement.
The man who feels that he is "different from other peo-
Enrico Fulchignoni is professor of psychology at the Univer¬
sity of Rome. He is one of Europe's specialists on the problems
of psycho-pathological art. His film "Images de la Folie",
devoted to this subject, was awarded the Bichat Prize for Medical
Films in 1955. Professor Fulchignoni is a member of Unesco's
staff.
pie" is forced by his very unbalance to revise accepted
standards and values in' order to adapt them for his own
use. This gives rise to a kind of protest of which the work
of art is an expression in more or less symbolic form.
According to certain schools of psychiatry, the effect of
this observation is two-fold. On the one hand, it enables
a specialist to study elements in a work of art presented
to him for psychological diagnosis and to indicate certain
deep-seated impulses behind the work of art. On the
other hand, in the field of therapy, it is now possible for
a patient to ease his psychological tension and conflicts
through artistic creation.
Other problems more or less related to the discovery of
the psycho-pathological significance of works of art have
gradually been raised. For example, what value can be
attached to spontaneous drawings or to paintings of sub¬
jects produced on command whioh preceded mental illness
when compared to those executed during the illness?
What difference is there between drawings which seem to
stem directly from mental disorders and those apparently
unrelated to them? And what yardstick is one to use for
works produced by mental patients who have never had
previous artistic training?
Questions such as these and many others were first
investigated chiefly in France and in the United States.
As the result of conclusive experiments made in these
countries art studios have multiplied in mental hospitals
in Brazil, Canada, Italy, Great Britain, Germany and other
countries in various parts of the world.
SCHIZOPHRENIC FLOWERS. A volume of Victorian
flower paintings was discovered recently in an antique shop
by a doctor in England. The paintings show that the painter,
who is unknown, apparently suffered from an acute schizo¬
phrenic episode lasting six months to a year and made a
good recovery. In May 1864 there is a sudden marked change
26

It was at the start of the century that Zieher and
Bertschinger made their first observations of psychotic
adults using the principles outlined above. Rorschach, the
great Swiss psychologist and father of the "ink-blot tests",
was among the first to show in 1913 how drawings by
schizophrenics could be used to make accurate diagnoses.
He was also one of the first to analyse apparently mean¬
ingless doodling for symbolic elements. A most important
discovery was placed at the disposal of medical men: that
an evolution could be observed in the drawings of mental
patients both in the normal development of the illness
and as treatment progressed, irrespective of whether the
treatment Was psycho-surgical (lobotomy), biological
(shock treatment, tranquillizing drugs, etc.) or psycholo¬
gical.
More recently another step was made when these same
principles were applied in treating children suffering from
mental and emotional disturbances. It was the English
school of psychiatry which in 1928 or thereabouts was the
first to discover the therapeutic effects of drawing, paint¬
ing or modelling on young patients. This was an impor¬
tant discovery since in certain cases drawings can replace
all other means of communication between the physician
and the child. This opened up a new avenue of contact
which had previously been ignored.
Very often a child can give free vent to his aggressive
instincts and to his emotional life through games, draw¬
ing or modelling. The use of techniques applied either
individually or in group form, has resulted in experiments
whereby children can freely express their impulses, their
anxieties and their feeling of insecurity. To the physician
this is very important because young patients are often
unable to explain their mental difficulties in words.
Artistic creation has therefore become an increasingly
valuable tool for diagnosis and therapy not only in cases
of mental disorders but also in the rehabilitation of delin¬
quent or maladjusted children.
In adults the process of artistic creation obviously is
The Unesco Courier. May 1959
much more complex and cannot be explained merely as
the liberation of instinctive impulses. Someone once said
that art is a winding path which the fantasy of the mind
takes to reach the road to reality. Psychologists consider
artistic creation as a path leading from the inner man to
the outside world, and they term this extroversion. By
its very nature it is a means of communication between
one person and another. Art in fact claims to be and is
a language. It is one of the most powerful ways of bring¬
ing an inner conflict out into the open and generalizing it.
Art, in doing this, can help the mentally-ill adult by
acting as mental catalyser.
Here, we perhaps have one explanation of the feeling
of fulfillment which has been described as one of the
characteristics of esthetic enjoyment. "Of course," writes
Prof. Volmat, a French specialist in- the field, "only few
of our patients who by and large are mediocre artists and
whose artistic expression is often rudimentary, ever attain
this fulfillment and harmony which require a complete
readjustment of their disturbed personalities. But by
turning to art, they take a first step toward mental equi¬
librium."
Thus art has enabled a large number of mentally ill
persons to regain their notions of being human beings
despite the disorder which has struck and paralyzed them.
There are cases where art therapy, like all therapy, is
advisable and when it is not. It has its successes and its
failures. It can and should be combined with other tech¬
niques of occupational therapy. It can be applied simul¬
taneously with shock treatment or psycho-surgery.
All schools of psychiatry which have been studying this
problem since the beginning of the century recognize in
this technique a new instrument of therapy which has
resulted in undeniable progress in curing mental illness.
Thus in certain cases, the language of colour and the
physical act of handling materials help the mentally sick
to overcome their inhibitions and their isolation and help
them to find their way back to normalcy.
in style, colour and form from the artist's ordinary flower
paintings. The next four paintings show even more marked
change and then symbols and hallucinations begin to appear.
Photos Courtesy Guttmann-Mackay Collection
The last picture suggests an acute phase of confusion and
gives a vivid impression of movement. Finally his pictures
returned to normal and resemble the first one shown.
27

THE FAMOUS CASE
OFALOYSE
Aloyse is one of the most famous names
In the history of pathological art. A
children's governess from Lausanne,
Switzerland, Aloyse became ill with
schizophrenia in 1918 and was committed
to a mental hospital. There she took up
drawing and painting and was soon
turning out vividly coloured works of
great beauty. Her output was prolific.
The more paintings she produced the
calmer she became. She specialized in
paintings of women famous in history
for their passionate love affairsCleopa¬
tra, Brunhilde, Mary Queen of Scots,
Maria Walewska, Josephine de Beauhar-
nais. A book on Aloyse as a case history
on the role of art in dealing with mental
disorders was written by a Swiss doctor, M.
Forel. "In her drawings," he wrote,
"the woman always has the leading place.
She is tall, beautiful and sensual; the
man is an inferior being relegated into
the background, strange and uncouth,
small and Ill-formed. The paintings of
Aloyse were not just an idle pastime.
Through her art she strove to give form
to the world of her fevered imagination,
and life and freedom to the creatures of
her fancy. As she herself put it: 'I saw
this living body and I told it to get' out of
the frame.' In her works a magic change
materialized and restored her security
in the world she had thus created." Photo
shows her imaginative rendering of "Mary
Queen of Scots or the Snake Necklace."
'PARADISE ON EARTH'
This coloured crayon drawing is the work
of a man who was hospitalized because
of an acute persecution complex accom¬
panied by strong feelings of jealousy
towards his wife. His drawing began
with and stemmed from his illness. In
this drawing, "Adam and Eve Turned
Out of Paradise", he has depicted the
earthly paradise (with trees bearing golden
apples and animals) in the abdomen of
God. From God's mouth come the
biblical words condemning the original
sinTo the serpent: A woman shall
crush thy head; to Adam: In the sweat
of thy face shalt thou eat bread ; to Eve:
In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.
28
' ...» *
ÉÉAÉ
yWV

The Unesco Courier. May 1959
Sacha-Masour, Paris
This drawing was done by a mental patient suffering from acute schizophrenia, combined with a strong persecution complex. As is the
case for so many victims of mental illness, art helped this patient to find an outlet for her fears and calmed her obsessions.
I DRAW AND MY
PHOBIAS VANISH
The woman who did these drawings was
a schizophrenic obsessed by sadistic and
masochistic feelings. She was incapable of
explaining In words or in writing the thoughts
that went through her mind. A few weeks
after her illness she found a new outlet for
her distress in drawing. She was later able
to tell her doctors: "When I draw, some of the
things inside me come out and my obsessions
disappear. I don't try to show a person or a
thing ; only what they suggest to me." Top
left of drawing shows a bird of prey attacking
a guinea pig (she raised guinea pigs) ; top
right, the patient depicts herself as a woman
with a snake's skin. Bottom left, she draws
herself as a little girl trying to break the arm
of a small devil ; bottom right, an octopus
writing and swallowing a whole guinea pig.
29

THE EVOLUTION
OF A CAT
The artist who becomes mentally ill does not
necessarily lose his creative ability, and thus
the works he produces offer a deep insight
into the sick man's mind. One of the best
known British artists in the early part of the
century was Louis Wain who lived surround¬
ed by cats that he used as models for
exceedingly popular] drawings. In the early
1920's Wain had a schizophrenic breakdown
(split personality) with intermittent relapses
until his death in 1936. Here we see the
remarkable changes that occurred in his cat
portraits as his schizophrenia evolved.
Courtesy Guttmann-Mackay Collection
*^P
30
