CAN SCIENCE CHANGE
A PERSON'S HEREDITY?
GREY & AGING MICE
Many generations of mice have travelled around the sides of this
rotating exercise wheel (below) used to determine the effect of
exercise on normal aging and on recovery from injury caused by
exposure to atomic radiation. The two groups of mice (photo,
above) were used in the studies and demonstrate the aging effects
of radiation. The mice are all the same age, but the group at the
right which turned grey and aged prematurely from exposure to
radiation, present a marked contrast to. the unexposed group on
the left. Studies of this type yield vital data on genetics.
USIS
w
W . NOYES
'E have long been familiar
with the basic laws of gene¬
tics. We know that if
parents, display certain tendencies,
their children will in all likelihood
inherit these. We know from our
experiments with animals that by
selecting the parents we can pro¬
duce among progeny animals with
particular characteristics. I am not
necessarily suggesting that we
should apply this knowledge to the
human race, and select those people
who should have children and weed
out those who should not. That
would be rather dangerous, although
experiments on those lines have occasionally been made
on a limited scale.
There are other things of which we know less. There
are certain molecules in the body .which could at least
give an indication of the future of the race, or indeed
determine it. We have molecules that are known to
chemists as steroids. There are about thirty of them in
the human body. In a more or less normal person, the
quantities of these molecules remain in a fixed ratio, but
this ratio varies in any person who has a tendency to
illness. Can science do anything to keep this ratio
constant once and for all?
Heredity is more or less determined by nucleic acids.
If a family shows an undesirable tendency, may it not be
possible to alter the character of these acids and the
relationships between the different groups?
Nucleic acids are necessary to
maintain cell life, for the
formation of proteins, for
growth and for heredity. It is well
¡known that if a cell has its nucleus
removed, the protoplasm dies and
the cell can no longer survive. We
also know that the growth of
abnormal cells, such as cancer cells,
depends on nucleic acids. Several
types of medicine used in cases of
cancer are effective because they
act on the nucleic acids. But it is
difficult to make sure that they act
only on the nucleic acids of can¬
cerous cells and not on normal cells
as well. That is why these types of medicine must be
used in moderation, for fear of killing the patient.
Nucleic acids are also to be found in viruses. The
active substance of viruses has been crystallized and
found to be a super-protein. Division of this substance
yielded pure nucleic acids which can be crystallized at
will. They retain their properties. They are pure
products and can be kept in a jar. If they are. used for
innoculation, they will reproduce, like a living organism.
Following certain experiments, the distinction between a
chemical substance and a living organism has gone.
Mutations have been obtained by changing some parts
of these nucleic acids. Moreover, we know that
chromosomes, which are formed from nucleo-protein, are
of basic importance in heredity. We know the particular
points in these chromosomes which determine a given
characteristic. It has also been possible to interfere with
these nucleic acids so as to produce mutations. One of
the ill effects of radio-activity is precisely that it modifies
these nucleic acids. When this happens, the person
affected may have quite abnormal offspring, which is one
of the terrible dangers of radio-activity.
These nucleic acids are now beginning to be synthesized.
If research along these lines continues successfully, we
shall be able to produce substances either to promote or
to arrest growth. It will be possible to influence heredity.
27
B. HOUSSAY
