LABOUR'S UNION IN
INTERNATIONAL TRIANGLE
by Ronald S. Fenton
On March 11, 1776, the Birmingham Gazette reported: "On Friday last a Steam Engine,
constructed upon Mr. Watt's new principles, was set to work at Bloomfield Colliery in
the presence of a number of scientific gentlemen, whose Curiosity was excited to see the
first movements of so singular and powerful a machine. By this example the doubts of
the inexperienced were dispelled."
Other and far more terrible doubts were soon to take their place as the machines
steadily multiplied, throwing skilled men everywhere out of work and making it possible for
employers to pick up labour at starvation rates, in England they called it the Industrial Revolution;
a time of astonishing unprecedented prosperity for some, of abject, hopeless poverty for others.
This was the most sweeping social change to come over man since the discovery of agriculture.
Never before had there been such social insecurity. Never had the gap yawned so wide between rich
and poor.
The industrial revolution gave rise to conditions which inspired a flood of new thought within each
nation to which the revolution spread. Humanitarians, social reformers, political visionaries, revo¬
lutionaries all offered their solutions.
There were many who spake up in the closing decades of the 19th century: Robert Owen, Louis
Villerme, Charles Hindley, Jerome Blanqui, Daniel Mareska, Emile de Giradin and others. But there
were yet only individual reformers... men with a personal vision inspired by the social changes of their
times. No government yet was ready for action, until another individual, a citizen of Switzerland,
Bundesrat Emil Frey, spoke up in the Swiss National Council: "Short-sighted greed is hindering
government regulations on women and child labour and the redress of other abuses. The voice of our
people calls us to act promptly."
This time a government listened. In 1880 the Swiss invited the major industrial states of Europe
to hold a conference on labour treaties. They were rebuffed, but ten years later 12 nations gathered
in Berlin for such a conference. Unfortunately the Congress of Berlin produced nothing of real
substance but a beginning had been made.
During the First World War, trade union organizations in the two camps and in the neutral coun¬
tries had voiced insistent demands for the right to take part in the peace negotiations and called for
inclusion in the future Peace Treaty of labour guarantees proclaiming, to use the words of the ori¬
ginal proposal by the French Confederation of Labour, "the national and international rights of
labour."
This suggestion, as put forward at an Inter-Allied Trade Conference held in 1916, was, in effect,
a revival of efforts for international labour regulations that had been initiated more than a quarter
of a century earlier. These efforts culminated in the setting up of an International Association for
Labour Legislation, an unofficial body whose proposals led in turn to the conclusion by technical
and diplomatic conference held in 1905 and 1906 of Conventions prohibiting night work for women
in industry and the use of white phosphorus (whose highly poisonous fumes killed or crippled thous¬
ands of workers in the manufacture of matches).
These modest beginnings inspired primarily by social reformers took on far broader dimensions
under the pressure which organized labour was able to exert before and after the conclusion of the
1918 Armistice. The Worldwide catastrophe had put a sharp stop to many constructive efforts, but
it shook men out of their complacency and forced them to examine war's economic causes. At the
CONT'D ON PAGE I 3

SAFETY FIRST FOR MINERS
Coal-mining is still one of the world's most hazardous jobs. Cave-ins,
fires, and coal dust and mine gases that may cause explosions, are some of
the perils the miner faces. To guide coal-producing countries in drafting
national safety regulations, the ILO issued a Model Code of Safety Regula¬
tions for Underground Work in I 950 which deals with requirements rang¬
ing from ventilation and precautions against coal dust to the investigation
of accidents and first-aid and rescue measures. ILO'S Industrial Committee
on Coal Mines provides a forum for government, employer and worker
representatives of major coal-producing countries to discuss problems of
safety, productivity, apprenticeship and welfare schemes. Photos show (I)
Old and new in detecting deadly gases. Caged canaries (right) once helped
to warn that gas was present. Today flame safety lamps (left) indicate per¬
centage of gas in air. (2) Indian miners in Bihar province set out for the pit
with mining lamps and wicker basketstraditional hold-all for Indian
labourershooked to their picks. (3) Bihar miners take lift to pit bottom.
Average depth of the pits in this area is only between 120 and 150 feet.
ILO Photos
12

LABOUR'S INTERNATIONAL TRIANGLE
Peace Conference at Versailles the idea emerged that
peace must be based on social and economic justice. To
carry this theory into practice, permanent international
machinery had to be created. That is how, in 1919, the
International Labour Organization, the ILO, came into
being.
Thus began a partnership unique in international
relations... the association of workers, employers and gov¬
ernments in the ILO. From the beginning the ILO was
set up not just as an agency to regulate wages, hours and
conditions of work, but as an international forum for the
discussions of problems. In its tripartite structure each
nation is represented by four delegates: two #for the
government, one for the employers and one for the
workers. These last two vote according to the wishes of
the organizations they represent. They may, and often
do, disagree with their government's policy or with each
other. It is this tripartite character which has given the
ILO much of its strength and balance and which helped it
to survive the waves of depression, fascism and war which
swept over the world between 1919 and 1939. It continued
in existence throughout the war, which enabled it, in 1946,
to become the first "specialized agency" associated with
the United Nations.
ILO's three basic organs are: (a) the International
Labour Conference which meets once a year and whose
principal task is to work out international labour stan¬
dards; (b) the governing body or "executive council" which
meets several times a year to take policy and programme
decisions (ten seats are held permanently by the "states
of chief industrial importance", ten elective seats are held
by other countries chosen every three years, ten seats are
held by representatives of the (workers and ten are held
by employers) ; (c) the International Labour Office in
Geneva which is the permanent secretariat of the ILO and
a centre of documentation and research.
Not the U. N. Labour Ministry
The ILO sometimes has been called a 'Vorld parliament
of labour" and sometimes the "labour ministry of
the United Nations". It is neither. But 40 years ago
it wrote a new chapter in international diplomacy when
it launched its system of voluntary standards and agree¬
ments. Delegates to its conference have no power to
commit their governments to ratify International Labour
Conventions. Instead of negotiating binding treaties or
agreements these delegates establish international stan¬
dards or targets in the forms of Conventions and Recom¬
mendations.
When the ILO came into existence it was faced not
only with the problem of drafting international labour
standards to cover a wide field of activities and to
redress abuses made of human labour in many countries,
but also the need to make these standards sufficiently
flexible so as to meet the needs of countries widely di¬
vergent in their social structure and degree of industrial
development.
The nature of the most urgent tasks is revealed in the
subjects of the first conventions introduced by the ILO:
working hours, unemployment, maternity protection,
nightwork for women, age of admissions to employment,
employment of young persons at night.
Flexibility clauses have helped to make the ILO stan¬
dards applicable to the less industrialized countries. Lower
age standards have been allowed for certain Asian
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

LABOUR'S INTERNATIONAL TRIANGLE
(Continued)
countries, and ratifying countries have been allowed to
apply certain conventions by stages. The Convention
concerning minimum standards of social security allows
countries to ratify in respect of only a proportion of the
benefits (sickness, unemployment, maternity, old age and
so on) and also enables countries "whose economic and
medical facilities are insufficiently developed" to avail
themselves of certain temporary exceptions in regard to
the proportion of protected persons, duration of benefits
etc.
The 114 Conventions and 112 Recommendations
adopted so far form the "International Labour Code."
A Convention does not bind a member country unless its
parliament or other national authority approves ratifica¬
tion. In all, the number of ratifications has almost
doubled since the end of the Second World War and has
now nearly reached the 2,000 mark on Conventions which
have been adopted since 1919.
The benefits which have been obtained since 1919 have
all been the result of standards freely agreed to on a
voluntary basis, often with the unanimous votes of
workers, employers and governments.
The body of ILO standards which has grown up
gradually over the years includes of necessity matters
which are of no direct concern to certain countries.
Maritime Conventions, over two dozen in number, only
interest nations possessing a merchant navy; Conventions
for the protection of indigenous and tribal populations
concern only States on whose territory such populations
are to be found.
The great majority of the 226 instruments which now
make up the International Labour Code relate, however,
to matters of universal interest such as freedom of
association, forced labour, the protection of women and
young workers, the search for employment, safety and
hygiene on the job, hours of work and paid vacations,
labour management relations, social security inspection,
etc.
The ILO shows the way; it does not give orders. But
it does keep a watchful eye on the way in which the
standards are integrated into the labour practices of
each country. In ratifying a convention, a country
promises first of all to take all necessary measures to make
effective the provisions of the instrument and also to
report to the ILO once a year on the measures taken to
implement the terms of the Convention. The government
must also send copies of these reports to workers' and
employers' organizations in its own country.
Each year the International Labour Conference sets up
a tripartite committee which is responsible for supervising
the effect given to the previous decisions during the last
12 months. In the first half of 1959 nearly 50 countries
provided the Conference, in one way or another, with
14
ILO Photos
TRAINING BETTER WORKERS. More than half of the ILO's work
under the U.N. Technical Assistance Programme has consisted in helping
people to get more and better work done with less wastage of human
and material resources. Last year alone, more than 320 ILO experts
were on assignment in 5 1 countries, many of them showing how to make
better use of manpower, and nearly 50% of ILO projects were in man¬
power organization and vocational training. Above, an ILO team teaches
Haitians new skills ; left, instructor at work in a Tripoli school (originally
set up by Unesco) where young Libyans are being taught a score of trades
and skills from automobile engineering to operating calculating ma¬
chines; below, foreman in a Netherlands factory briefs two Yugoslav
trainees. Yugoslavia has placed hundreds of workers in industries of
other European countries under ILO's worker-trainee programme.

The Unesco Courier. November 1959
IT ALL BEGAN
WITH A MATCH
The ordinary safety match was responsible
for the world's first international labour
convention in 1906. Until then safety
matches had usually been tipped with
white phosphorus whose poisonous vapours
killed or crippled thousands of workers in
the match-making industry. Inoffensive
red phosphorus could have been used,
but its higher cost would have placed
match-makers at a disadvantage in compet¬
ing for markets. The answer was the Berne
Convention which prohibited the use of
white phosphorus and thus put all coun¬
tries on the same footing. In 1919 the ILO
called on members to adhere to this conven¬
tion. Since then white phosphorus has been
abandoned. Most standards laid down by
ILO have some bearing on the health and
safety of workers and have led to the use
of safety devices and precautions such as
the use of protective masks like that worn
by worker (right) while spray-painting.
ILO Photo
information supplementing their reports or in answer to
comments from experts who had examined government
reports on the situation in their countries. The inter¬
play, year after year, of factual examination and moral
persuasion has proved to be the kind of international
approach most likely to bring action at the national level.
No country, however advanced, can fail to find in the
International Labour Code, certain standards higher than
its own and some indications on how to improve conditions
of work. The Code is, however, of greater importance to
the less advanced countries those just gaining political
independence and those in the early stages of industrializa¬
tion; they can draw from it the very basis of their social
legislation.
The influence of ILO standards has been most clearly
apparent when a government has /adopted specific
measures to bring its national statutes and conditions into
line with a convention it intends to ratify or has already
ratified. This is sometimes clearly stated in the law in
question as for example when Great Britain adopted a
Merchant Shipping Act "to give effect to certain Conven¬
tions adopted by the International Labour Conference."
Similarly, the Israeli laws on hours of work, on the
protection of wages and other labour subjects state clearly
that their adoption will enable Israel to ratify certain ILO
Conventions. In Greece the minimum age for employment
at sea was not regulated at all until the country ratified
the international convention which lays down a 14 year
minimum age limit.
Impact of the 'World Labour Code'
So the "World Labour Code" is not merely a rhetorical
headline. In almost every 'country of the world, and
in almost every occupation from farm-hand to filing
clerk, from deck-hand to truck-driver it has transformed
conditions of Work.
The objectives of the ILO remain today what they were
40 years ago: to secure the foundations of peace through
justice in social arrangements; and to this end to bring the
nations to work in concert for the improvement of condi¬
tions of life and labour. Yet today the ILO is a very
different kind of organization from what it (was at its
origin. When it began its work in 1919 its orientation was
primarily European and New World. Since the Second
World War it has become virtually universal and this
year, on its 40th birthday, it had eighty member states.
In the past 40 years different economic systems have
become established in different parts of the world and
nationalism has become the characteristic passion of
millions whose fathers were unrepresented when the first
sessions of the International Labour Conference met.
Political developments have made it necessary to pay more
attention to the problems of underdeveloped countries in
Latin America, Asia, the Middle East and, more recently,
in Africa.
Also there is an increasing emphasis on agricultural
workers and non-manual or professional workers an
emphasis which was, for all practical purposes, non¬
existent When the ILO Was created. For example,
agricultural workers make up the vast majority of workers
in underdeveloped countries, and non-manual workers are
coming into prominence because of technological changes
in industry.
While the traditional code-building work remains a basic
ILO occupation, more and more "operational" activities
are taking their places in its programme and the work of
the organization has come indispensably associated with
economic development, with industrialization in under¬
developed countries and ¡with such modern problems as
automation or industrial fatigue or the protection of
workers and scientists against radiation hazards. Work in
these areas falls broadly into categories such as manpower
organization, vocational training, management develop¬
ment, co-operation in handicrafts, labour administration,
social security, labour-management relations, safety and
health or workers and so on.
The ILO has assisted in the creation of productivity
centres in Egypt, Israel, Central America and elsewhere,
that distil and instil the latest productivity techniques at
all levels of management and make a major contribution
to the economic development programmes and building of
the standards of living of these countries and regions.
Similar work is being done in India. In Burma the ILO
helped by drafting basic legislation and arranging for the
training of personnel for the administration of the
country's first social security system. It undertook similar
projects in the Caribbean region, Latin America and the
Middle East.
To the high Andean plateaux, to the lands of tropical
Africa, to the hot dry countries of the Middle East and
further east to Asia and the green islands of Indonesia
have gone nearly 1,000 technical assistance experts to
help the countries of these regions with many problems of
industrial and agricultural expansion. Since 1953 the
ILO has arranged for nearly 1,200 worker-trainees to gain
experience outside their own countries.
Enormous strides have been made in improving the
condition of both the peasant and the industrial worker.
Progress has been uneven in the world, for conditions vary
greatly from one part to another, but at least certain
standards have been laid down, voluntarily accepted by
many nations, eagerly aspired to by others.
The labour policy in most countries is no longer
primarily a problem of the protection of workers, as it
was when the ILO was founded. It is now an integral part
of national economic and social policy.
15

ILO Photos
BOATMEN ON THE RHINE
Forty-five thousand Rhine boatmen and their families now
benefit from international regulations concerning social
security and conditions of work aboard ships and barges
of the river fleets of five nationsBelgium, France, German
Federal Republic, Netherlands, Switzerland. The ILO
assisted In negotiations between these countries which
have led to agreements under which pensions are paid to
boatmen Irrespective of the nationality of the ships on
which they serve and social security benefit is extended
to all. Above, Rhine river housewife shops at waterborne
grocery store while another (below right) hangs out washing
and keeps a watchful eye on baby. Nearly one-fourth of
all ILO Conventions deal with seafarers and cover such
questions as wages, hours of work, food and catering,
Below, crews' quarters aboard a British trawler; right,
veteran crew member at work aboard a German freighter.
16

The Unesco Courier. November 1959
ILO Photos
CRIPPLED AND DISABLED BUT NOT DEFEATED
Thanks to modern rehabilitation techniques, crippled and disabled people can learn to be useful and productive members of the community. At Solo in
Java, for instance, disabled Indonesians are being helped back to active lives at a unique centre set up by the Indonesians themselves in I 9 50. Today, the
U.N. and other international agencies are helping to run this centre. Above, left, an ILO expert directs the work of a trainee in the centre's woodwork
section. Above right, a future printerlearnshisjob. To help develop such facilities, the ILO has set standards aimed at improving existing services, provides
technical assistance and conducts year-round research. Its work is now going on in many countries from Brazil to Burma and from Turkeyto the Philippines.
ILO Photos
NEW TRADES FOR THE BLIND
Some four-fifths of the world's blind people, it is estimated, live in the
underdeveloped countries. Ceylon has some 6,000 blind and 2,000 of
them are expected to pass through workshops set up In Colombo with ILO
help. Here, blind men and women are learning some traditional trades
and, with the help of an ILO expert, some new ones. Left, trainees learn
the use of a hand loom. Above, hands of a woman trainee who will never
see again swiftly follow the raised dots of the Braille alphabet. She is being
taught a trade so she will no longer have to depend on charity to live.
17

ovel in action at a
usy phosphate factory, Morocco.
ckers handling cargo on the
t Casablanca. Morocco.
"eins are transformed
eek workshop.
men in the famed
factory, France.
5. Bringing in thé day's catch at
the fishing port of Tema, Ghana.
Photos © Atmasy, Part*
18

The Unesco Courier. November 1959

SPECIAL AID
FOR ASIA
In Asia industrial levels and traditions deve¬
loped by many other nations over more than
a century have to be built up rapidly if economic
development is to advance. At the recent ILO
Annual Conference, David Morse, the Director-
General of the Organization sounded a warning
that unemployment coupled with a rapid popu¬
lation increase is the biggest single labour
problem facing the world. Referring to predic¬
tions that the populations of Asia, Africa and
Latin America might quadruple during the next
half century, Mr. Morse said that there would
have to be a great and rapid increase in produc¬
tion and employment if this large population
was to sustain even its present low level of life.
Recognizing that the unskilled labour forces of
Asia have to be taught to produce goods and
services for their developing communities, the
ILO last year made this continent the principal
beneficiary of its technical assistance programme.
In addition, the ILO maintains a regional office
for Asia, holds regular regional conferences
and has set up an Asian Advisory Committee
to study the problems of this continent. Tur-
baned worker in this photo is checking struc¬
ture of a railway bridge in India. In handling
some of her labour force problems, India, now
carrying out a vast railway development plan,
has received technical assistance from the ILO.
ILO
NEW LOOK
AT AFRICA
Forty years ago when the ILO was formed there
were only three Independent states in all
Africa (Ethiopia, Liberia, Union of South Africa).
Today almost a score more have achieved inde¬
pendence or autonomy, and with it a whole
range of social questions and labour policy
questions have become matters of decision by
the Africans themselves. For the ILO this has
meant a reappraisal of its responsibilities in
the entire continent. In January ILO opened
an African Field Office in Lagos, Nigeria, and
last year it completed a comprehensive fac¬
tual survey of labour and social conditions in
some 3 5 countries and territories in Africa
south of the Sahara (African Labour Survey.
ILO, Geneva, 19 58). A similar survey of North
Africa is now in preparation. The growth of
Africa's labour force is exemplified by Nigeria
where the number of wage-earners quadrupled
between 1938 and 1956 and by the opening
in November 19 58 of an African Labour Col¬
lege at Kamala, Uganda by the International
Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Photo
shows a new shoe factory operating in Senegal.
© Almasy, Paris
20
