'Aficionados' won't believe this, but...
BULLS DO NOT SEE RED
by David Gunston
Do animals see colours? It is an interesting question,
hard to answer fully and conclusively. We, who
see everything coloured, can scarcely imagine a
world totally devoid of colour. For this reason we tend
at first to assume that all other creatures see the same
multi-coloured scene as ourselves. This is not so, of
course.
Colour is in itself such an arbitary, intangible thing,
and colour sense a faculty so difficult to test or explain,
that it has always been difficult for scientists to expound
about it with assurance. No object .really contains
colour, it merely absorbs the white light of daylight, as
everything does, reflecting back only one of the
components of that light, of the spectrum. Thus a green
leaf absorbs all the hues of the spectrum except green,
which it reflects, thus appearing itself to be green to
our eyes.
Just try to explain to a blind person, for instance,
what' red is without the use of comparison. It is quite
impossible. Quite' apart from the widespread prevalence
of partial or minor human colour blindness, and the
different interpretation put on the same intrinsic colour
by different people, it is also as well to remember that
our appreciation of colour is still developing and
changing. For instance, Homer always called the sea
wine-red, and the Ancient Greeks frequently referred
to the normal human face as green!.
Ultimately, everything depends on the optical receiving
apparatus involved.: A slight defect or variation there,
and the, person concerned may be partially colour¬
blind perhaps owing to the lack of one of the three
light-sensitive "pathways" from retina to brain. Each
transmits its own primary colour, red, green or blue (1),
Most people we call colour-blind are in fact only partly
so, having the green pathway missing, while a much
smaller group lack the red pathway, and so are red-
blind. These variations are physically very slight, and
are confined entirely to what we know as the nervous
system; there is thus the strongest evidence that
animals, many of which have eyes closely similar to our
eyes, lack these small features which give a colour sense
entirety.
Monochrome world of the mammals
From all this we can see just how difficult it is to apply
our own limited and tentative knowledge of colour
vision always remembering that we, ourselves, may
in some slight respect be colour-blindto other creatures.
The subject is one that, has provoked a great deal of
research, much of it inconclusive.
It is endlessly difficult to be dogmatic about whether
an animal can see a colour. No animal can reply
articulately to a direct question. Furthermore, in almost
all tests made with animals it is difficult to be absolutely
sure that the subject of the experiment is not choosing
or distinguishing between the colours shown by bright¬
ness or whiteness, and not by colour. For that reason,
any test that is to be of value must employ colours
of identical brightness and proportion of whiteness.
Otherwise, the creature, particularly if it is an intelligent
one, may distinguish between red and green solely by
brightness, just as many colour-blind human beings do.
(1) The term "primary colours" has become a somewhat elastic
description, embracing several different groups of colours distinc¬
tive for certain purposes. Red, yellow and blue are primary colours
to the artist, but scientifically speaking, the three primaries, or basic
colours each requiring its own cone cells in the eye for receiving it,
are red, green and blue (or violet). All the 160 odd colour shades
known to normal human beings can be made up of varying mixtures
of these three primaries but as light-waves, not paints.
But within the obvious limitations, we do know some¬
thing of the subject. Enough, for Instance, to say quite
definitely that almost all the mammals, with the notable
exceptions of the apes and the monkeys, do not see
colours at all. They live in a world of blacks and whites
and à fair range of greys. What they do often see quite
clearly is the difference in the intensity of the blacks,
and in the light intensity of the whites and greys, which
not infrequently leads people into thinking that animals
like dogs must in fact see certain colours.
How many times has a fond owner of a pet dog sworn
that his. or her animal can always, recognise a certain
coat or dress when worn by someone the dog may not
know, or can tell a particular dish or cushion solely by
its colours! It may sound strange to live in a monochrome
world, but most mammals are nocturnal, or at least cre¬
puscular, in habit, venturing forth only when the world
itself is a. shadowy, dark colourless place, lit only perhaps
by the pale deceiving light of the moon.
Learning to feed by colours
Bur we ourselves might not find it so strange. We have
never thought ordinary black-and-white movies
unnatural, and most newspaper and magazine photo¬
graphs are still reproduced in monochrome, yet we
recognise them as a reflection of life. Even a simple
black-and-white line drawing may be uncommonly
natural and vivid to our eyes; for all the human passion
for colour, we actually feel its absence less than we
imagine.
Dogs, cats, rabbits, rats, horses, sheep and even bulls,
we are certain, do not know colour in our sense of the
term. A great many experiments have been made on the
colour vision of bulls in Spain, in connexion with the
bull-fighting technique, and although they have all
shown that no bull can distinguish red as red, clear and
distinct from any other shade, and that bulls gener¬
ally are not in any way sensitive to red, the age-old art
of the toreador and his assistants with their red cloaks
is unlikely to be changed The red cloak is part of the
tradition of the sport and will doubtless remain, even
though those who use it know full well that it is the
fluttering, taunting sight that induces the beast to charge,
not its colour. A bull determined to charge will do-
so regardless of what colour is dangled before it.
A good deal of experimenting with other mammals
has achieved similar results, particularly with cats, horses,
rats and dogs. The tests usually take the form of training
the animal to associate food with a particular colour,
whilst showing it at the same time another colour un¬
accompanied by food. When the creature makes the
correct choice, more often than not, the colour with
no food attached must be gradually changed in intensity
to make sure that it is not only relative brightness that
influences the subject's decision.
If, at a certain stage in this colour "training", a change
in brightness is reached where the animal's reaction
breaks down and it expects food equally on either colour,
we can say with certainty that it is colour-blind, at least
by human standards. On the other hand, if the training
holds, and the creature invariably picks the correct colour
to obtain food, however much the intensity of the no-
food colour is altered, then we can deduce that it is able
to distinguish that particular pair of colours one from
another. However, this Is far from conclusive evidence
on colour vision, so the animal must then be re-trained
for another quite different pair of colours. Such experi¬
ments are inevitably lengthy and difficult, and care has
always to be taken external influences like smell, noise,
position of food, time of the day, presence of other colours
and distracting lights, etc. are avoided.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

BULLS DO NOT SEE RED re«,*»*»
Nevertheless, such tests have clearly shown the inability
of mammals generally to recognize colours, and the fact
that the apes and the monkeys do have good colour sense.
In this connexion between two groups of mammals, it is
Interesting to note that these colour-conscious species are
the only ones to have really bright colours on their own
bodies. (It might also be claimed that they have higher
intelligence, but there is no correlation between a
creature's intelligence and its colour sense birds, fish,
reptiles and Insects can in many cases see colours.) One
thinks immediately of the bright blues and pinks of
the mandrill and other apes, whose significance in
courtship rites is well known.
Most other mammals have bodies of duller hue: drab
greys, browns, black, fawn in endless combinations, or
white itself, largely designed for unobstrusiveness or
natural camouflage. Where a brightly-coloured animal
is seen, it is usually the result of human inter-breeding,
as with dogs, cats and cattle, or else the natural
camouflage shade of a creature viewed away from its
habitat. The red of the dog fox, the chestnut of the
squirrel, the golden-brown of the bear all merge harmoni¬
ously into their natural backgrounds. In fact, this pre¬
sence of bright colours is a rough guide to colour vision in
nature, if allowances is made for the possibility of natural
camouflage.
Hens are suspicious of blue grain
We see it most clearly shown with birds. They are
quite different from mammals, and can see most
colours with a vivid intensity. The striking
plumage of almost all birds plays a big part in their court¬
ship display, as everyone knows, which is ready proof of
their ability to see bright colours. Whether Darwin was
right in supposing that the bright coloration of male birds
has a survival value by being attractive to the female is a
matter for conjecture. ^What is obvious is the part such
plumage plays in a bird's life.
Birds generally see yellows, reds, greens . and oranges
most clearly. They cannot see blue so well witness the
comparative rarity of really bright blue birds while very
few birds can see violet, as far as we can tell. That shade
is. even less common on a bird. In addition, where blues
or purples do occur in avian plumage, they are nearly
always very brilliant, as with jays, kingfishers and
macaws, which seems to suggest that these shades can
only be distinguished by birds if they are unusually bright.
But the Australian lyre-bird, that feathered oddity of
great beauty and mystery, can see both blue and violet,
for it goes out of its way to select flowers of these colours
with which to adorn its arbour. In the main, however, it
is brilliance of colour that attracts a bird, whether it be
some conspicuous patch on a mate's or suitor's plumage,
the petals of a flower, the shining beam of a lighthouse
at night, or the glitter and sparkle of bright objects which
jackdaws and magpies steal and hide away.
Experiments on birds have been rather fewer than on
mammals, possibly because their ability to see colours is
so obviously demonstrated by their own persons. They
have also been almost completely confined to those species
Which can be kept in captivity with ease. One interesting
series of experiments with the ordinary domestic hen does
however illustrate the peculiar pitfalls present with
colour vision tests on birds. Grain was placed before the
hens and illuminated by a spectrum of coloured lights.
They immediately ate all the red, green and yellow grain,
but left that in the blue light, from which it was not
unnaturally concluded that these birds, at least, were
blue-blind. Only, later was it discovered, by further tests,
that hens would eat blue grain with a little persuasion.
The only reason they were originally shy of it was that
they never normally touch any kind of blue-coloured food.
Some fish can see certain colours. Perch, trout,
shanny, minnows and others have been proved by tests
to be able to recognize a fair range of shades. Perch and
other species have been regularly fed on red-stained
larvae, and then easily deceived with red wool. While
similar tests have been successful with food dyed yellow,
orange, green and brown. There is good evidence, too,
that prawns and shrimps have a colour sense. Probably
R. H. Noailles
BUTTERFLIES are classed among those insects which are known to
have the most marked sense of colour.. (Photo, greatly magnified, shows
a butterfly on a flower.) In the case of many pollinating insects, however,
the attraction to flowers is created as much by scent as by sight of
coloursas in the popularity of willow, ivy and lime flowers to bees.
all those fish species which can change their colour to
match their surroundings can see those, and possibly
other, colours. Curiously enough, however, no conclusive
tests have been made with chameleons, in spite of their
well-known colour-changing ability, although this crea¬
ture probably does see some colours. Certainly turtles :
have the faculty, and so have many lizards. Lizards
known to detest salt have been trained to reject salt-
soaked meal-worms on paper of several different colours.
Mosquitoes prefer a black shirt
Insects generally have a colour sense but it varies
considerably with species. There have been more
tests on the colour vision of bees than any other
creatures, which is hardly surprising in view of their value
as pollinators and honey-producers. A simple experiment
with bees was conducted as follows. Small squares of grey
paper of different shades but equal brightness were set
like the squares of a draught-board, and one blue square
was included in the middle. Each square was fitted with
a. tiny food dish, but only the blue square's dish had
syrup in it. After lengthy trials a bee could be taught to
fly straight to the iblue square, even when its position was
moved about the. board. Yet when a red paper of equal
brightness replaced the blue, the bee was flummoxed, and
could not tell it from the greys.
Bees are not only blind to reds: they live in a world
of blues, purples and yellows only, but they (and other
insects) can see further into ultraviolet than we can.
Many pollinating insects are of course attracted to
flowers as much by scent as by sight of colours witness
the popularity of willow, Ivy and lime flowers to bees.
As a rule only those insects with highly developed,
multi-lensed eyes have good colour vision. Dragonflies
probably have the best colour sense in the insect world,
with perhaps hoverflies, and some butterflies and moths,
as runners-up. House-flies know blue, and dislike it
enough to avoid blue-washed windows, or blue walls and
curtains, while mosquitoes, which are known to distinguish
yellow, white and black, appear to prefer the last-named
colour. In a special test made in an infested region in
Oregon, seven men ' wore / shirts of different colours.
Within half a minute. the black shirt had attracted most
insects, 1,499 to only 520 on the next infested "shirt, a
white one !
32
