TOWARDS A WORLD
HIGHWAY
by
W.H. Owens
© Almasy, Paris
Good roads are much more than efficient traffic
pavements. They link the nations and their
different ways of life, stimulate trade and travel,
and so help to advance the cause of international
understanding. The modern highway engineer, as he
conquers Nature's barriers and brings peoples closer
together, is making a really important and lasting
contribution towards World peace and prosperity.
Highway construction on a fast growing scale is in
progress in every continent today. Road teams are taming
the wilderness, stretching the frontiers of civilization, and
bringing remote and hitherto untapped areas of the
Earth's natural riches under development. As motor
transport replaces pack and draught animals in backward
territories, the primitive trackways and dirt roads of
tradition are being changed into all-weather surfaced
highways.
Great international projects like the Pan-American
Highway, the Trans-African Highway and the London-
Baghdad Highway are bringing the dream of a global
motor route nearer to fulfilment.- The time is surely
approaching when motorists will be able to drive round
the world on these trans-continental roads, stretching
from sea to sea and linked up across the oceans by a
network of air ferries.
Threading its way among peoples, scenery and climate
as diverse as any on Earth is the 15,000-mile Pan-American
Highway the world's longest road system. This is not a
single ribbon of road, but a super-international network
that includes the principal highways of all the countries
and states from Alaska south to the Argentine. There is
no specified route through the United States, for example,
because any one of a number of interlocking State and
national highways can be used to reach the Pan-American
system in Mexico or Alaska.
Over a century has passed since the U.S. statesman
Henry Clay first proposed a hemispheric road to unite the
Americas. Far ahead of his time he realised the
tremendous influence that such a highway could have on
the economic and cultural relations of the "Western
Hemisphere. Its importance is infinitely greater today
with the increasing development in Latin-American
countries.
By far the greater part of the Fairbanks-Buenos Aires
route has been open for years. Now road crews, backed
by further U.S. loans, are working with heavy mobile
equipment to pave the last, but most difficult, stretches
through the Central American Republics. These gaps
together total only 500 or 600 miles. But climate and
terrain in Guatemala, Costa Rica, Panama and neighbour
states have created vast problems and hazards, slowing
down the work. Sometimes the laborious work of years
has been destroyed by torrential rains in as many days.
This happened in 1955 on the Cartago-San Isidro stretch
Sine © THE UNESCO COURIER
Dangerous curves.
in Costa Rica, where 500,000 cubic, yards of volcanic soil
was washed right out of the newly laid road foundations.
No other continuous land route in the world can surpass
America's hemispheric road for spectacular and contrast¬
ing scenes. The Highway crosses the desolate frozen
wilderness, sun-baked deserts and the horizon-Wide
pampas; plunges through deep canyons and steaming
tropical jungles; winds up and down the escarpments of
mighty mountain ranges, 14,000 to 15,000 feet above sea
level. It enters the polar regions in Alaska and crosses
the equator in Ecuador. In Mexico and further south,
the Pan-American route runs hundreds of miles over
desert country where local Indian communities follow the
same primitive pattern of life as the white man found
when first he set foot in the Americas.
Some of the most important highway developments
outside America today are in progress in Africa, where,
despite rapidly changing conditions in the economic field,
communications are still among the most primitive in
the world. Thousands upon thousands of miles of bush
and jungle trackways form an intricate web over the
interior of Africa, linking village with village and pointing
out the safer paths.
But the motor vehicle has made its impact on that great
continent as everywhere else, and modern road transport
the key to future development cannot function efficiently
on routes that are extremely hazardous, and often im¬
passable, in the rainy season. This and the need for direct
links between new areas of production and markets have
made the construction of long-distance surfaced roads an
urgent matter. Prospects for African inter-territorial
trade are quite unlimited provided a modern system of
roads is built to carry it.
African transport conferences since World War II have
discussed the problem of long-distance motor highways.
The first steps towards an integrated network were taken
at the African Transport Conference at Johannesburg1 in
1950, where a number of primary routes linking the
various territories were worked out in some detail. Dele¬
gates agreed that the inter-territorial routes should per¬
mit safe travel at an average speed of 40 miles per hour.
Present road building operations inside Africa are widely
scattered, unrelated and planned primarily to serve new
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

Th*î Unesco Courier. June 1959
© Paul Almasy, Paris
NIGHTRIDE. Streaming south from Paris down the main highway to the Mediterranean coast, night-riding automobiles leave
a dazzling pathway of light as the beams of their headlamps are captured by a long photographic exposure. With 650,000 km. of
main and secondary roads and 119 km. per 100 sq.km. of surfaced roads, France has the highest density of roads In the world. Since
recent reconstruction work has been carried out, network is valued at £7,000 millionone-tenth of the country's total assets.

WORLD
HIGHWAY
(Continued)
1923 : THE MOTORWAY
IS BORN IN ITALY
mining, forestry, agricultural or irrigation projects.
Eventually, however, they will gradually become merged
together as part of a through continental highway system.
At the northern end of the future Trans-African route,
great highway improvements were made by Allied troops
in World War II. They completed the long Mediterranean
coast road from Tangier to Alexandria, while inland heavy
transport roads were laid over some of the traditional
camel tracks. So today there are two or three long¬
distance highways pushing southward across the Sahara
and the Sudan into the heart of Africa.
In May, 1957, the African Regional Road Congress met
at Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, and was attended by
delegates and observers from East, Central and South
Africa, the Belgian Congo, Portuguese Africa and the
United Kingdom. Discussions centred on the £10-£15
million scheme to modernize the Cape-Nairobi Highway
the backbone of future long-distance transport in Africa
over its entire length, and to develop the necessary' link
and feeder roads into adjacent Belgian and Portuguese
territories.
The tremendous value of this trunk route for stimulating
the flow of inter-territorial trade was emphasized by
Congress speakers. A South African delegate estimated
that if the Cape-Nairobi Highway was brought up to
international heavy duty standards, trade between the
Union and East and Central Africa could alone increase
to some £250 million within the next decade.
A particularly difficult section of the Nairobi highway
was recently completed in the wilds of Northern Rhodesia,
between Chirundu and Lusaka. These 94 miles run
through steep mountains and densely wooded valleys, then
drop 3,000 feet into the Zambezi lowlands.
Maintenance camps had to be set up at frequent
intervals along the route to service heavy road-making
machinery working under abnormal strain, and four
wayside stone quarries supplied materials. The immense
problems created by the rough terrain, uncertain climate
and utter remoteness of the site were overcome only by
the most detailed organization combined with excellent
teamwork between Europeans and Africans.
Africans themselves are playing a big part in the
construction of highways and bridges, and work with
great keenness and enthusiasm side by side with European
engineers and technicians. At Tala, in the hills east of
Nairobi, the Kenya Road Authority has established a
training school where young Africans from many different
tribes learn all about modern road construction and how
to handle heavy mobile machinery. After a six months'
course they emerge as qualified road supervisors and plant
operators. Equipped with their newly-acquired skill they
return. to their own districts to take a responsible part in
turning bush tracks and game trails into all-weather
roads that will make Kenya's new farmlands more
accessible to the markets and railheads.
In Europe the most significant road development has
been the super highway, or motorway, designed and built
especially for the needs of motor traffic. (Such highways
are most common in the United States, of course, where
thousands of miles of them have been constructed over
the past thirty years.)
The first motorways in Europe were built by the Italian
Government as early as 1923, but these autostrade made
no provision for dividing the opposite traffic streams. It
was in Germany and Holland that motorways with
separate carriageways, grade separation and full control
of access were developed; the first of the famous German
autobahnen built . on such lines, between Bonn and
Cologne, was completed in 1932.
Germany's autobahnen have been described as the
most beautiful motor roads in the world. No effort was
spared to. make them so without affec'ting their high
standard of safety, and efficiency. In scenic areas like the
Black Forest and the Bavarian Alps, landscape architects
were employed to adapt the alignment of the new
motorways in harmony with the changing scenery.
Ever since the war Western Germany- has been pressing
ahead with the task of completing the national autobahn
programme that was interrupted in 1939. She plans to
double her pre-war 1,200-mile autobahnen network in the
next ten to fifteen years. In 1956 the West Germans spent
£29 million on new autobahnen alone. In 1957 the figure
rose to about £52 million, and in a few years expenditure
on new highways of all kinds, including improvements to
existing roads, will be averaging about £125 million a year. .
Other countries of Western Europe are also gradually
extending their motorway mileage.
The Netherlands has over 400 miles of motorways
completed or under construction, and another 600 miles
are planned. The Dutch spent nine and a half million
pounds on motorway construction alone in 1956.
France is planning to build 1,000 miles of motorways and
150 miles of other main roads at a cost of some £300
million. Between 40 and 50 miles of French motorways,
chiefly on the outskirts of Paris, are already open to
traffic, and a further 86 miles are under construction
Italy has 306 miles of autostrada completed and is now
building a further 530 miles while Belgium has 72 miles
of motorway open, and another 600 miles are planned.
In Austria a new motorway of 196 miles, between
Salzburg and Vienna, is under construction. Built to
Almasy, Paris
POLYGLOT PANEL. In the countries which adhere to the international agreement on road traffic signs sponsored by the United
Nations, most of the signs lining the highways bear standardized symbols. On this Danish road, the International sign indicating
that one half is closed to traffic is supplemented by a signal panel in five languages which also shuts off the area being repaired.

© Dudley Noble
AFRICA HAS CHANGED since the days when David Livingstone was obliged to hack out a road through bush country and jungle
as he travelled from the Cape almost to the Equator. Road construction is being pushed ahead. Africa needs highways now to
develop both internal and international trade. Plans for new highways include one which will run from Cape Town to Nairobi,
with links to Belgian and Portuguese territories. In the north east, work on road construction and maintenance in Ethiopia has
developed rapidly since the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development made a S5 million loan in 1950. Photos show:
left, viaduct In Ethiopia's mountainous terrain ; right, a section of one of the 4,500 kms of all-weather roads in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
autobahn specifications, this first Austrian motorway will
link up with the West German system.
Thus it is seen that the countries of Western Europe,
too, are integrating their national road systems towards
an eventual network of Continental motor highways, built
to standard specifications throughout. Europe's longest
international route, E.5, runs from the seaport of Ostend
right through to Athens and Istanbul, and thence on to
Baghdad.
. While the western end of this route runs over some of
the world's most up-to-date motor roads the new
Ostend-Brussels Motorway and the famous autobahns of
Germany the Balkans end still has long stretches that
are far below European highway standards. But a great
deal of road construction and modernization is now in
progress in Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey.
The major road-building achievement in Yugoslovia
since 1945 is the 240-mile motor highway between Zagreb
and Belgrade. This is the fastest traffic highway in that
country and, apart from its level crossings, might compare
favourably with the new motorway construction in
Western Europe. A ¡key link is the splendid new Save
River Bridge at Belgrade, connecting the capital and
Southern Serbia with the highway to Zagreb and Western
Europe. More than half the cost of this £3 million bridge
was covered by United States development funds.
In Greece, more than half the road system was
destroyed or made temporarily impassable during World
War II. But in the past ten or twelve years remarkable
progress has been made with its repair and reconstruction.
This small country has spent nearly £15 million on its
roads since the war, and with the aid of American
technicians more than a thousand bridges have been'
restored to use.
Turkey, too, has made considerable headway with the
modernisation of her road system, and has more than
doubled the mileage of all-weather surfaced highways
since 1948. Such highways now total about 11,000 miles,
and another 700 miles are under construction. Much
work has been done on the busy Istanbul-Ankara section
of the international route, E.5, and this has been
reconstructed as a motorway.
In Turkey the highways of the West meet those
legendary trade routes of bygone centuries, which stretch
far eastwards across Persia into the heart of Asia. These
are among the world's most romantic roads, for they
include the early silk routes between China and Western
Asia, age-old caravan trails leading through Afghanistan
and the Khyber Pass into Northern India, and roads that
cross desolate and uninhabited regions on the borderland
of Northern Persia and Russia Turkistan, east of the
Caspian Sea.
Someday the European motor road to Istanbul and
Baghdad may be carried on through Persia and
Afghanistan to make a continuous overland route from
Western Europe to Pakistan and India. This motorist's
dream may perhaps become a reality sooner than
expected. For recent discussions between Turkey and
Pakistan included the subject of a long-distance highway
to link the capital cities of Istanbul, Baghdad, Teheran
and Karachi. This Would be part of the projected Pan-
Asian Highway to India and Malaya. (See p. 11)
Road-building achievements' of the future in all the
continents are quite unlimited. As they gradually
materialize, greater opportunities for international trade
and co-operation in other fields as well as undreamed of
travel delights will be opened up. But if mankind is to
gain the wonderful freedom that travel on the world
highway can offer, the nations must agree, sooner or
later, to get rid of the artificial barriers and tiresome
frontier delays and restrictions at each national boundary.
So long as we cling to them the purpose of a global
highway can never be fully achieved.

PAY AS YOU GO. Turnpike gates (upper part of photo) on the highway
from New Jersey (centre). Through traffic to and from New Jersey uses-
centre lanes. Side lanes (left and right) lead to and from the Lincoln Tunnel
which takes traffic into New York City under the Hudson River.
PATTERN OF
SUPER HIGHWAYS
THE U.S.A.
One out of every seven Americans earns his living in some
phase of highway travel ; 80% drive to work; 85% take their
vacations and pleasure trips by automobile. With an ever-
expanding economy and an ever-growing fleet of automobiles,
trucks and buses (now well over 65 million), the United States
has embarked on a vast construction programme to provide
enough roads to accomodate the nearly 90 million vehicles which
are expected to be circulating by 1972. This 16-year building
programme will crisscross the U.S.A. with an inter-state super¬
highway network covering well over 40,000 miles, plus thousands
of miles of state and local roads. Reaching out into every corner
of the country, the new web of highways will link 42 state capitals
and 90% of all cities with more than 50,000 population. It w¡ll
cost 8100,000 millionnearly 300 times the cost of the Panama
Canalbut with fewer curves, no crossroads, and a wide centre
strip, the super system is expected to save 3,500 lives annually,
reduce accident costs by S725 million and save transport compa¬
nies a further $825 million by cutting delay, fuel waste, tyre and
brake wear. Construction on this scale is only possible because
of the power, speed and versatility of today's road building
machines: moving assembly lines or. "paving trains" can place
up to 3/4 of a mile of 12 foot concrete lane, eight inches thick, in
one eight hour day ; batching plants serve up just the right mixture
of rock, sand and asphalt at the touch of a button. Photos on
these pages show some of the arabesque patterns, whorls,
intricate "knots" and geometric cloverleafs which are found at
the junctions of some of American's existing superhighways.
TRAFFIC PROBLEM in. Californiafrom three million motor vehicles
in 1 940 to six million in 1955is being met by massive roadbuilding
programme: 1,000 miles of multi-lane highways built in past ten years.
Above, section of Arroyo Seco road linking Pasadena and Los Angeles.
NEW JERSEY TURNPIKE coming from bottom right of photo crosses
Passaic River (centre) and Hackensack River (top right). In foreground
the Pulaski 'Skyway' is seen 'leapfrogging' the New Jersey Turnpike.
The 'Skyway' is one of the major modern roads leading into New York.

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
PENNSYLVANIA TURNPIKE, completed in 19 54, was one of U.S.A.'s
first superhighways. It runs 360 miles from the Delaware River in the
east to the Ohio border on the west, connecting Philadelphia and Pitts¬
burgh. This highway has no crossroads, sharp curves or steep grades.
PAY AS YOU GO. Turnpike gates (upper part of photo) on the highway
from New Jersey (centre). Through traffic to and from New Jersey uses
centre lanes. Side lanes (left and right) lead to and from the Lincoln Tunnel
which takes . traffic into New York City under the Hudson River.
(© Newsweek-Dale Healy
FOUR LAYERS of overpass bridges in Los Angeles, California, which
has more automobiles per number of inhabitants than any other city in
the world. The city has already built over I 00 miles of urban "freeways"
and is planning vaster network of highways to relieve traffic congestion.
LINKED MOTORWAYS. Near to Detroit, Michigan, these two motor¬
ways with double lanes, the other following the shore of Lake Michi¬
gan linked by ramps and underpasses. An arrangement of this type
keeps traffic moving at speed and cuts out dangerous intersections.
