As H-Bombs WAR IS NOW
mean mass
»* OBSOLETTE
BHABHA W
tab. is the greatest waster of
raw material that we have.
In many industrialized
countries l/3rd of the entire national expenditure goes
into producing instruments of war, which we hope will
never be used. We all know that atomic and hydrogen
weapons are very destructive, but I doubt if the ordinary
citizen fully realizes how destructive they are.
One has only to remember the bomb-damage, the des¬
truction in France, the devastation of Germany and the
Soviet Union most of this destruction was caused by con¬
ventional explosives. And the total amount of explosives
used by both sides together in the last war amounted to
between two and three million tons of TNT.
Now, one hydrogen bomb can have several times this
explosive power. It is of importance to realize in con¬
crete terms what this explosive force means. The area
of total destruction for a multi-megaton weapon, say a
15 megaton bomb is 5 miles or about 8 kms. An expert
has said that buildings in this area would be fraction-
alized, pulverized and vaporized. Irreparable damage
would be caused to houses within a radius of some 12 kms.
In addition, there is the radiation effect and the fall¬
out. Depending on the direction and the velocity of the
wind, 50% of the population would receive a lethal dose
in a strip 40 kms. wide and about 300 kms. long. Draw
this on a map of France and you will see how large it is.
I fervently hope that such a weapon will never be used.
It is the responsibility of every one of you to see that it
is never used. This matter is one where the ordinary
citizen has to express himself. It is now clear that with
these weapons a total war is not feasible any more. It
would amount to mass suicide or mass murder.
But there is a more insidious danger which I would
like to point out and that danger is the so-called small
tactical atomic weapon. Today such a weapon is of a
size comparable with the Hiroshima bomb. It may be a
quarter the size, but it is several hundred times bigger
than the largest block-buster of the last war. Such a
weapon must be a fission weapon and cannot be clean.
By its very nature a considerable area of the ground
would be contaminated with the radio-active fall-out.
To talk of such weapons as "small, tactical weapons" is
to deceive the public. And it is this which has such
serious consequences.
Now, it is a matter of some disagreement among experts
and specialists of atomic weapons and military experts
whether small, tactical weapons could be used in a
limited war without leading to the use of larger weapons.
As long as there is this doubt, the use must be a gamble
a gamble with the future of civilization and the future
of humanity itself. Would any responsible person agree
to permit such a gamble? It seems clear to me that
the progress of science and technology has made major
wars impossible and, indeed, wars in effect impossible
and we are only slow in adjusting our minds to the
changed situation. But it is essentially the duty of every
citizen to think about this matter and to express himself
forcibly. This matter is too important to be left to the
politicians and the military experts.
Charles E. Brown, Worcester Park, England
23
