PHANTOMS
OF THE BIRD WORLD
by John Westbury
THE CALIFORNIAN CONDOR
One lesson which natural history in¬
evitably teaches the ornithologist and
bird-lover is that it is never safe
to declare, without some qualifying state¬
ment, that a particular bird is extinct simply
because it has not been seen in its custom¬
ary habitat for from 50 to 100 years or so.
A case in point is the Californian Condor.
For nearly a century ornithologists had
considered this bird, one of the "giants"
of the air, to be extinct. The reasons
behind this supposition were sound enough.
The bird, a cliff-dwelling vulture known
also as the "Giant Condor", and found
mainly in California, had not been observ¬
ed (at least by knowledgeable people) since
the 1850's. Slow to reproduce, and un¬
adaptable by nature to man's encroachment
the condor (it seemed) had succombed
under conditions which had changed
amazingly all within the space of a century
or less.
Skeletal remains found near Los Angeles
strongly suggested that the Californian Con¬
dor had made his home in this part of the
world for something like 50,000 years.
Possessing great strength, a wing-span rang¬
ing from 9 to lie feet, and capable of
flying as high as 20,000 feet or more, the
condor seemed fitted by nature to per¬
petuate his species for all time, particularly
as his life span is in the region of a hundred
years. So it was with delight that a report
of "a huge, ungainly bird dwelling in the
Ventural county" was received by ornitho¬
logists a few years ago. An expeditionary
party of scientists and game wardens in¬
vestigated and discovered a number of the
birds living in the primitive wilds north of
Los Angeles. Over 25 were counted then,
but the latest count puts the survivors at
over 60, dwelling in a narrow isolated area
in the mountains, a region seldom visited
by man, which no doubt explains why they
had survived unseen.
Until recent years the American ivory-
billed woodpecker, second largest in the
world, had also been listed in the "believed
extinct" list. For centuries.it had its main
habitat in the ' Singer Tract country of
Louisiana, but lumbermen who laid waste
vast areas of the fine virgin forests here
also destroyed the homes of this attractive
bird. Then it was found in Florida. A
secret and guarded 1,000-acre reservation
was thereupon marked out to enable the
woodpecker to re-establish itself.
Speed saved the notornis
At the beginning of the present century,
New Zealand naturalists began to
believe that their notornis, a very rare
New Zealand bird, was on the verge of
extinction. With the passage of time this
belief was slowly turning into "certainty"
when, a few years ago, the notornis was
rediscovered in the Southland sanctuary. A
member of the "rail" family, this green and
purple plumaged bird is remarkable in that
it cannot fly, though it does possess rudi¬
mentary wings. Yet it is able to run at an
astonishing speed, a factor which no doubt
has contributed to its survival against its
many enemies sparrow hawks, stoats and
24

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
THE- DODO
THE IVORY-BILLED WOODPECKER
By permission of G. and C. Merriam Com¬
pany, publishers and copyright owners of
Webster's New International Dictionary. THE NOTORNIS
woodhens. It is hoped to breed the bird in
captivity to ensure its survival.
The saddleback, which resembles the
starling, is another bird which was thought
to be extinct in New Zealand. But a few
months ago an expedition led by Dr. R.A.
Falla, Director of the Dominion Museum
in Wellington, rediscovered the saddleback
on South Cape Island, a few miles southwest
of Stewart Island. It derives its odd name
from the chestnut saddle on its back, an¬
other oddity being the bright orange wattles
below its beak.
When it is clearly established that a cer¬
tain species of bird has not been seen over
a long period of time, it is natural enough
for ornithologists to conclude that it has
died out, and sadly to add its name to
those classical examples of extinct birds
the moa, the dodo, the great auk of the
arctic regions, and many others.
The moa, described as an "outsize
ostrich" in appearance was in fact a gene¬
ral name given to several species of flight¬
less birds which lived in New Zealand.
While the smallest species was about the
size of a turkey, the largest was around
12 feet high (i.e. more than twice as tall
as the average man), possessing a small
head, a long bare neck, short or reduced
wings and rounded, loosely-constructed
feathers. Though it could not fly, it could
run with remarkable speed.
Yet this inherent ability did not save
the moa, unless, of course, it still survives
in some remote and inaccessible swamp, a
possibility which few experts will even
consider. To account for its demise, vari¬
ous authorities have put forward theories
which are both plausible and interesting.
Some anthropologists, for instance, suggest
that it was Maori or earlier hunters who
wiped out the moa for they were very
fond of its flesh. An American expert,
studying the basic facts of their disap¬
pearance, has recently concluded that the
moas gradually dwindled in numbers be¬
cause they were unable to resist the tempta¬
tion to feed in dangerous forest swamps
that sucked them down to death. This
theory is supported by the discovery of
the skeletons of moas in the swamplands of
the Pyramid Valley in South Island. Others
say that various cataclysms of nature
earthquakes, floods, brush fires were
largely responsible.
No scientific doubt exists, however, re¬
garding the fate of the dodo, the pigeon¬
like bird found only on the Indian Ocean
island of Mauritius. The expression "as
dead as the dodo," summarizes its fate.
When early Portuguese navigators first
encountered the bird some centuries ago,
they found it was easy prey both for man
and dog, and so gave it the name of "dodo",
from the Portuguese word for simpleton.
For the dodo, three times as large as a
turkey, was so clumsily built that it could
not fly, run or even fight. Bulky, short of
leg, with a long beak and feeble wings, it
was no match for the island's settlers or
for the domestic animals that were intro¬
duced. By the end of the 17th century
the dodo was no more than a memory.
Feathers doomed the auk
Still another flightless bird which nature
seemingly forgot to provide with
adequate protection against its enemies
while on land is the great auk, found in the
northern hemisphere near Iceland, in
Greenland, northern Canada, and off
Newfoundland. Not unlike a penguin in
appearance, and about the size of a goose,
the great auk was killed off mainly for the
sake of its feathers, until it is now said to
be extinct.
A similar fate has befallen two much-
loved American birds, the beautiful passen¬
ger pigeon and the little Carolina parakeet.
The former, a long-failed swift-flying bird,
was once numbered in countless billions in
the mid-western States. Then came the
march of civilization, the destruction of its
meeting grounds and the mass capture of
the bird for food. In September 1914 the
last known passenger pigeon died of old
age in the Cincinnati zoo. Similarly, the
little Carolina parakeet was unable to
reproduce itself .quickly enough to counter¬
act its destruction by its enemies.
It is feared, too, that many other attrac¬
tive birds, among them the Labrador
duck, the heath hen, the Eskimo curlew
and the Laysan rail, are now extinct or
very close to it. Bird-lovers are, however,
hoping that the Eskimo curlew may still
survive on the Argentine pampas or in the
Arctic wilds, for it is a far-ranging migra¬
tory bird. But there is little hope for the
Laysan rail, a native of several Hawaiian
islets. When ornithologists found it the
bird was dying out on these islets through
lack of vegetation (this was being denuded
by rabbits); arrangements were made for
surviving birds to be taken to Midway
Island. Initially their numbers increased,
only to be swiftly decimated by the arri¬
val of. rats brought to the islands by ships
during the last war.
Yet, ornithologists point to the amazing
recoveries made by other birds they had
thought extinct, as a sound basis for hop¬
ing that some at least of these rare birds
may still survive. Before the war the trum¬
peter swan and the roseate spoonbill were
down to a few dozen survivors in their
respective habitats. Now they have been
found in much greater numbers, the form¬
er in the American West and Canada, the
latter in Texas and Florida.
There are others, of course, on the "dan¬
ger" list the cahow petrel still surviving,
if precariously, in Bermuda; the tall whoop¬
ing crane, an annual count of which at
its winter refuge in Texas reveals a steady
decline in numbers; the pure wild turkey
of the northeastern United States; the flam¬
ingo, scarcer than ever in the Bahamas;
and the tiny Bachman's warbler, only rare¬
ly seen these days in the swampy forests
of the southern United States.
While it is true that many species, extinct
or threatened with extinction, owe their
sad fate to man's tendency to kill them for
food, many owe their demise to á changing
civilization new methods of farming, the
destruction of virgin forests, wide-scale
building and all the other paraphernalia
which inevitably follow the changing pat¬
tern of man's progress.
25
