The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
Almost all of central Rotter¬
dam was razed to the ground
by a single bombing attack
on May 14, I 940 and by the
great fire which followed.
Today Rotterdam is one of
the most imposing cities in
the Western world, with
fine modern buildings, a
simple yet daring architec¬
tural style, spacious avenues,
and works of art, which are
all strikingly integrated into
the new urbanization plan.
Left, "Construction", a motif
in metal by the sculptor
Naum Gabo which stands
on the Coolsingel, Rot¬
terdam's "Champs-Elysées".
All photos Lies Wie£man (Ç,
Agence de Diffusion Internationale
MIRACLE AT
ROTTERDAM
by Michel Salmon
I love Rotterdam as some people love rain or the blustering wind or cold, stimulating weather
that quickens one to activity. There is a good reason for comparing it with the weather.
The sea is Rotterdam's cradle; it is the backcloth to its great stage crowded with docks,
houses, esplanades and factories on which rain, wind and cold often appear as actors and
"extras."
But Rotterdam also has its ruins, or rather its memories of ruins clean and tidy sites from
which rubble has been carefully cleared. "Rotterdam has not yet recovered from its wounds, but
the scars are not too unsightly," my friends in Rotterdam say, with a smile. Yet wounds like
these take a long time to heal; a town can be destroyed in a few hours, but takes a
decade or more to rebuild.
And now I am back in the centre of the city, walking down the Coolsingelthe
"Champs-Elysées" of Rotterdam. It looks futuristic with its fountains, striking statues,
parks, large new buildings and houses, its model shops and its glittering cinemas
*
13

MIRACLE AT
ROTTERDAM
(Continued)
ingenious combinations of glass, aluminium, stucco and
lights. The crowds surge and hurry along, and every¬
where there is a smell of roasting coffee, petrol and
freshly laid cement.
At the liberation, on May 5, 1945, more than 20,000 of
Rotterdam's citizens had been killed by the Nazis. Nearly
800 of these perished in the bombing of May, 1940.
As a result of the raid 11,000 buildings were destroyed,
and 25,000 families, or 80,000 people were left homeless.
Altogether, 2,393 shops, 1,500 offices, 1,212 factories and
mills, 675 warehouses, 526 restaurants and cafés, 184
garages, 69 schools, 21 churches, 12 cinemas, 6 concert
halls, 4 hospitals, the 4 stations, 2 theatres and 2 museums
were reduced to ashes. Over- an area bf 642 acres
everything was reduced to dust. There was nothing left
of the centre of the city or of the old harbour, so dear to
novelists of the sea, from Conrad to Cendrars.
On that tragic May 14, Rotterdam was set on fire by
incendiary bombs. High explosive bombs had already
destroyed the water mains and the firemen were unable
to stop the blaze from spreading. Rotterdam burned for
forty days and forty nights. When the last fire had
burned itself out there were over 6,000 million cubic feet
of rubble to be cleared away.
In the ensuing weeks and months, workmen had to dig
out of the ground, like so many stumps of decayed teeth,
160,000 foundation piles, of a total length of 1,240 miles
as far as from London to Moscow. (The soil in Rotterdam
is so loose and damp that buildings have to be set on a
foundation of piles.)
14
Mijnheer W.G. Witteveen, the chief architect of Rotter¬
dam, found a room in the municipal library, which was
still standing, and began to work feverishly on a plan
for the rebuilding. Though no rebuilding was permitted
during the occupation. The famous Witteveen plan
became a kind of a symbol and never was a secret so well
and yet so badly kept. The whole town knew of it ; and
the thought of the garden-cities and skyscrapers to be,
made destruction, hunger and fear seem less terrible.
I do not know how much of the Witteveen plan there
is in the Rotterdam of today. I have watched the city
recover; and, every time I have come back, there has been
still more feverish activity, with scaffolding everywhere
and the suburbs spreading outwards in all directions, so
that it gives the impression of a new city "sprung up
overnight," rather than an old city rebuilt.
All I know is that in July 1959, Rotterdam is one
of the most impressive cities in the West. From the
top of the Groothandelsgebowu), one of the biggest
commercial buildings in the world (it has 11 storeys and
is 720 feet long and 280 wide), you can see that a master
plan has been followed. In the background is the
harbour, with its stately lines of ships anchored at the
docks, its forest of cranes, hoists and oil-cracking towers
(the native of Rotterdam tends to think first of the
harbour and then of the city beside it). And from the
harbour to the polders delimiting the city to the north,
south and east, the 1,980 acres of this town of 750,000
souls is divided up into broad avenues, huge squares and
compact blocks of modern houses with green spaces

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
between them. (Almost 70% of the area of Rotterdam
consists of open spaces)
This is architecture on a humanistic level, architecture
to the measure of man, resisting the temptation to build
on a colossal scale and yet not infected by the nostalgic
conservatism which thinks it sacrilege to touch what is
old, even though it be a slum.
On the "'CooLsingeF' is the massive, Mycenaean cube of
the '"Bijenkorf", a department store designed by A Elzas,
of the Netherlands, Marcel Breuer, of the U.S.A., (one of
the three architects who planned the new Unesco Head¬
quarters building) and another American, Daniel Schwartz-
man. At every turn you find a masterpiece of modern
art a fresco by Louis Van Roode on the wall of the
post-office; a bronze by Marino Marini, taut as a bow
on the "Zuidplein"; in the station hall a sinister-looking
rock with the beauty of a black diamond, carved by
Umberto Mastroianni; an animal group by Anne Grim-
dalen in front of the Town Hall ; and of course Zadkine's
touching statue, symbolizing the desecration and resur¬
gence of the city.
Rotterdam has opened its doors to a "'League of
Nations" of architects, decorators and sculptors. From all
over the world they have come, and have created here a
universal idiom for the cities of the XXIst century. It is
a triumph of internationalism, in both mind and heart.
It is a triumph of understanding and international co¬
operation, in this great seaport opening onto adventure
the wide world over, and teaches the sceptical the lesson
that miracles can be worked by determination.
CITY OF AIR,
LIGHT & WIDE
OPEN SPACES
The new Rotterdam which has risen from the ashes of
war is a city of air, light and wide open spaces. In
the heart of town, shown in this panoramic view, seventy
per cent of the total area has been reserved for open
spaces, compared with some 45% in the pre-war city.
Though the area available for building sites has been
nearly halved, the erection of taller buildingsmade
possible by new, wider roadsand a more rational use
of space, has kept the building volume virtually un¬
changed. In this photo, taken in 1957, work was still
being carried out on the Central Station (left) and on
the Post Office building (left, background). Completed
station is seen in photo, opposite page. Other Important
buildings visible in rooftop view of Rotterdam: old town
hall with its tower and new 14-storey blocks of flats. In
planning urbanization, city authorities kept area on right
of photo clear for future development. New projects In¬
clude a hotel, a vast office building and a concert hall.
15

ROTTERDAM (Cont'd)
SYMPHONY
OF ART AND
ARCHITECTURE
A symphony in concrete, glass and stone, the new office
buildings and appartment houses of Rotterdam glisten in the
afternoon sun. The Rotterdam of today can truly be said
to be both beautiful and functional for its architects have
added to the basic utilitarianism of their designs the varied
works of decorators, sculptors and other artists of different
schools. The whole destroyed area of Rotterdam was requi¬
sitioned by the municipality to make a centralized planning
scheme. Former property owners were given options on new
building sites, but could claim compensation only if they used
the full amount for rebuilding. The result has been a rational
growth of shops and buildings (left and below left). Under¬
neath the great blocks of flats are a variety of small shops
which have brought the shopping public back again to the
heart of Rotterdam. Amid all these transformations, those
who died in the holocaust of May 1940 and throughout the
war years are not forgotten. In the Stadhuisplein now stands
a memorial to the victims of wara group of massively-hewn
figures by the sculptor Mari Andriessen (right and below).
I6

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
17

ROTTERDAM (Cont'd)
T IS REBOR
AS THE C I T
RISES A G A I
art which decorate the streets and squares of Rotterdam
are a triumph of international co-operation, coming as they do.from the hands of
artists of many lands. Many of these works have been erected as testimonies to
Rotterdam's destruction and suffering. In the Zuidplein» which is destined to
become the new cultural centre of south Rotterdam, stands "II Grande Miracolo"
(left) a bronze by the Italian sculptor Marino Marini, in honour of Rotterdam's
war victims. Centre, a group of bear cubs at playthe work ofAnne Grimalden of
MIBiaiMMIIWIHMgai
The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
the Netherlands. In the background is the City Hall with its tall towerone of the
few buildings which escaped complete destruction in the bombardment of 1940.
Since the city was reconstructed this building has been thrown into new-found
prominence by the widening of the pavement in front of it and the construction of a
new square opening in the Coolsingel Boulevard. Further along this sweep¬
ing boulevard is a small yet poignant reminder to those who pass of the city's
past ordealsthe statue of a mother shielding a child as walls crumble around her.
HI MliWIIIIWIIII
Ml Hi \
.<** m :
" «ÉPÎ
P 1*1
,;
18 19


ROTTERDAM (Cont'd)
**Í. ...
HARBOUR FLANKED
BY A CITY
The people of Rotterdam tend to think of their town as "a port surrounded
by a city", for Rotterdam is the Netherland's chief port and the second largest
in the world. Extensively damaged in 1944, it was back in working order only
six months after VE Day. Photo, above, shows the River Maas. An embank¬
ment and a broad boulevard have been laid out and a new inland shipping
lane extends right to the city centre. Monument at right, "The Bow" is for
war victims of the merchant navy. Below, two views of central Rotterdam.
20
