CURRENT
MISCONCEPTIONS
ABOUT THE
AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
by Ronald M. Berndt
Professor of Anthropology, University
of Western Australia
Most people, through the ages, have regarded those
living outside their normal range of experience not
only as strangers, but as fundamentally different
from themselves. The less association they have with
them, the greater is the margin for distortion. To some
Australian Aborigines, for instance, their not-so-distant
neighbours were "cannibals" or "promiscuous creatures
with no marriage rules". Disparaging others was one way
of emphasizing their own superiority.
Thus a number of Australian tribes referred to them¬
selves by words meaning "men", or "human beings": but
they took it for granted that this status was peculiarly
their own and did not apply to outsiders. They inter¬
preted What they saw and heard of the behaviour of
others in the light of their own preconceived views. In
this way, quite trivial differences were sometimes mag¬
nified until they came to seem overwhelmingly important.
On a larger scale, this is just what has happened in the
case of Europeans coming in contact with Australian
Aborigines as well as with other non-literate peoples. The
obvious differences in their ways of living were so great
that some of the newcomers claimed the Aborigines could
not be regarded as human. Not all of them went as far
as this. Nevertheless, the Aborigines have been popularly
and sweepingly categorized as the most "primitive" people
on earth, and labelled by words like "stone-age".
Certainly some such arbitrary label has been attached
to all sorts of people living in a wide variety of societies,
and scattered all over the world. Perhaps this didn't
matter much as long as people remained "pigeonholed",
so to spealk, with spatial mobility at a minimum; but the
situation to-day has changed so drastically that it has
quite serious implications. Anthropologists, who should
have been the first to point out the insidious character of
such terms, have lagged sadly behind although It has not
always been their fault since, like most if not all scientists,
28

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
Official Australian photos
they are essentially culture-bound: and in this they do
not differ radically from other members of their society.
Much of the blame here can be laid at the door of the
archaeologists, who in order to fill in gaps in their
archaeological evidence turned to living peoples who
possessed similar technical equipment, or used what
seemed to be the same kind of tools. These were, for the
most part, people who kept no written records; the
Australian Aborigines, among others, were vulnerable on
this score, and did not even realize that they were being
equated with early man. This is not a legitimate
approach. Yet it has survived right up to this day, and
has had an immense bearing on the general use of such
labels.
Although technological complexity is important in our
own kind of society as in many others, . there are other
kinds of cultural complexity which do not necessarily
coincide with this. Simply because the Australian
Aborigines used stone tools, had the minimum of material
objects, did not live in houses, wore little or no clothing,
hunted for and collected their food, we cannot compare
them in more than a superficial way with (for example)
Palaeolithic man. They are "modern men" (*) as we
ourselves are, not representatives of the "Stone-Age", in
the accepted archaeological use of that term.
A vague, emotionally loaded term such as "primitive",
when applied to any contemporary people, has a strong
connotation of "early type", perhaps "stone-age", but
certainly "crude", "mentally backward", and so on. Many
of us to-day prefer to use the term non-literate (not
illiterate or preliterate), to distinguish people like the
Australian Aborigines from those who share a tradition,
( See e.g. S. L. Washburn In E. A. Hoebel, J. D. Jennings and
E. R. Smith's Readings In Anthropology, McGraw-Hill, 1955, p. 108.
or norm, of literacy; even this is not entirely satisfactory.
Yet the bogey of "mental backwardness" or "inferiority"
has persisted from the past and is still with us. As a
catch-phrase, it is often used by members of one group
to downgrade another particularly as applied to people
attempting to adjust to a situation in which the speakers
themselves feel quite at home. People take their own
background of experience and their own way of life very
much for granted; and some of them find it hard to
believe that any "normal" person should have trouble
in acquiring the same familiarity with it.
Too many assessments of intelligence have been made
on just this basis: testing in an unfamiliar situation, often
artificially constructed, against a range of "givens"
relevant to the culture of the person carrying out the test.
And as far as the Australian Aborigines are concerned no
reliable information is available one way or the other.
There is ample material to show that these people can
adjust to changing conditions, under favourable circum¬
stances; and there is nothing, as far as we know, holding
them back mentally.
But, of course, any situation of adjustment which in¬
volves learning a new way of life is fraught with dif¬
ficulties which are not always linked with mental ability.
The Australian Aborigines are responsible people, with
a complex cultural background, and a fully developed
social organization but one that is different from our
own, with differing values and a different outlook on life.
There is nothing embryonic or primitive about them; their
development has merely taken place along different lines.
Traditionally, the Australian Aborigines were semi-
nomadic. The Continent was inhabited by many tribes,
their boundaries not as firmly fixed as has sometimes been
suggested. Each, however, was an autonomous political
unit, although there were some exceptions, notably among
the Wulamba of Eastern Arnhem Land and the "Narin-
CONT'D PAGES 30-31

MISCONCEPTIONS
ABOUT AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
(Continued)
Not a primitive 'Stone Age' people;
Not cut off from the outside world
yerl" of the Lower River Murray, South Australia. There
were some large cultural blocs, such as the Bidjandjara
and related groups of the Great Victoria Desert, stretching
across South Australia into Western Australia and Central
Australia. Also there were many languages, and diversity
in a wide range of other aspects as well. When we speak
of the Australian Aborigines as a whole, then we can do
so only in the most general terms. (In other words the
Aranda or Arunta, so well-known from the publications of
Spencer and Gillen, cannot be taken as "typical" Abor¬
igines.)
As far as traditional culture and society are concerned,
misconceptions about the Aborigines are numerous; but
two of these are especially important. One is that Abori¬
ginal society is (or was) static, that ideas and techniques
as well as behaviour patterns had not appreciably changed
over thousands of years. This is linked with the notion
of "primitiveness" already mentioned, with the implication
that their way of life had been somehow arrested in time.
It takes the form of such questions as: "Why didn't they
cultivate the land?" "'Why didn't they have any domestic
animals except the dingo?" "Why didn't they try to exploit
their environment instead of just adapting to it?"
Cultivation of plants
'contrary to nature'
Change, of course, is inevitable in any social situation,
and the Australian Aborigines were no exception. It
does not take outside impact to bring about change,
although this may speed it up. At the same time, in
most Aboriginal societies there was an emphasis on "non-
change", an essential conservatism. This did have certain
far-reaching effectsnotably in circumscribing personal
experience, and discouraging drastic innovation. In part
it stemmed from the basic tenets of their religious tradi¬
tions. Although for general purposes the distinction be¬
tween past, present and future was quite clearly recognized,
the religious view suggested a merging of one with the
other expressed, for instance, in the belief that the
Ancestral Beings Who lived on earth at the beginning of
time are as much alive to-day as they always were, and
will continue to be so.
Further, in their fundamental "world view" man was
part of nature, not opposed to it, and not sharply distinct
from other natural species. (This is, of course, in marked
contrast to our own approach.) The sacred life was of
utmost importance; but, contrary to what is held by some
anthropologists, the division between the sacred and the
profane was not always tightly defined, and women played
a greater part in religious activities than has sometimes
been acknowledged.
Against this background, we can appreciate better the
economic limitations of an environment in which, apart
from the fertile coastal areas, European settlers them¬
selves have not found it easy to exist without considerable
help from outside. Most of the Aborigines believed that
food of various kinds, like water, had been provided for
them by the Ancestral Beings: that their own part in this
lay on the one hand in the everyday tasks of collecting
or hunting for it, and on the other in performing the
rituals which would ensure that the supplies were maint¬
ained. In this view, the cultivation of plants was not only
unnecessary but, one might say, "contrary to nature".
Another source of misunderstanding has to do with
kinship. It has been said that Aborigines are predomin¬
antly interested in this, and that the social arrangements
HALF TRUTHS still exist about the "psychic powers" of the Abori¬
gines, their supposed mental telepathy and ability to work sor¬
cery or black magic. The romantic picture of Aborigines perform¬
ing spectacular dances and ceremonies also persists despite all
evidence to the contrary. Above, meditation over the sacred
boards, most sacred Aborigines' symbol of their desert culture.
30
FAMILY LIFE. It has been said that social arrangements based on
kinship among the Aborigines were rigid and unyielding. In practice,
Australian Aboriginal systems of kinship terms and behaviour associated
with them are fairly flexible. Aborigine, seen here with two of his
wives and their children, has a "Macassan" type bearda relic of earlier
days. In centre, foreground, is his wooden pipe with painted design.

The Unesco Courler. April 1959
RITUAL CEREMONIES
among the Aborigines are
things about which many
erroneous ideas have grown
up. Present-day reality is
far removed from the stories
that circulate. Except on
rare occasions, naked Abo¬
rigines no longer roam free¬
ly over the tribal lands.
Only in isolated areas can
one find these people living
approximavely as they did
in the past, and then only
a small handful, increasingly
depleted. While in some
places indigenous religion
is still a powerful' force,
rituals are performed less
frequently and with modi¬
fications. Photo shows a
sacred clan emblem being
painted on the chest of
a postulant for ritual at
Yirrkalla, N.E. Arnhem Land.
Photos Ronald M. Berndt
based on it were rigid and unyielding. Yet this is simply
part of the fabric of most social systems, emphasized more
in some than in others. In practice, Australian Aboriginal
systems of kinship terms and the behaviour associated
with them were fairly flexible. As far as choice of a
marriage partner was concerned there was much variation
within a limited range, allowing room for romantic love,
in spite of the emphasis on ideal marriage patterns.
The ghost of "primitive communism" has often been
conjured .Up in connexion with all this. But personal
ownership, and personal rights of distribution, were Well
entrenched; the sharing of food or the rendering of
services nearly always took place on a kinship basis, with
the expectation that they Would be reciprocated in due
course.
Another point about which a great deal of nonsense
has been written concerns the Australian Aborigines'
"instinctive" ability in tracking both human beings and
animals. Statements of this sort do not recognize that
such skills must be learnt and practice in them maintain¬
ed; Aborigines who have been drawn increasingly into
the Western European orbit quickly lose them. Again,
Aborigines, and particularly the men, are accused of being
lazy. The most popular example of this is that When on
a hunting or foraging trip an adult man usually walks
ahead of his womenfolk, who trail behind heavily laden,
while he carries only a spear and thrower. People who
cite this overlook or brush aside the fact that he must be
unencumbered so that he can use his weapons should
the need arise.
To dismiss the Aborigines as "naturally lazy" is to forget
that in their traditional environment, in most parts of
the Continent, they had to work hard for their living
or die. To say that they have "no sense of time" is to
forget that clock-watching is not the only means of reck¬
oning this. They are looked down on as* dirty, living
under insanitary conditions, by those who have seen only
the dilapidated shanties, or the static camps around out¬
back settlements.
In the bush the scene is different. In the necessity of
moving from waterhole to waterhole, from camp to camp.
each new site was abandoned before it had a chance
to become dirty; and any refuse left behind Would be
absorbed easily into the natural environment; as the tins
and old rags, so common to-day, are not. Then again,
there are the half-truths about psychic matters; mental
telepathy; the reading of smoke signals; the power to
work sorcery or black magic; resistance to pain; the
"instinctive urge" to go walkabout, and so on.
But to speak of the traditional societies and cultures
of these people is to speak of the past. The contemporary
scene is very different. There are no Aborigines in the
whole of Australia who have not felt, in some measure,
the impact of the introduced way of living. There are
very few people to-day who roam freely, living a tradi¬
tionally-oriented life: and it is safe to say that none of
them are unaware of Europeans.
Naked Aborigines no
longer roam the land
The Pintubi (so-called Bindaboo) who were recently
"discovered" had been contacted more than 20 years
ago and were not really far, as distances go in Aus¬
tralia, from Mission areas. In Arnhem Land, that 32,000-
odd square mile of Reserve in the Northern Territory, alien
contact has been quite intensive for centuries. Long
before Europeans appeared, traders from what is now
Indonesia had established bases around the coast, and to¬
day Arnhem Land is virtually encircled by mission stations
where most of the people congregate.
South and east, in the coastal cities " where most
Australian-Europeans live, there are comparatively few
people of Aboriginal or part-Aboriginal descent. Only in
isolated areas, such as in North-Western South Australia;
and East-Central Western Australia (where the activities
of the Atomic Energy Commission, and plans to open up
country for pastoral enterprises, threaten to curtail tribal
movements more drastically than in the past), can one
find these people living approximately as they did in the
past and then only a small handful, increasingly deplet-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Their culture swept
into the mainstream
of Australian life
(Continued)
ed through the attraction of settlements of various kinds
on the fringes of this semi-desert country.
Except on very rare occasions, naked Aborigines no
longer roam freely over these tribal lands. While in
some places indigenous religion is still a powerful force,
rituals are performed less frequently and with modifica¬
tions; and this is true for all aspects of their activity. The
romantic picture of Aborigines living in a traditional
fashion, performing spectacular ceremonies and dances,
has persisted in spite of all evidence to the contrary.
There is still a great deal of Aboriginality to be found, but
it is becoming mixed increasingly with introduced
elements.
Change, that inherent quality present in all social living,
has not left the Australian Aborigines untouched. The
picture to-day is of a people spread unevenly across the
Continent and not even now, under outside pressures,
viewing themselves as united. As in the past, although
now in a different setting, there is little interaction be¬
tween those in different parts of the Continent, and so far
little acknowledgement of any common heritage.
The dice are both
loaded and cast
Most of them /live In scattered groups in the poorer
quarters of the cities, or on the fringe of country
towns, pastoral stations, or mission and Government
settlements, incorporated in varying degrees into the Iwider
Australian community. They range from the unsophisti¬
cated to the virtually assimilated, with many in between;
but all have been caught up in the trend toward Euro-
peanizatlon, toward eventual assimilation if not phy¬
sically, then culturally and socially.
Although the policies of the various States and of the
Commonwealth itself differ on a number of points, they
all agree on one basic aim: that these people must be
absorbed into the mainstream of Australian life. Of
course, this will not be achieved by all of them at one and
the same time; but it can be hastened, as is the official
Intention to-day. The outcome, however, is a foregone
conclusion; the dice are too heavily loaded for anything
else to happen.
The greatest misconception has been, and Is, to regard
these contemporary Australian Aborigines, or at least all
but a few, as being primarily Aborigines in the traditional
sense. The majority have grown up under the shadow
of the European; and although in the remoter regions a
modified form of camp life persists, each year sees them
being committed irrevocably to more and more aspects
of European life. Once this process has begun, there is no
turning back...
Misconceptions block our understanding and apprecia¬
tion of traditional Aboriginal life as it Was in the past,
and as it is partly in some areas to-day. And these mis¬
conceptions inevitably have their repercussions In the
present, since they not only influence Government policy
in relation to these people but distort our appraisal of
the total situation.
ABORIGINAL
X RAY ART
Although the materials
and the colours of the
Aboriginal artist are very
limited, he uses the same
principles of line, colour,
balance and spacing of
degign elements present
in all great art. Photo
right, shows Arnhem
Land artist doing one
of the curious "X-ray"
paintings, so called be¬
cause internal as well as
external details are por¬
trayed. Below, "X-ray"
painting of a kangaroo. Photo Ronald M. Berndt
Photo © Unesco. From "Australia Aboriginal PaintingsArnhem Land", in the
Unesco World Art Series. Available in all good bookshops at a maximum price
of $ I 8.00 or ¡a equivalent in other currencies. Also obtainable from New York
Graphic Society, 95 East Putnam Avenue, Greenwich, Conn. U.S.A., and Zwemmer
Galleries, Charing Cross Road, London.
32
