INTO OUTER SPACE
ON RADIO WAVES
by Werner Buedeler
Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society
Only for the past thirty years have astronomers known
that radio waves, one of man's most useful servants
on earth, are being created within stars and in
inter-stellar space as well. Since the end of the Second
World War, however, these "messages" from outer space
have been recorded and scientifically evaluated. In this
way, a new science radio-astronomy has come into
being.
In the same way that the ordinary astronomer observes
the stars through his telescope, the radio astronomer lis¬
tens to strange sounds giving him information about elec¬
tronic processes in the solar corona (that is, the outer
region of the sun), invisible phenomena in the centre of
our own galaxy, and the expansion of the universe. Spe¬
cial receiving antennae, occasionally of tremendous, size,
have been constructed in order to pick up the faintest
noise from cosmic space.
Radio astronomers have obtained such a wealth of new
information in recent years that radio telescopes have
now become almost standard equipment in many obser¬
vatories. Radio-astronomy has enabled scientists to disco¬
ver colliding galaxies in space and the remains of super-
novae which exploded thousands of years ago. By carefully
recording cosmic noise (the name now given to radio
signals from outer space) they can trace interstellar
clouds of hydrogen, masses of this lightest of all ele¬
ments which are distributed among the stars. Recording
the electromagnetic or radio waves "broadcast" by
interstellar hydrogen on a precise wavelength (21.1 cen¬
timetres) has enabled astronomers to prove that our
own Miliky Way has spiral arms like those which other
galaxies in space Were already ¡known to possess. Today,
radio-astronomy is one of science's most flourishing and
exciting fields.
Photos USIS
EAR ON THE UNIVERSE. Giant antenna (right)
is one of two 90-feet diameter saucer-shaped
"ears" which work as a team at a California obser¬
vatory, picking up waves from radio-active stars
up to 30,000 million light years away. Some day
they may be used to track and guide space ships
as they speed far out into the universe. Above,
radio signals from the "Explorer" satellite launched
in January last year. This is how the first few seconds
of its flight were recorded on the graph of an oscillo¬
scope at one of a network of I 0 powerful Minitrack
radio stations in Australia, Cuba and the U.S.A.
set up to receive the satellite's radio messages
which it relayed during its globe-circling trips.
14

The Unesco Courier. September 1959
First, astronomers discovered radio communication in
space (it does not consist of "messages" sent by living
beings on other planets but of crackling sounds and
noises relayed back and forth between atoms) . Then they
tried to send man-made radio waves into space. Shortly
after the Second World War, they succeeded in estab¬
lishing radio contact with our nearest cosmic neighbour,
the moon. With the help of a powerful transmitter, a
radar signal was flashed toward the moon and received
almost three seconds later when it returned to earth after
bouncing off the moon's surface. This confirmed earlier
calculations of the distance of the moon from the earth
(it averages 238,600 miles). As We know that the speed
of all electromagnetic waves whether light waves, radio
Waves or X-rays is always 186,000 miles per second, it
was an easy task to calculate this distance on the basis
of the time which elapsed between the broadcasting of the
radar signal and its return to earth.
Making radar contacts with the moon is almost routine
today and, like radio astronomy, it tells us more about
this body in space which man himself might reach in the
near future. In the same way, astronomers have tried to
"'contact" the sun, Mars and Venus.
Radio waves in outer space came into their true glory,
however, with rocket exploration of the upper atmosphere
and the launching of artificial earth satellites. Here, man
was able to send a transmitter into space for the first
time and to receive its messages. The Sputniks, and the
Explorer, Vanguard, Discoverer and Score satellites all had
their own special transmitters telemetering back to earth
information on physical phenomena in space such as
temperature and intensity of cosmic rays and ultraviolet
sclar radiation (which does not penetrate to the ground) .
A wealth of new information was gained.
Then, with the launching of the Score satellite roaring
into space aboard a 70-foot Atlas rocket weighing 115 tons,
a human voice recorded on a tape (the voice of the Pre¬
sident of the United States) was transmitted back to
earth from the world beyond. Simple as it may look to
the layman, this experiment answered many questions
for scientists and spurred thinking in terms of true com¬
munication satellites.
A few years ago, an American telephone company had
already calculated that within the near future, communi¬
cation satellites used as relays for transatlantic telephone
calls and world-wide television service would be feasible,
even from a business viewpoint. Three such satellites
circling the earth in a 24-hour orbit (this means that
they would need 24 hours to go around the world and thus
they would appear stationary from' any given point on
earth if they orbited in a west-east direction) could trans¬
mit a television programme to any part of the world.
Very-high-frequency radio, now limited by the short
range of VHF Waves requiring costly relay stations every
30 miles, Would also benefit from such satellites.
The art of communication in space is still young and
We have much to learn before man can flash messages
from one side df the globe to the other via a space satel¬
lite or even a relay station on the surface of the moon
But the many successes which have been achieved in so
short a period of time prove that communication is no
longer restricted to our own planet.
THE TALKATIVE SATELLITE
Running on solar batteries, the radio transmitter of
"'Vanguard I" is- still functioning a year after it was
launched and it has created a rather unusual problem for
American scientists: they just don't know how to make it
shut up. Dr. John Hagen, director of the Vanguard rocket
programme, has commented that there is no way of
stopping it and it is now interfering with the transmission of
radio messages from other satellites. American scientists
are now looking for a way of turning off the sun-powered
radios aboard the Vanguards. Future satellites may be
equipped with remote control off-on switches.
CALLING THE FLYING DOCTOR. In the vast open spaces
of Australia radio is a vital link for people who live beyond
the reach of the ordinary medical services. Thanks to radio
links between isolated homesteads and the centres run by
the Royal Flying Doctor Service, people in practically every
area of the continent can ask for advice and obtain treatment.
Above, farmer's wife takes down the doctor's instructions
by radio. Pedal-operated generators are now generally replaced
by batteries. Australia also has its "schools of the air" for
children living far from town. The classroom of the two boys
(below) is their living-room with receiver-transmitter. They
live on an isolated sheep station and can talk to their teacher
miles away as easily as if she were in the same room.
Photos Australian News and Information Bureau
