The Unesco Courier. November 1959
© Almas/, Paris
On the ¿high plateaux of the Andes and in the valleys
of the Cordillera ranges some seven million
Indians of Latin America live at altitudes of
between 9,000 and 15,000 feet. They make up a large part
of the populations of Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia and they
reach to the south of Colombia and to the north of the
Argentine. Farm hands or peons, they eke out their lives
at a bare subsistence level, struggling against a hostile
nature and an impoverished soil. For centuries they have
lived in isolation from the rest of their countrymen, out¬
side the mainstream of national economic and social life.
The challenge of this great human problem is today
being met by the people of these Andean countries helped
by five international organizations. To raise the living
standards of these mountain people, to integrate them
into the life of their countries, to bring them hope for the
future and to give the lands where they live the full
strength of their hitherto untapped human resources
these are the aims of the Andean Programme.
This vast international undertaking |was born out of
efforts made over many years by the governments of
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, to integrate the Andean popu¬
lations into the national life. Because of the magnitude
of the problem, these governments sought the aid of inter¬
national organizations. Today, five international orga
nizations the United Nations, Unesco, the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion (FAO) and the International Labour Organization
(Which provides the co-ordinating leadership) are work¬
ing closely with the governments in carrying out the
enterprise.
In every one of the field bases of the Andean Programme,
agronomists, teachers, technical instructors, doctors,
anthropologists, social workers, nurses and veterinarians
are at work. They are showing the Indians (most of whom
speak Quechua or Aymara) to speak, read and write in
Spanish the official language of their countries; they
explain how crop yields can be increased; how to build
roads and irrigation ditches; how to make better homes;
how to prevent illness and how to look after domestic
animals properly.
The Andean Programme builds schools and model homes;
it sets up vocational training workshops in which artisans
and qualified workmen are trained; it trains local
administrators; and in some cases it helps to organize the
movement of whole communities to more fertile land.
The Andean Programme has received the understanding,
support and collaboration of the Indians. In the three
Andean countries the Indians are building schools and
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

7 MILLION FORGOTTEN INDIANS
(Continued)

The Unesco Courier. November 1959
ILO Photos
ON THE HIGHEST
LAKE IN THE WORLD
Situated on a plateau in the Andes Mountains,
at the dizzy height of more than 12,500 feet
above sea level, Lake Titicaca Is the highest
of the world's navigable lakes. As there is no
wood available, the Indians weave their fishing
boats from totora reeds. These craft are
strong enough to withstand the terrible
storms that often whip this 130-mile long
lake. It is in this region, on the high plateaux
amidst the snow-capped peaks, that live 7
million Indians among the poorest people
on earth. The fate of these Indians is now the
deep concern of three Latin American repub¬
lics and the U.N. At stake is the future
development of Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador.
23

7 MILLION
INDIANS
(Cont'd from page 21)
8 0°/° ILLITERATE AND AMONGST
THE POOREST PEOPLE IN THE WORLD
improving homes, sowing better seeds, opening roads, digg¬
ing wells, raising dikes sometimes on their own initiative;
sometimes under the stimulus of the Programme and with
the help and advice of experts from the field bases. To
help these technicians, Indians have travelled the narrow,
dangerous mountain tracks, carrying on their backs loads
of sand dug from deep quarries and heavy stones hacked
out from far-off mountains.
It would be Wrong to believe that the mass of the Indians
are complacent about their isolation and misery or that
they lack the will to improve their lot. The Indians of the
Andes have retained the love of the soil which nourishes
them; they are accustomed to toil. They possess an
extrordinary dignity and the determination to remove
their children from this crushing misery. Poor they may
be, yet they are nevertheless the descendants of a great
civilization the Empire of the Incas whose relics are
still being found.
The accounts of the conquistadores as Well as modern
archaeological discoveries and ethnological studies all
testify to the remarkable level of artistic, cultural and
social organization which these Andean Indians had
attained. Advanced methods of production and distribu¬
tion gave the Incas the chance to accumulate considerable
riches. The whole Andean region was linked by an
impressive network of communications. (See "The Royal
Highway of the Incas," The Unesco Courier, June
1959). The terraced fields provided enough food for a
people who knew how to build such remarkable cities as
Machu-Picchu and Cuzco in Peru and Tihuanaco in Boli¬
via, whose remains are admired today for their symmetry
and beauty.
But this civilization had not the strength to resist the
impact of the Spanish conquistadores who made them¬
selves masters of the Inca Empire some four centuries
ago. The economic and social organization of the Inca
Empire disintegrated rapidly, leading to the disappearance
of the ruling classes and the total decadence of the mass
of the Indians.
Most of the Indians lost the properties held by their
ancestors. They were forced to seek refuge in the most
inaccessible parts of the Cordillera, or to work in the
mines or on the great estates which Were taken over by
the conquistadores along with the people who lived on
them.
Despite past efforts of governments and organizations
to help the indigenous populations and to bring them the
advantages of modern civilization, the condition of the
Indian became more and more synonymous with economic
stagnation and social degradation.
The Indians found themselves forced back to the least
fertile land and to that Which was farthest from highways
and markets. They were reduced to bare-existence farm¬
ing and local handicrafts, scraping the exhausted and
unprofitable soil with archaic tools and Wooden ploughs,
spinning and weaving the coarse wool sheared from their
scrawny domestic animals, and living in huts made from
mud and rushes. The fate of the Indians who remained
on the great estates was no more enviable. They had
become peasants Without land, working on the soil almost
without pay under antiquated and patriarchal conditions.
This state of affairs today weighs heavily on the eco¬
nomy of countries with large Indian populations, whose
per capita income is one of the lowest in the world and
whose purchasing power is almost nil. As farmers, artisans
and miners they have long contributed to the production
of riches; in spite of this contribution their productivity
is low and they habitually consume nothing except a part
of the direct product of their labours.
How urgent is the problem? A look at the living condi¬
tions of the Andean Indians provides a clear and unequi¬
vocal answer. Their homes are sordid, dilapidated and
unhealthy. The average family consists of the father,
mother and perhaps four surviving children. Numb With
cold, they crowd themselves into a hut made of earth and
straw, a few feet square. They sleep in one promiscuous
mass on the skins of animals thrown before the hearth
whose Warmth they share With the dog, rabbits, chickens
and other domestic animals.
Surface water is scarce and they do not know how to dig
wells to tap underground Water. The few natural wells
are shallow and poorly protected against contamination.
When it is cold and the water is frozen, the Indians remove
their clothes to wash themselves only once in a matter
of weeks or even longer; their bedding is hardly ever
cleaned. "They never bathe themselves, they wash their
hands once a week, their faces on fiesta days and their
feet even more rarely", says the report of an ILO expert.
The hut is swept out once a month, and the little court¬
yard never.
In many Indian communities modern medicine is un¬
known. The doctor or the nurse have not yet replaced
the healer or the sorcerer. Herbs, potions and more or
less magical rites are the rule. The activities of the
The Indian of the Andes has an irrepressible desire for learning. "We know
that we are ignorant", they say to Andean programme experts, "We
want our children to have a better life, we want schools, schools, schools..."
The people of the village of Pulingui, Chimborazo province, Ecuador, build
themselves a new school. Mason is at work while children attend the old
school (in background). New one will have well lit, sunny class-rooms.
24

The Unesco Courler. November 1959
The Indians have been taught how to disinfect their animals and how to
fight animal diseases. Here, a group in Ecuador (left) comes to the Andean
Programme for help in improving their stock. Rams and ewes were
loaned to the farmers so that they could raise the quality of their
flocks. Centre, Bolivian women sometimes come many miles to attend
a sewing class held in a village community centre. The doctor is
beginning to replace the medicine man and hygiene to replace
superstition. Right, a doctor inspects TB vaccination of Peruvian child.
"healer" are particularly disastrous in cases of pregnancy
and childbirth. He can be said to be responsible for a
large part of the appalling infantile mortality rate one of
the highest in the world. The absence of all immunisa¬
tion measures means that smallpox and whooping cough
are endemic, causing the death of many infants. Tuber¬
culosis and other pulmonary afflictions play havoc.
Parasites are numerous and harmful. Food is monotonous
and inadequate. The diet is poor in protein and fats.
Badly housed and badly fed, the Indians are also almost
completely deprived of education. Schools are still rare
in rural areas, and where they do exist, they are short of
teachers and materials. Eighty per cent of the Indians
are illiterate and very few of them know Spanish which
thus adds to their isolation. Vocational, agricultural, and
handicrafts training is non-existent. The Indian is thus
condemned to remain an unskilled labourer receiving the
lowest pay.
The International Labour Organization has been concer¬
ned with the living and working conditions of indigenous
populations since the first years of its existence and in
1926 set up a committee to work out international stan¬
dards for their protection. (In 1953, the ILO published a
comprehensive study on this question: "Indigenous Peoples,
Living and Working Conditions of Aboriginal Populations
in Independent Countries.") It had already begun to study
the problems of the Andean Indians more than twenty
years ago, and in 1939 it reported: "Those questions which
concern principally the indigenous people... should not be
considered as part of the 'Indian problem' but rather as
part of the general social problems of the country, and
they should be dealt with rather from the angle of general
reform than of action on behalf of any particular race."
This principle was reaffirmed by the Conference of
American States Members of the ILO which met in
Montevideo in 1949 and adopted a far-reaching operation¬
al programme.
In 1952 a mission composed of representatives of the
U.N., the ILO, FAO, WHO and Unesco spent four months
in Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador making special studies of
the problems of the Andean Indians. On the basis of its
report the ILO drew up an operational programme which
was approved in 1953, and soon after the Andean Pro¬
gramme was put into action.
The first field base for the Programme was established
at Pillapi on the Bolivian shore of Lake Titicaca, on a
plateau at an altitude of nearly 14,000 feet. At the same
time an experimental school for textile handicrafts was
established at Quito, in Ecuador. In 1957 and 1958 the
Andean Programme Was being carried out from ten field
bases in the three countries with a large Indian popula¬
tion, the headquarters being in Lima, Peru.
The objectives of the programme better education,
Future local leaders receive Instruction in 3-weeks training course of
U.N. 's Andean programme. Returning home, they teach neighbours. In back¬
ground, students of La Paz University participate in first Bolivian work camp.
f^;** «.vis
ILO Photos
Campesinos build a road near Playa Verde (Green Beach) a sad, colourless
rock-strewn valley in Bolivia where the Andean Programme has established
a field base. Road will make village accessible for audio-viiual aid truck.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

7 MILLION
INDIANS
(Continued)
'WE NEED SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS
AND NEW WAYS TO EARN A LIVING'
training, health and welfare are being achieved through
action covering a wide variety of fields. For example,
following one exploratory mission an operational base was
set up in the central province of Chimborazo Which set
out to raise living standards in the rural Indian commu¬
nities of the region; to improve, diversify and stabilize
agricultural production and handicrafts; to introduce
general education and vocational training for adults and
young people and to improve housing conditions.
Here, as in other regions, the Work has not always been
easy and straightforward. In one community, for in¬
stance, it was noticed that although the local people had
reserved ground for a school they seemed to be in no hurry
to begin building it. Knowing the importance the Indians
attach to education, members of the mission asked them
to explain their indifference and slowness. "We prefer
to be careful", was the reply. "We know how these things
go. First they will send us a schoolteacher; and then will
come the tax collector."
Eventually the ice began to melt a little. "We need
schools and teachers," said the Indians, "since not being
able to go to school prevents advancement in life. We
also need potatoes that do not freeze with the first frost.
Can't we find a Way to keep water in the fields? In flood
time it carries off the little good land that is left. Can't
we be taught to produce things we can sell? We need
a bit of money in order to buy salt, trinkets for our wives,
tools. And we need something for the children, Who die,
but we don't know why."
ten times greater than in 1957. In the Playa Verde region
production has risen by between 400 to 500 per cent.
Efforts so far deployed have nevertheless been insuffi¬
cient to meet the needs of such a vast undertaking. So
the Andean programme as, yet affects only a minority of
the people and its results are essentially experimental.
The expansion of the programme will depend upon the
further development of government policies. At present,
the international organizations are helping to prepare for
the time when responsibility for the Andean programme
and its management will be transferred to the national
authorities. Thus emphasis must now be given to creating
the administrative machinery and to training personnel
for when the countries concerned continue alone the work
launched with the aid of international organizations.
The magnitude of the Andean problem and its meaning
in terms of human Welfare have evoked a truly interna¬
tional response. The Governments of Belgium and France
and employers' and woiikers' organizations in the Federal
Republic of Germany, Denmark, the United States,
Norway and Sweden have given equipment, machinery
and medicines to equip the vocational training workshops
and the medical centres of the Andean Programme. The
American organization Care and the United Nations
Children's Fund (Unicef) have given food packages.
Public opinion in Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia has been
aroused for this is a programme which seizes the imagi¬
nation. But perhaps the basic result of the Programme
is to have succeeded in reviving or arousing in the Indian
a zeal for progress and self-improvement.
Highway built by a kitchen boy
The highlands and valleys of the Andes Where the
Indians live are ripe for transformation into a region
of good pastures, in which the stock raising industry
can prosper and produce not only wool, but also meat
and dairy products, of which the Andean countries and
especially Peru are in need. It was With this in mind
that the Andean Programme began an experimental
pasturage project in the Puno region.
In the zones where the agricultural section of the Pro¬
gramme is being pushed ahead, the experts introduce the
campesinos to the use of chemical fertilizers, insecticides
and germicides. The agronomists explain the Worth of
selected plants and seeds, how to irrigate the dry lands
and how to drain the marshes. Veterinaries give demons¬
trations of cattle improvements. Sires have been imported
from abroad to improve the domestic stock.
At Playa Verde in Bolivia, emphasis is placed on the
training of local leaders among the Indians so as to pro¬
vide permanent and fruitful contact with the communities.
Candidates for the classes which were set up came in
from every part of the region and finally there Were more
students than there were places available.
When the students return to their communities they
teach their neighbours the lessons they have learned in
the centre. Their capacity for assimilating what they
are taught is extraordinary. One day an Indian arrived
at Playa Verde from Sacaca, a community north of Potosi,
about 100 miles away. Nobody had invited him and he
was not prepared to enter as a regular student. But he
did Want to find out What was going on at the base. No
one paid much attention to him and finally he installed
himself as kitchen boy.
Months later, the Playa Verde director visited Sacaca.
To his surprise he found that five miles of new highway,
a new school and three co-operatives had been built. Nine
students were having daily classes in reading and writing.
The author of all this, and also acting as teacher, was the
former kitchen boy...
In Playa Verde, ten communities were able to place part
of their crops on sale in 1957 and the areas sown in 1958
were three times greater than in the previous year. The
resulting harvest in seven communities near the base was
26
ILO
As part of the Andean Indian programme, the ILO has set up a textile
handicraft centre in Quito, Ecuador. Using the Indians' great artistic
tradition as an inspiration, the designs and colouring of the artisan
products were given new life. Exhibitions held in Quito, Geneva and
New York have revealed the high level attained In this workshop.
(See The Unesco Courier, February 1955). Here, trainees are at work.
