MAICHISHAN
by Anil de Silva
All photographs © Dominique Darbois, Paris

SUSPENDED GALLERIES IN
THE 'CORN RICK MOUNTAIN'
Just over a year ago an archaeological-photographic
mission headed by Madame Anil de Silva, of Ceylon,
reached the mountain sanctuary of Maichishan, an
impressive treasure house of Buddhist art in N.W. China
which was unknown to the outside world for centuries
until it was rediscovered some 20 years ago. The exclu¬
sive report presented on the following pages provides
readers of The Unesco Courier for the first time with an
unusual panorama of the almost unknown riches of the
"Corn Rick Mountain". Mme de Silva has spent many
years of study and research on Buddhist painting and
sculpture. Liaison officer to Unesco for the Government
of Ceylon, she is the author of "The Life of the Buddha"
(Phaidon Press, London, 1955) and two other works:
"Chinese Landscape Frescoes from Tun Huang" and
"Western Caves of Maichishan" shortly to be published.
The Unesco Courier. March 1959
The richest store . of Chinese Buddhist sculpture and
paintings which has become available to the world
recently lies in the cave chapels of Maichishan.
Maichishan, which means Corn Rick Mountain, so called
because of its shape, is situated in northwest China close
to Tien Shui, the town of Heavenly Water, on the railway
line running through the Yellow River basin from Peking
to Sian and Lanchow. Two hundred years ago, the wooden
galleries projecting along the West facade of this moun¬
tain were destroyed in a fire and until they were recons¬
tructed four years ago no one was able to enter them.
All this region has had a continuous history from
neolithic times and Sian itself, the ancient capital of
China, has been a centre of civilization for thousands of
years. Prom Tien Shui one drives across rich countryside
cultivated with maize, alternating with soya bean, melons
and egg plants. The roads are lined with weeping willows
and poplars, and children, like golden fish, swim- in the
rivers and pools. Gradually, as one draws near the
thickly wooded slopes of the western extremity of the
Ch'in Ling mountains, Maichishan is seen rising out of
this wooded countryside, a tall ancient pagoda topping
its summit. It is described in The Idle Tales of the Jade
Hall written in the 10th century A.D.:
"'In the North the Maichi range bestrides the counties
of Ching Shui and Weichow. In the South it touches the
county of Liang Tang. Maichishan stands halfway among
the ridges and peaks spread over five hundred li. It is
a great rock rising abruptly a million fathoms high,
perfectly circular in appearence resembling the shape of
a peasant's corn rick, after which it is named. On the
precipitous walls of its upper half, among the blue clouds,
were carved many Buddha figures and a thousand
chambers in the rock to serve as niches for other figures.
Although this was the work of man, one might think it
the work of the Gods. In the year Hsun Wei at the end
of the Tan Dynasty, I climbed to this place and left an
inscription..."
Another inscription formerly in the Hall of the Buddhas
is very vivid:
"A path like a ladder to the clouds was constructed on
the face of the rock... as if one were to mount a carriage
and pierce the mountain, carving out great niches,
bestriding the peak ridge and infinite medley of stars
overhead, all the land spinning far below. The walls are
covered with sacred inscriptions, the niches multiplied
with images of the Buddha. A Moon Disc Palace is
carved and a Hall of Mirrored Flowers."
Maichishan however was started very
much earlier than the 10th century. In
420 A.D. a Buddhist monk, T'an Hung,
retired to live there. Later he was joined
by another monk and soon three hundred
disciples had collected around them.
Cont'd
on
next page
21

MAICHISHAN (Continued)
A CLIFF
WITH 30-FT
STATUES
As the traveller approaches the beetling
cliffs of Maichishan the first Inkling
he gets of the art treasures enshrined
In this tunnelled mountain are the giant
figures of Buddha set on the rocky
facades. On right ¡s a detail of a
Sung Buddha (10th-11th century)\some
30 feet high, as seen from a nearby
gallery. Opposite page, another enor¬
mous statue of Buddha flanked by
attendants. Part of the significance
of Maichishan lies In the fact that here,
grouped together, is a unique collec¬
tion of large-scale modelled figures
dating from the 5th century down to
the 17th century A.D., for additions
to the caves and statuary were made
right to the end of the Ming dynasty.
The rock rises for about 500 ft. with colossal groups of
statues of the Buddha and attendants on its face. A
fissure in the centre divides Maichishan in two the
Western group and the Eastern group of caves. The Rai
Yin monastery lies at the foot of the rock surrounded by
thick jungle.
The Maichishan caves were excavated at various
periods, the earliest dated inscription in one of them being
of the 5th century during the time of the Northern Wei
Emperors. Today there are 194 cave-chapels, ranging
in size from as large as churches and abbeys, to as small
as shrines* All the walls were covered with frescoes and
numerous statues of the Buddha, Bodhisattvas, attendant
figures, disciples, lay donors, both men and Women,
guardians of the four cardinal points, apsaras or celestial
nymphs carrying offerings of flowers and incense,
heavenly musicians playing the harp, flute or cymbals.
For centuries all these have waited patiently to be re¬
discovered in the dim recesses of the caVes.
The names of the caves themselves are evocative: The
Hall of a Myriad Buddhas; The Nirvana Cave^ The Hall
of the Bull; The Gallery of the Thousand Buddhas; The
Hall of Scattering Flowers; The Cave of Heaven. In
ancient times wooden galleries had been constructed on
the face of the rock so that pilgrims and worshippers
could walk between them. The remains of the old
galleries destroyed by fire are seen in the long wooden
stakes which protrude from the face. The difficulty of
reconstructing the damaged galleries can hardly be
conceived, and carpenters did heroic work, using the old
stakes and sockets on the beetling cliff wall as they
climbed 150 ft. or more above the ground. .
The Gallery of a Thousand Buddhas carved during the
N.Wei dynasty (5th century A.D.) is about 100 feet long.
The figures are modelled in clay over a core of rock. As
one walks along this gallery with the figures on one side
and a sheer drop of hundreds of feet on the .other, it is
truly like a path in the clouds for on some days the
clouds float by on a level with the caves.
Though Maichishan was started under the N.Wei
Emperors (a Wei Empress actually retiring and living in
the monastery of Rai Yin) there were continual additions
in caves and statues right up to the Ming period in the
15th-17th Century A.D. It seems to have escaped the
effects of the three great persecutions of Buddhism,
known as the "Calamity of the Three Wus'". Each of
them lasted only a few years but great damage was done.
Thousands of temples with their famous frescoes were
destroyed; bronze statues and bells melted down; and in
the first persecution alone (444 A.D.) 260,000 monks and
nuns were forcibly returned to secular life.
Not one in a thousand dares
to climb to the Cave of Heaven
An enormous stone Buddha and two attendant figures
apparently of the Northern Chou period, under one
of whose Emperors the second persecution took place,
had been brought, no-one 'knows how or from where, and
placed in the highest cave, the Cave . of Heaven, most
certainly for safe keeping. A 10th-century description
shows how difficult a task this must have been: "Further
up from the last chamber there is still another excavation
in the rock called Heaven. It is reached by climbing a
single ladder suspended over space. Not one man in a
thousand has the nerve for this climb."
The Hall of a Myriad Buddhas is one of the largest of
these, caves and is elaborately constructed. Again we are
told, "ascending a hanging ladder from the western alcove
there are one thousand rooms and a myriad chambers.
22

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
The e.dge is unprotected and from it one steps on to air;
in climbing none dares look over his shoulder. Climbing
to the top one discovers a Hall of a Myriad Bodhisattavas,
more spacious than any of the great halls of ancient or
modern times. Carved beams, painted struts, carved
ceiling ridges and lintels with reliefs of clouds all are
cut out of the living rock."
Here the entire wall surface is covered with either
frescoes or thousands of impressed plaster figures of the
Buddha painted in bright colours. The great T'ang
Buddha standing at the entrance is about 18 feet high, his
hands extended in blessing over the figure of a disciple.
This cave, which is sometimes called the Cave of Tablets,
has 20 stone tablets carved with scenes from the life of
the Buddha and with sacred symbols. All the statues
and stone tablets were painted, and the centuries having
done their work, the paint is now of a delicate and
wonderful beauty.
The frescoes on the walls are rare examples of 5th and
6th century murals. There are scenes of battles,
processions of nobles and ladies, flying figures, donors,
disciples, figures of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas,
hunting scenes, palaces, forts and the everyday life of
those times.
The Emperors and Empresses who contributed to the
building of monuments like Maichishan employed
thousands of stone, cutters, sculptors and painters on
the face of the living, rock, creating such monuments as
the caves of Tun Huang, the P'ing Line temple, Yun Kang,
Lung Men and Maichishan which are undoubtedly
among the marvels of the Asian world. Though the Wei
and T'ang rulers did most to build up these magnificent
monuments to their faith, all the imperial houses in fact
encouraged and participated in this work.
For instance one of the Emperors of the short-lived
Sui dynasty (589-618 A.D.) ordered the construction of
nearly 4,000 temples, repaired one and a half million old
images and made 10,000 new ones of gold, ivory, bronze,
sandalwood, lacquer and stone.
At Maichishan we have excellent examples of the art of
all the various styles and periods, particularly the Wei
period which produced some of the most spiritual and
beautiful religious art in the world.
Most of the figures are modelled and are unique exam¬
ples of some of the largest sculpture of this type found
either in China or elsewhere. The rock of Maichishan
is not well suited for carving and the stone groups and
tablets found there were certainly brought from other
places, probably for safe keeping during troublous times.
Many scholars and poets came to the caves during the
years; some wrote verses and often carved them on the
cave walls. Wang Jen-yu, a poet of the T'ang period,
climbed to the Hall of Heaven; "'Looking down from this
position", he said, "one discerns the mass of mountains
like a low bank:
I have climbed the full length of the myriad-fathom
ladder suspended over space,
Making my idle body the co-equal for the white clouds.
Beyond the caves and far below how small the
mountains!
From the hall the level rays of the setting sun seem
low;
At the peak the road is perilous, few men can reach so
far.
On the aged cliff the pines are sturdy, the cranes love
to dwell there.
I would leave my name in this distant place beyond the
horizon,
So dusting the rocks I diligently inscribe these words."
23

MAICHISHAN (Continued)
24

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
LADDERS TO THE CLOUDS. Wooden
galleries and stairways were built in ancient
times on the face of the rock so pilgrims
could walk between them. Those projecting
on the West side were destroyed by fire
some two centuries ago. The caves on
this facade were therefore inaccessible
until a few years ago when the galleries
were rebuilt. Last year, after these photo¬
graphs were taken, the galleries were
again damaged, this time by an earth¬
quake. Entry to the caves is now unsafe.
One inscription formerly in the Hall of the
Buddhas vividly describes them: "A path
like a ladder to the clouds was constructed
on the face of the rock... as if one were
to mount a carriage and pierce the moun¬
tain, carving out great niches, bestriding
the peak ridge and an infinite medley of
stars overhead, all the land spinning far
below." (Below, view from cliff gallery.)
THE GALLERY OF A THOUSAND
BUDDHAS (left) dating from the
5th century A.D. has been described
as "a path in the clouds." Here,
figures modelled in clay over a core
of rock and protected by the over¬
hanging cliff, line one side of the
long gallery ; on the other there is
a sheer drop of hundreds of feet.
25

MAICHISHAN (Continued)
A HALO OF FLYIN mSmm
Behind the heads of the Buddhas, Boddhisattvas
and other figures, the ancient Buddhistartists often
made a halo or a nimbus on the walls of shrines
and chapels. They first painted the nimbus and then
placed the modelled figures in position. Thus they .
made a conscious effort to combine the elements
of relief and painting. In China the early haloes were
simply concentric circles of colour and the nimbus
bore flame and cloud motifs with flying apsaras
(celestial nymphs). Later the flame motif became
more complicated and elaborate, flowing figures
were placed round the nimbus. Similar developments
took place in India where haloes progressed from
the simplicity of the earlier sculpture to the elabo¬
rateness of later periods (5th-6th century A.D.).
Details on these pages, photographed at Maichishan,
include an apsara carrying an offering, a heavenly
musician playing the harp and other celestial figures,
enlarged from nimbus shown serving as background
to stone Buddha in upper right photo, opposite page.
26

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
27

MAICHISHAN (Continued)
f
IMAGES OF SERENITY. Some remarkable examples of Buddhist iconography from the caves of Maichishan. (1) Two Boddhi-
sattvas, or potential Buddhas, modelled in clay and painted. They have been depicted in. a most unusual "cheek to cheek" pose
which suggests two people in intimate conversation. The tenderness and gentle expression they reflect is typical of Wei Period
sculpture. (2) Lay devotee modelled in clay and painted in the 6th century. (The same figure photographed from another angle
appears on our back cover.) (3 and 4) Heads of two Boddhisattvas whose serenity of expression places them among the great
manifestations of religious art. The face of the second figure recalls the "smiling angel" of the Cathedral of Reims and, like No.2,
is reminiscent of French Gothic sculpture. (5) Modelled and painted head of a donor, dating from T'ang (8th-9th century) period.
28

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
29

MAICHISHAN ¡cmümí)
m* *:± - ; ¿ñ.mm&mM. p^m
BIOGRAPHY
IN STONE
The Cave of a Myriad Buddhas at Mai¬
chishan, the walls of which are covered
with frescoes and thousands of im¬
pressed brightly-coloured plaster fig¬
ures of the Buddha, is also known
as the Cave of the Tablets from its
twenty stone steles carved with sacred
symbols and scenes from the life of
the Buddha. The centuries have soft¬
ened the colours of the painted tablets
and given them a rare and delicate
beauty. Wei period artists sculpted
and painted the scenes depicted on
the stele shown on opposite page.
Details on this page are taken from left
side of the stele, respectively bottom
and fourth from the bottom panels.
30

31
