LANGUAGE: KEY FACTOR
OF INTEGRATION IN ISRAEL
by Pierre Vernier
Few countries have had to face educational problems
with such complications as those that have con¬
fronted the State of Israel in the last ten years. In
1948- the school population of Israel numbered some 100,000.
Today there are over 500,000 school children and students,
whose families have come from 60 different countries;
who use more than 70 languages and who have ways of
life and thought as varied as their tongues.
The measures taken to establish the educational system
of this country have been the subject of a study published
by Unesco under the title of "Education in Israel" in a
recent number of Unesco's "Education Abstracts." The
study, written by Mr. M. Avidor, Director-General of the
Ministry of Education of Israel, reviews "ten years' effort"
in the field of education.
Mr. Avidor points out that the salient factor in educa¬
tion in Israel is that "the school population has increased
five-fold during this period, although the general popula¬
tion has barely tripled itself. This brought in its train
serious problems of finding both buildings and materials.-
However, although at the beginning the situation was
difficult, in the last two or three years it has improved
considerably, each new village or community having a
school of its own, even if only a modest one."
Another acute problem was the shortage of teachers
whose numbers increased from 5,000 (1948) to 20,000 (1958).
During this period two major laws were passed affecting
education. The first, in 1949, made school attendance
compulsory for all children between the ages of 5 and
14. The second, in 1953, put most schools under State
control and regularized the system of education in all
schools. The period of compulsory education starts with
a year in kindergarten and moves through the elementary
schools. The young Israelis then have a choice of three
types of secondary education: secondary academic schools
under the control of the Ministry of Education and
Culture ; secondary agricultural schools under the
auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture or secondary trade
schools supervised by the Ministry of Labour. Students
continuing their studies can later proceed to one of three
fine universities : The Hebrew University in Jerusalem
which at the present time has six faculties arts, sciences,
médecine, law, agriculture and social science ; the Israel
Institute of Technology in Haifa which concentrates on
engineering and the Weizman Institute of Science at
Rehovot which engages in pure, and in some cases, applied
research in the exact sciences.
Classroom babble of tongues
Special schools have been established for young Arabs
living in Israel, mainly in the region of Nazareth
where 85 percent of the Arab population of the
country is concentrated. In these schools the Arab chil¬
dren, Moslem and Christian alike, are taught in Arabic,
Hebrew and English being regarded as second languages.
The school attendance of the boys is very satisfactory,
being over 90%, but only 50% of girls between the ages of
6 and 14 attend. Even this figure marks an improvement
on the period prior to the creation of the State of Israel.
The most interesting part of Mr. Avidor's report,
however, deals with the assimilation of the immigrants.
Coming from 60 countries, they speak more than 70
different languages and dialects and there was a danger
at one time that the Hebrew language would be submerged
under the influx of the new arrivals^some 700,000 in
four years.
"That this did not happen," writes Mr. Avidor, "Was due
to two factors the. multiplicity of languages which the
immigrants brought with them which forced them to use
one, and the rapid absorption of children into schools. In
each school the children arrived speaking a dozen or
more languages which made them turn quickly to a
common language, Hebrew, in order to communicate with
each other."
For the Israeli authorities, language is an essential
factor in the integration process, and the first objective of
the adult education programme, which is highly develop¬
ed all over the country, is to teach Hebrew to the new
arrivals. The Government, local authorities, labour or¬
ganizations and various voluntary bodies conduct courses
for adults, most outstanding of which are five or six-
month intensive courses held in the so-called "Ulpanim."
Though Hebrew constitutes a common denominator of
language, the problem still remains to find a common
denominator of culture for such a heterogeneous popula¬
tion in such a restricted area.
So adult education aims at giving a basic education to
new-comers who have never been to school and at the
same time providing general training to people over 16
who seek additional knowledge and skills. Courses have
been organised to this end all over the country and at all
levels by the Government, by the General Labour Federa¬
tion and by the Israeli Army which also performs a useful
educational function.
To accomplish so difficult a task, the educators and
leaders of Israel have used experimental methods and
Mr. Avidor notes that they have achieved more successes
than failures. This period of ten years has been long
enough to show that great progress has been made in
raising the cultural level of the new immigrants,
particularly of the younger generation, and the results
already obtained augur well for the future.
"Education in Israel" is one of a series of studies and
bibliographies published by Unesco on different national
systems of education.
WHAT ISRAELI YOUTH READS
The high literary standard of the books read by young
people in Israel is revealed by a recent study carried
out at the request of Israel's Minister of Education
and Culture among 1,500 eleventh grade pupils (aged 16-17)
attending 66 educational institutions.
Out of the 20 most widely read books, 16 were transla¬
tions and four were original Hebrew works. More than a
third of the young people questioned said that they preferred
translated works to original Hebrew ones. Heading the list
of favourite foreign authors was Tolstoy (32 per cent),
followed by Cronin (22 per cent), Steinbeck (20 per cent),
Pearl Buck (20 per cent) and Dostoïevski (19 per cent).
Among favourite Hebrew authors were Moshe Shamir
(65 per cent) and S.I. Agnon (26 per cent).
The survey showed that 80 per cent of the books read
by adolescents were novels. Top place was held by Hugo's
"Les Misérables", followed in order of popularity by "The
Diary of Anne Frank", "'War and Peace" and "The Caine
Mutiny". Researchers noted that all of the twenty most
popular books were prose works, one quarter were war
books, twelve had been published in recent years and three,
belonged to classical literature. .
Forty per cent of students questioned were members of
youth movements who had read an average of 56 books
apiece compared with 44 books read by non-members.
Secondary schools in the large towns have the highest
average of reading: 71 books. In teachers' training colleges
the rate is 60, in provincial secondary schools, 50. Classi¬
fication of readers according to parents' countries of origin
showed that the children of parents from Russia, Poland
and Lithuania read far more than any other groups.
Following the survey, the Ministry of Education and '
Culture has decided to introduce compulsory home reading
of books from a selected list in post-primary schools.
28
