
The Unesco Courier. November 1959
The ILO was born in 1919 but its origin is to be found
in the introduction of steam driven machinery into
the factories nearly a century earlier. This produced
an industrial revolution of which the two main features
were immensely greater production than had been possible
by unaided human labour and conditions for factory
workers as revolting as the worst forms of slavery.
The effort of the workers to defend themselves against
pitiless exploitation led to the formation of trades unions.
Simultaneously, as public opinion became increasingly
shocked by conditions in the factories, an effort was made
to secure legislation setting up minimum standards of
employment.
Since the goods produced had to compete on the inter¬
national market, it speedily became apparent that both
these efforts must take on an international character.
Trades unions established international federations; and
an international association for international labour
legislation was formed by those who were active in seeking
remedial measures by legal enactment.
This latter body had no official character; it Was unable
to do more than formulate proposals in the hope that
some enlightened government might initiate diplomatic
action to bring them into operation. The results were
meagre but they pointed the road along which progress
could be made.
At the end of the first world war the British Govern¬
ment urged the Peace Conference to create an official
institution charged with the task of formulating
and supervising the application of international labour
by Edward J. Phelan
ILO Director 1941-1948
legislation. After long discussion all the essential
elements of the British proposals were incorporated in the
Treaty of Versailles.
The new institution embodied several bold and novel
features. Workers and employers were to take part in
its operations with the same status and powers as gov¬
ernmental representatives; a two-thirds majority could
secure the adoption of a convention; any convention
adopted had to be submitted to the national parliaments,
thus leaving the final decision on ratification with public
opinion in each country.
These provisions were a revolutionary departure from
all traditional diplomatic procedure.
The approval of the Peace Conference was given on
April 11, 1919, and five months later the ILO held its
first conference in Washington.
The Conference achieved an astonishing measure of
success. Agreement was reached on all the technical
items of the agenda including the question of the limi¬
tation of hours of work to eight in the day and 48 in the
week. But, in addition, the Conference settled a number
of general questions of fundamental importance.
It asserted its political supremacy by admitting
Germany and Austria to membership of the Organization;
it perfected its rules of procedure; and it overcame the
difficulties encountered in constituting the Governing
Body, to which fell the task of completing the structure of
the Organization by choosing the Director of the Inter¬
national Labour Office.
In appointing Albert Thomas, the great French trade
union leader, to this post the Governing Body made a
choice which was to have a profound influence on the
future of the ILO. He had a genius for creative leadership
and his new functions gave him a unique opportunity for
its exercise. He saw the ILO not only as an instrument
for formulating international labour legislation but as a
living organism to which had been confided the mission of
furthering social justice. He boldly insisted that the ILO
had rights that must be respected, and these he proceeded
to assert even before the Supreme Council whose
authority at that time dominated the international scene.
His claim that the ILO was entitled to intervene in all
international discussions which might have social
repercussions seemed wholly unrealistic. The ILO for
which he demanded so powerful a status could hardly be
said to exist.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

For social justice (Continued)
Only in the course of time did it become evident that he
had sensed the stirring of new aspirations in a troubled
world; only slowly did his view prevail that the Organiza¬
tion with its uniquely representational character could
offer the prospect of securing effective progress towards
their fulfillment.
From 1920 to 1932 the ILO pursued two efforts which
acted and reacted on one another. The task of elaborat¬
ing international labour legislation was pressed forward
with such energy that the body of decisions adopted by
the Conference began to take on the dimensions of a com¬
prehensive international labour code.
At the same time the
foundations of the Or¬
ganization were streng¬
thened in its Member
States by the steady
growth of the con¬
viction that the ILO's
activities were of direct
interest to each mem¬
ber however special or
isolated its own parti¬
cular problems might
appear.
A similar develop¬
ment took place in the
opinion of organized
labour. At the begin¬
ning, the trades unions
movement had been
sceptical about the val¬
ue of the ILO. It had
demanded that the
Peace Conference
should itself lay down
a number of labour
standards, and it was
far from satisfied by
the decision to remit
the task of defining
such standards to a
special institution.
The ILO's activities,
however, supplied con¬
vincing proof that
the Organization could
achieve results of great
importance.
It succeeded in set¬
ting standards for con¬
ditions in agriculture
where trades unions
were weak and, in¬
deed, often inexistent;
through its representa¬
tion on the Mandates
Commission it secured
active consideration for
labour conditions in
the mandated terri¬
tories; it incited greatly
increased activity con¬
cerning labour prob¬
lems in colonies and possessions; it made its voice heard
in international discussions of economic issues; its exis¬
tence led to the formation of trades unions for the first
time in some countries, while in others it secured for them
a recognition and a status not hitherto accorded. As the
possibilities inherent in such achievements began to be
understood organized labour gave the ILO its whole¬
hearted support.
Thus when Albert Thomas died in 1932 his vision of
what the ILO might become was well on the way to
realization. Under Harold Butler, his successor, the
Organization continued to progress.
As the shadow of events became steadily more menacing
the Governing Body endeavoured to provide for the
situation the ILO would face if War broke out.
The Governing Body decided that the Organization must
continue to function in every way possible. It provided for
8
the exercise of its own powers by a small Emergency
Committee if it itself should be unable to meet; and it
obtained assurances from governments that the staff of
the Office would not be disorganized by measures of
national mobilization.
The situation that developed proved far graver than
could have been anticipated. Switzerland escaped invasion
but she was isolated in the middle of a continent
dominated by the Axis powers.
The war affected every country on the globe. Govern¬
ments everywhere were faced by acute problems arising
out of the dislocation of world trade and it was not to be
expected that they
could give any great
attention to the ILO.
PREAMBLE TO ILO CHARTER
IN TREATY OF VERSAILLES
Whereas universal and lasting peace can be estab¬
lished only if it is based upon social justice.
And whereas conditions of labour exist involving
such injustice, hardship and privation to large num¬
bers of people as to produce unrest so great that the
peace and harmony of the world are imperilled; and
an improvement of those conditions is urgently
required: as, for example, by the regulation of the
hours of work, including the establishment of a
maximum working day and week, the regulation of
the labour supply, the prevention of unemployment,
the provision of an adequate living wage, the pro¬
tection of the worker against sickness, disease and
injury arising out of his employment, the protection
of children, young persons and women, provision for
old age and injury, protection of the interests of
workers when employed in countries other than
their own, recognition of the principle of equal
remuneration for work of equal value, recognition
of the principle of freedom of association, the orga¬
nization of vocational and technical education and
other measures ;
Whereas also the failure of any nation to adopt
humane conditions of labour is an obstacle in the
way of other nations which desire to improve the
conditions in their own countries;
The High Contracting Parties, moved by senti¬
ments of justice and humanity as well as by the
desire to secure the permanent peace of the world,
and with a view to attaining the objectives set forth
in this Preamble, agree to the following Constitution
of the International Labour Organization.
PREAMBLE TO THE ILO CONSTITUTION (INCORPORATED IN THE VERSAILLES TREATY).
But a new element
soon appeared in the
situation. A wave of
opinion began to sweep
through the free world.
Voices were heard on
every side, not only
from workers' organi¬
zations but from heads
of governments, reli¬
gious authorities of all
creeds, and political
leaders of all parties,
demanding that in the
reconstruction of the
post-war world social
obj ectives must be
given the predominant
place.
Here, coming to the
surface with striking
unanimity, was the
movement for social
justice the first stirring
of which Albert Tho¬
mas had sensed twenty
years before.lt was evi¬
dent that the practical
attainment of such ob¬
jectives would require
both national and in¬
ternational action.
The ILO was admi¬
rably constituted to co¬
ordinate the one and
to promote the other.
Not only was it equip¬
ped with the neces¬
sary technical know¬
ledge but it was the
only international org¬
anization of a general
character of which
the United States was
a member.
Would it be used?
Weakened as it was
could it muster the will
and the strength to claim its place?
The answer was given when on October 27, 1941 some
two hundred delegates and advisers from thirty-five of its
Member States assembled in New York.
Thus revitalized and encouraged the Organization was
able to overcome the material difficulties created by war
conditions and to hold a series of representative meetings
which culminated in the Philadelphia Conference of 1944.
That Conference formulated in clear terms the social
principles that should guide post-war policy and asserted
the right of the ^International Labour Organization to
examine and draw attention to the social repercussions of
any action taken by other international institutions.
These decisions were embodied in the Declaration of
Philadelphia, a document which President Roosevelt
enthusiastically hailed as "summing up the aspirations of
an epoch."
