An invisible sea around us
The Unesco Courier. January 1959
THE ENCIRCLING AIR
by Kenneth Johns
Over and around us flows an encompassing blanket of
an invisible atmospheric ocean shielding yet forever
moulding the crust of the Earth with its tenuous
fingers of gas and vapour.
This aerial shield, with its yearly tides and complex day-
to-day movements, is all that stands between us and an
environment as harsh as that at the Moon's surface. The
air acts as a vast energy-carrier and, with the aid of the
great heat reservoir of the oceans, moderates the world's
climates. Without this comforting atmospheric overcoat,
the temperature could drop to below the temperature of
liquid air at night and soar to a baking 110° during the
day.
Under these conditions, life would not only be nearly
impossible; it is scarcely conceivable that life as we know
it could ever have begun.
Yet the presence of air alone would not be enough to
make our planet hospitable to life; complex and wide¬
spread global airstreams are essential to distribute heat
and moisture fairly evenly over the surface. Without the
tremendous mass movements of air the Earth would be
divided into zones of extremes. The lands Would be
sterile, rocky continents, seared by unfiltered sunlight
during the day for there could be no clouds, no rain, no
rivers to soften the rugged structure of uplifted primeval
mountains; there would be no alluvial soil to fill the
valleys and no fertile plains to be clothed by the lushness
of plant life.
Only in a thin and precarious band around the coasts
would moisture diffuse in from the seas to combat the
stark glare of the sun. Sunburned deserts would extend
across continents, on both sides of the Equator, and
Tibetan-like tundras, frozen and bleak, would stretch
polewards. The frigid seas would push their iceberg
probes far nearer the Equator than they now do; the
Earth Would toe a parody of a green and pleasant land.
The circulation of the air prevents this cataclysm,
ameliorating conditions over the Earth's surface. At
any moment the energy of the air moving across our
planet is equivalent to the combined energy of seven
million atomic bombs. Yet over a tenth of this energy
is lost every day by friction between the winds and the
ground. Every upjutting blade of grass and tiny ripple
of water takes its toll; a toll that must be constantly
replenished from the sun's radiation.
Thousand miles an hour gales
Although there are two million tons of air free for
every man, wpman and child of the human race,
within a little over a week the great cities of Earth
would be suffocating under motionless clouds of smoke
and exhaust fumes, if the energy lost toy friction was
not forever toeing replaced..
In direct contrast to this choking quiescence, if the
friction between air and surface was eliminated, winds
would rise steadily in strength until rushing, thousand
miles an hour gales would be sweeping endlessly around
the Earth.
Only the edges of the tremendous air movements brush
the lands beneath, where, distorted by local geographical
features, they create the meteorological phenomena we
recognise as weather. Far above, weaving an intricate
three-dimensional pattern across the whole globe, whirl
invisible air-torrents and air-falls which in sheer mass
far outweigh any surface Niagara. Until quite recently,
very few people suspected the existence of such gigantic
upper highways.
Yet even the fantastic strength and speed of these jet
streams is only one facet of the complexity of the upper
air streams.
For two centuries scientific measurement of air condi¬
tions near the Earth's surface was used in attempts to
forecast the Weather, and there |was little or no improve¬
ment in the old cause-and-efïect prognostications handed
down in folk-lore from generation to generation.
Breeding ground of the weather
Then, one hundred years ago, scientists began to look
for reasons rather than surface observations in an
attempt to understand why the weather changed in
such apparently haphazard ways. This was the beginning
of true weather forecasting. By about the turn of the
century meteorologists had a fair insight into the inter¬
play of the tremendous surface forces that, within a few
hours, can change the calm of a hot summer's day into
a maelstrom of destructive gales. Still, even then, the
true breeding ground of the weather the upper air
was beyond the range of the simplest meteorological
instruments.
It was known that air pressure changes accompanied
the mass movement of air associated with storms and
that there was a rotation effect yet these inter-related
happenings seemed to follow no simple, easily defined
track. Sometimes they remained stationary for days
and even back-tracked on themselves. As each rotating
mass a cyclone or anticyclone may be a thousand or
more miles across, this meant that there was no way of
determining exactly where the moving storms would be
twenty-four hours ahead. Even today, this problem is
not completely solved and often causes forecasts to be
completely inaccurate as we know only too well in this
weather-riddled world.
At first sight, the rotating cyclones and anticyclones
tracking across both hemispheres might seem little more
than vague local disturbances when compared with the
great atmospheric rivers that must be called into being
to explain the enormous and never-ending heat transfer
from the tropics to higher latitudes. Between the Equator
and latitude 38, the Earth receives more heat from the
sun than it radiates and reflects back into space, whilst
between latitude 38 and the poles the total loss of heat
is greater than the radiation received.
Warm ocean currents carry some of the warmth pole¬
wards; but this can be accurately measured and is only
a small fraction of the total energy transferred. Now,
modern theory suggests that cyclones and anticyclones,
tiny when compared with the area of the Earth, are the
true controlling features of the atmospheric circulation,
guiding and acting as energy accumulators for the energy
of the prevailing Winds.
The major wind systems are impelled
into motion by the two overpowering forces
of the sun's heat and the earth's rotation.
Without the spin of the earth to funnel the
Cont'd
on
next page
29

THE ENCIRCLING AIR
(Continued)
winds into their prevailing belts there would toe a single
great wind system; hot air rising over the Equatorial
lands and spreading out high above the earth before
chilling and descending over the polar regions.
Even by the beginning of the 1930's, the real nature of
the wide-scale circulation of air around the earth was
still not known although, earlier, it had been suggested
that one of its basic features Was the large masses of cold
air that sweep down from the poles to bring sub-polar
conditions to more temperate climates.
The growing use of aeroplanes boosted meteorology not
only by the increased need for continent-wide hour-to-
hour forecasts along airline routes, but also as a means
of exploring physical changes in the upper air. It was
not long before planes were superseded by radio-sondes
balloon-borne miniature meteorological stations drifting
upwards and reporting back by radio on the temperature,
pressure and humidity of the surrounding air. Tracked,
at first visually and later by radar, their movements
measured wind speeds at different levels.
And then of course the trouble started. The so-called
"classic" theory atmospheric circulation gave a simple but
direct picture showing the air being heated near the
Equator, expanding and rising many miles into the air.
At the same time, dense cold air over the poles dropped
and flowed back over the surface the difference in
pressure maintaining a high, slow-moving blanket of air
from Equator to poles. Superimposed on this stately
turnover were the prevailing easterly and westerly winds
due to the spin of the earth.
Unfortunately, this decisive picture just did not coin¬
cide with the rapidly mounting collection of upper air
measurement.
The more data collected, the more of a muddle the
upper atmosphere seemed. In it was a chaotic turbu¬
lence of upstreams, downstreams, jet streams, west and
east streams all apparently going their own sweet Way.
When hot air falls & cold air rises
With the use of high altitude meteorological rockets
and increased interest in the no-man's-land
between the surface and space, the number of
measurements multiplied enormously; slowly, the grand
pattern of upper air streams began to emerge.
Instead of their being one huge air cell in each
hemisphere, there are three cells.
In the northern hemisphere the cold dry air drops from
stratospheric heights over the North pole and pours
southwards. Swirled towards the east by the spin of the
earth, this blanket extends four or five lobes of cold air
to reach down and intermittently sweep over North
America, Asia and Europe. As a mass of air stationary
with reference to the earth at the North ¡Pole is spinning
once every 24 hours in relation to the stars, its spin shows
up as it moves southwards, the further south the greater
the spin. Outbursts of cold polar air masses can pene¬
trate equatorward up to about latitude 30°. Polar air has
its own inner rotation, and if it intrudes far enough
toward the Equator it may break away to form a separate
MODEL. OF THE ATMOSPHERE. Within the last decade or so
observations, theoretical studies and laboratory experiments all seem
to bear out a new conception of our atmosphere as an air ocean set in
motion by the sun's heat and broken up by the earth's rotation into a
complex pattern of little whirls and big whirls. Though not accepted
30
by all meteorologists the theory has recently been demonstrated in
remarkable fashion by small mechanical models, one of which, cons¬
tructed by Dave Fultz of the University of Chicago, is shown below.
Fultz uses a rotating flat-bottomed pan containing about an inch of
water to represent the atmosphere of one hemisphere. A few drops i

revolving cold mass in the surrounding ocean of warmer
air.
In the same way, hot, moist air rises in the tropics and
falls earthwards near latitude 30. This too gives rise to
spinning masses of warm air and these may move north¬
wards into the cooler air, slowly losing their spin.
Both these systems of toubbles hot air in a greater mass
of cool air and cold air in Warm represent a transfer of
potential energy that is transformed into moving energy
as each rotating bubble gradually loses its identity.
The cold air masses are cyclones. The rotating hot air
masses are anti-cyclones. Each acts as a means of convert¬
ing heat into kinetic energy, the power behind the winds.
Where there is a high pressure area, as at the centre of
an anti-cyclone, there is in effect a hill of air pushing the
earth's atmosphere further out into space; a low pressure
area represents a trough. With their rotation, the effect
is of a series of airwaves sweeping around the earth carry¬
ing life-giving rain to the centres of continents.
Outbursts of cold and warm air assume wavelike confi¬
gurations in the middle latitudes. The position and
movement of these Waves may be forecast, giving an idea
of weather trends on a global scale. This method cannot,
however, be used for regional forecasts where so many
surface factors have to be taken into account. The
northern hemisphere's surface air circulation is entirely
different at sea level, the prevailing winds north of lati¬
tude 60 being easterlies diametrically opposite to condi¬
tions existing higher.
Between the polar and tropical air cells, between Cairo
and Paris, lies a region where the vertical air flow is
reversed; hot air falls and cold air rises.
This is not a flagrant reversal of the laws of gravity and
The Unesco Courier. January 1959
thermodynamics. Energy is supplied to this intermediate
air cell by the other two cells and by cyclones and anti¬
cyclones. And With immense energy, almost anything is
possible, including defiance of gravity.
Weather 'spies' in outer space
Whilst this picture is contrary to older ideas, its
essential correctness has been demonstrated by a
fair amount of experimental work. Dye dropped
into a slowly spinning pan of water warmed at the rim
gives a remarkable two-dimensional pattern closely
analogous to the pressure patterns in the earth's atmo¬
sphere. Agreeing both qualitatively and quantitatively
with the equations involving rate of spin and temperature
differences, the model even reproduces the eddies of air
near the base of the atmosphere and the fast moving jet
streams near the top. (See photos below.)
Our knowledge of the movements of the earth's
atmosphere will be enormously broadened when data
from the International Geophysical Year is analyzed and
We have a flow of information from artificial satellites
outside the earth's confusing covering of air to add to our
standard internal measurements.
Perhaps the meteorologists will then know more about
the effects of the millions of tons of carbon dioxide pour¬
ing into the air from chimneys, more of the long-term
weather effects of nuclear contamination, more about
the causes of the ice ages and the two-to-ten-year
drought extending over half the United States.
Perhaps they Will even be more sure
weather.
of tomorrow's
of dye render the patterns of flow in the water visible. The pan is heated
at the periphery (the "equator") and cooled in the centre (the "pole").
Slow rotation gives a simple pattern of circulation (two photos left),
with accelerated rotation it breaks up into a pattern of eddies
resembling cyclones and anti-cyclones of a weather map (two photos
Photos © Dave Fultz. Reproduced from Scientific American
right). From the periphery and the centre eddies move toward the
middle "latitudes" in the pan. "Westerly" currents appear in this
zone, and "easterlies" come into being near the edge (the "equator").
The model even reproduces, the vertical variations in our atmosphere:
at the bottom,' separate eddies; higher up, fast-moving airstreams.
31
