WONDERLAND OF SOUVENIRS
FOR A ROYAL ROMAN TOURIST
Photo story by Angelo Frontoni. © Reproduction prohibited
Rome, the Eternal City, has
recently revealed to the world
new splendours of its past at
the magnificent villa of the emperor
Hadrian near Tivoli. It is a sur¬
prising thing that the Roman histori¬
ans recorded and handed down to
us only sparse information about this
vast and splendid edifice, the villa
Tiburtina built by Hadrian, for the
excavations which led to its discovery
have since shown this monument,
with its majestic architecture, en¬
trancing site and striking works of
art, to be one of the most beautiful
of its kind in the world.
The. Emperor Hadrian was by na¬
ture an artist and a great traveller
(the record of his journeys through
all parts of the empire forms the
chief authority for the events of his
life down to his final settlement in
Rome). He built the villa near Tivoli
as a place to spend his last years.
Here, in a setting both peaceful and
sumptuous, he could devote himself
28
to painting, music, poetry, literature
and other pleasures of his choice.
Thus on his return from his first
journey through the eastern pro¬
vinces of the empire he ordered work
to be started on the villa in 126 A.D.
Ambitious, and sensitive to his
surroundings, he planned the great
villa and its gardens as a kind of
epitome of the world he had visited,
one which would ever recall for him
the places and the buildings which
had left their impression on his
artistic imagination during many
long journeys. These included the
Academus near Athens, the Pryta-
neum, where the highest officers of
state met in Athens, the canal of the
ancient port of Canopus on the Nile
Delta, the famous vale of Tempe, set
between the mountains of Olympus
and Ossa in Thessaly, and even the
nether regions Which, poets declared
they had observed, and then
described in lyric works. To these
miniatures of celebrated places he
added an imperial palace and its
annexes, baths, a library, a theatre
and a judgement hall.
Today, as the remains of these
buildings are brought to light, their
size and diversity suggest that they
once belonged to a city rather than
a villa. The villa Tiburtina, or
"Adriana" as it is also Iknown, was
built on a plain, protected to the
north by a line of hills. It extends
from the right of the ancient Tibur¬
tina Way as far as the slopes of
mount Ripoli on which stands the
town of Tivoli, the remains of its
buildings and monuments covering
some two square miles.
After the death of Hadrian the his¬
tory of his wonderful home seems to
have become shrouded in mystery.
Since 1480, however when Pope
Alexander VI ordered the first exca¬
vations, great efforts have been made
to uncover the vestiges of the villa
which was once the pride of the
Roman Empire. The most recent

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
digging has uncovered a large area of
the villa and in particular the Cano-
pus, whose remains, now replaced on
their original site, give some idea of
their former splendour. Water again
flows in the canal and exact copies of
statues, caryatids and columns have
been made to evoke the sumptuous
festivities and entertainments which
Hadrian and his successors provided
for their guests. The originals are
preserved inside the villa and will
eventually be visible to the public in
one of the museums of Rome.
While visiting Egypt Hadrian had
been greatly impressed by the sacred
places of Canopus, a prosperous city
and port to the east of Alexandria, to
which it was linked by a canal fed
from one of the branches of the Nile.
This city took its name from Cano¬
pus, the pilot of Menelaus, who on
his return from Troy was said to
have died and to have been cremated
there. From all parts of Egypt the
faithful came to the city to visit the
temple of Serapis, to consult its ora¬
cle and to implore favours.
The villa Tiburtina "with its statues,
columns, canal and the ruins of what
was once the perfect copy of a distant
temple, offers an impression of the
greatness and prestige of Rome and
of its rulers who were able to per¬
petuate for their own time and for
posterity the renown of the Eternal
City.
EPITOME OF THE ANCIENT WORLD. The Emperor Hadrian planned his great villa end
its gardens near Tivoli, I 8 miles east of Rome, as a kind of epitome of the world he had visited during
his many travels through the Roman Empire. Here he reconstructed in miniature the places and
buildings which had most impressed him. One of these was the canal (opposite page) of the ancient
port of Canopus (named for the pilot of Menelaus, King of Sparta) in the Nile Delta. At the far
end of the canal is the Temple of Serapis. Above, among the graceful columns and arches at one
end of the canal are a crocodile carved in green stone, a now headless Amazon, Mars, the god of
war, and a warrior. Below, a view of the canal of Canopus as seen from the Temple of Serapis.
Photos © Angelo Frontoni, Rome
29

30

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
Monument to an Imperial
Traveller & Lover of Art
Photos © Angelo Frontoni, Rome
Hadrian conceived his magnificent villa as a peaceful and sumptuous setting where he could
devote himself to the pursuits of his choice. Photos on opposite page show; top, four
caryatids flanked by satyrs aligned along the canal of Canopus; bottom, the Thermae or
themal baths. Above, details of statues bordering the canal. Blood flows from leg of
wounded Amazon (right). Below, around swimming pool, from right to left, are buildings
housing thermal baths, remains of the imperial palace (in background), and part of the 30 feet
high wall surrounding the pool (left) together with relics of the Hall of the Philosophers.
31

»
HADRIAN THE
ROMAN 'GREEKLING'
Photos © Angelo Frontoni, Rome.
Statues, caryatids and columns along the Canopus Canal evoke the sumptuous entertain¬
ments given by the Emperor Hadrian. Hadrian erected many magnificent buildings in
Italy, but Athens was actually the favourite site of his architectural labours, and his pre¬
occupation with classical Hellenic art caused certain writers to name him the "Greek-
ling". Above left, caryatids, female figures used as columns; right, wounded Amazon and
the helmeted figure of Mars. Below, a marine divinity reclining on a wolf which recalls
the legend of Romulus (founder of Rome) and Remus, who were suckled by a wolf.
