In Yugoslavia
TEEN-AGERS FROM FOUR CONTINENTS
BUILD A MODERN HIGHWAY
Yugoslav Youth Movement photos
GREETING THE NEW ARRIVALS. Between ten and thirteen thousand young people worked each
month from March to November last year on the construction of the 87-miles long Ljubljana-Zagreb sec¬
tion of Yugoslavia's international cross-country highway. During the holiday months their numbers rose
to the peak figure of 18,000 and by the time this section of the highway was completed, some 60,000 volun¬
teers had done their share (out of some 200,000 who made application to participate). Here, at the
Kovenitka Camp, near Ljubljana, "veterans" of the volunteer brigades welcome a group of newcomers.
by Bertha Gaster
There have been hundreds of ways of making roads
in the pastvslave labour, serf and feudal labour,
communal levies, convict labour. But nowadays
the most common way is to do it on strictly commercial
lines. The authorities hire surveyors and engineers,
construction and road gangs, and in due course the road
is made, costing a certain sum. It is a plain, straight¬
forward business affair, and the profit and loss accounts*
are there in two parallel columns for all to see.
But there is also another way to whistle up boys
and girls from the ends of the country, farmhands,
students, secondary school children, waitresses, clerks,
then give them picks and shovels and let them go to it,
singing. By and by they will go home again, leaving a
road behind them, and however trained accountants work
out costs and expenditure, the full profit and loss on that
road will be hidden forever from business eyes.
This is the way Yugoslavia is building her "autoput",
or motor road, the new international highway which by
1960 should be crossing the land from the north-west to
20
the south-east. On November 23 1958 the newest stretch
was formally opened by Marshal Tito, a week before the
scheduled date. It is 140 kilometres (87 miles) long,
linking Ljubljana and Zagreb, the capitals of the Slove¬
nian and Croatian Federal Republics, and joining the
480 kilometres (300 miles) of highway already constructed
in the same way between Zagreb and Belgrade. And a
great part of it was the work of young Yugoslavs come
from all parts of the country in an enormous youth
project which lasted from March to November.
To find out how it was being done I had to go to Otocec,
halfway along the route, where the organizing staff of
the Youth Movement had its headquarters. We drove
from Zagreb through the low rolling hills of Slovenia,
beside rich meadows and wooded uplands and along the
banks of the winding Krkva river, sometimes on the old
road, soon to be relegated to slow farm traffic, sometimes
over a stretch of the newly cemented "autoput".
Otocec itself was a surprise, an ancient manor house
with pinkwashed plaster walls and corner turrets and an

arcaded courtyard, standing in a tiny island of flowers
and green gardens along one of the loveliest reaches of
the river. Now the property of the State, it has been
loaned to the Youth Movement for the duration of the
"action". Next year it is planned to turn it into a hotel.
It was José Hardmann, a young lawyer seconded to the
staff organisation handling the job there, who told me
the first part of the story. He was practical. He dealt
with facts and figures. At the beginning of the year
there were eighty kilometres (50 miles) of the new Ljubl¬
jana-Zagreb stretch of highway still to be built. There
was the Youth Movement of Yugoslavia which clamoured
for a share in the building. And from there, through
all the preliminary
planning, it seemed
but a step to the
single wooden barrack
set up by paid la¬
bour on each of the
proposed camp sites,
which were taken over
by the first volunteer
youth brigade arriv¬
ing in the slush and
snow of March to
prepare the ground.
With the exception
of the electrical bri¬
gade,' they were all
untrained, but within
twenty days sixteen
full working camps
or colonies another
was added later had
been built in the
countryside along the
designated route.
Water and electricity
had been laid on at
least one small village
in the neighbourhood
got electricity as a
r e s u 1 t telephones
connected, approach
roads built, wooden
barracks and huts
assembled, tents
pitched, and all stores
and equipment distri¬
buted, from bunks,
benches and tables,
blankets and sheets,
crockery and food,
down to the radio
and first aid installa¬
tions in each small
wireless station and
clinic. The g i r 1 s'
school taken over in
Novo Mesto as a tem¬
porary hospital had
also been fully
equipped and staffed,
though, as the head
doctor told me later
"fortunately, most of our beds have been consistently
empty". On April 1, as planned, the digging began.
José Hardmann also explained the way the scheme func¬
tioned, pointing out on the map the line picked by the
professional surveyors from Ljubljana who mapped out
and designed the road. "Some of it runs straight along
the old Roman road from the north," he said. There
were thirteen professional construction gangs, with paid
labour, stationed along the road, responsible for the later
stages of skilled work such as transporting and mixing
the cement and laying the final coats of bitumen and
cement "particularly hilly parts or curves will be laid
with cobbles to give cars a grip; our icy winters here are
no joke for drivers", said José Hardmann. And in be-
FLAGS OF THE NATIONS fly over the international camp at Kronovo where
I 20 volunteers from abroad were living. These young people came from the United
States, England, Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Sweden, France, Poland,
Italy, Germany, Tunisia, Morocco and Israel, and worked with their Yugoslav com¬
rades last July. Here, foreign volunteers return to camp after collecting their bedding.
The Unesco Courier. April 1959
tween the first and the last stages, like the filling of a
sandwich, came the young volunteers in their thousands
to dig and clear and level the road and lay the rubble
and shingle foundations.
Thousands is not an exaggeration. The students, secon¬
dary school children and foreign contingents, who came
during the summer holidays, stayed only one month; land-
workers, who came largely in the slack season in May
and June, stayed two. But it was reckoned that there
were between ten and thirteen thousand young people
working on the road each month, rising to the peak figure
of eighteen thousand in the July and August holiday
months, and that when the work was completed in
november, something
like sixty thousand
must have passed
through the colonies,
out of the 200,000
who had put in
applications to come.
I learned some
more from the hand¬
ful of young men
who have been, res¬
ponsible for most of
the organizing work,
forty in 'all, twenty
of them seconded for
the duration of the
project from univer¬
sity and training
schools and first jobs
all of them having
been active in youth
work for a long while
and more from the
boys and girls I talk¬
ed to as I went up
and down the road.
Staff and rank and
file alike wore the reg¬
ulation khaki drill
blouses and slacks of
the brigades, with
the little "titovka"
caps of the Partisans,
flashes on their
shoulders show¬
ing their ranks and
the names of their
brigades.
That loose working
garb soon became a
familiar sight to me
whether in a singing
column with picks
and shovels and fly¬
ing flag, setting off
for the morning or af¬
ternoon shift on the
road six hours, and
a compulsory two
hour's rest afterwards
or in a lorry load
lumbering by on an excursion to Zagreb or Ljubljana
or even further afield; or simply worn by boys and girls
swinging hands as they strolled up and down the broad
streets of the little half-way town of Novo Mesto on their
free day. Even here however, the girls had managed to
introduce a touch of fashion; it was definitely the done
thing, I noticed, for all the girls, unlike the boys, to wear
their trousers half twisted up the leg.
I learned from Dragoslav Petrovic and his friend Milu-
tin Damjanaovic, two eighteen-year-old farm labourers
from one of the Serbian brigades, that it was the local
youth organizations who handled the recruiting end, and
sifted applications to make up each brigade, four com¬
panies of thirty each, 120 in all, with an average of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Teen-agers build
a highway «.«.»..<.,
Working dress for staff and rank
and file on the Youth Road
is khaki drill blouses and slacks
and the small "titovka" caps,
worn by the youths (right) from
Bosnia, who are trying on the
new boots that have just been
issued to them. For heavy work
like mixing cement on a hot day,
(photo, far right) regulation dress
is abandoned in favour of shorts.
Yugoslav Youth Movement photos
twenty-five girls to each brigade, ages ranging from fifteen
to twenty.
The educational whys and wherefores of a youth project
on this national scale are many historical, social, poli¬
tical, even economic. Historically, the unity of the Yu¬
goslav lands has been bedevilled for centuries by local
rivalries and jealousies, Serb against Croat, Catholic
against Greek Orthodox, submerged Macedonians, dual
nationality border folk, rivalries exploited with cunning
effect, for instance, by the Nazis in the last war; Bringing
COOKHOUSE SESSION. A professional cook is attached to each
camp, but the rest of the cooking and work is done by relays of volun¬
teers like this group from Belgrade shown busily peeling potatoes.
22
the young folk together, Serbs, Croats, Bosnian Moslems,
border minorities, working and playing side by side on
a road which has been given for name the old Partisan
slogan "The Brotherhood and Unity Road" is a step
towards mutual understanding.
Politically, in a socialist country, it mixes up classes
and types, students and farmer boys, factory Workers and
secondary school pupils, living and eating and digging
as one, and learning from each other. Socially it gives
the young people of the more backward parts of the
country a chance to see something outside their own vil¬
lage, learn some of the simple rules of hygiene, and
acquire a few of the elementary skills badly needed in
the national drive towards industrialization and mecha¬
nization.
Young Memic Shemso, for instance, who at twenty had
never been out of his Bosnian village, had learnt a lot
of things. He told me some of them. How to clean a
house. How to make a bed. How to keep a settlement
neat. And he, in common with many others, had taken
advantage of the courses provided for leisure hours to
learn to ride a bicycle and motor cycle. In the first four
months some eleven thousand young men had gone
through bicycle, motor cycle and car courses, as well as
considerable numbers who took the tractor-driving course.
Classes in photography and wireless mechanics were also
available for students and others with higher qualifi¬
cations.
The pretty young waitress serving me at the Otocec
canteen was another example of how different sorts of
training schemes were dovetailed into the main plan.
Franska Basaj, seventeen, is learning to be a waitress
at the school for restaurant workers in Ljubljana, and
she was one of the seven students from the school who
were doing a three weeks' stint at the headquarters'
canteen. "When we go, other students will come", she
explained. "By November everyone in the school will
have had a turn." Franska wasn't sure she was enjoying
it very much. The work was hard and the hours were
long. "It's lovely here, but we don't get enough time to

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
enjoy it. Still, she added philosophically, "it's all good
practice."
There was plenty of evidence of spare time amusements
scattered about the camps; bright modernist designs and
a futurist frieze along the hut walls left by the Belgrade
art students of an earlier brigade; a small model of the
Zornik hydraulic dam in Bosnia modelled in mud and
plaster by a brigade from Zvornik; patterns and slogans
carried out in coloured pebbles decorating the entrances
of the camps and edging barracks and tents. There was
football and sport for those who liked them, though
swimming in the river had been forbidden, to the chagrin
of many, since two brigadists had been drowned. Cul¬
tural activities included occasional visits from theatrical
groups and orchestras, lectures organized and given by
students. Best of all, there were the long evenings round
camp fires with singing and dancing and walking and
talking under the shadow of the pine trees.
And economically did it pay? Funnily enough, said
José Hardmann, it did. Providing voluntary labour in
the form of a Youth Project is reckoned to cost seven
per cent more than by employing strictly commercial
methods with paid labour. But the social value, the edu¬
cational benefits of such "actions" in helping to raise the
general level, has long justified such a loss in the eyes of
the authorities. In point of fact, however, it Was ex¬
plained, since the 5,600,000 dinars which the road costs
comes from a Government loan on which interest has
to be paid, and since there is no paid labour force avail¬
able in the country big enough to do the job in less than
three years, it is calculated that the saving of interest
charges by finishing the work in one year, under the
youth project, thus saving two years' interest, more than
covers the extra seven per cent.
To this must be added the fact that a great deal of the
prefabricated barracks, tents and equipment of the youth
camps will be dismantled and used again in the coming
year on the next stretch of road to be constructed in the
south.
TIME OFF FOR DANCING. There is no shortage of music during off-
duty hours. Many volunteers bring accordions, guitars and other instru¬
ments with them for folk and modern dancing and camp sing-songs.
23
