THE MARCH
OF IRON
A CONTINENT
by R.R. Inskeep
Keeper of Prehistory, The Rhodes Livingstone Museum
Livingstone (Northern Rhodesia)
Everywhere in the ancient world the development
of iron metallurgy was a revolutionary advance that
permitted men to build new and more complex so¬
cieties. Africa was no exception to this rule. It
saw the rise of great African kingdoms equipped
with a new mastery over the soil and the forest and
over their non-iron-using neighbours. This iron¬
work was the product of home industries practised
for generations and which originally owed nothing
to the white man. It is now known that great iron
civilizations developed as early as the beginnings
of the Christian era in at least two widely separated
regions of the continent: one in West Africa (the
Sudan, Dahomey, Ghana etc.) ; another in eastern
and south-central Africa. A few years ago it was
hardly suspected that iron technology in south-
central Africa dated back so far, but since 1953
evidence has been piling up with the discovery of
early Christian period iron centres near Lake Tan¬
ganyika and elsewhere. Photo below shows an
ancient smelting furnace recently discovered in
southern Africa, and above, an early type of iron
arrow head showing marks of binding to hold poison
on the tang. Photos opposite show metal ornaments
worn by modern Bantu women of this region today.
Photos Rhodes Livingstone Museum.
If you were to tour Africa to-day, almost anywhere from
the Cape to Nairobi you would find abundant evidence
of the iron and steel industries of the Continent; rail¬
ways, bridges, steel-reinforced buildings, and even steel
barges sailing the peaceful Zambezi. These are all
reflections of the metal age as introduced to Africa by
European colonists. But if you wandered off the beaten
track almost anywhere along the same routes, you Would
find more or less primitive Africans also using iron; iron
spears and knives, iron arrow-heads, iron axes and hoes,
and even iron musical instruments.
This ironwork is the product of a home industry which
has been practised for generations in and around Bantu
villages, and which originally owes nothing to the white
man. In a few places in Tanganyika, the Equatorial
forests of the Congo, and the remote Kalahari desert you
would find small groups of hunting peoples who still do
not know the art of smelting and shaping iron. But even
these most primitive folk now have tools and Weapons of
iron which they obtain by trade from neighbouring Bantu
or Europeans. Some will obtain odd scraps of the metal
which they shape to their own requirements, not by the
methods of the metal worker, but by the age-old methods
of the stone-age; beating and hammering the cold metal
with a lump of stone on a stone anvil.
It is hard to think of an Africa in which no one hade any
knowledge of metal working, and where all tools, weapons
and ornaments were of stone, bone, ivory, wood, or other
non-metalic materials. But archaeologists have shown
that this was the case in Africa just as it was many years
earlier in Europe ajid the Near East. Everywhere from
the south coast to the southern fringes of the Sahara we
find the old camp sites and living places of stone-age
hunters. Then,, occasionally, we find in the living places
of some of the latest of the Stone Age peoples fragments
of Bantu pottery and even traces of iron smelting. These
are the sites which show us a picture of the old stone-
using, hunting peoples coming into contact with the first
metal-using farmers in the subcontinent.
Hunters turned to farming
pottery and iron-working
Hunting peoples must essentially be mobile, and they
have little use for cumbersome and brittle pottery. I
mention this because we generally associate the
appearance of pottery with the coming of iron. The
earliest pottery in Southern Africa is probably that of the
Hottentots, a cattle-owning, non-agricultural people who
migrated into South Africa ahead of the Bantu. We shall
have more to say about these people in connexion with
metals a little later.
Iron-working did not arrive in the sub-continent as an
isolated trait. It was accompanied by Well-made pottery
in use on a large scale, and, more important still, by
agriculture. Normally when we find evidence of any one
of these three things we can generally infer the others.
20

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
H.J. Hahndiek. Netherlands
Agriculture meant that man could produce his own food
instead of having to chase and gather it about the country
side. For the first time in history it became possible to
live a settled existence in permanent villages. This led
to the development of more complex and closely-knit
societies, with more time to develop their arts and crafts.
The advent of these earliest farmers in Southern Africa,
with their knowledge of smelting and smithing was
without a doubt the most significant change that the
country had seen during half-a-million years of human
occupation.
Were first skills brought
by southward moving Bantus ?
But who were the earliest iron-using peoples in
Southern Africa ? Whence came they ? And when
did they first appear on the scene ? These are
question to which we must admit that we don't know the
complete answers. But We do have some clues, and
archaeologists are now actively engaged in looking for
others. It is relatively easy to go into the bush and find
sites where there is evidence of early iron-working, but it
is another matter entirely to say how old the site is, or
Who the people Were who lived there.
The immense period of the Stone Age, and the various
cultures represented in the period can be divided up and
given some sort of dating on the basis of geological events,
but the period of iron-working is far too recent for
geology to be able to provide a clue. Some help can be
had from the writings of early European explorers, and it
is from these that we learn something of the early use of
metals in the extreme south.
It is clear from records dating back to 1510 that the
Cape Hottentots had no tools, weapons or ornaments of
metal and that during the ensuing centuries they only
acquired the art of metal Working from the Dutch ships
that called there. They always relied on the ships for
their supplies of raw material. In 1661 an expedition
despatched by Jan van Riebeeck to the Namaqua Hotten¬
tots some 200 miles from the Cape found these people in
possession of beads and chains of copper and iron which
they had mined and smelted themselves. Similar reports
exist from 1719 for the Ba Tlaping Hottentots who were,
however, in fairly close contact with the earliest Bantu in
the area. We thus see that metal working in the extreme
south is a comparatively recently acquired skill, and was
in all probability learned from first Bantu immigrants in
the- 16th or 17th centuries.
If the knowledge of iron-working was introduced by
southward moving Bantu then we should expect to find
it at earlier dates the further north we travel. This is in
fact borne out by the archaeological evidence from Central
Africa. Here, however, dating becomes much more diffi¬
cult as there are no records earlier than the 18th century
and very little of any value until Livingstone's explora
tions during the latter half of the 19th century. The
answers must lie almost entirely with the archaeologist
aided by the radio-chemist who, by processing carbon
recovered from old living sites, can tell us approximately
how old the sites are.
Let us digress for a moment and consider when the
knowledge of iron-working may have come to Africa.
Objects of iron are found in Mesopotamia in deposits
dated to the middle part of the 3rd millenium b.c. The
real focus of iron production in prehistoric times, however,
was in the Hittite empire during the period 1400 to 1200
b.c. and it is most likely that it was from here that the
craft first spread, into Europe, and south to Egypt, and
to other points along the North African coast. Iron does
not become really common in Egypt until around 600 to
500 b.c. The inhabitants of Meroe (650 b.c. to 350 a.D.),
an island in the Nile just north of Khartoum knew the
use of iron, and settlements, which can be linked with
Meroe by the pottery they contain, have been traced
considerably further south on the Blue Nile.
Here then is a possible route by which iron might have
been introduced to the people who later carried it by
migration to areas of Central and Southern Africa. Alter¬
natively the Horn of Africa and the East coast have been
suggested as a possible route. So too has the West coast
of Africa along the margins of the Sahara desert. But
at present there is insufficient evidence to favour any of
these suggestions, although the physical characteristics
of the Bantu, Who form the largest element in Africa's
population suggest that they came from the North East of
the continent.
'History book' inscribed
in thirty feet of clay
A few sites in the Rhodesias help to provide something
a little more certain in the way of dates. At
Kalambo Falls, at the south end of Lake Tangan¬
yika. Dr. J. D. Clark has found a hollow containing up
to thirty feet of swamp clays which contain early Iron Age
pottery at all levels from top to bottom. There is also
iron slag at some levels, and traces of hearths and clay
floors. A carbon sample from near the middle of the
deposit has given a date of 100 a.d. Since the pottery is
typologically early this may be a living site of some of the
earliest iron-using folk to reach Northern Rhodesia.
Another interesting and much discussed site is Zim¬
babwe in Southern Rhodesia. All romantic claims that
this intriguing ruin was once a temple of the Queen of
Sheba, or that it was built by the Phoenicians must, in
the light of scientific discoveries, be dropped. Careful
excavation, and close examination of the objects found
shows quite clearly that Zimbabwe (See page 10) is to be
attributed to early Bantu settlers: the same Bantu who
carried into the country the earliest knowledge of metal
working and farming.
CONT'D ON PAGE 23

THE MARCH OF IRON (Continued from page 21)
The builders of Zimbabwe were a lively, energetic people;
farmers and cattle owners, producing tools and ornaments
in copper, gold and iron, and acquiring beads of foreign
origin by trade. A radiocarbon date for Zimbabwe sug¬
gests that it Was in occupation during the 7th century a.d.
although it must be admitted that for technical reasons
this date is slightly suspect, and Zimbabwe may not be
as old as this. It does, however, give us an approximate
idea of when these folk first arrived in Rhodesia.
Pottery from the earliest levels at Zimbabwe is closely
related to pottery from several sites in Northern Rhodesia.
Two such sites in the south of Barotseland have been
dated by radiocarbon tests to between 100 and 400 a.d.
Unfortunately, owing no doubt to the acid conditions of
the soil, no iron has yet been discovered at these sites, and
because no proper excavation has been carried out we
know nothing of what the settlement was like.
A recent discovery about a hundred miles north
of the Victoria Falls may help to provide a link between
the earliest iron age folk hereabouts and the present day
inhabitants. At a tiny settlement ¡known as Kalomo has
been discovered what is virtually a miniature tell ; that
is, a mound formed from the accumulation of centuries
of rubbish. The occupants of this old village lived so
long on the one spot that they ended up by sitting on a
heap of their own rubbish some nine feet high ! A trial
excavation showed us that the last inhabitants lived there
comparatively recently, perhaps in the last century. The
earliest levels have not yet been dated, but they will
almost certainly take us back several centuries.
These folk were farmers who decorated themselves
with snail shell beads, and fashioned razors and arrow¬
heads from iron. They also made little figurines of
cattle and fat tailed sheep, but whether these were chil¬
dren's toys, or fertility cult objects we cannot yet say.
Their grain they stored in large bottle-shaped pits dug
up to nine feet into the rotten granite subsoil. It may
be that the man-made mound at Kalomo was fortified,
but whether against attack from neighbouring Bantu, or
from the last of the Stone Age tribes into whose territory
they had moved, we cannot say until more work has been
done.
To sum up then we may say that the period in question
has been so little studied that we are not yet in a position
to describe in detail what was happening during the
change from Stone Age to Metal Age. All the evidence
suggests, however, that the knowledge of iron-working
was not discovered independently in Southern Africa, but
was brought here by migrant peoples; simple farmers
from some unknown area either to the north east or north
west of the sub-continent, or perhaps, who reached Cen¬
tral Africa fairly soon after the beginning of the Christian
era, but who did not penetrate to the extreme south until
as late as the 15th or 16th centuries a.d. These migrant
peoples were undoubtedly the direct ancestors of the pres¬
ent day Bantu-speaking inhabitants of the country.
23
