UNESCO
MONTH'
IN PARIS
Paris, meeting-ground par
excellence of culture and
the arts, was the setting last
November for a succession of
highly successful scientific and
artistic events organized by the
French National Commission for
Unesco on the occasion of
the inauguration of Unesco's
new headquarters and Unesco's
tenth General Conference. The
programme, entitled "Unesco
Month" covered a wide range of
subjects including concerts, plays,
exhibitions and documentary
films from many countries.
Probably the most important
event of Unesco Month was a
three-day International Round
Table in which eight world-
famous scientists, five of them
Nobel Prize Winners, debated the
subject "Man and Scientific and
Technical Progress". Held in the
great conference hall of the new
Unesco headquarters, the Round
Table drew some 2,000 people on
each of the three evening sessions
and was broadcast and televised
to several countries. The Round
Table will be given full coverage
next month.
Unesco Month gave special
prominence to Unesco's Major
Project on East-West mutual
appreciation. While an exhibition
of "The Art of Gandhara and
Central Asia" was organized at
the Musée Guimet with the
co-operation of museum curators
of Pakistan, Berlin and Rome,
another museum in Paris, the
Musée Cernuschi, presented an
exhibition on artistic exchanges
between East and West during
the past 5,000 years.
An important part of Unesco
Month were the Semaines musi¬
cales de Paris (Paris Musical
Weeks) during which concerts
and musical performances were
arranged to complement a series
of discussions by noted figures in
the world of music on the diver¬
sity of musical cultures and parti¬
cularly the mutual influences of
Orient and Occident on musical
Cont'd on page 28
unescc
MUSIC WEEKS. One of the highlights of France's "Unesco .Month" was the long-
awaited series of concerts of modern and classical composers organized in co¬
operation with the International Music Council and in which a galaxy of artists of
international fame had agreed to participate. Photo above shows Ravi Shankar,
one of Asia's most brilliant musicians who played on several occasions, notably in a
U.N.Day concert broadcast in a special hookup between New York, Paris and Geneva
and also featuring the two violin virtuosos David Oistrakh and Yehudi Menuhin.
26

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
FROM STAGE
TO SCREEN
n conjunction with Unesco's
General Conference last Novem¬
ber, the French National Commis¬
sion for Unesco arranged an
impressive list of cultural events
In Paris. France's "Unesco
Month" as it was called, included
special theatrical performances,
concerts, documentary and other
film showings from different lands,
and various exhibitions dealing
with education, science and the
arts. In addition to the premiere
showing of the film "Le Bourgeois
Gentilhomme" (see page 2 and
photo left), the Comédie-Française
offered a gala performance of
Molière's "Fourberies de Scapin,"
while the Popular National Thea¬
tre presented Gérard Philipe
and Geneviève Page (far left) in
Musset's "Caprices de Marianne."
© Musée Guimet, Paris. From Peshawar Museum, Pakistan
HANDS OF A BUDDHA (above) was one of the many
works of art brought together from museums and other
collections in Pakistan, Berlin, Rome and Paris to show
how broad contacts between the ancient civilizations
produced original developments in art. This exhibition
"The Art of Gandhara andCentral Asia" illustrated Unes¬
co's Major Project for East-West mutual appreciation.
Hilding Ohlson, Gustavsberg
SCANDINAVIAN FORM. Scandinavia is recognized today as
one of the world leaders in interior decoration. The originality and
beauty of form and line of Scandinavia's furniture, ceramics, glass¬
ware and lamps was the subject of^an unusual "Unesco Month"
exhibition for which Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden
sent some of the best of their contemporary handicrafts. Photo
shows examples of the modern lines of today's Swedish pottery.
27

development. For the Musical
Weeks, Zurich, Rome, Prague,
Berlin, Brussels and Vienna sent
their most famous orchestras to
Paris, while from Asia came two
great virtuosos: Ravi Shankar of
India and Shinichi Yuise of lapan
who performed for the first time
together on a Paris stage in
a wildly acclaimed performance.
Of the Musical Weeks, Geor¬
ges Duhamel recently said: "It
is with real fervour and hope that
I note that Unesco has announced
the creation of the Paris Musical
Weeks ... If there is one art which
can teach people to know one
another better, to understand and
love their neighbours better, that
art is music . . . Music guides us
into the very souls of other men,
into the hearts of people of other
lands, whereas the ordinary
sources of information often tend
to distort or colour our judgments
of other peoples."
The fourth important event of
Unesco Month was the launching
of a series of International Days
for Documentary Films. Over
120 documentaries from 32 mem¬
ber states of Unesco were shown
to the public in Paris for the first
time. Divided into four chief,
categories (art films; scientific
and technical films; anthropolo¬
gical; and educational films) the
documentaries sought to promote
interest amongst people who are
not regular cinemagoers, and to
show the often unsuspected riches
contained in documentaries of
lesser-known countries.
Other items in the Unesco
Month programme included: an
unusual exhibition at the Institut
Pédagogique National of travel
diaries illustrated with sketches,
paintings and photographs show¬
ing how young French people
who have benefitted from French
travel fellowships see the world;
and an exhibition of 238 water
colours, pastels and gouache
paintings by the great masters
of French art since 1860 assembl¬
ed from various collections in
America and shown in France
for the first time.
Musée Cernuschi
'ORIENT-OCCIDENT, Encounters and Influences Over SO Centuries of Art," an exhibition
at the Musée Cernuschi ¡n Paris, gave striking testimony to the originality of Eastern and
Western cultures as well as to the interaction of their influences. The works displayed
ranged from examples of classical times, such as Greek divinities adopted and transformed by
the artists of Buddhist countries of East Asia down to modern ones showing how the exo-
tism of the East has been analysed by Western artists to serve as the basis for new departures
in the plastic or graphic arts. Whether dating from neolithic, classical, medieval or modern
times, the works assembled at the Musée Cernuschi showed many ways in which the
cultural sensibilities, of East and West have been brought closer together ¡n greater harmony.
Photo, courtesy French National Commission for Unesco
PIERRE AND MARIE CURIE whose discovery of radium towards the end of the 1 9th cen¬
tury did so much to revolutionize theories about the nature of matter and the universe were
honoured in an exhibition held at the Paris Palais de la Découverte. Organized by the French
and Polish National Commissions for Unesco (Marie Curie was born in Warsaw in 1867)
the exhibition told the story of the life and work of this husband-and-wife scientific team.
An identical version of the exhibition was also on view in Poland, The Paris exhibition
is to visit other countries. Photo shows Pierre and Marie Curie at their Paris home.
28
