RADIO HAMS':
AN INTERNATIONAL FAMILY
by
David
Gunston
In almost every corner of the globe.
In living rooms, dens, attics and special
"shacks", 260,000 radio "hams" main¬
tain a vast network of personal contact
by voice or Morse Code. Most amateurs
use self-built apparatus costing from £25
to £50. Right, a very elaborate set-up
operated by a U.S. amateur in California.
J. B. Knight Jnr., U.S.A.
USIS
ALL AGES AND PROFESSIONS are numbered among the more than one quarter of a million amateur radio operators scattered
over the globe. Above, Leonard Ross of Tujunga, California, who was believed to be the youngest ham operator in the world when
in 1953 he passed the General Licence class test at the age of eight. To pass the test he had to demonstrate his ability to send and
to receive at least 13 words of Morse code a minute. Photo shows Leonard, aged eight, operating the equipment in his radio shack.
I0

No study of communications in the modern world
would be complete without an account of the unique
contribution of amateur short-wave radio enthu¬
siasts, or "hams," |who form a great army of private indi¬
vidual communicators. In almost every corner of the globe,
in living-rooms, dens, offices, cabins, attics, cubby-holes
and outbuildings (all universally referred to as "shacks")
some 260,000 licensed operators maintain a vast network
of personal contact by voice or Morse Code signals that
is entirely free from political or propaganda influence.
Daily, hourly in fact, "hams" are in touch with fellow-
enthusiasts of both sexes and all ages in countries near
and far. It is an achievement without parallel, impossible
to envisage even fifty years ago, and the contribution
towards fuller international understanding and goodwill
cannot be measured.
1 Iff
^9^ . < ^
ft , «L "fl^S X
*
Official Soviet photo
SOVIET «HAMS' in 1958 received and sent 854,000 cards, known
as QSL-cards, which are the amateurs' method of confirming the estab¬
lishment of two-way radio contact. Here two novice "hams" at the
Pedagogical Institutein Karaganda, Soviet Kazakhstan, are seen assemb¬
ling one of ten ultra-short wave transmitters which they are building
as a gift for rural schools. They are members of a special radio club
where they study the international "ham language", operate their radio
station and join in contests and shows of self-built radio equipment.
Amateur radio and every "ham" will stress the - vital
importance of his status is primarily a hobby,
but as such must be the only one duly defined by an
international treaty drawn up by 90 nations. At the
International Radio-Communications Conference held in
Atlantic City, U.S.A., in 1947, it was defined as: "A service
of self-training, intercommunication and technical inves¬
tigations carried on by duly authorised persons interested
The Unesco Courier. S-eptember 1959
in radio technique solely with a personal aim and without
pecuniary interest."
Most amateurs, however, would probably define their
compelling interest more simply as "the practice of two-
way, short-wave radio-communication, not as a business
or means of profit, but as a spare-time hobby pursued for
the pleasure to be derived from an interest in radio tech¬
nique and construction, and for the ensuing friendships
with like-minded individuals throughout the world."
Strictly speaking, the description "amateur" in this
connexion is not applied to any neophyte or dabbler with
radio apparatus, but only to duly licensed transmitting
operators whose stations, or "rigs", have the official
sanction of their respective governments. Whatever
the connotation in other spheres, in the field of
amateur radio the prefix is a mark of distinction, superior
knowledge and accomplishment, and very much a cachet
to be achieved. In addition, there are large numbers of
persons with no desire to become transmitters operating
under official license, but who follow the hobby purely as
listeners using short-wave receivers. They are known in
"ham" parlance as SWLs (short-wave listeners).
The pursuit is just about as old as radio itself. It had
its beginnings in the very earliest days of the invention.
Around the turn of the century, when vague details of
the newly-born art of wireless telegraphy, as it was then
known, began to filter through to scientific journals and
beyond, technically-inclined persons began to feel the
first glimmerings of the very real fascination that now
absorbs the attention of over a quarter-of-a-million
people.
Marconi considered himself an amateur, and when he
finally succeeded in spanning the Atlantic Ocean by radio
in 1901, small groups of youthful experimenters in many
countries resolved to find out for themselves how it was
done. Initially, their work was crude and limited: they
were at first fortunate in sending and receiving wireless
waves over distances of a few feet. Gradually the range
increased to yards and eventually to many miles as new
detectors, new circuits and new aerial antennae were
constantly tried out.
Transmitting to the moon
Amateur radio began long before there were short¬
wave bands fitted as a matter of course to ordinary
radio sets, indeed long before radio receivers were
widely known at all. Oddly enough, the first '"hams" were
eventually to prove that messages could be sent and
received all over the world on low power by using the very
short waves which the experts said were useless, and the
period 1921-1926 witnessed epoch-maMng discoveries in
the field.
Amateurs In many scattered countries demonstrated
that high-powered transmitters such as are used for
normal daily long-and medium-wave transmissions or
programme broadcasts were unnecessary when wave¬
lengths below 100 metres were adapted for world-wide
communication. This brought the hobby within the scope
and purse of ordinary folk everywhere, and although
large sums can easily be spent on short-wave radio equip¬
ment, most of today's amateurs operate on apparatus
they have built themselves costing less than £50, whilst
there are many small but complete and reasonably effi¬
cient stations constructed by their owners for half of
this figure or even less.
Naturally, keen operators may spend more than these
figures renovating or extending their equipment, and the
annual turnover in apparatus, though not essential, may
be large. Surveys show that whereas about 80% of ama¬
teur transmitters are home-made and the rest are bought
ready-made, the reverse is the case with receivers. This
is because the modern superheterodyne radio receiver is
such a complex and precise instrument that elaborate
factory equipment is needed to construct it. So receiving
sets are usually cheaper and better-made than those built
at home, whereas transmitters are costly when made
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

RADIO HAMS'
(Continued)
commercially, and are best modified to local needs when
built by the operator himself.
However, apart from practical and financial considera¬
tions, many "hams" have no wish to deprive themselves
of the sheer creative delight of seeing the fruits of their
own hands perform the continuing miracle of transport¬
ing their voice or code signals across enormous distances
and bringing back the immediate reply of a kindred spirit
perhaps on the other side of the globe.
Nowadays the range of Well-equipped amateurs is
limited only by the dimensions of the earth, and in fact
not always by that. Several "hams" have managed to
transmit signals to the moon and record their reflection,
whilst many operators have tracked the various earth
satellites, and continue to work as monitoring stations
for this purpose. Naturally, conditions vary with the
seasons, the weather, the time of day and sunspot in¬
fluence, but to talk with friends many thousands of miles
away is a daily occurrence for all "hams'". The most im¬
portant factor in securing good results is the choice of
the most suitable frequency band for transmissions, for
each wavelength has its own peculiar properties.
Although nowadays many official broadcasting stations
as well as ships and aircraft use the short-waves, almost
every country by international agreement allots ama¬
teurs certain fixed bands, outside the limits of which
they must not operate. However, every amateur is allowed
at any time to choose the band he wishes to use and he
is also allowed (subject to certain band-planning schemes
designed for the general good) to select his own fre¬
quency and to change it when he desires.
' DX hounds' & 'ragchewers'
This is an important point on the more crowded short¬
wave-bands since it allows the keen amateur to
search for and then use a clear frequency (or
"channel") , then should heavy interference be experienc¬
ed later, to move immediately to another position on the
same band. With code signalling, it enables what is known
as "Singlechannel operation" (with both stations on
approximately the same frequency) to be used. Every
short wave-band has its limitations and problems, but
while they are never too great to allow free operation,
the amateur has always some new field to conquer.
Most "'hams" have equipment that will operate by voice
or by Morse Code, with roughly half the messages' being
transmitted by each method. Code work requires less
complex apparatus and may include the use of specialized
codes like the International Q Code which reduce the
language barrier. All licensed amateurs have to prove
their proficiency in Morse Code before they are allowed
fo operate. Indeed, no one in any country can expect
to.secure his amateur license without preliminary study,
application and practice, though self-training is not
difficult.
Most countries insist on written as well as practical
tests, and there is usually an age-limit of 16 or 18, though
several countries have reduced this to 14 or even 12. The
United States, Japan, Ireland and Israel are noteworthy
exceptions to this rule, fixing no age limit. Again, most
but not all countries insist on their operators possessing
citizenship: Germany, Finland, Morocco and Chile being
among the exceptions here.
How many "hams" are there in action today? The Am¬
erican Radio Relay League, largest member-body of the
International Amateur Radio Union, currently estimates
that there are rising 260,000 of them, of which 190,000 are
in the United States and its possessions. There are at
least a few amateurs in every country, and the countries
of Eastern Europe and the U.S.S.R. are no exceptions.
Amateur radio ignores the existence of frontiers and
though the fact is not generally realized, there are today
perhaps 10,000 "hams" in the Soviet Union, freely communi¬
cating iwith the rest of the world. Only in the reluctance
of national amateur radio societies in the Communist
countries to join the IARU does the shadow of politics
fall across the encouraging picture. At present, only the
Polish and Yugoslav societies are members. Czechoslo¬
vakia was formely a member, but resigned some years ago
because the IARU headquarters in the U.S.A. refused to
print the Stockholm "Peace Appeal" in their Calendar
Bulletin.
At present, some 54 countries have their own member-
societies affiliated to the International Amateur Radio
Union, with three others under consideration. India is
a particularly welcome new admission, with about 200
operators, while other representative countries (with
approximate number of amateurs) are: France, 2,800
Brazil, 9,000; Poland,' 250; South Africa, 2,000; Cuba, 900
Mexico, 900; Venezuela, 320; Canada, 8,000; Japan, 5,200
HAM ON WHEELS. More and
more amateur radio enthusiasts are
turning their automobiles into
mobile radio stations' by installing
equipment like that shown below.
Right, Canadian radio" "ham" ope¬
rates a short-wave mobile unit. In
Britain too, aerials like the one on
the rear of this car are becoming a
familiar sight. Amateur station
number is carried on bumper bar.
Photos T. Holloway, England
Great Britain, 8,500; Yugoslavia, 300; Spain, 830 and Ger¬
many, 5,000. In addition to these, there are organized
groups of amateurs in such widely-separated places as
Hong Kong, the Philippines, Austria, Costa Rica, Iceland,
Peru, Syria, Uruguay, Malaya, Colombia, Burma, Ecuador,
Finland, Australia and the Belgian Congo.
To the outsider, the amateur radio movement would
seem to be a particularly well-organized one, with flourish¬
ing if small national societies (all distinguished, in true
amateur radio fashion, by their initialsPZK (Poland),
EDR (Denmark), USKA (Switzerland), etc.in almost all
countries. Banded together into the well-organized IARU
they seek continual improvement in "hams'" relations with
their governments, arrange international agreements
affecting radio communications and in the words of the
IARU's Constitution, "'the encouragement of international
fraternalism". International Conferences have in fact
12

been successfully held in Madrid (1932), Cairo (1939),
Atlantic City (1947) and the next World Radio (Interna¬
tional Telecommunications Union) Conference is due to
be held at Geneva in the summer and autumn of this year.
But what, on the personal level, of the "hams" them¬
selves? What do they talk about, and how do they
contribute towards international understanding? Most
licence regulations expressly forbid the dissemination of
any messages of political, religious or commercial content,
leaving the amateur free to talk on personal and technical
matters to his heart's content. In actual fact, innume¬
rable individual topics are daily discussed over the ether,
with radio equipment and performance easily the most
popular!
Despite its high degree of specialization, amateur radio
consists of many phases of activity. An experimenter
will chat about his "rig" and compare endless notes with
others. A "DX hound" (DX meaning long-distance) is
a kind of angler of the ether, always hoping to pick up
some rare or remote station in another part of the world.
A "ragchewer", or born gossip, is Content to talk for hours
on end about his country and home, the weather, his
friends, his fellow-amateurs and the like. A "trafflc-
handlei" will spend much of his time at his station in
the clear service of others, relaying messages free of
charge for .the general public, simulating a regular com¬
munications system with national trunk lines and feeder
networks for possible emergency need, though all ama¬
teurs rise to the occasion when difficulties or disasters
occur.
Wherever there is a large-scale natural or man-made
disaster, with the frequent disabling of telephone and
commercial radio systems, amateurs step into the breach
to provide substitute communication links to the affected
areas. For example, an earthquake may cut off local
rescue teams from the outside! world, to which they can
be speedily linked by radio "hams", or in cases of fire or
The Unesco Courier. September 1959
explosion nearby amateurs can direct calls for help swiftly
to the right quarters when other means of communication
are out of action. This actually happened In the Texas
City disaster of 1947 when, had it not been for radio
amateurs, communication links would have been non¬
existent and rescue work gravely delayed. In the disas¬
trous floods in Eastern England in January and February
1953, '"hams" set up an emergency network which operated
continuously in conjunction' with the police and ambu¬
lance services.
Many "hams" in Europe, South Africa and America have
assisted expeditions and similar ventures by providing
constant radio links. The famous Kon-Tiki expedition
of Thor Heyerdahl was In regular contact with amateurs
in many countries as it drifted across the Pacific, while
more recent Arctic and Antarctic teams have benefited
not only by radio links provided by amateurs, but by the
regular relaying to their distant outposts of personal
messages from the homes of the men themselves.
Many others make a special point of relaying such
messages at fixed times to servicemen of their country
stationed in remote places, even the North Pole. Eighteen-
year-old Julius Madey, of New Jersey, U.S.A., winner of
the 1958 General Electric Edison Radio Amateur Award,
was cited for relaying more than 12,000 messages for
American servicemen at isolated Antarctic, Arctic and
South Pacific posts, and once through his station a young
mother announced the birth of her baby directly from
her hospital bed to her husband in Antarctica. Another
American amateur who was also specially commended
recently for his public services was 54-year-old Kenneth
M. Blaney of Sacramento, California, who spends twelve
hours a day handling messages and recording important
data on the Explorer satellites.
Amateurs win a race for life
When the inspired French film "Race for Life" (Si
tous les gars du monde...), which received the Bri¬
tish Film Academy United Nations Award for 1957,
was released, its story of help provided in a case of sick¬
ness at sea by a chain of "hams" all over the world, bring¬
ing an injection serum to the North Atlantic by means of
messages relayed via Togoland, Paris, Munich, East Ber¬
lin and Norway, Was viewed by many critics with scepti¬
cism.
It provided, in fact, a typical instance of just how ama¬
teurs can and do provide help in emergencies, and was
based on actual occurrences. Furthermore, whilst making
the film, director Christian Jaque was personally involved
,in a like case, wherein a French '"ham" picked up an
urgent call sent out by two amateurs in Brazil. They
were sending out a call for information on the correct
dosage of a new antidote not then in general use they
had received from Peru. Within the hour, the details from
Paris were in the hands of the Peruvian doctor.
Many other amateurs assist their governments in
service and civil defence work, notably the Military Ama¬
teur Radio System in the U.S.A. (MARS), which provides
a nationwide communications network consisting entirely
of amateurs upon which the services can rely in an emer¬
gency. Some "hams" aid coastguards, police and weather
forecasters, report on traffic problems, speed the rescue
of men from wrecked ships and aircraft, even assist in
the training of young people and the blind in electronics.
In addition to these practical services, amateurs
constantly further the development of the art and science
of radio by their experiments and observations. Being
usually unencumbered with ponderous knowledge, they
sometimes get to the heart of a technical problem quicker
than the professionals, while advances in many fields
of electronics, radar and long-distance radiotelegraphy
have originated in "'shacks'" all over the world.
From the schoolboy in Chile and the mining engineer
in Australia to the missionary in Samoa and the student
in Lithuania, the growing army of "'hams" is a truly
dedicated group with a spirit of human service hard to
equal.
13
