Official Soviet photo
Ultrasonicsthe study and use of high-frequency, inaudible sound waveshas found countless applications in research, medi¬
cine and industryfrom industrial drilling and the removal of barnacles from ships' hulls to the aging of whisky. Here two glass
objectsa jar and a valvehave been pierced by ultrasonic vibrations. Razor blade and pocket knife simply mark the holes.
W. NOYES

HAVE WE THE
RIGHT TO USE
UP OUR SOIL
RECKLESSLY?
Raw materials are not distributed evenly over the
surface of the globe and some of them are being
used up very rapidly. In the United States of
America, iron ore or at least the best quality iron ore is
beginning to run out. Some important elements, such as
copper, for instance, are no longer to be found, and now
have to be imported. Similarly, there is not an inex¬
haustible supply of coal and fuel oil.
It is, of course, the industrialized countries which are
such heavy consumers of all these raw materials. These
countries have therefore had to look for raw materials
wherever they happen to be available, and this raises not
only a practical but also a moral question.
Have Americans or Europeans, the right to use raw
materials coming from a country which may not be
industrialized just now but which will perhaps be indus¬
trialized in 50 years' time and will then need these raw
materials for its own development?
I do not pretend to be able to solve this problem, but
am merely putting it to you as an issue that will be
important in the future.
Let us look at the matter from a slightly different angle.
We export foodstuffs from the United States; the same
is true of South America and many other countries. Have
we the right to use our soil recklessly and let it wash away
into the Mississippi, for instance? Have we the right to
let it become exhausted, with the prospect of not being
able to use it for growing food in another fifty years?
By doing so, may we not run the risk of leaving the people
of other countries to starve to death?
I do not mean that you should make war on us because
we are misusing our soil, but I would emphasize that this
is a matter on which you should reflect. Have Americans
the right to do exactly what they like with their country?
I am quite aware that this view is not very popular in
the United States but I for my part Would like to stress
these facts because of their moral aspect and, above all,
because they bring us face to face with one of the causes
of wars.
Everyone ought to think seriously not only about the
way existing raw materials are used, but also about the
means of preserving them for future generations.
17
