THE TRUE
MEANING
OF AFRICAN
DANCES
by Keita Fodeba
m URING the many tours our troupe has made in
France and other countries, I have noticed
that for most Europeans, the authentic African
dance show corresponds to the single idea they
have formed of Africa from attending a
lecture or seeing, a film.
But this idea is bound to be Wrong, for Africa is a
much larger continent than Europe and more varied. A
film made of any given part of Africa cannot entirely
reflect the essential character of our different regions,
in the way that France Germany or Sweden, for example,
could never become identified to the point of merging
into one psychic entity. Senegal and the Congo are as
different from each other as Finland is from Italy. And
has not modern science endowed the West with, a number
of means of human contact as compared with our so-
called "primitive" countries, where Nature still weighs
heavily on man, often isolating him from his nearest
neighbours? It seems to us consequently tendentious to
try systematically to classify the whole of this vast conti¬
nent by reference to the colour of its inhabitants. The
influence of background upon man is far more important
than that of the degree of pigmentation of his skin. A
thousand historical examples prove this eloquently
enough, be it a question of white, black or yellow races.
Nevertheless, we do not think that the influence exerted
by geographical or social surroundings, however power¬
ful this may be, is alone sufficient to mould man. As
far as we, the black peoples of Africa, are concerned, it
is obvious that whatever may be the degree of assimi¬
lation of foreign cultures as a result of being many times
uprooted, it is still historically too early for us to lose all
our African ethnical characteristics.
Our transplanted brothers have generally been placed
in such political, moral and material conditions, that as
a result of retiring within themselves so
often they have reinforced their psychic
bonds with our continent. Owing to the
dominating effect of conditions of environ¬
ment upon the individual, it would seem
difficult to" speak of a culture of the Negro
18

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
RHYTHM AND MOVEMENT are media by which the people of Africa express
their feelings in a language of dance as intelligible as speech. Characteristic of
the life of Africa, the dance can become ritual, magic, witchcraft, exorcism, an
expression of freedom, of morals and varied sentiments... for dance is able to
reach to man's instincts and subconscious powers and to express him completely.
Zulu dance. © Paul Almasy, Paris
19

AFRICAN DANCES
(Continued)
World. Yet, to the best of our (knowledge, nowhere in the
world during the long years of their tragic expatriation
have the black races enjoyed social and economic con¬
ditions which were sufficient to destroy utterly their
original ties.
On the one hand, Africa being the land of origin of
the Negroes, we can probably deduce that for a long time,
and wherever they are, they will retain something an¬
cestral which will link them to their African brothers.
On the other hand, when we consider the fate reserved,
generally speaking for the black man in the so-called
"civilized" world, we are obliged, in the present circum¬
stances, to recognize and wish for a certain identity of
aim in culture. "Every culture worthy of the name, must
be able to give and to receive," it is said. And the added
merit of the black cultures will be that they all have the
same legitimate desire to defend the cause of an unjustly
used race.
When drawing up the programmes of the African Ballet
Company, our constant concern is to avoid misleading the
public by presenting a fictitious picture conforming to
the usual preconceived idea. To make Africa and all its
variety known, we have chosen dance, not only as an
excellent means of universal expression but also because,
with us, it is connected with all the other arts.
African dance indeed, far from being the autonomous
art that it is in Europe, is primarily a union of rhythm
and movement. A characteristic phenomenon of our life,
it can become ritual, magic, witchcraft, exorcism, an
expression of freedom, morals and sundry sentiments...
for dance is able to reach to man's instincts, to his sub¬
conscious powers and express him completely.
In all countries of the world, there are as many forms
of dance as there are peoples, customs, cults, traditions
and ethics. The differentiation between the arts in
Europe has progressively raised dance to the status of
ballet by detaching it from the life of the people, of
which in Africa it is a spontaneous emanation. The
developed form of dance, self-conscious and no longer
imitative, collective or religious but a creation in itself,
has existed in Western culture for many centuries.
This progressive tendency to intellectualize the dance,
which seems to be in proper relation to progress, seems
to forget the fact that the arts at the beginning sprang
from necessity, that is to say, they Were created in re¬
sponse to a vital need. Ballet, in its Western conception,
is an original choreographic and musical creation. Our
popular African dances hardly yet correspond to this.
But if ballet is "a form of artistic and cultural expression
developed by man in his endless quest for new means of
expression, in his yearning to create forms Which are
ceaselessly renewed according to his genius and abilities",
African dance as a means of expression and of exterio¬
rization can be identified with ballet. That is the reason
Why we call ourselves the "African Ballet Company" with
the conviction that our songs and dances will have some
significance for all who have correct ideas about life in
Africa.
If, in Europe, dance must necessarily aim at grace and
beauty, be aesthetic as well as expressive of an idea, in
our peaceful African villages, we still learn to sing and
dance just as one learns to talk. Nobody dances for his
neighbour but, instead, to express what he feels, translated
by the rhythm of his movements and his body into a
language which, although different from speech, is no
less intelligible. Moreover in a country where drums can
send messages to great distances, it would be impossible
to dissociate music and dance for the rhythms of sound
and those of the body have the same capacity for
expression. A step evokes a rhythm as much as a song
involves a dance figure.
Photo Ilse Steinhoff, from the film "L'homme contre la jungle"
CIRCUMSTANTIAL DANCES are as numerous and as varied as events in daily life in Africa and they are chiefly character¬
ized by a strong element of Improvisation. Thus, to the rhythms of the tom-toms and the balafons, the whole village will
join in a common celebration for the return of a soldier, a successful hunting trip or the reconciliation of two tribal chiefs.
20

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
/
© Pierre Verger
RITUAL CEREMONIES are nearly always accompanied by dances of symbolic character. Each African dance has a definite
reason behind it. There are traditional dances based on history or ceremonial rites, just as there are also circumstantial
ones which originate in the innumerable aspects of human existence. Photo shows a ritual dance performed in Dahomey.
Neither would it be possible to understand the essential
part played by dance in the life of the African peoples
if one did not bear in mind their conditions of life.
When à body has the lightness and the flexibility of a
"liana", who could prevent it from dancing? When the
economic stage is essentially agricultural, involving few
needs and material worries why not move like a bird or
snake, open like a flower and so be in communion with.
Nature and the mysterious powers which people it and
animate it?
If one remembers these circumstances it is easy to see
why the Africans are, so to speak, the real men of dance.
For the very rhythm of their existence is already an invi¬
tation to dancea simple rhythm in common time, which
can be translated into the following needs:
to work for the community
to enjoy the fruit of common labour
to honour the gods Who protect man during his life
and safeguard him after death
to exteriorize the cause and effect of these activities
by song and dance.
One should not however deduce from this that if our
people rhythmically, stamp the ground in the public place
in the village, they do so unconsciously, like a leaf shak¬
en by the wind. Not one of our dances it performed
without a definite reason. Just as there are traditional
dances based on history or ceremonial rites, so there are
circumstantial dances which arise from innumerable cir¬
cumstances of existence.
In this Way, when the Mandinga civilization was spread¬
ing over a large part of the Continent, the vulture which
usually hovered over the bodies of the fallen, was regard¬
ed as a symbol of bravery and courage. A dance was
dedicated to him, which the more intrepid warriors
solemnly executed after a victory. Today, the Mandinga
tradition has adopted this "'Dance of the Vulture" as a
token of honour and no one has the right to dance-it who
does not deserve to do so through some brilliant fèat of
arms or if he has not been authorized by the Council of
Elders.
A thousand dances of this kind stand out as landmarks
in the history of Africa and help to explain it. In return,
popular tradition has created, through the centuries,
other dances, the character of which is also symbolic, but
which are dedicated to ceremonial rites. Such are those
which, among the peoples of Upper Guinea, mark the
initiation of the child at puberty to the principal duties
of life. First, bewitched by the traditional rhythms, the
initiate is possessed by the devils of his own natural bad
tendencies; he dances until he loses consciousness. He
is brought back to life by the witchdoctor whose exorcism .
then points out the path of good to the child... As for
the circumstantial dances, they are as numerous and
different as the happenings of life and are mainly cha¬
racterized by the large part left to improvisation. In
this way, for instance, to the rhythms of the tom-toms
and balafons, the whole village will celebrate the return
of a soldier, a successful hunting trip or the reconciliation
of two tribal chiefs.
It is, moreover, important to note that a celebration of
which the original character is completely circumstantial,
may be periodically repeated later without in any way
becoming part of the cycle of ceremonial rites. The best
example which illustrates this is certainly that of the
clearing of the land. At the beginning of the rainy
season, the whole village gathers at the call of the drums
to cultivate together, in common, the field of every head
of a family. And at night, by moonlight, this form of
mutual assistance enjoyed without distinction by all the
families, is the occasion for great festivities and joyful
dances.
Yet, although all is replete with art and
poetry, there are still some people for
whom an African folklore performance is
far from being artistic, for the simple rea¬
son that 2,000 years of civilization have
not so far drawn their attention to the
Cont'd
on
next page
21

AFRICAN DANCES (Continued)
When a body has the
lightness & flexibility
of a liana, who could
prevent it from dancing?
existence of genuine forms of culture other than their
own. One can also remember that some civilizations at
thier peak have died out, not having been able to rege¬
nerate themselves by contact with external cultural move¬
ments. The rôle of African performers of the future must
be to bring out the essential, characteristic elements of
our cultures while ¡preserving their originality in our
contacts with the Western world.
How often do we hear the word '"genuine" used at
random to describe folklore performances.
Genuine, in fact, compared to what? To a more or
less false idea which one has conceived about the sensa¬
tional primitiveness of Africa? No! Authentic folklore
is that which truly represents the more characteristic
aspects of the existence it wishes to bring to life on the
stage. Thus, to appreciate the degree of authenticity, it
is necessary to know at least a little about the life which
gave birth to the performance. By giving, a priori, a pre-
logical mentality to the Africans, it is indisputable that
one cannot perceive the intense humanity contained in
their songs and dances.
For us, anthenticity is synonymous with reality. In so
far as folklore is made up of a country's traditions, poems,
songs, dances and popular legends, it can only be the
reflection of the life of that country. And if this life
develops, there is no reason why folklore, which is its
living expression, should not develop too. That is the
reason why the folklore of present-day Africa is as
authentic as that of ancient Africa, both of them being
the real expression of the Ufe of our country at two diffe¬
rent periods in its history.
What makes folklore authentic?
The present tendency of an African folklore company
such as ours must be to display to the whole world
the cultural values of both these two Áfricas; the
traditional and pre-colonial Africa of our forefathers and
the Africa of today which is gradually being impregnated
with Western civilization. Indeed it would be absurd to
confine our folklore only to our own country's past, for no
folklore in the world is entirely pure and free of all
mixture.
Because Arab influence has indelibly marked Spain, this
does not mean that the songs and danges of that country
are not genuine. On the other hand the history of the
dance teaches us how the liturgical, dances of the Middle
Ages differed from the popular French dances of the
period, during which, through various influences, the
latter became the choreographic language of the aristo¬
cracy and gave rise to theatre and court ballet, so nearly
resembling each other as to be indistinguishable. Have
the Basque dances of today remained unchanged in style
and meaning for hundreds of years?
In Africa too, just as there are the dances of our fathers
and our grandfathers, full of majesty and wisdom, so the
younger generations in the villages create today songs and
dances which picture our times, already marked by three
centuries of colonization.
During our last African tour, a musician of the forest
region of Guinea gave us, as a souvenir of his village,
some fine '"maracas" made of coconuts. Yet it is generally
considered that maracas come from South America...
There are a hundred similar examples that we could men¬
tion for the paradox of a certain type of ignorance is that
it considers all objects, instruments, dances and so on,
that the black peoples have brought with them in their
enforced pilgrimages to other continents, have only
become genuine since their exile and because of it.
The essence of authenticity in folklore is not to lose the
original character through external influences. In our
programme of African ballets we have a "Casamançais"
22

song, the words of which are in Portuguese Creole, but
the feeling of which is deeply African because it expresses
one of our oldest proverbs : "Love is like an egg, he who
breaks it is lost". In this way a Creole African song may
perfectly well find its place in an African performance,
Portuguese Creole having become the current dialect of
a large part of Casamance to the south of Senegal. In
the same way one should not be at all surprised to see
half-castes among our performers, singing and dancing in
the usual manner of our villages. For if Western
influence is felt in the economic, cultural and political
life of our country, it is also felt in the field of simple
human contacts and has produced the increasingly large
class of mulattos, considered by Africa as her own children.
During our last Paris season at the Théâtre des Champs-
Elysées, a Press critic seemed to be upset by the fact
that our singer Kandia, one of these traditional African
"griots", sang in a more or less Spanish-Flamenco style.
This journalist was obviously unaware that some African
empires from the 12th to the 15th century, had strong
ties with the Arab countries and were influenced by them
just as Spain came to bear the same Arab stamp.
Kandia has no idea what a Flamenco is but, brought up
to a knowledge of African history he knows that if the
huts in the Sudan (seat of the Mandinga Empire) are
rather Arab in style, it is because they have been inspired
by thet Mosques built by Es Saheli, the architect whom the
Emperor Kongo Moussa, brought back with him from his
sumptuous pilgrimage to Mecca. And it would be absurd
to think that our Sudanese huts were not authentic !
Drums speak with power & magic.
In all countries of the world, art progresses in relation
to the social, economic and political conditions which
determine it. . Thus as well as our pure, unmixed
forms of expression we must present those which have
been influenced by other civilizations. But whatever 'the
form of expression used, African art teaches us to regard
as essential in our societies solidarity, love of virtue and
brotherhood between men.
Nevertheless, the stage being different from life, it is
necessary to resort to a certain amount of stage adapta¬
tion to make ourselves understood by a foreign public.
In our African villages, the same dance may last a whole
night without tiring anyone. The dances are, moreover,
executed in the middle of a ring of spectators who also
take part almost as much as the dancers and musicians.
On the stage new conditions have to be created through
different devices in order to retain the freshness and
reality of the dance and to destroy the monotony which
is quick to arise due to the non-active participation of the.
audience. That " is the reason why we must take our
dances only at their culminating point shorten them and
cut out a thousand details which are not important except
in the public place of the village.
In conclusion it only remains to express a wish which
is dear to our hearts :
May the Africa of tomorrow never lose the secrets of
its songs and dances! May it always be able to dance,
for to Africa dance is life a thousand years having been
only like one long dance with many figures, a real dance
of life which is the message of Africa today! The Afri¬
cans in the cities must not neglect this message nor aban¬
don its meaning to the hazards and vicissitudes of history.
We do not know to what extent dance may play a deter¬
mining role in other societies. But We know that with
all its moral and social context, dance has been the link
which enabled African societies to maintain their cohe-
siveness. We know that only the drums have sufficent
power and magic in their 'voices to speak to Africans in
their original language.
However different the forms and origins of our dances
may be, they nevertheless seem to share the same spirit.
This is the spirit which man never ceases to discover with
wonder in himself. For him there is only one law : conti¬
nual progress, onwards and upwards. In this way, to the
dynamic power of the thought corresponds the dynamic
power of the dance, which is thought embodied.
The article above was adapted from "African Dance and the
Stage" by Keita Fodeba, published in Volume VII, No. 3 of
"World Theatre" (See page 35: "The Only International Theatre
Magazine"). Keita Fodeba was born in French Guinea, and
after leaving university he became a teacher in Saint-Louis,
Senegal. Prior to forming his African Ballet Company in 1950
he travelled throughout Africa to recruit his dancers. He is
now Guinea's Minister of the Interior.
The Unesco Courier. January 1959
23
