THE PRICE OF UNCLEAN AIR
Major smog disasters. There have been
four major smog disasters in the past
30 years. The first was in December 1930,
in the Meuse Valley near Liège, Belgium,
lined with blast furnaces, iron and steel
mills, zinc and glass works and other
chemical plants. After five days of per¬
sistent fog 63 people died. The victims
all suffered from acute irritation of the
respiratory tract and vomiting until death
came from heart failure. Several hundred
other people became severely ill; many
head of cattle had to be slaughtered. In
November 1948 another 5-day smog at
Donora, near Pittsburgh, caused the death
of 19 people.
The worst smog disaster in modern times
was the one that ravaged London in Dec¬
ember 1952 when a 4-day fog killed some
4,000 persons and made thousands of other
people violently ill. Even the cholera
epidemic of 1866 did not equal this, and
in the past 100 years only the peak week
of influenza in November 1918 produced
more deaths over the expected normal
than did the smog of 1952. Following the
disaster the Government called for an
investigation which resulted in a series of
recommendations aimed at preventing
recurrences. Nevertheless, a similar though
less severe smog occurred in 1956 causing
an estimated 1,000 additional deaths in
Greater London.
Financial losses: $3 million of damage
is reported to have been done to crops in
the Los Angeles area every year since 1953.
The total losses in the U.S.A. from air
pollution in 1950-1951 amounted to $1,500
million, i. e. $10 per inhabitant per year.
In the U.K. losses for 1947 were estimated
at £100 million, while in France the dam¬
ages are calculated to be as high as
240,000 million francs.
Damage to plants and animals: Animals
generally suffer from air pollution in the
same way as human beings. But cattle
WORLD ANTI-AIR-POLLUTION
CAMPAIGN URGED BY W.H.O.
A world campaign to combat the growing menace of air pollution has been
proposed by an international committee on air pollution recently set up
by the World Health Organization in Geneva and grouping together
medical and public health specialists from Europe, America, Asia and Africa.
In a special report issued a few months ago the committee calls for the
mobilization! of world public opinion through a broad programme of education
to make clear to everyone the nature and causes of air pollution, its harmful
effects on health, the difficulties which face any programme for producing clean
air, and the ways in which ordinary citizens can help in reducing air pollution.
The W.H.O. committee has proposed that national air pollution councils now
set up in every country to take stock of the situation as a whole and to
supervise all aspects of an anti-air-pollution drive in the nation. It suggests that
these councils include not only public health officials but also representatives of
various industries, agriculture, science, transport, housing, town planning, etc.
One of the important functions of these councils would be to advise on the form
and scope of special legislation eventually deemed necessary to combat air
pollution. According to the World Health Organization report one thing is
certain: on the basis of present knowledge much pollution can be avoided at a
reasonable cost by careful planning and siting of factories and dwellings, the
better design of equipment, and better operation based on adequate training of
management and employees. The report cites numerous examples of how
pollution can be reduced without undue cost and sometimes even with a financial
saving.
Smoke, it points out, for example, is a .visible sign of the inefficient burning of
fuel and hence of the wasting of fuel. If proper air supplies were ensured for
burning coal and oil in industrial boilers these would eliminate all or most of the
smoke with a consequent saving of fuel used for the same operation. However,
to avoid air pollution from domestic coal fires such as those in London, new
heating systems may have to be introduced.
Whereas it is generally accepted that unusual concentrations of smog over a
city have been responsible for sickness and death, the committee stressed the
fact that smaller doses of atmospheric pollution have also had harmful effects
upon the health of large numbers of people. The exact toxicity of long-continued
exposure to smaller concentrations of pollution, however, are not yet known, and
more research work is needed on a large scale in many selected places before
definite conclusions can be reached. The W.H.O. committee therefore urges a
stepped-up programme of research on air pollution and the pooling of information
between all countries.
are less resistant than sheep and pigs.
Sheep and cattle are particularly sensitive
to fluorine in the air which tends to accu¬
mulate in the grass. The teeth of grazing
animals have been known to deteriorate so
much through fluorosis that the animals
were unable to feed. Research in England
has shown how radishes and other plants
lose from half to nine-tenths of their
growth in a polluted atmosphere, if they
survive at all, and that soil loses its stock
of accessory plant foods very rapidly under
the action of polluted rain.
' Works of art can ¡be seriously affected
by pollution. Smoke is harmful to paint¬
ings, particularly on wood, and to' textiles,
leather and wax-film material. The deterio¬
ration of works of art and historical monu¬
ments by the corrosive effects of air
pollution has been a matter for concern to
Unesco and national authorities for years.
' Damage to buildings: Building materials
are corroded and disfigured by atmo¬
spheric pollution. Smoke particles stick
on every surface of stone, brick, paint or
glass, whether horizontal or vertical, which
may or may not be partly removed by
rain. An authoritative estimate in 1930 put
the cost of thé damage to buildings in the
United Kingdom at two and a half million
pounds per year.
EXAMPLES REPORTED
FROM EUROPE
Switzerland: Harmful effects on animals
and on plant life have been reported in the
neighbourhood of aluminium factories.
Poland: In some districts where the
concentration of smelting and similar
industries is particularly heavy, the health
of school children is being adversely
affected.
Netherlands: Pollution from fluorine
compounds has had such a serious effect
on cattle that some have had to be
slaughtered. Damage to plant life has
also been noted.
Germany: Animal losses have occurred
near plants releasing arsenic compounds
and metallic dusts into the air.
Sweden: Harmful effects on plat life
have been observed as a consequence of
flue gases from shale-oil factories, iron
works, phosphate factories, carbon.bisulfide
factories, copper works, electro-chemical
factories and sulfate cellulose plants.
Finland: Heavy compensation has been
paid by a sulphuric acid factory for damage
to crops and materials.
II
