VOLCÜ
Far more useful
than destructive
by E. Aubert de la RUe
iNCE ancient times volcanoes
have struck terror and wonder
into the heart of man. Yet
there is much more to volcanic
activity than the spectacular
and awe-inspiring eruptions which sometimes cause great
destruction. Comparatively few volcanoes are really dan¬
gerous and many of them are merely "noisy neighbours"
to those Who live nearby causing only a slight nuisance.
The share of good which volcanic force has brought to
the world has too often been obscured by the violent
outbursts of a few highly active cones.
In recent geological times, volcanoes have thrown up a
multitude of islands dotted among the oceans and seas of
the world which have added some hundreds of square
miles to the land surface of the earth. Their real value
to man however, lies in the widely varying uses to which
they can be put. On the continental land masses vol¬
canoes have raised up mountains which have done much
to increase what would otherwise have been a scanty
rainfall. And the peoples of the tropics often have a lofty
volcanic cone to thank for a more temperate climate.
The greatest benefit so far brought by volcanoes,'
however, has been the fertilizing effect of the lava and
ash they eject. The soils formed by the decay of these
volcanic products yield rich harvests in many countries.
This fertility accounts for the amazing density of popula¬
tion in the neighbourhood of many active craters. For¬
getful of past catastrophes and heedless of the dangers
that still threaten them, farmers have settled in large
numbers round Etna and Vesuvius and volcanoes in Cen¬
tral America, Indonesia, the Philippines and Japan, but
they now run fewer risks than their forefathers. In the
past few decades observation posts have been set up
alongside the most dangerous craters, so that an impend¬
ing eruption can be detected and warning given in good
time.
For a long while no attempt was made to harness the
enormous power generated by volcanoes. Even in quite
subsidiary forms it Was put only to such domestic uses
as heating and cooking or was employed therapeutically
in the form of hot mineral springs. Today the remarkable
technical achievements of Iceland and Italy arc- serving
as a spur to the harnessing of geothermal power for use
in industry. In a few years' time, other countries, par¬
ticularly those with few other sources of natural power,
are likely to be drawing more and more on the inexhaust¬
ible power offered by volcanoes.
The number of active volcanoes is not known exactly,
but has been estimated at between 400 and 620. These
figures relate only to eruptions on continents and islands
and not to those which occur on the ocean-floor but which
do not rise above sea-level; the exact locations of some
80 such craters are known, most of them being in the
Pacific.
As a rule, volcanoes are regarded as active if they have
erupted in historic times or if they are fumarolic that is,
if they have a vent from which vapour issues. Also includ¬
ed in this category are some recently discovered cones
situated in remote, deserted regions, about whose past
information is lacking but which are intact and appear
to be of recent formation. Several of the major eruptions
that have occurred since the beginning of the Christian
era have come from craters which for long showed no
sign of life and appeared to be quite extinct. The decep¬
tive nature of this inactivity has therefore to be taken
into account when making a classification of volcanoes.
Account must also be taken of new volcanoes which make
an unexpected appearance from time to time, such as
Jorullo in 1759. and Paracutin in 1943, both in the State
of Michoacan in Mexico, and the cone of scoria the
newest arrival in the volcanic worldwhich rose up in
1957 from the sea near the island of Fayal in the Azores.

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
FIERY LAKES
OF SEETHING
MOLTEN ROCK
Among the strangest and
rarest of all the world's
volcanic phenomena are
the lakes of boiling lava in
MhL 0 which innumerable tons of
I^L molten rock bubble and
, fume incessantly. Few
dfíuf^ remain permanently in this
i state, most of them drying
A Hfr up periodically until reacti
fä vated by new eruptions.
7 P^^" The best known of these
Wr^ fire-pits are found on the
J Ê W* * opposite sides of the earth
/ J the centre of the Pacific
« Ocean and in the heart of
/. Y * Africa. Those of the Paci-
\tj * -. fie are Savii in the Samoan
. . .. .- Islands and the great cratery *è '
^r^^T ^%^^ %« * V of Kilauea on the island of
.
wF * . Hawaii in the Hawaiian Na-
i IF i tional Park. Today the
. ^ only large-scale lava lake
^
that is permanently active
is in the volcano of Nira-
. | Hk gongo in the Belgian Con-
« -3 ^M go. (See next page) Fiery
. _ J0 ^^B flow of lava (left) was pho-
j/r ]^m% tographed at night in the
crater of Niragongo's neigh¬
bour volcano Nyamlagira.
At the start of this century
Nyamlagira was the most
active of Africa's volcanoes
and possessed a large lake
of molten lava. From Janu¬
ary 1938 until the end of
1940 it was almost cons¬
tantly in a state of eruption
which culminated in the
collapse of its cone and
central crater. At the same
time its lake of lava dried up
(g) Haroun Tazieff, taken from the
film "Aux Rendez-vous du Diable"
Probably not more than fifty volcanoes above sea-level
can properly be described as in a present state of erup¬
tion. Most . of the others regarded as active are very
intermittently so, and have long periods of quiescence
between eruptions. Cones which are continually aglow
and smoking like those of Stromboli in the Mediterranean,
Izalco in El Salvador, the "Lighthouse of the Pacific"
whose red glow" is visible at night from far out at sea,
and Iahue on Tanna Island in the New Hebrides are few
and far between.
It is accurate enough to say that about 500 volcanoes
are active in varying degrees. They are thus only a
fraction of all the world's thousands of extinct volcanoes.
Some of these are still well preserved while others are so
eaten away by erosion as to be scarcely recognizable,
although the weird and spectacular shapes into which they
have sometimes worn are- characteristic of former volcanic
regions. They stand as reminders of a period of intense
activity within the earth which ended with the dawn
of the quaternary geological period, and show quite clearly
how present-day vulcanicity has declined compared with
that of the past.
Today's volcanoes are not distributed at random but
can be traced along or not far from zones in which the
earth's crust has become dislodged and weakened. They
seldom are found singly but usually in rectilinear or semi¬
circular formations, particularly in the case of island
volcanoes. Some parts of the world, such as Australia
and most parts of Europe and Asia, have no active vol¬
canoes at all, whereas others, such as the two Americas,
the Pacific seaboard and the median ridge of the Atlantic
have a very large number.
The differing degrees of activity shown by volcanoes
depend on the chemical composition of their lava and on
the latter 's temperature and- vapour content, for these
factors determine the fluidity of the lava. Though erup¬
tions may therefore be divided into several classes, there
are two main types.
The first are the effusive eruptions, marked by what is
often a gentle outflow of relatively fluid, dark-coloured
lava. Mauna Loa and Kilauea in Hawaii,
Etna in Italy and most of the basaltic
eruptions usually belong to this type. These
outflows, some of them extending twelve
miles or so, are a danger to crops and
houses but seldom imperil the lives of the

VOLCANOES (Continued)
Photos © Haroun Tazieff


The Unesco Courier. January 1959
mmmmËËm
E. Aubert de la Rüe
VOLCANIC WASTELAND, stretching as far as the eye can see, is in the dry, barren Bara plain of the Somali Coast.
Stony "crop" covering the soil is composed of innumerable basalt rocks and boulders, the products of past volcanic activity.
peoples settled in their vicinity, who generally have time
to flee before the approaching lava which seldom travels
more than about fifty or at the most a few hundred yards
an hour. The Hawaiian volcanoes have the swiftest flow*
which for short distances and on a very steep slope, has
been known to exceed eighteen yards a second.
To the second type belong the very much more formid¬
able explosive eruptions. Highly viscous lava rises to the
surface of the crater, giving off great quantities of gaseous
products, and in particular water-vapour, which find diffi¬
culty in escaping. Explosions pulverize the lava creating
large quantities of ash and incandescent, semi-solid
lumps which are hurled upwards. The lighter materials,
obscuring the discharge of vapour from the crater, may
be carried far afield by currents of air. The great vol¬
canic outbursts have mostly been caused by this type of
explosion, which commonly occurs in craters that have
been so long dormant that lava from the last eruption has
had time to solidify and stop up the "throat" of the vol¬
cano. A lengthy period of quiescence causes an accumu¬
lation of gases to be trapped in the heart of the crater,
and this explains' the tremendous power generated by
volcanoes. The longer the time elapsing between two
successive eruptions, the more violent is the fresh outburst
likely to be.
In both historic and modern times, a number of volca¬
noes have won tragic fame for their disastrous eruptions.
The eruption of Vesuvius, which in 79 AD. buried Hercu-
laneum and Pompeii beneath its ashes is perhaps the best
known in history. Then there was the terrible explosion
of Tambora, on Sumbawa Island in 1815one of the most
staggering of all times Which claimed 50,000 victims and
cut 4,000 feet off the height of this mountain. In 1886, a
similar explosion literally ripped open the slumbering
volcano of TaraWera in New Zealand forming a fissure
several miles long. The eruption transformed the topo¬
graphy of the area, but claimed few victims in this spar¬
sely populated region. A few years previously, in 1883,
the eruption of Krakatoa in the Strait of Sunda devasta
ted an island, causing 36,000 deaths. Other memorable
catastrophes occurred in Nicaragua in 1835, when the
peak of Conseguina was cut off, the explosion being heard
nearly 1,000 miles away, in Japan in 1888 when Bandai
San lost 1,950 feet of its height in a few seconds, in Gua¬
temala in 1902, when Santa Maria buried a large area
under a pall of ash, and in Martinique in the same year,
When Mount Pelée wiped out the city of Saint Pierre with
its 28,000 inhabitants.
The deadliest form of volcanic activity is the sudden
recrudescence of volcanoes Which have been so long dor¬
mant that they are regarded as extinct and are therefore
left unwatched. The unexpected eruption of Mount
Lamington in New Guinea, which caused 6,000 deaths in
1952, is a recent case in point. Most of the great volcanic
disasters have, in fact, been caused by surprise outbursts
from dormant craters. Nowadays regular observations are
usually made on craters which show intermittent activity,
and a special alarm system is arranged to warn people
living nearby of impending danger. The most dangerous
volcanoes which are surrounded by rich farmland with a
dense population or those Which are situated near towns
and cities, are increasingly watched over by experts.
Vulcanology and geophysics have armed these specialists
with up-to-date detection devices such as seismographs,
geophones, and recording thermometers, as well as
analyses of gas content, gravimetric measurements, and
detection of possible changes in the surface of the ground
by very accurate levelling of the approaches to the
volcano. There have been many successful forecasts of
eruptions, the most famous of which concerned the 1914
eruption of Sakura JLma in the Bay of Kagoshima in
Japan; sufficient Warning was given for the Whole popula¬
tion to be evacuated. Some of the world's best equipped
vulcanological observatories are to be found
on Vesuvius and Etna in Italy and on
Kilauea, in Hawaii, as Well as in Martinique,
Japan and Indonesia. Planes and heli¬
copters are now available, if not to stop the
flow of the lava streams, at any rate to
Cont'd
on
next page

VOLCANOES (Continued)
alter their direction, by bombing the outflow pointsa
method which has often been successfully employed at
Mauna Loa in Hawaii.
Man has found scores of uses for the materials ejected
by volcanoes. From earliest times, volcanic lava, breccia
and tuff, which are usually easy to work, have been used
to build temples and palaces, individual dwellings and
sometimes whole cities. In every age, outstanding works
of art have been created with volcanic substances. Many
primitive peoples were famed for their skill in making
highly decorative objects from carved and polished lava.
The Indians of the high Mexican plateaux and the Andes,
and many South Sea Islanders, including the inhabitants
of Easter Island in the Pacific and the Marquesas, are
noted for such work.
A volcanic material highly prized by the peoples of
antiquity was obsidian, a natural glass, or vitreous lava,
extruded by certain volcanoes. It was universally
employed for making utilitarian objects as well as for
jewelry and ornamentation on account of its brilliance
and iridescence. The few rich deposits of obsidian were
deservedly famous. Those on the Island of Melos were
celebrated throughout the Aegean. Before metals came
into use the products of these deposits were in great
demand for the manufacture of armour and various tools.
In the pre-Colombian era, the inhabitants of the high
Mexican plateaux used the obsidian ejected by some of
their volcanoes for making knives, razors, arrow-heads
and works of art. The most extensively worked deposits
were on the Cerro de las Navajas (Mountain of Knives),
near Pachuca in the State of Hidalgo.
Town built of pumice stone
Since 1946, obsidian has acquired considerable industrial
importance on account of its expansibility. It is used
for the manufacture of perlite, a very light material
rather like pumice stone. Some obsidians have a high
water content which enables them to expand to twenty
times their volume when heated to a high enough tem¬
perature to soften them. The perlite obtained by process¬
ing the obsidian quarried in the West of the United States,
particularly in Nevada, and also in Italy (Ponza Island to
the west of Naples) and Sardinia, is used for the manu¬
facture of light, insulating and incombustible building
materials.
Pumice stone, with its very light, cellular texture, may
properly be described as the natural foam of volcanic
glass; it has many uses in industry and as a toilet
requisite. This variety of lava is in use in a great many
volcanic regions, but the finest quality comes from Lipari
Island in Italy, which produces 50,000 tons a year for
export. The pumice stone found in various parts of the
world is an excellent building material. For instance, the
town of Latacunga in the Andes of Ecuador was built»
entirely of pumice stone, as is also the huge dome of the
church of St. Sophia in Istanbul.
The lavas of present-day volcanoes, unlike those of the
past, are very poor in Workable metals, but the outflows
sometimes contain other useful substances. The volcanoes
of Naples and of Green River in Wyoming U.S.A., for
instance, are rich in potassium. Unfortunately, no cheap
processes have yet been developed for the extraction of
the potassium salts contained in these lavas.
One of the commonest volcanic products is sulphur,
which has been regularly mined from a great number of
craters, temporarily reduced to the status of sulphur-
springs. They are still being worked in some countries,
but volcanic sulphur deposits are small, scattered and
difficult of access and are being abandoned more and
more in favour of sedimentary deposits of sulphur such as
are found in Sicily and Texas.
Volcanoes bring from the bowels of the earth reserves
of mineral matter essential to plant life. They are also
one of the sources of the carbon dioxide contained in the
atmosphere, without which plants would not be able to
grow. Lime, phosphoric acid, potassium and other nu¬
tritive salts are . constantly being drained from the soil
by plants and the run-off of water, but are replaced to
lome extent by volcanoes which replenish impoverished
8
OUNTAIN GROWN
FROM A CORNFIELD
soils by furnishing a regular supply of elements necessary
to cultivation and plant life in general.
The over-abundant showers of ash from some explosive
eruptions naturally bring disaster and ruin for a time
at least. Yet the havoc they wreak is generally confined
to a small area and is of less importance than the
prosperity volcanoes bring to many agricultural districts.
Moreover, their beneficial effect is felt far beyond their
normal radius of activity, for they send up fine dust into
the air to such a height that it is carried long distances
by atmospheric currents.
The fertility of the soil thus formed on the slopes of
volcanoes has always been a magnet to farming commun¬
ities. Observing the infrequency with Which volcanoes
give vent to their destructive forces, the farmers consider
that the rich harvests reaped from land where lava once
flowed fully justify the risks of cultivation in such
relatively dangerous localities. All the disasters of the
past have never prevented man from clinging to land in
the proximity of volcanoes and even the threat of an
imminent eruption is not always enough to make him
abandon soil which gives such flourishing crops.
The slopes of Vesuvius and Etna, famous for their vines

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
On February 20, 1943, a Mexican farmer was ploughing his cornfield
near a village some 200 miles west of Mexico City, in a region of recent
volcanic activity in the western Sierra Madre. Suddenly he saw a spiral
of steam rise from a small depression in the ground, then the earth began
to crack and raise itself and finally a huge column of black smoke rolled
upwardsa new volcano, Paricutin was being born. By next day it had
built up a cone more than 50 feet high. In puffs that occurred every six
Photos © E. Aubert de la Rue
seconds it ejected cinders, ash and bombs of solid rock estimated at 2,700
tons a minute. Within six months the cone (above, right) was 1,000 feet
high. Paracutin provided what was termed "the most splendid firework
show of all time" but the volcano also engulfed villages in a sea of lava.
Top of church tower can still be seen (above, left) above the advancing
lava. Paracutin, which erupted for nearly ten years, was the first volcano in
history to be observed scientifically almost from the moment of its birth.
and orchards, are not the only volcanic sites thus sought
after; the sides of volcanoes in Central America, covered
with rich coffee plantations, and those of Java, the
Philippines and Japan are equally coveted. In the tropics
a host of volcanic islands have been turned into Gardens
of Eden where every kind of tropical fruit is grown. The
Canary Islands, the Azores, the West Indies, Sao Thoma,
Fernando Po and Reunion are but a few examples.
For a long time man had no defence against volcanic
eruptions and his chief feeling about them was one of
helplessness in the face of the irresistible forces they
unleash. Yet for centuries his imagination has also been
stimulated by the possibility of tapping the tremendous
reserves of power locked up in the depths of volcanoes.
Only in relatively recent times, however, has this dream
become an industrial reality. We are not as yet at the
stage of making direct use of the enormous power released
by erupting volcanoes, but at least various countries are
beginning to put some of the secondary forms of volcanic
activity to work for them. With modern equipment it is
possible to sink bores to great depths and thus reach very
high temperatures. Today it is no longer fanciful to
consider the possibility, within the near future, of drawing
off the incandescent gases generated in the underground
reservoirs of volcanoes.
Ideas which not long ago appeared Utopian are now
becoming facts. The natural vapour given off in large
quantities near Lardarello in Tuscany, Italy, has for long
attracted attention because of its special properties and its
industrial possibilities. Italian engineers not only work
these natural steamholes or soffioni, but they are now
drilling down to a depth of nearly 2,000 feet, where the
superheated vapour is captured and directed through
reinforced pipes to steam generating stations, now
producing some 300,000 (kilowatts. In addition, the
soffioni are used for chemical purposes, such as the
extraction of boron, carbon dioxide, ammonia and various
other industrial gases. Research into the uses of geo-
thermal power is being conducted in other parts of Italy,
particularly in the Phlegraean Fields, the Euganean Hills,
at Viterbo in Latium, on the islands of
Ischia and Vulcano and round Sciacca in
Sicily.
The Icelanders too have made extensive
use of the hot springs which abound on
their island as a subsidiary phenomenon

VOLCANOES (Continued)
C.N.R.S., Paris
LULL IN ACTIVITY of one of history's most famous volcanoes, Vesuvius, in the Bay of Naples, gave
air-photographer a chance to take this clear shot of its crater. Today Vesuvius is about 3,600 feet
high, but once it may have been twice that height since traces have been found of a very large crater
that was blown away in pre-historic times. After the eruption of 79 A.D. which buried Pompeii, Hercu-
laneum and Stabiae, Vesuvius was less active until the great eruption of 1631. Since then it has never
been really quiet, but when it is at its quietest it is possible to climb up and stand above the crater.
10

GIANT WITH
TWIN MOUTHS
Two moods of a twin-mouthed volcano,
Boquerón, off the west coast of Mexico,
captured In aerial photographs. Right, a dense
cloud of vapour and ash spouts upwards as
the volcano erupts. Below, a thin plume of
vapour rises from one of the twin mouths of
the Boquerón crater. Run-off. of molten lava
down to the sea has outlined the contours of
this volcanic island. Mexico is a land of
volcanoes. Starting at its border with the
United States is the beginning of a chain that
is practically unbroken until it reaches the
southern end of South America. The great
Mexican peak, Mount Popocatepetl, which
rises to 17,888 feet, is one of the highest
active volcanoes anywhere in the world today.
The Unesco Courier. January 1959
USIS photos
II

The Unesco Courier. January 1959
V VJ JJ V/1\XM WillM (Cont'd from page 9)
of volcanism. Since 1930 a system has been in operation
for supplying homes with hot water from springs. At
Reykjavik, the capital, nearly 3,500 homes are now heated
with water at 185° F. The town also has several
swimming-pools maintained at 98° F and public wash-
houses supplied with natural hot water. Villages and
even isolated farms now have their hot water supply
as well. Of special interest is the use by Iceland of hot
springs for the heating of hot houses, where many
varieties of fruits, vegetables and even flowers can be
grown, despite the cold climate.
Elsewhere too, a good deal of research has been devoted
in recent years to the possibilities of using the heat locked
up inside the earth as a source of power. This research
has been carried furthest in California, the State of
Hidalgo in Mexico, the Republic of El Salvador, the district
of Wairakei in New Zealand, famous for its hot springs,
and in East Africa and Japan.
Terrifying and destructive as eruptions may be, they are
a magnificent sight to watch with their dark columns of
ash, their great billows of vapour shot through with
flashes as brilliant as a firework display, their fuming
streams of lava and the blazing craters glowing red
against the night sky. The splendour of active volcanoes
and the strange subsidiary forms they take, such as
sulphur-springs, geyser jets, mud volcanoes and other
varí ¿ties of hot springs attract many tourists.
ISxtinct volcanoes, many of them weather-beaten and
crumbling, are often surrounded by enchanting scenery.
The charm of old volcanic regions such as the Eifel in
Germany, Auvergne in France and the Polynesian
archipelagoes, once thrown up by a long series of eruptions
and now sculpted into weird shapes by erosion are well
.known. The old eroded volcanoes of the Society Islands,
the Hawaiian archipelago and the islands of the Atlantic,
from the Azores to the West Indies, by way of the Canary
and Cape Verde Islands, are equally celebrated.
Geyser & hot spring parks
Extinct craters, where lakes have formed from the
gradual accumulation of rain water, some of them a
perfect circle, are a curiosity of many volcanic sites.
The impressive grandeur of some of these lakes has made
them deservedly famous as beauty spots. But the special
configuration of many old craters also enables man to
make other uses of them. Those which form a natural
enclosure as at Aden in Arabia can serve as reservoirs;
other old craters in Mexico, Patagonia and the Andes, are
prized as farmland, as they afford shelter for crops against
strong winds. Where the explosion of an island volcano
has opened a large breach in its wall, an excellent natural
harbour may be formed if the sea breaks into the crater.
In the past man's chief reaction to volcanoes was fear.
Today as this is replaced more and more by one of
interest, many countries with active or extinct volcanoes
on their territory are taking the trouble to preserve the
surrounding sites in their natural state. Many of the
finest volcanoes have now been converted into National
parks. The United States of America has taken the lead
in the preservations of volcanic sites and has created some
fifteen famous parks, including Yellowstone National
Park with its geysers and pools of boiling water, Greater
Lake National Park in Oregon, the park surrounding
Lassen Peak in California, and others in Hawaii and
elsewhere; in them visitors can observe past and present
volcanic activity in a wide variety of forms. Other
countries also have some very fine volcanic parks.
Thus it can be seen that in addition to bringing havoc
and also being of value to man the world's volcanoes make
first-class recreation centres, for in action they provide
natural spectacles of awe-inspiring beauty and scenery of
tremendous grandeur.
E. Aubert de la Riie, author of this article, is a French geologist
who has carried out numerous surveys and missions in different parts
of the world. In 1953 and in 1956 he went to Brazil on Unesco
technical assistance missions. Since October 1958 he has been
entrusted with a new Unesco mission as chief of a survey of natural
resources in South Chile. He is the author of many works on
geographical and geological questions, the most recent being "L'Homme
et les volcans" (Man and Volcanoes) published by Gallimard, Paris.
15
