A NUCLEAR REACTOR
NAMED WATER NYMPH
by Victor Hari
There are still people in India who have never seen a
motor-car or an eiectric light bulb. On the other
hand the first atomic reactor in Asia, outside the
Soviet Union, was built entirely by Indian scientists and
engineers at Trombay near Bombay arid will celebrate its
third birthday next August. Today India is the sixth
atomic power in the world not in terms of nuclear
weapons but research.
Why is nuclear research so vital to the progress of
India?
In the words of Dr. Homi Jehangir Bhabha, Secretary
of the recently constituted Atomic Energy Commission of
India: '"Atomic energy is the new branch of technology on
which the industrial revolution of the 20th century will
be based."
For India this 20th century industrial revolution is.
particularly important. In two years, the population of
the country will be 400 million and by 1975 it will amount
to 500 million. India's annual per capita income is Rs.295
($U.S.62) as compared to the American average of
Rs.10,000 (over $ U.S. 2,000). Thus we have to run even to
be able to stand still. .
But what about India's hydro-electric potential? What
about her coal reserves? Would it not be more realistic to
exploit these, first? The Government of India has under
construction a chain of multi-purpose river-valley projects
during the current Five Year Plan. But all the rivers
flowing across the face of India, and all the coal under¬
ground are not enough.
According to authoritative estimates India's coal
reserves amount roughly to 100 tons per head of popu¬
lation. This is one-twentieth of the per capita coal
reserves of China, roughly .one-thirty-fifth that of the
UK. and roughly one-hundred and fiftieth that of the
U.S.A. Now if an industrialized India were to consume as
much coal per head of population as. is done in the U.S.A.
today, it would exhaust its coal reserves in about
10 years!
India's major fuel: cattle dung
India's hydro-electric potential is estimated at between
35 and 40 million kilowatts. That is, when fully
harnessed and it is a costly and difficult process the
total hydel (hydro-electric) potential would be barely one-
tenth of a kilowatt per person, whereas it is 6 times more
in the U.S.A. and 11 times more in Norway even today!
And by the time the water power is fully harnessed,
the increase in population .will have, been formidable
enough to cancel the advantage.
The water power resources do not materially alter the
long-term problem of. India's energy needs. The world
reserves of oil are a small fraction of its coal reserves.
We therefore come to the inescapable conclusion that all
the reserves of hydro-electricity and conventional fuels in
India are insufficient to enable it to reach a standard of
living comparable with the present . standard of the
industrially advanced countries.
Actually the most widely used fuel in India today is
cattle dung. The ratio of coal, hydel, oil and wood to
dung for power use in India is 308 to 1,000, that is, two-
thirds of the fuel today is cattle dung: it amounts to about
225 million tons a year. Now if 225 million tons of dung
were put into the soil instead of being burnt, it would
make a big difference in agriculture.
Again for thermal power stations coal has to be
transported over great distances. Coal transport is
heavily subsidized, the subsidy varying from 30 to 100 per
cent of the cost of the coal. This enormous figure
becomes even more significant when it is "realized that
coal is one-third of the total ton-mileage of goods carried
by Indian railways. The relief to the railway-systemone
ton of uranium instead of 10,000 tons of coalwould be
enormous.
Energy hidden in the sands
But is nuclear power an economic proposition in India?
Estimates taken from England show that the capital
cost per kilowatt of atomic powerin a 250 mega¬
watt stationWould be Rs.1,600. Now, in a hydro-station
of the same power (250 Megawatts), for instance Koyna or
Rihand, the capital cost per Kilowatt is Rs.1.780 and
Rs.1.810. Of course, there are no fuel costs in a dam the
water does the job but nevertheless this large amount
of initial capital has to be found.
Has India the necessary nuclear fuel? A systematic
survey of uranium in ' the country began in 1949, and
modern techniques such as surveys by helicopters and
aeroplanes fitted with scintillo-meters were introduced in
1954. This has already doubled India's known reserves of
uranium. Although it is not rich in uranium, India can
produce enough for its purposes. Uranium will be con¬
verted into plutonium; and when this plutonium is fed
into a thorium -breeder-reactor, uranium-233 is bred from
the thorium and thorium can thus be used as the fuel
for India's power plants.
Once there. is enough plutonium for basic requirements,
natural uranium can be completely eliminated and only
thorium used.
India has one of the largest deposits in the world of
monazite, the thorium bearing sand. Thorium was.
previously imported (it was used for gas lamp mantles).
Today it is supplied by the Thorium Plant at Trombay and
India now exports thorium to countries in Europe and the
East. The important thing is that even the Indian known
reserves of uranium and thorium are equivalent in energy-
value to more than 30 times India's coal reserves. The
reserves of uranium and thorium are enough to support a
consumption of energy per person equal to that of the
most industrially advanced countries for over three
centuries.
The . Swimming Pool Reactor at Trombay, named
"Apsara"' water nymph which was inaugurated in 1957,.
last year completed 160,000 KW hours of operation, and
the demand on its time has increased so rapidly that it is
now running on a round-the-clock schedule.
The special facilities of this reactor are being exploited
to the maximum. One feature of the design, which
enables the core of the reactor to be worked at three
different positions, has proved particularly useful.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WATER
NYMPH
(Continued)
Reactor with a round-
the-clock schedule
The reactor has been used for experiments in physics
and as an irradiation facility in biological and chemical
Investigations, and also in the production of small
quantities of radio-isotopes. Many new and interesting
results have been obtained in the study of low energy
nuclear reactions, such as the angular distribution of
secondary radiations from fission and the number of
neutrons emitted from fast fission.
The reactor has also been used extensively in the
applications of atomic energy to agriculture and biology.
Various types of agricultural material such as linseed,
cotton, sugar-cane buds, tapioca and wheat have been
irradiated in this reactor. These samples have been
provided by various' research institutions all over India.
Several interesting observations on the effect of
radiation on biological cells have been observed, such as
the possibility of early ripening of rice, and similar
experiments on other types of agricultural material are in
progress. Small investigations and- medical therapy have
been produced. A plant has been set up for the
production of high purity radio-isotopes for medical work.
Larger quantities of these will available to the public than
hitherto supplied.
The reactor is also being used as a source of neutrons
for producing the rarer isotopes to study nuclear
spectroscopy, and as a source of sodium 24 for the analysis
of heavy water. The reactor is also used for studying
radiation damage and chemical processes.
Many universities and research institutions- are now
making use of the research facilities of this reactor, and
fellowships have been offered to students in South East
Asian countries, Poland and Yugoslavia.
Certain death to insect pests
Another reactor, the Canada-India Reactor, is being
built near the Apsara. The special steel dome which
will house it is already completed and the civil
engineering work is in progress which will be completed
by December 1959. A few months later it will go into
operation using natural uranium as fuel.
Work on the first atomic station in India is scheduled
to start this year but it is likely that foreign exchange
difficulties may hold up the work.
Thorium will replace uranium as the nuclear . fuel, but
the quantity of thorium India can use after a certain
period will depend on what is done now. It will depend
on how much plutonium is produced now from uranium
in the reactors. The rate of expansion of nuclear power
plants is entirely determined by this process of "breeding"
thorium. .
The peaceful uses of India's work in the field of radio¬
activity holds out great hope for the future. India's basic
problem is food. But the problem is only marginal, the
deficit being only about three per cent. Much more than
three per cent is lost from rotting and from the scourge
of pests.. It is possible to control both of these by
irradiation. Considerable research has already been done
elsewhere in insect control. This work will shortly be
taken up at Trombay. It may soon be possible to irradiate
grain which goes to granaries so that once the grain is
stored no pests will touch it and the grain will not rot
because the pests and weevils are killed by radiation.
A storage block of the Canada-India Reactor is being
designed for research in the preservation of food. It is
even possible to prevent the growth of some species of
pests in nature. Male pests are made sterile by
irradiation and the sterile males are then released into
the field during the breeding season. The female of the
species mates only once, and if mating occurs with a
sterile male she does not reproduce. This automatically
reduces the number of pests.
30
TWO GREAT EYES cover most of the head of the dragonfly, each eye
having from 20,000 to 25,000 tiny eyes joined together. Scientific obs¬
ervations appear to confirm that among insects, those equipped with
multi-lensed eyes like the dragonfly (above) perceive colours most easily.
Photos © R.H. Noailles
BIRDS REACT in general to vivid colours and discern yellows, reds, greens
and oranges with special clarity. It is the brilliance of colour that attracts
a bird, whether it be some conspicuous patch on a plumage, the petals of a
flower or the glitter of bright objects. Photo shows a young rock dove.
MEMBERS OF THE SHRIMP FAMILY, whether of the larger species
such as prawns (above) or the smaller common salt water shrimp are known
to have colour sense. Probably all. the fish species which can change their
colour to match their surroundings can see those, and perhaps other colours
