KHUJIR: ISLAND CAPITAL ON
THE WORLD'S DEEPEST LAKE
THE ISLAND OF OLKHON. ON LAKE BAIKAL: A WINDSWEPT SIBERIAN LANDSCAPE OF BARE HILLS. SAND DUNES AND LOG CABINS.
by Evgueni Veltistov
The island of Olkhon lies in the heart of Siberia, in the
middle of Lake Baikal,the deepest and one of the
coldest lakes in the world. The climate is harsh,
for the Baikal is a tremendous inland sea, nearly
400 miles long and between 15 and 50 miles wide,
surrounded on almost all sides by snowy mountains.
On the island the wind blows ceaselessly, year in year
out, so strongly that even in the heart of winter the snow
never settles on the ground: it is swept away by the wind.
The landscape of Olkhon is also .windswept a sym¬
phony in red and yellow tints with its bare hills, sand
dunes and log cabins.
In winter, the island is joined to the mainland by a road
across the ice. It is a dangerous crossing. Even when
the thermometer registers forty degrees below zero
(72 degrees of frost Fahrenheit) you have to keep a sharp
look-out, for crevasses are apt to appear suddenly in front
of your truck, and the best brakes in the world are useless
on such a skating rink.
Khujir, the island capital, is built on a high bank over¬
looking the lake. You get an excellent view of it as you
approach the island from across the water. The big trays
on which the fish are laid to dry stand out against a
background of yellow sand; you see the plank Walks that
lead up the bank and the salting and curing sheds. Up
on top of the cliff are solid-looking log houses, pine trees
and more sand.
On a sunny day, the whole town shines and sparkles like
the decorations on a Christmas tree, for all the houses
are made of pine-wood from the floor to the roof-top.
Khujir is a fishing village and Lake Baikal provides a live¬
lihood for most of its menfolk. The fishermen are tough
and sturdy and spend their lives on the water. In
26
summer, they cast their nets far out in the lake; in winter,
they go back and forth across the ice, checking the holes
they have cut in the ice by plunging their hands into the
freezing water, until they find that their nets are full of
fish.
Like all small towns Khujir has its chronicler the local
school-master, Nicolai Reviakin. He witnessed the birth
and the development of the town, since he arrived on the
island a quarter of a century ago when the site on which
Khujir now stands was nothing but a wilderness. It was
inhabited by a lone fisherman who had settled there in
spite of the fact that the Shamans (local priests or sor¬
cerers) considered the spot to be peopled by evil spirits.
The Buriats had brought offerings there from time imme¬
morial, and the womenfolk used a roundabout way to
avoid the "Shaman's Stone." But the first fisherman's
example was contagious; others, seeing that the bay was
an ideal place for fishing soon settled on the island.
Khujir has changed a good deal since those early days.
To-day, no one could imagine life there without a school
and a library, a clinic, a sewing centre and a hostel. Yet
twenty-five years ago none of these institutions existed;
and the newcomers had great difficulty in explaining to
the Buriats what a bath was used for and Why you needed
a doctor.
It is still mid-winter and bitterly cold, but the island
tailors are already busy prepararing for the spring season;
at the library people are queuing up for the books, papers
and periodicals Which have just arrived from Irkutsk, the
biggest town in the area; in the afternoon, children play
round the "Shaman's Stone", searching for old coins in its
cracks and fissures; and in the evening the fishermen's
club is thronged with people who come to dance, to listen
to a concert or see a film show.

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
In spite of its remoteness Khujir does not feel cut off
from the rest of the country. This is immediately noticed
in the local museum which Reviakin has set up with the
help of the schoolchildren. It is no coincidence that the
museum should be named after Vladimir Obruchev, the
great Russian geologist. In December 1956, the scientist
wrote from Moscow describing his trip to the island in
1889, enquiring about conditions there today, and asking
for samples of local ores.
Soon a regular exchange of correspondence started up
between Moscow and the island. It was cut short unfor¬
tunately by the scientist's death. But good results had
been achieved. The school now has an exhibition room
where various discoveries are on view together with stuffed
animals and a collection of ores. The children of Khujir
write regularly to other schoolchildren in the U.S.S.R.
telling them of their life on Lake Baikal, and
describing the flora and fauna.
No, Olkhon certainly does not feel isolated from the rest
of the world. The island keeps in touch with other parts
of the Soviet Union and even further afield. The local
fishermen send their catch to Irkutsk regularly, and last
year 25 barrels were shipped to the World Fair at Brussels
where tourists from all over the world were able to taste
fish from Lake Baikal.
The little port hums with activity. Two months ago,
despite the intense cold, trucks of all kinds and sizes were
coming and going across the ice; the noise of the power
station on the cliff mingled with that of the workshops
where motorboat engines were being repaired, and with
the creaking of the winch Which, in anticipation of the
summer months, was already extracting great bloks of ice
from the lake for the cold storage rooms.
Khujir is growing fast and so is its population. The
nursery school is now too small and a new one is being
built. Old huts where some of the fishermen used to live
are being replaced by comfortable, modern houses; and
the water supply is being laid on.
Many things still remain to be done, but the fishermen
of Olkhon have begun the job and will see it through.
Official Soviet photos
BARRELS pile up in a cooper's yard. Last year 25 barrels
of fish were shipped from Olkhon to the Brussels World Fair.
ROOF-TOP WORK by carpenters (right), putting the finishing touches to a large house in which four families will live. For
the moment it stands alone on a road leading up to the forest, but soon other houses will rise beside it. Lake Baikal is
the deepest fresh-water lake in the world. Left, a fisherman's wife repairs nets in preparation for the Spring season.
27
