by Henri Bart
Ninety-one years ago a wandering hunter named Adam
Renders returned southward from the unexplored
lands of what would become Southern Rhodesia,
beyond the river Limpopo, and made himself famous
with a strange tale. Not far. beyond the river, not as
much as 200 miles beyond it, he had seen tall grey ruins in
the bush. He could say little more than that, for he had
never seen such walls and towers before; but the tale
passed round, and grew the stranger as it passed, and
those who heard it reckoned that Africa had once,again
sprung one of its surprises. A hidden civilization in the
northern plains: who could have expected that? "-
A German geologist called Mauch was next to see this
mystery in towering stone. Four years after Renders, he
in his turn came back across the Limpopo and declared
that he had seen a fortress on a hilltop that was surely a
copy of King Solomon's temple on Mount Moriah; below
it, in the valley, he had seen a great building in stone that
was just as surely a copy of the palace in which the Queen
of Sheba had dwelt at Jerusalem in the 10th century b.c.
. The story spread across the world. Thirteen years after
Mauch's return, an unknown writer called Rider Haggard
made name and fortune with a book called King Solo¬
mon's Mines, a fine romantic tale of diamonds and Africa.
And a few years later the land was opened for European
occupation by an invading British column, and many more
reports came back. Yet Renders and Mauch, it seemed,
had not exaggerated: the ruins really were tall and spa¬
cious and inexplicable. Could any African "native"
have built them? The idea seemed absurd. Here an
alien hand had been at Work: another and much earlier
conqueror from outside. England Was only entering on
that vanished conqueror's heritage.
Gold rush in the ' Land of Ophir '
QCy ODAY then", wrote one of the pioneers of 1891, the
I year When the British took possession of these
lands to the north of the Limpopo, "The English¬
man is in the land of Ophir opening afresh the treasure
house of antiquity... (and soon) we may expect to see the
image of Queen Victoria stamped on the gold with which
King Solomon overlaid his ivory throne, and wreathed the
cedar pillars of his temple."
And then it was discovered that the ruins of Zimbabwe
were not alone. Little by little, as pioneering columns
pushed northward across the plains and spread away on
either side, men stumbled on many other such ruins: none
of them so large and splendid as Zimbabwe, but all of
them bearing an undeniable stamp of dignity and civic
strength.
Yet if this was the Land of Ophir, the source of all those
talents of gold which the Queen of Sheba gave to Solomon,
surely much of it must still remain? Many asked them¬
selves this question; and many hastened northwards in
the hope of treasure. They found unmistakable signs of
ancient mining: hundreds, even thousands, of aban¬
doned mine Workings thirty or sixty feet deep or so, scat¬
tered across the land. They staked new claims; and they
were not always disappointed.
Others took -an easier road to wealth. They plundered
the ruins. A prospector called Neal teamed up with a
couple of hopeful investors In Johannesburg to form an
Ancient Ruins Company Limited, and managed to loot
500 ounces of worked gold from burials in the ruins of
Rhodesia before high authority, realizing what precious
knowledge was probably being lost for ever with the gold,
ordered them to stop. That was in 1900. "But the
damage done", wrote the late J.F. Schofield, "was immense,
for everything except the gold was treated in a- most
reckless manner" while the gold, or most of it, was
melted down and sold.
When it came to explaining the origin of these ruins
and mine workings, the "legend of Ophir" for long led. the
field. Amateur archaeologists, eagerly investigating
these ruins with their minds full of remote antiquity,
declared they were Sabaean and Phoenician. They belong¬
ed, that is, to a period going back some thousand years
and more beyond the beginning of the Christian era.
These towers and battlements, it was said, were manifest¬
ly the work of civilizing intruders from the north, from
beyond the seas: they were not the work of native Afri¬
cans. Nothing like them, after all, existed anywhere in
southern Africa: nor was it in any case thinkable, it
was added, that the savage ancestors of these savage
natives whom Europeans were even then subduing with
such toil and bloodshed could ever have raised such monu¬
ments to a civilized past.
But a few others were not of this opinion. On the
contrary replied Selous, some of these Africans are still
building in stone in much the same way: and some of
them are still sinking mines. It was hard to deny autho¬
rity to Selous, for none of the wandering hunters of those
pioneering days knew the country half so well. The con¬
troversy raged.
Impressed by the bitterness of argument,, the British
Association entered the fray in 1905. It appointed a train-
10

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
ed archaeologist called David Randall-Maclver to make
a report on these much disputed ruins. Maclver's find¬
ings added fuel to the flames. He dismissed as nonsense
the claims of ancient or foreign origin: the ruins, he said,
could be proved to be relatively modern dating perhaps
to the 14th or 15th century a.d. and in his opinion they
were undoubtedly the work of native Africans.
The "Ophir-ites" were not dismayed. They returned
to the charge. And they returned with such good effect
that a quarter of a century later, in 1929, the British
Association appointed another trained archaeologist
whose work, it was thought, must surely carry conviction.
To the south of Salisbury, capital of Southern Rhodesia, lie the ruins
of G-eat Zimbabwe, former capital of a powerful Negro state. With
its massive stone walls, terraced battlements and towers, Zimbabwe
is only onethough the best preserved of a score of ruins in Rhodesia
which, together with even more numerous sites where gold, copper,
iron and tin were mined, prove that an age of metals grew and flowered
across some 12 centuries before Europeans entered a land they thought
entirely savage. Vital evidence about the Negro civilization which
built Zimbabwe was lost when gold, jewels and other objects were
looted from the ruins towards the end of the I 9th century. Mapun-
gubwe, another site to the south in the Transvaal escaped this fate and
important finds of gold and other objects made here have thrown
light on the metal culture that gave birth to this city. At Zimbabwe
two buildings stand out. One, the "Acropolis" (top of opposite page),
was a hilltop stronghold built into a natural mass of rocks. The other,
"the elliptical building" (above), rests on the plain below, its massive
girdling walls 30 feet high and 20 feet thick. Among the remains
which have been found within the ramparts is a conical tower (left),
at the foot of which important findings have recently been made.
Photos Office the High Commissioner for the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
Three years later Miss Gertrude Caton-Thömpson publish¬
ed her great book, The Zimbabwe Culture, and confirmed
the substance of everything that Maclver had said about
Zimbabwe. The ruins, she found, were mediaeval in date
and Bantu in origin! They were probably a little older
than Maclver had thought; but not by much.
Stone monuments to, an Iron Age
Even in face of this and Miss Caton-Thompson's book
has since become the "Bible" of all serious archaeolo¬
gical investigation in southern Africa for the relative¬
ly modern perioda few wishful-thinking romantics still
cling to the legend of Ophir. All authorities now accept the
general conclusions which Miss Caton-Thompson reached.
A radio-carbon dating from pieces of timber, taken from
the base of the main encircling wall at Zimbabwe, suggests
that some structure was already here in the fith or 8th
century a.d.: and the general time-scale of these ruins is
now agreed to refer to a period ranging from about 500 a.d.
to about 1750 a.d. Valuable information tending to the
same conclusion has come from the painstaking work of
Mr. Roger Summers, Keeper of the National Museums of
Southern Rhodesia, and his colleagues.
What, then, should one think about this most remark¬
able complex of stone ruins in a land where people had
never been known to have built in stone, nor possessed
the civic coherence to need and justify such palaces and
forts and chiefly dwelling places? The answer of the
experts is that these many ruins of Rhodesia, with Great
Zimbabwe most prominent among them, mark the early
growth and steady flowering of an Iron Age an age of
metals across some twelve centuries before Europeans
entered on a land they thought entirely savage (see page
20). They are the solid and indisputable fragments of a
truly African civilization which, if illiterate and technic¬
ally limited, nonetheless offers once again proof of the
skill and ingenuity of men who are thrown, as these Afri¬
cans were thrown, almost entirely on their own resources.
II
