REDUCING ARMAMENTS BY 1°/°
MEANS $1,500,000,000 SAVED
FOR USEFUL CONSTRUCTIVE WORK
G. BERGER
Today we hear a great deal of talk about society, and
society of course merits this attention. Some
societies are prosperous, others are underdeveloped,
but in every case it is man and man alone who experiences
the suffering, grief, anxiety and despair, and whenever
we forget man, then civilization is in peril.
The sciences of man are complex and difficult more
difficult than all the rest. But they are no less necessary
for that. We are all agreed that war does nothing to
solve our problems, that It is the worst of all evils; yet
nations continue to prepare for war. To take a less
obvious but no less telling example, it is very obvious that
increased agricultural output calls for some mechanization
and proper ways of fertilizing the soil. But the peasant
has to be persuaded to give up his usual habits and to use
fertilizer in the right way and in the right place. In
other words, the problems besetting the world today are
first and foremost human problems.
If we are unhappy or anxious, it is not only because we
have not enough power or raw materials or machinery,
but because we do not know how to set about working
one with another instead of preparing to fight one
against another.
It takes more than conviction, enthusiasm and sincerity
to put over a point of view to other people, to convince
them and arouse their enthusiasm. A certain technique
is needed, too. Social and psychological techniques exist,
but I am afraid that these techniques have not yet been
given all the attention they deserve from those responsible
for the allocation of funds.
There is one kind of research for which everyone is
willing to give money applied research which produces
immediate results. "We want such and such a thing;
make it for us straight away !" and money flows freely.
But basic research rouses far less enthusiasm. To some
it is a kind of luxury. Yet I feel that one of the very real
benefits of this Round Table has been to prove that the
basic sciences are as useful as and perhaps even more
Indispensable than any other kinds of science, and that
they deserve the fullest official support.
The sciences of man, however seem useless and they are
systematically neglected. Yet these sciences offer the
surest means of solving the world's problems today and
the proof of their potency lies in the very fact that they
can do harm.
A science reveals its real power when people doubt that
it is capable of doing good and point out that it actually
does harm. We have heard about the dangers of
psychological warfare, and We, are all aware of the
dreadful insidious influence of propaganda. Propaganda
has a power to influence our deepest thoughts and
feelings, and instead of compelling us, by overt, external
force, to do things we do not wish to do, it makes us
condone and acquiesce in injustice, crime and the vilest
of acts I
If psychological techniques can thus corrupt men's
minds through propaganda which is the great danger
threatening us then it follows that psychological and
social techniques may also be an effective antidote to the
poison of propaganda.
People sometimes say though it seems to me
ridiculous that the machine age threatens mankind, and
that soon we shall resemble the robots depicted in certain
films of the past, spending our lives mechanically pressing
buttons. That is not the kind of future that awaits us.
We are not in danger of being enslaved by the machine
but by our fellow men. It is society, equipped with every
instrument of propaganda, which will instil into our
minds the subtle, imperceptible poison that Will make us
bring about our own downfall.
Science is a search for light and truth. We must see
12
things as they are and develop our sciences of man openly,
fully aware of our acts, knowing the dangers they may
hold, but at the same time conscious that, like other
branches of science, they offer great possibilities. We
should realize that the sciences of man must not be set
up in opposition to the other sciences that would be
ridiculous but must be used with them in an attempt
to bring men greater happiness, a little more wisdom and
perhaps the kind of life that we all dream ofa life
giving us a true feeling of the dignity of man.
Science and culture are not foes but friends, helping
and strengthening each other. It is a mistake to
suppose that we have to choose between technology
and culture, as. if culture were not based on precise
technical ¡knowledge and vice versa.
We have the technical facilities for spreading culture,
just as we also have the technical means of fertilizing
the soil, feeding mankind and, perhaps, of transforming
the world.
We have the money to do this, far more, in fact, than
we need. Each year, the expenditure on armaments of
the member countries of the United Nations adds up to
more than one hundred and fifty thousand million dollars.
If 1% of this vast sum Were set aside for science, educa¬
tion and culture, and for feeding mankind, we should
have at least $1,500,000,000 available each year for this
peaceful, constructive work.
I know the serious domestic difficulties that arise over
the transfer of a percentage of any country's military
budget to its education budget. But such difficulties are
removed when the same effort is made by all countries
and the relative expenditure on armaments remains the
same for all.
No doubt the day will come when countries will no
longer spend money on arms. But we cannot afford to
wait until governments learn wisdom and peoples develop
confidence in each other. Something can be done and
done now.
I think we might very well consider a line of action
which combines great symbolic significance with real
practical value. This idea, which has been put forward
by others before me, is that all the governments should
make a 1% cut in their military, budgets and use this
money for the development of education, science and
culture and for improving general standards of living.
Science is useful, and it has been clearly shown that
pure science is as useful as what is called applied
science. It is necessary for the laboratories to work
in close touch with industry, but it is equally necessary
for scientists to have\good working conditions, and one
more essential thing enough time for their Work.
One of the greatest difficulties We have to face in these
days when everything is moving so fast is that we no
longer have time. A scientist must have leisure. Discov¬
eries do not come to order. They come from the work
of suitable research teams provided with proper equip¬
ment. For I speak from experience when I say that what
tempts academic staff most in the offers made to them
by industry are not high salaries but the Working facilities
they are given. If we want to keep scientists in our labo¬
ratories, if we want men for basic research, We must equip
those laboratories. For scientists, that is more important
than material gain.

The Unesco Courier. February 1959
É^
Jk y
M *^x
***£, ' ^?v
Yâvtm H îBTi
l^ywy-TT
am W -ímJfV*' ^S^-
mSîm
pfi Tj3fc**H*^ ¡55HSBBI
FLYING 'BRAIN':
6,500 DECISIONS
PER MINUTE
Science and technology are
today liberating man from
drab repetitive "thought".
Today, one man at the
controls of a giant cal¬
culator can have at his
command the computing
ability of 25,000 trained
mathematicians. At the
other end of the scale,
" miniature " calculators
are being developed to take
decisions for pilots flying
above the speed of sound.
Small " brain " (right), which
can produce 6,500 deci¬
sions per minute is now
used in U.S. jet plane (left).
USIS
Compagnie des Machines Bull
GAMMA CALCULATOR, the first of its type to be designed and built in France, can add and subtract figures of 12 digits
in 0.17 thousandths of a second and gives the answer to a multiplication of eleven digits by twelve digits in twenty-one
thousandths of a second. The machine not only prints the answers to the problems posed to it, but stores them in a " memory".
Business men already envision a day when electronic brains will be used not only for paper work problems, but to operate
factories, to run automobile production lines or any plant where the process can be reduced to a pre-set repetitive system.
13
