UTO M ATI ON
Modern Sorcerers Apprentice
or passport to prosperity?
Special report from ILO
Automation, , atomic energy and other technological
changes are dominating the labour and social scene
in more and more of the older industrial countries
and are a key factor in the development of the newly
industrializing countries. They pose serious problems of
economic and social adjustment for our industrial society
and throw down a challenge to our whole civilization.
True, many of the problems are not new. They arose in
earlier stage of industrialization. Today, however, they
seem to take on a more dramatic and a more drastic form.
Today, every country is caught up in the relentless
wheel of technological change. Each region and each
nation is affected, directly and indirectly, and at an ever
faster pace. There is no point in discussing here the
desirability of this evolution. There is no question of
turning back and little possibility even of regulating the
speed of development . Our problem is to move forward
in the social field fast enough to be able to ensure that
technological progress is translated into social progress.
We must give practical evidence of social growth if we are
to profit from and even to control the mighty technolo¬
gical forces which we have liberated. If we do not grow
to'the extent required of us, our whole civilization will
bend and may even break under the strain of change. If
we do grow enough and fast enough, we open the way for
creating a higher and richer civilization than man has yet
known.
The ILO's concern is with the labour and social front,
with what is happening to men and women at work, and
with the problems confronting them today in consequence
of the dynamics of technological change in our industrial
society. The ILO has much important work to do in
these fields. '
Despite substantial differences of opinion on many
aspects of automation and atomic energy, no one would
deny that they provide a powerful lever for economic
growth. They make possible a vast increase in produc¬
tion and in productivity. They make possible the more
rapid development required to keep pace with population
growth and to raise living standards. Indeed, these and
other forms of technological progress are essential if the
world economy is to grow and produce more and better
services and if it is to respond successfully to the chal¬
lenge of rising populations and higher standards of living.
This is the true perspective of the future and one of
which we should never lose sight.
Thus, the long-run outlook is good. But in the mean
time many short-run problems have to be met with ima¬
gination and vigour. Most of these relate to the labour
and social aspects of technological change rather than to
the technical aspects, and to our ability as a society to
absorb change readily to the general benefit of the people.
Employers have continued their search for technical
solutions to outstanding problems and have given increas¬
ing attention to the social aspects of technological chan¬
ges. Trade unions have been studying the implications
of these changes for workers. In many countries govern¬
ment services have taken steps to strengthen research
and other facilities so as to be able to understand and
anticipate the problems and to promote smooth adjust¬
ment to the accelerating pace of technological change. A
great many national and international conferences have
been held to discuss the impact of automation and atomic
energy and to consider the more general problems of
technological change. These questions have also been
examined by a very large number of employers' and
workers' organizations.
All these developments are symptomatic of a healthy
concern with the problems facing us today and constitute
reasonable and essential steps towards their solution.
But let us not lag behind the times. So far, we have
only probed the surface. Much remains to be done to
develop a sound basis for absorbing without unnecessary
friction the vast changes which are taking place. We
must adjust the pace of our social planning and action
to the inexorable pace of the technological developments
which are transforming the world economy. We have
a heavy responsibility to develop and pursue policies
which will facilitate the social growth now possible and
necessary for world development.
CONTO ON NEXT PAGE

O 90 °/o of all light bulbs in America
made by 14 workers at 14 machines
What is automation? Unfortunately but inevitably
there is no single answer to this question. Auto¬
mation means many different things to many
different people. Some people use the word almost as a
synonym for technological change. Others explain it as
simply advanced mechanization. Still others consider it
an entirely new philosophy of industrial operation.
Three fundamental developments account for nearly
everything that is commonly regarded as falling under
the heading of automation. The first, continuous auto¬
matic production or integration, is often called "Detroit
automation" in honour of the city where it got its start.
The second is often termed feed-back technology, based
on the use of built-in automatic devices which compare
the way work is being done with the way it is supposed
to be done and make automatically any adjustments in
the work process that may be necessary. The third is
best known as computer technology, resting primarily
on new developments in electrical engineering and cover¬
ing the use of general and special purpose computing
machines capable of recording and storing information
(usually in the form of numbers) and of performing both
simple and complex mathematical operations on such
data.
Clearly, automation is not new. What then is new
in the concept that lies behind the word "automation"?
First, perhaps, this concept implies a new way of think¬
ing about products and production. It presents our
generation with the problem of re-thinking the conduct
of industrial operations in terms of the principle of cpn-
tinuous flow governed by an electronic nervous system.
Second, there is contained within this concept the pos¬
sibility of envisaging a large and complex yet fully auto¬
matic factory in which a computer integrates and controls
the separate automatic production Unes. According to
a United Kingdom report on the subject, this is "the most
important new element in automation" even though it
cannot be realized immediately. Is it this particular
element which gives automation its dramatic and almost
frightening quality? What would such a factory be
like? One of the experts of the Radio Corporation of
America described it very clearly. He said:
People... in thinking about an automatic factory, conjure
up the idea of a very large black box into which flow a
great many varieties of raw materials and a large volume
of automatically handled data. Both the raw materials
and the data are processed, "untouched by human hands",
so that the right amounts of the right products are dis¬
tributed to the right places at the right time. However...
there will be many human workers... even though they will
have no direct connexion with processing the product.
Some will be the technical maintenance men who will keep
the machines operating. Others will design and install new
machines to take care of the changing product. There will
be production men who will no longer schedule production
28
of the parts of a given product, but instead will service the
programmes of machines in accordance with management
decision... There will be engineers and stylists who will
develop new products and who, when necessary, will deve¬
lop and design new automatic machinery or modify existing
machinery for making those new products. Thus, even in
the fully automatic factory, there would be "human hands".
Manpower is still necessary to make, tend and maintain
machines and to perform the many and more varied
functions of management. But the teams of operatives
directly engaged on the production process have vanished.
And, at the last session of the International Labour
Conference, the U.S.S.R. employers' delegate said: "...our
workshops are taking on the look of laboratories."
So far, however, fully automatic operation, while possi¬
ble of realization, has been achieved in practice in only
a few instances.
Perhaps the most significant novel feature of automa¬
tion is that it makes it possible to do many things and to
produce many goods and services which were simply not
feasible in the past. Atomic energy research could never
have reached its present stage without automatic devices
and controls. The huge oil refineries, chemical plants
and steel works of today could not be operated without
automatic controls. Compounds of ingredients formerly
too toxic to be handled safely can now be used. Many
new products have come on the market as a result of
refinements of precision work made possible by automa¬
tion. With advanced computer technology it is possible
to assemble and analyse information that was once pro¬
hibitively expensive to collect. Too often this novel
aspect of automation is overlooked. Yet it is certainly
the distinctive contribution of the new technology.
What is the impact? Fourteen glassblowing machines,
each operated by one worker, now produce 90 per cent, of
the glass light bulbs used in the United States and all
rTn
the glass tubes used in radio and television sets (except
picture tubes). Another example is the automatic manu¬
facture of equipment for attaching standard electronic
components to printed circuit boards. Machines now
print or etch or stencil on a board what were hand-wired
circuits before, soldered at all contact points; machines
make the components; machines attach them to the
printed circuit boards; machines make the parts; ma¬
chines assemble them.
Once the components are fed into a machine, for exam¬
ple, complete radio sets can be produced; and on one
body radio assembly line, turning out 1,000 radios a day,
two workers now produce more than 200 workers did with
the old methods. A food products company in the United
States has developed a machine which assembles in about

The Unesco Courier. November 1959
one minute the same number of parts that it normally
took one worker one full day to assemble.
"Detroit automation" (largely a matter of gains through
automatic moving and handling) is closely associated with
the automobile industry, though by no means confined
to it, of course. In the United States the non-automated
engine plant has died out for all practical purposes. In
the Ford Cleveland plant one man runs a transfer machine
performing more than 500 machine operations, whereas
conventional methods required 35 to 70 men. Formerly
400 workers took 40 minutes to turn out one engine block;
now, under automated methods, 48 workers complete a
bloc in less than half that time.
In the U.S.S.R. a fully automatic plant makes alumini¬
um pistons for heavy truck engines. No human hands
intervene throughout the process and even waste metal is
removed from the machines automatically. The line
adapts to several sizes of pistons, and change-over from
one to the other involves no delay. The machining of
engine blocks, pistons, ring-gears and crankshafts involv¬
ing a wide variety of operations is performed automati¬
cally in line transfer machines in nearly all the principal
automobile-producing factories of the world.
In these plants, wherever they are and whatever their
individual differences, many hundreds of operations are
carried out with only a handful of workers spread out
over many hundreds of feet of complex machinery. This
same type of automation is applied today in fertilizer
plants, in the handling of bulk materials and in many
other plants in many different countries.
Electronic computers use the telephone
Then, of course, there are all the "continuous flow"
industries, such as oil refining and piping, chemicals
(including atomic processing), plastics, paint, bever¬
ages, rubber, flour milling, cement, electric power, tele¬
graphs and telephones, sheet steel and steel castings, and
tanning. A modern oil refinery is almost completely auto¬
matic: the few workers in the plant watch instruments.
At the Esso Petroleum Refinery at Fawley in the United
Kingdom six men per shift handle equipment which distils
5 1/2 million gallons of crude oil per day; in the catalytic
cracking unit only eight men. per shift are used. All
operations are regulated from automatic control panels.
In the new Petrofina plant at Montreal (Canada) an
automatic log records, analyses and reports 400 process
variables, including temperature and pressure in the nine
production units. It types on a log each hour on the hour,
reports abnormal conditions between whiles and in case
of trouble gives the alarm and pinpoints the cause.
In the United States an automatic concrete plant, ope
rated from an electronic control panel, produces and loads
into ready-mix trucks any one of more than 1,500 diffe¬
rent mixing formulae that may be demanded; no manual
labour is used at any point in the process. In Czechoslo¬
vakia the newly opened cellulose factory at Henovce is
a highly automatic production unit.
In most cases, and this is a significant fact, the diffe¬
rent "types" of automation overlap. Electronics, in par¬
ticular, mixes with the others. Its special contribution
to automation is twofold: it extends the range of auto¬
matic control and it has made the processing of informa¬
tion rapid, accurate and automatic. There are two main
types of computer: analogue computers, which measure,
and digital, which calculate.
Analogue computers are used in oil research and ana¬
lysis, oil refining, defence research and operations, indus¬
trial controls of many kinds including automatic lathe
operations, and in milking machines. Digital computers
add, subtract and otherwise cope with mathematical prob¬
lems: they can compare, collate and choose between
logical alternatives; they can store information and bring
it out when they need it again; they can talk to each
other on the telephone and act on what they hear; and
they follow instructions.
Tapes tell machine tools what to do
But electronics goes far beyond office operations in
business, industry or elsewhere. Its distinctive con¬
tribution is in production operations, whether in
machine tool control or in breadbaking or in packing¬
house operations or in the steel industry. With its help,
there can be not only automatic control of continuous-
flow operations in industry but also tape control of machine
tools and operations, with the possibility of changing the
instructions after each job. While this last development
is just beginning to make its way into industry, it will, ,
according to most observers, be very important for the
future, because it means that automation can be applied
to short runs of products and thus to the very large per¬
centage of production which is in this form in all coun¬
tries. Moreover, as an industrial tool, electronics is
changing the concept and function of management as
well as of labour and bringing about many of the more
sweeping changes commonly ascribed to automation gene¬
rally.
There has been intensified concern with automation and
other forms of technological change in the U.S.S.R. and
Eastern European countries.. In the U.S.S.R. automation
is widely used in the engineering industry, in automobile
production, ball-bearing manufacture, on railroads, in
metal-working, food processing, the manufacture of build¬
ing materials, in chemicals, power production, the manu¬
facture of agricultural machinery and in a great many
other types of industrial and office work. The directives
of the 20th Communist Party Congress on the Sixth Five-
Year Plan, 1956-1960, call for a sharp increase in the rate
of automation and set forth targets for the introduction
of automation in production processes in various branches
of industry; heavy industry and the food industries are
to be the chief beneficiaries. In Czechoslovakia and
Poland as well, plans call for a considerable extension of
automation in industry.
In all the more industrialized countries, however, pro¬
gress is uneven. It varies by industries and still more by
undertakings. But the main trends converging towards
fuller automation are making their appearance in some
areas of the economy in all the industrial countries and
are even emerging in particular instances in some of the
economically less developed countries. At present, in
the most highly industrialized countries, and typically in
the U.SJS.R. and the United States, almost every major
area of the economy has been touched by some form of
automation or closely related technological developments.
The development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
has been even more spectacular in many ways. Only five
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

years ago it was said that its practical use in industry
could not be expected to materialize for two or three
decades. Yet by 1954 a nuclear energy plant was sup¬
plying power to industry and agriculture in one region of
the U.S.S.R.; in 1955 a town in the United States was for
a short period fully supplied with electricity from a simi¬
lar source; and in 1956 two nuclear energy plants went
into operation in France and the United Kingdom.
All these countries are already planning or constructing
a number of new and larger commercial power plants, but
the movement is by no means confined to them. More
than a score of countries, in all continents, have atomic
energy commissions to study their needs and plan their
programmes. By the autumn of 1956 there were at least
77 reactors in operation: 53 in the United States, ten in
the United Kingdom, four in the U.S.S.R., two in Canada,
seven in various countries of Western Europe and one in
India the first in Asia. Some hundreds of others are
being built or are in an advanced stage of planning. The
great majority of these are for research and experiment
and to train the specialists who will be needed in every
country that wishes to develop an atomic energy pro¬
gramme.
The use of nuclear power for various forms of transport
is developing more slowly than its use for industrial power,
because of the serious technical problems involved. Never¬
theless, the United States already has two nuclear-power¬
ed submarines and plans for nuclear-powered tankers
or large bulk cargo vessels are being developed
there and in France, Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom,
the U.S.S.R. and other countries. In the case of aircraft,
the problem of weight involved in the proper protection of
the persons on board is particularly serious, but it is
expected that a number of nuclear-powered aircraft will
be constructed within a few years.
Another use of atomic energy may well have as far-
reaching consequences as its use as a source of power.
This is the rapidly developing utilization of radio-isotopes,
a by-product of the production of nuclear energy. Radio¬
isotopes are already being used extensively in. research,
medicine and agriculture, and are being ever more widely
used in industry for a great variety of purposes. Here
there is a close link between atomic energy and automa¬
tion. But for the development of certain types of auto¬
mation, the construction of nuclear reactors would not
have been possible; in their turn, radio-isotopes make
possible many of the feedback devices which are the
essential element in one type of automation.
Radio-active Jacks of all Trades
Some idea of the rapid spread of the use of radio-active
isotopes is given by the fact that in the United States
the number of industrial firms employing them
more than doubled between 1954 and 1955. During the
first 11 months of 1955 over 11,000 shipments of isotopes
were despatched from Oak Ridge National Laboratory in
the United States, and in the United Kingdom the number
of consignments over the same period was even higher,
about one-third of the total going to overseas customers
in all parts of the world.
The U.S.S.R. is also making great and increasing use of
radio-isotopes in industry and agriculture and is sup¬
plying them to industry in Czechoslovakia, Poland and
other countries. Canada is also a large user as well as a
large supplier to foreign countries.
Radio-isotopes have many uses in industry. In nearly
every case, they are cheaper, less time-consuming and
more efficient than earlier methods, and in many cases,
they render services which were completely impossible
before; thus the annual saving to the industries of the
world is incalculable. Their use for one purpose alone
detecting the brine level in oil borings has been esti¬
mated to save oil companies some millions of pounds
sterling in a single year.
0 Problem n° 1 : what
in an era of push
will become of workers
button industries?
What is the impact of technological improvements on
employment? The answer depends on how fast and
how generally change takes place. Even more, per¬
haps, it depends on the buoyancy of the economy. So long
as improvements are introduced against a background of
high levels of economic activity and a continuing rate of
economic expansion, the maintenance of the general level
of employment is not likely to be a serious problem pro¬
vided the occupational shifts required to adjust to the
changes can be made.
There is reason to think that heavy investment in auto¬
mation, atomic energy and other technological develop¬
ments will tend to keep economies buoyant. Past experience
shows no reason to believe that technological innovations
lead to a decrease in the global volume of employment.
On the contrary it suggests that such innovations, while
they may cause declines in some areas of employment,
lead in the long run to an expansion of employment by
creating increases in other areas.
In the United States, for example, the number of em-
f\
1/
\ r
A
30

The Unesco Courier. November 1959
ployed persons increased by 25 per cent, between 1940 and
1950 a period of unusually rapid scientific and technolo¬
gical development; and has continued to increase since.
Despite all the technical advances to date, the country's-
employed labour force is at a peak level and unemploy¬
ment at a very low level.
In past years most of the industries which have gone
the furthest with advanced mechanization and automa¬
tion have been those in which employment has been ex¬
panding considerably. To follow along with the United
States example, the telephone industry introduced exten¬
sive automatic dialling and nearly doubled its employment
between 1940 and 1950.
The manufacturing industries which went further with
automation or which supplied equipment for automation
were also among those in which employment increased
considerably. In the communications equipment indus¬
try group, total employment rose from a little over 330,000
in 1947 to just over 500,000 in 1955 an increase of about
52 per cent, in comparison with a rise of only 8.2 per cent,
in all manufacturing industries over the same period.
It is certainly true that science and invention are cons¬
tantly opening up new areas of industrial and commercial
expansion. As the United States Secretary of Labour said
at the Congressional hearings on automation: "While
older and declining industries may show reducing oppor¬
tunity, new and vibrant industries are pushing out our
frontiers. This is the story of industrial America..."
Leading industrialists have pointed out that with the
progress towards automation new areas of employment
are opening up in many fields and in many new indus¬
tries. They believe that the record of economic growth
makes it seem almost absurd to fear unemployment as a
result of improved technology. In Australia, Canada, the
United Kingdom and some western European countries,
experience of the past has been somewhat similar.
On the whole the trend of opinion among employers
and trade unions as to the employment situation is opti¬
mistic but cautious. Nevertheless, and more particularly
in trade union circles, there is an evident fear that things
will not go on for ever as they are ; that a saturation point
may be reached; that, even with decreased hours of work
and increased leisure and new and growing demands, em¬
ployment will soon cease to expand; that old jobs will be
displaced faster than new jobs will be created; and that
unemployment on a wide scale will be the inevitable result
of automatic methods of production and other recent
technological development. What is the basis for these
apprehensions? Essentially, it is the implications of such
facts and figures as the following.
In the United States industrial production in 1955 was
41 per cent, above that for the years 1947-1949; employ¬
ment was up by only 8.3 per cent. In manufacturing
industries in September 1955 there were 600,000 jobs fewer
than in September 1953. In the textile industry employ¬
ment during the last five years has decreased by 20 per
cent. The fear is that employment opportunities are not
keeping pace with rising man-hour productivity.
Add to this the fact of lay-offs in the automobile indus¬
try and the prognostication that this industry, when
further automated, will employ only 200,000 workers as
compared with some 800,000 workers today; that in the
Ford automated engine plants, with only 10 per cent, of
the previous work force, production has been doubled;
that in an automated radio plant two workers turn ouc
1,000 radio sets a day where formerly 200 workers were
required; that in the electronics industry an Industry
often quoted as being one of those which will expand to
take up the slack left elsewhere output in 1952 was 275
per cent, higher than in 1947 but produced by only 40 per
cent, more workers; that in oil refining, employment fell
from 147,000 to 137,000 between 1947 and 1954 while output
rose by 22 per cent.; and, as a last example, that in
12 cases of automation ranging from chocolate refining to
railroad traffic control the reduction of worker require¬
ments ranged from 13 to 92 per cent., with an average
employment reduction of 63.4 per cent.
The same apprehensions are evident in Australia,
Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany and
the United Kingdom. The same types of facts and figures
are adduced to show a clear discrepancy between the
expansion of production and the expansion of employment.
Greatest effect on white-collar workers
Thus, it seems to be the fear of creeping unemploy¬
ment, developing simultaneously with rising pro¬
duction and productivity and spreading from one
industry branch to another, that is at the root of
misgivings about the future. It is cold comfort to reiterate
that the record of the past belies gloomy predictions.
These apprehensions are real and widespread. The only
way in which they can be countered is by concentrating
on the facts in each country, in each industry, in each
undertaking by giving sustained attention to the
changing employment situation, and by careful planning
not only to promote full employment and economic
growth but also to foster social policies for such growth.
Whatever may be the trend of total employment; and
let us note that the present situation at least gives no
cause for alarm it is recognized that large-scale shifts of
workers from one industry, occupation or undertaking to
another are an inevitable consequence of technological
change and that the necessary adjustments can be made
smoothly and easily only in conditions of full employment.
In general, the shifts under way seem to continue and
reinforce trends already evident, showing a general
tendency away from agriculture and from certain manu¬
facturing industries and towards new or developing manu¬
facturing and service industries and occupations.
According to many observers, the shortrun impact of
automation and analogous developments may be greater
on . white-collar employment than on manufacturing
employment. The displacement of the routine clerical
worker by the computer is forecast. It is noted that,
outside of certain manufacturing industries, the greatest
potential for automation lies in office work and that it
is already being introduced rapidly in activities in which
data-processing plays a predominant part.
Finally, so far as the composition of the labour force is
concerned the tendency is for young workers to enter
employment later and for older workers to retire from
work earlier now that old-age pension schemes are
common. In general it is expected that these trends will
be reinforced by recent technological advances. Even
during this last year there has been considerable evidence
that the trend towards raising the school-leaving age and
with it the age for admission into full-time employment
has received a strong impetus as a result of recent
technological developments, among other factors.
For older workers it is recognized that many different
elements are involved in policy and decisions relating to
retirement. For women the general tendency has been
towards greater numerical participation in the labour
force and wider employment opportunities. It may be
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

considered probable that automation and other changes
will reinforce this tendency as well, although transitional
difficulties may be evident in certain occupational sectors
(e.g. relatively unskilled clerical and assembly work).
Both handicapped and older workers men and women
alike may find more opportunities for useful employment
in the automated factories of the future, as more of the
physical functions of production are transferred from
human beings to machines.
Some countries anticipate a slowly growing or static
labour force in future decades and therefore look to the
higher man-hour productivity of automation to compensate
for relative labour shortage in the active age groups.
They believe that this is a most important factor in the
over-all employment outlook, as well as one affecting the
future composition of the labour force.
The trade unions do not blindly oppose technological
innovation but they oppose rationalization involving
worker retrenchment, rationalization which might create
unemployment and worsen what they regard as the
most serious national economic and social problem. Most
employers, on the other hand, are anxious to make use
of modern techniques of production. In most instances
the government is anxious that they shall do so, but it
takes the view that rationalization must not involve any
large-scale displacement of workers and that workers are
entitled to social protection.
Are unemployment fears justified ?
No one can fail to appreciate the anxiety there is about
unemployment and underemployment in the less
developed countries with heavy population pressures
and the many obstacles to stepping up the rate of develop¬
ment. Yet there is no intrinsic reason to suppose that
advanced technologies will make the difficult problems of
employment in those countries any more difficult nor is
there any reason to suppose that automation or other
technological innovations will of themselves solve these
problems.
It is likely, however, that increasingly automatic
methods of production will change the employment
pattern taking shape with industrialization. It is false to
assume that the newly industrializing countries will go
through the same stages as those, experienced by the
older industrial countries. For, example, is it not possible
that the proportion of the labour force absorbed by
manufacturing will be less than might have been expected
before the advent of automation? That a larger propor¬
tion will engage in construction and service (particularly
social service) activities? In the long run, may this not
mean a fuller and more effective utilization of manpower
resources than could ever have been realized through
mass-production methods of the past?
In the Socialist economies technological improvements
do not appear either to lead to overt unemployment or to
generate fear of unemployment, but (they do, as in other
countries, change the pattern of employment opportunity
and distribution. For example, despite the wide automa¬
tion of production carried out in the U.S.S.R. the number
of workers and employees increased by 9.5 million between
1951 and 1955. Soviet authorities emphasize that the pro¬
ductivity increases brought by advancing technology are
continuously creating fresh employment opportunities.
A good many problems of adjustment have sprung up
with the needs for manpower redistribution arising out of
technological advance. A great deal of attention is being
given to their solution. In most of the eastern European
countries the further development of automation and
atomic energy is regarded as essential to compensate the
growing manpower shortage being experienced with the
process of economic development and emphasis has been
placed on the human adjustments which will be required.
Technological 'progress holds out great savings in
labour: let us not be afraid to admit this. These savings
may be taken in the form of (1) higher output (either in
the same industry or in other parts of the economy), (2)
shorter hours, (3) unemployment; or a combination of the
three. The problem, it would seem, is to reach a satis¬
factory combination of the first two and avoid the third.
For some countries the main danger of unemployment
may arise not from too rapid but from too slow progress
in automation and other technological developments. As
a result these countries may lose markets to more efficient
competitors. This is a real danger in countries where
restrictive business practices are adopted by employers
and restrictive labour practices are insisted upon by trade
unions.
Pressure for high Wages by trade unions does not clog
technological progress, but, on the contrary, may promote
it by driving management to install more efficient me¬
thods and machines and by expanding the demand for
industrial goods and services. But rigid demarcation lines
between changing skills, "feather-bedding," unrealistic
views on apprenticeship ratios or length these are among
the factors which may clog technological progress.
Again, unwillingness to take risks, inefficient work
Drop In Industrial Injury Rates In
Podolsk Metal
Goods Factory, U.S.S.R., 1935-1955
7.2
Í
78.0
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
2.97
44.3
1_9 ln|uriesper
workers
1 Days of absence
per 100 workers
I I
1935
ILO drawing
1947 1955
organization, the absence of management development
policies and training facilities these are also factors
which block advance. The dividing line between measures
which are to be regarded as unreasonable restrictions on
technological progress and those which are to' be regarded
as affording reasonable safeguards for the interests of
employers and workers affected by technological progress
is not easy to draw.
Despite many differences of opinion about automation,
especially about how fast it will come and how far
it will go, there is a surprisingly wide area of general
agreement about its impact on Work and life.
The area of agreement can be summarized this way:
Automation is rich 'with promise of higher productivity, of
more goods and services, of higher living standards. It
will have a deep impact on wages, hours, and working
conditions, on labour-management relations. There is a
need to prepare for change in all fields of labour and
social policy.
The I.L.O. has a special responsibility in this field.
Its basic task is to ensure that the human problems of
automation are not neglected. Put positively, its real job
is to make sure that social goals triumph as the new
technology makes its way into the world economy.
32
