THE GREATNESS
OF ETHIOPIA:
LEGENDS
& REALITY
by Jean Doresse
) Jean Doresse
Although a variety of races with, widely differing lan¬
guages has met and mingled in Ethiopia, a remark¬
ably closely-knit culture has developed there over
the centuries. The primary reason for this unity is prob¬
ably geographical the peaceful scenery, greenness and
cool temperatures of these high plateaux, at an altitude
of over 6,500 feet, which call to mind some of Europe's
mountains rather than Africa. There is another element
making for unity the majority of the peoples living in
these uplands are, despite their dark skins, akin to the
white race.
It is for these reasons that long ago a civilization grew
up which distinguishes Ethiopia from the Negro-inhabited
parts of Africa, by which it is largely surrounded, and
which gives to the country affinities with the lands of
ancient civilization Egypt, Syria and Arabia with which
it had historical contacts.
Let us first of all set aside a myth still too
current; that ancient Ethiopia had ties With the
land of the Pharaohs. This romantic idea was widely
advanced by classical writers two thousand years ago.
Yet the country referred to both in the writings of Hero¬
dotus and in the Aethiopica of Heliodorus was not Ethiopia
itself, but merely the Sudanese Kingdom of Meroe. There
is, however, evidence that a protohistorical Ethiopian
30
ANCIENT LEGENDS are written large into the story of Ethiopia,
a country of ancient and distinctive civilization. They are still told
graphically, for example, in the brightly coloured paintings which in the
"cartoon" style of a series of panels reproduce scenes from the 1 4th cen¬
tury "Glory of the Kings," Ethiopia's National Book, which has. a biblical
civilization already existed some thousands of years before
our era, though it left behind no monuments.
Ancient Ethiopia was known to the Egyptians as the
"Land of Punt" or the "Land of the Gods", names which
covered more specifically the regions producing incense
which lay along the southern shores of the Red Sea, both
in East Africa and Arabia. Egypt in its earliest times had
traditions that some of its gods and legends had come
from those parts of the world, and its traders brought
back rare marchandise from these coasts. The expedi¬
tions sent by the Pharaohs, however, never penetrated to
the high plateaux; some merely went up the Nile to the.
markets of the Sudan; others, coming by sea, put in at
the points on the coast where wood, ivory and costly ani¬
mals were to be bought.
It is worth noting that, while the Minaean, Sabaean and
other kingdoms of Southern Arabia began to be famous
for their wealth and their culture about a thousand years
b.c., it was not until eight or ten centuries later that the
first travellers from the shores of the Mediterranean
reached the Abyssinian highlands, where they found large
cities and powerful rulers.
What they tell us is borne out by monuments still extant.
There was undoubtedly, at that time, a lively civilization
in Ethiopia, with firmly established, characteristic institu-

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
Musée de l'Homme, Paris
background. Painting reproduced above dates from the 19th century.
It tells the story of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba and of the birth of
Menelik, first Emperor of Ethiopia whom Ethiopians believe was the son
of Solomon and the Quenn. Left, early Ethiopian gold coin minted at
the end the 3 rd century A. D. It is inscribed in the Geez alphabet.
a form of writing that originated in Arabia, crossed the Red Sea and
became assimilated and adapted in Ethiopia. The Geez alphabet has
survived to the present day although Ethiopia's principal language is
Amharic. The Ethiopian money which was struck in the third century
had its own distinctive designs and was used until the 9th century.
tions of its own. The gateway to the country was the
great port of Adulis, where fleets from the Egypt of the
Ptolemies and from the Indian Ocean alike put in. The
chief towns were Coloë, the centre of the ivory trade, on
the edge of the plateau above Adulis, and Axum in the
interior of the country.
The peoples who held these cities belonged to races
which had been long settled on either coast of the Red
Sea. The most highly civilized of them used a Semitic
language and, in their inscriptions, they even employed the
Sabaean writing; they had abandoned the religion of
Africa in favour of one, with temples and altars, akin to
that of the great kingdoms of Southern Arabia. The
earliest monuments they had built had drawn inspiration
from the remarkable buildings whose countless remains
are still to be seen today on the plateaux of the Yemen
and the Hadramaut. i
But these were not mere imitations. All had been assi¬
milated and transformed on African soil. The Sabaean
.writing was soon to develop into Geez, which Ethiopia
has preserved to modern times^ The Sabaean architec¬
ture was to be treated in new ways by races accustomed
to cutting enormous blocks of hard stone and to erecting
monolithic obelisks as huge as those of the Pharaohs.
It was certainly a powerful nation, for the rulers of
Axum extended their power even to Arabia, from which
the first seeds of their own culture had come. In the
third and fourth centuries, the Ethiopian nation thus
secured a monopoly of trade in the south of the Red Sea,
on which, up to that time, only the Southern Arabian
kingdoms, producing incense and spices, had built their
greatness. From the end of the third century, Axum's
international importance was emphasized by the fact
that, for a short time, Greek was used in certain inscrip¬
tions and even on coins. For an Ethiopian coinage was
struck, using the same weights of metal as the. various
Roman gold pieces of the time but with its own quite
distinctive designs; it was to survive until the ninth
century.
The man who did most to develop this Ethiopian civi¬
lization was the Emperor Aizanas (about 320-350 a.D.),
who introduced the general use of Geez writing, based on
the Sabaean script, for the Semitic language spoken by
his people. At the same time, about 340 a.D., he intro¬
duced Christianity, which has ever since been the nation's
religion. It very soon developed characteristic features
of its own, however, being very biblical in inspiration and
sometimes showing a marked tendency towards Judaism,
clear traces of which are still to be seen in its myths and
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE GREATNESS OF ETHIOPIA
(Continued)
practices. Churches were built for the new religion,
reminiscent in design of the Axumite temples and combin¬
ing decorative features drawn from Arabia, Syria, Persia
and Coptic Egypt. Many monasteries were founded, in
which libraries grew up, starting with collections of
translations.
From the beginning of the seventh century onwards,
the Axumite Empire felt the repercussions of the decad¬
ence which had recently destroyed the last splendours
of the Southern Arabian states. The maritime trade of
the Red Sea on which its prosperity had been founded
also collapsed and in a short time an impoverished Ethio¬
pia found itself cut off, except for a few ties with Egypt,
from the rest of the world. This situation lasted until the
sixteenth century. Nevertheless, its culture scarcely
suffered and under the dynasty of the Zagués' (tenth or
twelfth century to 1270 a.d.) a fantastic capital, the city
of King Lalibela, grew up in the mountainous province of
Lasta. Its twelve monolithic churches mark the end of
the old Axumite artistic tradition as well as representing,
no doubt, its highest achievement.
Then began the Middle Ages, with the greatest develop¬
ment taking place further south than the provinces of
Tigre and Lasta, in the bleak mountains of Amhara and
the fertile plains of Shoa. There the Geez script had to
be adapted to a vernacular in which only a few traces of
the old Sabaean contribution were to be seen. This was
Amharic, which is still today the principal language of the
nation. But Geez was not forgotten; it was still used in
Christian liturgy and literature.
Against this new background, a series of kings who
proved themselves as distinguished statesmen, heroic
warriors, strict jurists, theologians and, in some cases,
inspired poets too one of the greatest was Zar'a Ya'kub
(1434-1468) brought into being a prosperous nation
which, in its monuments and paintings, its extensive lite¬
rature and its practical and detailed chronicles, calls to
mind the Middle Ages of Western Europe. In both litera¬
ture and art, the recognizable outside influences at work
come mainly from Coptic Egypt and from Syria, though
occasionally a few European features, brought there in
some way unknown, were sometimes mingled with the
others.
Unfortunately, the Middle Ages in Ethiopia were marked
by violent religious struggles. Islam, with which the old
rulers of Axum had maintained the most cordial relations,
had gained a foothold to the east of the high plateaux]
in low-lying regions where independent kingdoms had
been established. This branch of Islam, thoroughly
Ethiopian in spirit and (although it adopted Arabic as its
language) in its writings, remained peaceable for a time.
Then it allowed itself to be drawn on by certain hitherto
uncivilized peoples for whom it provided the unifying
element to make an all-out attack on the more prosperous
Christian table-lands. This was basically an economic
war; only at rare intervals did it assume the cha¬
racter of a holy one. The
fiercest challenge came short¬
ly before the middle of the
sixteenth century, when the
assault of the armies united
by the Imam Gragne laid
waste the great trading cen¬
tres, towns and churches of
Shoa, Amhara and Tigre.
Only the intervention, in
1541, of a small band of Por¬
tuguese soldiers led by Dom
Christophe de Gama saved
this 1,500 years-old empire
from ruin.
These men from the West,
though few in numbers, were
bearers of new techniques,,
yet they brought about no
change in the traditional
culture of Ethiopia. The
Western influence in fact
died out particularly quickly
because the only people who
came after the Portuguese
) Jean Doresse.
fíñflIíMii
l Almasy, Paris
AXUM, holy city of Ethiopia, adopted Christianity in the 4th century.
Today the imposing vestiges of its past still stand. Above, view of the
ancient cathedral. Below left, stone statue of a prince dating from the
3rd century which was found in the Tigre region of northern Ethiopia.
soldiers (the survivors of whom were very soon absorbed
and lost in the mass of the Ethiopian population) were a
handful of Catholic missionaries whose teachings were
immediately rejected by the nation.
Ethiopia clung to its rich, ancient culture, although, at
the end of this period, there were fresh developments in
its painting, its miniatures and a picturesque form of
architecture which is particularly well represented in the
imperial castles of Gondar. The Western influences to be
seen in these Works, however, are more or less indirect
and probably came not by way of European masters, but
through builders or painters from India, where the Por¬
tuguese had recently been spreading a wide knowledge of
their techniques and their art-forms.
Ethiopia was to undergo yet one more trial before the
advent of modern times a sudden invasion by wave
upon wave of the Galla peoples coming from the south and
the south-east. Within a few centuries, however, the
nation was to absord this hardy strain, some groups of
the invaders adopting Christianity and some Islam.
Once again, Ethiopian culture emerged untouched from
this period of turmoil, while the invaders, on the contrary,
adopted the classical dignity, of Ethiopian dress and cer¬
tain features of the law and the social organization of ths
old empire.
Ethiopia's real contacts with Europe date from the
opening of the Suez canal, from which time European
specialists were called in by some of the rulers to teach
the people those modern practices and techniques that
could be integrated with the country's simple way of life.
Ethiopia's contacts With European culture were made
easier by the fact that, the nation had throughout its
history been familiar with writing and legislation, and
had its own characteristic code of aesthetics.
The personality of Ethiopia developed in circumstances
exceptionally favourable to a proper balance, in a part of
Africa in which it could gather together elements of all
the great civilizations, from the most "classic" to those of
the distant East.
32
