PEACE OR WAR:
WHICH ROAD WILL HUMANITY TAKE?
What is the situation facing us today?
Science has the means to bring happi¬
ness and contentment to the world and
N. SEMENOY collective efforts can lay the foundation of a
truly great future. But should a new war
break out (it would inevitably be an atomic one) then
mankind would experience the most dreadful fate it has
ever known.
Which road will humanity take? The decision rests
with us, on our goodwill, our efforts and our determi¬
nation. What we can and must do is to put an end, once
and for all, to the testing of nuclear weapons. Though
this is perhaps not the main problem it is of primary
importance, for the first effect of prohibiting nuclear tests
would be to prevent any further improvement of devas¬
tating nuclear weapons. It would put a stop to radiation
contamination and would help to re-establish interna¬
tional confidence.
This would do much to dispel the present worldwide
fears and depression caused by the "cold war".
Finally, and most important of all, it Would hasten
the next and most decisive action a banning of the pro¬
duction and use of nuclear weapons, the destruction of
all existing stocks of such weapons, general disarmament,
and the renunciation of war as a means of settling inter¬
national disputes.
War is a relic from the past, a terrible and barbarous
survival which should have no place in a civilized world.
The menace of war has a disastrous psychological effect
on people and entails the squandering of a vast amount
of labour and resources; an enormous number of men do
nothing but learn how to kill one another. The overall
effect is to prevent nations from concentrating their
efforts and using their resources to improve living
standards, to enrich their cultural life and to assist econo¬
mically under-developed countries; it prevents them from
feeding and clothing their people properly and hinders
normal technological development.
The most important task today is to end this nightmare.
A unanimous and active world opinion could have a deci¬
sive effect in settling these questions, leaving aside other
relatively secondary problems not directly related to them.
In this collective effort to safeguard international peace,
to ban the testing of nuclear weapons and these weapons
themselves and to abolish war, the scientists, in all coun¬
tries, who are sincerely concerned for man's future and
for the progress and integrity of science, must unite and
take a leading part.
I am convinced that the vast majority of true scientists
do not work simply for the money they earn. Thus they
cannot stand idly by while science is destroyed and the
prospects which are opening up for it are brought to
nothing. It is a great blow for us to see the results of
our scientific work used to the detriment of mankind,
and in the present case we cannot tolerate it. We scien¬
tists must not stifle our humanitarian feelings but on the
contrary, give them full freedom, as should every honest
person. We should be keenly aware of our responsibilities,
and then act accordingly, uniting our efforts to solve
these problems. All of us living in the 20th century,
whether scientists or not, have a great obligation, not only
to ourselves but to future generations. If we succeed in
dispelling the heavy threat of war and concentrating our
efforts on opening up a new and enlightened era, mankind
can look forward to a truly happy existence even during
our own century.
21
