SMOG IN THE TROPICS
by E. M. Fournier a"Albe
For most people, who have only dreamed of going
there, Mexico is a country of colour, of light and
shade, of brilliant sunshine, with figures of horsemen
casting black shadows on the arid cactus-studded land.
And indeed this is a fairly true picture of Mexico as a
whole.
But the traveller arriving for the first time in Mexico
City is often sadly disappointed. The sky is free of
clouds, but it is not of the blue which he imagined. The
mountain peaks stand around the city, but their outlines
are only faintly visible through the dry haze. The air
is pleasantly cool, but not fresh. There is a faint but
persistent odour in the air which, if he were a chemist
would make him remark "mercaptans," or if he came
from Los Angeles might remind him vaguely of home.
The fact is that Mexico City has a smog. Not quite such
an aggressive smog as Los Angeles nor so depressing as
those of London, but still it is there, becoming thicker
each year as the city grows.
Mexicans have always been proud of the beauty of
their skies and have been quick to notice the change
which the last thirty years has gradually brought to
those of their capital. At first, they blamed the deforesta¬
tion of the hills and the drainage of the lake which in
Aztec times surrounded the city. It is true that in the
spring, after the dry winter, sudden stormscalled
tolvaneras bring palls of dust from the lake bed into
the city. But these storms only last a few hours, and
then the air clears again.
A change in the wind
cuts the sun's heat 50 %
What is new is the haze, sometimes almost as thick
as fog, which hangs over the city in the calm
windless mornings. Could this possibly be smoke?
If so, where from? Mexico City is becoming industrialized,
but still not to the extent of cities in North America and
Europe; and happily the climate does not require houses
to be heated, except on one or two days each year.
In 1955, the same questions began to be asked by a
small group of scientists working at the Institute of
Applied Science 'of the National University of Mexico.
They had been studying the strength of solar radiation,
thinking that one day it might be put to some use, and
were surprised to discover that the strength of the
sunlight ät the University depended on the direction of
the wind.
When it blew from the south and west, coming in from
the country, the sun was very strong, say 1.3 or 1.4 calories
per square centimetre per minute ; but on days when
the wind blew from the north bringing down to the
University the haze from the city, the sun's strength
fell sharply, sometimes .down to 0.6 calories, or less than
half its normal value! This even happened on dry,
cloudless days, and meant that the amount of dust and
smoke in the air coming from the city was really
tremendous.
One of the first things the scientists of the Institute
did was to check the data on visibility over the city,
observed every day from the headquarters of the National
Meteorological Service. It soon became obvious that a
great change had taken place in the last twenty years.
Up to about 1940 "the average visibility in the mornings
over the city was between 10 and 20 kilometres, but from
that year onwards there has been a steady decline and
at present it is hardly more than four kilometres. No
climatic change can account for this. It must be due
to an increase in air pollution.
The next step was to put out on roofs of buildings
in different parts of the city small glass dishes, to see
how much dust and grit they collected in the course of a
week. This of course could only be done in dry weather,
but luckily it rains very rarely in Mexico during the
winter months from December to March. At the end of
each week the dishes were collected and replaced by
clean ones. The dust collected in each dish was carefully
weighed and then examined under the microscope to
discover what types of dust and grit had been deposited,
whether it came from the ground or from chimneys.
Dust pall on Mexico City
totals 200 tons per day
The weighings showed that on the average about five
tons of dust and grit were deposited per square
kilometre per week during fine weather, and that in
the centre of the city the figure rose to over 15 tons per
square ¡kilometre per week, Which is almost as high as that
observed in English industrial towns, such as Birmingham.
How could this be true, in a city which is not nearly so
heavily industrialized? The reason is that Mexico City
lies in a valley surrounded on all sides but one by high
mountains. Winds are light, and smoke, instead of being
carried away, just hangs around the valley.
It is a simple matter to multiply the figure of five tons
per square kilometre by the area of the city (approxi¬
mately 250 sq. kilometres) and to arrive at the result that
1,250 tons of dust and grit fall on the city each week, or
nearly 200 tons a day.
Now, "if what goes up must come down" it is equally
true that 'What comes down must have gone up." In
other words, at least 200 tons of smoke are loosed into
the air every day, and probably half of this is unburnt
fuel, worth at least $ 5,000. So the cost to the city in
unburnt fuel alone may be nearly two million dollars
yearly. Add to that the cost of corrosion of metals and
materials, the extra laundry bills, the damage to buildings,
to say nothing of the danger to public health, and there
is clearly a case for studying the smog phenomenon and
investigating what steps may be taken to control it.
A beginning has now been made in Mexico. On the
one hand the Institute of Applied Science is continuing
its work and is making a special study of carbon dioxide
and carbon monoxide in the city air; the former be¬
cause it is the principal product of the combustion of any
kind of fuel and thus a good index of pollution ; the latter
because it is highly toxic and is produced in quite large
quantities by automobiles.
On the other hand, the Mexican Ministry of Health has
set up a special air pollution section in its Department of
Industrial Hygiene, which has started a comprehensive
study not only of the smoke but also of. the gases which
are found in city air: sulphur dioxide, the oxides of
nitroyen, aldehydes, ammonia, etc. Many of them are
toxic or corrosive, even in very small
amounts.
We know that the smog exists, because
we can see it every day. We know it is a
nuisance and may easily become a danger.
Cont'd
on
next page

SMOG IN THE TROPICS
(Continued)
But there are also many questions which must be
answered before effective steps can be taken to combat it.
What does the smog consist of, what kind of smoke,
grit and gases does it contain ? Where does it come from ?
From the large factories, from the oil refineries, from the
small industries, from homes or from the traffic ? What
quantities of each pollutant are produced every day ?
What proportion of these falls back on the city and what
proportion is carried away by the wind. When the
answers to these questions are known, but not before, it
will be possible to plan effective countermeasures.
Mexico City is but one of 'many cities in the tropics
which are growing rapidly and facing for the first time
the menace of smog. Many of the cities' are set in the
mountains and have delightful climates with abundant
sunshine and soft breezes, but it is just these climatic
amenities which aggravate the problem. Many industrial
cities of the north are habitable only because they are
washed and ventilated by rain and wind. In the calmer
tropics one cannot take such liberties with the atmosphere.
It is not to be used as a drain.
Governments and other authorities have two ways of
approach to the control of air pollution: education and
legislation. The technical methods to be employed vary
from one city to another, for no two cities have exactly
the same smog. Once the nature of the smog and its
principal sources are known, then the first step Will
probably be to ensure that the public in general, and in
particular those persons connected with activities which
produce the smog, are sufficiently informed of the
technical means available to reduce it.
These may be relatively simple and inexpensive, as for
instance when it is simply a matter of ensuring the more
16
© Magnum Photos
efficient and smokeless combustion of oil fuel in furnaces;
or they may be more expensive and complicated, as in the
case of suppressing the emission of certain gases from
chemical works. But almost always the money invested
in devices for preventing emission of smoke or gases is
returned within a very short time in the form of. increased
efficiency or of saleable by-products. Perhaps the most
knotty technical problem yet to be solved is that of
suppressing the emission of harmful gases from auto¬
mobile exhausts.
When education and persuasion fail to produce the
desired results recourse may be had to legislation. Many
countries have by now adopted legal measures to enforce
the zoning of certain industries and to restrict the
emission of smoke and gases in urban areas.
In all aspects of the air pollution problem, in research,
in techniques of suppression, in public education and in
the drafting and enforcement of legislation, the highly
industrialized countries of the north have learned much
from experience which can be passed on to those which
are facing the danger for the first time. Civilization
implies, by its definition, the concentration of people in
cities, and the present tendency throughout the world in
this direction is unlikely to be reversed in the foreseeable
future.
The newly growing cities will avoid much trouble and
expense if they profit from the errors and experience of
the older industrial centres. In the interchange of
information and skills which this implies, the United
Nations, through its Specialised Agencies such as the
World Health Organization and Unesco, has certainly an
important part to play. >
E.M. Fournier d'Albe is a British geophysicist who has been working
for the past three years on a Unesco mission at the Institute of Applied
Sciences in Mexico City. The Institute was created and developed with
the co-operation of scientists who were sent to Mexico under UNESCO's
share of the U.N. Technical Assistance programme. Prior to this
assignment, he spent three years for Unesco in Pakistan, helping to
develop a geophysical observatory at Quetta. He has also worked at
the Puy-de-Dome observatory in the Massif Central in France.

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
Henri Cartier-Bresson
LONDON GLINTING AND LEADEN GREY.
Magnum Photos
Even on the brightest of days a smoke haze fed by London's innumerable chimneys
hangs in the sky over Britain's capital. On wet and wintery days the moisture discharged into the air by the city often combines
with dust and smoke to form the fog which paints the London streets a leaden hue. Worst of all are the days when this vapour
is thick and the winds too weak to disperse it. The result is smog, choking clouds which turn day into night. (See next page.)
17
