SUDANESE NUBIA
'TERRA INCOGNITA' OF ARCHAEOLOGISTS
by J. Vercoutter
Director of the Antiquities Service, Republic of the Sudan
rchaeologically speaking the Sudanese part of
threatened Nubia is practically a "terra
incognita". It has never been systematically
surveyed. But it is ¡known to contain a vast
number of unexplored sites which lie buried
under the sands. These sites could provide
valuable data about the early history of mankind, and
their disappearance forever under the Waters of the Nile,
if not thoroughly investigated beforehand, will be an
irreparable loss.
Sudanese Nubia was a meeting ground of civilizations.
It was the borderland between Egypt, with its Medi¬
terranean and Asian affinities, and Africa proper, and it
was the gateway through which objects and ideas passed
between the ancient world and Africa, and vice versa.
As the link between two continents, the importance of
Sudanese Nubia cannot be overstated.
The reservoir of the high dam of Aswan will ultimately
flood about 115 miles of the present banks of the Nile in
the Sudan. By 1964, when the first stage of construction
is scheduled to be completed, over 40 miles of Sudanese
territory will be permanently under water. And these
40 miles are the area with the country's richest store of
archaeological remains, containing 47 known sites and
others likely to be unearthed in the course of prospection.
But in the entire 115 miles region of the Sudanese Nile
in jeopardy, only ten sites have thus far been partially
excavated. However, a rapid ground survey together with
an air survey recently carried out by the Sudanese Survey
Jean Vercoutter.
MASTER-WORK
OF
ARCHITECTURE
Much of Sudanese Nubia which is to be flooded
is unknown territory, archaeologically. In the
past few years alone over 100 sites have been
recorded in this area. Photos right and oppo¬
site page show one of them: a master-work of
Egyptian military architecture, the great castle
of Buhen near Wadi Haifa. The fortress has
just been discovered by Professor Walter
B. Emery of the University of London who led
two expeditions to Buhen last year and in 1958
for the Egypt Exploration Society. The disco¬
very has already revolutionized previous con¬
ceptions of pharaonic military architecture.
The fortress was built in the early Middle
Kingdom as one of a series of trading posts
and strongholds erected 3,900 years ago to
defend the strategic area of the Second Cata¬
ract dividing Upper and Lower Nubia. Sacked
about 1675 B.C. its vast fortifications were
rebuilt and enlarged in the New Kingdom
(1570 B.C.). Excavations are still under way
and have already unearthed the skeleton of
the earliest horse known in Egypt and a quan¬
tity of torn-up papyrus which may be the re¬
mains of military dispatches. On opposite page
is a reconstruction of the Middle Kingdom
castle, made by British artist Alan Sorrell, with
the help of Prof. Emery and based on his plans.
46

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
"** ¿nuit rî
Illustrated London News
Department has revealed the existence of more than
100 sites! The discovery of a remarkable Egyptian fortress
of the Middle and New Kingdom recently made by Pro¬
fessor Walter B. Emery at Buhen (in the' immediately
menaced area) shows how much Sudanese archaeology
has to give (see photos left and above). Can we allow
all these sites to be destroyed without their having been
at least partly explored, excavated and recorded?
The situation is no less urgent as regards the known
monuments of the Sudan. Among the ruins still standing
or clearly apparent and which will be engulfed by the
waters, are seven ancient towns, four Pharaonic temples,
at least 20 Christian churches (including some with
frescoes), rock graves of the 18th Egyptian dynasty, rock
chapels of early Christian date, numerous cemeteries, and
sites with rock drawings or rock inscriptions. Special
mention must be made of prehistoric sites, both Neolithic
and Palaeolithic, one of which has recently been dated
6 300 B.C. by the radio carbon process.
Among the sites which will disappear forever are the
two temples of the XVIIIth Dynasty inside the twin for¬
tresses of Semna and Kumma; the small temple of
Rameses II at Aksha, still buried in the desert sand; the
lovely temple of Buhen with its magnificent carvings and
paintings; the sites, mostly Egyptian citadels of the
Middle Kingdom (2065-1500 B.C.) of Mirgissa, Dabenarti,
Shelfak and Uronarti to mention but the most important
monuments known today.
Each year, survey and inspection tours carried out by
the Antiquities Service of the Republic of the Sudan
reveal new sites; trial excavations lay bare unexpected
finds such as the paintings of the Djehuty-hetep tomb at
Debeira or the Faras alabaster vase which was found in
a site thought to have been excavated.
In the Sudan, therefore, everything, or nearly every¬
thing, still remains to be done. But in the short time avail¬
able and with its very limited staff, the Sudan Antiquities
Service is unable, on its own, to carry out the urgent work
of surveying and excavating, of removing and safeguard¬
ing the monuments, and recording for posterity all these
operations.
The important, the urgent thing is to start, as quickly
as possible, a complete archaeological survey, mile by mile,
of the whole area to be flooded. A survey of this kind has
never been carried out before.
In 1955, when the Sudan first learned of the proposed
building of the new dam at Aswan, its Antiquities Service
prepared an emergency plan of action. In order to get a
clear picture of what would have to be done it started a
ground survey. But as this proved too slow a job with the
limited staff available, an air survey was made. The
entire threatened zone was photographed from the air in
1956-57 by the government's Survey Department, and this
air survey has now become the basis for the Sudan's
rescue plan. Thanks to Unesco, a specialist is now work¬
ing on the archaeological interpretation of these photo¬
graphs and the first precise archaeological map of the
region will soon be available.
What is urgently needed now is a photogrammetric
contour map of the area for which aerial stereoscopic
photographs have just been taken. Once the photogram¬
metric contour map is available it will be possible for the
ground survey to get under way. It is envisaged that
these surveys will be carried out on each bank of the Nile
with prospecting teams for a general survey preceding
excavation teams.
Most of the monuments in the threatened area are built
of mud brick and cannot be dismantled; but some have
frescoes painted on brick and these will need to be remov¬
ed. Four stone temples (Aksha, Buhen, Semna West and
Kumma) could and should be dismantled and taken to a
safe place. The temples at Semna and Kumma stand on
a rocky barrier, possibly the site of an ancient Egyptian
dam, and offer an imposing landscape. The ideal thing
would be to preserve them where they are.
47

SUDANESE NUBIA (Continued)
J. Vercoutter
1 MIRGISSA FORTRESS. Aerial view of one
' of many Sudanese sites still only partially
excavated. Situated on a steep rock close to
the Nile, south of Buhen, it has recently yielded
important finds Including the archives of a post
office chief of 4,000 years ago. Girdle walls are
made of sun-dried bricks. Site also contains
the ruins of a small temple built by Sesostris III.
O AKSHA TEMPLE. Remains of wall from
* temple built by Rameses II at Aksha, in the
Sudan, about 25 miles south of Abu Simbel. The
temple was dedicated to the great sun god Amon
to whom Rameses (far left and centre, kneeling)
is offering devotion. Much of this stone-built
temple is still buried beneath the desert sand.
3-4. SEMNA EAST & WEST. About 40 miles
south of Wadi Haifa the Nile narrows and
flows between granite cliffs forming impressive
rapids. To guard this passage (the southern
limit of Egypt under the Middle Kingdom) the
Pharaohs built two massive forts on either side of
the river. On the left bank lies West Semna ; on
the right East Semna, or Kumma. Both have impor¬
tant temples dating from 1500-1400 B.C. of which
the photos on the opposite page show details.
C TEMPLE OF BUHEN. Just north of the 2nd
" Cataract and opposite Wadi Haifa lie the ruins
of the lovely temple of Buhen bullt by Thutmosis II
and Hatshepsut over 3,000 years ago against a
high cliff overlooking the Nile. Photo shows only
a corner of the large Hall, but the temple has
remarkable carvings and paintings many of
which still retain much of their original colouring.
^|
t\
\i~4- Hi n
Courtesy Oriental Institute, Univ. of Chicago
48

The Unesco Courier, February 1960
Photos Courtesy Oriental Institute, Chicago
Mile by mile excavation survey imperative
49
