ASIA'S VICIOUS CIRCLE
A special report by our correspondent GEORGES FRADIER
Richard Lannoy, London
The problem of schooling in the countries of Asia is a vicious circle. The countries are poor because they are not properly
educated and they cannot build schools because they are poor. Asia's people are now determined to break this vicious circle.
One of the crucial issues of our time is the edu¬
cational future of the children of the world. For
the children of Asia, Latin America, tropical Africa
and the Arab states of the Middle East this is a prob¬
lem which, in magnitude and complexity, ranks
with those of hunger, sickness and poverty.
The extension of school facilities to all children
has always been a basic concern to Unesco.
International regional studies and conferences
sponsored by the Organization led to the launching
of a major Unesco project in 1957 for the extension
of primary education in Latin America. Since then,
surveys and inquiries have been made by Unesco
into the needs of Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
Preliminary investigations for each area were
completed last year and considered at meetings of
Ministers and Directors of Education from each
region, held in Karachi, Addis Ababa and Beirut
at the end of 1959 and early this year. The reports
they adopted are of special importance in connexion
with the long range efforts being planned and have
also made possible the formulation of proposals
for Unesco action which are being considered at
the eleventh session of Unesco's General Confer¬
ence which opens in Paris later this month.
Georges Fradier, special correspondent of The
Unesco Courier, travelling through Asia, Africa
and the Middle East, has had a first-hand view of
their educational resources, problems and projects.
Below we present his first reporta striking picture
of the educational problems and plans of Asian
countries whose populations total 800 million.
Further reports, on Africa and the Middle East, will
appear in future issues of The Unesco Courier
and the whole broad outline of the school situation
in the three regions will be reviewed in "Asia,
the Arab States and Africa: Education and Pro¬
gress", a forthcoming Unesco publication.

W7
^^f^M E live in an age which has grown ac-
^F W customed to huge figures. Miles, tons,
T T dollars and roubles are calculated in
terms involving more and more strings of zeros. Applied
to human beings such figures are lifeless and without
meaning. Thus when we speak of children we must think
of them one by one, remembering that in each and every
case a promise, a future, an opportunity and an irrepla¬
ceable life is at stake.
Here we are dealing with 130 million ir/eplaceable
children from 15 Asian countries about half of whom
are denied a basic opportunity (1). They are denied the
opportunity of obtaining an education, of escaping from
the narrow confines of inherited toil ("You don't know
anything so you can do the same work your father did"),
of understanding something of what goes on outside the
village, the factory or the home; they are denied the
opportunity of choosing their own careers or their own
opinions, of going through life with some degree of
awareness and understanding .
In Korea, for example, all children between the ages
of 6 and 12 go to school (much as in Western Europe about
1880) ; in Thailand almost all children go to school from 7
to 14. But in Vietnam, in India, in Pakistan, Indonesia
and Iran, only 5 out of every 10 children are lucky enough
to be taught the 3 Rs; out of 10 village children, 5 go to
school and 5 work in the fields; out of every 10 children
in the industrial suburbs, 5 spend their days in the class¬
room and 5 in the streets.
If we take these 15 Asian countries as a single unit, out
of every 10 children, 5 will never read a newspaper or a
letter or the history of their own countries. They will
never read a single line of any of the masterpieces of
"'world" literature, so named because they were conceived
and written for the benefit of all.
These 5 children, boys or girls, picked at random from
each group bf 10, wil grow up, live and work very much
like their illiterate parents before them. But not quite
like them. . Life will be even harder. Our civilization is
based on the written word. As that civilization develops
(1) Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Korea, Laos, Malaya, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Thai¬
land, Vietnam.
The Unesco Courier. November 1960
and spreads, Illiterates will be increasingly faced with a
difficult and Isolated existence, sometimes fearful and
secretive, sometimes jeering and rebellious, the same
existence as that led by the few complete Illiterates still
sometimes found in the large cities of the Western world.
The average number of Asian children condemned to
illiteracy is 5 out of 10; but in Afghanistan, in Laos or
Nepal, the number is as high as 7 or 8 in 10. In any
event, something like 65 million children in 15 Asian
countries are in this situation, despite the fact that tre¬
mendous progress has been made in these countries in
recent years.
Between 1950 and 1956, for example, the number of In¬
dian children in classrooms rose from 18,294,000 to
25,947,000; in Laos the number of schoolchildren increased
three-fold and in Iran and Malaya it almost doubled.
Undoubtedly these increases were offset by the over-all
increase in population, but they do reflect an unprece¬
dented effort on the part of the States concerned: 9,000
new schools built in Burma since 1950, 3,000 in Malaya
and 9,000 in the Philippines in 4 years, and more than
80,000 in India between 1950 and 1956. In the 15 countries,
primary school enrollment rose from 38.7 million in 1950
to more than 66 million in 1960.
When we take into account the teacher training that
had to be given and the salaries that had to be provided,
then it is safe to say that so much action in so short
a time was never taken during the 19th century (except
perhaps in the case of Japan) when today's "developed"
countries were introducing coanpulsory education. Yet
despite these remarkable (and costly) advances, Delhi,
Rangoon, Karachi, Teheran and the other eleven capitals
realize that these are merely the first steps on a long
and difficult road.
The governments of these countries have solemnly pledg¬
ed themselves to provide all children with a practical,
solid and useful education. They have even set them¬
selves a deadline: compulsory primary education every¬
where within 20 years.
Thousands of schools have been opened. But dozens
of towns and thousands of villages are still without
schools. In most cases the reason is simply lack of money.
Most of these States have been independent for less than
1 5 years ; whatever education systems they inherited, they
Steven Trefomdes, Boston, U.S.A.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ASIA'S VICIOUS CIRCLE (Cont'd)
3 Rs for 130 Million Children
have had to give priority in this period to the building
up of the elements necessary to independent States: eco¬
nomic development, means of defence, the maintenance
of public order. Inevitably, educators were asked to wait
a little longer. In fact some countries still seem to find
themselves in an impasse, and then what is the use of
proclaiming compulsory primary education when adequate
schools to receive the children cannot be built.
It is not unreasonable to expect a child to walk one
mile to school or even a .little more in very sparsely
populated regions. Thus at least one school is needed
for a zone of 3 to 5 square miles. In Korea, Pakistan,
¿Thailand and Malaya, however, there is only one school
for 7, 8 or 10 square miles; in Burma and Nepal, one for
23 square miles or more; in Iran one per 75 square miles.
These figures, moreover, are approximate and relate to
average areas. In actual fact most schools are grouped
around the towns. In India, the average individual area
served by each primary school is 4.2 square miles. But
India is essentially a land of villages and its 840,000 com¬
munities, most with less than 500 inhabitants, have, hard¬
ly more schools than electric power lines. The Indian
authorities estimate that they will need to build 180,000
schools before 1962 to provide a school within one and
half miles of each child's home.
Educationally speaking, then, there are groups of still
more under-privileged children in the under-privileged
regions and many of them are country children. Millions
of Indian, Afghan, Pakistani and Iranian boys are con¬
demned to remain illiterate simply because they are the
sons of peasants or village craftsmen. Education will be
available for their counterparts in the cities and towns,
but they will have to wait for adult education classes,
when these' are set up one day.
Another under-privileged group is not limited to rural
areas. In many cases the fact of being a girl is a barrier
to primary education not on an official ' basis, of course,
but in actual fact, just the same. In none of the 15
Asian countries are there as many girls in schools as there
are boys. In India, Pakistan and Iran girls represent less
than 50% of the school population; in other countries
where only 10 to 12 per cent of children attend school,
for every 10 boys able to read there is only one girl.
But the problems of rural education and education for
girls form only one aspect of a whole complex of factors
which puts a brake on the development of primary edu¬
cation. Differences in the progress that has been made
between one State and another are (partly due to vari¬
ations in educational policy and to the extent to which
people show an interest in their children's education. To
understand these differences, we need to take into account
diversity of material, social, cultural, political,
demographic and economic conditions.
Outstanding among the material fac¬
tors is .the multitude of little villages
already mentioned. India has 443,000
communities of less than 200 people. In Nepal, out of
28,770 villages or hamllets, 24,429 have less than 50 inhabi¬
tants; in Iran, 40,000 villages are scattered over an area
four times that of Great Britain; in Burma, 23,621 com¬
munities out of 32,000 have less than 500 inhabitants.
In all these countries, the vast majority of the people
live in tiny communities dispersed among the islands or
in the forests, clinging to the mountain sides, hidden
away in all but inaccessible valleys or clustered around
oases in the desert. When one considers the problem of
providing these thousands and thousands of communities
with schools, of equipping the schools, of finding the
teachers, paying their salaries and providing them with
somewhere to live, it is not hard to understand why even
the most enthusiastic advocates of compulsory primary-
education sometimes become disheartened.
Industrialization and urbanization growth are already
affecting the picture, drawing village people into towns
or creating new towns. Apart from this, it should be
possible to group villages in twos or threes and supply
one school for the group. Elsewhere, assuming that there
are suitable roads, it might be possible to use itinerant
teachers. In still other places, central boarding schools
might be set ¡up. There is no shortage of paper solu¬
tions. In practice, however, it has so far seemed more
advantageous and more urgent to try to meet the needs
of towns which are also short of schools.
What about the social aspect of the problem? There is
the complex situation of huge countries populated by sep¬
arate communities which are racially distinct and whose
customs are often markedly different. There are also the
mental or geographical barriers which continue to divide
the communities and castes. Most Asian countries, too,
possess some communities cut off from the national life
in general and living in inaccessible or wild regions.
There are probably enough priests,
shamans and wisemen among these
nomadic hunters and farmers to
provide for the traditional teaching for initiations and
crafts. But one is not likely to find among them literate
persons of the type most suitable to contribute to a natio¬
nall education programme. The "tribal populations'" may
toe scattered, but collectively they represent millions of
human beings and hundreds of thousands of children.
But the most important social factor here is the status
of women. Imagine a country where virtually all the
women are illiterate. Outside the home, no-one seeks
their opinion on the country's present or its future* their
task is to maintain the old traditions. But a country
wishing to advance and anxious to improve its living
conditions will have a hard road to travel if half the
population must be carried as a dead weight; and that is
what women have become through being deprived of the
elementary means of understanding and adjusting to
new things.
And, in the final analysis, it is on the women that so
much social progress depends. Once they have won the
right to education, women demand other rights: to parti¬
cipate in social, economic and finally political activities
from which they were previously excluded. Women, in
fact, know better than men how to combat poverty and
slums, unjust working conditions, and bad health and
hygiene conditions as well as ignorance in all its forms.
Once emancipated they demand enough new schools not
only for their sons but also for their daughters.
In this respect, there are some striking differences bet¬
ween one Asian country and another. In some regions,
women have long enjoyed a great measure of freedom and
there is no feeling or situation that prevents their educa¬
tion. In others, reformers still have an uphill fight to
convince the population as a whole .that it would be fair
and reasonable to provide schools for girls. In a few
countries .there will soon be as many girls at school as
boys. But others will have to make heavy sacrifices to
achieve as much, their task made all the harder because
in general the countries in which few girls now go to
school are also those most opposed to the idea of co¬
educational schools; thus these countries will have to
find as many women teachers as men.
Yet even in India and Korea where the disproportion
between the sexes is by no means the most marked, men
teachers outnumber women teachers by 5 to 1; elsewhere
the ratio is as much as 10 to 1. At the other end of the
scale there is Ceylon with almost as many women as men
teachers and the Philippines which stands out among
other Asian nations because it has more women than men
teachers.
It may seem surprising to talk of cultural barriers to
the progress of education. But the fact is that culture
has not always nor everywhere been linked with the idea
of general education given by teachers. On the contrary,
in many civilizations the most important knowledge and
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

BRICKLAYERS
IN SHORT
PANTS
Photos Unesco-P.A. Pittet
Few children have ever been asked to help build their own school. But in Indonesia it is a case of
needs must, and village folk and their children have made themselves responsible both for finding
the material and for building schools. Thus they contribute their share to the effort of the govern¬
ment which provides all funds for education. No special taxes or local rates are imposed for educa¬
tion. Top left, the headmistress and a teacher give working instructions to the children; right,
youngsters hard at work breaking up bricks. Scaffolding behind is of bamboos collected by the
children. Above, young masons carry their bricks to the building site on a "stretcher".

ASIA'S VICIOUS CIRCLE (Cont'd)
WRAPPED IN YELLOW SHAWLS. Indian boys at a Benares school (run on the ancient Vedic principles of
the Hindu religion) study under the supervision of a bearded teacher called a Brahmachari. Their studies include
Sanscrit and religious subjects, but they also follow the modern curriculum and enter for the normal State exami¬
nations. Shawls bear Sanscrit script with the word MA or Motherfor the Mother Goddess. Cultural traditions
of certain Asian countries have always encouraged the development of what we today call primary education.
Richard Lannoy

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
SOLEMN-FACED children on
their way to school pause for a
moment on the Cabantcharuk
Road near Djakarta, the capital
of the Indonesian Republic.
Photos Unesco-Pierre Pittet
ARCHAEOLOGIST from
France and boy from Bali study
some well-weathered stone figu¬
res inspired by stories from the
Ramayana, the Hindu epic poem.

ASIA'S VICIOUS CIRCLE (Cont'd from page 6)
the most useful, whether for this world or another, 'was
not the sort that could be passed on by a schoolteacher
to young scribes and future merchants. And a peasant,
able to recite from memory the noblest passages from
ancient epics and hymns, is unlikely to be overimpressed
by the business of writing.
Elsewhere, however, cultural traditions have always
encouraged what we call primary education. In Burma,
for instance, the religious tradition has for centuries been
a true intellectual tradition as well. Here, custom has
long decreed, that young boys should spend a certain
period in a monastery or temple. Guided by a master,
they learn the arts of reading and writingconsidered as
sacredwhile studying the doctrines and rules of
Buddhism. Obviously the development of primary educa¬
tion presents no social or psychological difficulties in a
country where the remotest village has always piously
sent its small monks to school. But then not everyone is
Burmese...
On the other hand, millions of Asian students, when
they hear about education in other lands, can under¬
standably be expected to remark, with some regret, "Not
everyone can be Russian, or English or Italian.9' For there
aire, fortunately, a great many children in the world who
do all their lessons in their own language, that of their
homes and the streets of their city, the same language
whether at work or play. These children don't realize
their good fortune. In Asia such duck is almost exception¬
al. Either the mother tongue is not the same as the
national language or this language is inadequate for even
slightly advanced studies, and so before long still another
language must be learned.
between 1956 and 1966: in 10 years it will have topped
527 million.
Because of the relatively short life-span in Asia, there
are many more school-age children in proportion to the
total .population than is the case in Occidental countries.
For this reason the burden of education grows Increas¬
ingly heavier. The great problem is where and how to
find the necessary funds. Advisers may suggest how each
of the difficulties confronting education should be met.
But they have little to propose for the most formidable
obstacle of all mass poverty.
Because they are poor and cannot provide clothes and
other necessities, people don't send their children to
school, or, children are taken away from school before
they have finished their education, either to help at
home or to earn a little money. But the impoverishment
of the people has still graver consequences: taxes have to
be kept low and this seriously limits the State's income;
what is available is devoted by priority to the activities
considered most essential.
This fundamental obstacle to educational progress is,
in fact, a vicious circle. The people of these countries
cannot build a sound educational system because they
are poor and they remain poor because they are not
properly educated. The government is short of money
to finance national education because its income is limited
by the low living standards of the people and these, in
turn, cannot be raised precisely because of the inadequate
system of education.
It is this vicious circle which the Asian countries have
determined to break.
Here then are some of ,the difficulties
confronting children in simple pri¬
mary education. At least half their
time is spent in learning languages which often have no
connexion with each other and which do not even use the
same alphabet. The resulting organizational prob¬
lems are naturally immense. Sometimes a school must
be started for each linguistic group; at best, teachers
must be specially trained, Schoolbooks have to be speci¬
ally prepared, and it is difficult for a publisher to produce
a reading primer on a large scale and at a low price:
the schools need twenty different books in 20 different
languages using a variety of types.
Yet despite all these huge problems, let us suppose that
the nations of Asia now had all the books they needed
and had managed to build enough schools and to train
enough teachers. Let us imagine that the present
problem of primary education had been miraculously
solved in every country, from Manila to Tabriz. Would
ministries of education be able to relax and simply super¬
vise the smooth working of the educational system? No!
the problem would be as great as before. The task would
no sooner be completed than everything would have to
be started again from the beginning. For while the
authorities might have effectively provided for the educa¬
tion of 130 million of today's children, in 20 year's time-
To illustrate the educational problems posed by the rate
of population increase, we may take as examples, two
countries of very different sizeIndia and Ceylon. By
1961 the population of Ceylon is expected to reach
10,390,000. Ceylon's birth rate is 40 per 1,000 and, thanks
to improvements in hygiene and medicine and victories
over- malaria, the mortality rate has dropped to 10 per
1,000. Today the population increase stands at 2.9 per
cent.
This means that in 10 years the population will number
15 million, and that in 20 years an island as large as
Belgium and the Netherlands combined, but without any
resources other than agriculture, will number more than
20 million inhabitants. Already Ceylon must plan to
provide educational facilities for 890,000 new school¬
children by 1968, simply to maintain the number of
children attending school at the present proportion of
70 per cent of those of school age.
In India it is expected that the birth-rate will drop to
32.9 per thousand within 10 years (as against 41.7 per
thousand in 1955, and as compared with the then U.S.S.R.
rate of 25.6 per thousand and the TJLS.A. rate of 25 per
thousand). At the same time the death-rate is expected
to drop from 26 per 1,000 to less than 14. . On this basis
the population of India will have increased by 86 million
Bathtlme for the children of a fisherman In the Philippines. But when they
are older will there be schools for them to go to ? The education authorities
are making a sustained effort to replace the 85% of schools which were des-
10
