Scripps Institution of Oceanography. U.S.A.
Penguins find an unexpected haven on harpooned
whale (below) and form ranks to salute the colours
attached to marker harpoon. Whale was caught by
Soviet fishing fleet operating ¡n Antarctic waters. Above,
a whale dives straight down to evade capture. Whales
are not fish and must rise to the surface to breathe.

FISH
The great
food
potential
by D.B. Finn
Director, Fisheries Division, Food & Agriculture Organization
How great is the potential world
supply of fish for food?
First, as far as existing fisheries
go, there are many reasons to believe that the trend 'will
continue upward, especially in Asia and the Far East, in
Africa and in South America. Expansion in these areas
will depend, to a large extent, on the rate at which the
countries concerned are able to mechanize their fishing
fleets, introduce modern gear and equipment ,and train
their fishermen In the use of mechanized boats and new
fishing techniques. This is a slow, gradual business. Fur¬
thermore, we still do not know to what extent the
existing fisheries of these countries can support increased
exploitation, although the evidence before us suggests
that substantially increased catches can be made. This
is being successfully demonstrated in India, Ceylon and
elsewhere.
Another important factor is that most of the fishing
carried out today is confined to the continental shelves,
which are estimated to form only about 10 per cent of the
marine area. However, experience during recent years
shows that pelagic fish, such as tuna, may be caught over
wide areas of the oceans and seas. For example, Japanese
fishermen operating from the coast of Brazil into the
South Atlantic have consistently made substantial catches
of several species of tuna. Similarly, a big tuna fishing
industry has been built up by French fishermen operating
56

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
A SCHOOL OF MENHADEN SURROUNDED BY A SEINE NET OFF THE U.S. COAST.
© Ian Hahn, Woods Hole, U.S.A.
from Dakar, West Africa, while Japanese fishermen have
also shown that there are substantial tuna fisheries to be
developed along other parts of the African coast; they are
also operating successfully in various areas of the Indian
Ocean, the China Sea and, of course, the Pacific Ocean.
Another example of such possibilities for increasing fish
production is to be found in Haiti where an FAO expert
has proved by experimental fishing that there are plenty
of tunas in nearby waters. Indeed, he has put forward
a proposal for establishing in Haiti a tuna fishery similar
to that already established in Cuba.
In the past few years, we have had many encouraging
reports on fish stocks from our experts working in various
countries, all of which clearly point to great possibilities
for increasing fish production. For example, an FAO
expert working in Saudi Arabia was able to help organize
fleet fishing operations in the Red Sea and proved in
this practical way that the stocks of fish there are
sufficient to support a fishing enterprise. In fact, this
was another instance where increased production of fish
led to many other problems, particularly those of
transport, distribution and marketing.
The Mediterranean is generally regarded as a poor
fishing sea, but our experts have obtained some encourag¬
ing results in experimental fishing off the coasts of
Syria and Tunisia. Until recent years, shrimp fishing was
of little importance in the Mediterranean and, in fact,
some people believed there were no worthwhile shrimp
stocks in this sea. Then, shortly after the Second World
War, some French fishermen discovered substantial stocks
of big shrimps of an excellent quality. As a result, trawlers
working from Algeria, Egypt, Italy and Turkey are fishing
these stocks and a very profitable shrimp trade has been
developed.
All these facts support the view of many fishery experts
that the stocks of fish in several parts of the world are
underexploited. These areas include the Arabian Sea and
the Persian Gulf, where anchovy and similar species are
caught, the southern waters of Australia, the west coast
of South America, and the English Channel, where there
are substantial stocks of pilchards.
Support for the point of view that there are very large
unfished stocks in the oceans and seas is to be found
in the sudden disasters which from time to time overtake
fish populations. For example, in 1957, a ship from the
U.S.S.R., sailing through the southeastern part of the
Arabian Sea, came upon vast quantities of dead fish.
According to the Soviet report, the fish were found between
60°-70° E and 10°-12° N, covering an area of about 200,000
square kilometres. The fish were said to be 20 to 25
centimetres in length, in which case they would weigh
about 100 grammes each. If we assume that one tenth
of the area reported contained dead fish at a density of
10 to the square metre, some 20 million tons of fish
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE GREAT FOOD POTENTIAL (Continued;
perished. But even if it was only a tenth as serious as
this conclusion suggests, some two million tons of fish
were killed.
Probably this mortality was caused by a layer of water
known as the tropical subsurface oxygen minimum.
Under certain conditions this layer is brought up to the
top by strong upwellings and the fish die from lack of
oxygen. It is not a rare occurrence as many reports of
this phenomenon have been made by eye witnesses. For
instance, in April 1956, a ship sailing through the Arabian
Sea saw the water begin to "boil by the sudden appearance
of many thousands of fish about the size of mackerel."
A number of other phenomena of this kind have been
reported from this area.
The important point in this_ connection is, of course,
the vast quantity of fish observed, amounting to millions
of tons. Such fish form part of the underexploited or
unexploited stocks available in the world, and it is
interesting to speculate on the vastness of the stocks
which can survive such disasters. Therefore, it does not
seem overoptimistic to suggest that many millions of
tons of fish could be taken regularly every year from
such stocks.
One has only to look at the extraordinarily rapid
development of the pilchard fishery of South Africa to
appreciate something of the huge potential of the sea.
Here a thriving fishery has been developed in a few years,
yielding hundreds of thousands of tons of fish in that
short time.
New stocks of crustaceans and molluscs have been dis¬
covered in recent years in various parts of the world.
Crustaceans have been discovered 'off the east coast of
America, off the east coast of Australia, and in the Gulf
of Mexico, while crayfish are being fished in South Africa
and Western Australia. This by no means exhausts recent
discoveries and it seems most likely that, with the more
intensive development of fisheries which is taking place
in all parts of the world, new fishing grounds for crabs,
lobsters, shrimps, oysters, and so on, will be discovered.
This refers only to fish, crustaceans and molluscs taken
from the sea, but there is also the fresh-water fish to be
considered. A substantial increase in fish production from
inland waters has already taken place and I think it is
safe to forecast that production will be further increased.
Those who have seen the tambaks of Indonesia and the
live carp on sale in China will realize that fish culture
is an ancient and traditional art in those parts of Asia.
It is a practice which has been passed down from father
to son and from master to apprentice. It is an art rather
than a 'science, the techniques of which were perfected
in relation to a certain set of conditions laboriously
worked out by a process of trial and error. While this
empirical system produced fish, little was known of the
reasons why things worked. Today, a new approach to
fish culture has been prepared by the intense study by
scientists of the basic principles involved. A scientific
basis for the art of fish culture has been worked out and
is being further developed . and this has made it possible
to cope with problems and conditions which have defeated
fish culturists in the past. Today, we can bring into use
water that once lay idle and unmanaged.
The potentialities for fish production in inland waters
are vast. For example, it is estimated that there are
37 million hectares of cultivable inland waters in the
Indo-Pacific region alone. If all this water were put into-
use, it is obvious that a substantial harvest of fish could
be reaped from it each year.
There are many advantages to be accrued from such
fish culture, particularly in the economically under¬
developed areas. For instance, fish may be reared where
they are needed and harvested when they are required,
which eliminates many of the problems of transport,
preservation and marketing, invariably serious hindrances
to the development of trade in underdeveloped countries.
Work is also being done to encourage fish farming in
Central America where, without doubt, a considerable
industry could be established which would do much to
add to the supply of animal protein in the diets of the
people of those countries. Again, there is the success
which has attended the introduction of fresh-water fish
in wet rice paddies. These experiments have shown that
the fish feed on insect, animal and plant pests, with a
resulting beneficial effect on the rice crop. Many people
believe that the rice yield may be increased by as much
as seven per cent and, of course, there is besides the
production of fish. It is quite obvious that this type of
fish farming should be introduced on a wide scale in
India, Egypt, Burma and in other countries where rice is
grown in wet paddies.
Surveys made of the potential supply of fish from ma¬
rine and fresh water lead invariably to the conclusion that
the present world fish catch could be more than doubled.
There is much evidence to suggest that the existing
known stocks are sufficient for a catch of 50 to 60 million
tons to be made and maintained yearly «without taking
into account the possible discovery of new fisheries.
Drawing © Felton Design Studio, U.S.A.
NEW WAYS OF FISHING. Most fishermen still use methods that have not changed for centuries. But now science is giving
them newtools. Left to right, boat equipped with pump sucks schools of fish on board. Bubble "fence", produced by compressed
air spurting from holes In trailing pipe, "herds" fish towards pump. Overhead a plane scouts for new schools. Boat in centre
uses device for creating an electric "fence", based on knowledge that fish are attracted or repelled by positive or negative poles of
electrical field. Right, locating fish precisely with sonar (sound echo) equipment, showing both depth and importance of school.
58

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
r
SEAWEED
FOR THE
DINNER
TABLE
Seaside peasant girl rakes ¡n
a harvest of seaweed on a
Japanese beach. In Japan,
fish is the principal source of
animal protein. The Japanese
eat seven times more fish
than the Americans, for
example. Japanese eat not
only the sea's animal life, but
many kinds of seaweeda
rich source of vitamins and
minerals. Seaweed is gather¬
ed in other countries too,
but is generally not eaten
directly. Instead it is pro¬
cessed into a substance called
algin.usedin cosmetics, tex¬
tiles, paper, ink, and drugs
as well as in jellies and jams.
© Almasy, Paris
GREAT STRIDES IN FISHING INDUSTRIES
m t is estimated that only a fraction of one per
cent of the food consumed by human beings
is fish from the oceans and seas, although these cover
more than 70 per cent of the surface of the earth.
It should be possible to obtain greatly increased
quantities of food from this source for the sea is, acre
for acre, about as productive as arable land.
The world catch of fish has increased substantially in
the past few years and is now approaching 34 million
metric tons a year. This is about 14 million tons more
than was caught in 1938. The largest increases, achieved
by the technically developed countries, are largely due
to the use of improved boats, gear and equipment,
especially the use of electronic devices to help locate fish
and the development of fleet fishing techniques. In some
cases, large increases have also been the result of inten¬
sive fishing of one or two particular species of fish.
For example, the Danish and Norwegian production of
herring has more than doubled since 1938 because Danish
and Norwegian fishermen have developed the fishing of
winter herring.
In Iceland, great development has taken place in the
cod fishery. The catch of some 90,000 tons in 1938 has
increased considerably in the past decade and in 1957
exceeded 24,200 tons.
The United States provides an example of the develop¬
ment of tuna fishing. Before the Second World War tuna
was a virtually unexploited species so far as United States
fishermen were concerned, but it has since become a
major commercial product. The development of this
fishery in the United States has called for a very heavy
capital investment in fishing boats and fish processing
plant and equipment.
Perhaps the most dramatic increase in fish production
since 1945 has taken place in the Union of South Africa
(including South West Africa). This catch is based on
the pilchard stocks which were virtually unfished com¬
mercially in 1938. Since then, a major fishing industry
has been developed more than 300,000 tons of pilchards
being landed in 1957 and more than 400,000 tons in 1958.
More recently, there have been some astonishing
developments in the fishing industry of the U.S.S.R., both
as regards number and type of fishing vessels employed
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

GREAT STRIDES IN FISHING (Cont'd)
and the size of the catch. The Soviet catch has, in fact,
increased by more than a million tons since 1938, when
it amounted to something over 1,500,000 tons. In 1956,
it was more than 2,620,000 tons. During this same period
the number pf fishing boats in the U.S.S.R. increased
from 36,406 to 60,443. The most significant increase took
place in powered craft, whose number jumped from 2,727
to 12,387. Thus, in a few years, the Soviets have put into
operation some very large new fishing fleets and they are
now making substantially greater catches.
Again, one of the notable postwar fishing developments,
which is adding to the trend toward bigger catches by the
industrialized nations, is the emergence of the factory-
ship. The British have successfully introduced factory-
ship operations with the Fairtry, a vessel which can go
to sea for two or three months and fish and process her
catch on board. The Soviets, too, have developed factory-
ships and are reported to1 have some dozens in operation.
One of the most impressive expansions in fisheries since
the Second World War has been the increased catch made
by the fishermen of Japan. In 1938, they caught more
than 3,560,000 tons of fish and in 1953 over 5,505,000 tons.
Japan, indeed, is far in the lead among the fishing nations
of the (world and catches some 2,830,000 tons more than
the second nation, the United States.
The Yearbook of Fishery Statistics lists the leading
eight nations (in order of importance) as Japan, United
States (incl. Alaska), China (mainland), U.S.S.R., Norway,
India, United Kingdom, Canada (includ. Newfoundland).
The most interesting point about this list of leading
fishing nations is that India has joined the select few
with a catch exceeding 1 million tons a year. This is
especially significant because India is one of the countries
where there is a great and urgent need to provide the
people with a diet richer in animal protein, and the
increase in the fish catch reflects the efforts to develop
and modernize the Indian fishing fleets and fishing
industry.
Äs in other fields of human activity agriculture, in¬
dustry, science, médecine, etc. the gap between the
developed and the underdeveloped countries tends to
widen rather than narrow. For example, northern
Europe has increased its fish catch from 1,750,000 tons in
1938 to 3,160,000 tons in 1957an 80 per cent increase.
Compared with this, the increase in the fish catch of Asia
has been from 9,360,000 to 12,880,000 tons. Yet Asia is in
need of far greater food supplies. This is a typical
situation which illustrates the necessity for international
co-operation, for the developed countries to aid the under¬
developed. In the case of Asia the situation is worse than
appears at first sight because one country alone Japan
accounts for 5,399,000 tons, leaving about 7,400,000 tons
for all other countries in the region. A similar situation
exists in Africa and also in South America..-
The problem of raising the productivity of the under¬
developed countries can be looked at in a different light.
For example, by 1957 the total food production of the
world had more than regained the prewar level per
head of population: yet, more than half the people in
the world some 1,500 million persons even today lack
sufficient animal protein to keep in good health. It is
true that there has been a great increase in agricultural
production in recent years but nearly half of it has taken
place in North America, which supports . only seven per
cent of the world's population.
In the Far East, where more than 50 per cent of the
people of the world lives, food production has not
advanced beyond prewar levels and these were, as most
people today know, quite inadequate to maintain human
beings healthy and vigorous. And, although more food
is being grown in the underdeveloped countries, this is
being offset by the increased survival rate, so that there
remain vast areas of the world where populations continue
to live close to the starvation point.
It is not suggested that the resources of the sea are
60
WORLD'S BIGGEST FISH MARKET
so vast that, given the men, money, means and equipment,
it would be possible to make a huge increase in food
production from this source. All that can safely be said
at this time is that substantial increases can be obtained
from known resources, as demonstrated in India. Nobody
knows the extent of the resources of the sea, and one of
the great tasks confronting mankind is to explore and
investigate these resources and determine their nature
and extent. But enough is known for fishery biologists
to predict that production of fish, crustaceans and mol¬
luscs can probably be doubled without damaging present
known resources. This is an encouraging outlook which
helps to promote realistic planning to increase production.
The immediate aim is not to double fish production
generally but to bring about a substantial increase in
those areas of the world where the need for animal
protein is most urgent.
Such an increase in production involves many problems

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
Photos © Almasy, Paris
Tunny carpeting the quay at Tokyo (above) are part of the 1 ,500 tons of fish which change hands each day by auction (above left) in the
city's fish marketthe largest in the world. Fish provides the most important parTof the protein diet of Tokyo's 9,300,000 inhabitants, as
it does for most Japanese. Japan is far in the lead among the fishing nations and each year catches well over five million tons.
and factors which at first sight are not apparent. It
calls, for example, for international co-operation to
conserve, develop, husband and manage the world
fisheries. Not even the most powerful of the technically
developed nations can expect to operate successfully alone
in a programme to increase fish production. So much
of commercial fishing is competitive and it often takes
place in areas of the oceans and seas over which no
nation has tenancy or exclusive legal rights, so that
international agreement must be introduced if the fisheries
are to be preserved and maintained in a healthy state.
This is probably a factor of the utmost importance for
those countries which are now developing, or hope to
develop, their fishing fleets to operate in waters outside
territorial limits.
Again, apart from considerations of national or inter¬
national policy in the development of fisheries, there is
need to mechanize fishing fleets, introduce new and
improved types of boats and equipment, and to teach
fishermen to operate such engines and gear and to use
new fishing techniques. All these problems are not easily
or quickly solved, and, even after progress has been
made in this direction, there often arise other problems
which may be connected with fishery administration and
services or concerned with the storage, processing,
transport, marketing and distribution of fish and fish
products.
Although these and many other problems hinder and
hamper efforts to increase fish production, the facts and
figures of the situation point hopefully to the future. The
world total catch increased by about 60 per cent, from
19,090,000 tons to 33,720,000 tons between 1948 and 1957.
Thus, some of the great potential of fish in the world
supply of food has been realized far more quickly than
many experts dared hope a few years ago. Progress in
fisheries has. been greater in the past 30 years than in
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

GREAT STRIDES IN FISHING (Cont'd)
© Almasy
In the ports of Japan, Geiger counters are still used to check landed fish that are caught In the Pacific
Ocean although no serious cases of radio-active contamination have been observed for the past six years.
the previous 3,000. There are reasons to hope that this
progress will be quickened and it may be that the next
decade will see another substantial increase in the world
fish catch.
A condition essential for the healthy development of
the fisheries of the world, and to obtain the maximum
yield from those fisheries, is an increase in international
co-operation. Much progress has been made in this
direction as is evidenced by the various fishery agreements
and by the joint activities of governments and of various
scientific and technical organizations.
Despite this progress, however, fishing as an industry
is still at the stage reached by agriculture thousands of
years ago. We still hunt fish over thousands of square
miles of oceans and seas where no nation has rights of
individual ownership and where the stocks of fish are
wild. The aim in fisheries must be toward husbandry,
so that stocks of fish can be herded and grazed as a
farmer herds cattle. It is doubtful if we can establish fish
husbandry for certain species, but there are distinct
prospects of success with others, provided nations co-
62
operate in seeking the orderly development of world
fisheries.
Man has the technical ability to overcome all these
problems. The principal requirement is to organize the
technical skills, materials, gear, equipment, etc., in such
a way as to bring about the rapid development of the
underdeveloped fisheries. This can only be done through
international co-operation on an increasing scale. It is
only through such co-operation that we can hope to
achieve the orderly development of world fisheries which
will benefit the fishing industries of all nations and will
lead to great increases in the supply of fish to consumers
everywhere.
This article is a condensation of chapters from a booklet,
"Fish-the Great Food Potential," by Dr. D.B. Finn which
is shortly to be published by the Food and Agriculture
Organization, Rome. The Editors wish to thank FAO for
permission to use this material in advance of publication.
