THE
STAIRWAY
OF THE
GIANTS
by Paul Almasy
Photos © Almasy, Paris
Some 2,000 years ago, the tribes of the Upper Bontok Valley
on the Philippines' island of Luzon completely transformed
their wild mountain fastnesses by a grandiose feat of agri¬
cultural engineering. Taking between 1,500 and 2,000 years
to do so, they had terraced the mountainsides into a series
of ricefields that look (above right) like a stairway for giants.
To.retain these narrow fields they built some 15,000 miles of
high stone walls and laid down innumerable bamboo pipes to
irrigate the rice. Tattooed on arms and chest, peasant
(opposite page) ¡s a descendant of the men who built these
innumerable terraces. These mountain-dwellers, men and
women alike, smoke cigars made from homegrown tobacco.
Above, housewife relaxes with cigarofChurchillian dimensions.
16
In diverse lands and throughout history man,
the settler and the farmer, has often challeng¬
ed a hostile Nature, transforming desert,
jungle or steppe to draw his sustenance from
the soil. Yet rarely has he ever changed a landscape as
profoundly as in the Bontok Valley on the Philippines'
island of Luzon.
Here, in the heart of a wild mountain range, the famous
terraced ricefields of the Ifugaos, spreading over several
hundred square miles, are a green and living testament
to the ingenuity of this people in devising agricultural
techniques a masterpiece of human patience and endu¬
rance.
Describing this region is impossible only pictures can
give an idea of the scope of this achievement one of
history's most remarkable examples of agricultural deve¬
lopment. In the Banaue Valley alone, terraces cover
400 square kilometres and the walls supporting them total

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
some 15,000 miles in length. Archaeologists and historians
who have studied the Bontok ricefields estimate that the
islanders must have worked from 1,500 to 2,000 years to
build the terraces and their systems of irrigation. There
are terraced ricefields in China, Japan and Indonesia^but
these ricefields of the Ifugaos in the Luzon mountains are
by far the biggest in the world, with the highest and the
best-constructed stone walls.
It is believed that a small tribe which emigrated from
Indonesia taught the Ifugaos how to construct ricefields
in terraces. This must have happened some 4,000 years
ago. Remains studied by specialists suggest that the
Upper Bontok Valley took on its present-day aspect only
at the beginning of the Christian era.
We know very little about the Ifugaos who, 4,000 years
ago, took on this gigantic task which the people of the
Philippines call the "eighth wonder of the world." They
probably came from the Asian mainland and they reached
Luzon while seeking a new land in which to settle or after
fleeing from a powerful enemy.
Today, the Upper Bontok Valley and the neighbouring
valleys are inhabited by various tribes, one of them still
known as the "Ifugaos." Their neighbours are the Bon-
toks and the Kalingas. All these mountaineers are excep¬
tionally gifted farmers and they maintain the terraces
of their ancestors with great technical skill. They are
continually improving irrigation systems and ways of
growing rice and raising livestock (their two main occu¬
pations).
There is no better proof of their ingenuity than the
scarecrows they construct to protect their seeds from the
birds. These scarecrows resemble those found in other
lands, but are kept perpetually moving, operated by the
brooks and the many little streams in the region. A
mechanism as ingenious as it is simple transmits the
energy of the streams to the scarecrows through a system
CON'D ON NEXT PAGE

STAIRWAY OF THE GIANTS (Continued)
of cords. In some cases, the moving scarecrows may be
as far as 800 yards from the water.
While the Kalinga ricefields are not as spectacular as
those of the Ifugaos and the Bontoks, they are also
remarkably well maintained. The homes and villages of
these mountaineers are among the cleanest and best kept
in the world. Yet it is not uncommon to hear certain
city-dwellers refer to these tribesmen as "savages." It
is a pejorative and unjustified label for people who are
among Asia's most highly skilled farmers and who
have been able to create and to preserve such gigantic
works of engineering.
Its origin may lie in the fact that for centuries, Kalin-
gas, Bontoks, Ifugaos and other tribes were perpetually at
war and, as a sign of victory, the men returned to their
villages with the heads of enemies slain in battle. This
gave them the name of head-hunters. However barba¬
rous a custom it may have been, it certainly was not
unique in the annals of warfare and it has been aban¬
doned for many years.
It is even said that the introduction of baseball and
football among the Luzon mountaineers broke them of
their habit of collecting heads. This seems to correspond
to the theory of an American administrator of fifty years
ago who wrote that head-hunting was not always an
integral part of tribal warfare but, more often, a sport
where two rival teams deliberately accepted the supreme
risks of this combat. At the end of the "match", heads
were counted in the same way as goals at a football match,»
If these mountaineers are still called "primitives" and
"savages" it may be because of the regrettable habit of
certain "civilized" people in thus describing others who
wear only a minimum amount of clothes. The farmers in
the Upper Bontoc Valley have to work in extremely tough
conditions under a blazing sun. They believeand they
are logically correct: that there is no need to wear
trousers and shirts which could only hinder them in their
work. But it is ridiculous to use the term "savages" in
referring to peoples capable of such achievements.
18

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
PM
CENTURIES OF PATIENT WORK went into
the making of these ricefield terraces which climb
up the mountainsides from the valley floors to
heights of nearly 7,000 feet. Hardworking and
skilful farmers, the mountain dwellers of Bontok
are also expert masonsthey need to be with
literally thousands of miles of terrace walls to
maintain. Kalinga village home (right) with its
plaited facade testifies to their skill in yet another
craft. Above right, with his bow and his axe, this
young man of Bontok has a rather forbidding
appearance. These mountain people are, In
fact, very friendly and hospitable to strangers.
19
