28

QUALUNG TO BATHYSCAPH
DIVING SAUCER, seen here resting on the ocean
bed, might, well be called the helicopter of the
deepit is light, extremely man and,
down to depths of 1,000, ft. can " land " anywhere
A cloud of air bubbles rising from his aqualung,
Commandant Cousteau (author of the article on this
page) writes last minute instructions for the crew
of the saucer, which he will hold up to one of the
portholes. This French research vessel, now being
used for undersea exploration, weighs only three
and a half tons and can easily be stowed in the
hold of its mother ship, the research vessel, Calypso
(above left). It accomodates an observer and a
pilot, seen (below right) peering from a porthole
after the saucer's hatch has been clamped down.
Photos © Les Requins Associés, Paris
' 1""~«&B»»fc,
by
Jacques-Yves Cousteau
u nul our day, the oceans have
always raised huge barriers to
man's curiosity and understanding. Enormous distances
and stormy weather made early navigation uncertain
and perilous. For the diver the sea was a hostile environ¬
ment which discouraged or limited his daring. And even
the fisherman, who draws his food from the deep, is still
compelled to grope blindly the only hunter in the world
who does not see or who does not know his quarry.
Finally, the oceanographer still lowers his instruments
more or less haphazardly, rather like an explorer setting
out to discover a new continent with modern equipment,
but with his eyes blindfolded.
Seeing under water, in order to be better able to under¬
stand and interpret what we are doing, will be an obvious
necessity tomorrow. Only yesterday, it was an impos¬
sibility; today, it represents a conquest which, while barely
begun by self-contained divers, has just been completed
with the historic descent of the bathyscaph Trieste.
It is now possible for us to descend, to observe and to
take action at any depth.
From the surface to a depth of 40 metres, there are
fifteen million cubic kilometres awaiting the self-
Commandant Jacques-Yves Cousteau, world famous for his
Calypso undersea expeditions, is co-inventor of the Aqua-Lung,
"the passport to inner space," and director of the Océanographie
Museum at Monaco. He is president of the World Underwater
Confederation.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

UNDERSEA CONQUEST (Continued)
contained diver. This is the sea's most living layer the
one that washes the coasts, the one where nearly all the
plant life of the oceans is produced by photosynthesis.
Life here obeys the alternation of day and night, it follows
the rhythm of the seasons. At sunset, hosts of animals
rise from depths as far as 600 metres down to come close
to the surface and feed on microscopic algae or wage
silent combats. At dawn, all these intruders, fearing light
for various reasons, disappear back into zones reached
only by a dim glow.
Most of the time, sea water is clear. In the open sea,
it is not unusual to find underwater visibility of more
than 60 metres. There, sight is a vital and perhaps a
predominant sense. The diver, equipped with a mask,
can enjoy sight on equal terms with the fish. He feels
reassured and at ease; often, he even feels daring.
Crystal waters turn milky
when the sea is in bloom
The crystal of the ocean waters turns milky in .the spring
when the sea is in bloom. Along coasts battered by
breakers and washed by tides, water is often rather
clear. But near harbours and estuaries, countless particles
in suspension diffuse the light and at times divers cannot
even see a hand in front of them. In these troubled
waters filled with alluvial material or small grains of sand,
many micro-organisms die because of their vulnerability
to such conditions. Certain algae and most corals cannot
survive here. But fish sometimes teem in such waters,
either because of fear or hunger. Their eyes are of no
use in such "foggy" conditions but other senses take over:
for example, there is the sense which enables them to
interpret the slightest pressure wave and tells them all
that is going on in the fog.
In the "sunny layer," divers equipped with breathing
apparatus can stay down for an average of twenty minutes
and enjoy considerable security and freedom of movement.
Diving to a depth of forty metres, is becoming so simple
that it is no longer an affair for professionals alone. It
is a great deal easier to teach diving to a geologist than
to teach geology to a diver!
Milne Edwards was the first man to dive with a helmet
and make observations of interest to marine zoology.
Later, Pierre Drach pioneered scientific research with free-
diving apparatus. Under his leadership, the divers of
the Calypso methodically gathered harvests in the Red
Sea in 1951. In Germany, Hans Hass inspired university
men to become divers. In the United States, the Woods
Hole Océanographie Institution trained an underwater
photography, and exploration team; at the Scripps
Institute in California, young scientists dived to dis¬
cover new species, geologists observed and filmed the
phenomenon of cascading, measured the resistance of
sediments on the spot and studied an underwater canyon.
In the Mediterranean, underwater archeology was born.
Applied to the hunt for oil, geological prospecting has
made use of self-contained divers whether in the Persian
Gulf or the Gulf of Mexico. Diving has rapidly become an
indispensable tool for the scientific exploration of the sea;
its use is already being extended to polar expeditions.
Let us end with a comparison: on land, in our own
element, it can be said that the volume of space actually
inhabited is that of a layer going from the ground to
the tops of the highest trees. That adds up to about
four million cubic kilometreshardly more than a quarter
of that upper layer of the sea accessible to divers!
Below 40 metres, light seems to come from all sides:
there are no longer any shadows. When you look up to
the surface, you can no longer make out the reassuring
gleam of the sun. Self-contained divers breathing air
begin to feel the first attacks of "depth drunkeness"in
other words, nitrogen poisoningwhich threatens their
safety by dulling their instinct for survival... pressure,
shadows and cold underscore the hostility of the marine
world to man. Around 300 metres, in the visible part of
the spectrum, there is only a pale light, sufficient to
30
make out objects a short ' distance away once your eyes
have become accustomed to the darkness. Beyond that
it is practically night.
The "twilight zone" of eighty million cubic kilometres
includes all of those provinces of the sea known as the
continental shelf. Often, it infringes upon the steep slopes
of the talus. This extremely rich zone is still not very
well known even though it is the most widely used area for
deep-sea fishing. The continental shelf represents 8 %
of the surface of the sea; that is, an area slightly smaller
than Asia.
Self-contained diving apparatus has enabled us to enter
the twilight layer: breathing air, Italian divers have
managed to reach a depth of 120 metres for a few seconds.
With a mixture of helium and oxygen, an Englishman
has gone down to 165 metres. But these forays must be
classed as isolated feats and a few seconds at such a
depth must be paid for with hours of decompression
under medical supervision. Between 40 and 300 metres,
the explorer must protect himself with a rigid shell;
either a sphere hanging from a cable or, even better,
small free-moving submarines.
The French Office Française de Recherches Sous-
marines (O.F.R.S.) and the research ship Calypso have
just successfully put into service such a submarine at
depths down to 300 metres. Its flattened shape has earned
it the title of "diving saucer." The saucer only weighs
three-and-a-half tons, it is easily stowed in the .hold of
a ship 40 metres long, and it accomodates two persons, a
pilot and an observer. It can remain submerged more
than twelve hours and it has enough electrical energy
to run six hours under normal conditions. Its speed is
modest (3 kilometres an hour) but adequate for ex¬
ploration. It is propelled by hydrojets and the shape of its
hull was designed for extreme maneuverability. It is
equipped with a gyro-compass, sounding apparatus in
three directions, a radio-telephone, a tape recorder,
cameras to take still and motion-pictures, and a "hydraulic
hand" to take samples.
Strange attacks of dizziness on
the brink of a submarine gulf
Practically speaking, the saucer is the equivalent in
the twilight layer to self-contained diving apparatus
in the sunny layer. After sixteen test and training
dives off the West Indies, the Cape Verde Islands and
Corsica, the first saucer immediately began its scientific
career. Professor Edgerton of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and Professor Pérès of the Faculty of Aix-
Marseilles in France went down to make observations,
and scientists from many countries will follow in their
wake beginning this summer. In the very near future, the
twilight layer will be invaded by a number of submarines
of the "'diving saucer" class.
When, aboard a diving saucer, you reach the edge of
the continental shelf, you are struck by the abruptness
with which the floor of the sea suddenly falls away.
Under the bright gleam of your searchlights, the bottom
disappears into the blue. You have to reason with yourself
to fight off a feeling of dizziness. Then you put your
bow down, on occasions as much as 30 or 35 degrees, to
follow the slope downwards. Its surface is often scarred
by underwater canyons, abrupt and extremely narrow,
which sometimes have steps cut into their walls like giant
staircases. Over such terrain, the best echo sounders in
the world are unable to transcribe what you see through
the portholes of a submarine designed for exploration.
But, at 300 metres, you must stop and turn the job to a
craft which does not yet exist. However, the two bathy¬
scaphs conceived by Professor Piccardthe F.N.R.S. III
and the Italian "Trieste," (later acquired and transformed
by the U.S. Navy)are capable of descents to depths of
4,000 metres just as if they were lifts without any cables.
Twice, I was able to go down in a bathyscaph with
Commandant Houot in the Toulon canyon. Sometimes
broken up into tormented shapes, sometimes covered with
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
French Navy and National Geographic Magazine
I Les Requins Associés, Paris
SHADOWY MASS in the water (above)
is the hull of the French Navy's bathyscaph
F.N.R.S. 3, built seven years ago according
to the design of Professor Piccard, creator
of the bathyscaph Trieste. Ghostly looking
web-footed figure is one of a team of
aqualung divers which carries out safety
check before vessel plunges to the depths.
When bathyscaph wishes to return to
surface ballast is dropped by electroma¬
gnets activated from inside the hull.
Divers doublecheck that locks on electro¬
magnets have all been removed. If even one
failed to work bathyscaph crew would be
trapped below the surface. Left, sub¬
marine "scooter." Powered by an electric
motor, it can propel an aqualung diver for
two hours at a speed of three knots.
31

UNDERSEA CONQUEST (Continued)
Drawing by Barney M. Reid © Navy League of the United States, I960
RECORD PLUNGE into the ocean depths was made on January 23, 1960 by the bathyscaph "Trieste"
which went down seven miles below the surface of the Pacific in the Marianas Islands, into the
deepest trench so far known to man. Locked in a windowed gondola, 6 1/2 feet in diameter, the
crew of two looked out on a scene of mysterious life none had ever witnessed before.
mud, these "pre-continents" plunge sharply down toward
the flat and uninteresting stretches of the seabed.
The great ocean basins, occasionally pierced by isolated
rocky peaks, volcanoes or even mountain ranges, are
mainly huge sedimentary plains. This zone, probably rather
monotonous in appearance, is found at depths of between
3,500 and 6,000 metres. It alone accounts for 67 % of the
total area of the seas and the oceans.
Earlier, I defined the boundaries of the "medium
depths" as 300 and 4,000 metres. While the upper limit
corresponds clearly to a physical and geological, dis¬
continuity, the lower limit, on the contrary, is dictated
only by our present-day technical possibilities.
So far, the "medium depths" have been penetrated
about sixty times by the F.N.R.S. III and the "Trieste,"
two bathyscaphs based upon the principle of a large
float filled with petrol to give buoyancy to a heavy steel
nacelle. These heavy, delicate and not very mobile devices
are the glorious pioneers of deep-water exploration.
But their principle goes back to pre-war days, then-
construction was considerably delayed and, in fact, they
were obsolete as soon as they were born.
Today, we can and we should be able to get along
without any float at all down to a depth of 4,000 metres.
Techniques of building hollow structures have made such
progress that small submarines are to be built which
will resist pressures of 400 atmospheres with an acceptable
safety coefficient, but still with sufficient buoyancy.
The "Aluminaut" project in the United States is taking
advantage of this technical progress by using light alloys.
With three men on board and a full range of scientific
apparatus, the "Aluminaut" will be able to cruise the
sea several thousand metres down and will be small
enough to be transported aboard a medium-sized océano¬
graphie vessel.
In France, the O.F.R.S. is studying a project for an even
more maneuverable submarine, in which extensive use
is made of the most recent discoveries in plastics. This
technical research has been made easier by the cal¬
culations of a safety co-efficient which becomes lower and
lower as operational pressures rises higher and higher
(this is quite logical because relative changes in pressure
caused by an accidental change in depth are smaller for
32
a submarine designed to operate at 4,000 metres than for
one built for 400 metres.
Until the "Aluminaut" or similar devices go into
service the bathyscaphs have opened new vistas in our
knowledge of the "medium depths." The scientific balance
sheet of the F.N.R.S. 3 is firmly on the credit side.
Among the numerous observations made through its thick
plexiglass portholes, two general conclusions have been
brought out: in the open sea, the density of plankton
certainly does not decrease regularly with an increase in
depth (it is not at all rare to run through an extremely
dense layer of plankton at 1,000 metres); and, secondly,
the bottom of the sea, covered most of the time with thick
layers of sediments, is the scene of intense underground
life. There is hardly a square, yard without holes small,
medium-sized or large and these holes are dens whose
inhabitants are still very much of a mystery to us.
The great ocean trenches (the Mariannas, the Philip¬
pines, Tonga, Porto Rico, etc.) are narrow furrows, located
mainly in the Pacific. Their realm, properly speaking,
can be said to begin at a depth of 6,000 metres and
represents only 2 % of the total area of the sea. But they
are critical spots on the earth's crust where it is either
very thin or the scene of intense seismic activity. The
systematic study of these deep trenches is of . such great
interest that "superbathyscaphs" are on drawing-boards
or even under construction.
These superbathyscaphs will be large vessels with
enormous floats containing petrol or other light sub¬
stances, and having spherical hulls with room for a large
amount of scientific apparatus. They will have enough
power for a satisfactory range and cruising speed. The
vast adjacent provinces between 4,000 and 6,000 metres,
which the submarines of the "Aluminaut" type will be
unable to probe, will be the hunting grounds of the
superbathyscaphs.
The "Trieste," equipped with a special spherical nacelle,
was able to descend into the bottom of the Marianna
Trench, thus conquering the "Anti-Everest." It was a
landmark in the history of oceanography, but though
remarkable, this performance was really something of a
special exploit. The "Trieste" is actually very poorly
adapted to the path which it has opened to its successors,
the superbathyscaphs.
