CHILD AESOPS OF THE CAMEROONS
THE CROCODILE AND THE BULLOCK THE HORSE AND THE DONKEY
The bullock is thirsty and goes to the river to drink.
He goes into deep water. A crocodile seizes him by
the hoof and pulls him towards the bottom. The
bullock pulls hard too .
The crocodile is, very strong. But so is the bullock.
Who will win?
The bullock says to the crocodile: "Cayman !, just
look at the sun."
While the crocodile is looking at the sun, the bullock
gores him with his horn.
The bullock is the winner.
Dairou Issa (Tcholiré School)
The donkey goes into the horse's stable. He says to
the horse:
"I'm stronger than you. Let's have a fight."
The donkey gives the horse a kick. The horse grabs
the donkey's ears with his teeth and pulls hard.
Now all donkeys have long ears. They don't fight
horses any more.
Isma, aged 10
THE FAWN AND THE FLY
The fawn and the fly lived together in the forest.
"Let's play at hide-and-seek", said the fly. "She who wins
will be queen of the forest. You go and hide and I will look
for you." Then the fly settled on the back of the fawn's head.
The fawn hid herself inside a thick bush and called out: "Where
am I?"
"There you are, there you are", cried the fly. "I've won.
Now I will go and hide."
Then she flew back and settled again on the fawn's head.
"Look for me," she caDed. The fawn looked everywhere, but
never found the fly.
At the end of the day the fly came out from her hiding place
and said:
"You never found me, so I am queen of the forest."
Richard Kamga (Gauganté School)
THE MOUSE AND THE BIRD
The mouse and the bird are friends. They decide to build a
house in the bush. The mouse says to the bird: "You go and
collect the wood and I'll go and fetch the grass."
While the mouse looks for the grass a snake catches it and
eats it up. While the bird is fetching the wood a man catches
it and gives it to his child to play with.
The mouse and the bird did not build their house. They are
not even friends now. The mouse lives in the ground. The bird
lives in the sky.
Hamadou Daboré, aged 9
THE CORMORANTS
One day I go with my mother to fetch water from the
river.
I see a cormorant fishing. I take a pebble and throw
it at him.
The cormorant rises with a big fish in its beak. Then
it flies along just skimming the water.
Another cormorant appears. He says to the first: "Wait
for me." Then he dives into the water and comes up
with a fish. He shares it with his friend.
When they have finished eating the fish, the two birds
fly away, singing as they go.
Wabili, aged 9 (Pitoa School)
Texts on this page are taken from Bibliothèque de l'Ecolier Africain,
published by Editions du Groupe Camerounais d'Education Moderne.
13
