The Little World of Asia's Teachers
Aivisit to a few ."'ordinary" schools in
the East inspires not only sympathy
.for the teachers, but also admiration
for these poorly but neatly dressed men and women, who
are at their schools from an early hour each day. Two
things about the average school strike one immediately:
it is too small for its purpose and it is forbiddingly austere.
It may be a straw hut built by the village council or a
group of small mud houses or, more often, a "modern"
building of bricks and cement, which means it is even
less attractive with its treeless courtyard and its dusty
school garden.
A glance round the classroom offers a neat but bleak
perspective of benches, a dais and a single window. There
is nothing to relieve the bare walls; not even a map or
a picture. But the teacher is not likely to be conscious of
this emptiness; his own home is just as austere, and even
the best furnished living-room in the neighbourhood
probably has nothing but a calendar or a religious print
by way of ornament. A classroom with a blackboard, a
few chalks and a sponge is relatively well-off.
The teacher has probably never heard of visual and
audio-visual aids to teaching. If you mention these
things to him, he will probably nod and smilingly tell you
/
Unesco-P.A. Pittet-
troyed during the last war. To meet any sudden Increases In enrolment
or when typhoons have damaged school buildings, they also build
"temporary" schoolhouses of light materials such as softwood and bamboo.
that they are not yet available in that part of the world.
Here, in fact, even the basic equipmentmaps, wall
charts and large sheets of drawing paper are all difficult
to come by, if indeed the school has any sort of paper
other than perhaps the portrait of the Chief of State
which hangs in the headmaster's office. A radio? Yes!
one would be useful, but there is no mains electricity so
it would have to be a battery set. And anyway there is
no one to look after it or to repair it if needs be.
And here are the children a hundred or so, apparently
of all ages between 7 and 14, squeeze themselves onto the
narrow benches. How still and well-behaved they are;
just as quiet in the stifling summer heat as they are in
the monsoon season or in the chill cold of winter.
They work hard on the whole, the teacher tells you,
or at any rate they are eager to learn, but after a few
hours they get tired and their attention wanders. "The
trouble is," he adds, "that some of them don't get enough
to eat. They come from poor families. If only we could
help to feed them." (School canteens are practically non¬
existent in Asia. Among the exceptions: Ceylon, where
each child receives a cup of milk and a bread roll each
day; Korea, where in many schools children are given
powdered milk, supplied, as in Ceylon, by American funds;
the Philippines, where a cheap meal is available; Madras
State, where subsidies enable school committees to serve
meals an experiment which the State intends to develop
until 30% of schoolchildren will be getting one meal a
day in 1966.
As to the children's health, all the teacher can tell you
about it is that on the whole it is good as good as can
be expected. There are no files to supply further informa¬
tion and no doctor to look after the children, although
nearly all the countries are trying to expand their medical
services.
Tihe next thing that strikes you are
the obvious differences in size
and apparent maturity among the
children in the classroom. You are not mistaken; they
are of all ages. Some are perhaps brighter than others
and each year they go on to a higher class until they
finish the school programme. But these are not the
majority.
"'There are always some who stay in the class for
another year," says the teacher; "that is something that
really plagues us in this school." It is also the constant
headache in many other primary schools thoughout Asia.
Far too many children stay for one, two or even three
years in the first class, eventually struggle into a more
advanced one, then become discouraged and give up.
The children who "stick" in the same class for several
years and those who give up altogether are symptomatic
of more deep-seated ills: irregularity of attendance,
ineffective teaching and the unsuitable orientation of the
school programme.
As for the other symptoms, the teacher will sometimes
admit that the lessons he gives, as well as those of his
colleagues could, in principle, be improved. (An inspector
will tell you how difficult it is to overcome the placid
resistance of teachers who have been trained according
to old-fashioned methods.) But to improve teaching
takes time. The programme has to be carried out as
well as may be, mostly without guidance; there are few
inspectors and these confine their activities to inspecting.
The school programme is packed with subjects; nothing
has been forgotten. First come languages (generally at
least two have to be learned and in some countries as
many as five). Then come arithmetic, history, geography,
object lessons and elementary science; next the arts and
manual work, such as agriculture; drawing, singing,
dancing, sports and gymnastics; and what some
countries consider a basic subject religion or civics and
ethics. "It is a great deal for one man to cope with,"
says the teacher. It is. also a great deal for the children
to cope with, and they too are likely to lose themselves
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ASIA'S VICIOUS CIRCLE (Cont'd)
15 nations plan a school revolution
in this labyrinth of subjects, loosely related to each other
and still less related to the local life.
Nowadays, however, some countries do encourage the
use of active methods: "projects" or practical tasks are
carried out in the community schools of the Philippines,
"co-ordinated education" in India's new schools, and
"interest centres" form part of the programme in some
Laotian schools. Usually, the good pupils learn everything
by heart, and unfortunately they are not alone in thinking
that this is the best way of passing examinations.
Active methods which make demands on intelligence
rather than memory and which aim at developing
initiative and a spirit of co-operation should be applied by
teachers having a broad general culture and proper peda¬
gogical training, which are not required to the same
extent when traditional methods are used. They also
require much more classroom material pictures, photo¬
graphs, equipment of all kinds and, above all, plenty of
books.
These same methods encourage children to choose their
own reading matter. This very idea is enough to make
the teacher of our "ordinary" school anywhere in Asia
raise his hands to heaven. Choose what they would like
to read? Why, he himself has only a handful of books
and his pupils have to make do with the unique textbook
which serves them throughout one year a textbook
sometimes shared by two or three children. One reason
for this terrible shortage is that during the past ten years
it has been necessary .to translate into national or local
languages books which were only available previously in
English, French or Dutch. Another is that Asia is short
of paper. Finally, however cheap the textbooks may be,
there are always people and communities for whom they
are too dear.
These then are the conditions in
which the teacher each day carries
out the job entrusted to him by
society, in the hope that from the classroom will emerge
younger generations less shackled to a particular destiny
and better fitted for the tasks of their time. And perhaps
before his day is over, the teacher will have run an adult
education class or .stopped by at the town hall where he
acts as secretary. Finally, he will be free to go home,
a home in all probability devoid either of .comfort or
charm.
For teachers are still poorly paid in some Asian countries
less well paid than other civil servants of similar
status. And the teacher's social condition depends very
largely on his economic situation. Nor is it merely a
question of his personal well-being: at a time when
compulsory primary education is coming into its own, the
teacher must have an adequate standing in society. If
he is treated as an unimportant, minor official, it will be
all the harder for him to create the respect and desire for
knowledge which Asian countries are seeking to inculcate
in even the remotest villages.
The educational picture of Asia is changing all too
rapidly for it to be summed up briefly. The important
fact which stands out is that the peoples and
governments are resolute in their determination to
vanquish the many obstacles to educational progress. A
veritable revolution lies ahead for the under-equipped
countries and their largely illiterate populations. But it
will be a peaceful and calculated revolution which, in some
countries, has been planned to the last detail.
In India, for example, educational projects are drawn
up by the governments of the different States and co¬
ordinated in an over-all plan by the Ministry of Educa¬
tion. India's Third Five-Year Plan (1961-66) which has
just been completed, aims at making primary education
compulsory for all children from 6 to 11 and at increasing
the school population to 54 million. The final goal for
India is free and compulsory primary education up to the
age of 14. In Pakistan, the government has set up a
National Education Commission which recently published
a complete report on education at all levels.
12
Plans have also been .drawn up by ministries or
planning councils and commissions in Afghanistan,
Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, Korea, Iran and Viet Nam. In
some countries, recently created planning and statistical
departments are still not properly equipped for their job.
But the need to methodically plan the extension and
reform of primary education is now universally recognized.
This was apparent when representatives of Asian States
met at Karachi this year at the UNEsco-sponsored
conference which produced a work plan designed to
ensure "universal, free and compulsory education in Asia."
The first of the 15 objectives in this remarkable pro¬
gramme is to ensure at least seven, year primary educa¬
tion for all children within the next 20 years. It is a
tremendous task and must be carried out stage by stage.
Thus, the second aim is to raise the number of primary
school pupils to 11 per cent of the population in 1965,
to 14 per cent in 1970, to 17 per cent in 1975 and,
eventually, to 20 per cent in 1980.
Five objectives concern teachers: there should be one
teacher for 35 pupils. All teachers should have a good
secondary education plus at least two years' professional
training. Within five years enough training colleges and
special courses are to be established to produce the
qualified teachers which the development programme
requires. Teacher training colleges will have specialized
instructors in the proportion of 1 for 15 student teachers.
In its budgetary provision, the plan envisages the
increasing of recurring expenditures to 10 dollars per pupil
in 1965, to 12 dollars in 1970, to 16 in 1975 and to 20 in
1980.

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
With Its 90 million inhabi¬
tants spread out over the
world's largest group of
islands, Indonesia needs to
train a vast army of teachers.
Right, students in a handi¬
crafts class at a teacher-
training college; below, op¬
posite page, preparing a silk
screen for the production
of charts at a Teaching
Aids Centre in Bandung.
Photos Unesco-Pierre Pittet
Schools to be built must have classroom areas calculated
on the basis of 1 square metre per pupil; enough equip¬
ment, furniture and teaching materials for these schools
must be provided and adequate administration and inspec¬
tion services created. Accomodation must be found for
50% of the teachers. More money must be spent to raise
the level of instruction in teacher training colleges: 125
dollars per year per pupil in 1965, rising to 200 dollars in
1980. Last, but not least, the plan emphasises the urgent
need to produce books, for teachers and pupils alike.
What is the real significance of this plan and what will
it cost?
B Y 1980 it is estimated that the total
population of these 15 Asian countries
will have reached 1,185,000,000. This
means .that in 20 years time these countries should
be ready to provide 7 years' primary education for 237
million children (compared with 4 or 5 years currently
provided for 60 to 65 million).
A vast army of teachers will be needed to cope with
this teeming school population. The bulk of the colleges
where they will be trained are still to be built and staffed.
When they are operating, it is calculated that these
schools will have to train 286,000 teachers each year by
1965, 388,000 before 1970, and 599,000 each year between
1975 and 1980, when primary education in the 15 countries
will be needing the services of about 6,770,000 men and
women teachers.
The total cost has been estimated at $ 56,217,000,000
spread over 20 years. It sounds like a frightening amount
of money, but in point of fact it is only enough to pay
for a modest project: to provide for Asian children during
the next 20 years means of education that are today
considered inadequate for Western children.
Furthermore its full achievement will cost these
countries annually 5 dollars per head of population. This
is about the same as is now being spent in Ceylon on all
levels of education and probably less than one-tenth of
expenditure on primary education in the West. Compared
with the Asian plan to spend 20 dollars per pupil by 1980,
Venezuela currently spends more than 100 dollars.
In a unanimous recommendation, the Karachi
Conference suggested specific ways of raising money for
the plan: reforms making possible an increase in primary
education allowances; levying of taxes suited to local
conditions; special loans; appeals for voluntary contribu¬
tions from local committees. .
But the Conference insisted equally strongly on the
need for outside aid. If we have to rely solely on our
own national resources, said the delegates, we might just
as well give up the plan. In this case, compulsory
primary education for Asian children might become a
reality sometime in the 21st century. But the children
of Asia connot wait until then, and the delegates at
Karachi refused to consider such a possibility.
In their final recommendation, they declared, in part:
"The main method of ensuring this aid (outside financial
support) consists in bilateral and multilateral arrange¬
ments between the countries of the region and the
economically developed countries, and a further effort in
this direction should be made in the near future. It is
to be hoped that Unesco will offer its good offices to
encourage this assistance and, given the growing goodwill
of countries throughout the world, there is reason to hope
that the amount of such assistance will greatly increase
before long. The meeting also feels that Unesco should
encourage the creation of an international fund for
primary education designed to complete the bilateral and
multilateral agreements..."
Unless action is taken now, hundreds of millions of
children will still lack education ten years hence. It is
not these children who are to be pitied, but the adults
they are to become. Ignorance today will be misery
tomorrow. That is why the problem of education is one
confronting clear-thinking and responsible citizens of
every country on earth. On the solution of this problem
depends not only the future progress of Asia, Africa, Latin
America and the Middle East, but the prosperity and peace
of the whole world.
13
