ABU SIMBEL (Continued)
"Try to imagine the Cathedral of Notre Dame carved out of a
single block of stone... nothing in our part of the world can
convey an Idea of the labour that must have gone into this
gigantic achievement." Thus wrote the French author, Maxime
20
FIRST PHOTOGRAPH: 1850. This is the first photograph ever made of the Great Temple of Abu Simbel.
A daguerrotype, it was taken by Maxime du Camp in 1850. The façade lies half hidden under the sand which
obstructed the Temple so completely in 1817 that it lay hidden even though the Nefertari Temple was known.
When discovered, the 67-foot statues were so deeply buried that no one could tell if they were sitting or standing.

The Unesco Courler. February 1960
du Camp, after visiting Abu Simbel 100 years ago. Above
left, first panoramic photograph of Abu Simbel taken in 1905,
showing the river of sand flowing down between the temples.
Above, Great Temple (on left) and Temple of Nefertari today.
n September 1812, a 28-year-old Swiss
traveller named Johann Ludwig Burck-
hardt arrived in Cairo. His object was to
join a caravan going to Fezzan and from
there to explore the sources of the Niger.
While waiting for this opportunity to occur
he decided to travel up the Nile to see the
monuments of ancient Egypt which were then for the first
time being revealed to Westerners.
At this early period of the 19th century it was impossible
for Europeans to journey up the Nile by boat beyond the
town of Derr, some 150 miles south of Aswan. And no one,
until then, had yet undertaken the arduous journey by
land except one Englishman named Legh who in February
1813 had obtained permission to travel by camel to the
fortress of Ibrim, 15 miles or so south of Derr.
But Burckhardt was no ordinary European. He had
studied Arabic in London and Cambridge. He had spent
several years in Syria as well as the Lebanon and Pal¬
estine in the guise of a Mohammedan trader from India,
and had gained such an intimate knowledge of Arabic, of
Islamic religion and of the manners and customs of the
people that he had come to be considered as learned as
the Ulema themselves, if not more so. He was later to
become the first European to perform the rites of
pilgrimage at Mecca and adopted the name Ibrahim ibn
Abdallah (he is the famous "Sheikh Ibrahim").
And so early in 1813 Burckhardt decided to explore the
Nile valley south of Derr by land, and struck across the
desert with his camels, venturing into the Sudan as far as
Dongola well beyond the Third Cataract of Dal. On his
way southward he followed the right (East) bank of the
Nile, halting at Ibrim and then at the tiny hamlet of
Ferrayg where he inquired about the Pharaonic ruins
which might be visited in the region. He was told that
at a place called Ebsambal (Abu Simbel) just north of
Ferrayg, but on the other side of the river, there existed
a small temple. The inhabitants, it should be noted, spoke
of only one temple, and eyen a year later the people of
Derr and Ibrim told a traveller that only one existed.
On his return trip northward from the Sudan,
Burckhardt now followed the left (West) bank of the Nile
in order to explore the sites on that side of the river and
particularly Abu Simbel which no one had yet described.
On March 22, 1813 he made a halt on the plateau, left
his camels with his Nubian guide and went down into the
sand-choked ravine. He inspected the small temple (of
Nefertari) at his leisure and then, as time was passing,
prepared to rejoin his companion.
"Having, as I supposed, seen all the antiquities of
Ebsambal", he wrote in his travel diary, "I was about to
ascend the sandy side of the mountain by the same way
I had descended; when having luckily turned more to the
southward, I fell in with what is yet visible of four
immense colossal statues cut out of the rock, at a distance
of about two hundred yards from the temple..."
Almost totally buried in the sand for more than a
thousand years, the façade of the Great Temple of Abu
Simbel and as Burckhardt quite logically surmised an
edifice hollowed out of the rocky cliff were thus restored
to their rightful place as one of the most stupendous
monuments of ancient Egyptian architecture.
We do not know if he made a written report of his
discovery before returning to Cairo in June 1815. We do
know though that the British consul-general in Alex¬
andria at the time, Colonel Ernest Missett, whom
Burckhardt met, did speak of the find to others and
spurred interest in it. No longer was Nubia an unknown,
inaccessible region, and the path now was open for the
intrepid traveller to reveal its archaeological treasures.
Explorers were soon at the site but they were either
disheartened by the huge mountain of sand blocking the
façade or failed to get the local help to clear it. The
colossal facade was to wait until 1817 before its entrance
was first freed from the sand by Giovanni Battista Belzoni
himself a colossus of a man, six feet seven inches tall
and of amazing strength. Belzoni arrived at Abu Simbel
CONT'D ON NEXT FAGE

ABU SIMBEL (Continued)
Drawing by David Roberts. Photo Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
CARVED INTO THE MOUNTAIN: A drawing made in 1855 of the inner entrance hall of the Great Temple with
its eight colossal statues of Rameses II, each 30 feet high. Statues stand knee deep in the sand. Each is hold¬
ing the crook and the scourgethe two symbols of kingly power. To penetrate the temple the artist had to let
himself slide down the steep mounds of sand which blocked the doorway. Everything about the Great Temple Is
colossal. Carved out of solid rock it Is 108 feet high, 124 feet wide and goes over 200 feet into the mountain.
in September 1816 at the head of an expedition supported
and financed by the new British consul-general, Henry
Salt.
Like his predecessors he was dogged with difficulties and
the refusal of the local people to help. Finally on August
1, 1817 the Great Temple of Abu Simbel was officially
opened in the presence of Belzoni, Salt's secretary H.W.
Beechey and two Royal Navy captains.
Twenty-two days were needed to remove enough sand
to reach the entrance. For the first five days 100 local
workers did the clearing, and when they refused to go
on, Belzoni, Beechey, the two Navy captains, a Turkish
soldier and a Greek servant took over alone, working 10
hours a day with the heat averaging 112° F. in the shade
(44° C). They worked from dawn to eight in the morning
and from two p.m. (the mountain then shaded them)
until dusk. The sand removed rose up 50 feet.
As they were consolidating the menacing mass of sand
a toad emerged from the opening they had made in the
upper left-hand corner of the temple door. When the
creature had disappeared the whole team slid through
the small aperture, crawled over the sand barrier filling
the entrance corridor and followed the gentle slope down
to the interior hall with its Osirian pillars. By the light
of their torches and despite the smoke and stifling heat,
they gazed in awe at the colossal figures before them and
at all the reliefs they saw in the succeeding chambers.
One question was still unanswered: were the colossal
statues of the façade standing or sitting? This was
answered in the winter of 1818-1819 when a large expedi¬
tion entirely cleared the southern (extreme left) colossus.
22
As a safety measure the legs of the statue next to it were
also cleared thus revealing the now famous Greek
inscriptions dating back to the Nubian campaign of
Psammetichus II. (see page 39).
From then on, the great names in Egyptology visited
Abu Simbel and drew on its riches : Bonomi, Lane, Burton,
Wilkinson, Champollion, Rosellini, Hay, Lepsius, Mariette,
and many others.
Despite repeated clearing operations, the sands kept
blowing back into the Abu Simbel ravine from the
Western desert. In 1892 sand-diversion walls were erected
on the summit of the desert plateau. In 1902, when
the level of the Aswan dam was first raised, Gaston Mas-
pero, then director of the Egyptian Antiquities Service
instructed the architect Barsanti to reinforce these di¬
version walls. Thus, it was only in 1909-1910, when all
danger from the blowing desert had passed, that all the
sand was at last cleared by Barsanti from the four
colossi, from the terrace, the forecourt and the temple
approaches.
It is thus barely fifty years since the monumental
ensemble of Abu Simbel has really been revealed to us,
thanks to the successive efforts of these men. Had it not
been unknown and buried in the sand for so many cen¬
turies it might well have ranked among the Seven Wonders
of the world. From Burckhardt to Barsanti, travellers,
explorers and scientists of all nationalities followed each
other during the 19th century in order to free one of the
finest masterpieces of Pharaonic art from its tomb of
sand. Their example justifies the hope that a second
wave of international solidarity will save the great temple
of Abu Simbel from the watery grave that now awaits it.
