TWO LITTLE ROCKS. White and Negro children leaving
school arm In arm at Llttlerock, California, (left) contrast
strikingly with Negro students in Little Rock, Arkansas, escor¬
ted from classes under protection of Federal troops. Little
by
Cyril Bibby
5
, M ti(
here are very few places, even in
lands with a proud history of tolera-
. tion, where beneath the smooth
surface there is not some undercurrent of racial prejudice.
The Negro has the same rights of admission to hotels in
Britain as any other person, but he may frequently find
that all their rooms are "already occupied." The Algerian
may be a citizen of France, but his path will be harder
than that of a fellow-citizen of lighter hue. The Jew may
distinguish himself in an American university, but certain
student fraternities will be closed to him. And, con¬
trariwise, the Gentile may be held in low esteem by the
Jew, and the European despised by the very African or
Asian on whom he himself looks down.
One of the difficulties in any discussion of race rela¬
tions is that of definition. From a purely academic point
of view, it might be better to wait until biologists and
anthropologists and sociologists have produced a unani¬
mous definition of "race" but the matter is not simply
an academic one. Racial prejudice and discrimination are
present and urgent evils, and racial tension and friction
have mounted menacingly in our own generation. More¬
over, a firm belief in something which is not a fact is
itself a fact, and there can be "racial prejudice" against
a group which is not a "race". We cannot, therefore,
delay action indefinitely while awaiting definition.
Perhaps an extreme case of this difficulty relates to the
Jewish people. They certainly do not constitute a race
in any proper sense, and it might be argued that anti-
Semitism should not be considered in the same context
as colour prejudice; but, despite the objective differences
between them, these two phenomena have many subjec¬
tive features in common. Nevertheless, it should be stated
explicitly that the joint treatment here of anti-Semitism
and colour prejudice must not be taken to imply that the

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
W-T/V
Rock was in the headlines just three years ago when Arkansas
resisted the historic U.S. Supreme Court decision calling for
the Integration of Negro and White children in schools. Negro
children now attend and leave classes unescorted. Despite
Photos © Planet News, London
other headline-making racial strife, progress has been made
in U.S. school integration. According to a recent report,
racial segregation, once the rule in the South, has now ended
in almost one quarter of the southern school districts.
distinction between Jew and Gentile is of the same nature
as that between Negroid and Caucasoid and Mongoloid.
All too often, when society is faced with a problem of
human behaviour or social relations, there is a tendency
to assume that its solution can be left to the schools.
Teachers, generally speaking, are conscientious people
with a sharp sense of social obligation, and they are
usually prepared to play their part in any urgent social
task. But their part in eradicating racial prejudice,
although important, is only a part ; and the school can
be wholly successful only if Society at large plays its
part also.
What the child does not know, and what even many
educated adults do not seem to know, is that it is quite
impossible to mark off mankind into a few simple and
clearly delineated groups on the basis of physical
differences.
The concept of "race", originating in a recognition of
obvious physical distinctions between different human
groups, has been developed by anthropologists as a device
for classifying populations. And, as often happens when
a concept is extended beyond its original range, this deve¬
lopment of the idea of race has produced many difficul¬
ties. Some anthropologists distinguish few "races", others
distinguish many: and it is hard to find two anthropolo¬
gists who completely agree in their classifications. More¬
over, the popular idea of racial classification is so out of
touch with the biological facts of human variation that
some people would prefer to abandon entirely the use of
the word "race" in connexion with the human species.
Unfortunately the word seems too well established for
abandonment; and alternatives such as "ethnic group" or
"genetically distinguishable populations" are too cumber¬
some for general acceptance into common speech. Thus,
the teacher had better turn his efforts to showing his
pupils how to use the word "race" more exactly and to
freeing their minds of the prejudices which the word so
often carries with it.
The teacher of biology, dealing in the ordinary course
of his lessons with species and their varieties, might well
consider the main divisions of mankind. The native Afri¬
can and the native European, the native of China and
the aboriginal native of Australia, differ sufficiently to
warrant their being placed in distinguishable subgroups
of the human species; and, providing that one does not
imagine that the boundaries between them are hard and
fast, these great subgroups may be not too inaccurately
called "races". Children are not ostriches, and honest
recognition of biological variation is not intolerance.
The teacher should explain that there is no biological
warrant at all for such terms as "the Aryan race", "the
British race", "the Jewish race", "the Arab race" and so
on. "Aryan" is a linguistic term for a hypothetical early
language, "British" is a political term for a particular
group of nations sharing certain historical traditions and
constitutional forms, "Jewish" is a socio-theological term
for people with an ancient religious tradition and with
recognizable customs, "Arab" is an ecological term for
those who lead or have comparatively recently led a par¬
ticular type of seml-nomadic life in the Middle East.
None of these are "Races" in any proper biological sense:
indeed, to speak of an "Aryan race" is as great an abuse
of words as to speak of a "black-skinned language", and
this should be made clear to children.
Similarly, the "Jewish race" is a myth. There are people
called Jews, and these people 'are sometimes recognizable
as such, but that does not make them into a race.
Style of dress, type of gesture, habits of hygiene, turns
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

RACE, PREJUDICE & EDUCATION (Cont'd)
of speech all these things, dependent on social envi¬
ronment rather than on biological heredity, combine to
facilitate recognition of the members of a cultural group.
And that is, primarily, what Jews are: a cultural group
sharing a common religious tradition, a common sacred
language, and a great wealth of common customs. There
are characteristically Jewish gestures, a characteristically
Jewish pattern of family life, certain characteristically
Jewish occupations and cultural Interests, but there is no
Jewish race.
The teacher, therefore, is on safe ground in correcting
any of his pupils who speak of a "Jewish race". One may
properly speak of "the Jewish religion" or of "the Jewish
people", but never of "the Jewish race".
Nor is this a purely pedantic point. It is partly because
the word "race" has been so loosely used in the past,
sometimes to denote biological groups and sometimes lin¬
guistic groups or religious groups, and because inexact
use of language encourages inexact ideas of all kinds, that
mankind has been led into racial prejudice and discrimi¬
nation. Intolerance and cruelty and exploitation are
things too ugly to be willingly accepted by most decent
people: they have to be wrapped up in an ideological
dressing which will disguise their ugliness, and muddled
ideas of race have often provided such a dressing.
At various times the French, the English and the Ger¬
mans have all been claimed as "Aryans," and in Nazi Ger¬
many the myths of an "Aryan race" and a "Jewish race"
were twin strands in an elaborate pattern of prejudice,
discrimination, cruelty and finally mass-murder. The
teacher who persuades his pupils to use the word "race"
exactly, is helping them also to see the world about them
more clearly. Moreover, an understanding of how loosely
and inaccurately the word "race" is often employed may
well be the first step to the exertion of some rational
control over the emotional feelings which the word so
often arouses.
JL, ic
eachers will often find that their pu¬
pils have fixed and oversimplified
ideas (stereotypes, as they are called)
about race. They may imagine, for example, that all Neg¬
roes and only Negroes have "woolly" hair, or that all
Chinese and only Chinese have "slanting" eyes or that all
Scandinavians are tall and blond and blue-eyed. We need
not be surprised that children in ethnically uniform areas
hold such ideas, for their personal contacts provide no
evident corrective to the verbal and visual over-simplifi¬
cations which impinge on them from all the media of
mass communication. It is, however, a little more surpris¬
ing that children living in cosmopolitan cities, which count
people of all colours and ethnic origins among their citi¬
zens, may also have similar false stereotypes.
Evidently, social barriers may be almost as effective
obstacles to understanding as those of geography, and the
distance from Park Avenue to Harlem may in this sense
be as great as that from Berlin to Addis Ababa. Even
where children of different colours and different ethnic
origins sit in the same classroom, the scales of prejudice
may still so obstruct the pupils' vision as to prevent them
from recognizing what is plain there for them to see.
It is similarly easy to make false generalizations about
"racial character" on the basis of observed or Imagined
behaviour, and we may find many of our pupils with false
ideas of this kind. Thus, the European child may believe
that Negroes are lazy and violent in nature, the Gentile
child may imagine that Jews have natures mercantile and
mean, while the Jewish child may take Gentiles to be
crude and unimaginative. The child of the colonial settler
may assume that the natives are naturally unintelligent
and servile, while the child of the native may imagine
that the settlers are naturally harsh and overbearing.
Without denying that peoples vary in many ways and,
Indeed, while emphasizing that such variation may be a
source of great cultural richness the teacher can do
much to make his pupils aware of the unreality of most
stereotypes. "Racial character" is a concept which courts
confusion: the sooner children can be freed from it, the
better.
The idea of "race" is a very complex one, with elements
belonging to biology, psychology, sociology, anthropology,
geography and history; and it is quite impossible to give
any short account of it without running the risk of dan
gerous over-simplification. However, it is possible to clear
away fairly quickly some of the lumber of myth and
fallacy which obscures the essential facts. The major
fallacy which bedevils any proper understanding of the
situation is the simple but false idea that mankind can
be split into a number of quite distinct divisions characte¬
rized by clear-cut biological differences. Naturally, if a
school uses atlases which include population maps based
on the Blumenbach or similar system of "black, brown,
yellow, red and white races", the teacher will need to
point out their utter fallaciousness.
In fact, the biological classification of our species is a
matter of great complexity. If skin colour is taken as a
criterion, the natives of Africa and Australia fall in one
group and those of Europe in another; but, if hairiness of
body be the criterion, the European falls with the abori¬
ginal Australians, while the African must be placed in a
group apart. Use cephalic index as a guide, and one finds
long-heads and short-heads mixed up together the whole
DIFFERENT DOES
COI, London
NIGERIAN STUDENT Oladotun Okubanjo was recently
elected chairman of the Students' Union at the Ealing Technical
College, London, which has a student body of 8,000. Here
he presides over meeting of Union's Executive Committee.
Today there are more than 26,000 Commonwealth students
in Britain, including 8,000 from Nigeria, and 4,000 from India.
world over; use blood-group distribution, and yet other
affiliations are indicated.
A classification of mankind by one biological criterion
does not correspond with the classification which results
from using another criterion; and it is impossible to say,
of any one particular criterion, "This is the right one".
Recognizing this, anthropologists take account of all these
characteristics in combination; and, even then, it is still
very difficult to decide to what ethnic group some indi¬
viduals belong.
Racial prejudice is not inherent in the nature of hu¬
manity but emerges and gathers strength only in certain
social conditions. It Is, of course, a common observation
that members of any "in-group" tend to be prejudiced
against the members of an "out-group" conquerors
against conquered, old residents against newcomers, one
neighbouring tribe against another-^but this does not
mean that intergroup tensions are unavoidable. It is also
a fact that colour prejudice may be exhibited by those
whose skins are yellow or brown or black, as well as by
those whose skins are white, but this does not mean that
colour prejudice is innate. Indeed, infants of different
religions and different colours will commonly play unself¬
consciously together, only learning prejudice gradually
from their elders.

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
Although today few will be found to justify the grosser
forms of racial discrimination and exploitation, there is
still a fairly widespread feeling that "coloured" people
are in some way inferior to "white" people. And such is
the power of the preconceptions of the predominant group
that many "coloured" people themselves share this idea
of their inferiority. It is a feeling rather than a belief,
vague and ill-defined rather than clear-cut and definite,
based on prejudice rather than on reason. There is, in
fact, no very useful sense in which it may legitimately be
said that one ethnic group is inherently superior to
another.
The teacher has many opportunities to clarify the
muddied waters of popular belief. It is true that, during
recent centuries, the "pink" peoples have in general
reached a higher level of civilization (certainly of techno¬
logical achievements) than the browns and yellows and
blacks, but history shows that it has not always been so.
The English child, learning about the invasion of his land
NOT MEAN INFERIOR
USIS
FIRST DAY AT SCHOOL for Robert Brooks, a little Negro
boy, and one of the 3,600,000 six-year-old U.S. children who
were enrolled In the first-grade classes of the nation's schools
this year. Studies by U.S. psychologists show that white and
Negro children place less emphasis on race after they have
lived and played together in classrooms and summer camps.
by the legions of Julius Caesar, is usually told that his
forebears were stained with woad and roughly clad in
animal pelts, but he may be surprised to learn that Cicero
advised Atticus not to buy British slaves since "they are
so utterly stupid and Incapable of learning".
European children, and those of European descent,
might learn that during earlier centuries, when the lands
that are now Germany and France and Scandinavia were
backward and ignorant, there was a brilliant flowering of
Hellenistic culture in the North African city of Alexandria
and that in the Arab States the lamp of learning burned
brightly. In the "Middle Ages", Marco Polo travelled the
territories of Tartary and chronicled the wonders that
met his eye, and West Africa had its Ghana kingdom so
admired by Arab voyagers. Before the fifteenth century,
the African State of Benin was producing its little master¬
pieces of bronze and ivory; in the sixteenth, one of the
great centres of Moslem culture was the University of
Timbuktu; in the seventeenth, across the globe in China,
there was the exquisite civilization of the early Manchu
dynasty.
Cultural achievement at any one moment in history is
no evidence of innate superiority, but depends upon all
sorts of economic, social, political and geographical con¬
ditions. The idea that only the "white" peoples are capa
ble of high culture cannot withstand for a moment the
ineluctable facts of history: the teacher who presents the
facts to his pupils need scarcely draw the moral, for it is
manifest. Moreover, it is quite unjustifiable to assess the
level of a culture by reference solely to its technical
achievements.
Unfortunately, the textbooks used in schools do not
commonly consider questions of this sort: more often,
they tell whatever redounds to the credit of the country
in which they are written. No objective teaching of his¬
tory can exclude consideration of the enslavement of
- Africans and the exploitation of Asians by the powers of
Europe; nor, if it is to avoid one-sidedness, can It fall to
indicate that in earlier days Africans enslaved each other,
and Asians exploited Asians. But this is no reason for
failing to disclose the darker side of European dominance.
The good teacher will not allow himself to be circum¬
scribed by narrowly national books, and there are publi¬
cations available which will help him to teach history
more impartially.
Geography books, too, may be misleading. Not uncom¬
monly they imply, and in some cases explicitly state, that
one so-called "race" is superior to another. Especially is
this the case with textbooks used in the schools of a
colonial power, where the natives of an African colony
may be described as "child-like" and as having been
"uncivilized until the more energetic and intelligent white
man came".
In European schools, there is a tend-
v ency for textbooks to imply the infer-
.. iority of the Amerindians and Austra-
loids whom the Europeans decimated, of the Negroids
whom they once enslaved, and of the Asiatics whom they
in the past exploited. Similarly, some of the textbooks
commonly used in United States schools give inadequate
Information on ethnic matters and do little to promote
racial tolerance. They sometimes present a picture of
"the American way of life" which implies that it is
"white", Protestant and middle-class, and which omits all
reference to segregation and discrimination.
Nor is it only the text that may mislead in this way:
the camera can lie very effectively if its lens is suitably
pointed. Thus, if the only photographs of "Blacks" in a
geography book show them with mud-matted hair and
skewers through their noses, while the photographs of
"Whites" depict them in elegant linen and fine footwear,
an impression of Negro inferiority is almost inevitably
given.
Meanwhile, the commercial cinema misleads many a
child: on the screen, Negroes tend to appear either as
bloodthirsty warriors or as lovable children, Orientals
either as sinister plotters or as sleek sophisticates, and
non-Europeans generally as menial servants. All too
often, unfortunately, teachers tend to turn up their noses
at the local cinema and thereby abandon their pupils to
Its distorting influence. If teachers would make a habit
of discussing with their children the "fllm of the week",
they would find many an opportunity of correcting false
Impressions.
People may differ in all sorts of ways, but difference
is one thing and superiority is another. Red hair is
different from black hair, but is neither superior nor
inferior to It the two are different, but of equal status.
The same could apply to some mental differences. More¬
over, the teacher whose daily life is spent with children
of very different physiques, intellectual abilities and tem¬
peramental characteristics, and who yet tries to treat
them all as individual human beings with equal rights to
his care and consideration, will need no convincing that
the condemnation of racial discrimination does not
depend upon any proof that all ethnic groups have Iden¬
tical physical or mental or emotional endowments.
Very often, the warmly hero-worshipping mind of ado¬
lescence will be less vividly impressed by sustained and
reasoned argument than by striking individual examples
of physical, intellectual, temperamental and moral great¬
ness in people of different ethnic origins; and there will
be many opportunities in the school to mention examples
of outstanding achievement by members of various ethnic
and so-called "racial" groups.
Yet not too much should be made of this "'eminent
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

RACE, PREJUDICE & EDUCATION (Cont'd)
Ignorance, reservoir of racial prejudice
individuals" approach to the matter. In the first place it
is a simple fact that thus far in history there have been
comparatively few Negroes of the highest culture, and
many of them have been of mixed Negroid-Caucasoid
ancestry. Second, and more important, to overstress that
there are great Negroes and Asians' and Jews may seem
to imply that racial tolerance should be dependent on
such greatness, which is going a long way to grant one
of the very premises of racial bigotry.
It may, moreover, make some children of minority
groups feel that they must win acceptance in the school
by distinguishing themselves in some way, and thus pro¬
duce either excessive strain or objectionable aggressive¬
ness. In the case of the Jewish people in particular, their
history is so studded with human greatness that there
may be danger in stressing what is, for some Gentiles,
already an unconscious source of envy and resentment.
If, however, there Is evidence in the classroom of damag¬
ing Ignorance on this point, the teacher should certainly
quote one or two cases to illustrate Jewish ability.
I t has been remarked that "every
people has a right to have its scound-
. reis", and this puts the question in its
proper perspective. When a Jewish financier cheats his
shareholders or a Negro soldier rapes a girl, the words
"Jewish" and "Negro" are likely to figure prominently in
newspaper headlines; when the offenders are Gentile or
White, their ethnic affiliations are usually not mentioned.
This circular process of labelling the group with the
offences of a few delinquent members, and then labelling
the members of the group with the attached delinquen¬
cies, is responsible for the maintenance of much group
prejudice; and it is no more honest to seek to parallel the
process with the achievements of a few persons of
distinction.
The important thing is for our pupils to learn to judge
each individual as an individual neither owning the glory
nor bearing the shame of other individuals in his group.
And, most essential, the whole day-by-day conduct of the
school should be directed towards building up better ways
of thinking and feeling in general, so that the pupils
learn to think straight and feel charitably when con¬
fronted with any individual or group different from
themselves.
It is sometimes supposed that young children are
always free of racial prejudice, but this attractive picture
of childhood innocence scarcely corresponds with the
facts. From the very earliest days infants are imbibing
the implicit assumptions of the society in which they live;
and, if the social environment is one of racial discrimina¬
tion, it will be difficult indeed for a child to grow up
without taking it for granted that such a state of affairs
is part of the natural order of things.
In some ways, racial prejudice and discrimination today
play the same social role as did the persecution of the
Christians and Jews in Imperial Rome, the crusades
against the infidels in medieval Christendom, the inquisi¬
tion of heretics and the burning of witches. All such
attacks have these things usually in common they pro¬
vide a means of distracting the attention of the oppressed
from the defects of their oppressors, they offer the oppor¬
tunity of direct or indirect material gain, they serve to
"smear" a whole group of people indiscriminately and so
aid charlatans and witch-hunters in their nefarious
designs, and they provide a socially acceptable outlet for
feelings of frustration and aggression.
The early Christians of Rome were falsely accused of
obscenity, ritual murder and disloyalty, and the group-
prejudices of our own time are nourished by charges no
less false. If Jews can be blamed both as the internation¬
al capitalists and as the international communists for
intergroup prejudice knows no logic the common people
may be diverted from careful inquiry into the causes of
the calamities which befall them. If Negroes can be
stereotyped as stupid, a good excuse is provided for keep¬
ing them out of the skilled jobs desired by the "white"
workers.
10
If all Europeans can be labelled as "white devils", they
can more easily be cast out from Asian lands. If the
entire people of an African or Asian region can be cha¬
racterized as "terrorists", some sort of justification may
be provided for denying them self-government and the
protection of normal legal process.
Not only are fear and frustration potent sources of
aggression, but the situation may be aggravated by
feelings of inadequacy or guilt. One reason why anti-
Semitism so flourished in Germany may have been that
the German people, prevented by their late achievement
of nationhood from establishing a worldwide empire like
Britain's, found reassurance in the assertion of their
"Aryan" superiority. One reason why the Englishman,
racially tolerant at home, so often develops racial pre¬
judice in Africa and Asia, may be that there he represents
a dominant minority group and fears the potential rebel¬
lion of the subservient native majority a situation which
today exists very clearly in South Africa. One reason why
many "'Whites" from the Southern states of the U.S.A.
are so virulent in their expression of racial prejudice is
probably that, deep down, they feel guilty about the way
in which the Negroes have been treated.
Wherever erroneous stereotypes based on simple igno¬
rance betray themselves in the child's comments, the
teacher can supply the corrective in the form of further
Photo © Keystone
SWASTIKA-LIKE Crossed Circle is symbol of a
small racist fringe group in Britain which last year
staged a "Keep Britain White" meeting in Trafalgar
Square, London. (Above and top right, opposite page).
information. And, wherever such stereotypes are per¬
petuated by a pupil's refusal to recognize the facts, the
teacher can gradually open his eyes for him and gently
wash away the scales that cover them. There is,
admittedly, no certainty that what the teacher does in
the school to encourage an enlightened attitude to inter¬
group relations will have a permanent effect on pupils'
behaviour once they leave school.
But this is no reason for not performing the task that
lies to hand: after all, it is a commonplace in education
that we are uncertain what permanent effects this or that
element in schooling may have, but we do not for that
reason close down our schools. And in any event, con¬
trolled experiment has shown that it is in fact possible
to change children's racial attitudes quite considerably

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
Photo © Keystone
KEEP BRITAIN WHITE proclaims poster at London meeting protest¬
ing immigration of Negro British subjects from W. Indies and Africa.
Photo © Keystone
ANTI-NEGRO RIOTS like one seen here in Notting Hill, London
have often been the work of irresponsible Teddy boys and girls.
by means of carefully devised educational procedures in
the school.
The teacher will often find that his pupils' prejudices
have complex origins which are difficult to trace. For two
or three centuries the Western world has been washed by
the waves of racial and religio-racial discrimination, and
its waters have seeped into the very fabric of our social
thought. Thus, it will often be the faint whisper of pre¬
judice, rather than its strident clamour, which the
teacher with a sensitive ear will detect, and it Is a
whisper not easily stilled.
The blatant lie can be exposed as plainly false and the
crude political discrimination denounced as manifestly
unjust, but the delicate denial of human fraternity which
takes the form of not-quite-tfriendship is too subtle a
thing to be conjured away easily. Only by patiently
correcting month by month each minor manifestation of
prejudice, and by demonstrating year by year a genuinely
all-embracing acceptance of humanity, can the teacher
hope finally to free his pupils of this more tenuous type
of discrimination.
I
Photo © Keystone
BLACK AND WHITE can live together in harmony proclaims Lon¬
don picket group following of violence in which a Negro was killed.
t is important that the teacher should
provoke genuine discussion not for¬
mal debate, which often tends to
confirm speakers in their views and makes their abandon¬
ment a matter of loss of prestige encouraging the pupils
to express all points of view quite openly and freely. Any
too obvious or premature disapproval of undesirable opi¬
nions may lead to their repression, but will not secure
their eradication; and it is a poor service to ethnic under¬
standing merely to suppress views, leaving them still
potent and liable to break out with renewed virulence
after the child has left school.
Moreover, it must be remembered that the child who
exhibits prejudice is as much in need of help as the child
who is subjected to it, should be treated by the teacher
with the same sympathy and understanding, and in some
cases may actually need protection by the teacher from
the indignation of classmates who resent all racial pre¬
judice. The securer a child feels, the less emotional need
he will have to indulge in discrimination: and the teacher
must therefore take care, while indicating unambiguously
his own tolerance, not to appear to reject the prejudiced
pupil.
Each child's self-respect must be built up in every
possible way, and this can only be done if the teacher
tries to enter into the mind of his pupil, no matter how
much he may disapprove of its distortions and confusions
and contradictions. It is a painful process, as any honest
teacher will recognize from his own experience, to give
up prejudices behind which one has sheltered for years,
and we must not be surprised if our pupils offer uncons¬
cious resistance to efforts at their enlightenment. Any
sudden and ruthless stripping away of a child's protective
covering may in the long run do more harm than good;
and the teacher should seek to be not a bulldozer, to
demolish his pupils' illogicalities by brute force of argu¬
ment, but rather a lightning conductor by which their
emotional tensions and their accompanying prejudices
may safely leak away.
There is in the modern world altogether too widespread
a tendency to uniformity and conformity in all things,
and we are in danger of losing sight of the enormous
human potentiality for idiosyncrasy and originality. We
do not know what combinations of desirable character¬
istics, what possibilities of cultural diversity, may not
await us in a world which ceases to measure all men by
the yardstick of "white" ways but which, instead, encou¬
rages peoples of all pigmentations to develop to the fullest
their own innate qualities and to combine in the forma¬
tion of fresh mixtures. Teachers should not seek to mini¬
mize ethnic differences or to pretend that they do not
exist, but rather to emphasize the uniqueness of each
individual human person and to encourage children to
appreciate the value of human variation.
One element in racial prejudice is sometimes of an
aesthetic nature: the child brought up to admire Greek
statues and the paintings of the Italian Renaissance is
often conditioned against skins that are not white and
locks that do not flow. If, therefore, art teachers were
sometimes to deal with visual and plastic representations
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

RACE, PREJUDICE & EDUCATION (Cont'd)
of other physical types, it might do something to erode
racial prejudice. Once a person ceases to say, "I can't
tell one Japanese from another" or, "All Negroes look
alike to me", and instead begins to appreciate the beauty
of an almond eye and the delicate sleekness of an ebony
skin, he is on the way to overcoming any repugnance to
"yellows" and "blacks" which may have soaked into him
from the atmosphere around.
It is not unknown for children to agree in classroom
discussions that racial discrimination is wrong and racial
prejudice irrational, and even to learn in community study
a good deal about the factors influencing race relations,
and none the less to continue in their daily lives to exer¬
cise discrimination and display prejudice in all sorts of
little ways. There is a Chinese proverb which may be
approximately rendered, "If I hear, I forget; if I see,
I remember; if I do, I know"; and it is in action against
racial wrongs that children really learn racial Tightness.
Once a child has actually committed himself by assert¬
ing his friendship for a schoolmate of different colour,
once he has argued with his playmates that a child
hitherto racially rejected should be admitted to their
games, he has become emotionally involved in the struggle
for racial equality and has innerly identified himself with
those who insist on racial tolerance.
T-
pr
JLoi
hus. If the teacher can, without ever
essing any individual to the point
of resentment, encourage his pupils
not merely to talk about but actively to take part in a
programme of non-discrimination, he may achieve
something which no amount of mere moral exhortation
can bring about. Before many years have passed, the
pupils of the secondary school will be adult citizens of the
community, and while at school they should learn ethnic
equality not merely by precept but in practice.
It Is essential to remember that children, like their
elders, are reluctant to act alone. The individual with the
courage to flout the herd is a priceless asset to a commu¬
nity, for without such individuals a society ossifies. It is,
however, unrealistic to expect most pupils to adopt a
line of action distasteful to their closest friends; in the
main, a child's attitudes and acts are those accepted by
his playmates and classmates, his "peer-group." Recog¬
nizing this, the teacher who wishes to alter behaviour
will normally seek to influence the whole group rather
than an individual in isolation.
Yet the child is not constrained absolutely by his peer-
group: the behaviour of respected adults can set a most
effective example. If teachers seem to contract out of the
social situation, pupils can scarcely be blamed for doing
likewise. If teachers demonstrate by their actions their
concern for social righteousness, pupils will be encouraged
to do the same.
Finally, therefore, the teacher should have the temerity
to exercise his citizen rights. All too often, in many
lands, teachers tend to be somewhat retiring spending
their evenings and weekends with a few choice friends,
themselves not infrequently teachers too. Only rarely do
they join in the casual conversations of the local café or
public house, take part in politics and local government,
engage in friendly argument with miners and shopkeepers
and engineers. But those who remain within ivory towers
can do little to influence the affairs of the great world
outside, and the teacher who wishes to help his pupils
to a life full and rich and free must be prepared to share
in the shaping of the society in which they will live it.
GUIDEBOOK TO RACE
The above article is based on chapters selected from "Race, Preju¬
dice and Education" by Dr. Cyril Bibby, lecturer at the Institute of
Education, London University, and at the College of St. Mark and
St. John, London. Dr. Bibby discusses the reasons for racial prejudice
and what can be 'done about it. He gives the biological facts about
the divisions and variations of mankind, traces the growth of racial
discrimination and discusses the tangled emotions behind it. His
manuscript, which was commissioned by Unesco, was revised in the
light of comments by twenty-six experts from places as far apart as
Mexico, Poland, Canada, Germany and India. Published by Heinemann,
London, price 7/6.
12
Photos © Keystone
GERMAN YOUTH DEMONSTRATED EN MASSE against a
series of anti-Semitic incidents which occurred early this year.
Right, assembled before a synagogue In Berlin, ten thousand young
people vow to fight against any revival of anti-Semitism. The
demonstration followed a long night procession by young Germans
through West Berlin to protest "Against Racial Hatred" (banner,
above). Similar demonstrations took place in East Berlin where
young marchers (below) carried banner marked "Down with anti-
Semitism". The first racist incident occurred in Cologne on Christ¬
mas Eve when swastikas were smeared on a new synagogue that
the West German Chancellor had helped to dedicate three months
earlier. This was followed by an outbreak of similar incidents
not only in Germany, but also in other European countries and in
the United Statesoften the work of delinquents or cranks.
