VICTORY IN SIGHT OVER
THE BABEL OF BRAILLE
by Sir Clutha Mackenzie
In the century since Louis Braille invented his
ingenious "touch" alphabet of raised dots, a Babel
of Braille developed as his system was applied
in a variety of ways in different languages. In
1949 the Government of India asked Unesco to
take up the problem of the unification of Braille,
and rapid progress was made towards a broadly
uniform Braille system for all languages and
scripts. In 1952, a World Braille Council was
set up under the aegis of Unesco. Chairman of
the Council was Sir Clutha Mackenzie, himself
blind, who had been in charge of Unesco's work
in this field throughout this time. Here, Sir
Clutha describes some of the results that
have already been achieved through Unesco's
efforts to aid the unification of Braille scripts.
The task, to Which Unesco set its hand for two and
a half years from July, 1949, has brought rich rew¬
ards in the field of Braille reading and writing. It brought
an end to the long arguments over conflicting systems in
many Asian, African and Latin-American countries and at
the same time resulted in the rationalization of the systems
used in Yugoslavia and Spain. Through the generosity of
the American Foundation for Overseas Blind, Braille
presses have been established in many centres throughout
the world to print much-needed school text books, maga¬
zines and general literature; this has all gone along with a
big upsurge in the general rehabilitation of the blind of
these great areas.
I first encountered Braille conflicts in 1939 when, at the
request of the Government of Bombay, I studied the
schools for the blind in that Province. One of the most
glaring defects was the existence of two divergent Braille
systems in the city of Bombay itself with the result that
the children and ex-students of the two schools could not
read one another's Braille forms.
When I returned to India in 1942 to establish an Indian
St Dunstan's for the rehabilitation of the war-blinded, it
appeared that India had no less than eight rival systems.
These arose from the fact that early missions, in founding
small scattered schools, adapted Braille in their own ways
to local languages. About half of these systems followed
the original letters of Louis Braille, the gallant, blind
Frenchman who had designed the Braille alphabet in 1827.
As Indian languages, however, employ from fifty-five to
sixty-five letters, the possibilities of the twenty-six Roman
letters were soon exhausted; and almost no uniformity held
good among the remaining letters.
Braille, it should be explained, is comprised of the sixty-
three possible combinations of dots employed in the
domino sox (three dots high and two wide). This is
ample for a script of from fifty to fifty-five letters plus
punctuation and accent marks; but difficulties arise when
the letters exceed these numbers. The schools were all
alive to the grave handicaps this situation imposed, but
conference after conference failed to bring agreement.
The attitude most of the schools took up was that each
14

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
would be delighted to attain uniformity were its own code
accepted.
The Central Government's Department of Education
made a new approach in 1940 when it set up a special
committee to study the problem and to recommend a code
for Ail-India. It is accepted practice among modern
workers for the blind that Braille matters should be decided
by the users of the system, the blind themselves. The
Education Department, unfortunately unaware of this,
appointed four sighted men, only one of whom had any
extensive experience of Braille teaching.
Its report, published in 1943, only contributed to
further confusion by adding a ninth system. The findings
were referred to me in my capacity as secretary of a Joint
Committee of the Departments of Health and Education
appointed to report on the big question of the problems of
blindness in India. It was impossible to recommend this
new code as it complied with none of the basic rules of
the Braille system. Simply put, these were that the same
letter or the same or nearly similar sound of a letter should
everywhere be represented by the same Braille character.
Were the Indian blind to confine their reading and contacts
to only one language, this would be of little importance;
but the fact that the educated Indian blind almost invariably
learn at least one foreign language (and often two or even
three) makes this principle essential.
Another factor of importance is that most languages
employ "contracted Braille." With European languages
this form is based on frequency studies of the common
combinations of letters used as prefixes, suffixes and
digraphs. In English, for example, "ing," "ed," "dis"
and the ch, gh, sh and th all have their single Braille
sign. A few of these had been embodied in the earlier
Indian systems, most Indian languages expressing these
sounds by their own single letters. Again, Indian and
many other Oriental languages have more vowels than
English, but the additional vowels can mostly be
accommodated by the extra vowels of European languages.
We gathered together an ad hoc committee of blinded
Indians, each knowing from three to five languages, and
the blind English head of a school for the Blind in the
Madras Presidency. This Committee designed an Indian
code which would fit in with these principles. Their
report was duly discussed with the Education Department's
Special Committee, but this had no immediate effect on
the situation.
Today, however Braille books, especially for educational
and vocational training purposes, are being printed at
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE.


BABEL OF BRAILLE (Cont'd)
Dehra Dun, and for the first time in India in a uniform
code capable of serving all the different languages of the
sub-continent. At this, the first central institution of its
kind in India, a small but very valuable beginning is being
made with the immense task of attacking what is one of
the major social problems of that country.
Making a report for the Government of China in 1947
we found a similar situation to that in India eight
conflicting codes. . Workers for the Blind in China
however had the justification that Chinese ideographic
script of 50,000 characters was a much harder nut to
crack.
The blind British manager of a Peking bank had designed
quite an original system. Reuters' Telegraph Co. had
discovered that the Chinese language was composed of
some 400 syllables and tone marks. Instead of trying to
telegraph the 50,000 ideographic characters, Reuters had
serially numbered the syllables. The bank manager
replaced these with their corresponding Braille numbers.
The result was a system which the Chinese child could
master in the course of time, coming to recognise the
numbers as the syllables which they represented.
The adaptations of Braille for the various languages
employing Arabic script numbered about fifteen. These
included, not only the various dialects, but also certain
distinct languages from Hausa in the West to Malay in the
East. Some of them read from right to left and some
from left to right this directional problem was only solved
after some difficulty, but the Arabs courteously yielded to
World Braille practice.
I had the pleasure, in Pakistan in 1954, of receiving
forty sets of Koran in the new International Arabic Braille
from an Arabic Braille Press in Hashemite Jordan, and of
presenting them to schools for the blind and leading blind
mullahs as a gift from the American Foundation for
Overseas Blind. The Braille was so closely akin to the
new Urdu Braille of Pakistan that it could be read
immediately by blind Pakistanis. The blind Pakistani is
fond, too, of Persian poetry and will be delighted when
Persia has her own Braille press and publishes these works
in International Iranian Braille.
The two and a half years I was with Unesco were
entirely taken up with the solution of orthographic Braille
problems in five continents; but with their end Unesco
bequeathed the continuation of the task to the World
Braille Council, a small body to which I was nominated
Chairman. Much work remained to be done, not only in
16
getting the new International Braille systems adopted, but
also in other fields of Braille where disunity persisted,
notably in muse notation and mathematical and chemical
symbols.
Louis Braille was an intelligent pupil of the first school
for the blind in the world, that was founded in Paris in
1782. He became both an organist and a Professor of
Mathematics at the School, and naturally he commanded
the services of his six dots so that they could adequately
represent these subjects as well as orthography. In the
course of their spread, however, divergencies have also
grown up.
In Paris in 1954, under the joint auspices of Unesco
and of the World Council for the Welfare of the Bund, we
held our International Conference on Braille Music Nota¬
tion. A new International Manual has been published
which has led to an improvement in International
uniformity, but not yet to the degree anticipated. Nev¬
ertheless, negotiations continue in the hopes of gaining
more complete agreement. During 1959 at the W.C.W.B.
Conference in Rome (which now has totally succeeded
Unesco as our old parent body) it was agreed that the
study of mathematical and chemical symbols should be
proceeded with, this task to be in the hands of Professor
Pierre Henri, himself blind and the ultimate successor of
Louis Braille in the same post in the same school in Paris
Institution Nationale des Jeunes Aveugles.
The adaptation of African languages to International
Braille, when reference is made to the International Pho¬
netic Alphabet and the special Table of Braille Signs for
African Languages, contained in the Unesco publication,
"'World Braille Usage", presents no real difficulty. The
Committee on Bantu Languages is engaged at this moment
in planning alphabets for four South African languages
and similar work is under way in Central, East and West
Africa. The problems arising from the publication of sev¬
eral forms of Spanish contracted Braille in Latin-America
have also been solved ; and thus the excellent work, under¬
taken by Unesco, has yielded and is still yielding rich
results in all three departments of Braille.
