1,000 MILLION
LIVES IN DANGER
nODAY twelve hundred million human beings are living
under the constant threat of malaria. It Is not a
spectacular disease. Its victims show no wounds or
mutilations to excite our pity ; it comes upon them
as they sleep, In the stillness of the night, carried
by a silent attacker, the mosquito. It is the "'fever" long
believed to be inescapable in tropical countries, more of a
nuisance than an illness people said.
The truth is that malaria is a disaster, and its terrible
consequences among that third of the world's population
which already has more than its fair share of disease and
poverty cannot be easily visualized in countries that are
free of it. Malaria epidemics can be just as destructive as
plague epidemics. Those Who live in malaria-ridden areas,
however, have become resigned to it, and accept it as a
natural part of their everyday life. Its victims are quite
unaware of the physical and moral deterioration it has
brought about as through countless centuries it has sapped
their strength, robbed them of initiative, and made them
vulnerable to other, more deadly infections. Moreover, it is
estimated that malaria accounts for 10-15 per cent, of infant
mortality in these countries.
The ultimate aim of the present world-wide antimalaria
campaign is to eliminate the disease, to wipe it off the
face of the globe, never giving up until the very last case
in the remotest corner of the earth has been tracked down.
The necessity for this giant undertaking was formally
and unanimously recognized by the representatives of all
the governments attending the Eighth World Health Assem¬
bly in Mexico City in 1955. The World Health Organization
was given charge of this world-wide operation which was
to be something quite new in medical annals.
This was to be a health programme presenting many
features of a military campaign, and one Whose aim was
not merely the surrender, but the extermination of the
enemy. An antimalaria army came into being, with its
intelligence service, its supply lines, its transport facilities,
its arms and munitions depots, its logistics offices, its general
staff and its high command: the last an office of modest
dimensions in the pleasant setting of Geneva. It is
occupied by Dr C. A. Alvarado, Director of WHO's Division
W.H.O map.
have concerted international for¬
ces on such a scale been de¬
ployed against a single disease.
Never before
Never before
have doctors, engineers, lab¬
oratory workers and helpers of
all kinds been mobilized in such large numbers in so
many different countries to combat the same evil.
Never before has a scheme been launched
that so intimately affects the
living conditions of such vast numbers of the earth's
inhabitants.
Hi
of Malaria Eradication and chief of the 329 international
malaria experts now at work in 73 different countries.
"We are engaged on a monster programme", Dr Alvarado
admits. "It calls for tens of thousands of teams, and mil¬
lions of tons of supplies and equipment. Hundreds of
millions of homes must be visited, hundreds of millions of
blood tests carried out, and tons of drugs supplied.
Thousands of lorries, cars, bicycles, donkeys, camels,
elephants and boats are needed. We must co-ordinate the
work of hundreds of laboratories, help establish contacts
and exchange of information between hundreds of research
and laboratory workers, arrange meetings of experts, trans¬
late reports from many different countries so that they can
be understood in the others.
"This drive to wipe out malaria also means making
thousands of maps, taking a census of population in the
affected areas, keeping a check on the movements of mil¬
lions of nomads, giving lectures, and holding open-air
discussions with villagers to convince them of the need for
the action being taken.
"'Malaria eradication", says Dr Alvarado, "is above all an
organizational and administrative problem, for we now know
almost all we need to know about its scientific and technical

The Unesco Courier. April 1960
g¿	
w
Eradication programme
being prepared
Noeradication pro-
gramme
Some species of mos¬
quitos resistant to
insecticides
f^SSÄfeäSS*«!
aspects and researchers are working hard on the few remain¬
ing unknowns. But malaria eradication is also a question
of money. According to our estimates, the campaign costs
rather less than one dollar for. each human being being
freed from the menace of malaria".
For thousands of years malaria remained a mysterious
affliction, which seemed connected with the presence of
marshes or other unhealthy surroundings. The foul smells
arising from stagnant water were also held responsible. The
first step towards solving the mystery was the discovery, in
1880, by a Frenchman, Laveran, that malaria was caused by
a parasitic organism, a haemosporidium (Plasmodium). In
1898 a British doctor, Ronald Ross, showed that the parasite
of bird malaria is transmitted by female mosquitos, and the
same year Italian scientists proved that the human parasite
is carried by Anopheles mosquitos.
Up to that time malaria patients had been treated with
cinchona bark, which later became quinine, and blood-let¬
ting was also practised. Whenever they could, people would
move away from areas that were believed unhealthy, thus,
without realizing it, escaping the risk of contact with mos¬
quitos. Water management and marsh drainage schemes
were also carried out.
It was the discovery of DDT by a Swiss, Paul Müller, who
was awarded the Nobel Prize for it, that completely chang¬
ed the outlook in the fight against malaria after the Second
World War.
It transformed malaria control into a simple operation
of spraying this "residual" insecticide on the inside walls of
dwellings, where the mosquitos rest after feeding on human
blood. The poison killed off the mosquitos. Malaria sufferers
were then given medical treatment, and the spread of the
-disease was thus halted.
It seemed that the battle had been won. At last the anti-
malaria campaigns would extend beyond the privileged
areas to all the villages and hamlets where they were most
badly needed. It would be possible for the first time to
estimate the time and money required on the basis of the
size of the population to be protected and the average wall
surface to be sprayed per head. The amount of insecticide
needed, the number of spraying pumps, the manpower
involved, and so on could then be accurately worked out.
The war against malaria had entered a new phase, in
which science and logistics were paramount. The way was
now open for the huge eradication programme that was
soon to be launched.
