PAINTER
OF LIFE
by Pierre Luent
^^^^^ in the relentless heat, a group of men
walked briskly through the galleries and cool
rooms of the royal palace which led to the King's
chambers. At their head strode a dark young man
whose long upturned moustache emphasized a
strong, tip-tilted nose. His long black hair fell in
waves over a collar of white lace. His eyes sparkled
under strongly marked brows and his cool manner
gave no hint that in the next few minutes his whole
future would be decided.
The doors of the royal chamber opened and Don
Diego Rodriguez de Silva y Velazquez was ushered
in. The young man knelt and bowed his head.
When he rose, he saw before him for the first time,
King Philip IV of Spain.
Don Rodriguez de Silva y Velazquez was born in
4 CONT'D ON PAGE 7

Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"

The Old Cook. "I should prefer to be the leading painter of what are considered common subjects than the second-best of
the refined", Velazquez is said to have declared. The great Spanish artist is generally known as a painter of the Court in the
17th century and of dainty 'little princesses. But he was an artist who appreciated life in all its forms even the most humble.
As a youth he painted kitchen scenes and peasants. He was about twenty when he completed "The Old Cook" (sometimes
called "The Omelette") bringing a strange beauty to these familiar objects with a skill already remarkable. (See detail page 6)

PAINTER OF LIFE (Cont'd)

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
A career of genius begins in the uproar
and disorder of a Seville art academy
Seville on Sunday June 6, 1599, in a small house on the
narrow, twisting Calle de la Gorgoja, in the parish of San
Pedro. In the middle of the previous century, a Portuguese
gentleman, Don Diego Rodriguez de Silva, together with
his wife Dona Ana and ¡his son Juan left the town of
Oporto and settled in Seville. There Juan married Dona
Jeronrma Velazquez y Buen Rostro, niece of an aristocratic
lady, The child of this marriage was Don Diego Velaz¬
quez.
His first years were spent in the San Pedro district
among the rambling streets, the whitewashed houses
huddled together in an incredible jumble with their little
shady patios and tlheir azulojos which emphasized the
hues of the jasmines and carnations planted there.
His parents were well-to-do but far from rich, and had
originally planned .that Don Diego should study law. But
although proficient in philosophy and Latin, the boy
revealed a passion for something quite different: drawing.
At first his father took this for no more than a child's
simple amusement but he soon realized (that it was some¬
thing much deeper and accordingly decided to send his
son to the studio of the great Francisco de Herrera.
This was a strange studio: classes were held amidst the
wildest disorder and uproar, dominated by the piercing
voice of the Master who delivered insults and blows gene¬
rously and indiscriminately with his cane which was
conveniently tipped with a piece of charcoal for drawing.
The following year, Don Diego, then barely twelve enter¬
ed the school of another master, Don Francisco Pacheco,
whose lessons were given with much more discrimination
and method. Little Diego's neighbour and fellow pupil
was a certain Zunbaran, who was also destined to make
a name for himself and who became Diego's life-long
friend.
In 1617, Pacheco felt that the child prodigy
Velazquez had learned enough to be awarded
the diploma 'entitling him to exercise the
profession of painter. But Pacheco did much more than
give him a diploma. He also gave him his daughter. In
1618, in the Church of St. Michel, Diego Velazquez married
the gentle and charming Juana Pachecofurther evidence,
of .the Master's great confidence in his pupil's future.
In 1622, Velazquez decided to try his fortune in Madrid.
The prospects were favourable: he had friends at Court,
among them Juan de Fonseca, Luis de Gongora and the
Duke of Olivares. But his first stay there led to nothing
and Diego was unable to achieve his ambition to paint the
King's portrait. Unable to obtain access to the King,
he painted the portrait from memory and then returned
to Seville. The following year, however, he received a
letter from Fonseca with an order from the Duke of Oli¬
vares, at that time the King's favourite, instructing him to
return to Madrid. Accompanying the letter was the tidy
sum of fifty crowns.
The young man lost no time in presenting himself at
the "'Corte" in Madrid. He was accompanied toy his father-
in-law and his half-Moorish servant Juan Pareja who was
also his pupil and friend. Within a few days of his arri¬
val he had painted Fonseca's portrait. A friend of the
latter showed it to the King who found it magnificent and
expressed the wish to meet the artist.
This was the first meeting between the twenty-four-
year-old painter and the seventeen-year-old King. Phi¬
lip TV was not handsome but Velazquez gave nobility and
dignity to his stem and melancholy countenance. The
King was so pleased with the portrait that he at once
ordered a second, this time fulMength. This was follow
ed by portraits of other members of the royal family, of
the Duke oí Olivares and even of the Prince of Wales,
the future Charles I of England who was in Madrid at the
time. The King granted Velazquez a stipend of twenty
ducats per month. Though he had not yet made his
fortune, Velazquez nonetheless brought his family to
Madrid.
e began to attract attention. One day he
H^ ^B exhibited an equestrian portrait of the King
-^^- in the Caille Mayor. The painting caused a
sensation and aroused some envy. Criticism was levelled
at the shape of the horse ! On one occasion, the King
himself told him slydy, "T have heard that you can only
paint heads", to which Diego replied, "Your Majesty
flatters me; personally, I know no one capable of painting
them!"'
He painted a good many other heads for all that. In
particular, he did the portrait of the strange child, Don
Carlos, the King's brother, whom he showed with a cape
on his shoulder, the collar of the Golden Fleece on his
breast and capriciously holding a glove by the finger.
What Velazquez was able to catchand it Is an indication
of the mastery over his art which he already possessed
was the Prince's strange expression, his calm disdainful
attitude.
In 1627, the King decided to make Velazquez an usher;
but according to court customs he could only be paid a
salary corresponding to the lowest category of palace
employees.
The following year he met Rubens who was passing
through Madrid. The two artists compared their aesthe¬
tic ideas. One day Rubens described a Bacchic Flemish
festival. The subject appealed to Velazquez but not in
the Rubens manner. It resulted in El Dios Baco, the
God Bacchus, which was purchased by the King for one
hundred silver ducats. But the painter did not invent
figures dressed in the style of Sophocles. He took his ins¬
piration from the taverns of Madrid and the common
' people, and with a true understanding of the significance
of the picture, he gave it the name which it still bears
today Los Borrachos, the drunkards or drinkers. It
was, in fact, a portrayal of a group of drunkards seen
through the eyes of a man who never got drunk.
This was Velazquez's first period. It was one of vigour,
solidity, where dark hues and chiaroscura were used to
provide relief. He stripped his subjects like a child
taking a toy apart to see what lies inside. At this time
he was still at the stage of analyzing; later, possessed of
all the necessary elements he was to combine them in his
works of synthesis.
Not satisfied with buying "Los Borrachos'" for
one hundred ducats, the King paid him
another three hundred as arrears of salary.
For Velazquez, the total represented two year's salary.
Instead of devoting the sum to his family, the painter
took the advice of his ifather-in-law and of Rubens and
set off for Italy to see the masterpieces of that country
and learn everything he could. He left Madrid on
August 10, 1629, with the faithful Pareja, his pocket .the
heavier by two hundred ducats which the Duke of Olivares
had given him as a parting gift.
During the journey he met the renowned General Am¬
brosio de ßpinola. This was a Genoese soldier who had
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PAINTER OF LIFE (Cont'd)
'Imitate nothing and nobody...
paint all things as you see them'
fought in Flanders in the service of Spain and received
the surrender of Breda. Velazquez Was much taken with
his pleasant personality and his intelligence. Later on,
he included the General's portrait from memory In his
famous painting, The Surrender of Breda.
Velazquez then spent a period 'at the Villa Medici.
Amidst the reminders of classical times he returned to
mythology and painted Vulcan's Forge, abounding in
irony but also in life: every figure possessed its own indi¬
viduality and expression and every object its form and
volume.
In 1630 he returned to Spain. Henceforward he had
no more doubts. His study of the Italian masterpieces
had confirmed him in his vocation: "'Imitate nothing and
nobody, paint men and things as you see them."
This was Velazquez's great period as a portraitist. His
works reached such a pitch of realism, that there is an
anecdote about Philip IV entering the painter's studio and
seeing the face of Admiral Pulido Pareja in the shadows.
"What's this," the King is said to have exclaimed "'are you
still here? I thought you'd left." Then, realizing that he
had spoken to a portrait, the King remarked to the paint¬
er, "T assure you I really was taken in!"
\r
w# ELAZQUEZ painted the court jesters and his
^F daughter, Juana Velazquez. He also painted
T a number of religious subjects at the urging
of several devout memlbers of .the court: The Visit of Saint
Anthony to Saint Paul was one; Another was Christ
on the Cross, painted about 1630. Although painted by
an .artist who scarcely ever touched religious themes, it
is perhaps .the most remarkable and profound religious
painting of the century.
Memories of his journey through Italy led him to paint
the portrait of General Spinola and various other persons
in the Surrender of Breda, also known as The Lances.
But Velazquez was now back in Madrid; and the back¬
ground of his picture is not the landscape of the Nether¬
lands but the country around the Corte. In spite
of this, the picture is one of the most valued works of
its kind.
In 1643, Don Gaspar de Guzman, Duke of Olivares,
Velazquez's patron, who was not liked by the Queen, fell
into .disgrace. AM his proteges at the Court departed but
the King kept the painter with him. He even acquainted
him with his ambition to create a gallery which should
assemble works by all the greatest Spanish masters.
Velazquez at once suggested that he should also acquire
some of the best paintings of the Italian masters and
requested permission to go to Italy to buy them.
But grave (events were taking place in Madrid.
First, the Queen died; then Prince Balthazar
Carlos, the King's only son, .died at seventeen
on the eve of his wedding to his cousin, Mariana of
Austria. Some years later, and in order to solve the
political problem caused by .these deaths, Philip TV decided
to marry his son's fiancée. He sent an emissary to Trento
to meet his fiancee on her way to Spain.
This was Velazquez's long-awaited opportunity to leave
Madrid. After a difficult journey he reached Genoa with
the faithful Juan de Pareja and, leaving the other mem¬
bers of the mission, travelled to Milan where he studied
the famous Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci; then he
passed through Padua and reached Venice where he
8
bought five pictures for Philip IV. Next he visited Flor¬
ence and Rome and then Naples.
At this point Pope Innocent X who had been Nuncio in
Madrid asked Velazquez to paint his portrait. Diego who
saw a resemblance between the Sovereign Pontiff and
Juan de Pareja, painted a portrait of the latter by way
of preparation. The result was brilliant and Velazquez
ventured to present it to the Pope. Another masterpiece
had been created: the brilliant gaze, the chiaroscura, the
details, the wrinkles everything combined to form an
immediate revelation of character.
This was the painter's second period. He was still ana¬
lysing but he was also interpreting. Innocent X, contrary
Dominguez-Garcfa, Madrid
to all expectations, was highly pleased with the picture
and made a gift to Velazquez of a gold chain and a medal
engraved with his likeness.
When Velazquez returned to Madrid there was no
shortage of work. Philip TV had commandeered the
painter from the moment of his return. Portraits were
wanted of the new Queen, Mariana of Austria, of the
aging King himself and of the Infanta Margarita.
Velazquez had 'become such an Important figure at Court
that he requested and obtained the post of. King's Har¬
binger, his duties being to prepare the . monarch's
lodgings during his travels.
But he continued to paint and devoted himself in par¬
ticular to the court jesters: Barbarroja, Don John of
Austria, Don Antonio the Englishman and others. These
were a humorist's canvasses, like the portrait of Mars,
God of War, who was none other than a blustering
rogue of Seville; for under the influence of the literature
of the day, Velazquez sometimes dealt with mythology
and the pagan gods whom he portrayed not as gods but
as men:
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Wallace Collection. © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Lady with a fan. This portrait painted by Velazquez between 1644 and 1648 has been called
"a supreme representation of the Spanish woman". It was once thought that Velazquez used
his daughter as a model for this work, but nowadays it is generally agreed that the portrait is of
an unknown woman. The grave reticent expression, the mysterious, languid eyes reveal Velaz¬
quez's remarkable gift for probing beyond the human features in his deep search of the under¬
lying character. In this painting, justly considered one of Velazquez's masterpieces, sober browns
and greys harmonize perfectly with the luminous tints of the skin and the black shawl and dress.

PAINTER OF LIFE (Cont'd from, page 8)
Nevertheless the painter remained faithful to his
ideal: to paint the truth, the reality of life. A striking
example is seen in the famous picture The Spinners,
painted at the time of the setting-up of the royal tapes¬
try works. Perfectly composed, his figures are natural
and their attitudes denote a complete freedom of move¬
ment. The play of light is varied, in direction and in¬
tensity; and the whole gives an impression of depth and
space. The viewer feels that Velazquez has not grouped
figures on a canvas but that his observer's eye has
caught them, in an instant of reality.
It was not long before the King expressed a wish to
have a large family portrait and it was now that Velaz¬
quez produced what is undoubtedly and rightly his
most celebrated work: The Maids of Honour (Las Meni¬
nas).
The King and the Queen have taken up their position
in front of the painter. Beside Velazquez is the Infanta
Margarita and her little retinue of jesters and compa¬
nions; the painter appears at the left of the canvas,
brush in hand; he is looking at the King and Queen who
are seen in the background reflected in a looking-glass;
in the foreground is the Infanta, flanked by two maids of
honour, Agustina Sarmiento and Isabel de Velasco.
Further to the right, the dwarf Maribarbola looks at the
and the dwarf Nicolasiilo Pertusato slyly kicks a
dog asleep in the foreground. In the shadows, the lady-
in-waiting Dona Marcela de Ulla dressed as a nun
whispers to a squire. Finally, right in the background
and framed by a doorway, the Queen's Harbinger, Don
José Nieto de Velasco, looks on.
B^H ach face reflects a different thought, each
^Ê i ' costume and object has its own colour, altered
-^^ by the reflection of the neighbouring object.
The feeling of space and depth is as marked as with The
Spinners. Velazquez haJd gone Ibeyond the limits known
in this fieflld at the time. And here again he painted
what he saw. The Flemish primitives too had painted
things exactly as they were tout all with the same wealth
of detail, whether hi the foreground or .the 'background.
It was not enough to paint things smaller when they were
further away. It was also necessary to include fewer
details. In this picture Velazquez went beyond his own
technique and (reached the culminating point of his art.
This was his last period: for the beholder, the .artist's
'"reality" was transformed into' illusion, the
illusion of naturalness, space, life and light.
Henceforth the artist was at the height of his fame.
The King made him a Knight of the Order of Santiago
in 1659 after having ennobled him. Velazquez's last years
were drawing dose. The painter returned to religious
themes with the Coronation of the Virgin where he
seems to have been inspired by El Greco." He also paint¬
ed the portrait of his friend, the sculptor Alonso Cano,-
and his last portrait of alll, the Infanta Margarita.
e made one last voyage. In 1660 Velazquez
JÊ ^(L_ set off for the French frontier where, on
June 1, on .the Tüe des Faisans, in the middle
of the Bidassoa River, Phillip IV met Louis XTV. The
voyage was an exhausting one over rain-soaked roads.
On June 26, the King's Harbinger ¡returned to Madrid. He
was 61 years olid. Weary from working alll day and
moving about all night, as he wrote to a friend, Velazquez
was obliged to take to his bed on July 31. Afflicted with
"tertiary fever," he died on August 6, 1660 surrounded by
his family, his closest friends and the inseparable Juan
de Pareja.
Velazquez was given a full court funeral in the Church
of St John the Baptist in Madrid where he was buried.
The only people missing at this last tribute were mem¬
bers of the Chapter of the Knights of Santiago who had
never welcomed him in their Order. It is said that the
King revenged himself for this insult by having the
great cross of Santiago painted in on the artist's doublet
in "'The Maids of Honour so that he might wear it for¬
ever in the great masterpiece of his career.
Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Pablo of Valladolid. Once believed to be the portrait of
an actor, this painting is now recognized as that of Pablo of
Valladolid, a jester at the Spanish Court. The true nature of
the jester is strikingly depicted a sad man whose haunt¬
ing eyes betray his deep melancholy. 1633, Prado Museum.
10

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
National Gallery, London, © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Venus and Cupid. Velazquez helped to lay the foundations
of modern Impressionist painting. When, centuries later, the
Impressionists made it their aim to study the effect of light
and atmosphere, they turned to Velazquez who was hailed as
their precursor. His modem treatment is strongly evident in
this head of Venus, a detail of "Venus and Cupid" (right)
where Velazquez did not depict the face of Venus directly,
but revealed it as a faint and ghostly reflection in the mirror
held by Cupid. This work is one of the mythological paintings
executed by Velazquez. Several of the works perished in the
fire which swept the Alcazar in 1734. "Venus and Cupid" was
bought in 1905 for £45,000 by the National Gallery, London.
