U.S.S.R. SEES VICTORY AHEAD
IN 40 YEAR WAR ON MALARIA
by L.J. Bruce-Chwatt
BuRiNG the nineteenth century and the early part
of the twentieth, malaria was one of the main
endemic diseases in Russia, occurring through¬
out the country but being particularly
prevalent in the Caucasus, in Transcaucasia,
in Central Asia, and along the lower Volga.
The annual mortality in the garrisons stationed during
the latter part of the nineteenth century along the
northern shore of the Black Sea and near the Persian
frontier amounted to as much as 25 %. It was estimated
that 5,000,000 people were affected annually in the years
1890-1900, and at least 3,500,000 during World War I.
In the wake of that war, the huge movements of popu¬
lation that took place, and the general lowering of eco¬
nomic and social standards, led to the greatest malaria
epidemic of modern times in Europe, which ravaged a
large part of the TJ.S.S.R. in 1922-1923. There were 600,000
fatal cases of malaria in each year, and in parts of Cen¬
tral Asia, the Caucasus and the Volga basin 75-100 %
of the population were infected. One report claimed that
not less than 12,000,000 cases were involved.
In the early twenties an Institute of Protozoology and
Chemotherapy (now the Institute of Malaria, Medical
Parasitology, and Helminthology) was set up in Moscow,
and rural antimalaria stations were created in growing
numbers. By 1930 the situation had improved: public
health measures in general, and malaria control in parti¬
cular, were more widely undertaken and better executed,
and institutes of tropical medicine had been established
in a number of places.
Apart from 1934-1936, when there was a temporary
increase especially in Central Asia and the
Caucasus, the morbidity rate for Malaria fell
gradually year by year, until in 1939 it was the lowest
that had ever been recorded in the U.S.S.R. The Second
World War caused a temporary setback; there was,
almost inevitably, a great increase in the number of cases
in the devastated areas, particularly in the Ukraine and
Byelorussia.
In the post-war years public health services were
reorganized and malaria control tightened up. In 1951
a national antimalaria programme was included in the
Five-Year Plan, with striking results: whereas in 1952
...the number of cases of malaria in the U.S.S.R. had been
183,603, in 1958 it was 4,678. In 1952 the concept of eli¬
mination of malaria as a mass disease was adopted, and
by 1955 it had become obvious that total eradication could
be achieved by 1960.
The comprehensive programme for the elimination of
malaria as a mass disease from the U.S.S.R. has been
carried out with an impressive drive and determination
that could not have been possible without adequate
medical, scientific, and auxiliary personnel. In 1956 no
less than 2,780,000 persons, or about 1.3 % of the entire
population, worked in one capacity or another in the
field of public health; there was therefore no shortage
of staff for malaria elimination.
From the outset the programme was based on the
existing wide network of dispensaries, health centres,
polyclinics, and the like. Notification of cases of malaria
had been compulsory in some parts of the country ever
This account of malaria eradication in the U.S.S.R. is condensed
from an article by Dr. Bruce-Chwatt, Chief, Planning, Division of
Malaria Eradication, W.B.O., which appeared in the "Bulletin of the
World Heallth Organization".
since 1921. It was extended to other areas in 1947-1948,
and registration of cases, made on a much more stringent
procedure, has covered the entire country since 1951.
A comprehensive training programme was put into
effect. In addition to chemiotherapy and spraying, other
available methods of control were pressed into use, tech¬
nical guidance being given by the Moscow Institute of
Malaria, Medical Parasitology, and Helminthology and by
the regional institutes. An outstanding characteristic of
the whole programme is the careful planning of anti¬
malaria measures in relation to both general and specific
economic and social development. Public health educa¬
tion has received much emphasis, and is carried out by
meetings, discussions groups, pamphlets, posters and films.
On the basis of general directives sent out by the
Ministry of Health, the planning of antimalaria
measures within each district is done by the district
medical unit, with the advice of the corresponding health
centre.
The medical follow-up and drug administration are
carried out by the hospitals, .polyclinics, dispensaries and
other health units. Small-scale insecticidal measures are
carried out by local health units, with the co-operation
of other health organizations if necessary. Large-scale
spraying is always done by the district health centres.
Much attention is paid to the blood examination of
all fever cases reporting for medical attention. Medical
and paramedical personnel are often reminded of the
possibility of malaria in cases of obscure fever, and the
population is encouraged to go to medical aid centres for
the diagnosis and treatment of even minor aliments. All
overt cases of malaria and all persons found to be posi¬
tive for malaria are registered. These registrations are
sent monthly to the provincial health authority.
In addition to passive surveillance of this kind, there
is active surveillance during the transmission season in
all areas where malaria used to be common. It is carried
out by district health visitors or voluntary drug distri¬
butors, visits being made every five or ten days, accord¬
ing to the size of the district. All local inhabitants or
visitors with fever or vague general symptoms have their
blood examined for malaria parasites, but no immediate
treatment is given.
This work is often carried out by non-medical
personnel, such as members of the Red Cross.
Mass surveys of the population are also occa¬
sionally carried out. Some surveys cover individuals who
are known to have had malaria during previous years,
who have had undiagnosed fevers, or have come from
malarious areas; but in smaller localities the whole popu¬
lation is examined.
The results of this intensive programme have been
spectacular. In the largest administrative unit, the
Russian Socialist Federated Soviet Republic, the trend
of morbidity can be assessed by taking the 1940 figures
as 100%. After a peak of 103 % in 1945, the percentage
fell to 55 in 1948, to 42 in 1949, to 19 in 1950, to 8 in 1951,
to 4 in 1952, to 1.5 in 1954, and to 0.25 in 1956.
According to recent information supplied to WHO, the
total number of cases of malaria in the U.S.S.R. was 5,097
CONT'D ON PAGE- 32

U.S.S.R. WAR ON MALARIA
(Continued from page 17)
in 1957 (3,652 primary infections and 1,445 relapses) and
4,678 in 1958 (this figure is provisional).
The figure of 10 cases of malaria per 10,000 population
was accepted as the limit above which malaria was regard¬
ed as a mass disease. According to this criterion malaria
was eliminated as a mass disease from wide areas of the
U.S.S.R. about five years ago.
It would be justifiable to say that eradication has
already been, or is about to be, attained in 88 % of the
total potentially malarious area of the U.S.S.R. This
undeniable success has been attributed to three simul¬
taneously executed measures which are given in the order
of importance attributed to them : first, the early diagnosis
of individual cases of the disease, intensive treatment,
and a careful follow-up of each case for not less than
two years; second, the use of residual insecticides for the
total coverage of an area, or for either barrier, village,
or focal spraying; and third, the widespread prevention
of mosquito breeding by the use of all available methods.
Plans have been outlined for the posteradication period
1959-1965. Attention will be concentrated on preventing
the introduction of malaria from outside, and on improv¬
ing mosquito control, preferably by antilarval measures.
New methods are to be developed for the early recogni¬
tion of symptomless parasite carriers, anti-relapse treat¬
ment is to be improved, better measures of preventing
epidemics from imported cases sought, the development
of old and new insecticides encouraged, insecticidal
methods adapted for use in areas with silkworm
industries, and the study of the epidemiology and eradica¬
tion of malaria in other countries encouraged.
Now that malaria is close to the point of eradication
in the U.S.S.R., there are a number of epidemiological
points of interest. One is the sharp decrease in the over¬
all incidence of malaria. Another is the absence of any
sizeable foci of malaria. Small foci are still to be found,
indeed, and present a potential danger.
Over the whole potentially malarious area of the Soviet
Union there are now three groups of communities: those
(by far the most common) where eradication has been
achieved, and where cases of malaria are totally absent
or only, in exceptional cases, imported; those where
malaria persists as a small focus of infection; and those
where, after an absence of cases for one to three years,
a few local cases have appeared.
From the point of view of an epidemiologist this last
group of cases is particularly important, and it has been
carefully investigated. The results of this investigation
have shown that, while population movements are occa¬
sionally responsible for the reinfestation of a small area,
the main cause is either premature discontinuance of
antimalaria measures or gaps in the system of sur¬
veillance.
The problem of the importation of cases of malaria
from outside the country is also under investigation. The
leading Soviet malariologists are emphatic in their warn¬
ing that the success achieved in the malaria eradication
campaign should not lead to a casual attitude to the
problem and thus to a premature weakening of a vast
organization which is geared to the complete and per¬
manent elimination of malaria from the whole of the
U.S.S.R.
32
