PATAGONIA
PARADOX OF DESOLATION
HAND PROSPERITY
by B. Aubert de La Rue
7 here are places in the world whose
names set the imagination afire.
Among them are those at the
southernmost tip of Latin Amer¬
ica. Patagonia, the Strait of Ma¬
gellan, Tierra del Fuego, Cape
Horn all these conjure up a remote and desolate land
with a harsh, hostile climate; a land swept by ¡winds and
storms; a land of forbidding shores lashed by giant
breakers. This, undeniably, is the general run of weather
on this frontier of the inhabited world, Where swirling
waters have tossed many a ship on the rocky shores. Yet
this narrow extremity of the American continent, stret¬
ching down towards Antarctica, is not an utterly deso¬
late place, but abounds in natural beauties and resources.
Western Patagonia belongs to Chile which now has plans
for integrating the region's three hitherto isolated and
neglected provinces of Chiloé, Aysén and Magallanes, more
closely into the economic life of the nation. This
mountainous and maritime region is a kind of Norway of
the south where the mighty Andes and the Pacific Ocean
seem to intermingle as the coast of southern Chile breaks
up into a maze of islands.
It contrasts strongly with the eastern side, adjoining
the Argentine border, which comes into the Pampas belt
and comprises many plateaux and plains, culminating in
16
the flat or slightly undulating country on either side of
the Strait of Magellan.
Chilean Patagonia covers an area of some 96,000 square
miles, or roughly a third of the whole country, but only a
small percentage of Chile's population lives here (about
220,000 people out seven million). As a first step in their
plan of integration, the authorities in the Chilean capital,
Santiago, intend to carry out a vast survey of the southern
territories and to make a detailed inventory of the varied
natural resources of the area. This is a job calling for
more funds and technical personnel than Chile can
provide, and the government hopes that some help will
be forthcoming from the United Nations Special Fund for
Technical Assistance, and in particular from Unesco.
In appointing me to carry out a preliminary on-the-spot
survey and to report on the means for putting the main
project into operation, Unesco added a new region to the
many in which it has already operated.
Patagonia is situated at a latitude which, in the northern
hemisphere, offers an essentially temperature climate, a
latitude on which most of the great capital cities lie, yet
it has a cold climate characterized not so much by severe
winters as by the absence of summer heat. It has only
one town of any size, Punta Arenas. Other than this,
there are only small, isolated settlements, cattle-breeding
stations and scattered farms, separated by vast empty
stretches of country which is difficult to cross and still
often unknown territory.
Because of its immense icefields, this rugged region

The Unesco Courier. January 1960
Photos © Paul Almasy
cannot be linked by road with the rest of the country.
The air link from Santiago to Punta Arenas covers 20
degrees of latitude and takes just over five hours. The
flight is a remarkable experience. Chilean pilots have
every reason to consider the route one of the most
dangerous in the world, but to the passenger it offers a
fantastic panorama of volcanoes, lakes and fjords, wild
valleys, lush forests, jagged coastlines, snow-clad peaks
and glistening ice-fields.
Santiago in summer enjoys constantly fine, hot weather
and shimmers in a dazzling light. The last traces of snow
on the nearby Andes have melted away, leaving only a few
glaciers perched on peaks at altitudes of 16,000 to 20,000
feet and glistening in the sun. Taking off for Patagonia,
the plane climbs steeply over the vast patchwork of crops
in the irrigated fields of the Central Valley, bounded on
the Pacific side by the slopes of the coastal mountain
chain and on the East by the main mountain range.
Rising up on this side are the spectacular series of volcanic
peaks which have laid dormant with the exception of the
gently-smoking Viela Rica since the memorable eruptions
of 1932.
The aridity of central Chile soon gives place to a more
humid, verdant region dotted with rivers and lakes. This
is Chile's "Switzerland," the most attractive part of the
country. Here the climate is pleasantly cool and grassland
alternates with forests. It is an agricultural and cattle-
raising area, much frequented in summer by holiday-
makers.
Then, like a sentinel standing guard at the ramparts
of the grim wilderness of Patagonia, the cone-shaped
outline of Osorno with its snow-capped peak comes up on
the horizon. Beyond it are other famous mountains
Tronador, followed by the gaping crater of Calbuco.
Thus, after a two-hours' flight, the aircraft reaches
Puerto Montt. At this point the continent suddenly
breaks up and Patagonia begins. From here on, the
Central Valley, garden and granary of Chile, gives place
to a fantastic labyrinth of promontories and islands,
narrow channels and fjord-like inlets. It seems incredible
that ships on their way to the far-off Strait of Magellan
can manage to wend their way through this maze, beset
eus they are by violent currents, blinding rain and, as they
get ever further south, snow squalls. Navigation along
this coast is indeed a delicate and dangerous enterprise.
First of the endless chain of islands which run parallel
to the continent and extend down to Cape Horn, fringing
the coast for hundreds of miles, is Chiloé. It is
overpopulated and its people cling to the past, observing
archaic customs and traditions. Living in a few old-
fashioned townships or a multitude of tiny country
villages distinguished by picturesque wooden houses, the
Chilotes, a people of mixed Indian and Spanish blood, are
spreading to all parts of Patagonia and now form the
main element of its population.
In their home country their main occupations are
fishing, cattle-breeding and farming, but the archaic
methods they use give but poor results. Many of the
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

PATAGONIA (Continued)
Photos © Almasy, Paris
Sfij 9a ' i iXi- : \ ' m' "
»
wi 1
'MM
9kt*y<> ' aWEfS^W^ -
8i2*^J^k^3l
Br7^*ç-É^P^îl --wis « *$
« ' ^rvl P' e*K
Iki .riffi JPBBfcg"' <Bqpîa^E
01
P^Lmm ft - «kW
MmW ftP li
¿mm.
:. f'..:«riji^^^. j "' ip "i
**'.* : j
"-"r
2.Ä pO
©E.A ubert de la Rue
MOST SOUTHERL
EDGE OF AMERICA
Patagonia gets its name from
the Spanish word patagones
(big feet) for there is a
legend that the Indians who
once lived there were giants
with huge feet. Today
despite a century of immi¬
gration into the area the
population density of most
of Chilean Patagonia is less
than one person per square
mile. Some descendants of
the Indians have mingled .'*
with the immigrants and
have become lumbermen and
fishermen. Others (above
and left), continue to live
like their ancestors in shel¬
ters made of wood, brush
and tarpaulins. Among them
are the Yaghans, the south¬
ernmost people in the world,
now reduced to a handful
and living in the extreme
south of Tierra del Fuego.
Abundance of timber in the
region is shown by wooden .
houses of Fuerte Bulnes, a
village on the continent's tip.
.1
J
18

The Unesco Courier. , January 1960
19

DESOLATION
& PROSPERITY
(Continued from page 17)
Chilotes live poverty-stricken lives. Yet their island
enjoys a mild climate and is free from frost and snow.
Cereals ripen well there and the island is noted for its
potatoes. It is, in fact, from Chiloé rather than from the
high plateaux of Bolivia and Peru, that the first potatoes
are supposed to have come.
Today, the Chilotes have settled in most parts of
southern Chile. In the Chonos islands, where they have
become lumberjacks, they fell huge quantities of cyprus
trees and turn them into fencing posts most of which are
bought by Argentina and used to build sheep pens. Others
have set up colonies along the coasts and the more
protected valleys of the nearby mainland, and often live
nomad lives on the channels in search of the few remain¬
ing otters and seals which have survived the wholesale
slaughters of the past.
Still other Chilotes work for small fisheries, canning sea-
urchins, spider crabs and all kinds of shellfish, including
the mariscos, giant mussels which are also dried and
smoked. Countless heaps of shells marking former camp¬
ing sites along the coasts show that these mussels were a
staple food of the original Indian inhabitants of these
regions. Today mariscos are in great demand throughout
Chile. Chilotes are also employed as shepherds on all the
farms, and are regarded as good workers.
As the outlines of Chiloé become dim and blurred by
the fluffy cumulus clouds over the Pacific, the aircraft,
winging its way south, now flies over the startlingly
green western slopes of the Andes. The southern forests
which cover them are usually dripping with moisture for
here torrential rain falls on an average of 300 days each
year.
Senseless squandering of Nature's wealth
With its evergreen trees and its undergrowth of
. quila, a species of bamboo which forms impene¬
trable thickets, the forest has all the luxuriance
of a profusely growing tropical one. Beginning on the
coast, it can be seen extending unbroken along the
valleys and up the mountain sides.
Yet this fine, thick carpet of verdure is sometimes
scarred by dull streaks and patches of grey where forest
fires have left nothing but bare trunks, some still upright,
others strewn over the ground. Flying over Patagonia I
saw forest fires from Chiloé down almost to Cape Horn.
Most are started by isolated farmers who find flames an
easier tool than the axe when they wish to clear land for
cultivation. Unfortunately they disregard the strong
winds which fan the flames and spread the flrei unchecked
over huge areas.
Hundreds of thousands of acres of forest have been
destroyed in this way during the past century of
settlement in Patagonia. The ostensible reason for the
fires is to open up more land for pasturing, but in fact
they are often started quite uselessly and at the risk of
setting off the deadly process of soil erosion. The
authorities are well aware of this danger and of the
senseless squandering of this source of natural wealth, but
so far no laws or regulations have put an effective stop
to the practice.
Beyond the grim, majestic Aysen fjord the character of
the landscape becomes far more harsh and severe. The
glaciers become larger and soon one is flying over a polar .
landscape which continues almost uninterruptedly as far
as Tierra del Fuego. Here, at an equivalent Southern
Hemisphere latitude to that of the European Alps, the
famous San Rafael glacier and many others run right
down to sea level, forming a patch of the fantastic blue
colour, which appears to be a peculiarity of the glaciers
of Patagonia.
Amid the dazzling snow-capped peaks and glaciers,
mighty granite needles stand out and two in particular,
Fitzroy and Cerro Paine, mark the end of the crossing
of the Great Cordillera and the beginning of the
Photos © E. Aubert de la Rue
1-2. LAST LARGE CITY, Punta Arenas, with a population of 50,000,
claims to be the southernmos city in the world. (Ushuaia, in the
Argentine part of Tierra del Fuego, is further south, but has only 7,000
inhabitants.) Situated on the Strait of Magellan, Punta Arenas
has a free port status and exports large quantities of wool (above).
3. LAST GROUND. Among the tufted grasses of Diego Ramirez
islandlast terrain of Patagoniaa colony of albatrosses installed in
its nesting quarters. Albatrosses usually lay their single eggs on the
bare ground. These birds in rainy Patagonia have learned to keep
their eggs dry by building raised mounds of mud as nesting places.
4. LAST KITCHEN GARDEN. In this vegetable patch at Puerto
Williams on Navarino island, lettuce and potatoes grow well as long as
they are protected by wooden screens from the sweeping westerly
winds. Puerto Williams is the world's most southerly established village.
5. LAST FLOWERS. Primroses growing on Lennox Island, near to
Cape Horn. The nearest terrain to the south of here is the vast
icy wasteland of Antarctica with its scientific observation stations.
20 CONT'D ON PAGE 22

The Unesco Courier. January 1960
21

PATAGONIA (Continued)
LAND OF FIRE
LAND OF ICE
Explorers, navigators and scientists
are remembered In the names given
to many places on the southernmost
part of the American continent in and
around Tierra del Fuego (The Land of
Fire). Exploits of Ferdinand Magellan,
the Portuguese navigator and the first
European to sail these waters, are
commemorated In monument (right) at
Punta Arenas, capital of province of
Magallanes, also named, together with
Magellan Strait, for this explorer.
Below, Cape Horn, given its name in
1616 by William Schouten, a Dutch
sailor, for his native town of Hoorn.
Photographed on a calm, sunny day,
the towering cliffs seem to belie their
sinister reputation as the scene of so
many shipwrecks. Far right, the Italia
glacier, one of several which appear to
hurl themselves down from the Darwin
Cordillera (named for the great scien¬
tist) and crash Into the Beagle Channel,
which recalls the voyage of H.M.S.
Beagle during which Darwin gathered
the material on which he based his
"Origin of Species". The centenary
of Its publication and the I 50th anni¬
versary of Darwin's birth which coin¬
cided last year were marked by celebra¬
tions with which Unesco was associated.
Almasy, Paris
Photos © E. Aubert de la Rue
dun-coloured steppes extending as far as the eye can see
to the Strait of Magellan and beyond. . .
Now the flight is almost ended and as the plane loses
height it is possible to see details of the pampas below,
squared off into enclosures containing thousands of sheep
looking from above for all the World like ants' eggs.
There are between two and three million sheep in Chilean
Patagonia and the breeding industry which supplies wool
and frozen meat for export is still the main economic
resource of the southern provinces. The white-walled
buildings of the sheep farms, protected against the
perpetual westerly winds by screens of trees or planks,
are connected by dusty tracks with Punta Arenas which
now appears in the distance as a large red patch lying
at the foot of mountains still decked with snow. A final
circuit over the Strait of Magellan, broad at this point and
flowing between foam-flecked shores, and the aircraft
lands on the airfield of Chabunco.
After the wild solitudes of the Patagonian Andes, it is
astonishing to find a modern city the size of Punta
Arenas so far from civilization. Much changed within the
past few years and still developing, Punta Arenas has a
population of close on 50,000. Some of its prosperity is
due to the discovery of oil in nearby Tierra del Fuego
which has brought an influx of technicians.
The city, capital of the province of Magallanes, also
enjoys the status of a free port. This right was granted
in recent years so as to aid the economic development of
the southern provinces. It allows the Importation, duty
22

The Unesco Courier. January 1960
free, of ail kinds of foreign goods that are inexistent or
prohibitively expensive in the rest of the country, where
their importation is strictly controlled. But customs
officials can sometimes be tolerant, and more and more
people find it worth while to come all the way from
Santiago to do their shopping in Punta Arenas.
The town manages somehow to remind one both of
Canada and Central Europe because many of the houses
are built of wood though this practice is now dying out
and many of the inhabitants came originally from
Yugoslavia, drawn here at the end of the last century by
the discovery of gold in Tierra del Fuego. Descendants of
these people now run most of the local trade and
Dalmatian and Croatian names abound in all the streets.
Punta Arenas lays claim to several distinctions in¬
cluding that of being the cleanest and best-kept town in
Chile and the one with the highest living standards. It
also boasts of being the capital of the province with the
smallest proportion of illiterates and, lastly, of being the
southernmost town in the world. This it may well have
been at one time, but its position has now been usurped
by Ushuaia, a rapidly growing town in the Argentine
part of Tierra del Fuego, which already has 7,000 inhabi¬
tants. In Puerto Williams, however, Chile can still boast
of having the most southerly established village in the
world. Round about, there are still a few cattle farms
and also the tiny Mejillones reserve where some twenty
to* thirty Yaghans, the last survivors of the Fuegians, live
to . this day. (For the story of what happened to many of
the Indians see The Unesco Courier, issue N° 8-9, 1954.)
From Puerto Williams on Navarino Island on the
farthest tip of Chile Where aeroplanes can land I
boarded a Chilian naval vessel which took me through
the Beagle Channel to the surrounding islands and round
the ill-famed Cape Horn. On the beautiful calm day
when I saw it it had nothing sinister about it whatever.
This trip around the channels of Patagonia was fol¬
lowed by long excursions on foot through the forests of
antarctic beech which clothe the mountains of Navarino
Island, where the only living things one meets are flights
of parrots with their shrill calls and herds of the graceful
guanacos which inhabit these solitary parts.
I also went to look at the glaciers which seem to hurl
themselves down from the heights of the Darwin Cordil¬
lera and then crash into the Beagle Channel. Travelling
by lorry along the roads and tracks of Tierra del Fuego,
where hundreds of wild geese take flight as one appro¬
aches, I visited several ranches, the Sombrero oilfields and
also the fishing-grounds off Useless Bay.
Back again on the mainland, I crossed the particularly
arid steppe country the home of sheep and wild ostriches
which borders the Strait of Magellan on the Atlantic'
side. Further north, I visited several lignite mines.
Today these are worked on a scale sufficient to meet local
needs only, through the area between Punta Arenas and
Puerto Natales has enormous deposits of this mineral.
New treks on foot across the pampas brought me to the
CONT'D ON PAGE 25

PATAGONIA (Continued)
E. Aubert de la Rue
LASHED BY WILD WINDS
With its grey skies, heavy rains
and tempestuous winds, Patagonia
is . a country of wild appearance,
The beech tree (above) on Navarino
island, its upper trunk blown into
an almost horizontal position, has
become a weathervane of nature.
Here, the great west winds blow
with gale force almost every day.

The Unesco Courier. January I960
At an altitude of
1,500 feet the blan¬
ket of forest is so
exposed to the fu rious
westerly winds that
trunks become twis¬
ted and tormented
into a tangle through
which it is almost
Impossible to pass.
© E. Aubert de la Rue
Children at Punta
Arenas play among
the bare timbers of
a wrecked vessel.
Patagonia Is one of
the stormiest regions
on earth, and Its
swirling waters have
tossed many an un¬
lucky ship to disaster
on the rocky shores.
© Almasy, Paris
beauties of the Cerro Paine region, whose mountain tor¬
rents, like many of the icy streams in the south, abound
in salmon.
Crossing into another province, I visited the island of
Chiloé where some of the old-established settlements
irresistibly recall parts of Canada. If the resources of
the "Big Island" as the local people call it its forests,
farms and the sea around it were properly exploited, it
should be possible to raise the present low living standards
of the people.
In the few summer months I spent travelling all over
Chilian Patagonia, using every kind of transport, I was
able to see the striking contrasts offered by this country.
Calm sunny days, sometimes even hot ones, alternated
with spells of icy rain, snow-squalls and hurricanes.
This preliminary survey, including as it did the possi¬
bility of sounding out and listening to local viewpoints,
was an invaluable first step to working out a programme
of research along the lines envisaged by the Chilean
Government. Great hopes are placed on the rational
exploitation of the resources of its southern provinces.
These resources are complex, bearing on such varying
activities as cattle-breeding and agriculture, lumbering
and marine biology (to aid the development of the fishing
industry) and tourist travel for which the grandeur and
beauty of certain areas would be an undeniable attraction.
Of considerable importance, too, are the prospection for
mineral deposits and the use of Patagonia's widespread
potential hydro-electric resourcesvital elements in the
industrialization of some sectors of the country's economy.
25
