Unesco-Laurenza
TWO NILE GODS wreathing the floral emblems (papyrus and lily) of Lower and Upper Egypt round the hieroglyphic symbol for
"to unite." These carvings decorate two thrones of the colossi of Rameses II on the façade of the Great Temple at Abu Simbel.

THE DRAMA OF NUBIA
by Georges Fradier
OMEONE once said that it is best to announce a
great calamity like a fire, a massacre or a
tidal wave, in measured tones and in simple
words. I shall therefore say quite simply: The
monuments of ancient Egypt, among them
Philae, Amada, Kalabsha and Abu Simbel, are in danger.
But I wonder if the full significance of this sentence will
not escape some persons. What it really means is that we
ourselves are in danger. The construction of the High
Dam at Aswan threatens to engulf these monuments, or
to disintegrate them. In other words it will obliterate
them completely and amputate a portion one of the
most extraordinary portions of our memories.
I say "memories" advisedly. By definition as well as
etymologically, a monument is something that reminds
us; it is a memorial, a remembrance (the Latin verb
monere from which it comes means "to remind").
To the artist and the historian, a monument even
creates memory, and is sometimes the foundation of a
whole branch of learning.
Painted caves and rock carvings are monuments: they
do more than recall the world of hunting and magic In
which men lived ten thousand years ago. They alone have
revealed this world. Before they were discovered, this
world was completely unknown and did not exist.
In its place were all sorts of preposterous suppositions.
But when we discovered it, we added thousands of years
of knowledge, of conscious and unconscious adventures,
to our past. In fact, the revelation is still so new that we
have not had time to glean all it can teach us about our
distant ancestors, that is, about ourselves.
The Upper Nile has hundreds of prehistoric sites,
mostly unexplored. Three or four rivers of the world,
and the tenacity and genius of those who first lived along
them, are the sources of what we call our arts and our
sciences. But it was hardly fifty years ago that we began
systematically excavating prehistoric strata in the valleys
of the Tigris and Euphrates, the Indus and the Nile. Such
excavations are expensive and yield no gold or ivory trea¬
sures. But there was plenty of time to dig or so we thought.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE DRAMA
OF NUBIA
(Continued)
These great
cannot be
testaments in stone
allowed to perish
Suddenly the Aswan dam project has raised a cry of
alarm; within five years, within four years, the unexplored
sites of Egyptian Nubia will be forever beyond our reach.
According to further plans which have already been
announced, the artificial lake will rise southward as far as
the Dal (third) Cataract, and most of Sudanese Nubia
will also be swallowed up in its turn.
In the Sudanese part of Nubia, more than 400 kilo¬
metres of alluvium, sand and sandstone hold the secrets
of the first colonists of the Nile. They built their villages
at the edge of a Sahara which was probably still savanna;
no doubt it Was they who Were the preceptors of Egypt.
Will we now abandon hope of piercing the mysteries of
that remote culture buried at the junction point where
the Mediterranean world and the African world meet, and
the study of which can throw so much light on the origins
of both and on the links which perhaps unite them ?
To resign oneself to such a loss would mean blithely
accepting a kind of partial amnesia, like that of a man
who has no memory of his early childhood or of his
parents. It is quite possible that he may be happy
without it. But we should pity him for having been
emptied of his history and for not knowing where he
came from. On the excavation sites which must be open¬
ed up immediately in Nubia, archaeologists and pre-
historians may find the memories we lack (and this lack
is cruelly felt, as soon as we are aware of it), memories
which give dimension and proportion to mankind.
To save the temples
international
aid is necessary
Other monuments were destined for more solemn pur¬
poses. The kings who created Philae, those who had
colossal statues and halls carved deep in the rock of
Abu Simbel, those before them who built the pyramids,
believed they knew and sought to proclaim until the end of
time "whence we come, who we are, whither we are going."
We do not share their conviction, but we do not smile at
it either. We know it to be the most precious depository
of our collective memory: what we have come to call
culture, or as we used to say, the humanities.
No progress or decline of civilizations has prevailed
against this beauty, which remains irresistible today even
to the most ignorant men. These temples and statues are
still, after twenty or thirty centuries, the models of the
beauty they served to define. One does not need to grasp
their whole historic significance in order to realize that
they are among the highest works of man among the
really great achievements which justify our speaking of
humanity and make us feel, in 1960, beholden to the
architects, the painters, the sculptors, the priests and even
the workmen of the divine pharaohs.
There are other bonds, too. Anyone may if he so desires
have brotherly feelings in his heart for the thousands of
millions of men who preceded us on earth; or be moved
by the thought of the long, slow development of technical
mastery. Yet a nobler kinship is revealed to us by the
most ancient masterpieces of art; they are manifestations
of a need to go beyond what was done before, of a fervour
and a pride about which history, without them, would
tell us practically nothing.
These irreplaceable monuments (and irreplaceable they
are, for no museum can ever be substituted for a tem¬
ple, the sacred ground about it and the sky that bathes it)
are more valuable than all the gold mines of the world.
And there are not so many such monuments. The true
masterpieces of art, and especially of architecture, are
rightly said to be universal: they are part of the heritage
of all peoples, and that means that all of us need them.
Only a few cities, however, only a few periods in history
have reared them. A few countries hold what remains of
the marvels which it was the privilege of certain centuries
to amass along the shores of the Mediterranean, in China
and in Egypt. Time, conquerors and merchants have
destroyed so much already that there is dangerously little
left.
We need only a bit of violence, a bit of neglect, a bit of
avarice, and Greece, China and Egypt herself will have no
more to show us than formless ruins like those in a
little town of Burgundy where, 160 years ago, there still
stood the greatest of Romanesque churches, the master¬
piece of the European Middle Ages, Cluny.
Today, an international institution exists which would
have opposed the demolition of Cluny, even if the
destroyer had invoked public necessity as his excuse. This
institution is Unesco ; one of its tasks is to safeguard the
cultural and scientific heritage of mankind. It has heard
the appeals of the United Arab Republic and the Republic
of Sudan. For indeed no one desires to destroy the glories
of Nubia. The authorities who have decided to build the
high dam are the very ones who are trying to do every¬
thing to preserve the monuments in the valley that will
be submerged. But to do everything means to have the
financial and technical resources which the authorities
regrettably do not possess. International aid is therefore
indispensable.
No one should imagine that this campaign was conceived
on the spur of the moment, that it is just panic at the
eleventh hour. The Government of the United Arab
Republic, thinking of the fate of Nubia, turned to Unesco
nearly five years ago. A Documentation and Study Centre
on the history of the art and civilization of ancient Egypt
was then founded; it has been working under steadily
greater stress to carry out a full scientific survey of the
monuments in jeopardy. (See page 40.)
However, saving the temples themselves, with their sites
and, in some cases, the cliff they form part of, requires
resources on a much vaster scale. Furthermore, even
before the rescue operation can begin, thorough geogra¬
phical and geological studies of the ground must be made.
Excavation expeditions
in Egypt & Sudan
to receive 50 °/o of finds
In July 1959, Unesco sent a special mission to the author¬
ities of the United Arab Republic and shortly after¬
wards, in agreement with them, asked the Institut
Géographique National in Paris to make a photogramme-
tric survey of the area, both from the air and from the
ground. In October, Unesco convened in Cairo an inter¬
national committee of Egyptologists, archaeologists and
engineers. The experts journeyed up the Nile from the
Aswan district as far as the Sudanese frontier and explor¬
ed most of the monuments along the valley which is to be
submerged a few years hence.
At the first meeting of the committee, the Egyptian
Minister of Culture and National Guidance, H.E. Seroit
Okasha, made an extremely important declaration on
behalf of his Government. In exchange for the interna¬
tional assistance requested, the United Arab Republic has
offered (1) to surrender at least half of all future excava¬
tion finds made in the threatened area except for certain

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
specimens which may be considered unique or essential
to Egyptian museum collections; (2) to authorize excava¬
tions on other Egyptian sites; (3) to cede certain temples
of Upper Nubia and permit them to be shipped abroad;
(4) to give up an important collection of ancient objects
which are State property.
The Government of the Sudan, in exchange for inter¬
national assistance, has offered, with the same reserva¬
tions, 50 % of the finds made in the area.
Today, the Director-General of Unesco, after a unani¬
mous decision by the Executive Board, is launching a
solemn appeal to governments, appropriate public and
private institutions and to the citizens of all countries to
take part in this great international rescue operation.
The Director-General now is in possession of the
experts' outline of the first emergency steps envisaged in
the plan to rescue the monuments of Nubia. This plan
includes a detailed list of all the threatened monuments,
and what must be done to save each of them from des¬
truction. Frescoes must be taken down; bas-reliefs must
be cut out; small temples must be taken apart stone by
stone and rebuilt in a safer place, some in oases which
the dam waters will create, others abroad.
One would not
dismantle
Westminster Abbey
However, as regards the famed ensembles of Philae
and Abu Simbel, the verdict of the experts is cate¬
gorical: the only solution is to preserve them where
they stand. One would not dismantle Westminster Abbey
and set it up again elsewhere. One cannot "save" the
Parthenon by reconstituting the Acropolis in an open air
museum.
The Island of Philae, tragically flooded nine months
out of the year since the first Aswan dam was built in
1902, can, on the contrary, become an island again. The
rock of Abu Simbel can and must escape the muddy
waters which need only to lick the feet of its colossal
statues to cause them to disintegrate within a few years.
The most imposing and most urgent task is the one to
be undertaken here. A group of engineer-advisers at this
very moment are on the spot making the necessary
surveys and studies.
To build dikes between the high dam and the artificial
lake, downstream, so that Philae may find its purity and
native sun again, to raise a rampart off Abu Simbel, so
as to preserve not only the most majestic temple of the
Upper Nile but also the light and shadow which make
its statues live this undoubtedly will cost money. Much
more money than we are in the habit of giving to archeo-
logists, art historians and museum curators. The sum
may reach $30,000,000. But When we think that it is being
asked of 81 States, among which are the richest and most
powerful countries in the world, it seems hard to feel
frightened by such a figure. One is even irresistibly
tempted to compare it with that of the most modest
armaments' budget... However, comparisons of this kind
are, it would appear, in bad taste and frowned upon as
unrealistic...
So let us look at the photographs in this issue of the
dwellings built for the gods thousands of years ago and
which have suddenly become so fragile. Men and women
of all ages, of every rank and language, will be looking
at them with us. But not one of us is without responsi¬
bility: not one of us is powerless in our country, our com¬
munity, our city. While we turn these pages, we cannot
be indifferent to the fate of these great testaments of
stone, these proud, tragic affirmations of an eternal,
invincible will to ennoble mankind.
Photos Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
Prince Amen-her-Kepshef, one of the two hundred
children of Rameses II, nestles between the feet
of the second colossal statue of his father on the
façade of the Great Temple at Abu Simbel. At some
unknown date, the head and torso of this colossus
broke off from the mountain side in which the figure
had been carved. The story goes that a hole was
bored into the chest at neck level and wood hammered
and pounded in. Water was then poured inside
causing the wood to expand until the top of the
statue split off. The headless figure is seen in the
large colour photo on centre pages (26-27) with the fal¬
len rock at its feet and boring gashes at shoulder level.
