HOW LONG DO THEY LIVE ?
by David Gunston
Sow long do wild things live? Is man's normal
lifespan puny by comparison with many of
them? Like many other fascinating aspects of
nature, records here have been much distort¬
ed. Genuine Methuselahs are as rare in nature
as they are amongst human beings. In point
of fact, only trees live a great deal longer than men, and
from the animal kingdom only the giant tortoises of the
Galapagos and Seychelles Islands regularly live beyond
the human limit. Elephants, the next longest-lived ani¬
mals, occasionally outlive man, but very few other creat¬
ures achieve such a feat under normal conditions.
Nevertheless, some quite remarkable facts do emerge
from an undistorted study of longevity in the wild. Man
has always tended to overestimate nature's powers of
granting long life to her creatures. Once he realized
that some things do outlive him he fell for every exagge¬
ration that was thought up by quack sages, from the
6,000 years of every churchyard yew to the phoenix which
"lyveth 300 or 500 yeares, when whiche yeares have pass¬
ed she maketh a neste."
It is strange that trees should have such a hold on
life, especially since the shortest lives in all nature are
also found in the vegetable kingdom: many flowers of
cacti live for a few hours only, and the flowers of wheat
live for two hours at the most. The claim for the oldest
tree in the world comes from Queensland, Australia, where
a macrozamia tree is reputed to be at least 12,000 years
old, although it is still only 20 feet high.
Trees 3,000 years old
when Christ was born
Trees of obvious age have inspired more popular falla¬
cies than any other living things. The famous dra¬
gon trees of Orotava, in the Canary Islands, most of
which have now been destroyed, were widely held to be
anything from 8,000 to 10,000 years old, perhaps With some
justification, although no reliable ring-counts were ever
made to prove this.
Probably the crown for the genuinely oldest tree alive
to-day is held by the gigantic Tule cypress growing in a
spacious churchyard in the village of Santa Maria de
Tule, near Oaxaca, in Southern Mexico. Fully vigorous
and of a spreading Weeping habit, this amazing tree has
a trunk diameter of 52 feet, which means that 28 people
touching finger-tips can barely encircle it with ease. Yet
it is only about 150 feet high, and is therefore over-topp¬
ed by many ancient Californian sequoias, or redwoods,
for which extravagant claims are also made. Yet the
average girth of a sequoia 3,000 to 4,000 years old is
seldom much above 36 feet. The Tule cypress's history
is lost in the mists of Mexican time, but it is undoubtedly
every day of 5,000 years old.
The oldest proved age for a giant sequoia, based on a
careful ring-count, is 4,000, and many still growing are
over 3,000 years old. Indeed, a 1,000-year-old sequoia is
still a youngster. Even so, it is a staggering fact that
any living organism which was contemporary with the
Bronze Age and the Ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamian
civilization, and which was over 3,000 years old at the
birth of Christ, should still be thriving to-day. It is
deserving of moré respect than that given it by visiting
fools with their initial-carving penknives.
Churchyard yews are often over 1,000 years old. Beech
trees rarely exceed 400 years, and the normal life-span
of most trees of this kind is not more than 250-300 years.
30
Many others die before they reach 150. Frequently the
Iknown dates of alien trees artificially introduced into
other countries disprove false claims of old age. For
instance, it is commonly held that Francis Bacon plant¬
ed the catalpa in Gray's Inn, London, but this species
was not introduced from America until 1726, when Bacon
had been dead exactly a century.
The Galapagos and Seychelle tortoises are the only real
Methuselahs of the animal world, regularly attaining a
life-span of 100 to 150 and occasionally 200 years. Tor¬
toises, notoriously slow a-dying, have a firm grip on life,
for many species may live to be centenarians. One famous
Marion's tortoise lived in ithe army barracks at Mauritius
from 1766 until 1918, when it was killed accidentally at the
age of 152. Mediterranean tortoises live long, too, and
one has been reliably recorded as dying when 125, while
the little box turtle has been known to reach 123.
Of all mammals only
elephants outlive men
Of all the mammals, from mice to Whales, only the ele¬
phant sometimes outlives man, although many speci¬
mens enjoy the traditional human span or less. Ac¬
cording to the records of the Bombay-Burmah Trading
Company, of their 17,000 working elephants, only about
nine per cent, live to between 55 and 65, and less than
two per cent, beyond 65. Quite a number of elephants
over fifty years of age have been known in zoos, and one
in the U.S.A. was said to be 85 When it died.
It is the rare exception that reaches the full century,
and the stories of zoo elephants having carried "several
generations of children" on their backs are somewhat
exaggerated. The original "Jumbo" of the London Zoo,
whose popularity started such tales, died from an acci¬
dent when only 24. Nevertheless, some of the tawny old
bulls in herds of wild elephants have probably lived for
longer than the average man.
The domestic horse, if allowed to survive into senility,
probably lives next longest amongst the mammals, and
several cases of fifty-year-old horses are on record, and"
one exceptional case of 62. Even so, a horse living to 47,
as one did recently, attracts a good deal of attention.
Most horse-owners have their animals destroyed long
before that.
Tiniest beings have
shortest life spans
A donkey has been known to live to 47 also, and in va¬
rious zoos, a hippopotamus of 41, a rhinoceros of 40
several bears from 30 to 34, a spiny anteater of 42 and
a chimpanzee of 26 are all authenticated instances of
comparative longevity. The oldest dog whose claim seems
allowable was 34; one of over 20 is exceptional, and 18
a remarkably good age for the average pet. Cats however
do live rather longer, and specimens known to be 39, 31
and 27 are recorded and many over 20 are known.
The longest reliably accurate life-span for a whale is
37 years, but it is generally thought that the larger whales
normally reach 30 or over if the whalers let them. At
the other end of the size scale insects have notoriously
short lives, although a tapeworm once lived inside a man
for 35 years.
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

The Unesco Courier. April I960
RECORD HOLDERS
IN THE LONGEVITY
STAKES
CAT
39 years
PARROT
140 years
**$j&
TORTOISE
200 years
DOG
34 years
"Slow and steady wins the race", according to the
fable of The Hare and the Tortoise in which the
slowest mover was the first home. The wisdom
of the maxim seems to be borne out by statistics.
In the animal world only the giant tortoises of the
Galapagos and Seychelles Islands regularly live
beyond the human limit. Here are some examples
of lifespans in the animal and vegetable kingdoms
arranged clockwise in order of their maximum
known longevity. Between the ages of the duck
and the cypress tree is a difference of 5,000 years.
31

HOW LONG DO
THEY LIVE? (Continued)
In all these cases the records of creatures kept in arti¬
ficial captivity are longer than they would be for wild
creatures. The hazards of nature are such that real old
age is comparatively rare and is achieved only by fluke
or good fortune. Loss of vigour, failing eyesight, and
above all, deteriorating teeth take their swift toll in the
wild, leaving only a tiny proportion of the original popu¬
lation to enjoy a lengthy span.
Cockatoos go bald
& lose their memory
In a Zoo, things are different: food is plentiful, with
no need for hunting; there is permanent shelter and
freedom from enemies. Even accidents are rare.
The 25-year-old fox in captivity is really abnormal, for
its opposite number in the wild is already at 14 or 15
ancient, with broken teeth, scarred muzzle and grizzled
emaciated body. There is an authentic record of a wild
tiger of 17, but among the smaller hunters the Weasel
is decrepit at eight. Badgers may live to be 16 or so, and
they are closely followed, surprisingly enough, by toads,
which live much longer than frogs. Generally speaking,
the smaller and more prolific the creature, the shorter
its average expectation of life. There is undoubtedly some
link between physical size, low reproductive powers and
longevity.
The oldest known bird is always said to be the mute
swan shot in Derbyshire in 1887 bearing a ring on one leg
dated either 1717 or 1711, which seems .to indicate that it
was at least 170 years old at the time of its death. An eagle
shot in France in 1845 was found to be Wearing a metal
collar with a Latin inscription indicating that the bird
had been used for falconry in the Caucasus in 1750, over
90 years before. Both these cases, if true, are quite excep¬
tional.
The raven is probably the commonest bird Methuselah,
records of 69 years being known. Other birds surviving
for over half a century include pelicans and condors, 52;
eagle-owl, 68; golden eagle, 56. Amongst captive birds
parrots achieve the greatest age, 140 being about the
record here, while a number have lived well over the
century. Cockatoos also enjoy long life, several reaching
their nineties without loss of perkiness, although baldness
and loss of memory are usual.
Genuine old age amongst truly wild birds is difficult
to prove, but is undoubtedly infrequent. A magpie of 30,
an Arctic skua of 25, a chaffinch of 17 and several ducks
of 14 are all probably holders of maximum ages. Indeed,
to reach 10 is a feat for most small birds, and larger birds
of 20 or so are quite uncommon. Captive geese live for
much longer than their wild brethren: one was 44 when
it died, and records of 33 and 37 have been proved accu¬
rate. I also know of a pet canary aged 23, and an Am¬
erican bird is said to be 32 and still singing. An eel of
56 and a mirror carp of 47 lead the known fish veterans.
Although cases are known of a goldfish of 30 and a plaice
of 25, most of the larger fish seldom reach their twentieth
birthday, and nearly all the smaller species die before
they are 10 or 12.
All in all, man with his traditional threescore years
and ten fares batter than most of his fellow creatures.
Only the silent immutable trees make him look a mere
baby.

