QUESTION MARKS IN THE DESERT
by Dr. Anwar Shoukry
Director of Pharaonic Antiquities, Antiquities Service of Egypt
and Professor Francois Daumas
Director, French Institute of Oriental Archaeology, Cairo
No one who visits present-day Nubia
at different times of the year can
fail to be struck by the two sharp¬
ly contrasting landscapes. In
winter, during January for instan¬
ce, the country has become a sort of nar¬
row lake which extends to the cliffs on the
Libyan and Arabian sides of the Nile valley,
on which stand villages with large houses,
painted and adorned with earthenware tiles.
But in summer particularly in August and
, September when the sluice gates of the
Aswan dam have been opened to let through
the flood waters the Nile retreats almost to
its old bed. Wide stretches of black earth
appear, providing a few green crops which
often do not even ripen. And in places,
great temples, most of them almost invi¬
sible under the winter waters, now tower
up in the shape of imposing ruins: Ka¬
labsha, Dendur, Dakka.
When the building of the first dam was
decided on, the Antiquities Service of Egypt,
then under the direction of Gaston Mas-
pero, not only consolidated the temples,
but also carried out excavations in the area
before the dam was raised and then each
time it was heightened until the flood-
water level reached the 121 metre mark.
It might at first be thought, therefore, that
only the land above spot level 121 would
remain to be excavated before the erection
of the High Dam.
In archaeology, however, things are
never as simple as they may first appear.
How can one be sure that a valley has
been properly excavated when, despite the
fact that it is not very wide, it is hundreds
of miles long? Is there any chance of find¬
ing something in the areas flooded in
winter? What may be found above spot
level 121? Have excavations in Nubia left
no mysteries still to be penetrated?
First of all there are certain sites where
the excavations carried out have been
inadequate. They should be continued as
long as we are lucky to have the low
waters during the summer, particularly in
the case of the great Nubian temples. The
scientists who were sent to monuments
like Kalabsha or Wadi es-Sebua cleared the
inside of the temples but did not explore
the surroundings.
In 1956, a study was made of the struc¬
ture of the various walls that surround the
temple of Kalabsha. It did not take long
to realize that one of these walls could be
explained only by the presence of a sacred
lake. Only one such lake that of Den-
dara has come down to us intact.
Excavations at Kalabsha are thus clearly
imperative. Clearing work carried out to
the west of the supposed lake by the Anti¬
quities Service in September 1959, has
already brought to light the roofs of two
chapels which are apparently intact. Un¬
fortunately, the Nile rose abnormally high
during this period so that excavation work
had to be interrupted. This is not the
place to enter into a discussion on the
theological reasons justifying these excava¬
tions but it will be readily understood that
a detailed knowledge of the way a temple is
arranged is important if one is to get really
to the heart of Egyptian religion.
In the present case, what is at stake is
not merely an architectural survey but the
interpretation of an essential element in
ancient temples. And this may be all the
more important because in Nubia, where
the population has never been very dense,
the monuments have suffered less then else¬
where.
The situation is much the same as re¬
gards the temple of Wadi es-Sebua. Exca¬
vations in the past cleared only the avenue
lined with sphinxes (the dromes). We
know nothing of the entire front part of
the sanctuary buried under the high
waters of the Nile and which could provide
information of the greatest importance.
Some sections of the exterior wall are still
visible, but no one has ever thought of
surveying or exploring them. Thus with¬
out citing any other example, excavations
will certainly yield major results as far as
the study of religion is concerned.
But even during the high-water season,
archaeological work could very well yield
excellent results. The research carried out
on the two occasions when the height of
the old dam was raised, laid bare a stran¬
gely refined yet primitive civilization, that
of the Blemmyes, dating from the sixth
century A.D.: well-provided royal tombs,
furnished with coffers richly inlaid with
ivory, pottery of all kinds, games, even
completely accoutred horses.
The Meroitic culture the name comes
from Meroe, the capital city of its kings,
near Shendi has brought to light many
facts of which we had no inkling, in parti¬
cular the penetration of Greek influences
in these somewhat remote regions of Afri¬
ca. Recently, in a Meroitic cemetery bor¬
dering the high waters, an Italian mission
unearthed a copper bowl engraved with the
image of a cow, of very fine workmanship.
The same mission, last year, resumed exca¬
vations at Ikhmindi and had the luck to
discover an inscription describing how the
city was founded, in the Byzantine era.
The German excavations at Amada have
likewise been very encouraging.
But there are still points in doubt. It
is to these that attention should be drawn.
Research that starts from reflexion may
well lead to more interesting discoveries.
Upper Nubia has many traces of the
Middle Empire and the XVIIIth Dynasty
whereas in Lower Nubia the remains date
mostly from the XDCth Dynasty and the
Graeco-Roman era. But we are convinced
that, if the temples of Lower Nubia had
been more carefully excavated, they would
have yielded a larger number of ancient
documents.
There is an even more tantalizing ques¬
tion. The viceroys of Kush, who governed
the country from the XVIIIth to the XXth
Dynasty, seem to have resided at Aniba.
But only one tomb of any importance has
been found that of Pennut. No necro¬
polis of viceroys. No residence. Yet
these mighty chiefs of Egypt's African em¬
pire, would not have been satisfied with a
mere house, however large. They must
have had a palace. Funeral statuettes,
called Oushebtis, of other viceroys, show
that they had tombs, at least secondary
ones, even if their bodies were brought
back to Egypt. Where may we find these
vestiges of the Egyptian occupation of the
country in remote antiquity?
These are the kind of questions excava¬
tion expeditions will have to find answers
to. We hope they succeed before the great
sheet of water submerges Nubia forever.

