1?
H^^ ACISM has been called the social cancer of our time. It gnaws away slowly and
insidiously until it invades the whole organism of society and erupts in violence
and death.
In the years immediately following the Second World War it may have seemed that racism
was definitely on the decline. Racial hatred had logically led from discrimination to acts of indes¬
cribable horror and death camp massacres carried out on an industrial scale. The shock and
repulsion that swept the world so discredited the doctrine of racism that it dared not show
itself cynically and blatantly as it had done before.
The struggle against Hitlerism had had its own logic too. One could hardly battle racism
and still practice it, even indirectly. And so, in the countries united against Nazism many bar¬
riers of discrimination and prejudice tumbled and a spirit of greater tolerance marked rela¬
tions between the different races.
But the cancer of racism was by no means extirpated.
Human memory is short, and the gruesome past slips or is pushed easily into oblivion. The
death camps of yesterday have apparently not been sufficient to put an end to the doctrine that
one race is superior to another. The older people in many countries have forgotten them; the new
generations barely know they existed. Furthermore, ten years of fanatical racism sowed dra¬
gon's teeth around the world and one cannot tell when they may germinate and lead to a terri¬
ble harvest.
Today, the excesses of racialism are universally decried and condemned, but the racist out¬
look or attitude which is at the root of these excesses and makes them possible is still with us.
It is all the more dangerous since ours is the century of the great awakening and accession to
indépendance of the coloured peoples of the world who have long been its victims. Instead of
being accepted as normal and foreseeable, the mistakes and hesitations made by the newly-
independent peoples as they pass through the trying initial periods of autonomy are interpreted
in racist terms by certain people as proof of racial inferiority. In its turn, the racism of the
white man has given rise to a reaction among coloured people which, rightly or wrongly, is des¬
cribed as "counter-racism".
Many public and private organizations, both national and international, have sensed the dan¬
ger of latent racism in the world and have taken steps to combat it. Through science and edu¬
cation the twin means at its disposal Unesco has been at grips with the problem since the
first years of its creation. (The Unesco Courier too has devoted several past issues to racism.)
Last year and again this year racism became front page news once more. An epidemic of
anti-Semitism in many countries and the massacre of negroes in South Africa set off a wave
of world protest culminating in the condemnation of such acts by the Human Rights Commis¬
sion of the United Nations. At Unesco, where feelings ran high, the Executive Board in a spe¬
cial meeting voted a strongly-worded resolution (see partial text on cover) denouncing racial dis¬
crimination, anti-Semitism, violence and hatred, and called on governments and Unesco to cam¬
paign against these evils and to propagate "the doctrine of the total equality and kinship of all
men and women everywhere."
If racism is to be eliminated as an active ideology of our time we must know more of the
terrain on which it develops. One thing we do know: the place where preventive measures can
be most effective is in the school and in the home. That is why Unesco has set out to inform
both the teacher and the general public of the basic facts established by modern science.
Neither anthropology, nor biology nor for that matter any science offers the slightest
justification for racist dogmas, which are based on discredited scientific notions or emotional
irrationalism. The full facts still need to be placed before every person so that the social cancer
of racism may one day be eradicated.

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
Courtesy Cahiers du Cinema
CRY, MY BELOVED COUNTRY
MASSACRE AT SHARPEVILLE. This Is the picture that shocked the world last March when nearly 100 Africans were killed
and over 200 wounded at Sharpeville, South Africa, as police opened fire on a crowd protesting against the rule which forces Africans
to carry passbooks. Top photo is from "Come Back Africa", a film which spotlights the lot of the Negro in South Africa.
© United Press, London
