PHILAE
The sacred isle
by Etienne Drioton
Professor at the Collège de France
The riches of the island of Philae with its exquisite temples
and colonnades and the graceful " kiosk " of Trajan have
consecrated its renown. The temples are not the work of a
single pharaoh. Each new king embellished and extended
what his predecessor had done. But practically all the build¬
ings which still stand are due to pharaohs of the Hellenistic
period or to the Roman Emperors who governed after them.
Right, bas-relief on the first pylon of the Temple of Isis shows
Horus between his mother Isis and the goddess Hathor.
Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
34

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
For the generation before mine, the temple of Phi¬
lae was still the pearl of Egypt.
My teacher, Georges Bénédite, who copied its
inscriptions in 1887 and 1888, ten years before the
building of the first Aswan dam was begun, often
spoke of Philae as one of the most remarkable experiences
of his life. He would describe his feeling of enchantment
each time he crossed the grim granite-rock desert of
Aswan and came within sight of the sacred island of Isis.
There stood the temple of the goddess reflecting her
pylons, porticoes and kiosks in the blue waters of the Nile,
surrounded by palm-trees and acacia mimosas. It was,
Bénédite said, the vision of Paradise for one emerging
from hell.
But it was not for its beauty alone today somewhat
diminished, since the flooding of the island throughout
most of the year has destroyed the vegetation that Phi¬
lae was famous in ancient times. In the last period of
its history, it' had, with the adjacent islands, become one
of the great religious centres of ancient Egypt, replacing
Abydos in the cult of Osiris.
Philae is the smallest of three islands, which are the
remains of a granitic shelf, running from south-west to
north-east, from which the rapids of the First Cataract
begin, and winch the Nile has demolished in carving out
its course. Philae is also the most easterly of these
islands. To the, west, separated from it by a narrow
channel, is the island of Bigeh, twelve times its size;
then comes El-Hêseh, three times larger than Bigeh,
beside the west bank of the river.
On his journey about 450 B.C., Herodotus did not get as
far as this region. He stopped at Elephantine, four and a
half miles below Philae, and merely questioned the in¬
habitants about points of interest that lay beyond.
From what they said he gathered that the country above
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Unesco-Laurenza
35

PHILAE
sacred
isle
(Continued)
Flute player
Elephantine was mountainous and that one could see the
chasms from which the Nile issued, between the crags
named Krophi and Mophi. However, he noted nothing of
interest before the island of Takhompso, twenty miles
farther south. There was, then, presumably nothing
remarkable about the region at that time.
This agrees with negative archaeological data. The
oldest building remaining on the island of Philae is the
small temple of Nectanebo II (359-341 B.C.). This monu¬
ment is dedicated to Isis, identified with Hathor and asso¬
ciated with the gods of Bigeh.
The remains of the temple of Bigeh are the façade of
a vestibule built under Ptolemy XIII (father of the cele¬
brated Cleopatra) and the central part of a pylon
decorated under the reign of the Emperor Augustus. The
building replaced another one, dating perhaps as far
back as Sesostris III (1887-1850 B.C.), and in any case as
far as Thutmosis III (1504-1450 B.C.) and Amenophis II
(1450-1425 B.C.). These last two kings had adorned it with
statues. The gods worshipped there were those of Ele¬
phantine, the ram Khnum and his companion goddesses,
assimilated to Hathor. Nothing in the composition of its
pantheon revealed any particular pre-eminence given
either to Osiris or to Isis.
However, their supremacy was established in the area
by the first century A.D. The historian Diodorus Siculus
wrote:
"Others maintain that the bodies of these two divinities
(Isis and Osiris) are not at Memphis, but near the fron¬
tier between Ethiopia and Egypt, in an island of the Nile,
near Philae, called for this reason 'the sacred plain'.
The monuments of the island are shown in support of this
opinion: the tomb of Osiris, venerated by the priests
throughout Egypt, and the 360 vessels for libations
surrounding it. The priests of the locality fill these vessels
with milk every day, and with lamentations invoke the
divinities by name. Apart from the priests, no one is
allowed on the island."
Hieroglyphic inscriptions carved in the temple of Philae
confirm and add to the information given by Diodorus
:o-L-'' , ^êWSSêM
-^ . Ä
m
\m\í
m
fe*í
ê'i-t *
If
fei
^êVj
2d
Siculus concerning the group of sacred islands at Philae.
In particular, a divine edict on the subject is inscribed in
two versions on the portal of the Emperor Hadrian. The
better-preserved of them may be translated as follows:
"The Holy Mound is the sacred golden domain of Osiris
and his sister Isis. It was predestined therefore from the
beginning (of the world)... Milk shall not be lacking to
this Mount of the Sacred Wood, nor to the temple where
Osiris is buried. Let there be provided for him, round this
place, 365 tables of offerings, upon which there shall be
palm leaves, in order that libations may not cease, that
water may never be lacking about him. Let there every
day be divine service by the appointed high priest;' let
there be a libation to Isis, Lady of Philae, when the liba¬
tion of each day is poured. Let there be no beating of
drums or playing of harps or flutes. No man shall ever
enter here; no one, great or small, shall tread upon this
spot. Nor shall any bird be hunted, nor any fish taken,
within 40 cubits to the south, to the north, to the west,
to the east. No one here shall raise his voice during the
sacred time of the days when Isis, Lady of Philae, who is
enthroned, shall be here to pour the libation each tenth
day. Isis, Lady of Philae, will embark for the Sacred
Mound on the holy days, in the sacred bark of which the
name is... (effaced).
"Re has signed this writ; Shu son of Re has signed
this writ; Kêb son of Shu has signed this writ, which
Thot himself has composed."
Photos Unesco-Raccah
Tambourine player
Harpist
Such was the religious character of Bigeh during the
second century A.D. All or part of it was sacred to Osiris
and had become, according to the Greek term, an Abaton,
that is, an area within which it was forbidden to pene¬
trate. The sleep of the dead god beneath his sacred wood
must not be disturbed. The same rule of silence was
imposed, during that period, in all the sanctuaries of
Osiris, notably those of Memphis and Abydos, which also
had their Abaton. But none of them achieved the fame
of Bigeh.
Close by this island dedicated to the dead god, Isis
in her temple of Philae belonged to the world of the
living. For this very reason, so as to provide a link with
the world of the departed, she devoted herself to
maintaining the cult of her brother-husband. On all holy
occasions, the idol of Isis was taken from its tabernacle,
embarked on the river and disembarked at Bigeh, where
it presided over the solemn libations at the tomb of Osiris.
The religious geography of the Philae site would be
incomplete if mention were omitted of the function of
the island of El-Hêséh. The excavations carried out by
the American archaeologist G.A. Reisner have led to the
discovery of some funeral stelae which prove that the
westernmost and largest island in the group contained a
necropolis in which the faithful could be buried as near
to him as possible, though the Abaton discipline kept
them away from the tomb of Osiris. The custom was
inherited from the oldest traditions of Abydos.
As we see, the history of Philae mirrors the religious
trends which inspired Egypt in the days of the Ptolemies
and the Roman emperors. During the Assyrian, Babylo¬
nian and Persian invasions, the people gradually turned
36

away from the gods of the State religion, the sun gods
who had been unable to protect Egypt.
The faith of the people was transferred to Osiris, whose
legend explained all ills and authorized all hopes. The
cult of Osiris spread rapidly in those calamitous times,
and it is not surprising that it should then have reached
the threshold of the Cataract, where only the gods of
Elephantine had been honoured before.
The same trend was observable throughout Egypt. A
legend was created to explain why there were so many
temples of Osiris, for which the ritual required that each
of them should have a tomb of the god. Seth had cut
Osiris' body into sixteen parts and dispersed them
throughout Egypt in order to prevent Isis from reassem¬
bling them. She, however, went in search of these
fragments and, wherever she found one, she made a tomb
for it and consecrated a temple. Bigeh, for instance, was
supposed to possess Osiris' left leg.
But this arrangement did not lead to harmony amongst
the temple clergy; each temple claimed to be the sole
possessor of the authentic relics. So finally a legend
prevailed according to which Isis, in order to baffle Seth,
had deposited many coffins of Osiris in different parts
of Egypt; but only one of them, which could not be
distinguished from the others, contained the god's body.
Thereafter, each temple had no trouble in claiming that
its coffin was the right one Bigeh just like the others.
The Unesco Courier. February 1960
Another feature of religion at this time, unknown in the
Pharaonic period, was the tendency to give more impor¬
tance to Isis than to Osiris. This tendency is apparent
in the religious establishments of the Philae group. The
mortuary character of Osiris being accentuated, Isis
remained the living element, helpful to men, of the divine
couple. The temple of Philae was dedicated to her. We
should also bear in mind that, assimilated to the Great
Goddesses from Asia, it was she who, in the Roman
Empire, patronized the mysteries whose epithet was not
"Osirian" but "Isiac".
While speaking of all the mirabilia which antiquity
attributed to the Philae island group, we cannot fail to
mention that the old legend of the Krophi and Mophi
crags, sources of the Nile, as related by Herodotus, finally
took up its abode there. A bas-relief in the temple of
Philae shows, hidden under the earth in the midst of the
rocks of Bigeh, crouched in a cavern from which he dis¬
patches his flow of waters, the god Nile. The ancient
Egyptians, whose armies had many a time taken the road
to the Sudan, knew as well as we do that the Nile came
from much further south. But they also believed that its
peculiarities its regular floods and the fertilizing power
of its waters were due to a good genius hidden some¬
where in the bed of the river, perhaps in the Cataract, the
swirling of which proclaimed his presence and his activity.
This was not physical geography, but mythical geography.
WC-#*
3 /*.'? '
Unesco-Raccah
A magnificent view of the Temple of Isis at Philae. Foreground, the second pylon ; behind it the first pylon with white line near
top showing high water mark in the Nile flood season. In background, colonnade is just barely visible. The name Philae is said
to come from the word Pillaq meaning "the end", the island being at the southernmost limit of Egypt in the Nubia area. In the
Arab period it was known as Qasr (castle) or Qasr Anas el WogQd, a legendary personage from the Arabian Nights. The three mus¬
icians shown on opposite page are some of the charming representations found on the columns in the Temple of Hathor.
37
