In July 1957 began one of the great scientific
co-operation enterprises of our time when the
International Geophysical Year (I.G.Y.) was launched
with the participation of some 70 nations. Though con¬
ceived at first as an 18-month world venture to advance
knowledge of our planet, all the participating countries
unanimously agreed to extend it for another year the
year of International Geographical Co-operation (I.G.C.).
During this period, oceanography and marine research
made tremendous progress. Scientists acquired greater
knowledge of the seas and the oceans, of the history
of the earth, of the life of deep-water creatures, the
forces affecting weather and the geography of the sea
bottom, to name but a few fields.
Now, scientific bodies in all countries have decided
to continue their collaboration, and the Indian Ocean
the least studied stretch of water in the world has been
chosen as the theatre of research operations for the next
four or five years. (See page 19.)
Four Soviet research vessels the Vityaz, the Lomonosov,
the Ob and the Sevastopol are equipped for this work.
The Vityaz, a ship belonging to the Institute of
Oceanology of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, has done
most of her work in the Pacific and Indian Oceans. At
the beginning of the 1958-59 period, she had completed
her twenty-sixth expedition and then, in the following,
months, she made four trips and started on a fifth, her
thirty-first expedition, to the Indian Ocean. This scientific
Odyssey has seen the Vityaz log more than 100,000 miles,
making 600 stops for research.
The processes going on in the ocean are so closely inter¬
woven that they can be understood only through detailed
study of all their aspects. Scientists aboard the Vityaz
are mainly interested in the life story of the ocean, the
pattern of chemical distribution, the circulation of deep
waters, the distribution of deep sea life, the study of
biological processes, examination of seabed deposits by
drilling and acoustic prospecting, rate of sedimentary
deposits, and the geography of the ocean floor.

FROM TROPICAL
WATERS TO
ISLANDS OF ICE
Behind this matter-of-fact list lie some fascinating
objectives. For example, the study of the sedimentary
deposits making up the ocean floor may throw consider¬
able light upon the history of our planet and its seas.
Even today, the prevalent theory on the origin of the
earth's seas holds that they were formed by condensation
of atmospheric vapour which had accumulated during an
earlier and warmer period. Many scientists, though,
believe that the oceans were formed by the spewing out
of water from the Earth's crust by volcanic action.
This agrees with the theory that celestial bodies were
formed by the accumulation of meteoric matter which
later grew hot as the result of radioactivity. If this
theory is correct, it provides a new explanation of why
the sea is salty. Salinity, some scientists maintain, did
not come from an accumulation of salts washed into the
ocean by rivers, but from primary matter expelled from
the earth's crust along with the water.
At any rate, reading the story in deposits on the bed
of the sea should enable us to reconstruct the story of
the earth more accurately than by merely studying its
land surfaces. Remains of micro-organisms found in
.
»
É
p. *
t -
1 1
Ataaùrf» "L^^r »-3ÄÄ»*#^»* .
m¡1
Official Soviet photo Unesco-Bill Simmons
SCIENTIFIC ODYSSEY of the Soviet ocean-going research ship Vityaz (left) has taken it over 100,000 miles, which Included
more than 600 halts for observation and studies. Right, buoys on deck of another Soviet research vessel, the Mikhail Lomonosov
ate used in making detailed maps of the ocean floor. Dropped into sea with a light wire attached, the buoys are then anchored to
the bottom. A flag on top and a radar reflector permit scientists from the ship to make accurate measurements of the sea floor.
Photo was taken last year when vessel docked in New York, where the First International Océanographie Congress was being held.
38

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
these seabed deposits have already given scientists a clear
picture of those changes of climate which occured during
ice ages when hot and cold periods alternated.
The Vityaz worked in both the northern and southern
Pacific, straddling the Equator. Her measurements of
the Pacific's "trenches" showed the greatest depth
11,034 metres in the Marianna depression. Her scientists
also made the noteworthy discovery of swift-moving
currents on the ocean floor and even in certain deep
trenches. In some places, these currents were found to
move at the rate of 7.9 inches a second. On one of her
southern expeditions, the Vityaz linked up with an Ob
expedition to the Antarctic, covering an entire meridian.
Biologists studying the deep trenches of the ocean
found some strange and very ancient forms of life.
Research by the Vityaz and the Danish vessel, the
Galathea, has led to a map showing the distribution of
life on the ocean bed. In deep water, there are only
a few milligrammes per square metre of these microscopic
animals, but the quantity often rises to several kilo¬
grammes per square metre offshore.
Deep-water currents deadly to fish
Then the Vityaz left at the end of 1959 on its latest
expedition to the Indian Ocean. On this trip, she has
covered 30,000 miles with 247 halts for (research work.
A new map of the ocean bed has been plotted and it shows
wide plateaus, isolated mountains, new deep-sea currents
and many forms of animal life unknown to science. In
some parts of the Indian Ocean, scientists found large
deposits of the teeth of extinct species of sharks and
the beaks of squids. Elsewhere, biologists studied the rich
life of coral reefs and, in the western part of the ocean,
they found shoals of tuna and other food fish.
In the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian sea, the Vityaz
concentrated upon certain deep-water currents which are
poor in oxygen and wreak havoc among fish whenever
they rise to the surface. This expedition was accompanied
by three Indian scientists, including the well-known
marine biologist, Prof. Nil. Prasad.
Elsewhere, océanographie research has yielded major
results in the Arctic Basinthat deep-water area of the
Arctic bounded by a continental shelf. Research vessels
are unable to reach this region and the work has been
done mainly by aircraft and by stations established on
drifting ice floes. Both Soviet and American scientists
have worked in this area.
The most extensive study of all has been made of the
Arctic ice pack. Its drift was measured by 100 radio
beacons and 50 automatic meterological stations installed
over a large area. The average rate of general drift has
been found to be about two kilometres a day.
The most outstanding feature of the Arctic Basin is the
presence of old ice in the ice pack. This ice, many years
oía, makes up about 70 % of the total, the remainder
being under two years old. Under the influence of the
wind, the boundaries of the great Arctic ice pack may
shift as much as 600 or 700 kilometres. At all times of
the year, stretches of open water appear in the ice pack
because of the irregularity of its drifting but there are
areas in which open water appears regularly and remains
for long periods.
Large fields of ice, known as "ice islands" are found
within the pack. Some have an area as great as 200-
300 square miles. Since they often have a smooth, flat
surface, these "islands" are convenient sites for research
stations working over long periods.
Research in the Arctic has also told us a great deal
about the bed of this ocean. One discovery was that
of the Lomonosov Range, a chain of underwater mountains
running from the New Siberian Islands to Greenland. The
highest known point in this range is at a depth of 954
metres, but there may be even higher peaks awaiting
discovery elsewhere.
Those are a few of the results which have been gathered
on océanographie expeditions by one country, the Soviet
Union. No one country is able to gather all information
about the ocean. Only the co-ordinatioñ of the efforts
of all countries connected with the sea can arm science
with the information needed to make the sea's wealth
available to all mankind.
Official Soviet photo
LIGHT PENETRATION in sea is being measured from the deck
of the Vityaz with a hydrophotometer. Research by this ship in the
Pacific included measurement of ocean gulfs and discovery of rapidly mo¬
ving currents on the ocean floor and even in certain deep trenches.
39
