JANE ADDAMS
crusader for peace
an d you th
by Pauline Bentley
In 1860 there was born
in the village of Cedar-
ville, among the rich
and open countryside of
Illinois in the United
States of America, a deli¬
cate, bright eyed little
girl whose childhood
was haunted by a dream.
She dreamt that only
she remained alive in
the world and that upon
her alone rested the res¬
ponsibilities of making
a waggon wheel which
would get the world
started again. In the
daytime she would go to
the village forge and
watch from the doorway
as the blacksmith work¬
ed, asking him questions
and trying earnestly to
memorize the process of wheel-making.
She never told anyone of this dream until she wrote
of it years later in her autobiography, and in time it
slipped into its place among childhood memories, but
looking backward from today it could appear prophetic;
that small dreamer grew up to be Jane Addams whose
whole life was in fact dedicated to "making wheels and
getting things started".
By the time she died in 1935, Jane Addams was a world
figure, famous for her achievements in social reform and
her work towards international peace. Her work was
manifold and its legacy still enriches us today; she founded
the famous Hull House settlement in Chicago, and in an
age when any kind of social work was totally unorganized,
she and the handful of ardent helpers she gathered round
her helped to set the pattern of present day formal socio¬
logical investigation. Their efforts brought better living
and working conditions to the under privileged and
oppressed, without reservation of class, creed or race,
particularly to the children and young people who were
their first concern, and the gradual expansion of their
influence enforced civic legislation which changed the
social fabric of the time.
To the causes she championed Jane Addams brought a
penetrating intellect which never failed to take into
account any opposing viewpoint, a quietly brilliant gift of
oratory and authorship, and an unfaltering integrity which
established her as one of the outstanding public figures
of her time. In private life she radiated a compassionate
and gentle serenity which endeared her to those whom
she inspired. She was honoured by the love of the people
among whom she lived and worked as well as by numerous
civic and academic distinctions, and in 1931 she received
the final accolade when she became the first American
woman to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
The driving force behind all her endeavors was the
24
conviction that only understanding between people, bet¬
ween groups and societies and nations, could ensure peace
and progress and to develop such understanding was her
main ambition:
Its roots as her basic inspiration seem to have sprung
from her own character and also from the lessons of her
childhood.
Her mother died when Jane was two, and she grew up
closest to her father. John Addams was a friend of the
young Abraham Lincoln. Jane adored him and eagerly
absorbed from him the Lincoln traditions of tolerance
and liberty ; she was much struck as a child to find him
one day dazed with grief at the news of the death of the
Italian liberator, Mazzini. From her father's reaction to
the loss of this stranger, whom he had never even known,
Jane learnt something she prized all her life "a sense
of the genuine relationship which may exist between men
who share large hopes and like visions even though they
differ in language, nationality and creed."
She began early to question the inequalities of society,
when as a little girl her father took her into the nearest
town and she saw for the first time the squalor of city
poverty. "The horrid 'little houses so close together"
worried her into resolving that when she grew up she
"would build a big house among .the horrid little ones so
that people could come and visit her." Twenty years later
she was to do exactly this when she opened Hull House
in the Chicago slums, but like so many great altruists, she
found the path from wide-eyed idealism to its final reali¬
zation was anything but straightforward.
I n 1881, her father died and though she tried
to smother her grief by concentrated medical
. study at Philadelphia, her health broke down
under the strain. The spinal disorder with which she was
born necessitated an operation, leaving her physically and
nervously exhausted, and for her health's sake she was
advised to travel in Europe. The next few years passed
for her in spiritual confusion and depression. The careless
round of pleasure and enjoyment which seemed to be
expected of a young woman of her type seemed to her
futile and her education only a burden to her direct
understanding of the sufferings which she glimpsed on
her travels.
In the journal she kept during these years she notes
her bitter resentment at the wretched poverty of a London
midnight street-market selling rotten food and the impulse
in Germany which sent her flying to remonstrate with a
brewery overseer regarding some oppressed women labour¬
ing for him. These experiences and her own feeling of
inadequacy before them filled her with an unformulated
desire to take action.
Her purpose, as yet shadowy and indistinct, was "to rent
a house in a part of the city where primitive and actual
needs are found." This idea simmered until 1888 when, in
Madrid, Jane voiced it to her travelling companion and

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
Photo © Max Stein, courtesy Philadelphia Inquirer
A SOCIAL PIONEER, Jane Addams was involved with practically every great cause and reform movement in the United States.
She was champion of the poor, pioneer in health, welfare and social work, instigator of child-labour legislation, and winner of
the 1931 Nobel Peace Prize. Above (on extreme right) she campaigns for women's voting rights at a New York meeting in 1912.
old college friend, Ellen Gates Starr. She realized that if
she was to do more than just dream, she must put her
idea to the test at once. The time of preparation had
given way to the days of action.
Losing no time, she left at once for England, where she
sought help and advice from Samuel Barnett, the English
clergyman who had four years previously founded the first
of all settlements, Toynbee Hal in London. She then
hurried back home to look for '"her big house among the
horrid little ones."
She found it in Chicago, where rapid industrial expansion
and alternating waves of boom and slump had made
the city one of the gaudiest as well as the most wretched
in America. Fortunes from railroads, meat-packing and
shipbuilding were being made while the most abject
poverty remained untended by any kind of civic legislation
and nowhere more so than in the nineteenth ward of the
city, which was largely given over to the emigrants from
all over Europe who, through bewilderment and poverty,
found themselves exploited as cheap labour.
Here, on Halstead Street, surrounded by sweatshops,
tenements and filthy alleys, Jane Addams discovered Hull
House, a fine old mansion degenerated into half drinking
saloon, half warehouse. With the care and enthusiasm of
new young housewives, she and Ellen Starr furnished it
and in September 1889 opened it "to provide a centre for
a higher civic and social life; to institute and maintain
educational and philanthropic enterprises and to inves¬
tigate and improve the condition of industrial Chicago."
From the beginning, Jane Addams found the claims of
the children of Halstead Street her first attention. A
kindergarten and nursery came into being almost im¬
mediately and a Boy's Club grew up rapidly. Remembering
the unhurried joys of her own countryside childhood
games she opened a playground at Hull House and later
agitated for the first civic playgrounds and parks where
the city children could at last play in .peace and in safety.
Great place was given to the force of Art in education;
arts and crafts classes were soon started with a studio
and music school and a new world opened to children who
had never before known of its existence.
One of her foremost concerns was the relationship bet¬
ween first and second generation immigrants; she saw
how the more rapidly Americanized children tended to
despise their elders, and she gathered these old people
together to give exhibitions of their native skills in weav¬
ing, spinning and cooking, and so on. These meetings
became a feature of Hüll House, giving new dignity to the
older immigrants and earning them a new respect from
their children. At the same time, she took up the cudgels
for the children when their parents acquiesced too readily
in their being employed in ways far too harsh for their
age.
When the immigrant children at a Hull House Christ¬
mas party refused sweets saying they "couldn't face them"
after working 14 hours a day in a sweet factory, Jane
Addams started investigating the whole question of child
labour to find that children of .five were Working in the
glass and textile industries. With Dr. Alice Hamilton and
Florence Kelley, who came as residents to help her in
Hull House, she started to work on this question,
continuing, against bitter opposition and even attempted
bribery, to combat it until, finally, after fourteen years,
in 1903, the first Child Labour Laws were passed in
Illinois.
Another of the Hull House residents, Julia Lathrop,
became head of the first Children's Bureau in Washington
and was also concerned with Jane Addams in the question
of the many juvenile delinquents spawned by poverty and
ignorance in the city. Their work led to the formation of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

r
the first Juvenile Court in America, a Juvenile Protective
Association, and later initiated the use of psychology in
the treatment of young criminals.
For three years Jane Addams worked on the Chicago
Board of Education trying to instil her ideas into the
factions which at that time composed it. "Our schools
must give the children better and truer standards for
judging life. Life does not ask whether a man can read'
or write so much as it asks him whether he can use
whatever faculties have been given him... To find a native
talent in a man, woman or child, and then see that it is
exercised, is one of the greatest objects of all social
work..."
Il
ON THE WALLS of the Riverside Church in New York stand
figures honouring two great humanitarians of the modern age :
Jane Addams (shown in photo above) and Dr. Albert Schweitzer.
26
n the first year, 52,000 people came for help or
advice to Hull House; in the second, thousands
.a week were coming and it is said Jane Addams
never refused to see any one of them. With her devoted
team of residents, she minded toaJbies, kept house, orga¬
nized new buildings as they were needed, maintained
finances entirely from her own pocket, or with the help
of generous friends, and wrote and lectured increasingly.
She published 9 major works in 30 years which established
her as an authority on social enquiry and leave an inde¬
lible record of her as a humanitarian.
She learnt patience and tenacity "Premature reforms
fail. Doctrinaire reforms fail. Reforms to be effective
must be rooted in and routed through the social conscious¬
ness. One does good, if at all, with people, not to people."
Jane Addams never lost sight of her guiding principle,
the simple understanding between people, but she was no
bigot; her effectiveness lay often in her balanced ability
to see all sides of every question; she tackled what lay
before her with humility and the wish, not the certainty,
to foe right. Walter Lippman once described her as "in¬
habiting reality", and Jane Addams was indeed no
theorist: she admired the inspiration of a Tolstoï, and
visited him at Yasnaya Polyana, in 1895, but she believed
fundamentally in action, in "'pushing vigorously but
kindly through and beyond all difficulties."
At the end of ten years' work at Hull House she had
grown immeasurably as a citizen and both she and the
settlement were world famous. The one building on
Halstead Street had become a huge establishment, with
training workshops as well as studios, a theatre, an art
gallery and a country club for summer recreational acti¬
vities.
Complete racial, religious and political tolerance
distinguished Hull House; it later earned Jane
Addams the (reputation of "dangerous radi¬
calism" and a good deal of .abuse, but for the moment
her star was set high and in the first decade of the 20th
century she achieved an almost imperial status in Ame¬
rica, with 14 academic honorary degrees and many prizes
to her credit.
Neither fame nor calumny deflected her from her work;
she handed all the money she made to the settlement and
went on to continue and enlarge her activities. Her
upbringing and background ensured her support of
Women's Suffrage and as the first world war approached
she became increasingly aware of their traditionally
pacific role in history. Her tenet of mutual understanding
and neighbourliness expanded into a confirmed inter¬
nationalism which inspired her finest work her work for
world peace.
In 1904 she was principal speaker at the National Peace
Societies' convention in Boston; in 1907 she published her
book "Newer Ideals for Peace" which was received en¬
thusiastically. She took part in the first National Peace
Congress ever held in America and supported Theodore
Roosevelt as the first President to use the World Court
at the Hague in an international dispute.
At the outbreak of the European war in 1914 she plung¬
ed wholeheartedly into the work for continuous mediation
of neutral powers to bring about peace. As a means to
this end, she accepted the chairmanship of the Women's
Peace Party which was to develop into the historic
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom,
dedicated "'to uniting women in all countries who are
opposed to any kind of war, exploitation and oppression,
and who work for universal disarmament and for the
solution of conflicts by the recognition of human solida-

The Unesco Courier. November I960
rity, by conciliation and arbitration, by world co-operation
and by the establishment of social political and economic
justice for all, without distinction of sex, race, class or
creed."
She presided over the Congress of Women in 1915 at the
Hague and accepted, with Dr. Aletta Jacobs of Holland, the
mission to interview leading statesmen of a world at war.
They were received courteously at top level in 12 capitals
and were told that neutral action to bring about an
honourable peace would be welcomed. Jane Addams
returned to Washington and handed to President Wilson
the report and resolutions of the Congress, some of which
in a modified form were embodied in .the famous 14 points.
America's entry into the war did not deter her from
her pacifist work, although public opinion turned bitterly
against her. She lost the support of even her family and
many of her Hull House colleagues, but she maintained
the League's decision to continue working for peace
wherever possible. Hull House continued to be a sanc¬
tuary for all shades of opinion and she defended cons¬
cientious objectors and harrassed immigrants.
generation facing the Depression. She was by this time
over 60 and increasingly beset by ill health which often
forced her into hospital but she never stopped her work
for Peace.
In 1931 she presented to President Hoover in Washing¬
ton a petition for disarmament signed by 200,000 Ameri¬
can women but had to refuse appointment as delegate to
the Geneva Disarmament conference the next year be¬
cause of ill-health.
She was waiting for an attack of bronchitis to clear up
before she could undergo a major operation which had
been recommended, when she received news that with
Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler she had been awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize for 1931. The day it was formally
presented in the presence of the Swedish Court, Jane
was in hospital in Baltimore; so she never heard the
address honouring her as '"the foremost woman of her
nation... the spokesman for all peace-loving women of the
world."
The Peace prize money she promptly handed to the
Women's Independent League for Peace and Freedom and
HULL HOUSE, one of America's
pioneer social settlements, was foun¬
ded . by Jane Addams in Chicago's
West Side slums. Here, for most of
her life, she strove against injustice
and unkindness, against dirt and di¬
sease, against greed and dishonesty
in public office, against intolerance,
bigotry, ignorance and war. Even in
her late years, she continued to take
a special interest in the myriads of
children who have found the key to
a new world in Hull House (left).
As soon as the war ended she again presided at the
Second Women's Peace Congress held in Zurich in
1919, supporting the League of Nations and forseeing the
dangers inherent in the Versailles Peace Treaty. After
an extensive tour with the Friends' Service Committee
through war-stricken Europe, she returned to travel the
length and breadth of America to plead for food for the
children and the starving people of all nations, irrespective
of their war-time allegiances.
Her attitude and her stand against military training of
any kind earned her personal vilification, but the Women's
International League grew and she presided at its confe¬
rences in Vienna, Washington, Dublin and Prague where
in 1929 she forced through her own resignation. During
the post-war years she travelled the world, presiding at
the Pan-Pacific Women's Union and speaking all over the
Far East.
When women were given the vote she turned her at¬
tention to what she called the humanization of justice in
which she included the Negro question, the immigrants
Quota Act, Old Age Pensions, and the needs of the younger
as far as her health would let her, she continued her work
for "'peace and bread".
Four years later she died, mourned by the simple people
of Chicago whom she had benefitted, and honoured by
famous men and women the world over.
This year her centennial is being commemorated by a
75,000 dollar grant from the Fieild Foundation Inc., for a
training school for settlement house workers, and by the
creation by the League and .the Office of the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees, of a "Jane Addams" house
for 32 refugee families in the refugee village of Spital on
the Drau in Austria. To these great and fitting ceremonies
in her memory there could be added the echo and example
of her own credo:
"I believe so firmly in this great world at peace, ready
to come into being as our wills turn toward it, that I must
needs go about this present world of disorder and darkness
like an exile doing such feeble things as I can -toward the
world of my desire. Nothing could be worse than the
fear that one had given up too soon and left one effort
unexpended which might have saved the world."
27
