ATOMS OVERBOARD!
by George W. C. Tait
Director, Division of Health, Safety and Waste
Disposal, International Atomic Energy Agency
PI
B ^^^ ADioACTivE waste is an inevitable result of
man's exploitation of nuclear fission. Such
wastes will appear in vast quantities if present plans and
hopes succeed in harnessing the atomic nucleus for the
production of a major fraction of man's future needs for .
energy. The thinking person may well ask if there is
any threat ¡to the sea from radioactive contamination
when he considers the common practice of using it as a
catch-all for undesirable waste.
The hazards of radioactivity have been underlined in
the development of man's use of nuclear forces, first as
a dangerous laboratory curiosity and later as an unpa¬
ralleled weapon of destruction. The knowledge of how
radioactivity in the sea can return to man through the
food he eats directs concern to this possibility. Unac¬
ceptable contamination of a major part of man's food is
conceivable if all the radioactivity produced in the fore¬
seeable future were to be dispersed uniformly in the sea.
The intelligent layman looks with some concern to the
scientist, the oceanographer or the marine biologist for
guidance, and to those responsible for the control of radio¬
active wastes for assurance.
The scientist in his turn approaches radioactive waste
disposal from two points of view. He may use his field
of science to investigate the safety of waste disposal or
he may use the threat of waste disposal to promote his
specialty. Both these courses are perfectly legitimate but
the scientist should indicate which course is being follow¬
ed. The oceanographer is concerned with how wastes
placed in any part of the ocean are dispersed and even¬
tually encountered by living creatures. The marine bio¬
logist enquires how these dangerous substances enter the
living organism, are concentrated or diluted as they pass
from one creature to another and eventually reach man.
The oceanographer in searching for the safest methods
of disposal into the sea had first been attracted by the
deep trenches which are found in various parts of the
sea. It seemed a reasonable guess that such depths
should be isolated from the upper waters for long periods
of time. As a result of more recent work this guess
appears to be wrong. The value of the ocean abysses as
Isolated disposal areas is now doubted. Nevertheless
there is considerable evidence that the deeper waters of
the oceans as a whole do not mix rapidly with the upper
layers. Estimates of the time required for mixing vary
over a large range (50 to 2,000 years). Even if the shor¬
ter time was correct there would be an advantage to put
wastes into deep rather than surface waters to delay
their uptake by fishes.
However, the extent and rate of mixing is little under-
Photos © C. O. I., London
ATOMIC 'SEWAGE' from a new British atomic energy establishment at Wlnfrith Heath in Dorset will be disposed of through
the pipe-line shown here under construction. Radioactive liquid wastes. from the centre, five miles inland, will be carried by the
pipe a further two miles on the seabed. The British already have a long experience of disposing of this kind of sewage from
their atom factory at Windscale In Cumberland. Here again a pipe-line carries the wastes two miles out into the Irish Sea.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ATOMS OVERBOARD ! (Continued)
stood, especially in the deep sea, and oceanographers
hesitate to provide any guidance as to the behaviour of
wastes without much further research. The food chain
and changes in concentration of radioactive material in
passing from micro-organisms in the sea through fish to
man is even less well known and a tremendous amount
of research is called for before general answers can be
found to the result of disposing major quantities of radio¬
active material into the sea.
99.9 % of wastes stored on land
There appears to be little demand on the part of those
responsible for radioactive waste to use the seas as
a general large scale disposal area. This situation is
due to several circumstances. In the first, place there is
no present need. Ninety-nine point nine percent of
wastes being produced are safely put away in permanent
storage. This storage is conveniently near the places of
production and does not raise the very real transportation
and handling problems which would come with large scale
waste disposal into the deep sea. This type of storage has
already been so perfected that its cost is probably less
than that of transportation of the waste to a suitable
place for sea disposal. Finally a not insignificant factor
is that the government scientists and engineers generally
responsible for advising on waste disposal practices are
conservationists at heart, and have little incentive to
recommend doubtful practices. There is little enthusiasm
for large scale future use of the sea.
A large part of this reluctance to turn to the sea is the
importance which is attached to it as one of man's
greatest resources and the fear that if a mistake were
made, it could not be corrected. As a result in planning
large scale disposal for the future most attention is
directed to the land, which appears to be the simplest
and best solution to our immediate problems. The future
looks to the use of favourable geological structures or
fixation in materials resistant to all weathering. Beyond
this, of course, lies the hope of new forms of nuclear
energy, which do not give the tremendous yield of wastes
found with the fission process.
Any reader of the daily papers might well wonder why
the much publicized disposal of radioactive wastes off the
coast of several countries has been overlooked so far in
this discussion. Simply because this sort of thing is
trivial beside what we have just been considering. The
quantities of radioactivity released are so small when
compared with the quantities produced that the discard¬
ing of these wastes can hardly be considered any real
contribution to the world's problems of radioactive waste
disposal.
Public as disposal 'watch dogs'
I't must always be remembered that all things are radio¬
active to some degree. The question then becomes what
degree of radioactivity in trash and garbage is to be
considered the cut-off point beyond which it cannot be
allowed to enter the sea. The writer knows of no one
responsible for the controls of radioactive wastes who
advocates allowing any amounts to enter the sea which
would adversely affect man and his environment. It is
generally accepted that there should be no adverse effect
on the harvest of food from even a small local area of
the sea. The technical problem faced by the responsible
specialist is to set standards and methods of control to
ensure that the radioactivity of wastes entering the sea
never reaches a sufficiently high level to result in pollution
even in a restricted locality (1).
Those responsible for controlling these relatively small
releases of radioactive wastes into the sea generally go
to great lengths to ensure that conditions leading to pollu¬
tion harmful to man cannot occur. It must of course
be recognized that pressure can be exerted to interfere
with the successful carrying out of their work. On the
one hand those who are most concerned with the econo¬
mics of nuclear energy may be tempted to advocate any
techniques which appear to provide the possibility of
cutting costs. This is particularly true at the present
where the calculation of nuclear power costs are very
critical and any small saving in handling wastes might
affect the competitive position of a particular proposal.
For this reason there is much to be said for an organi¬
zation which widely separates the control of radioactive
waste disposal from those concerned with production.
On the other hand there is an unfortunate tendency
of many scientific specialists to be unaware and uncon¬
cerned with the work of their colleagues in neighbouring
. fields. Even scientists are subject to human vanity and
like to think they alone have achieved enlightenment.
As a result, many criticisms of radioactive waste handling,
especially with respect to sea disposal, represent partial
information and cannot stand up to careful analysis.
C. O. I. London
(1) An international panel oí experts on the disposal of radioactive
wastes In the sea, set up by the I.A.E.A. and headed by Mr. Harry
Brynlelsson (Sweden) has recently submitted its report to the Director
General of the Agency. It Is hoped that Its recommendations will
form the basis for an international agreement to prevent radioactive
contamination of the seas.
ATOM-FISHING BOAT, Mary Munro II, alongside the
quay in Whitehaven harbour on a misty morning. Regularly
each month her crew search for radioactivity in the sea off
the Cumberland coast where an atom works discharges
its nuclear fission wastes through a long pipe-line.
In this situation intelligent members of the public have
a useful function and an important responsibility. They
should ask that those responsible for controlling the entry
of radioactive wastes into the sea should justify the.
measures they take. There is no sound argument for
secrecy. On the basis of justification they should support
those responsible both against pressure from, advocates
of laxity and from irresponsible criticisms by those who
have not taken the pains to inform themselves thoroughly
on the overall problem.
Maintaining the seas free from radioactive pollution
should not be costly, but its achievement does call for
consistent determination.
