The Unesco Courier. April 1960
People sometimes ask what purpose is served by
launching rockets into outer space and how this
can benefit mankind? The answers are that
rocket flights have already helped to solve a
host of scientific problems and are now
throwing light on a number of questions still
awaiting solution. Their greatest importance, however,
lies in the magnificent prospects they open up for the
future. That is Why We feel justified in saying that the
launching of space rockets opens up a new era in the
history of man's conquest of outer space.
All our technical progress and all our civilization are,
in general, closely bound up with our knowledge of
natural laws, that is," laws governing the Universe that
surrounds us. Natural laws cannot be adequately studied
within the narrow walls of our laboratories. For their
proper study we must get out into the boundless expanses
of outer space. Atoms of matter are the same everywhere
but their nature is infinite, with the manifestations
depending on external conditions that can only be partly
reproduced on Earth.
In outer space we find matter in states of great density
and great dispersion. The average density of the white
dwarf stars, for example, is ten thousand times that of
water; such bodies may exist for thousands of millions
of years. The density of interstellar space, on the con¬
trary, is about thirty degrees of magnitude less, being
about one atom to the cubic centimetre.
The temperature of the central regions of the Sun is
about twenty million degrees; at such temperatures
nuclear reactions are set off spontaneously and keep the
Sun's radiation going. The temperature inside the giant
red stars reaches thousands of millions of degrees and
is appropriate for the formation of chemical elements
heavier than hydrogen or helium. Material particles, the
nuclei of elements, mainly of hydrogen, that constitute
the streams of cosmic rays, are accelerated by the mag¬
netic fields of our galaxy to velocities approaching that of
light. All these processes take place in infinite space and
have been going on for a period of time that is, for all
practical purposes, also infinite.
We cannot understand the laws of nature and master
her secrets if we do not study the entire Universe in all
its more important manifestations. Nor can we properly
understand the nature of our Earth if we do not compare
it with related planets, even if only with those that cons¬
titute our own solar system.
So far the only bodies from outer space that have come
into contact with Earth are those meteorites and perhaps
remains of. comet nuclei that have broken through our
atmosphere and reached the Earth's surface without being
fully destroyed. Even ordinary meteors are burned up
in the upper layers of the atmosphere; we can only get
a glimpse of other cosmic bodies at a distance of millions
and millions of miles and, what is more, from the bottom
of an ocean of air.
It is this atmospheric envelope around the Earth that
hampers the study of the Universe. Constant atmospheric
turbulences distort optic images and they blur to such
an extent that really big magnifications cannot be
employed. It has therefore been found possible to observe
finer details of the structure of the solar surface by send¬
ing telescopes up in balloons, if only to a height of 6-10
miles, than it has been possible to do at terrestrial obser¬
vatories, even those located high up in the mountains.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CONQUEST
OF SPACE
(Continued)
Launched on A October, 1959, a Soviet
Automatic Space Station photographs the
far side of the moon for the first time. Far
right, Soviet vehicle at moment of taking
photograph. On signal from Earth, gas jets
stopped space station's spinning, lined it up
with sun's rays (shown by arrows) and focused
two lenses on moon. Exposed film was
automatically developed. A scanner changed
picture to electric pulses that were sent to
Earth. Right, diagram of flight trajectory.
Official Soviet photos
POSITION. OF THE MOON IN THE END
OF THE ASS'S CKU OF ROTATION
POSITION OF THE MOON
AT THE TIME
OF IT BEING
CIRCUMNAVIGATED
BY THE ASS -
The diffusion of sunlight in the atmosphere in daytime
and the luminosity of the high ionosphere at night
prevent the observation of such faint objects as the solar
corona at a great enough distance from the Sun or the
many indistinct nebulae that have recently been
discovered by the use of rockets. The Earth's magnetic
field prevents the penetration of primary cosmic rays
from outer space and in places where they do break
through they are fully absorbed by the upper layers of
the atmosphere so that we can only observe their
secondary effect.
It is equally true that the particularly active and, con¬
sequently, the most interesting radiations from the Sun
and other cosmic bodies are completely absorbed by those
upper layers of the atmosphere that affect them most
strongly. Until recently it has been possible to observe
the Universe from Earth only through a '"window"' limited
to radiations to which the eye is receptive.
It is only during the past few decades that another
"window" has been opened through which the much
longer radio waves can be received. The most active
cosmic radiations (which have the very shortest wave¬
lengths) are still beyond the reach of direct observation
however, because they are fully absorbed by the upper
layers of the atmosphere.
All these difficulties disappear once we reach outer
space. Imagine, for example, an astronomical observatory
flying through space as an independent planet. It would
be very easy for it to take samples of interplanetary
matter. What does this matter consist of, what gases and
dusts does it contain? Such a simple test would im¬
mediately solve the still disputed question of the sources
supplying the interplanetary matter which appears to
observers on Earth in the form of zodiacal light (1). If it
is dust it may come from comets and, partially, from
asteroids as the product of their constant disintegration
and would indicate the intensity of that process. If it is
gas it is emitted mainly from the solar atmosphere and
characterises the corpuscular radiation of the Sun. The
answers, obtained by a rocket observatory, will enable us
to check up on our conceptions of the nature of inter¬
planetary space and give them greater precision and, at
the same time, to draw new conclusions on the processes
that are going on within our solar system.
(1) A tract of nebulous light sometimes visible before sunrise or
after sunset extending along the zodiac on each side of the sun in
the form of an elongated ellipse.
Even a simple glance at the Sun or a planet through a
rocket telescope will tell us a great deal. We shall be able
to see the long streams of the solar corona that at present
can only be seen during a total eclipse and of which
only the part closest to the Sun is visible at other times
through a special instrument. Outside the atmosphere it
will be possible to see, against the black background of
space, how the corona gradually changes into zodiacal
light and begins to spread out along the ecliptic. The
aspect of the solar corona at various distances from the
Sun's surface will enable us to judge the extent to which
it is supplied with matter in the form of dust gathered
from interplanetary space and to what extent it is made
up of gases radiated from the Sun itself.
Space camera surveys the lunar 'seas'
Asimple spectral photograph of the Sun's corona and
other solar envelopes would enable us to register the
basic radiations of hydrogen and espacially of other
more heavy elements connected with transitions at the
lowest energy levels, that are outside the range of
observers on Earth. It is precisely these radiations, possible
only at corona temperatures of several million degrees,
that have the greatest effect on the upper layers of the
atmosphere and condition their considerable extension
and high temperature. The study of this solar radiation
in the X-ray region of the spectrum will most likely
enable us to understand the nature of the mechanism by
which the Sun influences the Earth and also the mecha¬
nism by which the so-called "flares" and other solar
phenomena arise; they are possibly connected with some
nuclear reactions.
There is also very much that can be explained in the
nature of the planets that form the solar system.
For the first time in history it has been proved possible
to obtain a picture of the hidden side of the "Moon and
to transmit it back to Earth from a telephoto installation
mounted on an automatic interplanetary station. The
image so obtained is clear enough to show even such
details as the central peaks inside the craters that have
been named Lomonosov and Tsiolkovsky. This is an
achievement that does credit to our scientists working in
the field of electronics. Since the camera was between
the Sun and the Moon at the time the photographs were
taken, the relief of the lunar surface is not discernible.
24

The Unesco Courier. April 1960
The following features distinguish the hidden side from
the earthward side of the Moon. On the earthward side
many of the craters have bright rays running from them
that are very distinct at full moon; those surrounding
some of the craters are very extensive and clearly marked.
They are always connected with the central peaks in the
craters and, it is believed, with their former volcanic
activity. Not a sign of any such formation is to be seen
on the other side of the Moon.
The far side of the Moon also seems to be deficient in
those dark patches that are called '"seas" and this is very
informative. The biggest of these "seas" on the earthward
side is the Oceanus Procellarum; the surface directly
opposite on the other side is bright and level with nothing
on it resembling a "sea".
Such a great difference cannot be a matter of chance.
It will be remembered that the Moon is not a perfect
sphere: the earthward side is pulled outwards in the
direction of our planet to a distance of several dozen
kilometres as though it were formed by the hardening of
a gigantic tidal wave. This makes it safe to assume that
the thickness of the lunar crust varies in different parts
of that body. It is of interest to connect this with the
intensity of lunar volcanic processes, in particular with
the process that gave rise to the lunar "seas". At a
certain period in the Moon's development, when the
craters and annular mountains had already taken shape,
large areas of the surface were in a molten state and later
hardened to form "seas" surrounded by high eruptive
formations, the mountain ranges. On the hidden side of
the Moon this process is scarcely noticeable.
A detailed study of this phenomenon will cast much
new light on the development of the Moon's crust; it will
also help towards a better understanding of the evolution
of our planet.
It is rather difficult to give a list of the various problems
that, it will be possible to solve by the use of a space
laboratory since its possibilities are immense. Here on
Earth we usually have to employ telescopes with a
magnification of no more than 300 to 400 diameters on
account of the interference of the atmosphere. Even at
the present level of optics it will be possible to make
telescopes for a cosmic laboratory that have a magnifi¬
cation of tens of thousands of diameters ; this means,
for example, that objects with dimensions of about ten
metres will be clearly visible on the Moon. It follows
from this that it will be possible to investigate the smal
lest features such as the crater mouths on the peaks in
the centre of lunar ring formations.
And how much that is new will be discovered by similar
observations of other planets, especially Mars! Schiapa-
relli and Lovell, who made their observations at the turn
of the century, worked under the best conditions available
on Earth. They discovered the canals on Mars and
believed them to be artificial engineering works. But
there are no canals in the sense in which they understood
them, and no regular formations ' of any sort on Mars.
There is something else there, something connected with
constant, systematic change. If a telescope a hundred
times more powerful than those in use today could be
turned on Mars many new facts concerning that planet
would come to light.
Will man migrate to distant worlds?
Even a simple photograph of Mars's spectrum simul¬
taneously in its infra-red and ultra-violet regions will
provide an ultimate solution to the problem of
whether oxygen is present or not. This may be proved by
studying the ozone bands, which cannot be done from
Earth on account of the mighty bands of ozone at great
heights in Earth's atmosphere. If there is oxygen on Mars
there should also be ozone, the latter being much easier to
detect than oxygen because of its absorbent qualities in
appropriate wavelengths. In order to "see" this ozone
we have to get rid on the interference of Earth's
atmosphere, we have to get beyond its bounds.
Everything that has been said so far is based on the
assumption that our cosmic observatory will conduct
observations at distances of millions of miles in the same
way as terrestrial observers. But motion in the practically
empty interplanetary space within the Sun's gravitational
field as, for example, the motion of all planets including
the Earth, does not involve the expenditure of any form
of energy, requiring only time, and one may easily ima¬
gine the possibility of approaching close to one of the
planets and even landing on it.
Is it worth while dreaming of the migration of man to
other planets in our own or some other system? We do
not think there is any need for it. Our planet is the best
for us in all the Universe. We have inherited it from
many past generations and we must try to make it better
for all mankind!
25
