THE GULF IS VANISHING
by Pierre Henri
T
\\ "Tp he blind need more than knowledge or university
degrees if they are to have equal chances in the
world of those who can see... A hundred years ago
it was a great achievement to be able to teach
a sightless person how to read, write, count and
to provide him with a minimum of general knowledge.
Today It means very little."
When I wrote this in an article for The Unesco Courier
(The Blind are Achieving a Fuller Rôle in Everyday
Life March, 1952) I was, in no way asserting as has
since been said that it is pointless to educate the blind.
To have upheld such a viewpoint would have been absurd.
In a world where educated men and women are striving
to bring the benefits of education to those who have so
far been deprived of them, it is inconceivable that one
group of human beings the blind should be ignored.
Furthermore, anyone who is deprived in some measure
of his physical or sensorial powers must make greater
demands on his intellect to compensate for what he lacks.
Even the sighted person sees as much with his mind as
with his eyes. But where the sighted person perceives, the
blind one must learn to understand and to familiarize
himself with what he cannot see: the implements he uses,
his home and his town. He has to use his imagination
and create a mental picture of so many things. If John
Locke the English philsopher called for "'a sound mind in
a sound body," we might in the present context affirm
that "'the less sound the body the greater the need for a
sound mind."
If the personality is deprived through an infirmity of
one of its elements, frustration is likely to occur. Unless
there is some form of compensation, sightlessness tends to
cause an imbalance. Education provides just such a
compensation: by widening vision through the mind it
acts as a safety valve, prevents the development of
Pierre Henri is Vice-Chairman of the World Braille Council,
created under Unesco's auspices, and is professor at the National
Institution of the Young Blind, Paris.
frustrations and reduces the danger of inner emotional
conflicts.
A man does not live in a vacuum, however, nor act by
and for himself alone. He is an integral part of an entity
where physical world, social universe and individual self
come togelther. From this viewpoint, education offers to
the blind person a way to restore himself in the eyes of
other men and thus, as it were, in his awn eyes. Thus
the feeling that it will compensate for their reduced
physical state stimulates the hunger of the disabled for
education.
It is in this respect that the Braille system, that
indispensable tool of learning which helps the blind to
equality with other men, has proved its worth. It was,
in fact, regarded at one time as a cure-all, as the answer
to the most difficult problem in the rehabilitation of the
blind. But whereas the development of intelligence and
the acquisition of knowledge are certainly useful elements
in this process of rehabilitation, they are by no means
the only ones.
The American psychologist, Thomas Cutsforth, himself
blind, advanced views in a study published in 1933 which
rather shocked people at the time, but which are
generally accepted today. Cutsworth argued that, no
matter at' what age it occurs, blindness immediately begins
to shape the personality in direct relation to the fact of
sightlessness. This is perhaps most apparent to the
ordinary person in a physical way. We have only to think
of the peculiarities of stance or gesture which are exhibited
by some blind people. They are so completely related to
blindness as to be known as "'blindisms."
The uninformed person would regard these as nervous
tics caused by blindness. They are in fact, usually fixed
habits, mostly acquired in very early childhood: a display
of hostility to the physical world (head thrown back, fore¬
arms held horizontally with hands hanging down, walking
on the heels with toes raised and feet apart) ; photophobia
(head held down); muscular activity designed to
compensate for a sedentary existence (movements of the
CONT'D ON PAGE 3 I
BLIND COUPLE
RAISES A FAMILY
Leading a happy family life in spite of blindness
has been the achievement of Mr. and Mrs. James
DiBiase of New York City. They play with
their children, Janet and Billy, have family
outings and are busy keeping up their modest
but pleasant home. With so many interests,
they have no time for self-pity. Marjorie
DiBiase does her own housework, and Jimmy
DiBiase has three jobs, running his news-stand
in the daytime, teaching music at the Brooklyn
Industrial School for the Blind in the evening,
and playing the piano in cafés during weekends.
Marjorie, a vivacious, cheerful woman, lost
her sight when she was nine years old; Jimmy
was only two when blindness struck him.
Both their children have normal vision. A
stranger, watching the group gathering around
the piano (left) would never realize that two
were sightless. "There are just a few things
we do differently from other people," says Mar¬
jorie "If the children want us to see something,
they have to put our hands on it. They accept
this as natural, because they grew up with it."
USIS
17

'DO-IT-YOURSELF'
STARTS EARLY
Among children under five only seven
in every 100,000 are blind whereas the
proportion of blind people in the world
as a whole is nearer 3 50 for every
100,000 inhabitants. Thus most blind
children have had sight at some time and
benefit from a visual memory which is
a definite aid to education. In many
countries this education is given in special
classes or special schools but as far as
possible it follows the lines of that given
to sighted children. Today many thou¬
sands of the young sightless are learning
to step out without fear, to play and work
with the seeing and to surmount their
disability. Above, reading a Braille book
in a U.S. school; left, young cooks in the
making at an English school; right, learn¬
ing to clamber about fearlessly on these
bars is part of the experience of living,
studying and playing together which all
children, sightlessor sighted, should have.
Campbell Press Studios Ltd., London.
18

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
19

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
THE GULF IS
VANISHING
(Cont'd from page 17)
PROBING THE PSYCHOLOGY
& BEHAVIOUR OF THE BLIND
body or head, hand rubbing, passing spread fingers in
front of the eyes in cases where there is still some ability
to distinguish light). To the lack of spontaneous imita¬
tion can be attributed that facial inexpressiveness which
gives young blind people an appearance of precocious
maturity and is also responsible for the non-socialization
of gestures.
The psychological and psycho-social effects, though
unseen, are none the less real. They include a tendency
towards an intellectual and social egocentricity which
leads the blind person to develop an idea of the world
around him and of his relations with others purely in
terms of self. They also include an inclination towards
excessive verbalism (which is misleading as to actual
intellectual endowment), egocentric day-dreaming (which
makes up for a decrease in outside activities and opens
up a pleasant world which can be shaped at will) , motory
inertia and an integration with the limited circle of his
own kind.
'Voiceless' objects 'speak'
through his finger tips
The effects on character, which are simply the conse¬
quences of the above personality traits, are more
familiar to those closest to the blind person. They
may run from aggressivity to a habitual or systematic
withdrawel into a private world, depending on tempera¬
ment and circumstances, and they open the way to end¬
less disputes.
In reality the picture is not as blacik as would appear.
Here a deliberately pessimistic approach has been taken
in order to show the effect produced by a physical
handicap when it becomes the dominant element in the
development of personality. At the same time it reveals
clearly the scope of the efforts which are needed to offset
this disturbing influence. Generalizations should be
avoided, however, because of various factors that exert
their influence.
Firstly, in Occidental countries at least, congenital
blindness is rare and even those who become sightless
before the age of six or seven before they have had time
to acquire the attitudes of the normally sighted and to
absorb a sufficient number of visual images are a small
minority, probably making up less than 5% of the blind
people of a given country. And it should be kept in mind
that two-thirds of the known blind are over 60 years of
age. Thus most blind people have been able to see for
most of their lives and have amassed visual images' to
which they continue to cling.
Secondly there is the vital impulsion which subcon¬
sciously brings a person to refuse the idea of being
defeated: it pushes the child to explore, to conquer, to
master his world and to imitate the sighted people around
him. This attitude, above all others, opens the way to
freedom for the afflicted from their affliction, and can
lead them to the supreme victory of no longer being
conscious of it.
Thirdly, and directly related to this; the attitude of
those surrounding the blind person must be taken into
account. Studies have shown that the development of
the young blind person is above all conditioned by that
attitude, which is itself governed by the affectivity (or
even the neuropathic state) of the parents especially the
motherrather than, by their intellectual capabilities.
It should be clear that we can do more for those "in the
shadows" than merely bring them "intellectual light",
valuable as this may be. The education of such an
individual calls for more than the mere removal of
ignorance; it is primarily a question of "normalization",
of removing as far as possible the consequences of the
"abnormality".
On the physical level this involves repair, the reduction
of the ocular results of the malady. If they are to be
accepted in a climate which is free of pity and of anything
likely to induce an instinctive revulsion, then certain
things must be done without delay for the blind person.
Certain other physical handicaps are scarcely noticed in
the sighted person, but take on a major importance when
accompanied by blindness.
Closely related to the foregoing but with an additional
intellectual element is the problem of coping with space
and the world around. The man with normal vision does
not have to learn to move about, nor to use makeshifts
(awareness of obstacles, for instance), nor to interpret
such fleeting signs as small sounds, subtle smells and
vocal inflexions. There is no limit to the number of
"voiceless" objects which are therefore not apparent to
the sightless person: he must take the initiative and
make them "speak" to him through his finger-tips. A
whole course of specialized instruction is needed.
The world of people is no less difficult for the sightless
than the purely material world. Blindness is the subject
of numerous preconceived ideas which are distinctly to
the disadvantage of the victim. The sense of inferiority,
insecurity, frustrations or inner conflicts induce in the
blind "associai" or even "anti-social" reactions. Once
again, this calls for a course of emotional training and
character moulding which may not involve visible
instruction but which is none the less a permanent
preoccupation of those concerned with the education or
re-education of the sightless. Additionally, there is the
question of social conduct, imitation and non-verbal
conventions which the normally sighted person acquires,
preserves or adapts through spontaneous imitation but
which must be induced (or maintained) in the blind unless
they are to become "desocialized".
These questions enter little, if at all, into the
education of the normally sighted; but for those
whose sight is seriously impaired, they are of more
importance than grasping some subtle grammatical point
or reading the classics, or learning dates or extracting
square roots. Of course, the two things are not mutually
exclusive, but if a choice must be made there can be only
one answer:
Serious danger of creating
social & vocational misfits
Since We are concerned above all With a work of social
rehabilitation, it is as well to stress that this should
be based not so much on the subject's background as
on the surroundings in which he will eventually live. All
educational systems tend to involve a loss of social
standing precisely because they seek to "raise up". But
where individuals With a normal sensory equipment are
concerned, there are so many forms of employment
available to them that out-and-out failures are
comparatively rare. For the blind, openings are limited
and changes of occupation difficult. The school is some¬
times responsible for social inadaptability. In western
countries where mixing and levelling-out tend to
obliterate racial or social differences, this happens only
in the sphere of professional activity, as some blind
university graduates have found.
v The problem becomes of still greater significance when
methods of educating or re-educating the physically
handicapped, are passed on to economically under¬
developed countries.
There have been missions or other religious groups who,
not so long ago, took the blind, young and old alike, from
their villages in Asia and Africa; who gave them a
European education and then, unable to find employment
for them, sent them back home where they were literate
in an illiterate society, equipped to do Work unrelated to
local needs and customs and where sometimes even their
traditional religion was no longer acceptable to them.
Nothing could be better calculated to increase the
difficulties of the blind and extend the gulf which
separates them from society when that society is
unprepared to assimilate them.
31
