French scouts &. Unesco
Clubs chalk up a success
FIFTEEN MILLION FRANCS OVERNIGHT
UNKRA
YOUNG KOREAN ORPHAN in the National School for the Blind at Seoul writes with one
of the special Braille plates supplied to the school through Unesco's Gift Coupon Programme.
Other Korean schools for the blind received help through the same programme which for the
past ten years has made possible a person-to-person international aid, with individuals and
groups in 14 countries raising funds to help pay for worthwhile educational projects in other
lands. Braille plates for the Seoul school were paid for by donors in U.S.A. and England.
IV
I ^B ever in the 10-year history of Unesco's Gift
^ Coupon Programme has there been a campaign
as dramatic and instantaneously successful as the unique
. nationwide public appeal launched last November in
France for funds to assist schools for the blind in various
parts of the world.
Sponsored by the French National Commission for
Unesco and conducted by the French Federation of
Unesco Clubs, with the aid of Boy Scouts' organizations,
the campaign was sparked by a radio broadcast on the
night of November 24. Before morning, over 15 million
francs ($30,000) had been collected from all over France.
Equal to the monetary success, which virtually wiped
out the most urgent needs for educational equipment of
five institutions for the blind on Unesco's Gift Coupon
project list, was the campaign's effectiveness in acquaint¬
ing a widespread audience with Unesco's overall efforts to
spur educational development, not only for the blind, but
for all people everywhere.
The Gift Coupon Programme has for ten years been a
popular vehicle for just such focussing of public attention
on problems in education throughout the world, as well
as for enlisting individual co-operation in working to
solve them. Designed at first to help reconstruct schools
and school systems destroyed or neglected during the
war, the programme has since been extended to include
educational institutions of all kinds on its project list:
schools, of course, community centres and development
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FIFTEEN MILLION
FRANCS OVERNIGHT
(Continued)
MORE THAN 400 UNESCO
CLUBS GO INTO ACTION
projects, technical institutes, libraries, co-operative
training groups, rehabilitation centres, women's and youth
organizations and many others. To-day, people of
14 countries in Europe and North America are talking part
in this person-to-person international aid by working
through their organizations to raise funds, buy the
UNEsco-issued Gift Coupons and then send them to the
project they select. Recipients use the coupons as a sort
of international "money order" to buy the needed
educational equipment from any supplier, who sends the
coupons to Unesco for redemption.
The organizers of the French campaign chose their
theme "Aid for the World's Blind" to commemorate
the 150th anniversary of the birth of Louis Braille,
inventor of the system of writing which bears his name,
and also to marik the 10th anniversary of the world
uniformisation of the Braille notation system under
Unesco's auspices.
Person-to-person aid goes
to Ghana and Indonesia
Although it is more- than a century since the Braille
alphabet was invented, most of the blind people
throughout the world still lead the same existence
as those in the Middle Ages. They are beggars, fortune¬
tellers, street-singers. The Braille alphabet has indeed
been adapted to nearly all languages, but in many
countries there is not a single library of works in Braille
and there are far too few specialized instructors. Africa
and Asia, which have the highest proportion of blind
persons, particularly lack teachers and equipment.
With these stark facts in mind, the French Unesco
Clubs set out to collect enough money to buy all the
Braille books and supplies, all the musical instruments,
all the physical training equipment and all the arts and
crafts materials listed as vitally needed items by the
institutions for the blind among Unesco's projects.
One of these is the school at Akropong in Ghana, which
started in 1946 when Church of Scotland missionaries
took three blind children into their care and began to
instruct them in Braille. Today, with some 50 sightless
pupils, the school has grown into a pioneering model cen¬
tre for blind training in Ghana, among whose 4 million
inhabitants there are some 50,000 blind persons.
The perfection and extension of instructional techni¬
ques in an Indonesian institution will also be assisted as
a result of the campaign. The Foundation for Rehabili¬
tation of the Blind in Semarang, the capital city of Cen¬
tral Java where the number of blind is estimated at more
than 100,000 persons, has established in its home and
school a comprehensive training programme.
Similar institutions in Ceylon, Iran and Tunisia com¬
plete the group of projects benefitting from the French
campaign, which from the outset was original in planning
and efficient in execution. The whole effort was designed
to generate widespread interest prior to the radio broad¬
cast in November.
First, the more than 400 Unesco clubs participating
organized action on the local level. Press articles on the
life and career of Louis Braille, on problems of the blind,
on the projects to be aided and other promotion literature
were appropriately distributed. A central point, usually
the town hall, for the collection of funds was selected.
Co-operation of local scout groups was arranged to man
these booths on the night of the broadcast.
Another innovation was the plan to offer a postcard-
record to the first 100,000 donors responding to the radio
appeal. This card featured an original design by artist
Jean Lurçat and a recording of a traditional Christmas
carol, arranged by organist Jean Langlais and sung by
the choir of the French Institute for the Blind. Since
then, 25,000 copies of this postcard-record have been
ordered by the German National Commission for Unesco
with the idea of starting a similar campaign in the Fed¬
eral Republic of Germany.
Pre-campaign publicity did not speak of fund-raising
or the exact nature of the programme to be carried out
on the night of November 24 during the popular broad¬
cast "Vous êtes formidables" over radio station "Europe
N° 1". On that night radio personalities launched the
appeal to millions of listeners, describing the projects,
giving background information on Unesco and its work,
and asking listeners to go to the central collection points
and donate to the cause.
The result truly was "formidable". Blind persons in
five countries will long toe grateful to the people of France
for this singular demonstration of good will.
MATERIALS FOR THE BLIND
GRANTED FREE ENTRY
Under its programme to promote the free flow of
information between countries, Unesco works for
the elimination of import duties and postal charges
on information materials needed by the blind.
Duty-free entry for books and other publications in
Braille is granted under the UNESCO-sponsored Agreement
on the Importation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Materials, now applied by 32 countries. These countries
also grant free entry to other educational, scientific or
cultural materials if consigned to approved institutions,
and provide import licences and foreign exchange for
all materials for the blind.
Acting on a proposal inspired by Unesco, the Universal
Postal Union decided in 1952 to allow publications for
the blind to be mailed abroad post-free. In an appeal
to Member States, Unesco asked governments to apply
this concession liberally and to exempt such publications
from internal postal charges as well. A number of
countries have since granted these concessions.
26
