&
THE WORLD'S KNOWLEDGE
^ T
H INSIDE A CIGAR BOX
WKËBBÊÊÊÈ
fr
\í
>.
A% í>£í ..¿¿i JkM% '
r .iL-/ wfáHE km'
fcy Ritchie Calder
'--vilLU
Ehen, in 1801, Jacquard invented a loom, in
which a series of punch cards enabled a machine
to weave figured fabrics which had once de¬
pended on the art and skills of hand-weavers, he
nearly lost his life in the riots which followed.
In Britain, when Kay devised the flying shuttle,
the weavers destroyed his house. When Ark-
wright, Hargreaves and Crompton further mechanized
weaving, the workers rose and burned the factories. The.
poet, Lord Byron, intervened impassionedly on behalf of
the despairing worker, whose livelihood was being taken
from them by the machines.
Yet these machines eventually meant work for millions,
cheaper goods for the people, and economic prosperity.
Until about fifteen years ago, the great engineering
advances were in machines to relieve men of muscle drud¬
gery. What this means might be illustrated by the fact
that the turbines of an ocean liner of today represent the
muscle-efforts of three million galley slaves, pulling on
oars. And the average modern worker in an up-to-date
factory can, with the flick or a switch, have at his disposal
work-power equivalent to a hundred human slaves.
But, in the past dozen years or so, new types of machines
have come into existence which are causing uneasiness not
only among workers who see "automation" replacing their
skills but also among philosophers. The machines are
called Electronic Computers and the name suggests what
they were originally, just calculating machines, or glorified
electrical versions of the "bead-frames" on which children
26
learn to count. The name now is quite misleading because
these machines do not just do arithmetic. They imitate
many of the functions of the human brain and control
and direct other machines which replace, not only muscle
effort, but the human senses.
At the International Conference on Information Proces¬
sing, organised by Unesco in Paris (June 15-20
1959), the two thousand scientists and engineers who
attended were seriously discussing machines which would
memorise all the knowledge in the world and in which the
equivalent of an individual human memory could be
reproduced on a piece of glass, 5" by 6" the size of
a photographic plate. They were describing machines
which can produce business decisions and be "taught" to
think for themselves and to form valued judgments. As
Dr. Edward Teller, of California University, pointed out,
once a machine can form value judgments, it is conceivable
that it will develop emotions.
DWENTY years ago, all this was impossible.
Even electronic calculations seemed impracti¬
cable. Three hundred years ago, the French
mathematician Blaise Pascal invented a
mechanical calculating machine. Over a hun¬
dred years ago, Charles Babbage, an English
mathematician, worked out a machine which
could do mathematical calculations and analyses on a
punch card system like that which Jacquard employed in

The Unesco Courler. January 1960
Photos IBM, Paris
POWERFUL AND RAPID calculation instrument, this electronic
data processing machine is usually used tosolvescientificand engineer¬
ing problems. It is really a set of interconnected machines composed
of an input unit, processing unit and output units. From the console,
the operator, can supervise the performance of millions of data-
processing steps by the units. Opposite page, part of a plate of
magnetic core storage (the "memory" unit) composed of thousands
of tiny doughnut-shaped ferro-magnetic rings threaded on wire.
his loom. Cash-registers and mechanical comptometers,
hand-operated, were doing complicated calculations before
the Second World War. But the first of the electronic
computers began to function only twelve years ago.
Radio valves replaced the cogs of the mechanical compto¬
meters (or, more elementarily, the beads of the counting-
frame).
The early machines consisted of massive racks of radio
tubes and tangles of wires but they could do addition,
subtraction, multiplication and division and work out, in
split seconds, mathematical equations which would have
taken hours, or days, of pen-and-paper calculations.
Today, regardless of the number of digits in the sum a
computer can average ten thousand operations in a
second. The latest are a thousand times faster than those
of three years ago and a million times faster than those of
ten years ago. The only limit to their ultimate speeds is
the velocity of light which is 186,000 miles a second but
the distances the signals have to travel in a computer are
not reckoned in miles but in fractions of millionths of an
inch. So that "the Computer People" can talk glibly of
getting results in hundreths of millionths of a second.
The machines, in terms of work-capacity are getting
bigger and bigger but the components are getting smaller
and smaller. Instead of having radio valves they are being
constructed with transistors no bigger than grains of rice.
But even that is gigantic compared with recent advances.
In what is called the "cryotron", the cells which store
information are a 250th of a millionth of an inch in dia¬
meter. The circuits consists of "wires" of similar
dimensions a spider's web, which only an ultra-powerful
microscope can see. These circuits and '"cells" are print¬
ed on glass and a temperature of 270 degrees below zero
is maintained by "deep-freezing" the units in liquid hydro¬
gen. At that temperature certain metals offer no resis¬
tance to the currents of electricity which can therefore go
on flowing, at the speed of light, indefinitely and without
loss of signal-strength.
Ehen one gets down to those dimensions it will
be possible to store all the information of all
the books of all the libraries of all the world
in a space no bigger than a cigar-box.
The problem then is how to get it out.
Humans are forgetful when they cannot recall
information which is in their memory. Too so,
the problem in the electronic brains is how to retrieve it,
when, and in what form, one wants it. As one expert at
the conference put it "An electronic computer is a bank
in which information is deposited, put away in a vault,
and eventually paid out."
To "pay in" the information the computer expert has
it typed out as punch-holes in a paper tape. And on the
tape also he gives instructions as to how it is to be used.
This is called "programming". The information is then
recorded on a magnetic memory by the computer. It will
pay it out exactly as instructed by the programmer. It will
transfer its information again to a punched tape which will
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE WORLD'S
KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
automatically operate a typewriter, so that the result is
readable.
The computer began as a fast way of doing arithmetic
but any logical process can be converted into numbers and
thus into a code by which all kinds of information can be
stored or processes executed.
For example, a computer can be put in charge of a ma¬
chine Which is working on some large and complicated
piece of machine cutting like carving, to precisions of
thousandths of an inch a huge block of metal into the solid
and complex shapes of a supersonic aircraft, or a rocket.
The computer will help to work out the specifications and
the mathematical contours of the part. The programmers
will then feed into it the instructions which it has, itself,
helped to produce and it will then control the automatic
machine-tools which will cut the metal in three dimensions
simultaneously.
With its electronic allies, like photoelectric eyes; the
Merton grating (which gives a machine the sense of touch
and greater accuracy than any skilled craftsman); and the
servo-motors which manipulate parts (with a '"feed-back"
like a mechanized nervous-system) the computer can carry
out, if need be, any job a human operator can do. In
other words, it can work out ¡the details of a computer
more advanced than itself and then control the machines
to make those parts and (eventually, if not yet) assemble
them. It could, in fact, reproduce itself breed other
computers.
NTENSiVE work by linguists, mathematicians
and engineers, is going on all over the world
to secure mechanical translation of languages
from Russian into English, Japanese into
French and so on; The progress is slow
because one does not just exchange words;
there is the grammar and structure of senten¬
ces and idioms which are peculiar to each language. But
in translation of scientific works, articles have been trans¬
ferred from one language to another in terms which are
quite comprehensible to experts in the branch of science
concerned. Success has already been achieved in the
translation of work into the language of the blind, Braille.
What the experts are now seeking is "pattern identifica¬
tion" which means that the computers, instead of having
to be fed with punched tape, would be able to read directly
from a printed page or identify the sound-pattern of the
spoken word and then to translate into the other .language.
That is still some years off.
But the scientists and engineers have already given to
the computer enough human attributes to worry (many
people. The president of the Paris : Conference,
Dr. Howard Aiken, of Harvard University, wanted to reas¬
sure them. He said that, while they must always bear in
mind their social responsibilities, the scientists and engi¬
neers could feel that, so far from making men the slaves
of the machines, the machines were liberating them from
slaving at tasks that were drudgery, making possible a
higher standard of life for everyone, and leaving people
free for creative work.
28" -
To store information It receives the
electronic data-processing machine on
the previous page uses plates made
up of tiny rings (shown here In com¬
parison to a matchbox). One memory
unit is composed of 36 plates made
up of 4,096 rings each. The core
storage Is the most powerful and the
fastest working memory of the machine.
IBM, Paris
