APES
THINGS
TO COME
by
Ritchie Calder
ow is it that its potential victim can recognise
a buzzard by its shape or shadow, and take evasive action?
How can a small boy tell you the name of an aircraft
flying high overhead? Or, for that matter, how do we
recognise "A" as the first letter of the alphabet? Or how
can we distinguish a Southern drawl from a Brooklyn
accent, or a word spoken in French from a word spoken
in Russian?
It is done by "pattern identification", the recognition
of a visual image or the form of a sound. It depends on
remembering shapes, or sounds, comparing them with
others and associating them with concepts. The alphabet
is a visual imprint in our memories. We have stored away
in our brains sounds which we can cross-refer to other
sounds and associate them with accents or languages which
we hear.
"Pattern identification" was one of the subjects most
earnestly discussed at the International Conference on
Information Processing, organised by Unesco in Paris last
year and attended by 2,000 experts from 37 countries.
This meeting of "The Computer People" (as they call
themselves) was concerned with the remarkable machines
which can do incredible sums at fantastic speeds; have
prodigious mechanical "memories" which can store infor¬
mation; can be taught to think; can control other machines;
send artificial satellites into orbit, or rockets to the moon;
and translate one language into another.
All these things are done by what is called "program¬
ming". The experts work out the ways in which informa¬
tion can be stored in the machines and instructions about
how that information can be used or recovered. A pro¬
gramme is a numerical code, like a secret service cipher
which the electronic brain-cells can unravel. The infor¬
mation and instructions have to be fed into the machines
as punch-cards or punch-tapes. This means that while
the electronic part of a computer can handle at least
10,000 "bits" of information in a second, a great deal of
time has to be spent in working out the programme and
punching out the instructions.
16
If text in (say) French is to be translated into (say)
Russian it has to be typed out on a machine which converts
it into punched symbols. The machine then analyses this
punched information, compares the words it has been given
with the comparative dictionaries which have been similarly
punch-fed into it. It makes the translation again on to
tape which operates an electric typewriter and produces the
Russian in readable form.
The ideal, of course, is to confront the machine with
the actual written page and have it quickly reproduce the
translation as another printed page. It would be even
more useful if it could take a voice speaking in French and
translate the language either as a Russian text or as an
artificial voice speaking in Russian.
ut that, at the moment, in the language of "The
Computer People" is just "'blue sky" talking about what
one wishes to happen. Nevertheless, the discussions at the
Unesco conference were optimistic about the technical
possibilities. In the past twelve years, "The Computer
People" have increased from a handful to hundreds of
thousands. Their computers have been transformed from
devices for doing arithmetic into thinking machines, with
faculties uncannily human. It is only a matter of time
before they acquire "pattern identification".
What does it involve? There is no difficulty about
electronically seeing and conveying an image. That hap¬
pens in television. The camera records the image, converts
it into electrical signals which are transmitted and reassem¬
bled on the television receiver screen. The human viewer
does the "pattern identification". The radio and the
telephone converts the spoken word into signals which are
reconstituted as the identical voice at the other end. But
the human listener does the "pattern identification".
Images and voices can be memorised electronically.
The television pictures can be stored, not just as visible
film as in the cinema but as the recording, on magnetic

tape, of the signals which, reactivated, will faithfully
reappear as a picture on the television screen. The same,
of course, is true of tape recordings of voice "patterns".
nother remarkable advance is a device Which
takes a voice, analyses its frequencies and expresses them
as a code, like sending a telegraph message instead of a
telephone voice. This code is then deciphered at the other
end and the receiving machine reproduces the code as an
artificial voice. It is not the voice of the original speaker
but it can be coded even to convey an accent; it can be
recognisably Scottish, for instance.
That is another step towards "pattern identification".
"You say 'tomahto'; and I say 'tomato'," (In the words
of the song) or the French say "formidahble" and I say
"formid'ble". And the voice-coder can tell the difference.
The technical difficulties are, however, formidahble (or
formid'ble) because for identification purposes the machine
has to have a memory which not only stores images but can
compare them associate them with the ideas which they
represent. It has not only to recognise the letter "A"; it
has to realise that it is the first letter of the alphabet. Or
"2" is no longer the number with which the digitical
computer is familiar; it is an image which has to be built
up. In arithmetic "2" is 1 plus 1 three "bits" of infor¬
mation but as the Japanese scientists, reporting on their
work on "pattern identification" at the Unesco conference,
pointed out, the image "2" needs 120 "bits" of infor¬
mation to make it identifiable.
As scientists working on recognition of speech by ma¬
chine at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, U.S.A.,

told the conference, the analysis of speech is like chemical
analysis; its substance has to be broken down into its consti¬
tuent parts. The constituents of the spoken word must be
constants no matter in what "formula" or in what language
they are assembled. But a voice-prescription is more
difficult than the chemist's formula. A machine to be
effective will have to translate not only syllables but the
inflection the sneer, or the good-humoured laugh, -which
makes all the difference in the intention of the speaker.
Photos ILO
'FEEDING' A COMPUTOR. Whether they are required
to do incredible calculations at fantastic speeds, run factory
production lines or translate one language into another,
computing machines must first be "fed" with information
and instructions. Programming, as this is known, is done
on punch cards or punch tapes. Here (above left) a specialist
prepares a computor for a complicated task by combining
certain of its cables. After the initial work has been done,
the computor will not only carry out the task that was fed
into it on tape, but also control constantly the performance
of its work. Today many industrial products are being
fabricated by means of automation. In this automated
German thread-producing plant (above right) only a small
staff is required to control the entire flow of production.
Apart from the value of "pattern identification" in the
ultimate translation of languages, there is the mathema¬
tician's concern that the computer should be able to cope
with geometrical shapes as it has done with arithmetical
equations and, preferably, in three-dimensions.
ne immediate, and not too difficult possibility in
"pattern identification", is in abstracting. The machine
is being taught to glance at a scientific paper and select
the parts which identify the authors and the sentences
Which would give the essence of the account.
Nowadays, some 3,000,000 original scientific papers are
published in over 40,000 scientific journals every year. It
is becoming almost impossible to cope with this Niagara of
information.
Once the machine has been taught not only to memorize
but to extract and translate the significant material it
will make the information easily and quickly accessible to
those who need it and who can act upon it. The awesome
truth is that this will produce more discoveries and more
papers and more machines to cope with them.
17
