A Message from the Director-General of Unesco
or countless centuries the Nile has given life to the lands through which it
flows. Today, the inhabitants of these lands, who are increasing rapidly in
number, must ask their mighty river to give more than in the past. The
High Dam which is soon to rise at Aswan will usher in a new era of eco¬
nomic progress destined to provide more food for millions of people.
These are the people to whom we owe one of the greatest civilizations in history.
On the banks of their river they raised edifices the beauty and grandeur of which have
never been surpassed. But with the new dam a vast lake will be created in Nubia, a
lake which threatens to engulf some of the most glorious of these monuments for ever.
An agonizing dilemma therefore faces the authorities charged with developing the
Nile Valley: how are they to choose between the needs and welfare of their people
and the treasures which belong not only to their country but to humanity as a whole?
The authorities are fully aware that they are the depositaries, before all the world,
of the monuments of the Nubian Valley, and they are eager to ensure their safeguard.
It is these motives which led the United Arab Republic and the Government of the
Sudan to appeal to Unesco for the purpose of obtaining the international aid which
is indispensable.
As soon asl received these appeals, I recognized that Unesco could not possibly
fail to respond. The action it is being asked to undertake is in full conformity with
the essential objectives of the Organization. We cannot allow temples like Abu
Simbel and Philae, which are veritable gems of ancient art, to disappear; nor can we
abandon forever the treasures which lie buried in the sand on sites not yet systema¬
tically excavated.
Here is an exemplary occasion for demonstrating the international solidarity which
Unesco has been striving to make a reality in all domains. No one, indeed, can
deny the urgency of this cause and the effort required, or the need for sharing the
burden among as large a number of countries as possible.
Moreover, in return for the international assistance given, the Government of
the United Arab Republic is offering not less than fifty per cent of the finds excavated
in Nubia, authorization to carry out further excavations in other parts of Egypt, and
the cession of precious objects and monuments, including certain Nubian temples,
for transfer abroad. The Government of the Sudan, for its part, is offering fifty per
cent of the finds from excavations to be made in its territory.
An International Consultative Committee will be responsible for advising the com¬
petent government authorities on the plans for prospective excavations, on the use
made of financial contributions, and on the distribution of counterparts offered by
the United Arab Republic.
There can be no doubt that the preservation and excavation operations which
can, and must, begin within the next few months, will provide a new impetus to
archaeology. The history of civilizations, religions and art, and our knowledge of
prehistoric times will be immeasurably enriched as a result.
At my proposal, the Executive Board of Unesco has decided that I should issue an
appeal for international co-operation. This appeal, which I intend to launch in the
very near future, will be addressed not only to governments and to the public and
private institutions concerned, but also to public opinion in all countries of the world.
A group of Patrons and an International Action Committee will support Unesco in
this world campaign. I feel certain that all those who clearly understand what is at
stake will wish to participate, for they will recognize that an unprecedented task
calls for an unprecedented effort.
VITTORINO VERONESE
3
