The' Unesco Courter. June 1960
WHO Photo by Homer Page
EYE INFECTION Is a major cause of blindness, and trachoma the chief culprit, disabling some 400 million people throughout
the world. In India, with more than two million, blind persons, trachoma ranks as the largest single cause of preventable blindness.
Above, Dr. Jatnam Singh, member of a medical team, examines a young trachoma victim in a village of northern India where in
some rural areas between 80 and 90 per cent of the people suffer from this infection. The team, with WHO help, works its way
through the region, examining patients, organizing mass antibiotic treatment, and carrying out research on spread of infection.

MORE BLIND PERSONS IN CALCUTTA
THAN IN THE WHOLE OF CANADA
by W. H. Owens
More than a century of effort, mainly through volun¬
tary societies, has opened up a new world of oppor¬
tunity for sightless people.
While the incidence of blindness is still fairly high in the
advanced countries, normally preventable blindness has
been reduced to a minimum through the progress and
general availability of medical, hygiene and social services.
But the condition of the infinitely larger blind popula¬
tions in the lesser developed parts of the world is very
different indeed. It is worst of all in Asia and Africa where
about four-fifths of all the world's blind people live, and
where, until very recently, blindness was fatalistically
accepted everywhere as one of the irremediable conditions
of mankind. Although the highest incidence of the loss
of sight is in Africa, where in the upper reaches of the
Nile more than 4,000 per 100,000 population have defec¬
tive vision, by far the greatest concentration of blindness
is in Asia.
India alone has more than 2,000,000 blind persons, of
whom at least 100,000 are children. In the city of Cal¬
cutta there are more blind people than in the whole of
Canada. Existing welfare services hardly touch more than
one per cent of those without sight, most of whom are
widely scattered in villages all over the vast sub-continent
and are doomed to live, as the blind of India have always
lived, as beggars or family dependents, often in misery
and want.
Probably 90 per cent of all the blindness in the lesser
developed countries is caused by preventable disease. In
West Africa, for example, over 400,000 people su fier from
CONT'D OH NEXT FAGE

CALCUTTA (Cont'd)
FOUR-FIFTHS OF WORLD'S
SIGHTLESS IN RURAL AREAS
onchocerciasis, or river blindness, an eye disease spread
by carrier flies. This is so rampant in the northern parts
of Ghana and Nigeria that these regions have been called
"the country of the blind". (Unesco Courier, April 1956.)
Trachoma, which has been a major cause of blindness
for over 2,000 years, claims millions of victims in many
parts of the world and, in fact, only western Europe, North
America and Australasia are relatively free from it. But
with modern drugs trachoma can now be cured.
In the past ten or twelve years some remarkable progress
has been made. Since its foundation in 1949, the World
Council for the Welfare of the Blind has grown from a
small group, representing mainly the countries of Western
Europe and North America, into a truly international body
drawing its members from all the five continents. Central
organizations for blind training and welfare are now
established in many Asian, African and Latin-American
countries where nothing of the kind existed previously, and,
what is also very important, methods to check the spread
of eye disease are being put into effect on a steadily
increasing scale.
The United Nations and its special agencies have taken
active interest in the problems, of the blind by intensifying
research into the causes of blindness, by controlling disease-
spreading pests, and by improving living conditions and
treatment facilities. Mobile eye dispensaries are operating
successfully in Egypt, India, Pakistan and elsewhere. The
World Health Organization and the U.N. Children's Fund
contribute greatly to the world wide anti-trachoma cam¬
paign.
Valuable research projects have been carried put in

West Africa by the Royal Commonwealth Society for
the Blind. (This British voluntary organization,
founded in 1950, is working through local blind welfare
associations in about thirty emergent territories throughout
the world.) In the course of a four-year investigation of
blindness in West Africa an ophthalmic team, led by
Dr Frederick Rodger, travelled more than 100,000 miles
through Ghana, the Cameroons and Northern Nigeria,
often under very difficult conditions in remote and wild
country.
Intensive ophthalmic examinations of more than 8,000
individuals, selected from widely different areas and racial
groups throughout the region, showed that trachoma, cata¬
ract and onchocerciasis are the main causes of blindness
but that much sight is also lost through smallpox, measles,
tuberculosis and syphilis. The 350-page report resulting
from this investigation, entitled "Blindness in West
Africa", is the most detailed and exhaustive study of its
kind ever made and has won international acclaim.
For a century or longer the training of blind people has
been confined almost entirely to handicraft workshops in
towns and cities. Some 80 per cent of the world's blind
live in rural areas, however, and up to now very little
indeed has been done for them apart from the limited
though excellent work of foreign missions. Realizing this,
the 1959 Assembly of the World Council for the Welfare
of the Blind passed a resolution urging the need for train¬
ing in agricultural and rural crafts so that sightless people
might become useful members of their own communities.
This new conception of blind training has been
pioneered with great success in five African countri s and
12
also in the Far East by the Royal Commonwealth Society
for the Blind. The results have been so promising that
similar schemes of rural training may soon be launched
in other countries. They have demonstrated the value of
a policy which, if it were to be applied on a really large
scale for example, through the community development
programme of a country like India might in a few years
open up a new age for very large numbers of blind people
in the lesser developed parts of the world.
A typical rural training scheme in Africa is the 60-acre
Ikeja Farmcraft Centre, near Lagos, which is run for the
Nigerian Government. Blind villagers who attend this cen¬
tre, often with their wives, live for a year in surroundings
which are quite familiar to them. During an intensive
course the students learn about every branch of agriculture,
from the clearing of virgin bushland to the harvesting and
marketing of the crops they grow.
Experiments have been made with the cultivation of a
wide range of local crops such as yams, maize, groundnuts,
cotton, ochra, sun hemp, pineapples and so on. Using
mud, bamboo and palm leaf, the students learn also to
build their own living quarters and shelters for the
livestock. Students also spend a part of each day in
the workshop learning to make articles from home-grown
materials which will have a ready sale in the villages.
The first sixteen blind students attending the Ikeja cen¬
tre arrived in a helpless condition and most of them were

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
THE BLIND LEADING THE BLIND. This scene which recalls
Breughel's painting is a tragic everyday fact in large areas of Africa.
The blindness Is caused by a disease called onchocerciasis for which
a little black gnat is responsible. When It bites a human being,
It transmits microscopic worms which multiply under the skin,
then invade the tissue of the eyes, eventually bringing total blindness.
WHO
HELEN KELLER
WORLD CRUSADE
FOR THE BLIND
~%i
<^^ '
Helen Keller, known as the Ambassador of the
Blind, celebrates her 80th birthday this month.
To mark this event, the American Foundation
for the Overseas Blind is raising a $1,250,000 fund,
"The Helen Keller World Crusade for the Blind",
to be used for work among the world's sightless
people. Miss Keller has been associated with
the Foundation since its inception more than
40 years ago and as its International Relations
Counsellor has spent much time in areas of the
Middle East, Asia, Africa and Latin America
where nine-tenths of the world's blind live. Blind
and deaf from early childhood, she rose above
her handicaps to become one of the best-known
figures In the modern world. At 24 she graduated
from college ; since then has been constantly
travelling, writing and working to improve condi¬
tions for the world's blind. She has given cou¬
rage and assistance to innumerable blind people
for she believes that the blind should live and
work like their fellows, unremarked and with
full responsibility. She herself is a vivid example
of what special education and training can achieve
and she can look back on a lifetime studded
with achievements. Perhaps better than anyone
she can preach the gospel of self help for she
has lived It. Below, during one of her journeys
Miss Keller examines a broom made by blind
craftsmen in Kfar-Urlel, Village of the Blind, Israel.
-.«a ~ vv
undernourished. By the end of the year's training,
however, they were all 100 per cent physically fit, able to
tackle almost any job on the farm, and confident they
could be accepted as useful members in the village com¬
munities to which they returned.
How important rural training can be in a country where
four-fifths of the blind population are villagers has been
shown' at the Malayan fishing village of Kuala Besut in
Trengganu. For less than £50, the community built and
equipped a workshop and dormitory where blind villagers
can now provide the local fishing industry with rope, fish
frames and traps, brooms and rakes all made from
locally grown materials.
The National Association for the Blind in India has
shown keen interest in such schemes of rural training
because, as mentioned earlier, most of the 2,000,000 blind
of that country live in scattered village communities. The
problem in India may be measured by the vast numbers
involved, but a start may be made soon.
The second All India Conference for the Blind, held at
Bombay in June, 1959, passed a resolution urging the
Central and State Governments, together with voluntary
societies working for the Indian blind, to establish agricul¬
tural and rural training centres which would provide sight¬
less people with adaptive training in simple pursuits in
their familiar rural surroundings. Such schemes, it is
hoped, may be included in India's third five-year Plan.
USIS
