Prado Museum, Madrid
Ladies of the Fountain. This charming detail from a large painting entitled "Fountain of the
Tritons", is another illustration of Velazquez's amazingly modern technique. The blurred outlines
of the two seated ladies in profile were achieved by the artist with quick daubs from his brush.
As one approaches the painting, the forms melt into the background. This is one of the later
works of Velazquez, and the detail might almost have come from the brush of Edouard Manet.


VELAZQUEZ
AND MODERN ART
by Julian Gallego
Velazquez's most astonishing quality is that he
makes us feel he belongs to our age. His
pictures look as if they were fresh from (the
brush of a contemporary artist, .and have nothing of the
"period" atmosphere ¡characteristic of galleries of olid
paintings. They would not toe out off place in a Modern
Art Museum. The only anachronism would be the clothes
of the people he portrays, tfor naturally they are dressed
in the style of 17th century Spain, the men in dark clothes
with unotostrusive starched colars, (the women in the
voluminous skirts know as "farthingales," on which they
rest their hands, surmounted by a bodice, bejewelled and
colourful, their hair elaborately curled.
The costumes are, it is true, very alien to us; but be
cause the faces and eyes of their wearers are still alive
and full of expression, because the velvets and silks are
still fresh, and because the whole scene is painted in bold
technique with clear tones and free brush-work, we have
the intriguing impression of watching the life of bygone
centuries; it is as though a modern painter had been able,
like the "Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur's Court", to
live in a past age, and had brought us back his impres¬
sions, seen through the eyes of modern man.
Examined in detail, many of Velazquez's pictures look
like the work of an artist belonging to the Impressionist
school, which flourished in France at the end of the 19th
century, that is three hundred years after the birth of
Velazquez. His landscapes of the Villa Medici in Rome,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

VELAZQUEZ AND MODERN ART (Cont'd)
Diego's 17th Century 'New Look'
painted with broad strokes, and his figures, silhouetted
by the light, might well be the work of Claude Monet.
The strong drawing and the restrained expressive model¬
ling of some of the headsin The Spinners for example
remind us of certain portraits by Degas. The portraits of
the Infanta Margarita, where the delicacy of the subject
is matched by the freshness of the colours and the lustre
of the sparkling brushwork might well belong to the same
period as the best work of Auguste Renoir, whose Ger¬
maine Laceu with her spreading skirt and her bouquet is,
as it were, an echo of Velazquez.
But the artist most profoundly influenced by Velazquez
was Edouard Manet who declared, in his letters from
Madrid, that he had discovered his ideal in painting in the
pictures of the great Spaniard, the contemplation of whose
work filled him with new hope and boundless confidence.
Manet made a copy of the portrait of the buffoon Pabillos
of Valladolid at the Prado, about which he said that the
background melted away, leaving only the air surrounding
the intensely alive figure; he imitated this picture in his
famous Fife-player, by no means the only one off Manet's
paintings which reveals the profound influence of Velaz¬
quez's technique, colour and handling of light.
Thus Velazquez could, without exaggeration, be called
an "Impressionist" painter. His main concern in paint¬
ing, as with Sisley or Monet, is to convey the impression
of light, otf light and air. He does not want his figures to
be statues, but to give the effect of life and even move¬
ment at the touch of the light. Velazquez paints through
his eyes alone. Though be began by painting figures and
objects enclosed by the outline of the drawing, standing
out solid and almost tangible as Caravaggio had done
in Italy he soon realized that such strictly defined mas¬
ses and shapes belonged to' sculpture rather than to paint¬
ing, and in painting that meant not to touch but to
look at. He therefore felt that the visual element should
predominate.
His pictures are like open windows r when we look, for
instance, at the portrait of the Infante Baltasar Carlos on
horseback, we seem to catch a breath of the pure air of
the Guadarrama. This background of snowcapped moun¬
tains is executed with a few strokes, in tones so accurate
as to give the impression of air and distance. In his late
work, the painter uses touches of pure colour in juxtapo¬
sition which then blend in the eye of the spectator, a
few yards away, to give the effect of vibrating light.
That is why it is so interesting to look at Velazquez's mas¬
terpieces, such as Las Meninas and The Spinners or some
of his late portraits at a close distance. We realize that
neither flesh nor fabrics are ever painted in one colour.
^K -^m enerally speaking, painters before Velazquez,
^^^H and even 'his contemporaries, 'believed that the
parts off an object in shadow were the same
colour as those exposed to 'the light so that, for painting
shadows, it was sufficient merely to add a little brown or
"earth shadow pigment."
But Velazquez declared that the parts off an object in
the light are not the same colour as the parts in shadow,
since the colour is transformed by the atmosphere and the
reflexion of other objects. He therefore mixed the colours
for his shadows separately; and examined close to, every
inch of fabric, flesh or air is seen to be composed of a
variety of colours. Which is precisely what the Impres¬
sionists did, much later.
We observe in the works of old masters a disturbing lack
of unity between figures and background: the people
seem to be posing in front of a backdrop, as in old photo¬
graphs. But Velazquez's pictures achieved visual unity,
everything being 'equally important, and equally real.
Figures in real life do not appear to be more strongly
outlined than the surrounding scene. Velazquez is objec¬
tive, putting down what he sees; and his objectivity, far
from springing from any lack of inspiration, is a sign of
genius.
The Impressionists and with them Paul Cezanne revo¬
lutionized contemporary art by attaching the same pic-
24
torial value to everything a human head, a book, a fruit
or a hat; but they were influenced considerably, in thus
breaking down the hierarchical classification of natural
objects, by the results of photography, which had just
been invented.
In the middle of the 17th century, to see things as
Velazquez saw them was not as natural as it appears to
us now. Let me explain what I mean: though we see
as our predecessors did, we now look at things differently.
Seeing is natural, but looking is something that has to be
learned. And artists as a rule are the people who teach
us to look, to pick out, from amongst the lines of land¬
scape or a figure, those which they consider essential; and
to distinguish, amongst the infinite number of tones of
light, those which correspond and harmonize with one
another.
11
l or example if, being acquainted with Chinese
^B painting, wè see a mountain landscape, our
-^^^- eyes will pick out certain idetails, the intersect¬
ing outlines otf the rocks, .the patches off fir-trees, and
the lanidscape will seem to ,us to toe carefully designed
and harmonious just like a Chinese painting; if we are
not familiar with Chinese painting it might well appear
disordered and without form. Then again if after looking
at the river scenes painted toy the French Impressionists,
we pass by a river one spring day, we shall discern certain
tones of blue, white and pink and we shall, say: "This
river looks like a picture by Claude Monet."
So it is that artists teach us to look, and everyone is
enriched by visiting art galleries. Everyone, that is,
except the creators of a new way of looking. Velazquez,
by taking the human figure, hitherto enclosed, and plac¬
ing it in the full light, doing away with the conception
of the background and, by subtle gradations of tone, mak¬
ing the air flow round the objects depicted, revolutioniz¬
ed not only painting tout also our way of looking at things.
It was this that caused the famous French critic, H. Taine,
to write that in comparison with Velazquez's paintings all
others looked lifeless and academic.
Another feature of Velazquez that makes him one of
the painters closest to our understanding is his attention
to "values." The term "value" in painting is used to
denote the degree of lightness or darkness of the tone
of objects, regardless of their colour. A yellow may have
a lower value than a (blue ,as we shall see if we half close
our eyes. This conception of values was unknown in
Velazquez's day. It is for this Teason that we find some of
the works of great painters, even great colourists, unpleas-
ing there may be some object, a cloak for instance, which
seems to be much nearer to our eye than the wearer,
because its tone value is wrong.
Velazquez, though knowing nothing of this conception
of values, nevertheless used them with such mastery that
he sometimes painted pictures with very few colours
such as Lets Meninas, for instances which yet give the im¬
pression of being as highly coloured as a Rubens canvas.
Picasso when he undertook recently to give his own inter¬
pretation of this famous picture worked mainly, in his
most successful versions, on the basis of this subtle gra¬
dation of values, painting almost exclusively in shades of
grey, the colour most characteristic of Velazquez's work.
Velazquez's greys shimmer and vibrate, so exquisitely
subtle are their tones. There is no other painter to equal
him in rendering the pearly lustre of the Madrid light
reflected in the landscape and the skin of women.
Venus and Cupid his sole and extremely chaste nude, is
painted in greys and pinks; but the reclining figure stands
out against a background of vivid green and red.
Velazquez was not afraid to use strong, warm tones.
His portrait of Innocent X is a magnificent symphony in
crimson. Like a Soutine, everything in this canvas is red,
including the head of the Pontiff.
In his portraits of the Infanta Margarita (hanging in
Madrid and Vienna), Velazquez's palette is so rich and
varied that he surpasses even the Impressionists, coming
closer to the painters of our day. The poetic vase of
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

VELAZQUEZ AND MODERN ART (Cont'd from page 24)
Detail from View of Saragossa. (Prado Museum)
flowers in the portrait of Margarita wearing a salmon pink
and silver dress sparkles with colour it might have come
straight from the brush of Marc Chagall.
But Velazquez has affinities with painters much nearer
even to the present day. A great many modern artists
have abandoned the representation of objects considering,
rightly or wrongly, that photography has relieved them
of the task of keeping documentary records. There are
people who now look askance at Velazquez's pictures be¬
cause they are figurative. In fact nothing is simpler than
to prove this prejudice unfounded.
We have only to approach one of his works and cut out
a fragment here, a sleeve, a piece of farthingale, of wall
or of landscape there; and we shall find ourselves con¬
fronted with an abstract picture. The beauty of the
colours, the free arrangement of the forms and the variety
of the pictorial qualities are fully equal to those of any
non-figurative picture.
Formerly, quality was held to lie in the ability to imi-
28
täte in painting, the particular texture of a material
silk, velvet, wood, glass... (The minor Dutch masters, such
as Metsu or Terborg, excelled in this respect.) Nowadays,
the word quality is used to denote ithe original beauty of
the actual pictorial matter, with its impasto and thin
paint effects, smoothness and roughness, lustre and matt
passages. :
In both these senses, Velazquez's pictures are admirable.
Standing a few steps away from one of his portraits, we
seem to see the silver and satin of a ceremonial robe; then
as we draw nearer, we realize that this effect is obtained
by a combination off exquisite colours, transparent and
opaque, applied, some lavishly, others in barely perceptible
touches, with consummate mastery.
All this raises Velazquez's works above the level of mere
illustration to the heights of pure art. What does The
Spinners represent? According to the learned, a myth
(that of Minerva and Arachne) treated with the painter's
characteristic realism. But those in search of a subject

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
say that it is a tapestry workshop with various women at
work whilst in the background visitors look at the finished
work; then again, admirers of Impressionist paint¬
ing see the picture as a treatment of the problem of
light and atmosphere, with a dark foreground and a very
light background; lovers of abstract ant, as a superb play
of strokes and colours.
And what about Las Meninas? In this famous picture
there is a revolutionary change even in the subject mat¬
ter, in that the King and Queen whose portrait Velazquez
is painting are outside the picture (in the place occupied
by the spectator) , and we only know who they are because
there is a mirror in the back of the Salon, which reflects
the faces of the King and Queen instead of our own. We
are thus enclosed in the atmosphere of the picture to
which we add, as it were, another personage.
In the Prado Museum there is, in front of Las Meninas,
a mirror reflecting, at the same time, both the painted
figures and the flesh-and-blood spectators. "But where
is the picture?" exclaimed Théophile Gautier, the famous
writer and art expert, on seeing this canvas for the first
time, for he realized that the real subject was not so
much a domestic scene in the Royal Palace as a magnifi¬
cent depiction of atmospheric and light effects. If we
draw nearer, we shall appreciate the exquisite subtlety of
its tone values, the freedom and boldness of the brush-
work and the beauty and variety of the paint.
Any other of Velazquez's great works prove to be equally
"modern" and accessible. This perennial freshness is a
quality exclusive to a small number of works of art which
are appreciated by each individual and each epoch on
different grounds, and always with good reason.
I have tried in this article to describe Velazquez's main
qualities, the ones which make us feel that his works
belong to our age. But naturally the subject is vast and
there is much more to be said. I leave it to each reader
to add those reflexions which this special issue may
inspire.
29
