here are about 550 million children aged 5-14
in the world today and 300 million boys and
girls are enrolled in school. For 250 million
no schooling is available. Very roughly, but
conservatively, it Would take $90,000 million
to accommodate these children, and another
$10,000 million a year to run the new schools.
The economic, social and individual effects of this
deprivation are well ¡knoWn. . The provision of education
is indispensable for economic and social progress.
Throughout the world, a satisfactory balance has not yet
been reached between the social programmes which help
to preserve life and the programmes that are aimed at
improving the condition of life.
Education is one major element of the latter group, and
there is a constant struggle to get ahead of increases in
population. Around 1950, about 56 per cent of the world
adult population was literate but only 48 per cent of the
children were going to school, meaning that the number
of future illiterates was likely to be greater than in the
past. By heavy sacrifices, countries raised the proportion
of school enrolments to 55 per cent five years later;
however, even this will not be enough to ensure a more
literate future generation than in the past.
In describing needs, however simply, it is better to take
by turn the main regions of the world. These differ so
much one from another that wider generalization risks
being too abstract. At the risk of over-simplifying
complex questions I shall try to pinpoint some of the
most urgent issues in education today and in the next
few years.
In Latin America, priority is attached by education
authorities to elementary schooling and to vocational
education. Despite some advanced countries, the region
has a high illiteracy rate, and elementary schooling is
not widely available. Rural areas are particularly under¬
privileged. Both the ICA and Unesco have Worked on
the rural school problem in recent years; Unesco in its
Latin American major project singling out for action the
training of better and more rural teachers.
But so far efforts aré not commensurate with the size
of the problem. Vocational and technical education have

No schools
today
for one
child in
two
by Leo R. Femig
of the Unesco Department of Education
Unesco-Pimol
Village school at Nong-Karn, Thailand.
made great strides in many countries, notably Argentina
and Brazil, and have been supported by industry. But
opportunities for adequate training for agriculture, home
economics and trades in general are still lacking in most
areas. Of the two million Latin American students who
pursue studies after elementary school, some 70 per cent
are enrolled in academic high schools, and a very small
percentage of the rest are studying courses of value to
rural occupations.
In the Near East region, educational problem No. 1 is
that presented by the Arab refugees from Palestine. Here
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, with the
technical co-operation of Unesco, provides schooling for
120,000 refugee children, at an average cost of $50 per
child per year. All refugee children of elementary school
age are now in school. But the programme urgently needs
expansion, particularly in technical and vocational edu¬
cation: at present there are only two vocational training
centres, with a total combined capacity of less than 500
students. Within the countries themselves, technical and
vocational education opportunities are also regarded as
a priority problem. In some parts, where a formal school
system is just beginning to take shape, a considerable
expansion of elementary schooling is required.
For South-East Asia, where heavily populated States
with newly won independence predominate, attention is
being focused on much the same issues as in Latin Ame¬
rica, although for different reasons. One need is the
expansion of elementary schooling, particularly in rural
areas which still account for over 90 per cent of the
population. The second is a more varied secondary school
curriculum, training for practical life rather than for
white-collar jobs.
Much progress has been made in the high school field
by governments, and the Ford Foundation has centred
many education projects on the same point. Yet some
idea of the magnitude of the problem can be obtained
from the situation in India: despite ten years of effort
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

250 million children
without schools (Continued)
to convert the academic, bookish high schools into prac¬
tical multi-purpose schools, it is expected that by 1960
only 1,187 of the existing 20,000 schools will have been
affected and this programme does not even cover the
new schools to meet the needs of a rising population.
As to the other priority, universal elementary education,
the needs are correspondingly greater because of the vast
number involved. A third problem is also acutely felt
in this region of large populations and incipient indus¬
trialization: the absence of an industry serving the schools
with basic teaching equipment, paper, furniture and the
rest. Until such supplies become available, funds cannot
be diverted to the import of more advanced aids, such
as radios, moving picture projectors, etc., which are
regarded as standard classroom equipment in the West.
In identifying this need in Asia, I do not of course over¬
look the fact that it also occurs elsewhere, notably in
the Near East and Africa.
While the African region is perhaps one where all
aspects of education press equally heavily for attention,
some priorities may be hazarded. In the evolution of
new States, higher education in all forms is required
urgently to provide the necessary leadership. And secon¬
dary education, both general and vocational, will have
to be expanded for any significant steps forward in
productivity and welfare, as well as to feed institutions
of higher education; at present high schools enrol 2 per
cent of the numbers attending elementary schools, while
in the United States, Britain and France the figure is
between 30 and 40 per cent.
To say that higher education or universal elementary
schooling is an urgent need is not to explain much about
the need itself. This is best done by examining the
classic components of education the student, the class¬
room, the teacher, then the school system as a whole.
Lunch: an integral part
of going to school
First, the students. They are there, numerous enough;
but one cannot achieve an efficient education simply
by providing the buildings and the teachers these
students lack. It must be remembered that in under¬
developed areas, poverty and malnutrition accompany
illiteracy; a minimum welfare service is indispensable
to encourage school attendance and to enable children to
profit from tuition. Even in the United States the School
Lunch Programme is looked upon as an integral part of
the public school system. The experience of Unicef's
dried milk programme in many underdeveloped regions,
notably some Caribbean territories, has shown that a
basic nutrition service directly benefits school attendance
and relations between home and school.
Next, the plant, covering buildings, equipment and
teaching supplies. Provision of buildings is costly, as
everyone knows; from say $4 million for an institution
of higher education through $500,000-$750,000 for a secon¬
dary institution down to a modest $100,000 or less for an
elementary school. Of these figures, the greatest variation
in costs occurs at elementary level, where standards vary
greatly, and many underdeveloped areas create such
schools at as low a cost as $500-$l,000.
Outlay on building programme has to be progressive
and planned, the more so since each portion of capital
outlay brings in its wake fresh recurrent costs for runn¬
ing the school thus set up. The education development
schemes in Tropical Africa have revealed the risk of
overtaxing the local economy and the need for the pos¬
sibility of carry-over from one fiscal year to the next.
Moreover, too little in general is known about low-cost
school building construction and the use of local mate¬
rials. Research here might produce great savings.
Finally, it must be noted that teaching supplies are
indispensable for an efficient school system, and the
production of them is urgently needed in at least one
region. Costs of textbook plants or furniture factories
vary too much to allow one to fix norms; but Unesco
12
experience with textbooks in Korea, Ford Foundation help
to Burma, and the production of simple science equip¬
ment in India prove that these problems can be solved
at a national level only if sufficient capital is available.
Alongside students and buildings, there is a need for
teachers perhaps the greatest need of all. The education
of teachers is the investment part of the education budget,
and a fairly costly one, since the majority of teachers-
to-be have to be assisted during their course of training.
In rural elementary education as in general and voca¬
tional secondary schooling, the demand for teachers is
perhaps the point where development programmes can
do the most good: but action here requires not only the
setting up and staffing or the improvement of teacher
colleges, but also the provision of funds for maintaining
such schools at an efficient level of intake and output.
Last, the area of the school system as a whole, involv¬
ing educational administration, planning and research
aspects which lie close together is one of world-wide
concern. In much of the World, and notably in the
regions touched on above, research is the best method
for countries to cope in the long run with their own
problems. The difficulties are many: lack of research
personnel, of funds for faculties of education, and of
general public support for such activities.

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
Primary school in Basel, Switzerland Paul Merkle, Basel
Most of the preparation for administrators, planners
and research workers has been secured at high cost
through sending students to North America and Europe.
While such study abroad is important, it is likely that
regional, and progressively, national institutions will be
needed if an adequate supply of trained men and women
is to be produced. The institutional side of the fact¬
finding process bureaux for gathering, analysing and
diffusing educational data was "recognized when the
United States set up its Office of Education in 1867, but
is only now appearing as a felt need in the newly inde¬
pendent States.
The existing programme of Unesco reveals how resources
may be applied internationally to the solution of national
needs. Unesco at present provides some measure of edu¬
cational assistance to a large number of its Member
States in Asia, Africa and Latin America. This assistance
is aimed at improving education at all levels: university,
secondary education (vocational and general) and ele¬
mentary education. It is, for the most part, focused on
(a) help to governments in planning the development of
their national education systems and (b) the training of
teaching staff. Funds for the provision of equipment are
negligible. Each project aided by Unesco could be consi¬
derably expanded, were funds to become available.
