TEXAS TOWERS. Stimulated by the search for oil
under the continental shelves, men have already built
artificial islands in the seaTexas towers, first used off
the coast of this U.S. State and taking their stance on
the continental: shelf. Islands of this kind may be built on
many of the shoals in the oceans or rise up from the top
of sea mounts close to the surface. Anchoring a ship in
thousands of fathoms of water is also now practical through
the use of light, self-buoyant anchor cables of nylon.
U.S. Hydrographie Office
m-w
Wf9Kf$'y
nil« "I jpt»

TURN TO THE SEA
by Athelstan Spilhaus
I o understand our earth, sun, the
wÊÊÊÊÊÊ^^ other planets of our solar system
and the space through which they move, we must treat
them as a whole. The birth of the earth was part oj the
origin of our galaxy. To follow the evolution of the earth
and pf life upon it one has, to consider everything, from its
hot molten centre, out through the mantle of plastic-like
material, to the crust we live on, the oceans thai surround
us, the air we breathe, and even the space beyond.
Through this space comes the sunshine which provides the
energy of all our fuels (except the nuclear ones) and of
the food, the fuel for all life, both plant and animal.
Through space, rays of tremendous energy and cosmic
origin arrive, which, by bombarding earthly substances,
cause radio-active isotopes which are the clocks and
calendars for telling the birthdays of events on earth.
We live on land and know more about that part of the
earth's surface than anything else. Because the age of
our earth is a sizeable fraction of the age of the galaxy on
whose fringe we ride, the study of the history of our planet
is a laboratory study of the history of the universe. But
three-quarters of our laboratory is under water!
This inner space on our planet which is in many respects
more important to us, more unknown, and at least as
interesting as outer space, is inundated by ocean waters
which cover much of the record of history beneath them.
They hide the shape of the sea floor; they make it difficult
to go down and drill into that floor; and they cover fossil
sediments, the layers of which are the pages of earth
history. This huge volume of water, the world ocean, we
can neither see through without instruments nor explore
without special vessels to carry us. The most pressing
problem on earth is to feed the multiplying population, and
to meet this ever-present challenge we must study the sea.
Let us, in our effort to understand earth, sun and space,
turn to the sea.
Athelstan Spilhaus is a trustee of the Woods Hole Océano¬
graphie Institution, Dean of the Institute of Technology, Uni¬
versity of Minnesota and a member of the Committee on
Oceanography of the National Academy of Sciences-National
Research Council of the United States. He was a member of
the Unesco Executive Board from 1954 to 1958.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TURN TO THE SEA (Continued)
OUR PLANET EARTH
IS MISNAMED
The terrestrial globe has a total surface area of S 1 0 million square kilometres.
Of this, the sea accounts for 3 6 I million square kilometres or 70.8 per cent,
leaving the land areas the modest share of 29.2 per cent. Therefore the
planet we call Earth should really be called Ocean. The total volume of
water in the sea occupying 70,8 percent of the planet's surface Is 1,370 mil¬
lion cubic kilometres, representing an over-all average depth of 3,800 metres,
as against an average land altitude of 840 metres above sea level. Contrary
, to what was believed for centuries, the ocean bed is not flat: indeed, the
depth over 76 per cent of the area varies between 3,000 and 6,000 metres.
The sea has been found to contain, in solution, practically all the known
natural elements of Mendeleieff's classification; it is our planet's greatest
depository of minerals of every description. All forms of life started in the
sea and today its animal population comprises some 300,000 species
whose habitats range from the coastal shallows to the deepest cavities of
the Pacific, and from sunlit waters to depths to which daylight never pene¬
trates. Some species are vegetarian, others carnivorous; some sluggish,
others active; some static, others mobile. Furthermore the existence of
the sea means 250,000 kilometres of coastline: a whole world of earth
and stone endlessly remoulded by the wavesto man's profit when silting
provides new room for human enterprise, or to his loss when erosion attacks
his blockwork, harbour installations or other artificial sea defences.
Presenting a continuous fluid mass from the Poles to the Equator, its thermal
inertia has something analogous to a "flywheel effect" on extremes of tempe¬
rature in tropical and polar regions alike, constantly modifying climates by
partially transferring to colder regions the heat absorbed in low latitudes.
Moreover, while the great continental rivers discharge into the sea 13 million
cubic kilometres of water every hour, the sea as steadily returns it to the
atmosphere in an endless cycle in which the vapour drawn up from the sea
by the sun forms clouds which travel as the winds direct, discharging on the
most distant lands the rain or snow which mean life to them. The sea,
then. Is the world's bank of minerals, organic substances, and thermal and
dynamic energy derived from the sun; It regufates our climate, provides
fresh water, and is the generator of all life, terrestrial and aquatic alike.
© Niton Design Studio Washington
o LABORATORY OF
THE UNIVERSE
H NCE upon a time, four and a half
billion years ago, the earth new
born, was hot, round, and pockmarked all over by the
turmoil within and without. There were no well-defined
continental rises and no marked depressions in its surface.
There was no water, no atmosphere as we know it, and of
course no life. How did the distribution of continental
elevations and oceanic depressions come about? How did
the water fill the ocean basins? Were they filled slowly?
Or was the mantle of water always about what it is today?
How did the atmosphere's present composition come
about? And how did life begin in the oceans? How did

the chain of evolution begin and develop to the wealth of
plant and animal life that we know on our planet today?
These are the primary questions of the natural history
of our earth in which the oceans play a leading role. Eons
ago they were the birthplace of life itself. Even today,
they supply the moisture in our atmosphere, provide us
with life-giving rain, temper our climate, and have an
unknown potential, almost untapped, of food and minerals
needed by man. As population on earth increases, the
resources of the continents that poke out from beneath the
sea become strained to meet humanity's needs, and to
support our life that began in the sea we have once again
to turn to the sea.
Science, contrary to popular belief, gives no final
answers. For each question answered by scientists half a
dozen others are raised; thus, the known unknowns about
our planet, our origin, and our universe multiply more
quickly even than people! This is a fortunate thing;
otherwise the material on which to feed man's curiosity
would dwindle. And so man with his theories supposes
solutions but nature continually proposes new problems.
When the earth first began to form not long after the
origin of the universe, it was not as compact as it is today,
but gradually it shrunk to its present size and degree of

solidity. In fact, the diffuse protoplanet from which it
formed may have had a hundred times the mass of material,
consisting mostly of light gases which, because of their
violent motion, escaped to space. Only after this did our
geologic record begin and we date the age of the earth
from that time. The age of the universe is estimated by
observing the. rate at which stars far, far away recede from
each other. In receding, their light shifts to the longer
wave length, red, just as the whistle of a departing train
lowers in pitch as it speeds away. From this rate of
spreading of the stars we can calculate how long ago they
were all close together.
The Martian observer from his distance would not
detect details of our coast lines. He would probably be
The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
struck by the curious assymmetry of the planet, where
water appears as the mirror image of land. Four
continents he would discern the dominant pattern of
three petal-like land areas stretching down from the
northern hemisphere the Americas, Europe-Africa, and
Asia-Australasia the tips pointing toward but not
reaching the fourth continent, Antarctica. Diametrically
opposite, across the globe from each of the continents, he
would see a corresponding ocean the Arctic Ocean
opposite the Antarctic continent, the Pacific Ocean
opposite Europe-Africa, the Indian opposite the Americas,
and the Atlantic opposite Asia-Australasia. These
oceans, too, he would see as petal-shaped, starting in the
southern hemisphere and reaching upward with their
points toward the Arctic Ocean.
Fl
^11 ow the earth's crust developed con-
B^B"^ tinents and ocean basins is explain¬
ed by some as due to the slow convection that is, rising
of hot material and sinking of colder in doughnut-like
cells of the semi-plastic material beneath. The continents
were formed where two doughnuts touched and the out¬
flows toward each of their edges converged. The oceans
similarly formed at the centre of the doughnuts where the
flow outward toward the edges of the ring diverges, leaving
a hollow.
This would mean that during geologic time the continents
have grown and the ocean basins have deepened. We
find by measuring the decay of radioactive substances into
stable ones, the same method that gives us the estimate of
the four and a half bilhon year age of the earth, that the
oldest rocks are generally found toward the centre of the
continents, thus supporting the idea of slow growth
around the edges, ¡and the ocean basins are '"younger" or
newer material brought up from the earth's insides.
Four continents and four great oceans four regions
where our doughnuts of hot plastic material converge and
leave the surface slag of continents and four doughnut
centres where tthe spreading flow hollows oceanic
depressions. This simple hypothesis might be the
All land engulfed in 100 million years
beginning of an explanation of the interesting pattern of
oppositeness that we have in our land and sea distribution.
One of the unsolved questions is whether the ocean
waters and the atmosphere were formed before the be¬
ginning of geologic record or whether they grew slowly
throughout time squeezed out from our planet. In favour
of the slow growth of the oceans is the fact that the rate
of flow of water from volcanic springs at the present time
is more than sufficient to have filled the oceans through
geologic time. And in a large area of the Pacific Ocean
there are coral atolls and sea mounts with their flat tops far
below present sea level.
This could have come about only by a deepening of the
ocean bottom from which they rise due the continuing inter¬
nal convection or to the increase in the amount of water in
the ocean basins, or most probably both of these. Some of
this deepening seems to have taken place only in the last
hundred million years and would indicate that perhaps a
fourth of all ocean water has been squeezed to the surface
of the earth by the turmoil within it in the last fortieth of
its age. If the internal activity Which causes this increase
of water continues, we may have a completely water-
covered planet after the next hundred million years.
Slumbering centuries in the ocean chasms
o explain life in the sea we must
understand its origin, its evolution,
and the total relationship in the cycle of sunshine and
nutrients to plants, to grazing animals, to predators, and
back to nutrients through the action of bacteria. We must
understand also the linking of life in the sea to birds and
land animals, including the greatest predator, man.
Life began in the oceans and has continued there far
longer than it has existed in air or on land. Every major
large family of life on earth has its most primitive members
in the ocean and finds its earliest forebears there. But
because the ocean performs for life the same function it
performs for our climate, namely a steadying flywheel
effect with no marked or rapid changes, the challenge for
development of new species is not as great as on land, so
that rates of evolution in the ocean have not been as rapid.
In spite of the much longer time life has existed in sea
water and the fact that there is more ocean than land, only
twenty per cent of all the species alive today are in the
ocean. The rate of evolution is in fact faster on land,
adapting species to the more widely varying and rigorous
conditions there.
In places that are alternately wet and dry, such as
shorelines where the oceans and land meet, and the tides
rhythmically submerge the beach and expose it to searing
heat or bitter cold, the challenge to survival has produced
the greatest concentration of different kinds of life. We
should expect that the rate of evolution is slower the
deeper one goes in the ocean because uniform conditions
do not promote selection and because of the lower tempera¬
tures which cause all chemical reactions to go more slowly.
Of course, the ocean shields its life from cosmic rays
which can produce mutations, but it seems likely that
cosmic radiation is unimportant compared to the natural
mutation rate provided by the thermal agitation of matter.
So we find living fossils, forms of life that have not
changed for millions of /ears, such as coelacanths, perhaps
the hnk between fish and the vertebrates on land. As we
find better ways to observe and collect in the ocean, we
will find many more forms unchanged through ages
lower branches of the tree of evolution.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

0 EYES TO PIERCE THE NIGHT
Felton Design Studio
STATIONS IN THE SEA like those shown here will enable men to live in, observe and explore
the ocean depths. From the tallcigar-shaped buoy (on left) they will be able to record physical and
biological interplay. Horizontal tubular construction on right will provide a permanent observation
post. There will be submarine "tractors" with mechanical arms and suction tubes for collecting
plants, animals and geological specimens. Above the tractor is a jet-propelled bathyscaph.
he oceans have been represent¬
ed as a fearsome thing. The
earliest maps always showed the land then known girdled
by a ring of impenetrable seas. But understanding
dispels fear, and if we chart them properly, the oceans can
help to bring world friendship as highways of international
commerce and exchange.
This means that we must have maps showing the
contours of hills and valleys, ridges and trenches, and the
nature of the bottom whether it is a good mirror for
sound waves or a poor one. The mid-Atlantic ridge
beneath the sea, probably the greatest mountain range on
earth, may look entirely different from continental
mountains because it has never been subjected to such
severe processes of erosion. As Maury charted surface
currents and winds, modern Maurys will chart the speed
and direction of currents at all depths in the oceans.
Only recently great subsurface rivers, equivalent to a
thousand Mississippis, have been found underneath the
huge surface currents, such as the Gulf Stream and its
counterparts in other oceans. As we get differences of
gravity on land due to the presence of mountains, valleys
and plains and the different material in them, so gravity
varies in the ocean and charts of its variation and of the
variations in the earth's magnetic field will be a further
aid to navigators.
Airplanes flying over land now seldom use the earlier
navigational methods. In ordinary flying the country is
criss-crossed by radio beams tracks along which the
airplane runs unerringly to its destination. On land we
have networks of radars which plot the positions of all
aircraft to prevent collisions. It cannot be too long before
we will have the counterpart of these criss-crossed networks
in the sea submarine beacons radiating sound beams for
the guidance of underwater craft as the lighthouse uses a
light beam to guide ships on the surface. Sound receivers
must be coupled together in a vast underwater spider web
of millions of miles of cables which, like radar in the air
space, can keep track continuously of normal comings and
goings, yet single out any stranger.
We must with our instruments and vehicles be able to
see through the ocean to understand it. And best of all

is to go down into it and use our senses directly! Scientific
instruments extend the range of our senses, and vehicles
extend the reach of our arms and legs. By instruments
alone we know something of the distant space above us
where we have never been. Similarly we know a little
about the deep ocean where we have never been by the
probings of instruments on long wires. Instruments can
detect the whole of the electro-magnetic spectrum from
the longest radio waves to the shortest gamma and X-rays
but including the narrow range encompassed by our eyes.
They can hear above or below the pitch to which our ears
are tuned, measure pressures too small to feel or too great,
for us to withstand, and analyze substances far more
accurately than we can do by natural taste and smell.
The eyes are of little use where there is little to see, as
in space. So that man, in space, is only a repairman of
the sensing instruments transmitting information to earth,
or an experimental animal, or a space-craft chauffeur until
he can land on an extraterrestrial body. But ultimately all
recorded bits of information are put into the scientist's
brain through his eyes. In unexplored regions where
there is so much to see that is hitherto unknown there is
great advantage in having la watcher on the spot so that
the information goes directly into his brain and the
The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
exploration plan can be developed as it unfolds. The
ocean is such a region.
It is only in the last few years that we have begun to go
down into the ocean to see things for ourselves. Up to
that time our knowledge came from the chance gathering
of nets operated from surface vessels like a blind man
making a butterfly collection. Because vehicles to take us
deep down in the sea were not available, we have
concentrated on developing instruments for measuring its
characteristics from the surface. Now bathyscaphs, deep-
diving manned ocean balloons, have gone down nearly
seven miles, and skin diving enables almost anyone to see
the profusion of life in the shallow edges of the sea. In
the next few years we will see a corresponding develop¬
ment of new vehicles to let us take the plunge with our
new instruments.
We will have different kinds of bathyscaphs some that
can operate at 12,000 feet can investigate one-third of
the ocean which is shallower than that; others that can go
down half again as deep can cover ninety-five per cent
of the area of the ocean's bottom; and finally, the stronger
bathyscaphs like the bathyscaph manned by Piccard and
Walsh that made the record dive and that can withstand
Photo Conrad Limbaugh, University of California, Scripps Institution of Oceanography
SANDFALLS on the ocean bed are the counterparts of waterfalls on land. One shown here,
about 30 feet high, is in the Cape San Lucas submarine canyon, Baja California. Currents
feed the sand from nearby beaches into the canyon. Photograph was taken during, an
expedition made by the University of California's Scripps Institution of Oceanography.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TURN TO THE SEA (Continued)
the pressures of the deepest ocean trench, seven tons per
square inch, over seven miles down, will cover the
remaining five per cent.
These deep diving, manned vehicles, which we will soon
have, will be like a lobster, able to go up and down, move
horizontally in the water in any depth and crawl along the
bottom. They will have mechanical arms like claws
remotely controlled by the man in the pressure-tight shell.
His eyes will be extended by a television circuit where the
pickup will be on the end of the controllable hand. More
flexible than our own eyes, it will be able to turn in any
direction and present what it sees on a screen to the man
inside. If it sees a rock of interest, the claw-like hands
can take an underwater geologist's hammer and collect
the specimen. If it sees a fish, they can collect it with a
net. If it sees ripples and sediments, it can photograph
and measure them. Directed by the knowledge and expe¬
rience of the investigator inside the cabin, it can multiply
many times over the amount of information that could be
secured by instruments alone. __
Furthermore, when we descend to these depths we have
to protect ourselves from the tremendous external
pressures by a strong water-tight cabin which maintains our
normal air pressure of fifteen pounds per square inch
inside. Animals that have adapted themselves to the
darkness of the depths and the pressure of seven miles of
sea water on top of them die when caught by chance in
trawls operated from the surface because now, when they
are brought to the surface, the change in pressure kills
them. But with the bathyscaph they will be collected and
placed in a strong container which will keep them at their
accustomed pressure, temperature and darkness while they
are brought to the surface alive to be studied in oceanaria
specially designed to reproduce the physical conditions
under which they live and in which they may reproduce
themselves.
These small deep water bathyscaphs will be launched
from and return to a mother ship. The mother ship
will be a surface vessel at first but later we may see large,
very-deep-water submarines acting as bases for the small,
inquisitive, manned bathyscaphs which would scatter from
her to collect the data to report and return to her from
time to time. These new means of gathering data will
lead to world-wide maps of the ocean's plant, animal, and
total biological fife. We do not have these yet, and neither
have our aquaria grown to the size where, under controlled
conditions that we can observe, we can study the interac¬
tions of total communities of ocean life.
But we will have huge marine biotrons or oceanariums
where we can learn why organisms and fish perform
migrations, vertical and horizontal, whether they navigate
celestially as the birds perhaps do, how creatures in the
darkest recesses seven miles down generate their own lights
within their bodies, and how they withstand the tremendous

pressures. We are just beginning to have the tools and
materials to build these immense facilities, and Whether
we will take large samples of the ocean and place them
in plastic tanks on land, where we can control temperature,
pressure, nutrients, and other conditions, or whether we
will build plastic houses at the bottom of the sea so that
we can observe the denizens at home, I do not know.
I expect we will probably do both.
Photo O.F.R.S. © Les Requins Associés, Paris
FILM PRODUCERS gather in an underwater "studio"a rocky, seaweed covered grotto100
feet down under the sea near Marseilles. Modern Improvements in construction of waterproof
filming and lighting equipment and, above all, the development of the aqualung diving apparatus
have made possible some remarkable accomplishments in underwater filming in recent years.
I0

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
0n studying our planet we have to
I know the geographical distribution
of its physical and biological make-up. But we also need
to know how things change at one and ithe same place
with time. On land we watch the response of animals
and trees to the changing of seasons in one locality. We
can relate animal behaviour and plant response to the
varying conditions of the weather recorded by instru¬
ments against time at one place. But in the ocean, so
far, no one has anchored a ship and made a series of
measurements, except in rare instances, for more than a
few days. Yet measurements of the time variations of
temperature, salinity, currents, light, correlated with
biological observations of the variations of plankton and
fish populations at a fixed position over a long period,
would be extremely revealing.
Stimulated by the search for oil under the continental
shelves, we already have built artificial islands, Texas
towers, marching into the sea and taking their stance on
the continental shelves. These can be the first stations
in the sea, and artificial islands of this kind may be built
on many of the shoals in the oceans or rise. from the top
of sea mounts that reach up nearly to the surface. In

very deep water the next step would be to anchor an
ordinary surface ship for a period of a year. Anchoring
in thousands of fathoms of water is now practical because
we can use self-buoyant anchor cables.
Formerly the main problem of anchoring in deep water
was not that the forces of wave and swell on the ship
Les Requins Associés, Paris.
broke the cable but that the very weight of the long cable
itself caused it to part. Now with nylon or other plastic
materials having the same density as sea water the cable is
weightless, and anchoring even in the deepest parts of the
sea is possible.
Next to come, and better than a ship, will be vertical
floating tubes, hundreds of feet long, cigarlike in shape,
heavy on the bottom and projecting a few feet into the
air at the top. These will be moored in one place. The
men in this tall tubular buoy floating in the sea will be able
to live, watch, and record the physical and biological
interplay never before observed. Initially we may use
submarine hulls standing on end for these buoys, and in
the not-too-distant future permanent stations of this kind
will be scattered all over the oceans. Not only will they
be useful for understanding the sea but they will be mid-
ocean lighthouses and emergency shelters for ocean trav¬
ellers and fishermen.
As well as these anchored buoys, there will be
manned, drifting buoys travelling slowly with the currents,
and for each manned buoy, drifting or moored, there will
be numerous unmanned ones at surface, mid-depths
and bottom, sending what their instruments measure au¬
tomatically to the manned stations to be re-transmitted by
radio to great central storage computing and analysis
centres, either on land or at sea.
These networks of buoys in and on the sea will not
replace surface océanographie ships but will, rather,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TURN TO THE SEA (Continue,
increase the need for them because the buoys will have to
be supplied, attended, and their data collected. Aircraft
flying above the sea also will be used to gather the
information about the oceans. From an aircraft at high
speed a view of the ocean can show currents, wind streaks,
boundaries between water of different kinds, and
concentrations of marine life. Also, the buoys in the sea
can transmit their data from the depths first by sound to
the surface and then by radio to an aircraft flying above
them. The airplane could question many buoys at the
same time and get a synoptic or simultaneous bird's-eye
picture of the situation.
The airplanes, too, can drop measuring instruments
which, as they sink down into the depths, transmit the
conditions of the different layers through which they pass.
We may expect to see large mother ships letting down
bathyscaphs and sending up helicopters to gather the total
data that we will need about the sea. Not only these
special vehicles for océanographie research but also ocean
liners and fishing vessels can be equipped with continually
recording instruments which, without interfering with their
normal business, can chart temperature, salinities
abundance of plant and animal plankton, and fish
populations. Only by the use of all of these can we hope
to obtain the world map of the huge oceans relating their
physical conditions to the distribution of life in them.
This map will give us the basis to understand the
complicated relationships that will enable us to make
useful predictions for fisheries, for ocean travel, for
underwater communications, and out of it will come many
other uses of ocean forecasting. All these together will
provide the network of observations of both ocean and
atmospheric conditions necessary for the numerical
weather predictors that we have today and for the
electronic oceanic forecasting computers that we will have
tomorrow.

o TAKING THE SEA'S PULSE
LTHOUGH we all chuckle and poke
fun at the weatherman, there is no
doubt that weather forecasts, even in their present state,
save lives and money in untold amounts each year. To
forecast ocean conditions will be increasingly useful and
important as mankind turns more to the sea. Ocean and
atmosphere work together, each influencing the other, so
that improved océanographie forecasts and better informa¬
tion of sea conditions will improve weather predictions,
and better weather predictions, such as being able to
foretell the strength of the winds over the sea, will improve
the predictions of wave, surf, and swell. Accurate predic¬
tion of these factors will reduce transoceanic crossing
times, increase passenger comfort, reduce ship maintenance
and repair costs, and save the lives of men and ships.
Knowing how strong a wind and how long a distance or
fetch it takes to generate waves lets us predict the height
of the pounding waves a vessel may expect to encounter.
The pulsing of the sea that we observe in the high and
low tides is the phenomenon that can be forecast most
accurately. Basic theory of the tides applies only to the
very deep ocean where, so far, we cannot measure them.
Yet, curiously enough, we can predict tides for coastal
points where as yet we don't fully understand them. The
tide periods can be broken down from a long record at
any place into regular cyclic ones, reconstructed and
extrapolated into the future. This is because the tide
generating forces are governed by the precise and highly
predictable motions of earth, sun, moon and other bodies
in our planetary system.
Another particular ocean forecast that has been used
for many years is the prediction of the coming and going
of ice in northern seas. Ice forecasting was highly
developed quite a long time ago in the Baltic Sea. Because
of the great amount of trade that went in and out of its
numerous ports it was important to know in advance when
the ports would be open or be closed by ice. A more
menacing kind of ice in the ocean, the treacherous
floating icebergs which show only a small fraction of their
huge bulk above water, also has been watched and
predicted for some time. Since the Titanic collided with
an iceberg in a disaster that shocked the world, an in-
12
ternational ice patrol service has studied conditions, made
forecasts, and issued warnings to steer shipping clear of
this danger. To do this the time and amount of calving
of the icebergs from glaciers is studied and the currents
that carry them down in the Baffin Bay area are watched
beyond the Grand Banks where they cross the main ship¬
ping lanes, right to their final melting, as they meet the
eddying fringes of the warm Gulf Stream.
How the surface winds affect the production of food
on which fish graze and how they affect the infant
mortality of the fish sets a basis for future fishery
forecasting. Already one remarkable example of the
value of forecasting can be found in haddock fishing on
George's banks. Here the strength and duration of
offshore winds during the haddock's annual spawning
period makes it possible to predict three years in advance
the probable size of the harvest of three-year-old-fish.
Both the wave and fisheries forecasts depend on knowing
from the weatherman the winds over the sea and the
forecasts will improve as the observing network at sea is
improved.
In the oceans we use sound waves not only for
communication and for echo-sounding the depth of the
ocean bottom but also for locating schools of fish. Good
or poor sound transmission depends on the distribution of
temperature and salinity and the location of mysterious
scattering layers and other conditions that can be
measured. The ionosphere influenced by the sun affects
our ability to communicate by radio through atmosphere.
Just as we have a central radio propagation laboratory to
predict and recommend the best wave lengths, so physical
conditions in the sea that affect sound will be measured
and an important part of ocean forecasting will be the
prediction of sound propagation in it.
Predictions of changes of major ocean currents,
themselves partly driven by wind, may provide a way of
foretelling their influence on subsequent weather. Océano¬
graphie forecasting has the advantage that changes are
much slower than those of the weather. Even if unreliable
at first, their usefulness and wide application will make
the world ocean forecasting service a necessity in the next
few years.
CONT'D ON PAGE 14

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
13

TURN TO THE SEA (Continued)-
oTHEGR
' MiMMMWl
STURES
OF TOMORROW
Photo © E. Aubert de la Rüe, showing salt being " harvested'
from seawater evaporating ponds at Djibouti, Somaliland.
EFORE human beings existed the sea was supplying that vital need '
for life on land water freshened by. the natural process of distilla¬
tion by the sun. Producing fresh water artificially from the sea is still an expensive process but is
already done for domestic purposes in isolated islands or places of military strategic or economic
importance such as on the coral atolls of the Pacific and the oil towns in the desert on the edge of
the Persian Gulf. In certain areas of the world, limited in their industrial development solely by
the shortage of water, the value of fresh water will increase and the cost of producing it from the
sea will decrease through technological advances. Fresh water will be the major product that we
will extract artificially from the sea in years to come.
Making fresh water by taking the salt from sea or brackish water is already done on a large scale
in many places. It is done by various methods. First there is the one that emulates nature by
distilling the water by boiling it off with the heat of fossil or nuclear fuels or the sun's heat and
leaving the salt behind. An electrical method whereby a current causes positive salt ions to flow
in one direction and negative ions in the other, thus separating the salt, is another possibility.
Also, we have thin membranes which let pure water through while blocking the flow of salts.
There are certain synthetic liquids, too, which absorb large quantities of plain water but reject
the salts. In contrast to the boiling or distillation production of fresh water where we must add

heat, we can emulate nature again and by taking heat away freeze sea water to separate the salt.
Natural sea ice is far less salty than the water from which it freezes. As the freezing process
proceeds, most of the salts are excluded, but one of the problems of this method is that crystals of
salt cling or are included in the frozen fresh water. The method is interesting because it takes
much less energy to freeze water than to boil it. There are biological methods, too, which hold
promise. It has been suggested that certain salt-absorbing algae might be used to de-salt sea water.
14

hen people think of what we get
from the sea, they think first of
fish. Apart from the sun's natural extraction of water,
what man takes out of the sea in the greatest quantity are
its living resources. In countries such as Japan fish form
the most important part of the protein diet. Total world's
protein for human consumption, animal foods and other
purposes, taken from the sea, amounts to thirty million
tons a year (about a tenth is used in the United States).
The amount has increased by about one-half in the last ten
years.
With growing world populations to feed, it is certain
that the world's fisheries will increase their harvest, and
we are sure that the sea can give this increase if we can
learn better to husband and garner her resources. Since
only a few kinds of fish of the large number of known
varieties are taken and since many parts of the ocean,
The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
especially in the southern hemisphere, are scarcely fished
at, all, we are sure of this. The living bounty of the sea
on which man will become increasingly dependent is self-
renewing provided we do not overfish as we once over-cut
our timberlands.
Over-fishing is not yet a problem except for a few
species-. However, they are among the more valuable
(salmon, haddock, halibut, whale). Those which can be
captured easily and command a high price have been
decimated in the past, such as Steller's sea cow now
extinct. Conservation of all these is an important national
and international task, and Whale hunting is now
rigidly controlled by international agreement. Although
the fishing boats use modern navigation, sonar and
aircraft to spot their catches, they employ methods nets,
trawls and lines which have not changed for hundreds of
years.
Floating cities foreseen in the Antarctic
OWEVER, new methods of fishing,
based on wider knowledge of the
available fish and their life cycles, will increase the poten¬
tial harvest tremendously while at the same time increasing
the need for wise conservation. We must bear in mind one
essential difference between land and sea resources: that on
land the property belongs to an individual who, in his own
interest, must conserve its resources; whereas the sea, being
open to all, is exploited to the fullest extent, limited only by
the economics of the fishing.
The fish harvest of the world is used to feed people not
only directly but indirectly through feeding poultry and
livestock and fertilizing plants. In countries with
abundant . agricultural land people eat only a limited
quantity of fish and, being economically able to pick and
choose, only a few varieties. The average person in the
United States eats eleven pounds of fish a year. This
amount has not increased in twenty years in spite of all
the improvements in refrigeration, freezing, transportation,
and so forth.
In Japan, where people crowd the land, fish is their
principal source of animal protein and they eat on an
average seven times as much as those in the United
States. They have learned also how to prepare hundreds
of varieties tastily and they eat not only the animal life
but many kinds of seaweed. Seaweed is gathered in other
countries, too, but is generally not eaten directly but
processed into a substance called algin, used in cosmetics,
textiles, paper, ink and drugs as well as in chocolate milk,
jellies and jams.
As the needs of the world for food increase, new and
different ways of fishing will be used. Today in the
Caspian Sea fish are attracted by underwater lights and
sucked aboard the fishing vessels by pumps. There will
be efficient new methods, too, of finding the fish. Sonar
and aircraft can locate them and studies of how their
food is blown by the wind can tell us where to capture
them.
As times goes on, the counterpart of agriculture in the
oceans, aquaculture, will catch up with the latest
agricultural methods on land. We will make sure that a
greater percentage of eggs hatch and that infant mortality
in fish is decreased so that more larvae and, above all,
young fish survive. We may hatch and raise small fish
in controlled oceanaria just as we hatch chicks in a brooder

or raise trout in hatcheries. We will increase the pro¬
ductivity of sea water by '"ploughing" the sea just as we
till the land, because the productivity of the sea seems to
depend on the bringing of dissolved substances from deep
layers to the surfaces.
One way of doing this would be to have a nuclear
reactor at the bottom of the sea to heat the lower water
and make it rise upwards and mix by convection, as we
would heat a pan of water on the stove. We will even
fertilize the sea artificially. We will not use phosphates
and nitrates as we do on land, even though these are the
basic nutrients for fish growth, because the volume of water
is suoh that the quantities of these basic nutrients would
be too great to contemplate. It will be possible, however,
to introduce trace elements in minute quantities to affect
growth in the ocean.
Like the whale factories which process the whole Whale
efficiently in Antarctic waters, we will see marine plant
and animal processing ships supplied by the catching boats
which scour the seas around them. The processing ships
will operate in essence as huge floating chemical
engineering factories. Their development will make fish
harvesting cheap enough to use a much wider variety of
fish than before, including what we now call trash fish.
Unappetizing-looking marine life will be transformed at
sea in these factories to tasty, nutritive protein. In the
most productive areas of the ocean as off Peru and in
Antarctic waters we may see floating industrial cities of
these processing plants.
The most important regions for aquaculture are the
shallow, almost land-locked waters that lie in estuaries all
over the world. These estuaries are important to our
food harvest from the sea for several reasons. First, it
is there that valuable shell fish reside permanently, and
second, they are the nursery where baby shell fish and
other fish begin their lives before they grow up to move
out into the ocean. Third, aquaculture can be carried on
there more easily than in the open sea. With the
competition for land for building, manufacturing, docking,
and tidal wave protection at the ocean edge, the charac¬
ter of estuarian waters may be vitally affected in a way
which would seriously harm these resources of the sea.
Coastal city planners, engineers and manufacturers must
consult the fishery biologists if man is not going to
intervene in a harmful way with the productive life of the
ocean.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

° GIANT VACUUM CLEANERS
TO MINE THE SEA FLOOR
NGiNEERS are concerned with the
erosion of land due to the powerful
wave action upon our coasts. They study the force of the
waves, the way in which different types of coastline
withstand this force, and how to modify coastlines to make
them more resistant. These studies involve how wave
energy is generated, how it is bent and reflected, and
how it is dissipated. The valiant efforts to preserve the
coastline must be carried out in a way that will satisfy the
many competing uses of the seashores and not kill the
precious life in the sea that depends on estuaries.
Of great importance to life in estuaries is the rate of
flushing. How soon will the natural tidal pumping
scavenge and dilute any polluting materials poured into
them? There are pockets in certain estuaries where this
pumping is insufficient and where, in consequence, waste
should not be put. This problem is particularly impor¬
tant when we consider radioactive waste materials in
estuaries or the radioactive fallout from some use of a
nuclear weapon or when atomic bombs are used for the
peaceful purpose of blasting out artificial harbours of the
future.
Besides fresh water and its living resources for food,
the sea gives us other raw materials for use in our civili¬
zation salt, magnesium, and other minerals. Because of
the tremendous volume of the sea, the total amount of
any mineral in it is a staggering quantity and leads to
dreams such as "gold from the sea." But with few
exceptions, so dilute is the concentration that extraction is
as uneconomical as processing a very, very low grade ore
on land. Salt from the sea by evaporation is an ancient
industry and for thousands of years man has taken it for
his use by allowing the sun to evaporate off the water from
shallow salterns. Nowadays not only sodium salts but
potassium and magnesium salts are separated from sea
water. Bromine gas is a valuable byproduct of both salt
works and magnesium production. Lightweight magne¬
sium, second most abundant metal in sea water, is
extracted by such a simple process that it is economical
even though there is only a tenth of one per cent of it in
sea water whereas normal rock and soil on land contain
forty times as much.
The whole question of whether or not we extract
anything from sea water depends on whether it competes
favourably with getting the same substance from
somewhere else. But as in the case of the artificial
distillation of fresh water, as time goes on the scarcity of
substances previously in abundant supply raises their value
and makes processes, formerly prohibitively costly, econo¬
mical.
Some minerals are contained in nodules which lie on
the bottom in plentiful quantities over vast areas of the
deep sea. How they formed over millions of years is not
properly understood. We will mine the sea floor two
thousand fathoms below the surface for the small per¬
centages of cobalt, copper and nickel which are contained
in nodules of manganese and iron that now lie exposed
there. They will be mined by using huge vacuum cleaners
TEMPEST
IN A TANK
Large, rotating tank (right) at Woods
Hole Océanographie Institute in the
U.S.A. is used for studies of ocean
currents. Rotation of the earth,
heating, cooling and wind condi¬
tions can be duplicated In the model.
Through studies of this kind, scien¬
tists try to learn more about the con¬
ditions that produce such maritime
catastrophes as the hurricane "Carol"
which devastated the Atlantic coast
of the United States in 1954. (Photo
opposite page shows small boat
owners saving their craft in the
early stages of Carol's rampage).
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution
16

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
to suck them up into the holds of surface ships or by
submarine caterpillar-tracked earth movers that scrape the
valuable nodules into submarine mine hoists.
Under the shallower water of the continental shelves we
are now tapping valuable reserves of petroleum and will
turn to the sea more and more for oil. Petroleum, the
stored sunshine of ancient marine animal fossils, lies not
only under our land where the sea once was but also four
hundred billion barrels of it, about a third of all remaining
on earth, waits in reserve underneath the sea bed.
The sea has been used from time immemorial as a great
trash can. As long as wastes are organic or ordinary
chemicals the sea can turn them «into useful nutrients or
at least dilute them enough to be harmless. Now man
has a waste radioactive waste that he can neither burn
and blow into the atmosphere, nor allow to seep into the
ground, nor without thought discharge into the sea. The
sea is still considered and is being studied as a convenient
place to dump radioactive wastes. Seventy per cent of
the fission products of all our nuclear bombs fall on the
sea because the sea covers that percentage of the area of
the earth. And even though sea water dilutes them, some
biological organisms in the food chain that leads to man
can concentrate radioactive isotopes thousands of times.
It has been thought that perhaps a thousand tons a year
of nuclear radioactive ashes can be deposited safely in the
deep isolated basins of the ocean, but we cannot be sure
until we know how long water stays in these deeps.
Rounded rocks have been found at the bottom of them,
a possible indication that currents there are faster than we
think. It would be a pity if man, who often unthinkingly
has harmed his environment on earth by denuding forests,
making whole species of animals extinct, causing eye-
watering smogs in his cities, over farming land and making
it sterile, should by ignorance affect the animal popula¬
tions of the deep sea and set up a chain reaction which
might harm everything living in the ocean.
Before we put these Ionglived radioactive materials into
the sea, we should wait for our research to tell us whether
or not it is safe. Because the need to dispose of these
wastes is pressing, we must speed up our studies of the
currents, chemistry, geology and biology of the sea and its
fife so that we can answer the question: Will it be harmful
to future generations?
There is great energy stored in the sea. The most
obvious that we can tap is the ebb and flow of the tide,
especially at places where tides are unusually high, such
as the Bay of Fundy where they rise and fall the height
of a four-story building. Other extraordinarily high tides
are in southern Alaska and at Inchon in Korea. The
great tides of the world occur because the twice-a-day pull
of the moon happens to be in synchronism with the natural
mode of vibration of the water in the particular estuary
basins. Attempts are now being made to harness the
tides in France, and the Passamaquoddy project to utilize
the water's rise and fall in the Bay of Fundy is still alive.
Another way of using the energy of the sea is to drive
heat engines by the difference in temperature between the
warm surface and the cold deep water of the oceans.
I do not suggest cutting back the exciting exploration
of space, but m : rely point out that for a comparatively
tiny sum we could preserve a balance in investigating our
own earth which, as I have stressed, is a most convenient
and accessible laboratory to understand the problems ; of
the universe.
Much of the undersea landscape, hidden from our eyes,
is less well known than the face of the moon that we see!
With minerals resting on it, nutrients sinking toward it,
geologic history locked in its sedimentary layers, and petro¬
leum beneath it, the sea's bottom is at least as interesting,
and certainly more immediately useful to mankind, than
the moon's back side. What we need to do to investigate
the sea can be done for a yearly cost which is a small
fraction of what we now spend on space.
To understand earth, sun and space we must balance
the expenditures of our resources, human and material,
so that we do not neglect, in our enthusiasm over sun and
space, our own earth. It is wonderful to look out and
try to understand space; it will be exciting to go out; but...
we should not forget the earth on which we stand and the
great storehouse of living needs... ours for the taking...
held for us in the seas.
© Jan Hahn
Woods Hole
17
