ILO
International Labour Office expert A. Asenjo (above, on right of photo)
himself blind, is helping Brazil to develop its vocational rehabilitation
services for blind persons. He is seen here in a Sao Paulo printing
shop with blind workers who are assembling Braille publications.
Opposite page, at London's School for the Sightless, the boy reading
to his friends from a Braille book of medieval legends does so with
such speed that no one hearing him would guess that he is blind.

WHEN IS
A PERSON
CONSIDERED
BLIND?
by
Nino Frank
Absolute and total blindness is almost an anomaly.
Most blind people can "see" to a certain extent or at
least recreate for themselves the image of what they
can no longer directly perceive, using what are sometimes
called "'the eyes of the mind" or "the eyes of memory".
For the fact is that only four blind, persons in every
hundred are under 20 years of age and rarer still are
those afflicted with blindness before the age of five
by which time a child's eye has absorbed a multitude
of images of the surrounding world. Whereas the pro¬
portion of blind to seeing people in the world is about
350 per 100,000 inhabitants, that of children under five
is only seven per 100,000.
Sustained by hearing, by touch and even by smell, a
person who has lost [his sight still has the power to create
a light Within himself and to reconstruct the world
around him. Thanks to this capacity he is no longer
someone '"different" from his fellows and has certainly
no need of the Ikindi of hurtful and upsetting pity which
people so often show towards him. .
What he does need and has the right to is the con¬
sideration and help of society and this at once raises, as
it has always done, the problem of the exact status of
the blind in the community. As total blindness is com¬
paratively rare, the problem, in most cases is to decide to
what extent a person's power of vision is impaired, thus
placing him In a special situation. Blindness therefore,
has come to toe measured in practical or occupational
terms, by which the expression "blind" denotes "any
person who, by treason of the physical condition of his
eyes, cannot live a completely normal 'life'".
What, then, is a blind person? If some are deprived
of the least perception of light, others can still register
light and shade, can see colours if they are strongly lit,
but cannot distinguish forms; others, again, can perceive
forms, but are incapable of determining the exact place
of these in relation to others. There are many other

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
Camera Press Ltd., London
variations. Some people have relatively good visual
acuity in the morning and virtually none in the evening.
In some a perfectly adequate power of sight is undermined
by physical defects such as nystagmus (a regular, in¬
voluntary oscillation of the eyeball). Others, with suf¬
ficient central vision, have a reduced peripheral field. If
such people are not literally '"blind" ab oculis, or "depri¬
ved of eyes'", a conception etymologically preserved in the
French word aveugle they nevertheless are unable to
live a normal life to work, to study or to move about as
freely as others.
The concept of the visual field is a leading factor in any
definition of blindness. A normal eye covers 135 degrees
on the horizontal axis, and both eyes together, about
180 degrees; the field of vision on the vertical axis is
less about il05 degrees as it is limited by the arch of
the brow. In reaching definitions of blindness, several
countries make use of these elements.' In the United
States, for instance, a person is considered legally blind
if his central vision is less than a tenth of the average or
his visual field is less than 20 degrees.
The French definition of blindness includes anyone
whose central vision, even when corrected toy spectacles,
does not reach a .twentieth power of normal sight
anyone, that is, who cannot distinguish at one metre,
something which a person with normal sight could see at
twenty metres.
German law is far more rigorous and only recognizes
as blind and legally entitled to assistance those whose
vision is one-sixtieth of the normal. Bavaria goes even
further and its definition of blindness only covers those
with one-hundreth of normal vision.
Several countries still measure blindness by the distance
at which the outstretched fingers of the hand can be
counted a metre in most cases, but as much as three
metres in Egypt until recently. The two extremes in
criteria are those of Switzerland which in general recog¬
nizes any person as blind if he is unable to perform
work requiring sight, and India, which only acknowledges
total blindness.
Variations like these have stimulated the search for
some standard definition which Would at once provide a
universal criterion for use by all countries and Which
could eventually be established by international agreement.
A standard definition of this kind was outlined in a report
. submitted in 1954 to the U.N. Social Affairs Division. The
report was ,also presented the same year to the General
Assembly of the World Council for the Welfare of the
Blind (WCWB) in Paris. It proposed that the benefits
enjoyed by the blind should be given to persons possessing
not more than 3/60ths of normal vision (after correction
by spectacles) or suffering from a defect of vision (i.e. a
reduction of the visual field) which reduces its practical
efficiency to 3/60ths.
Statistics on blindness throughout the world are not
strictly comparable because of the variation in national
definitions. The proportion of blind people in the United
States appears higher than in France because the Am¬
erican definition takes l/10th vision as its standard while
France takes l/20th. After laws to improve the lot of
the blind were passed in Britain, the number of registered
blind people increased from 28,000 to 60,000. Furthermore,
in some countries with high proportions of blind people
Egypt and India, for example available figures
are not absolutely reliable.
How many blind people are there in the world? A
report submitted to the World Council for the Welfare
of the Blind in Rome, last year, estimated that there are
about nine and a half million, or 3.58 in every thousand
people, and that of these more than seven million live
in rural areas. The report, presented by Dr van
Schalkwijk, Chairman of the Rural Activities Committee,
said that over 3,600,000 could be rehabilitated, more than
two million being capable of agricultural work.
