Atlas Photo, Paris


THE WAVE-MYSTERY
OF D-DAY 1944
by Ritchie Calder
H UR scientific knowledge of waves
dates back to D-Day, 1944.
True ? or False ? Absurd as it
may seem, it is true. For all those thousands of years
since some unknown, prehistoric ancestor found himself
adrift in a cockleshell on the surface of the sea, men have
been tossed around, battered into nausea, and drowned,
by the action of waves the Argonauts, the Vikings, Colum¬
bus, the Pilgrim Fathers and all the millions of travellers
who have contemplated waves with sea-green distaste.
They knew what waves did; they never knew what
they were.
Then, at the Quebec Conference which decided on the
Normandy Landings, someone asked "How do waves
work?" The answer was important because, remember,
they were going to build artificial harbours and jetties
and lay a pipeline across the English Channel. Rough
or smooth, a huge expeditionary force had to be landed
on a split-second timing.
And nobody knew the answer not the Blue Water Men
of the allied navies nor the scientists. They knew about
tides, of course; Newton had given them the scientific
explanation of the drag of the forces of the Moon's gravity
and their almanacs could give a precise prediction of the
level of the tide at any given point on the Normandy
Coast. But not the waves they were just something that
naval men endured, and their's not to reason why.
So the scientists had to scratch their heads. Apart from
the mechanism of wave formation, there were all sorts of
factors the nature of that funnel, the English Channel;
the configurations of that coast-line on which the waves
would break erratically and even the geology of the sea¬
shore. And on that, a long-haired British professor (who,
even in uniform, would not cut it) recalled how he had
been bathing on that coast after a stormy night and had
noticed that the surf was peaty. Was that relevant? It
was so relevant that a commando raid was immediately
organized to steal ashore and take geological cores of -the
possible landing-places.
Temporary answers were found not all of them, as
events proved, satisfactory, but enough to underline the
need for scientific knotwledge and measurements about a
phenomenon which had more attention from the poets
and the painters than from the scientists.
CONT'D ON PAGE 66

WAVE
MYSTERY
(Cont'd from p. 37)
THE MIGHTY RIVERS
OF INNER SPACE
So it is only sixteen years since practical methods were
evolved of measuring the height of sea-waves and less
than ten since wave-recorders were fitted to ships, to
accumulate the Information without which further expla¬
nations could never be produced. Yet, once the scientists
got going, it became apparent that the problem was not
nearly as intractable as it had seemed.
The scientists are still trying to find how wind energy
makes the regular wave pattern of a great storm Instead
of stirring the ocean into mere confusion. It is a question
of accumulating data. There are known, storm-centres,
or areas where "master-waves" are generated, but there
are other wave systems, due to secondary causes, and the
visible waves we see at any given time are the result of a
number of component wave-trains travelling at different
speeds and in different directions.
Energy from the Roaring Forties
Those have to be sorted out. This is done by a wave-
analyzer which tells how the energy is distributed bet¬
ween waves of different length. It is an electronic
device and it does very much for the sea what a radio-set
does for electromagnetic waves. It picks out the waves
from the generating-areas as though from different
transmitters and separates them.
They know that waves of different length separate after
leaving a storm area so that the very long low waves,
rising as ground swell on shallow banks, herald the
approach of the shorter steeper swell with most of the
storm energy. It has now reached the stage of refinement
where scientists on the coast of Cornwall or California can
measure the very low swell which has carried energy all
the way from the Roaring Forties of the Southern Hemi¬
sphere.
Methods have been evolved which can distinguish
between what seamen call "sea" and "swell." That is to
say the instruments can tell the difference between 'waves
created by local winds and those originating in storms
possibly thousands of miles away. So, in combination
with the weathermen, the oceanographers can now predict
waves based on meteorological data.
By experiment and theory, the scientists can produce
figures and patterns which are of enormous benefit to
coastal and harbour engineers and to naval architects.
New liners will have "built into them" information, for the
comfort of their passengers and efficiency of running,
which was not available at the end of the war.
Tossed like a Kon-Tiki raft
Already there is a mass of material about wave action
on seacoasts and shoals which will be of value in the
protection of coast-lines which, through the centu¬
ries, have been etched by the action of waves.
That is the surface and the movements which can create
Atlantic rollers 60 feet high, toss a liner as though it were
a Kon-Tiki raft. What of the depths?
The oceans cover nearly three-quarters of the surface
of the Planet Earth and we know rather less about the
geography of this drowned part of our world than we do
about the surface of the Moon. The average depth of
the ocean is about 24 miles but there are "deeps" or
"trenches" which are as deep as 64 miles farther down
than the peak of Everest is up. It is not a "silent world."
With hydrophones, it is possible to pick up jungle noises,
often of creatures we have never seen. And it is certainly
not still; it is in pretty constant movement.
The seas and the climate are inseparable. The oceans
act as a great accumulator or savings bank of heat. The
heat from the sun is stored in the water and Is given off
in times of cold, so that there is a continuous adjustment
of the world's climate. To understand weather, you have
to understand the sea and, the other way round, to under¬
stand the oceans you have to understand the circulation
of the atmosphere.
It is estimated that nine-tenths of the surface currents
(not just the waves) are wind-driven including the Gulf
Stream, which Benjamin Franklin observed so scienti¬
fically nearly two centuries ago, the Humboldt Current
which swept the Kon Tiki raft to Polynesia and the
Kuroshia Current. And even the deep currents are to
some extent influenced by the wind because the surface
water pushed by the winds against the coast is "bent"
downwards to exercise pressures on water layers at lower
depths to get them moving current-wise. It is rather
like on escalator.
More and more is being learned about those deeper
currents. The thing to be remembered is that the water
in the oceans is not all of one density and that lighter
water can lie on top of heavier (because it is colder or
saltier) water like a layer cake. These layers can skid
over, or under each other or move in different directions
to each other.
Gulf stream flows two ways
To study the nature and movement of those deep cur¬
rents instruments have been devised. In a way they
are analogous to those which the weathermen use.
When meteorologists want to explore the upper atmo¬
sphere and study air currents high above the earth, they
send up balloons with transmitting instruments in a
"radiosonde" which signals back information. The ocea¬
nographers who want to study currents far below the sur¬
face of the sea use something similar.
They use two long aluminium tubes which contain
batteries and a simple electronic circuit. It has a sound-
producer like that used in echo-sounding. This Instru¬
ment can be lowered to any precise depth. If you load it
at the surface with enough weight to make it float at a
depth of 2,500 metres, it only needs another gramme of
weight to take it to exactly 2,530 metres. At the prede¬
termined depth it drifts with the current and sends out
pulse-signals. These signals can be picked up by a surface
ship.
Such methods have been used in a "combined operation"
by the British and Americans to study the Gulf Stream. It
was shown that the northward flowing Gulf Stream was
strong at the surface. There was, however, little or no
movement between 4,500 and 6,000 feet but floats released
at 8,200 feet and at 9,200 feet drifted southwardsin the
opposite direction to the surface stream. The speed of
this counter-current was a third of a knot.
Now the plotting of knowledge about the sea is being
intensified. We have had Depth Travel, as Well as Space
Travel. The bathyscaph has gone down to the bottom
of one of the Pacific Trenches. Surface ships make
regular and repeated surveys and gradually we are begin¬
ning to find out things we did not know.
66
