._ ,
.
MOBILE LIBRARY 'SETS UP SHOP' IN THE VILLAGE SQUARE.
CHILDREN MAKE EXCITING FINDS IN THEIR OWN SECTION.
MY library was dukedom large enough," says Pros¬
pero in Shakespeare's "The Tempest," and happy
is the modern man who is able to build up his
own library at home. But in the rural districts of Greece
where books are scarce and the means for establishing
permanent libraries scant, the weekly visits of Mrs. Stella
Peppa-Xephlouda with the Mobile Library is looked upon
as an important event in the life of every community.
The joys of literature and the benefits of education by
means of technical books are being brought to the doors
of the villagers in the Greek countryside.
The Mobile Library of the Ministry of Education today
possesses ten thousand books in Greek and other lan¬
guages and operates in a car donated by Unesco.
Soon it is anticipated there will be at least ten cars
and over a hundred thousand volumes. Everything must
have a beginning and in this case the beginning was the
book-lending centres in various country districts and the
activities of those great propagators of Greek cultural
development, the schoolteachers...
Photos K. Paphaélides © Elkin. Athens "Pictures from Greece" magazine
30

BOOKS EELS
A library comes to a Greek village
VILLAGE TEEN-AGERS IN PARTICULAR FLOCK TO SEEK INFORMATION ON EVERYTHING FROM COOKERY TO RADIO TECHNOLOGY.
If you happened to be in the picturesque little village
of Villia when the Mobile Library arrived, you would
see a constant procession of young and old returning
books and taking out new ones. And you would be aston¬
ished at the type of books that are frequently asked
for.
They are not novels, thrillers or romances as you might
expect. They are technical and agricultural books, books
on electrology, radio, technology, handicraft, handbooks
on child-care for mothers, and cookery or domestic
science books for young girls.
Six thousand five hundred people are at present regis¬
tered readers of the Mobile Library, which maintains a
total of seventy-eight book-lending centres in Central
Greece, Euboia and the Péloponnèse.
According to the programme drawn up by Mr. Kour-
noutos, Director of Art and Letters in the Ministry of
Education, the Mobile Library will gradually extend its
activities to the rest of the country. In addition, this
institution will serve as a kind of adviser in the founding
of local lending libraries. Such libraries are starting to
operate in Kiato in Corinthia and in Menidhi and Koropi
in Attica, and will refer for information and guidance to
the collection and catalogues of the Mobile Library.
In Polydroso there is already a local library possess¬
ing ten thousand volumes. While other villages are not
so fortunate, in such places as Bralos, Amphikleia, Hairo-
neia, Karya and Aliartos, the villagers' interest in books
increases day by day.
The people running the Mobile Library are doing a
good job and doing it enthusiastically and with a smile.
The cultural warmth that radiates from the Mobile
Library of Mrs. Peppa-Xephlouda is a conquest over the
arid intellectual soil of some of the country districts and
more and more people are coming to realize the impor¬
tance of books as companions in everyday life.
Rome was not built in a day, nor are kingdoms and
dukedoms established in so short a period. The Mobile
Library has begun a work of enlightenment among the
small communities that is undoubtedly contributing to the
cultural progress of the country.
31
