THE MAGIC ART
OF CZECH GLASS
by Indrich Santar
Klement Gottwald State Prizewinner and author of the
scenario of the Czechoslovak Glass Exhibition in Moscow
" * tr»
ai.» \ <u .
M» P r- urn,
1'F'IIII
,/JlTTJUJiJ r^fu
-!1
¡
& JM££*L
m
~.+m
u i
Uy
7*:
.<r
kV
VI \1S&¿*< \\X
.~5 ;
'/ :r
*«*>>',. 4
It
m
GLASS FLOOR
is laid down by
artisans in Mos¬
cow prior to open¬
ing of a recent
exhibition in the
Soviet Union on
the history and
modern develop¬
ment of Czech
glass. Exhibition
was largest of its
kind ever held.
Sixteenth cen¬
tury wood en¬
graving (opposite
page) depicts a
pedlar heavily
laden with a mul-
lection of Czech
glass products.
.
.
J*r
9r
*&**&**
Jan Lukas

NO one knows exactly where or when men first
made glass. The Roman historian, Pliny the
Elder, attributed the discovery of glassmaking
to the Phoenicians but modern research has
traced glass far beyond the date set by Pliny.
In the case of Egypt, the oldest definitely dated piece
bears the cartouche of Amenhotep who reigned from
1551 to 1526 B.C. and glass beads found in excavations
at Ur (2450 B.C.) indicate that the manufacture may
have started in Mesopotamia or even further north.
Strangely enough most ordinary glass today is made
from the same materials used from the very beginning,
namely sand, lime and soda or potash and the pro¬
portions are usually about the same as those used
perhaps 4,000 years ago. The same is not true of the
techniques now employed, for today, glassmakers pro¬
duce different types of glass designed for a thousand
and one uses to which it is put in modern life.
Among the countries which have contributed their
skills and ingenuity to the development of the magic
art of the glassmaker, certainly one of the most out¬
standing is Czechoslovakia. In Moscow recently, a vast
exhibition of Czechoslovak glass gave eloquent proof
of the achievements of a centuries' old industry famed
alike for its expressively beautiful craftsmanship and
for the innumerable practical uses it has given to glass
in medicine, architecture, photography, cinematography,
broadcasting, television and many fields of research and
technology.
This was not only the largest exhibition in the history
of the Czechoslovak glass industry but also probably
the biggest thematic exhibition devoted exclusively to
glass that has ever been organized anywhere in the
world. It stressed the fascinating methods employed in
present-day glass production and at the same time
vividly recalled the history of Czech glass.
The history of the "'crystal masters"of Czechoslovakia
goes back many centuries. Archaeological and his¬
torical studies have shown that glass was made some
200 years B.C. on what is now the territory of Czecho¬
slovakia (it was then inhabited by Celtic tribes). It is
believed that glass manufacture diminished during the
first centuries of the Slav settlement of the country and
was not revived until the ninth or tenth century, the
formative period of the first Czech state. Ancient chro¬
nicles and artifacts of the period tell us that in the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD-WIDE RENOWN OF
BOHEMIA'S CRYSTAL GLASS
THE MAGIC
ART
Continued
potteries (guty) in the forests of Southern Moravia,
especially at Gradiska and Mikulcic, a well-developed
glass industry existed. Such items as Slovak glass beads,
rings, amulets, etc., have been found during archaeolo¬
gical excavations.
Glass manufacture in the Czech lands attained a high
level of development during the reign of the Czech
King, Charles IV (fourteenth century) who was also
Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. Some of the
glassware of the period that has been preserved is
unique sets of glassware, a considerable amount of
jewellery and ornaments and utensils used by apothe¬
caries and alchemists.
The art of combining coloured glass with painting
for stained glass church windows reached a very high
standard in Bohemia. In the year 1458, Enea Silvio de
Piccolomini wrote in his History of Bohemia: "I con¬
tend that in my time there are no such beautiful and
magnificent windows in the churches of any kingdom
in the whole of Europe as those in the Kingdom of
Bohemia. The light filters through . tall, wide windows
Reproduced from "Glati In Czechoslovakia"
published by S. N. T. L., Prague, 1958
made from clear, artistically decorated glass. And all
this is to be found not only in the towns and cities but
also in small villages."
The pretentiousness of feudal life, the thirst for luxury
and magnificence, brought about an extensive develop¬
ment of handicrafts and, in Bohemia, of glassmaking
in particular. The development was so great that by
the 16th century there were thirty-four glass manufac¬
tories on the territory of present-day Bohemia and
Moravia. They later began to specialize in the produc¬
tion of different types of glass and the old Czech crafts¬
men gave their glass an appearance of nobility that
made it famous throughout the world. They made many
varieties of glass, each embodying specific qualities,
especially that possessing the brilliance of a diamond
when elaborately cut and polished; this variety of glass
became widely known as "'Czech crystal glass." The
fine glassware of the Czech masters became an important
item in Czech export and even began to rival the work
of the famous Venetian craftsmen.
The diary of a certain Kreibich, a glass merchant of
that time, has been preserved and
from it we know that he made thirty
journeys to different countries,
supplied glass to the Russian Tsar
and the Turkish Sultan and carried
the produce of Czech craftsmen to
London, Stockholm and Rome ; he
also sold his wares in America and
Africa...
After the Thirty Years' War (1618-
48) Czech glass finally ousted Vene¬
tian glassware from the market.
The crisis created by the Napo¬
leonic wars and the continental
blockade, as well as the development
of glass production in a number of
European countries, checked the
development of the Czech glass
industry and its revival as an art only
became possible in the twenties of
the present century. The First
World War cut Czecb glass off from
the world market and brought about
a considerable stagnation in the
industry. It was only after the
foundation of the Czechoslovak
Republic, in 1918, that the period of
gradual expansion began.
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
RED-HOT GLASS blown by Czech glass-
makers and refined by the sensitive hands of
cutters and engravers has conquered the world
with its endless beauty. Left, crystal glass vase
engraved according to design of Czech artist,
J. Kotik. Right, glassmakers at work In
Czechoslovakia. Each craftsman has his
own "window" opening into the glowing
heart of the circular furnace (upper photo).
16

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
17

THE MAGIC ART (Continued)
CRYSTAL-PURE
CRAFTSMANSHIP
The development of glass production and the continuous
discovery of new possibilities in the use of glass are an integral
part of Czechoslovak history. Centuries ago Czechoslovaks
called glass "the most precious jewel of the land", and the
name "Bohemian glass" has become so universal in the history
of artistic production that it now stands for glass of a certain
composition processed into an object of art rather than to indi¬
cate the origin of the product. Down the years an ever-enriched
sense of artistry combined with skill of hand and eye has en¬
abled Czech artists and glass-makers, working in close colla¬
boration, to produce works of the quality shown here. Right,
engraved crystal jug (northern Bohemia, 1875) and Rococo
many-sided glass with cut monogram (Bohemia, around 1750).
Far right, 14th century drinking glass discovered in a house
in the old part of Prague. Below, several striking examples of
gracefully beautiful products of modern Czech glassmakers.
Reproduced from "Class In Czechoslovakia ", published by SNTL, Prague, 1958
18

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
19

THE MAGIC
ART
(Continued from page 16)
Tiny human and animal figures are
given graceful and amusing forms by
their creator, Professor Brychta, a
leading Czechoslovak glass designer.
CTK, Prague
The Czech producers made great efforts to gain pri¬
ority on the world market and increase the volume of
exports above the pre-war level, by adapting themselves
to foreign tastes and fashions. This was one of the
reasons for Czech glassware losing the typical originality
that had made it so famous in the past.
T
HE artistic merits of Czech glassware were
preserved by a few outstanding Czech artists
who were materially independent of glass production.
Among these latter were several artist enthusiasts (Pro¬
fessor Jaroslav Brychta, for example) who led a struggle
against the narrow commercial approach to glass pro¬
duction in Czechoslovakia and who laboured persistently
to find new, purely Czech forms for their art ware. Those
who worked without any support from the owners of
glassworks, however, were but few in number. Never¬
theless, these few enthusiasts, by their efforts, prevented
the further degradation of Czech art glassware.
Under the Nazi occupation during the second World
War, the Czechoslovak glass industry suffered heavy
losses. The majority of the foreign markets were lost
and many glassworks were reorganized for war produc¬
tion. This traditional branch of Czech economy was
saved only by the nationalization of the industry after
the liberation of Czechoslovakia and by the contribution
of all workers in the industry.
Glass, as is well-known, is one of the oldest of man-
made materials. Methods of treating glass have been
gradually perfected at various stages in the history of
its production; during the past few years new varieties
of glass have been invented and the prospects for further
improvement and more extensive use are tremendous.
Modern glass production in Czechoslovakia is
distinguished by its tremendous variety of wares (those
produced by its glassworks amount to some 300,000
items) . They include heavy and thin cut glass, coloured
and painted glass, the famous Czech glass bijouterie
(the glassworks at Jablonec turns out 7,000 new designs
every year), technical glass, building glass...
20
New items, the production of which is being rapidly
developed in Czechoslovakia, include glass pipes for
electric wiring, water and other purposes, foam glass
(a new insulating material), glass tiles for facing walls,
building mosaic and art mosaic.
Unbreakable glass is manufactured at two glassworks
in Karlovy Vary; glass with a great variety of chemical
additives is used for the manufacture of laboratory,
sanitary and dental ustensils and for a wide range of
items such as phials, microscope slides and electric bulbs.
The production of glass fittings for lamps of all kinds
is an important branch of the industry. In this field an
important place is held by the manufacture of chande¬
liers, both classical and modern, which, decorated with
glasswork, are exported to all parts of the world.
The Moscow exhibition demonstrated many varieties
of glass and the uses to which they are put. This is only
a fraction of the possible applications for glass, especially
in industry and building. Panels, staircases, facing tiles,
piping and sanitary equipment, furniture and drapings
for the home these can all be prepared from special
varieties of glass, from glass fibre or laminated fibre (the
latter glued together with plastics.) Many flour mills
and dairies in Czechoslovakia have received glass equip¬
ment that has proved more serviceable than articles made
from other materials.
lass is an inseparable part of our lives, espe¬
cially artistic and domestic glassware. It is
impossible to substitute plastic imitations for glass just
as it is impossible to substitute other materials for the
bronze, marble and stone without which a sculptor can¬
not work.
Czechoslovak glassware is famous today far beyond
the bounds of its homeland it is imported into 120
countries and the Czechoslovak people have every right
to be proud of the art of their compatriots, the artists
and craftsmen whose skill and fantasy create such works
of beauty from plain sand, potash and limestone.

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
Taken from "Glass in Czechoslovakia", published by SNTL, Prague, I 9 58
ENGRAVER TO THE EMPEROR. Close-up of a piece of early engraved Bohemian glassthe
work of Caspar Lehman, engraver at the court of the Emperor Rudolph II (I 605). On an armorial
beaker, Lehman engraved the allegorical figures of Liberalitas, Potestas and Nobilitas together with
floral decorations. Shown here are details of the figure Nobilitas. Originally in the castle of Hluboka,
on the River Moldau, the beaker is now in the collection of the Industrial Art Museum, Prague.
21
