I weep, therefore I am
by Ritchie Calder
A
T a British schools' conference recently some
students had an argument about how much
(or little) science knows about common¬
place things. Here are three questions for
which they wanted an answer.
QUESTION. David Crichton, of George Heriot's
School, Edinburgh, asks: "Is the fact that human
beings weep important physiologically speaking?"
9 ANSWER: Human beings exist because they can
weep. At least, that Is the suggestion made by
Professor Ashley Montagu of Princeton.
At a Columbia University Seminar on "Genetics
and the Evolution of Man" he argued that weeping
was an important factor in human survival, and
went so far as to say that the perpetuation of the
species was left to those who could weep.
His scientific arguments derive from the length
of the dependency period of the human child.
Human infants do not usually shed tears until
they are about six weeks old. Until they can speak
or have the ability to help themselves their only
means of attracting the attention of others when
they are in distress is by crying. In a tearless infant
crying is no more than the intake and expulsion of
air. It can be shown experimentally that such
crying will dry out the mucous membranes of the
nose. The dried mucous is a useful medium for
growing bacteria and the dried membrane becomes
permeable to germs and admits deadly diseases.
Tears do not only spurt from the eye. As we
know from the nose blowing at "weepy" films they
get into the breathing passages and keep the
mucous membrane moist.
But as Sir Alexander Fleming showed, long before
he discovered penicillin, tears are not just water.
They contain a powerful germ-killer which he called
"lysozyme". This is also found in the secretions
of the nose. This substance is capable of killing
bacteria in the eye or the nose in five to ten
minutes. It inactivates even the polio virus
Lysoyme explains |why the human eye, a delicate
organ, is so rarely Infected by the germs in
the atmosphere to which it is exposed. Similarly
the nose tries to cope with the germs we breathe.
So, the argument runs, natural selection favoured
those infants who were able to produce an abundant
flow of tears.
QUESTION: Carol Whyte of Parkstone Girls
Grammar School, Poole, Dorset, asks: "Was the
poet, Lord Byron, right when he wrote: 'And if I
laugh at any mortal thing, 'tis that I may not
weep'?"
ANSWER: Byron was as near the truth as anyone
in medical science is today. The psychologist,
William McDougall, called laughter "the antidote
to sympathy". Animals suffer the pains they feel
but human beings, with their powers of imagination,
suffer the pains of others as well. We weep for the
misfortunes of others, but we laugh at the mishaps
of the circus clown. As great comedians, like Charlie
Chaplin, have shown, laughter and tears are just
a sob's breath apart.
Indeed, a sob and a laugh are very much alike.
They are both, physiologically, the deep exhaling
and inhaling of air into the lungs, with the cackle
of laughter operating the vocal chords. Hearty
laughter sends a rush of blood to the brain and
to the face and we say: "He laughed until the tears
came."
Although we associate laughter with pleasure and
enjoyment, it is a harsh sound and, as the psycho¬
logists would point out, the harmless expression of
a cruel instinct.
That may sound an exaggeration but, when you
think of it, humour is our own or somebody else's
discomfiture. The universal cause of laughter is
the man who slips on a banana-skin. Even the
hoary old joke about the mother-in-law would lose
its point unless the listeners thought she might be
hearing it. We laugh at other peoples' em¬
barrassment, or at our own; we laugh at the
ludicrous, at people being silly or being made to
look silly. But, also, laughter is highly infectious.
We laugh because others laugh.
An interesting example is tickling. If we tickle
ourselves or are tickled by a stray hair or a fly the
effect is merely -disagreeable and we do not laugh.
Somebody else has to tickle us and both the tickled
and the tickler laugh, and, by laughing together,
they intensify and prolong their laughter, even to
the point of hysterics.
The laughter of young children at play is no more
than the yapping of puppy dogs, but the laughter of
children at Punch being hit by a truncheon, or
carried off to be hanged, is an elementary instance
of the quite primitive nature of laughter. The
situation has to be unreal. No normal child would
laugh at genuine cruelty.
None of this must detract from the value of
laughter. It is a release from tensions and a restor¬
ative. It is physically, mentally and emotionally
relaxing, but the psychologist would say it is not
just that we laugh because we are enjoying
ourselves; we are enjoying ourselves because we
laugh. We are the only creatures that do. And one
does not exclude the "laughing" hyena. He is not
enjoying himself.
QUESTION: John Hood (17), of Sheen Grammar
School, Surrey, asks: "What is the purpose of
yawning?"
ANSWER: The purpose is not, as is commonly
imagined, to get more oxygen into the lungs.
J.S. Haldane proved that many years ago. It is to
expel carbon dioxide, the gas drained from tired
blood cells. He showed that, although the body
needs oxygen, the mechanism of breathing is
governed by carbon dioxide rather than by oxygen.
It is the carbon dioxide in the blood which provokes
the brain to send messages down to the lung
muscles. And a yawn is a convulsive deep breath.
Yawning occurs at moments of lassitude what
a doctor friend of mine calls "waking sleep". It may
be in the open air, relaxing after a walk, and you
yawn and say "All this fresh air is making me
sleepy." Or it may be in the close, hot atmosphere
of a stuffy room. It may be when your body is
weary and you are read for bed. Or it may be when
a speech or conversation has become boring.
Whichever it is sluggishness of body or mind
yawning appears to be due to the carbon dioxide
drugging the blood. The yawn is the counteracting
muscle-response to restore equilibrium.
Yawning Is highly infectious. That is what makes
it social "rudeness"1 implying that you are bored.
But I hope you will yawn reading this because it
is suggestive. You will yawn when a cat or a dog
gapes or stretches. It need not be rude, just imit¬
ative, but you will politely smother it as you would
smother a sneeze, because it is infectious.
22
