DOS & DON'TS
FOR THE SIGHTED
by F. Potter
One of the greatest causes of depression, frustra¬
tion and sometimes of acute pain to the
blind is the" attitude of other people towards them.
One naturally feels sympathetic towards anyone who is
handicapped by blindness, and one is anxious to render
him assistance whenever possible; but the manner in which
that help is given can make a great deal of difference in the
effect produced.
It can make the blind person feel that he is still just
like other people except for his lack of sight, or it can
make him feel that he is a helpless encumbrance, and the
person who has only recently been deprived of his sight is
particularly vulnerable. Here are a few suggestions for
When a blind person is seen standing near the edge of
a pavement, it is very likely that he wishes to cross the
road. But anyone wishing to help should not just take his
arm and try to lead him across without a word; he may
be waiting there for a friend. "Can I help you?", will
cover the situation quite adequately. If, however, he has
decided to attempt the crossing unaided which may even¬
tually happen if he has waited unsuccessfully for assistance
for a long time do not stop him in "mid-stream" to ask
whether he needs your help, for. then the strain of trying
to concentrate his attention on the traffic sounds all
around him and of answering your question at the same
time is very great. Just take his arm and lead him to safety,
parting from him with a "you are all right now", or "you
have just crossed... street". And don't forget to give
warning of kerbs and steps "step up", or "step down".
Some good folk, when leading a blind person, seize his
' arm in a vice-like grasp and try to hoist it up to shoulder
level. (Such over-anxiety to render maximum assistance
giving aid in the manner in which it will be most
appreciated.
It is obviously very desirable for a sightless person to
carry a white stick in the street primarily as a means of
mobility, and also to make clear his incapacity and need
of assistance under certain conditions. Yet many blind
people feel that it is degrading to carry such a stick
because of the exaggerated pity which it evokes in the
minds of the sighted. Such half-whispered remarks (which
are usually clearly heard by the blind) as, "Look at that
poor blind man! How terrible!" are often the cause of the
man never carrying a white stick again.
Don't lift him bodily on to the bus
has sometimes even resulted in the man being lifted almost
bodily on to a tous.) A light grip on the arm with firm
pressures for directional guidance and verbal instructions
regarding steps are all that are really necessary, and do not
cause the person to feel clumsy and awkward. After you
help him across a street, it is unlikely that he will ask you
to accompany him further, thereby causing you incon¬
venience. The fact that he is out alone will indicate that
he is quite able to go on his way unaided, requiring assis¬
tance only when crossing busy roads.
A visually handicapped person sometimes finds it diffi¬
cult in a crowded room to know exactly when he is being
addressed, especially if the speaker is some distance from
him. Under such circumstances, confusion and embarrass¬
ment are avoided by the use of his name when opening
a conversation.
Never '"talk over" him to his guide, as he would much
prefer to speak for himself.
Don't assume all the blind have keen hearing
There are a number of fairly widespread misconceptions
about the blind which might usefully be corrected. The
most common one is that blind people have unusually keen
hearing. This belief is particularly fallacious in western
countries where the great majority of the sightless become
blind after the age of fifty 50 per cent after sixty.
Thus, for physiological reasons, most blind people are not
likely to have a more acute sense of hearing than the ave¬
rage sighted person with normal hearing. However, lack¬
ing sight, the visually handicapped are obliged to make
greater use of other senses, and are thus able to con¬
centrate their whole attention on what they hear and smell
so as to gain information about their surroundings. An
"observant" blind person can learn quite a lot about a
stranger from his footsteps, his breathing, his handshake,
and, of course, his voice, manner of speaking, and laugh.
It is also erroneous to think that most blind people read
Braille. Because of the relatively high incidence of blind¬
ness after the age of fifty, the majority of blind people are
Fred Potter, who is blind, is a member of Unesco's secretarial staff.
unable to cultivate a sufficiently sensitive touch to read
Braille with any great fluency, and this has led to the de¬
velopment of the "Talking Book" (recorded on discs)
which is increasing in popularity as reproducing apparatus
becomes cheaper. The Braille system is easily memorized,
but the cultivation of a sensitive touch usually takes many
months or even years.
Music in all its forms is obviously a potential source of
great pleasure to the blind, but it is certainly not true to
say that all blind people are musicians or even enjoy music.
If a man is tone-deaf before he loses his sight, he remains
tone-deaf afterwards. In short, generalizations about the
blind are just as misleading as those sometimes applied to
races and nations.
Broadly speaking, one should treat blind people as per¬
fectly normal individuals who happen to be without sight
but who are in complete possession of all other faculties.
If, in a moment of forgetfulness, you were to ask a blind
man what he thought of your new shoes, he would be very
amused and feel himself complimented.
23
