CHEKHOV WROTE FOR THE THEATRE ALL HIS LIFE. HIS EARLY PLAYS WERE ONE-ACT COMEDIES. WITH MATURITY CAME WORKS
OfTicial Soviet píiota

Contract with
conscience
by Pauline Bentley
Article copyright. Reproduction prohibited
Anton Chekhov at the age of 28, an unfinished
sketch made by his artist brother Nicolas.

The Unesco Courier. January 1960
WITH A DISTINCTIVE STYLE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL REALISM
Official Soviet photo
LIKE 'THE CHERRY ORCHARD' PRESENTED HERE BY THE MOSCOW ART THEATRE
A
It is just 100 years since the birth of the great Russian dramatist, author and humanist Anton
Pavlovitch Chekhov. Born on January 17, 1860 at Taganrog on the Sea of Azov, the son
of a tradesman and the grandson of a serf, Chekhov had a relatively short creative life for he
died at the age of 44. Yet the works he produced in less than two decades were sufficient
to place him as one of the greatest contributors to Russian and world literature. In 1960,
homage will be paid to Chekhov in all parts of the world with the commemoration of the
centenary reaching its apogee in the Soviet Union. Unesco is associating itself with the anni¬
versary celebrations. It is distributing special articles on Chekhov in its Member States and
is sending a specially produced documentary radio programme to some 130 broadcasting sta¬
tions. Schools will receive a Unesco filmstrip on Chekhov with accompanying booklet in
English, French and Spanish. As its share in this universal homage, The Unesco Courier
devotes several pages of this issue to Chekhov, his life and work. The article below is based
on Unesco's radio programme written by Pauline Bentley, British actress and playwright who
has devoted many years to the study of Chekhov and the theatre. On page 13, Professor
Maria Yelizarova, a Soviet authority and author of several books on Chekhov's artistic crea¬
tions discusses Chekhov as a master of the short story.
MONG writers there are those who die enriching
life and literature not only with their work, but
sometimes leaving behind them as well a
legend which can exceed the truth from
i which it springs.
The Russian writer, Anton Chekhov, who
I was born just a hundred years ago, will very
likely evoke an immediate recollection of
melancholy and gentle futility. His legend is
one of pessimism. How did this come about?
There were in a way three Che'khovs the funny .writer for
the Moscow comic papers, the serious short story writer,
and the playwright. And it is perhaps as a playwright
that he is best known.
Outside his own country, his last four great plays,
"The Seagull", "uncle Vanya", "The Three Sisters" and
"The Cherry Orchard", are nearly always presented with
a deliberate accent on their minor key and inconclusive
content. And yet from many letters and the notebooks
which he left we can see how much Chekhov fought
against this interpretation of his work and how little he
would have cared for his legend. He was far too lucid
and humorous to wallow in melancholia for its own sake.
Perhaps it should be remembered he was writing at a
time when the society around him was decaying, restless
and frustrated. After the exhilaration of the reforms
which had taken place in Russia in the 1860's, Russia
was in the doldrums before the storm of the Revolution
and Chekhov caught this mood of his times. Many of
his stories and characters reflect it, since he was one of
the most truthful of writers, but time and again he points
beyond to a hopeful future, and his natural optimism
shines through.
Here is how another writer, Korolenko, a friend of his,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CHEKHOV (Continued)
6 1 hate violence and
lies of any kind'
Photo taken from "Europe", Paris
Anton Chekhov and his wife Olga who had been
an actress in the Moscow Art Theatre. When,
in 1904, Chekhov went to Badenweiler in Ger¬
many for the sake of his rapidly failing health,
she accompanied him on that last trip. After
her husband's death, she resumed her car¬
eer in the theatre and was eventually honoured
with the Soviet title of Artist of the People.
described the young Anton when they met in Moscow,
in 1887.
"Before me stood a young man who looked indeed
younger than his years, a little above average height,
with an oval face and regular, clear cut features, still
retaining the soft contours of youth. There was something
unusual about the face, something which I was not able'
to define at first. Despite the fact that it was obviously
the face of an intellectual, it suggested a simple-hearted
country lad. It was that which made his face so
attractive. Even his eyes, luminous and deep, gleamed at
once with thought and with almost childish naivete.
"His whole appearance, his gestures, his way and
manner of speaking, like his writing, radiated simplicity.
On the whole, at this my first meeting with him, Chekhov
struck me as a profoundly cheerful soul. The endless
source of wit and spontaneous gaiety which fills his
stories seemed to well up in his eyes. But beneath it we
sensed there was something deeper that had yet to develop
and was bound to develop for the best. I got a general
impression of sincerity and charm."
Behind Chekhov at this time there already lay an
unhappy childhood, and the first signs of the tuberculosis
which killed him when he was only 44. He was one of
six children, born in the little seaport town of Taganrog
on the Sea of Azov in south Russia. Unlike the aristocratic
writers, Turgenev and Count Tolstoi, who Was later his
.friend, he came of peasant stock. His grandfather was
a serf who bought the family's freedom for 700 roubles
a head. His own father was an unsuccessful grocer who
made Anton's childhood miserable with enforced piety,
frequent beatings and rigid schooling.
When Anton was sixteen, the shop failed and the family
fled its creditors to Moscow, leaving him behind in
Taganrog to finish his schooling and fend for himself by
coaching others and doing odd jobs for the merchants of
the town. These were years of poverty and hardship but
Anton survived them with characteristic gaiety and high
spirits. He even managed to write cheering letters to
the family in Moscow.
He used these years to educate himself in every way,
to deliberately free himself from the limitations of birth
and class. In a letter describing his ideal of a writer which
he wrote years later to an editor called Suvorin, he recalls
something of his struggle during the years alone in
Taganrog:
"In addition to a profusion of talent and material,
something else is necessary to a writer. First, a mature
mind, and, secondly, a feeling of personal freedom. The
plebeian intellectuals have to purchase with their youth
what the aristocratic writers receive gratis from mother
nature. Why don't you write a story about a young man
whose father was a serf, a young man who was in turn
salesman, choirboy, schoolboy and student, brought up to
treat rank with respect, to kiss the hands of priests, to
worship other men's ideas, to express gratitude for every
bit of bread he eats, constantly flogged, going about
giving lessons in worn boots, fighting with other boys,
torturing animals, fond of dining with rich relatives,
acting the hypocrite before God and men, for.no other
reason than consciousness of his own insignificance. Go
on' to describe how this young man squeezed the slave
in him out of his system drop by drop, till one fine
morning he wakes up and discovers there is no more
slavish blood coursing through his veins it is all real
human blood."
He was nineteen when he first arrived in Moscow and
became a student at the Medical Faculty of the University
city; and because he found the family in far worse cir¬
cumstances than he expected, he cast about for a means
of earning money to support them while continuing his
studies. His choice fell more or less by chance upon
writing. From Taganrog he had sent his brother,
Alexander, a home-made weekly news sheet which he
called "the Stammerer". This aped the low-grade comic
news sheet which was fashionable in Moscow at the time.
Alexander had already managed to place some of this
material in the Moscow papers, which he worked for, and
Chekhov now simply enlarged this activity. He adopted
a series of nicknames, amongst them that of Antoshe
Chekhonte. So, while working at the Medical School, he
poured out an endless stream of jokes, captions, sketches,
social gossip and even dramatic criticism for the miserable
pay these papers offered him.
Another writer of his time, Bunin, has described these
inauspicious beginnings of Chekhov as a writer...

The Unesco Courier. January 1960
A DAY WITH
TOLSTOY
One day In 1901, Chekhov, who
had taken up residence at Yalta on
the Black Sea on the orders of his
doctors, went to visit Leo Tolstoy
who was also living in the Crimea.
As they sat talking on the verandah
of Tolstoy's villa, they were photo¬
graphed (right) by Tolstoy's wife.
Chekhov was a keen admirer of his
great contemporary whose works, he
said, had influenced his own writing.
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
"He began his work in the midst of a large family,
suffering poverty all through his youth, and he not only
worked for the most wretched pay, but in an environment
which might have damped the most ardent inspiration
in a tiny apartment, amidst hubbub and loud talk, often
sitting at the end of the table around which were gathered
not only the entire family but a number of student
boarders. Even later he endured a long period of want.
But no one ever heard him rail against his fate, and this
not because his standards were low although leading a
life of rare and lofty simplicity, he nevertheless detested
bleakness and drabness."
Chekhov gave no serious attention to his writing at this
time. He regarded medicine as his vocation and writing
as merely hackwork. Even later, when success came to
him, he persisted in calling medicine his wife, and litera¬
ture merely his mistress. And success did come, slowly
and steadily. First one St. Petersburg editor, Leykin, then
another, Suvorin, of the conservative weekly "New Times",
offered him contracts. These contracts reduced the finan¬
cial pressure of supporting his family and allowed him
to expand from 80 to 150 lines per story.
In 1884 he qualified as a doctor. Though he never
practised medicine regularly, he did work in Moscow and
in country hospitals. He drew heavily for his characters,
both from the sophisticated Moscow artists and intelli¬
gentsia and the country peasants. But even with his
growing fame, he still regarded literature as the lesser of
his occupations, until in 1886 the appearance of a story of
his called "The Gamekeeper" provoked an older, and much
respected writer, Grigorovitch, to write congratulating and
advising him to respect and husband a talent as great
as his.
Chekhov was thunderstruck: "If I do have a gift to be
respected, I must confess that I have hitherto not given
it any respect. I felt I had some talent but had fallen
into the habit of considering it trifling. Hitherto my atti¬
tude towards all my literary work has been extremely fri¬
volous, negligent and casual. I don't recall a single story
upon which I have spent more than 24 hours. I wrote
"The Gamekeeper", which you liked, in a bath-house.
I have composed my stories as reporters write their
accounts of fires, mechanically, half consciously, with no
thought for their readers or themselves.
"I am going to stop doing work that must be done in a
hurry, but not just yet. There is no possibility of my
getting out of the routine I have been following. I don't
mind going hungry I've already experienced this but
there is the family to be thought of. I give to writing my
leisure hours two or three during the day and a small
A VISIT FROM
GORKY
Shortly after he went to live at
Yalta in I 899, Chekhov wrote to his
friend, Maxim Gorky, asking him
to come and stay with him. A few
months later Gorky arrived in the
Crimea and was photographed with
his host. The two were regular
correspondents and Gorky made
a point of sending a copy of each of
his works to Chekhov as soon as
it came off the printing press.
In 1900 Chekhov was elected an
honorary fellow of the Academy of
Science, but resigned when the
election of Gorky to the Academy
was cancelled by the Government.
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
CONT'D ON PAGE I I

CHEKHOV (Continued)
x
	
f
¿**y* 4
^*W¿-<"
(
1
1
r
it
r
<rri^^kJ£~£ A. V-^
< *«*
^ t^y A -**;»*
rV.fcifJT
Jf «k. «>>
o**%->. ^»J
¿«W*«'* (
l>0mmm*f*'*~- 1
I
Ctf. .:_.	:	 	:			;	:	-^l	
Photos taken from "Chekhov and the Theatre", Moscow, I 9
TRUE TO LIFE. The theatre of Chekhov's day was traditionally a melodramatic affair with stock, heroic characters. Chekhov
wished to "de-theatricalize" it; he wanted to reveal the lives of ordinary people, to make a dramatic play of'character rather
than plot. He found the formula he was seeking when he wrote "The Seagull" in 1895. Produced in St. Petersburg, it was
a disastrous failure neither actors nor public could understand this new sort of play. In 1 898 it was revived by a new thea¬
tre now famous Moscow Art Theatrewhich was just struggling into existence under Nemirovich Danchenkp*end Stanis¬
lavsky. This time its success saved both play and theatre. The Moscow Art Theatre still bears the emblem of a seagull
on its curtain. Photos show (top) members of the Moscow Art Theatre listening to Chekhov reading "The Seagull" in 1 898 ;
(bottom) the company in I 900 at Chekhov's home in the Crimea, where they performed "The Seagull" and "Uncle Vanya".
8
54

Flickering
flames
of social
protest
After the success of "The
Seagull", Chekhov's con¬
nexion with the Moscow Art
Theatre became very close
Indeed. Three of his great¬
est works"Uncle Vanya",
"The Three Sisters" and
"The Cherry Orchard"
were produced there bet¬
ween 1899 and 1904. Pho¬
tos show scenes and cha¬
racters from present day
productions of these works
by the Moscow Art Theatre.
Right and below, "The Three
Sisters" in which the small
sparks of social protest
which had been discerned
in earlier works now seemed
to blaze up more fiercely
and openly. The play had
its opening during a period
of social unrest which was
soon to explode In the revo¬
lution of 1905. Right (above)
Fers, the aged servant In
"The Cherry Orchard", who
symbolizes the old order;
(below) Astrov, the country
doctor In "Uncle Vanya".
Chekhov expressed many of
his own ideas through the
character of Doctor Astrov.
Official Soviet photos
The . Unesco Courier. January 1960

10

CHEKHOV
(Continued from page 7)
The Unesco Courier. January 1960
'The Seagull' saves a theatre
part of the night. In the summer, when I have more
spare time and living costs are lower, I shall take up
serious work..."
And take up serious work he did. Antoshe Chekhonte
disappeared and from then on Chekhov published under
his own name. He slowed down the phenomenal output
of his stories from an average of a hundred stories a year
to only a score or so. Usually they deal with one main cha¬
racter surrounded by vaguer ones and they recount not
so much a story, as a slice of life. At first glance they
seem to be written haphazardly, but so brilliant is their
construction in fact that their apparent formlessness is
impossible to copy, as many of his imitators have found.
The writer Maxim Gorki, whom Chekhov encouraged
from the beginning of his career and who became his
great friend in Yalta towards the end of his life, wrote
to another colleague, Andreev: "Learn compactness and
economy of expression from Chekhov, but God prevent
you from imitating his language it is inimitable and
you'll only be spoiled if you copy it it is like a beauty who
is passionless and gives herself to no one."
His last stories are classics in their own right. In them
are reflected his ruling creative principles of an unwaver¬
ing respect for truth and objectivity, and the sense of an
artist's responsibility which he once described himself:
"My holy of holies is the human body and brain, talent,
inspiration, love and personal freedom freedom from
force and lies whatever form the last two may take.
Had I been a great artist that is the line I should like to
have followed. I am not a liberal, or a conservative or an
evolutionist or a monk. I should like to be a free artist,
that's all. I hate violence and lies of any kind. Pha-
riseeism, stupidity and licence are to be found not only
in middle class homes and police stations. I see them in
science, in literature and among young people.
"It seems to me that the writer of fiction should not
try to be the judge of his characters and their conver¬
sations, but only an unbiased witness. An artist must
judge only of what he understands. He observes, selects,
guesses, combines. Only the stating, not the solution, of
a problem is compulsory to an artist. In "Anna Kare-
nina" and "Eugene Onyegin" not a single problem is
solved but they satisfy you completely because the prob¬
lems are correctly stated.
Plays as complex and
simple as real life
ççryi he writer is not a confectioner, a cosmetician or an
I entertainer. He is a man who has to fulfil a
contract with his conscience and his sense of
duty, and however much he may hate it, he must over¬
come his fastidiousness and soil his imagination with the
dirt of life. To a chemist the notion of dirt does not exist
.and the writer must be as objective as the chemist. He
must renounce every subjective attitude to life. You've
only to look at the writers whom we consider immortal or
even good the best of them are realists and depict life
as it is there is a conscious aim in every line they write
so that you feel, as well as depicting life as it is, they
depict life as it should be."
Life as it should be. This was Chekhov's cry. Nothing,
nothing deflected him from his purpose, which was to
point his optimistic belief in the future. He himself built
schools and hospitals in the village where he bought his
country house. His treatise on the savage penal settle¬
ments which he voluntarily visited on the desolate island
of Sakhalin helped to spark some prison reforms there.
But it was by his writing, and particularly in his last four
plays, the work of his maturity, that Chekhov carried out
his intention of pointing to a better life ahead by illustrat¬
ing the miseries of life around him.
It is no accident that Chekhov's maturest works were
his plays. He wrote for the theatre all his life; he publish¬
ed many popular one-act comedies in his early Moscow
days and as time went by he developed very definite ideas
about playwriting : "On the stage everything should be
as complex, and as simple, as real life.. People are having
dinner, and while they are having it, their future happi¬
ness may be decided or their lives shattered. The hero
and heroine of a play are always expected to be dramati¬
cally effective. But in life people don't shoot themselves
or hang themselves or fall in love or deliver themselves
of clever sayings every minute. They spend most of their
time eating, drinking, running after women or men, talk¬
ing nonsense. A play ought to be written in which the
people come and go, dine, talk of the weather or play
cards, not because the author wants it but because that is
what happens in real life. Life on the stage should be as
it really is and the people too should be as they are, not
stilted."
Unfounded legend of
Chekhov's melancholy
The theatre in his day was traditionally a melodrama¬
tic affair with stock, heroic characters, full of action
and high-sounding phrases. Chekhov wanted to
change all this, to use the theatre for a different purpose.
He wanted to reveal the lives of ordinary people, to make
a dramatic play of character rather than plot. He found
the formula he was seeking when he wrote "The Seagull"
in 1895. This was the first play in which he established his
own distinctive style of psychological realism. Its first
presentation in 1896 was unsuitably cast and it was a
disastrous failure neither actors nor public could under¬
stand this new sort of play, where they were shown the
complicated relationships and states of mind of a set of
characters to whom nothing in particular seemed to
happen.
The failure of the play deeply affected Chekhov's
weakening health and he returned to Yalta where he had
been living for some time on the advice of his doctors.
It was only with great difficulty that he was persuaded to
allow "The Seagull" to be done again by another, new
theatre which was just struggling into existence in
Moscow. This was the now famous Moscow Arts Theatre
under Nemirovich Danchenko and Stanislavsky. These
two men had the idea of bringing much of the same sort
of realism into theatrical production as Chekhov had
wanted to bring into playwriting, and they chose his
"Seagull" to be part of the first season.
The public were no more ready for this new kind of play
presentation than they had been for the first production
of "The Seagull", and the Moscow Arts Theatre looked as
though it was going to fail at its outset until Stanislavsky's
production of "The Seagull" in 1898 saved both play and
theatre. To this day the Moscow Arts Theatre bears the
emblem of a seagull on its curtain and ranks Chekhov
amongst its patron authors. AH his three major remain¬
ing plays, "Uncle Vanya", "'The Three Sisters" and "The
Cherry Orchard", were presented by Stanislavsky with
great artistic and commercial success.
The productions were all marked by argument
and discussion. This Was true for "The Cherry Orchard"
which Stanislavsky persisted in treating with melancholy
although Chekhov himself wanted it to be more optimistic
in tone.
It was largely out of such disagreements and Stanis¬
lavsky's establishment of his interpretation of the plays
that Chekhov's legend of melancholy was born. Stanis¬
lavsky's low-key interpretation need not obscure the fact
that Chekhov's inspiration was a positive one, as he him¬
self stated once when he was talking to the theatre critic,
Tikhonov: "You tell me that people cry at my plays. I've
heard others say the same. But that wasn't why I wrote
them. All I wanted was to say honestly to people: 'Have
a look at yourselves and see how bad and dreary your
lives are'. The important thing is that people should
realize that, for when they do, they will certainly create
another and better life for themselves. I won't live to see
it, but I know, that it will be quite different, quite unlike
our present life."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CHEKHOV (Continued)
HIS THREE IDEATS:
TRUTH, INTEGRITY
HUMAN DIGNITY
JOURNEY TO SAKHALIN
(Continued)
The peculiar and unique distinction of Chekhov's plays
is the style, the way in which they were written. Like his
stories, they seem haphazard. When the curtain goes up
on a Chekhov play one is not aware of watching a set of
people detached from one's own life, one simply feels that
one has been able to become an extension of their lives.
His influence as a writer on the theatre today lies to a
great extent in the important place he takes in that rea¬
listic theatrical movement which started in Europe
towards the middle of the nineteenth century, and whose
effects can still be felt today. As soon as his works were
published outside Russia, they were avidly read and much
admired. The Irish playwright, George Bernard Shaw,
emulated his style deliberately in his play "Heartbreak
House", though he intellectualized the characters in it
instead of keeping them the essentially human beings
that Chekhov always created.
Between the plays of another Irishman, Synge, and
Chekhov's there is a similarity of inspiration, though this
was not deliberate. On the American school of playwrit¬
ing of the 1920's Chekhov's influence can be seen in
writers like Sherwood Anderson and Saroyan and in con¬
temporary writers of the Tennessee Williams' school. But
perhaps Chekhov's strongest influence on the theatre
today grew not out of his writing as such, but out of the
method of presentation which his plays inspired the
Moscow Arts to give them, a reforming ideal and preoccu¬
pation with the souls of their characters rather than plot.
Strong impact on
writers in the West
As a writer outside the theatre Chekhov's influence on
those who read him in the West was considerable,
and more direct. After Guy de Maupassant he came
to be recognized as the master of the short story. Writers
as varied in nationality and intention as Katherine Mans¬
field or Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, Ernest Hemingway,
William Faulkner, and Thomas Mann, who describes Chek¬
hov's work as that of "genius in a nutshell"all these
have written and spoken of the effect upon them of this
gentle, compassionate Russian.
In 1904, Chekhov Went to Badenweiler in Germany for
the sake of his rapidly failing health. With him went
Olga, his wife, a famed actress in Russia, who has left a
record of that last trip: "...Anton Pavlovich took his
departure for another world quietly and calmly. Early in
the night he woke up and asked me for the first time in
his life to send for the doctor. I remember one ghastly
moment of bewilderment the sensation of the nearness
of hundreds of people in the great, sleeping hotel, and
at the same time the feeling of my own utter loneliness
and helplessness..."
"The doctor came in and told me to give him cham¬
pagne. Anton Pavlovich sat up and said to the doctor,
very loudly and meaningly, in German, a language which
he knew very little: Teh sterbe'. Then he picked up the
glass, turned his face towards me, gave his wonderful
smile and said T haven't drunk champagne for a long
time...', drained the glass, lay quietly on his left side and
very soon fell silent for ever... And the terrible quiet of
the night was only broken by the violent flutterings of a
huge black moth, which kept knocking itself painfully
against the lighted electric lamps, and hurling itself about
the room..."
And so Chekhov died. The dignity of human beings,
the integrity of the artist, truththese were the ideals by
which Chekhov lived and by which he Would have wished
to be remembered.
12
IN THE STEPS OF
ANTON CHEKHOV
A major event in Anton Chekhov's life was the visit he made to the
convict island of Sakhalin, off the Siberian coast and to the north of
Japan. Not only did it give him material for two books, "The Island of
Sakhalin" and "Siberia", but it also helped him to mature as a writer
and did much to determine the trend of his future work. Chekhov
left Moscow in 1890 and after a long and difficult journey reached his
goal. He visited the prisons and entered the cellsdamp hovels
crawling with vermin where prisoners lay chained to planks. His
study of Sakhalin was thorough and objective and the precise and impar¬
tial book he wrote on his return caused such a stir that the Government
was forced to send out an investigating commission. (Photo, right,
brought back by Chekhov, shows convicts being put in chains.) Sixty-
eight years later, in the summer of 1958, Sergei Mikbailovich Chekhov,
an artist and the nephew of the great Russian writer, accompanied by
his son, Sergei, a student artist, covered in ten flying hours the 7,000
miles from Moscow to Sakhalin which it took Anton Chekhov three
months to reach, travelling by train, poste-chaise and boat. They
went there to complete aseries of pictures called "Chekhov Landmarks"
whose execution had already taken them to many other parts of Russia.
At Sakhalin they sketched and painted the places and things that Chekhov
had seen and written about. They found and drew (above) some of the
low, dark, hideous buildings which have still survived from those days.
And they also recorded the striking changes that have taken place
there with new towns and settlements springing up (below). They
found that the memory of Chekhov lives on in stories and legends,
in the names of towns and settlements and they met people who still
speak of the writer's self-sacrificing effort to ease the lot of the convicts.
Official Soviet documents
