THE FLICK OF A SWITCH
by Daniel Behrman
H
ow do plants adapt themselves and
survive during a torrid summer in
the Sahara or a long spell of heavy rain in Provence.
Scientists hope that they will soon learn the answers to
some of the puzzling problems of plant behaviour from a
special laboratory, an "ecotron" which is to be built at
Montpellier in southern France.
By simply flicking over a switch they will be able to
obtain precise data on plants growing in "climates"
artificially created in the "ecotron" whose work will
reinforce the offensive launched by science against some
of the worst problems afflicting the world's arid zones
one third of its land surface.
Now in the planning stage with half its total budget of
$1,200,000 already alloted, the ecotron will be the newest
chapter in the four-centuries-old history of Montpellier as
a hothouse of botany. It Will be the laboratory of the
University of Montpellier's Institute of Botany, headed by
Prof. Louis Emberger.
Professor Emberger is one of the world's leading au¬
thorities on plant ecologythe study of relationships of
plants to their environmentand it was he who christened
the "ecotron." Part of its name comes from ecology and
the other part from the cyclotrons used in nuclear physics.
Appropriately enough, the ecotron will enable measure¬
ments of plant behaviour to be made with a precision
usually associated with nuclear physics.
The Institute at Montpellier is already something of a
mecca for scientists from countries in the world's dry belt
who study there under Unesco fellowships enabling them
to specialize in plant ecology.
The "ecotron" will be a powerful weapon in the fight
science is waging against aridity and the misery it en¬
genders for hundreds of millions. Here, a climate will not
only be reproduced With its exact conditions of light,
temperature and humidity (as ecologists themselves say, it
would be ridiculous to spend more than a million dollars
to duplicate what nature offers at no cost), but it will
be "taken apart" so that the ecologist will be able to
learn which of these conditions is essential to plant life.
The plant scientist can turn his findings over to the
agricultural engineer whose task is to raise food produc¬
tion. For example, if soil is over-irrigated a plant often
"transpires" too much and wastes water. At the same
time, too much water can actually lower its absorption of
carbon dioxide in the process of photosynthesis, whereby
plants create living matter from carbon dioxide, water and'
mineral salts.
In other words, the study of how a plant behaves in the
ecotron will allow scientists to determine precisely how
much irrigation water it should receive and how often
thereby both raising its productivity and reducing its
consumption of scarce water.
14
How will these studies be carried out? Recently, we
had an opportunity to take a tour of the Montpellier
ecotron on paper, of course with Profesor Emberger and
Dr. Frode E. Eckardt, who is in charge of its construction.
Once it is completed as a wing of the brand-new
building of the Institute of Botany, the ecotron will
outwardly be a long, low construction of abstract, zigzag
design in the shade of the ancient trees of Montpellier's
botanical gardens, founded in 1593.
Inwardly, it will be a world of its own, so much so that
its staff will have to pass through an "airlock" to go to
work. In special rooms, research workers will change their
clothes, shower, and then put on sterile smocks and, for
certain tasks, gloves and boots. The purpose of these
precautions is to prevent the introduction of insects and
viruses from the outside world into the ecotron.
The heart of the ecotron will be its control room. Here,
a single man with panels of switches and rheostats will be
able to set the weather in the laboratory rooms. To be
exact, he will mainly oversee the setting of the weather
by automation. For example, it will be possible to take
graphs of temperature, humidity and sunlight from re¬
corders in, let's say, central Tunisia and then feed them
into this electronic equipment which will reproduce the
same conditions within a given room of the ecotron.
I
t may very well be one of four rooms
in the laboratory's most highly auto¬
mated section. There, an experimenter will be able to
vary, at will, light, temperature and humidity, and the
carbon dioxide content of the air. Like a stage manager,
he will create a setting where plants can act their parts.
In fact, the lights for these rooms are to be made by the
same firm responsible for stage lighting in Paris theatres
and for illuminating castles in the "sound and light
shows" all over France.
Next to each room will be a small laboratory where
readings can be taken without entering the room. This is
extremely important because the mere presence of a
human being in such an experiment can seriously modify
its conditions.
This is also one of the main respects in which Mont¬
pellier's ecotron will differ from "phytotrons" already in
use in the United States, France, the Netherlands and the
U.S.S.R. There, the growth of plants over a long-term
period is studied in large rooms where the temperature is
held constant. To observe how a plant reacts to a change
in temperature, the experimenter wheels it into a different
room kept at a different temperature. One of the
objectives of the phytotron is to make a highly precise

study of the physiology of plants with a view towards
raising yields. Experiments are often conducted on a
large scale.
Montpellier is more concerned with such delicate pro¬
cesses as photosynthesis and transpiration and, in general,
learning how plants react to changes in their environment.
Smaller rooms, in which the climate can be varied, will
be used.
Both in the phytotron and the ecotron, botany is
emerging from what might be called its "hand
craftsmanhip" stage. The scientist will be freed from
such chores as hourly readings which will be registered
and co-ordinated automatically. At the same time, the
ecotron's electronic brain will "remember" experiments on
perforated tape and will be able to duplicate them at any
time.
The ecotron will also include a cold room where tem¬
peratures as low as 5°F can be created, and four green¬
house rooms where plants will "perform" under natural
light while other conditions are varied. Temperatures in
these rooms will be controlled: in the hottest of the four,
they will be "Saharan." In another room, plants will be
subjected to small doses of radioactivity.
^-""^^ÄIl^V^Hii ^ , ¿ *
y rfiàî
fe
Unesco-Aubert de la Rue
The world's arid zones cover one-third of its land surface. Not all of
this area is as badly afflicted as this wasteland in Latin America due
to total erosion of the soil following excessive deforestation and bad
agricultural practices. Today, science has taken the offensive against
some of the worst problems of the arid zones, aided by research carried
out In specialized laboratories like Montpellier's Institute of Botany.
A
ix this will take place only a few
hundred yards away from what Pro¬
fessor Emberger calls "the birthplace of plant ecology."
Opposite the institute in the botanical gardens stands
"La Montagne" created by Richer de Belleval, the 16th
century founder- of the gardens. The "mountain" is a
ridge about 100 yards long and 5 yards high, running from
East to West. On its southern slope, Richer de Belleval
planted sunloving Mediterranean vegetation which thrives
in dry soil. On its shady northern slope, the pioneer in¬
troduced more northern varieties.
The Unesco Courier. September 1960
Today, the rest is almost hallucinating. One side of the
tiny ridge is a Provençal hillside with perfumed rosemary,
spurge and other low sturdy plants baking in the sun.
The other is a thick forest, mysterious and romantic with
ivy winding around massive trunks.
That was the beginning of botany in Montpellier during
the reign of good King Henri IV who wanted every
Frenchman to have a chicken in his cooking pot. Since
then, Richer be Belleval's successors have reigned there in
unbroken line down to Louis Emberger. The list is
studded with the greats of botany. Here, in the early
18th century, Pierre Magnol (who gave his name to the
magnolia) held the chair of botany. Here, Augustin Pyra-
mus de Candolle pioneered a new system of plant classifi¬
cation in the early 19th century and planted a garden still
piously preserved in its original form. Another great link
in this chain of botanists was Charles Flahault who died
in 1945 at the age of 84.
Professor Emberger, the present head, has been fighting
for his ideas almost since the day when he first became
interested in botany as a child in his native Alsace. He
once wrote : "Often we are asked about the usefulness of
an institute of botany in the atomic age. The fact is that
plants have the power to make a synthesis of life. Then
do they not have anything to teach us? We go into
ecstasy over the power of the atom but plants have the
power of life."
T
o help scientists from countries in
the arid zone itself to read the story
of vegetation, Unesco has been offering a series of fellow¬
ships in plant ecology at Montpellier.
Recently, a group of six young scientists made the pil¬
grimage to Montpellier from Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Morocco,
the Sudan and Turkey, and fellowships are now being
awarded to eight more for a two-year course. When we
visited Montpellier, four of the first group had already
completed their stays in which they worked in plant eco¬
logy, including mapping, for periods running from nine
to eighteen months. Their fellowships also covered stays
at a leading soil science laboratory near Paris.
But we did have an opportunity to meet two Unesco
fellows who had stayed in Montpellier for intensive study,
Dr. Ali Zargàri of Iran and Mr. Elmi Taher Amireh. of
Jordan.
Dr. Zargari is a professor of botany at the Higher Tea¬
cher Training College of the University of Teheran and
director of the herbarium at Iran's arid zone research
institute. At forty, he is also the author of a three-volume
work on Iranian medicinal plants which has been honour¬
ed by a royal prize in Teheran.
His work at Montpellier, he told us, has changed his
own viewpoint from that of the "pure botanist" collecting
specimens to that of the ecologist, who is interested in
soil and weather as well as in species of plants. In this
respect, ecology sums up rather happily the goal of Unes¬
co's arid zone programme, to unite various branches of
science into a common front against the desert.
Mr. Amireh told us he was an inspector of horticulture
in Amman. At Montpellier he is studying the water eco¬
nomy of Quercus coccifera, the hardy kermes oak of
Languedoc. On sunny days, he gets up at 4 a.m. to be
at his testing station twelve miles outside the city in the
maquis by 'sunrise. There he measures the plant's eva¬
poration and transpiration, cutting off a sample every
fifteen minutes and then weighing it five or six times at
intervals of one minute. This is repeated at fifteen-
minute intervals until sundown when Mr. Amireh returns
to Montpellier and puts his sample into an oven to learn
its weight when completely dry.
Upon his return to Jordan, Mr. Amireh would like to
attempt similar experiments on local plants to find out
just how much precious water they consume.
15
