DENIZENS OF THE OCEAN FIGURE PROMINENTLY IN THIS KHMER RELIEF CARVED ON THE BAYON TEMPLE AT ANGKOR THOM IN CAMBODIA.
A t the dawn of civilization, as far
back as the earliest knowledge we
possess of the science of our
ancestors, the ocean '"girdling the earth with Its
endless stream" was looked upon as a circular river
running round the edges of the world like the rim
of a wheel; and to cross it was a homeric adven¬
ture to be attempted only by men of exceptional courage
or lust for gain.
Long before anything of the kind was tried, generation
after generation of traders, had probably for many cen¬
turies been making their way in fragile vessels propelled
by oars, equipped with primitive sails but without
rudders, along the coastal waters of the lands which held
in their interior all the treasures of that age essences,
spices, ivory, gold, silver, gums and precious woods.
Two thousand years B.C. long before the Trojan war
the Phoenicians, pioneers of international trade and
ocean exploration, set up trading posts on the shores of
the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean. In the Persian Gulf
the first lighthouses appeared, served by a priestly caste
responsible for maintaining the fires night and day; these
lighthouses also served as mail offices and information
centres for mariners in those days, collecting all infor¬
mation on routes followed, dangers met with, naviga¬
tional techniques used, coastal topography, and winds
and currents. Soon schools were founded which taught
Henri Rotschi is in charge of the Physical Oceanography
Section of the Institut Français d'Océanie (Noumea, New
Caledonia). He took part in the Capricorn expedition
organized in 1952-53 by the Scripps Institution of Oceano¬
graphy of the University of California. He is also a mem¬
ber of the Physical Oceanography Section of the Comité
National Français de Géodésie et Géophysique. This arti¬
cle was abridged from "Man Discovers the Sea" which
appeared in a special issue of Impact of Science on
Society, on the marine sciences. (Vol X [1960] N° 2.)
40
the art of navigation and of plotting a course from
astronomical observations..
The real cradle of seafaring was the Mediterranean. It
was there that the tremendous adventure started which
led men out on to the high seas, spurred on at first purely
by the desire for gain, but later by the thirst for know¬
ledge for its own sake. The Phoenicians, swarming west¬
wards through the Pillars of Hercules, turned south along
the coast of Africa and north up the coasts of Europe as
far as Britain until the cold, fog, high winds and their
helplessness against the powerful tidal currents, unknown
in the Mediterranean, caused them to turn back once
more to the south.
This small-scale . coastal traffic carried on by traders
more mindful of their profits than of the advancement
of geography was succeeded very soon by the era of long¬
distance ocean exploration started in 330 b.c. by Pytheas
of Marseilles, geographer and astronomer, who sailed
north as far as the Arctic Circle, turning back only when
floating ice barred further progress. He seems to have
sighted Britain, the Shetlands .and Iceland or Norway.
As to the fruits of his voyage, he brought back neither
gold nor silver nor any merchandise, but a first report
on the Arctic approaches and a precise astronomical
explanation of the Midnight Sun, entitling him to rank
as the first oceanographer. He it was, too, who first used
astronomical calculations to plot the position of fixed
points.
The great ocean journeys of exploration captured the
imagination of the learned throughout the Mediterranean
and encouraged them to exercise their minds on all the
aspects of geography perceptible by man in their day.
Pythagoras deduced the spheroid form of the earth from
the accounts of mariners and together with Herodotus,
Aristotle, Hipparchus and Ptolemaeus, laid the founda¬
tions of what was later to become the science of oceano¬
graphy as we know it today. Soundings were taken,
charts plotted and the positions of harbours determined;

Pathfinders of yesterday and today
THE OLD MEN
(& the new ones)
OF THE SEA
by tlenri Rotschi
Pierre Pittet. Geneva
distances traversed were calculated from the stars; and
currents, winds and tides ceased to be terrifying mani¬
festations of the wrath of heaven and became aids which
men had learned to use to extend the ocean routes
carrying the flow of trade and serving in turn as a vehicle
for armies, ideas and wealth.
The greatest, strongest and most influential countries
were those with the most and the largest harbours,
equipped with the best facilities, and situated in the best
places to attract the steady flow of trade which is the
mainspring of all human activities; and the approaches
to these ports were studded with carefully tended lights
and guiding marks. Power came from the sea, by the
sea, and did not exist apart from the sea.
The Pax Romana changed all this: conquest on land
was preferred to ocean adventure, and the old primitive
terrors and superstitious fears reasserted their hold over
the heirs of the first explorers.
Those who kept the sacred fire alight were the Vikings
and the Arabs. The Arabs gave the West the hinged
rudder, the compass and the astrolabe, and once these
technical improvements were in use the way was opened
to long-distance navigation. Nevertheless it was without
their help that the Vikings, in open wooden ships with
a single square sail, explored the North Sea, reached
Gaul and southern Britain and then discovered in succes¬
sion the west coasts of the British Isles, Iceland, and
Greenland, to land finally in America.
A few centuries later Prince Henry the Navigator sent
forth his caravels to open the route to the lands rich in
Drawings taken from " Man and the Underwater World ", by Pierre de Latil and Jean Rivoire.
«5-
(a) Greek diver of the 4th cent.
B.C., as described by Aristotle.
(b) Breathing tube and underwater
mask (design, Leonardo da Vinci)
(c) "Articulated diving suit" invent¬
ed by William Carrey, in 1802. i
(d) Underwater fishing device of
Le Batteaux, a Frenchman, 1853.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PATHFINDERS OF THE SEA (Cont'd)
OCEANOGRAPHER PRINCE
Oceanography really came into being in 1 872 during the research
voyage of the British corvette H.M.S. Challenger which during
three and a half years sailed and steamed nearly 70,000 nautical
miles around the globe. A few years later, in 1885, Prince
Albert I of Monaco began to equip vessels for océanographie
work. Right, one of these ships, the Princess Alice II dwarfed
by the immensity of a fjord in Spitzbergen at the beginning
of this century. Below, Prince Albert (in white, with tropical
helmet) supervises the lowering of a triangular shaped fish
trap which he devised and used on his expeditions. The Prince
founded the Océanographie Institute in Paris, and in 1910
created the now famous Océanographie Museum in Monaco.
Photos Océanographie Museum. Mon;
spices and gold, and less than 100 years after that Vasco
da Gama reached India. This gradual eastward thrust
from the western countries was balanced by the more or
less contemporaneous irruption into the Pacific of the
Polynesians, trusting their lives to frail outrigger canoes
and to their knowledge of the stars.
After that, once Christopher Columbus had shown the
way to the Americas, there was a rush in search of new
and hitherto unknown direct routes to Asia and in quest
of the last continent still awaiting discovery, Antarctica,
credited in the contemporary imagination with far more
amenities than in fact it possesses. Balboa then discov¬
ered the Pacific; Magellan circumnavigated the world
and made the first soundings of the ocean deeps, while
Cook found a south polar ocean girdling the globe instead
of the Antarctic continent he had expected, and traversed
the Pacific from north to south and east to west. After
him came Bougainville and a host of others, of whom
many were sealers and whalers.
Finally came the search for the North-West Passage,
where the great names are Davis, Hudson, Barents and
Bering.
At the dawn of the nineteenth century the terrestrial
globe or most of it was well known. All that remained
to be done was to discover a few islands lost in the vast-
ness of the ocean and to explore the Poles. But still
nothing was known of the ocean deeps or of the nature
or conformation of the bottom of the sea.
After the four thousand years and more since the first
man, driven by curiosity and the lust for gain, took to
the sea, how did things stand? In his Physical geography
of the sea, published in 1855, Lieutenant Maury of the
American Navy epitomized the centuries' accumulated
lore on winds and currents which he had been able to
collect from the seafarers of all nations. By collating
all the material given him, Maury was able to issue charts
which enabled sea captains to change the routes of the
long ocean passages and cut weeks off the sailing time,
say, to Australia or round the Horn. These were the first
Sailing directions, to this day the bedside book of every
ship's captain and every navigating officer; they contain
all that is known of the physical geography of the seas,
coastal approaches, winds, currents and tides, hazards
and seamarks; and without them many a ship would be
lost by seeking to approach inhospitable coasts.
Obviously, much information had been put on paper
before this by ships' captains anxious to benefit by the
lessons of experience. Unhappily, all these navigational
aids, being, ipso facto, the keys to wealth and power, were
the carefully guarded secrets of shipowners and masters;
The most ancient reference works which have come
down to us are the portolani and peripli, and from them
we can form some idea of the technical knowledge of
42

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
h
mariners in the ancient world. The portolani were
charts showing landing places on the Mediterranean
coasts and were used in conjunction with the sailing
directions then in force; the peripli, on the other hand,
supplied all necessary details of coastlines, havens and
supply facilities.
Next came more specifically marine charts. The earli¬
est still extant date from the end of the sixteenth
century and are confined almost entirely to the waters
of Western Europe and the East Atlantic; but little by
little geographical knowledge increased with a corres¬
ponding improvement in the accuracy and coverage of
the charts publicly available. However, by far the best
charts were those produced by the private companies
such as the Compagnie des Indes (East India Company)
which maintained their own hydrographers and had
remarkable collections of charts which were among their
most jealously guarded professional secrets.
It was thanks to Maury's initiative that the advantages
of pooling navigational knowledge became so obvious that
the way to the production of the present-day sailing
directions and accurate charts was abruptly opened.
But the sea is a very big subject and has other physical
aspects which have attracted scientific interest. In the
seventeenth century Varenius published a Geography of
the lands and seas of the earth, epitomizing the whole
contemporary corpus of astronomical and meteorological
knowledge and giving the first scientific description of the
periodical phenomena which took place in the sea and
which, incidentally, had already attracted the boundless
curiosity of Leonardo da Vinci. Next, the fast-growing
science of mathematics turned its attention to everything
that could be brought within its sphere of reference, with
Newton and Laplace proffering the first scientific expla¬
nation of the tides, and Bernoulli! paving the way for the
analysis of the motions of fluids by the future science of
hydrodynamics. Concurrently great interest developed
in everything relating to the sea. Zoology embarked on
the description of marine animals, concurrently with the
appearance of the first marine zoological collections, while
geographers mapped out the ocean bed.
When the nineteenth century opened, scientists, econo¬
mists, and politicians alike the thinkers and the doers
had grasped the importance of the part played by the sea
and everything connected with it in all human activities.
Now men were no longer concerned to find new routes
or new continents, to seek out new gold-mines or alter¬
native sources of consumer goods, but only to extend their
hold on a watery universe which they could not yet
control and which only detailed knowledge, still complet¬
ely lacking, would enable them to use for their own ends.
Consciousness of ignorance in the matter gradually
increased, with the result that the great maritime nations
began to dispatch scientific expeditions to every corner
of the seas, following the example of the British
Challenger, the world's first, océanographie ship to
embark on a four-year course of ocean research. Thus
oceanography was born, and the sea came into its own
as a field of scientific study. .
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PATHFIN DERS OF THE SEA (Continue,ti d)
What we have is oceanography generally, that is, the
whole range of specialized "marine" sciences dynamics,
dealing with horizontal and vertical circulation and, per¬
manent or temporary, periodic or aperiodic water move¬
ments; physics, which is concerned with the sea's optical,
acoustic, electric and similar properties; chemistry,
dealing with the nature and properties of sea-water and
variations in those properties having associations with
dynamic or biological phenomena; biology, studying the
nature of the living creatures in the sea and the bionomy
or biological cycle of the several species; and physical
geography, geology and geophysics which are concerned
with the morphology of coasts and the ocean bed, and
the nature of the sediments and substrata appertaining
thereto.
Oceanography really came into being during the voyage
of the Challenger the culmination of all the voyages for
gain or knowledge, which from Columbus and Magellan
downwards had gradually lifted the veil of ignorance and
superstition hiding the sea. The Challenger was a four-
masted corvette with auxiliary engines,, and her cruise
lasted four years. Under the guidance of Britain's most
eminent scientists, research, was carried out in every
branch of marine science, and an amazing range and
quantity of samples and specimens of every kind, as well
as observations and measurements, was brought back to
Edinburgh.
The study, analysis and description of these data
yielded the material for 40 volumes which, for many years
after their publication, ranked as the standard work on
oceanography, opening up all the main departments of
oceanographical knowledge, more particularly with
regard to the morphology and geology of the ocean bed
and the physics and chemistry of the sea. These
chapters were subsequently expanded, and will, it is
hoped, be completed as the result of present and future
research.
Once the example had been given, it merely remained
to follow it, and up to tne second world war, similar
cruises were frequently undertaken by German, French,
American, Russian and Scandinavian scientific expedi-
tions.The deep water areas were sought out and deeps
(Puerto Rico, Mindanao, Japan, Mariana, Tonga-Kerma-
dec, etc.) discovered, descending to 8,000 or 10,000 metres.
Live species were collected at ever greater depths; the
main features of the sea-floor relief began to be per¬
ceived, and observed data on the nature of the marine
sediments gradually accumulated.
New tools to plumb the deep
As the methods for measuring physical and chemical
properties, at sea and in the laboratory alike, improv¬
ed, so did knowledge of the physics and chemistry of
the sea become more accurate. Certain physical properties,
such as density and specific heat, were quickly deter¬
mined, whereas others, such as viscosity and transparency
governed by the dynamics of water in motion, presented
a more stubborn problem. Towards 1880 an accurate
method of determining the composition of sea-water was
discovered, and 20 years later its relative invariability
was established. This is one of the most important facts
in physical oceanography, since most of the salinity
analyses so far published are based on the constant rela¬
tion of salinity to the chlorine content.
Next, studies were carried out on the influence of
mineral salts, found in low concentrations in the upper
levels of the sea, in the first phases of the nutritional
cycle, and on the part they play precisely analogous to
that of soil fertilizers in the photosynthesis of marine
algae. The biologists, initially, concentrated almost
entirely on descriptions of the vast numbers of species
peopling the sea, but progressively, as more taxonomic
categories came to be clearly . established and their
structure thoroughly determined, they shifted their
attention to the complex interrelations of the different
organisms with one another and with their environment.
At last the dynamics of the sea began to be intelligible;
not only did direct study of the major ocean currents
make it possible to plot their course and evaluate their
importance but the application to the study of the sea
of fluid mechanics and of the theories worked out for
atmospheric circulation provided a solid mathematical
basis for our knowledge of the movements of water
masses; while the description of surface and internal
waves and of tides was facilitated by the development of
hydrodynamics.
Such developments in research and the corresponding
increase in the sum of knowledge were only possible as
a result of the great improvements achieved in ocean
observation and sampling techniques. Apart from the
innovation of steam propulsion, the most spectacular
progress has unquestionably been in deep-sounding
methods which have progressed from the hand-operated
deep-sea lead, and mechanical sounders with line and
weight, to the modern continuous echo-sounder which
does in a few seconds what would have taken, with the
old mechanical sounder, several hours. To begin with,
samples of ooze were taken with grabs or bottom sam¬
plers of only moderate efficiency. With the advent of
the core sampler, however, there was steady improvement
until sediment cores several metres in length could be
secured.
Water temperatures at different depths were measured
with a degree of accuracy approaching a hundredth of a
Centigrade degree, using the so-called "reversing" ther¬
mometer specially designed for the purpose. Current
meters of many types, both direct-reading and recording,
were devised for fixed-point current measurement at dif¬
ferent depths, while on the biological side dredges were
designed for collecting organisms living at the bottom of
the sea, as well as various types of sieve net for studying
the distribution of microscopic animal life at all depths.
Special sieve nets were also invented for studying the
microscopic algae of the phytoplankton.
The second world war caused gigantic strides to be .
taken in oceanography. For tactical purposes, it became
essential to know more about the physical properties of
the sea and, in particular, its acoustics, sonic and ultra¬
sonic detection methods having become of prime impor¬
tance with the appearance of instruments such as Asdic,
or directional beam ultrasonic range-finders. As the
speed of sound transmission in water varies with the
latter's density i.e., with its temperature and salinity,
the former being much the most important at the
shallow depths at which submarines operate the rapid
measurement of the continuous variations of temperature
at different depths became a necessity. The result was
the invention of the bathythermograph, which plots the
variations down to 300 metres on a smoked glass plate.
After the war, as sonar continued to improve with
steadily narrower and more accurate directional beams,
so did the precision of the echo-recording equipment
increase; the error for depths of over 5,000 metres is now
less than one metre. Core samplers were completely trans¬
formed, so that it is now possible to extract cores 20 metres
in length and thus be able to study sediments deposited
about 150 million years ago, while seismic refraction
methods afforded precise measurements of the thickness
of sediments.
WALKING THE PLANK-1960. Not a victim of modern
pirates about to take the fatal plunge, but a scientist at
sea supervising the lowering of a 50 gallon water sampler
from the U.S. research vessel Crawford of the Woods Hole
Océanographie Institution. Samples from various depths
collected during the International Geophysical Year have
been analysed and tested in U.S. and European universities.
© R-E. Baylor. Woods Hole, U.S.A.
44

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
Magnetic and gravimetric studies carried out at sea
established a connexion between certain characteristics
of the submarine topography and variations in the
magnetic field, and made it possible to detect petroleum
deposits; improved equipment for taking specimens allows
of accurate work at any selected intermediate depth;
buoys transmitting radio signals opened the way to the
direct and widespread study of both surface and deep
ocean currents; and radioactive tracers offered new
methods for studying sediment dispersal and for eva¬
luating the amount of living matter produced in the
upper levels of the sea.
The enlistment of electronics for research at sea made
it possible not only to fix the positions of research vessels
more accurately by radio navigation, but also to determine
many variables on the spot, besides providing devices for
the continuous measurement of variations in temperature
and salinity according to depth; another apparatus
devised was a direct-reading current meter for use by
ships under way. In a word, oceanography has become
the business of highly specialized scientists, drawn from
disciplines as different as geophysics and chemistry, elec¬
tronics and pure mathematics; and research at sea has
become a team job, with ¡the effectiveness of each one's
work dependent on the backing of the team as a whole.
For the fact is that any advance in one direction inci¬
dentally increases the general sum of knowledge, since
in the sea the tiniest particle settling on the ooze in the
profoundest deep is the endproduct of a vast complex of
phenomena of which some at least have no direct
connexion either with submarine geology or with sedi¬
mentation.
Oceanographers without knowing it
Marinees for many centuries were oceanographers
without knowing it. While oceanography, pre-emi¬
nently a "high-cost" science with an influence on
innumerable human activities, has never received the
publicity with which other examples of man's spirit of dis¬
covery have been hailed, the fact remains that all those
with any degree of responsibility for the future course of
the world's economy are becoming daily more aware of the
part which the sea must play in the relatively near future.
In view of the rapid and almost universal rise in
standards of living and the consequent readily calculable
increase in requirements in industrial raw materials and
energy, it is clear that the natural resources of the
earth will not long be able to meet the enhanced demand
for animal and vegetable proteins, coal, petroleum and
metals.
It follows that the sea with its inexhaustible reserves
will be the first rextra-terrestrial" source of these
products on which we shall have to draw, long before the
moon or some planet or other is in a position to supply
them in appreciable quantities. Fisheries will expand
and be carried on more scientifically; large quantities of
protein will probably be extracted from plankton, and
"aquiculture" will be developed in suitable areas, with
methodically worked "fields" of algae yielding food and
industrial raw materials. The sea will be harnessed to
supply low-cost energy to countries not possessing their own
natural hydroelectric or fossil fuel power sources, and
part of the power available will be used for working the
mineral reserves in solution in sea-water, or embedded in
the abyssal ooze.
While there is nothing far-fetched about this picture,
it will only become a reality when certain prerequisite
conditions have been met.
First and foremost, improvements are essential in the
quality and quantity of the tools available to oceano¬
graphers laboratories, ships, and general and research
equipment. In relation to what they have to do, they seem,
indeed, today to be ludicrously inadequate. Some countries
have understood this and have started national oceano-
graphical institutes with considerable funds at their
disposal contributed by various departmental budgets
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PATHFINDERS OF THE SEA (Continued)
NEW WINE IN OLD BOTTLES
More than 2,000 years ago a cargo ship bound from Greece
to Marseilles and carrying amphorae filled with wine sank
shortly before reaching its destination. A few years ago
divers from Commandant Cousteau's team found these gra¬
ceful two-handled earthenware amphora where the ship had
sunk (below left). They bore the identification mark (a trident)
of the shipowner-wine merchant who had despatched them.
Through it, they were able to identify the villa where this mer¬
chant, Marcos Sestios, lived at Delos in Greece, (below right)
and where the trident mark was inscribed in the mosaic paving ,
To celebrate their find, the diver-archaeologists, dressed in
costumes of the ancients, held a feast at which they ate
from plates found in the wreck and filled their glasses with
20th century wine poured from a sea-weathered amphora.
© Les Requins Associés
(e.g., defence, industry), and equipped with large vessels
for work at sea.
Research in its eternal pursuit of greater efficiency,
must inevitably be organized on an international basis.
The joint operations conducted in the North and equato¬
rial Pacific by Canadian, American, Japanese and French
vessels, and the era of international co-operation inaugu¬
rated in connexion with the International Geophysical
Year, point the way which will be followecLby oceanogra¬
phy in the years to come, thus presenting the maritime
nations with fresh opportunities for better mutual under¬
standing and more effective mutual help.
Although the sea has been a source of inspiration to a
great many poets, story-tellers and musicians, there can
be no doubt that it is in the economic sphere that its
influence has been greatest. It is therefore not surprising
that when oceanographical research has had practical
implications the result has usually been an improvement
of the world economic situation apart from any influence
that wars may have had on the development of the
marine sciences. Among the human activities more
closely connected with the sea which have benefited most
from research, there is one whose importance extends far
beyond the circle of maritime nations proper and which
takes immediate rank as a common world interest: navi¬
gation.
World history and the history of the growth of interna¬
tional trade go hand in hand. From the earliest times
the seas have been used not only for overseas trade but
for short- and medium-range coastal traffic between
places in the same country; and everywhere the sea
antedated roads as the gateway through which sovereign
States achieved economic and political progress. Just as
improvements in maritime transport for long depended
on advances in our knowledge of the sea, of coastal topo¬
graphy and of winds and currents, so today are such
improvements in many respects bound up with the pro¬
gress of oceanography which is still destined to play a
decisive role in the exploitation of the world's great trade
routes.
Keeping a ship at sea may run to a considerable sum
per day. Accordingly, whenever a vessel cargo or
passenger is to make an ocean passage, the course
plotted makes allowance, firstly, for the nature, strength
and direction of the major ocean currents which might
be met with en route, representing a gain or loss of costly
hours or even days, and secondly, for the prevailing
meteorological conditions, their probable evolution, and
their effect: calculable with a high degree of accuracy on
the state of the sea. Thus oceanography's study of the
major currents such as the Gulf Stream, the Labrador
Current and the equatorial currents, their causes, courses
and fluctuations, has rendered priceless service to inter¬
national trade.
The world's harbours, natural and man-made, are under
continuous assault from the swell, the waves and the cur¬
rents. This may take the form of a direct attack on the
protective works or, more insidiously, of an invasion of
silt blocking the basins and channels. In the first, case
the whole port would sooner or later be overwhelmed, and
in the second would be left miles inland, high and dry.
Men have therefore had ,to create a Whole science of
coastal defence, building moles and breakwaters or
modifying the forms of harbour works wherever it is
46

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
necessary to deflect a current, create an artificial bed of
silt or check swell-heave. AU this must be based on a
profound knowledge of the coastal dynamics and the
associated tidal and current regimes, as well as of the
regime of swell-heave and waves, whose propagation is
affected by every shallow or headland, being ultimately
linked with the prevailing meteorological régime and the
interaction of sea and atmosphere. Thus meteorology
and dynamics, hydraulics and sedimentation, are essential
factors in questions pertaining to coastal developments.
Again, not only must the ports be kept in an efficient
state to handle the traffic based oh them: the coast on
which they lie must also be safe for navigation, i.e., all
the dangers and hazards they present for vessels of
varying tonnage must be fully ascertained, recorded and
"'pin-pointed". This is usually the task of national
hydrographie services which are responsible for producing
detailed charts of coastal waters giving all necessary
information on currents, shallows, leading marks, etc.
These charting operations, formerly carried out by
laborious soundings with the hand-lead, can now be
executed much more rapidly thanks to the introduction
of ultrasonic echo-sounders: but while some coastal areas,
Where ocean traffic has always been heavy, are
remarkably well-charted, there are others, mostly in the
underdeveloped countries, where the task remains a
gigantic one.
In such cases only revolutionary methods can give rapid
results, but they do exist, the war having helped their
development. Where there is a sand bottom, photo¬
graphs of the bottom, seen through the water are scanned
for variations in the brilliance of the sand, which varies
according to its depth; while for general use on any coast
the characteristics of the waves are first observed in deep
water, the depth being then determined by noting the
changes in their height and speed of translation, both of
which depend on the intensity of friction against the
bottom, which varies with the depth. Here again, the
technician has found unintended but not unprofitable
ways of applying the purely theoretical studies which
oceanography has developed over the last few years.
The discovery of submarine petroleum deposits has
given considerable impetus to the geophysical prospection
of the continental shelf i.e., of the relatively flat part
of the submerged continental mass running down from
the waterline to a depth of about 200 metres, when the
angle of slope mostly changes and there is a steep plunge
into deep water. The shelf is a submerged extension of
the adjacent land mass and, having undergone the same
upheavals and submersions, is the same in structure and
hence in mineral resources. It is estimated that the total
continental shelf area of the world contains some 120 mil¬
lion cubic kilometres of petroliferous sediments, with a
reserve of crude oil of about 400 thousand million barrels,
or nearly 40,000 million tons. This is equivalent to one-
third of the world's total reserves, to 45 times the 1956
consumption figure and to nearly 5 per cent of the total
reserves of fossil energy. It will thus be apparent that the
possibilities of the sea as an oilfield are far from negli¬
gible, and that extraction will be extended, as fast as sea-
drilling techniques are improved, to increasingly greater
depths, the sole obstacles at present being the effects of
corrosion, swell-heave and waves on equipment not
designed for working under such severe conditions.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PATHFINDERS OF THE SEA (Continued)
Another prospect is that coastal development works will
afford fresh ppssibillties for using the tides for power
production. In view of the lower operating costs of tidal
generating stations, it is probable that under certain con¬
ditions, and when the coastal configuration makes their
installation relatively easy, it would be more economical
to use them rather than have recourse to atomic power.
The fact that the projected Severn Estuary scheme is
expected to yield 2.3 thousand million kilowatt-hours, the
Cobscook Bay scheme (Fundy Bay), 340 million kilowatt-
hours and the Mont St. Michel scheme 12,5 thousand mil¬
lion kilowatt-hours, shows that there are massive reserves
of energy still available in the sea, apart from its other
reserves in the form of thermal energy, which will be on
the market as soon as a few technological obstacles have
been overcome. Both types of energy are the more im¬
portant in that they belong to the category of permanent
marine resources which can be drawn on indefinitely and
can never be exhausted.
Spectacular developments, over the last few years, in
submarine geology and the techniques of "abyssal" pho¬
tography have served to reveal that great stretches of
the sea bottom are covered with metalliferous concretions,
called nodules, mainly iron and manganese oxides, but
with an admixture of appreciable quantities of rarer
metals such as nickel, cobalt and copper. Considering the
immense area involved, this represents a reserve of mine¬
rals of incalculable richness, and steps will certainly be
taken to exploit it when land supplies are exhausted. The
areas are ready to hand, and only technical difficulties
stand in the way of their being worked forthwith.
suspected that doing this might provoke an excessive
extension of glaciers in Europe and North America; up to
now the idea has been rejected in view of the possibility
that the dry winds from the north might pick up moisture
in their passage over an Arctic Ocean free of ice and
empty their clouds on the already snow-capped mountains
of the Northern Hemisphere, thus bringing about a gra¬
dual fall of temperature.
Conversely, a rise in mean temperatures might possibly
result from the present-day excessive consumption of coal,
petroleum and other combustibles, with the consequent
discharge of vast tonnages of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere Part of this is absorbed by the sea, but the
rest goes to raise the atmosphere's C02 content and may
in the long run increase air temperatures by Io to 2°C.
by holding back long-wave radiations near the earth's
surface. The result could be a chain reaction culminating
in the melting of the polar ice and consequent submersion
of great areas of the present land masses. The fate of
mankind depends on the sea's power to absorb carbon
dioxide and on the cyclic mechanism which raises all
the subjacent water layers successively to the surface.
Here again man could intervene in an attempt to restore
the balance upset by his own interference.
Finally, as man's future as a power user depends on the
harnessing of thermo-nuclear energy, it should be borne
in mind that the sea is the world's greatest hydrogen
reserve.
Melting the Arctic ice-cap
The sea also has other marine mineral resources which
will become extremely . important, once economical
methods of extraction from sea-water have been per¬
fected. Already the residual brine of salt marshes yields
sodium sulphate, potassium chloride, magnesium chloride
and exychloride of magnesium. Borax, bromine and
lithium, and salts of potassium and sodium are extracted
from extinct seas such as Lake Searles in California, and
from the Dead Sea where the degree of salinity is 10 times
greater than in the ocean; and what time and nature
have done again and again and throughout Earth's geolo¬
gical history man can try to reproduce with all and any
of the energy sources at his command.
For instance, engineers may be led to use nuclear power
to get fresh water from salt for the reclamation of areas
which are now arid, reducing the costs of the operation
by recovering the kinds of industrial raw materials
referred to above from the residual brine; they might
even get uranium which is found in solution in sea-water
in such high concentration that its fission would yield
100 times the amount of energy required to evaporate the
water. Of course, when we reckon out the details of such
an operation and compare them with the action of the
sun on the sea and the energy expenditure represented
by evaporation from the ocean surface 10,000 times man's
total consumption of power from all sources, coal, petro¬
leum and hydro-electric power put together we can see
that our means of modifying the situation are limited
and our radius of action extremely restricted.
However, an idea is gradually gaining ground that the
balance of energies which regulate the interactions of sea
and atmosphere and produce the climates that we know
is metastable to the same degree that certain atmospheric
processes are found to be so. A slight pressure on some
local phenomenon could lead to large-scale modifications.
When the mechanisms controlling weather and climates
are fully known, it will probably be possible to identify the
climatic sensitive points on which man can operate to
modify atmospheric conditions as required.
For instance a possible subject for serious and
exhaustive investigation would be the idea of using
nuclear power to melt part of the Arctic ice-cap which
blocks Siberian sea communications, although it is
48
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution
GRIMACING MONSTER is the underside of the head of a shark.
Belonging to the family Oxynotidae, of which only one group with
three species are known in Mediterranean and Australian waters, these
3-foot sharks have peculiar teeth not possessed by any other species.
