Remarkable creative skill and imagination are expressed
in this drawing from the Art Centre at Pltoa (Cameroons)
made by a youngster from one of the bush villages

PITOA - PILOT SCHOOL
IN A CAMEROON VILLAGE
by Rene Caloz
PERCHED on an upturned packing case
in the centre of the classroom, Bou-
kar, the little Cameroon boy, hesitatingly read out the
story he had written:
"While I am playing I find a little snake. I hit it with
a stick. My father comes up. *What are you doing?',
he asks me. 'I am hitting this smake.' My father takes
the stick and he hits the snake too."
When Boukar had finished, he looked up from, the paper
from which he had been reading. Judging from the faces
around him the impression he had made, he proudly
began to read it a second time. But the teacher told
him to go back to his place, and called a lijttle girl, Isma,
to come out to the blackboard.
Isma jumped up, took a piece of chalk, rubbed her head
reflectively for a moment, and then began to draw. As
the chalk grated on the blackboard, Boukar gazed
dreamily at the packing case. This old box had become
a kind of tribune on which all the ambitions of a little
world were centered. Each morning the teacher would
ask : " Who is going on the box ?". Only those children
who had been able to make up and write out a short
story on their own were eligible for this honour. The
rest, the majority of the class, were still only able to
describe orally what they had drawn.
At last Isma put down her chalk and turned a roguish
eye towards the teacher, who asked her to explain the
drawing. Looking at the blackboard with her head on
one side, she said: "A woman is walking along the road.
A bird comes along and steals some of her hair. With
the hair the bird makes its nest." Smiling broadly, Isma
turned around as the class roared with laughter.
Both Boukar and Isma go to school in the Cameroon
village of Pitoa. This mountainous, northern region is
inhabited by the Fulbés and the Kirdis, two tribes which
were once enemies. At Pitoa, 200 little Africans from vil¬
lages in the bush live in at the school where they receive
a primary education.
During the past few years, the school at Pitoa has
become a real pilot centre for education in the African
countries thanks to the perception and devotion of its
staff and its teacher-director, Roger Lagrave. Here, like
a bridge spanning differences between centuries and races,
the most up-to-date methods are used to teach children
who have come straight from remote villages in the bush.
In any country, the first day at school makes a big
psychological impression on a child. It is his first real
break with the warm, sheltered atmosphere of home life.
On the African child who has just left the far-off tribal
village where he was born, the effect is even greater.
From one day to the next he is plunged into a totally
strange civilization and way of life.
Added to the impact of this disturbing change are the
feelings created by the long separation from family and
friends. At Pitoa, therefore, the teachers need to use
special methods and even to devise new ones capable of
overcoming these inner conflicts and of opening up young
minds to a different world.
In solving these problems, nothing has worked as
well as painting and drawing. When they reach school,
the children speak only their tribal languages. They
After drawing this picture on the blackboard, Isma explains: "A bird
comes along and takes strands of a woman's hair to make its nest."
quickly and instinctively accept drawing as a means of
expression and communication.
At the very first lesson, the teacher asks the children
to make drawings of anything that comes into the heads.
The first efforts are always clumsy and disorganized a
jumble of things which the child sees around him every
day : gourds, huts, animals, trees, etc. The names of these,
the children quickly learn to translate into French under
the teacher's guidance.
Gradually the drawings become more orderly. As their
skill with pencil and brush grows, the children encourag¬
ed to use their imagination begin to draw scenes from
village life. Graphic expression precedes and then
stimulates oral expression, bringing the first verbs to
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PILOT SCHOOL
(Cont'd)
enrich a growing vocabulary. They start to make up their
first simple phrasés in French. Only then do writing les¬
sons begin.
Mr. Lagrave, educational director of the Pitoa School,
has noted that by the end of the first term the most
advanced children are able to write their first words in
French. By now a few others are speaking it, but the
majority of the class is still at the drawing stage. By
the end of the first school year most children have started
to write in French.
Drawing and painting have become the key to a new
world. They have helped children, already somewhat
perplexed by the rudiments of the new language, to adapt
their outlooks from those of children in an African tribal
village, while giving them full scope for individual ex¬
pression.
The teachers at Pitoa found to their surprise that when
these children were left to draw on their own sources of
inspiration and were not given any technical advice, they
showed a natural creative aptitude and a sense of colour
harmony even more truly spontaneous than those with
which young Europeans, for example, are apt to surprise
one.
From an early age, European youngsters come under
all kinds of formative influences. The children from the
bush, however, start almost from scratch. They have to
seek everything within themselves, just as did our early
ancestors. With uninhibited powers of inspiration, a pow¬
erful urge to express themselves, a brush and some paints,
they have drawn from within themselves an youthful
African art style that is both original and rich.
This style is expressed in certain, often repeated themes.
There are, for example, the birds of the bushherons,
marabou-storks, ducks and cormorantsall offering
colourful visions which impress themselves on the minds
of youngsters who have spent their childhood along the
banks of Africa's rivers. Here, as in other lands, a
youngster will set down on paper what he knows, and not
just what he sees. In depicting the cormorant he also
shows the fishes it has swallowed and, in admiration for
its angling skill, he sometimes pictures it with several
beaks and long, supple necks.
Ten here is the serpent; the enemy, an ever-present
threat to small bare feet scampering in the bush. So it
is punished in effigy, shown pinned down by that killer
of snakes, the secretary-bird. Or sometimes it becomes
the animal totem, a symbol of taboo. But in all cases,
the harmony of colours transforms these representations
of reality. Thus, from the art centre in Pitoa has flowed
a rich harvest of original and audacious works, full of
suprising power and delightful freshness.
What becomes of these artists whose ages range from
nine to fourteen ? Unfortunately, as is often the case, this
childhood genius fades as maturity approaches. Only a
few of the fortunate ones manage to retain it. The school¬
children of Pitoa will become doctors, teachers and eng¬
ineers. But it has all been worthwhile ; painting has been
the magic charm to exorcise the spells besetting their
childhood, helping them to take the giant leap from the
African bush into the mid-20th century.
When the schoolchild at Pitoa has completed the three
stages of this primary basic education (drawing, spoken
language and writing) he has still not escaped from
his isolation. He knows how to write in French. But to
whom can he write ? He can read. But what will he find
to read ? Unlike youngsters in European countries, for
example, these children of the Cameroons until recent¬
ly had no books suitable to their knowledge and capabili¬
ties other than school textbooks. Thus they came to look
on reading as a purely classroom activity.
To these two problems of isolation and reading material,
the Modern Education Group of the Cameroons has also
found ingenious solutions and has put them into prac¬
tice. These educators provided reading material corres¬
ponding to the educational level and background of this
young public, by producing collections of short stories:
"Fables of the Bush," "Mamadou, the little Shepherd,"
"'At the World's End," which are lively, documentary texts
telling about such things as the millet crop, the mangrove
tree, monkeys, the river, fishing, and so on.
Roger Lagrave went even further and, using some of
the methods developed by the French educator, C. Frei-
net, he got his pupils to help him in writing these new
books. Out of this grew the "African Book Club", whose
publication fund is partly covered by the sale of children's
drawings and also through radio broadcasts.
Each year, the boys and girls in one or more of the
classes set to work on a new book whose preparation is
also the occasion for a concentrated study of the French
language. The themes chosen for these books reveal a
progressive broadening of horizons. The first, "Malik
Child of the Bush," described the life of a typical child
and his family in a Cameroons village. "Two Children in
the Northern Cameroons" told the story of a child as
he left his village and began to experience the realities
of the larger life of his country.
The third book, "Bouba and Jacques" had a special
significance for it brought the children in contact with
another country, France, and a way of life very different
DRAWING THEIR
1 DRAWING is used as a bridge leading to reading and
by the children from the bush who attend the school
Pitoa, Cameroons. First efforts with pencil and brush are usually
a jumble of familiar objectshuts, gourds, trees, animals. From
the names of these, the children learn their first words in French.

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
from their own. All the material for this book came from
a pen-friends' exchange between the boys and girls of
Pitoa and those of Costes-Gozon in the Aveyron Depart¬
ment of southern France.
Each week, in the form of questions and answers bet¬
ween a French boy, Jacques, and his African friend, Bouba,
villagers in France and African bush dwellers nearly
4,000 miles away got to know more about each other
(see page 8).
The fourth book in the series, completed this year, is
entitled Nous de partout (We from everywhere). Having
got to know his own country, the child sets out to explore
other parts of the world and discovers that modern tech¬
niques can help to free him from his isolation.
Suggestive of the future possibilities of this admirable
educational venture born in Africa are the words of the
preface to this latest book :
"In gaining its independence, the Cameroons has taken
its place among the nations.
"In this book we would like you to meet some of these
nationsour friends. But this is not a geography book,
and you will not find in it the names of rivers and their
lengths nor the names of mountains and their heights.
Instead, every page shows children, many children and
their ordinary day-to-day lives in these far-off countries.
"They have sent us their school newspapers in which
they have described their life, their work and play, their
problems and their hopes.
"Reading what they have written, we have been very
touched for we have found there our friends, as they
really are, from every continent our friends from
everywhere. For wherever they come from, from hot
lands or from the cold ones, whether they eat wheat, or
millet or rice, they are all our friends and this is
something that no frontiers can change.
"And we need this friendship so that we may work
together to build a vast and a brotherly world. This
friendship makes us very happy."
WAY TO FRENCH WITHOUT TEARS
2 GROWING SKILL of young artists plus freedom to use
their imagination quickly brings a change. Scenes from
village life replace the "jumble" drawings. Vocabularies expand,
and soon the children are able to write down in French the names
of the objects and persons they have depicted In their drawings.
3 HARVEST SCENE with the family at work in the fields
« was drawn by a young child from the bush after attending
school for two months. Through his first drawings he learned
words like father, mother, millet and gourd. Group scenes
introduced verbs, and now he begins writing his first sentences.
