OF MAAT
GODDESS OF PRECISION
Maât, goddess of precision and equi¬
librium, Is the emblem of the Documen¬
tation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo.
*^*~-*>*
N the desert shores of- the Nile in Lower
Nubia, a small army is waging a battle unique
in history. Its task is twofold: to safeguard a
heritage thousands of years old, and to record
the lesson its treasures have to teach before
they are obliterated within a few years.
This army with its headquarters in Cairo, its flotilla on
the Nile, its liaison officers, its reconnaissance patrols and
its working parties operating in the field, represents a new
force in the service of humanistic studies and the protection
öf beauty. For almost the past five years, under the sign
of Maât, Egyptian goddess of precision and equilibrium, it
has been running an inexorable race against time. It calls
itself in all simplicity Documentation Centre on Ancient
Egypt, a modest title indeed for a unique archaeological
operation about to assume truly Pharaonic proportions.
Under the torrid Nubian skies, the Egyptologists of the
Centre and their teams of technical experts have been on
the job year after year, advancing as fast as the exacting
nature of their operations allows. The time these
missions can spend in the field is limited by the intolerable
summer heat, the floods of the Nile and the inundations
caused by the sudden, unpredictable torrential rains which
sweep the upper reaches of the river. Every single day
is precious to them and following the Egyptian decision
to go ahead with the gigantic project of the Aswan High
Dam (the Sadd el-Aali) the time factor has assumed even
more dramatic proportions.
The Aswan project meant that the whole of Nubia with
its irreplaceable monuments would be submerged by an
artificial lake some 300 miles long. In the face of this
major undertaking, sparked by the imperative economic
needs of today, it would have been a waste of time to
deplore its effects on the civilizations of yesterday. There
was work to be done, and done quickly.
At the beginning of September 1955, the first teams of
Egyptologists arrived on the Abu Simbel site, the most
important in the whole of Nubia. Here, twenty-five miles
north of the Sudanese border, and downstream from the
second cataract, the awe-inspiring tawny facades of the
two sanctuaries of Rameses II still stand today in the
dazzling desert light.
40
At the feet of Rameses and his queen, Nefertari,
scaffolding went up. Archaeologists, philologists, photog¬
raphers, draughtsmen, architects and moulders arrived on
the site. Work began at dawn and often went on far into
the night since the heat and blinding light prevented pho¬
tographers from working in the afternoon. Invaded by
cameras, searchlights and generating plants, the age-old
sanctuary began to look like a film studio.
Every square inch of the great Abu Simbel group was
minutely examined. Since then, black and white and colour
photographs, photogrammetric negatives, architects' notes,
casts and copies of hieroglyphic texts, rock graffiti and
Greek, Coptic and Semitic inscriptions, have gradually
been amassed in the Cairo Documentation Centre. Already
this material constitutes the fullest and most accurate in¬
ventory of facts about these monuments that has ever been
collected. Systematic surveys of the temples of Debod,
Kalabsha and Wadi-es-Sebua and the chapels of Abu Oda
and Jebel Chams are now also nearing completion.
'Noah's Ark' on the Nile
While doing this urgent field work, the Documenta¬
tion Centre has also had to set up and equip its
own headquarters. From the very start of the
Nubian expeditions it had to keep teams supplied and to
protect photographic material. It would be difficult to
exaggerate the difficulties this involved in the grilling heat
of Nubia. The work, however, has become much easier
since the Centre acquired a five cabin boat, the 1" Horus ",
which is used to' carry out rapid missions and tours of ins¬
pection and to relieve working teams. Now the Centre
is to receive another boat, a kind of " Noah's Ark ", built
specially to its specifications by the Egyptian Government.
This floating laboratory can be towed along the Nile and
moored close to the sites where work is in progress. It will
carry workshops, offices, stores and a library and will pro¬
vide the teams with living quarters.
Finally, a year ago, the Centre itself took on. concrete
form as an attractive modern building in Cairo, close to
the Corniche du Ml. It has been planned and equipped
CONT'D ON PAGE 43

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
Institut Géographique National, Saint-Mandé
Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
I
	i
. ' . 	*-	~.,B .	! > À
¡TV
:	
i ^*¿' \ '
%v :.\v' V X
-*»«
CAPTURED BY
PHOTOGRAMMETRY
The photographs on this and the
following pages show the remar¬
kable results achieved by a new
science photogrammetry which
makes it possible to determine the
shape and dimensions of an object
from two stereoscopic photographs
and then to reconstitute it in the
laboratory in the form of an exact
model. The work shown here was
carried out at the request of the
Documentation Centre on Ancient
Egypt, Cairo, by the French National
Geographic Institute. Photos show:
1. An ordinary photograph of a bas-
relief showing a group of prisoners
at the foot of the colossal statue of
Rameses II to the right of the
entrance to the Great Temple of
Abu Simbel.
2. The frieze as it appears with all
the contour lines plotted as a
result of stereoscopic photography.
4I

PHOTOGRAMMETRY (Continued)
3. Contour plotting is then placed in a pantograver. This 5. Detail of one of the figures before levelling pro
4. Contour lines are reconstituted on a block of plaster duction is accurate to one-half of a millimetre (a fiftieth
which is placed at the other end of the pantograver. of an inch) and shows amazing results of photogrammetry.
Äll^jfe)^
Photos © Institut Géographique National, St Mandé
H .
42

UNDER THE SIGN
OF MAAT
{Continued)
The Unesco Courier. February 1960
Documentation Centre
on Ancient Egypt
down to the smallest detail for the recording and use of
Egyptological material. Its lecture halls, library, card in¬
dexes and its air-conditioned photographic laboratories and
archives have already made it an ideal centre for these
studies.
The Documentation Centre was set up in May 1955 by
the Antiquities Service of Egypt with the direct co-opera¬
tion of. Unesco. It is an Egyptian body, financed by the
Government of the United Arab Republic. Unesco has a
representative on the Board of Directors of the Centre
and provides technical aid in the form of international
specialists.
Race against time
in Lower Nubia
From the days of Champollion the founder of scien¬
tific Egyptology the work of preserving monuments,
organizing excavation work, research and documen¬
tation studies has been carried out by a great many foun¬
dations, museums and universities in Egypt, Europe and
America. It has often been done most successfully, but
almost inevitably in a piecemeal fashion. Never until now
has so systematically organized a body as the Cairo Centre
been at work in this field. Its operations have called for
powerful resources and the services of large teams of full-
time specialists working in a synchronized operation.
Originally, the Centre had chosen as its first task to
make systematic surveys of the Necropolis of Thebes where
the tombs, once well-preserved, had shown signs of dete¬
rioration. The announcement of the High Dam project
changed the order of priorities and began the race against
time in Lower Nubia. In the next five years something
like one hundred missions are planned with a clear-cut
programme of work relating to the monuments threatened
by the Aswan High Dam.
The archaeologists and philologists attached to the
Centre co-ordinate all operations taking into account exist¬
ing documentation and data. They direct work in the
field and then record the results of every mission on card
indexes.
Painting and sculpture
recreated by the camera
Facts needed to complement copies and descriptions
are assembled by the technical section. Architects
prepare plans, sections and elevation, complete to
the most minute detail every brick, every flagstone and
even the smallest hole in a wall is marked in. Experts in
architectural drawing trained at the Centre use photo¬
graphs to prepare exact plans of groups of monuments.
The old method of making tracings from actual monuments
is no longer used except for small details, or in cases where
monuments are too closely hemmed in or in too bad a state
of preservation for satisfactory photographs to be taken.
Copies of those reliefs which are renowned for their beauty
or historical interest and of any hieroglyphic inscriptions
likely to provoke controversy, are made by moulders, who
also prepare architectural models.
Photographers find themselves working closely with most
of the other specialists. Following details of the master
plan, they develop their test film each day on the spot
before sending the negatives to the developing laboratory
in Cairo. At the same time they take identical photographs
on colour film. Yet even all this work is not enough.
The photographic reproduction of works of art, and of
sculpture in particular, is as André Malraux has termed
it a phenomenon of recreation. Freed from the recesses
where they were hidden away, sculptures seem to spring
into life again when viewed in this new light, becoming
familiar and acquiring fresh significance.
Photography, like drawing and even architectural plans,
contains a certain element of subjectivity which can pro¬
duce various degrees of distortion. To obtain the absolute
accuracy demanded by scientific recording, use has been
made of photogrammetry, a process that has been em¬
ployed for the past forty years in the preparation of geogra¬
phical maps.
This method was first used to survey a monument in
1850 and today provides invaluable documentary mat¬
erial for archaeologists. The stereoscopic photographs,
taken with the aid of a phototheodolite, give precise in¬
formation down to the smallest detail of a relief and thus
make possible the creation of an absolutely faithful copy
in reproductions, models and casts.
New horizons opened
by photogrammetry
Photogrammetry opens up new horizons in the know¬
ledge of forms and techniques. It may even make
possible the discovery of architectural laws as yet
undisclosed by Egyptologists, and may add to our know¬
ledge of sculptural techniques. For instance, the contour
lines taken on the face of the North-West Osirian colossus
(23 feet) in the inner court of the Great Temple of Abu
Simbel, and those taken on the face of the South colossus
(65 feet) on the façade, show some striking resemblances
between the two even down to the modelling of the carti¬
lage of the nose.
When all the survey programmes are completed, the
Documentation Centre in Cairo will be a rich, permanent
source of information both for Egyptological studies and
for works destined for the man in the street. As a safety
measure, all the archives are to be microfilmed and one
copy of every document will be given special security treat¬
ment to guard against any possible destruction or
deterioration.
Thanks to the international action undertaken by Unesco
there is now reason to hope that these majestic monuments
will be saved from the encroaching waters and that pre¬
sent and future generations will still be able to visit the
giant statues of Rameses II and the island temples of
Philae. Furthermore, the extensive work undertaken by
the Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt will give the
world's Egyptologists the possibility of adding to our know¬
ledge of one of the areas of the Ancient World which has by
no means finished yielding up its secrets.
43
