FRANK CONVERSATION AT
AN PTY TABLE
by Khushwant Singh
The Coffee House in the Delhi Uni¬
versity Campus was jammed. There
was a long queue of students waiting
for seats and as soon as anyone got up someone would
dash to take his chair. I paid for my cup of coffee and
looked around for a table. There didn't seem any hope
of getting one and I decided to gulp down my beverage
standing by the bar as many others were doing.
I suddenly caught sight of an empty table in the far
corner of the room empty in as much three of the
four chairs were unoccupied and the fourth was
taken by someone who had hidden his face behind a
newspaper. I threaded my way through the crowded
room, guarding my precious cup of coffee from the noisy,
gesticulating mob of boys and girls.
"Are these seats taken?", I asked, as politely as I could.
The man lowered his newspaper for a second and replied
with a gruff "No." He was a Negro.
I took my seat and began to sip my coffee in silence.
Something about the man's attitude and the empty seats
in a cafe with a queue waiting to find places made me
uneasy and curious. After a polite cough, I opened the
conversation.
"Are you studying in Delhi University?"
The man lowered his newspaper again and replied as
offensively as before. "'Yes I am. Do you want to see
my identity card?"
Before I could protest he had fished out his student's
card and placed it on the table. He was from Ghana and
as dark as they come. I put out my hand to him. "I
didn't mean to be rude: I just wanted to talk. I have
never met anyone from Ghana before. My name is Singh.
I am a professor at Aligarh."
He took my hand gingerly and mumbled his name. My
opening gambit was another faux pas. "How do you like
being in India?"
"Do you really want to know?" he asked, mincing every
word. "The truth, the whole truth and not just propa¬
ganda!"
He told me of the few months he had
been in Delhi; of the hospitality
extended by Indian boys and girls to
"white" (and occasionally "brown") foreign students, but
denied to Negro students; of the cold aloofness of the
majority of Indians towards him and his fellow Africans;
of the indifference of waiters in cafes to serve Negro
patrons; of the crowded coffee house and empty seats
around a table where a Negro happened to sit.
His words stung like slaps on the face. Weren't we the
nation who more loudly than others proclaimed the equa¬
lity of races and read holier-than-thou sermons to the
South African whites and the Little Rock Americans?
"But our government..." I protested.
"I said nothing against your government", he inter¬
rupted impatiently. "It is your government that has
invited me and hundreds of other Africans to study in
Indian Universities. It gives us good scholarships. We
are invited to meet the President and the Prime Minister.
And your Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan, has asked
28
me to tea more than once. Sometimes the Vice-Chan¬
cellor and the Professors also ask us to their homes. But
it is always an occasion a sort of "African occasion" as
a duty that has to be performed. The students who
don't have to do it, never ask us. They seldom mix with
us and even avoid sitting near us." Didn't I see for
myself?
The Indian Constitution has abolished race and caste
distinctions but the Indian people are still a long way
from abolishing prejudices based on race and colour for
our caste-system is essentially based on colour complexes.
The Sanskrit word for caste is Varna which literally
means colour. Varna goes back to the times when the
fair-skinned Aryans invaded India over three thousand
years ago.
The first lot of invaders did not bring their women and
there was a certain amount of intermingling of the Aryan
and the dark negroid Adibasi (aboriginal) who the Aryan
had subjugated. Then more Aryans came with their
women and families. The aboriginals were pushed out
into the jungles and reduced to servitude. To exploit
the situation to their best advantage, the Aryans devel¬
oped the caste system based on occupation and' the
"purity" of race.
On the top were the Brahmins who had
the monopoly of learning. Next came
the Kshatryas or the warriors who
defended the society. The third group were the
Vaisyas or the traders. The fourth were the Sudras or the
workers. And the fifththe old aboriginalwas reduced
to doing the most unpleasant jobs like scavenging, skinn¬
ing dead animals, and given no status in society by
being declared an untouchable.
This system which had its apologist in Manu developed
a rigidity which made intermarriages between the dif¬
ferent castes almost impossible. There is enough evidence
to prove that the basis of the division was colour. Even
to this day the Brahmins and the Kshatryas are lighter-
skinned than the Vaisya and the Sudra. And the
Untouchable is dark and negroid.
Prejudices die hard. The Indian Government has made
valiant efforts to wipe out the caste system. All temples
have been thrown open to "untouchables". In villages
where the lower castes were not allowed to draw water
out of wells belonging to the upper castes, there are
governing bodies (Panchayats, with at least one member
elected from the "untouchables") whose duty it is to
see that no discrimination is practised by one caste
against another, and if there be any case, to get the aid
of the police to rectify it.
The law comes down heavily on the discriminator.
Government action and rapid industrialization has begun
to break the caste edifice but it will be a long time before
the colour complex is erased from the Indian mind. Pick
up any daily newspaper and turn to the matrimonial ads.
You will see that in nine out of ten the one quality that
an Indian male demands of his prospective wife is that
she should be fair, and the one thing that a father will
advertise (if he can) about his unmarried daughter, is
her light skinor keep silent on the subject of looks.
