WAS ANCIENT GREECE
VANQUISHED BY MALARIA?
WHO photo by K. Rafaelidis
Only when the last case has been tracked down and treated and the possibility of infection has ceased
to exist will the earth be truly rid of malaria. Migrants, who are counted in millions, present a
tricky problem. Ifj they carry the malaria parasite in their bloodstream they may reinfect areas
that have been cleared. Above, a some of the dwellers in nomad encampment near Skala, Greece.
I as the real enemy which caused the fall of
ancient Greece the malaria mosquito, whose
ravages so weakened the country's inhabi¬
tants that its frontiers were left defenceless
in the face of threatening enemies? This is
a hypothesis of Professor G.D. Belios, head
of Greece's antimalaria services.
"Greece has been a prey to the disease for more than
two thousand years," he says, "'and it has left deep scars
on the country.
"If we read the legends of Hercules, We find references
to schemes of land improvement through the draining
of marshes. For instance, there was the Hydra of the
Lernaean marshes Iwhich worked havoc among the popu¬
lation and the flocks. Again, Hercules succeeded in
cleaning the Augean stables by changing the course of
a river.
"Nevertheless, malaria was less prevalent in ancient
Greece than it was just before modem eradication cam¬
paigns Were launched. Changes have occurred in geo¬
graphical and probably also meteorological conditions.
The forests were much more extensive and the mountain
slopes were not as naked and barren as they loofk today;
the ground was more evenly watered, heavy rains did not
produce raging torrents, the temperature was less variable,
the land ¡was extensively cultivated and waterworks had
been constructed. Finally, the rules of hygiene that were
14
strictly observed in the Greece of those days helped to
keep the inhabitants in good health."
Professor Belios thinks it conceivable, however, that
malaria ultimately weakened the resistance of the soldiers
of ancient Greece, so that her frontiers were laid open
to the invader. Her institutions collapsed, the water¬
works fell into ruin, agriculture was neglected, and the
fertile plains gradually changed into barren wastes, until
at last the country which had led the world was plunged
into long centuries of darkness.
1938 : I million cases
1958 : twelve hundred
Greece, once the most malaria-ridden country in Eu¬
rope, is today an advance post in the world war
against this disease. It was the scene of the first
internationally-supported large-scale operations involving
the use of the all-powerful DDT. From Greece came the
first proof that the interruption of spraying operations
did not necessarily mean that malaria would reoccupy the
land. It was also in Greece that resistance to insecticides
was first observed in mosquitos.
"In 1938 we had nearly a million cases of malaria, and
ten thousand people died of the disease; in 1958 we had
twelve hundred cases and not a single death, although

our population has increased by two million1", says Pro¬
fessor Belios.
"Between 1930 and 1938, malaria was costing us fifty
million dollars a year in working days lost, hospital
expenses, drugs at that time we were importing thirty
tons of quinine a year. At present our antimalaria ser¬
vices do not cost more than eight hundred thousand
dollars yearly.
"Greece's national income showed an increase of more
than 75 per cent over the years 1950 to 1956, and although
the successful antimalaria drive is not the only reason
it has certainly been an important factor.
"The virtual disappearance of malaria has had a consi¬
derable effect on the general mortality rate in Greece,
which is seven per thousand today as compared with
seventeen per thousand in 1921. Infant mortality has
dropped from 135 per thousand in 1931 to 40 today.
"The average height of our recruits nowadays is 4 to 5
centimetres above what it was twenty years ago."
The campaign against malaria in Greece was launched
with a great flourish in 1946. While vast areas of marsh
and ricefields were being systematically covered with
larvicide sprayed from 17 aeroplanes, antimalaria squads
were visiting some 5,000 out of the country's 11,000 villages
to treat the insides of the houses with insecticides.
Mosquitos, flies, fleas, bugs and lice died off as if by
magic. There was a marked drop in the number of cases
of dysentery, a disease often spread by flies. Where fields
of olive trees had been sprayed with insecticides from
the air, the year's crop showed a 25 per cent, increase.
"'Our wildest dreams were coming true before our
eyes", says Professor Belios. "It was more than we had
ever dared to hope for. But in 1951 it became difficult
to obtain the insecticide, mainly because of the Korean
war, and we had to discontinue spraying."
It was this combination of circumstances which led to
The Unesco Courier. April 1960
the discovery that stopping insecticide spraying did not
necessarily mean the return of malaria. Greece was to
serve as a precious example five years later when the prin¬
ciples of malaria eradication were laid down, comprising
two main stages: an all-out attack on the mosquitos that
carry the disease, and then consolidation through syste¬
matic tracking down of the remaining cases.
Laughter in the village
and money in the bank
Today malaria has been practically driven out of
Greece, so effective are the operations of the
country's antimalaria service, both on the mainland
and on the countless islands of the archipelago. Case-
spotting teams are doing house-to-house visiting in
thousands of village, while private practitioners, teachers,
mayors and priests regard it as their duty to report suspect¬
ed cases. The Ministry's 1,100 rural and communal dispen¬
saries also play their part. All patients admitted to hospi¬
tal undergo routine blood tests, and twenty-four laborato¬
ries are devoting all their time to blood testing. Insec¬
ticide spraying has been reduced to an absolute minimum.
That is how Greece has almost rid herself of a scourge
which has had a tragic influence on her destiny.
Nowadays in the southern Péloponnèse there are great
rice plantations and the cotton fields at Skala are vast.
Only ten years ago half this land lay fallow, and mala¬
ria was general. Now at harvest time the village streets
are alive with laughter and high spirits, the bank stays
open day and night to pay for the crops, and there is
a big fair in the olive groves to which the country people
come to lay in their winter supplies.
In 1959 there was only one case of malaria in the whole
of the Skala district, a soldier back from military service
) F. Barzilay
Once the most malaria-ridden country in Europe, Greece is today an advance post in the world war against this disease. After being a prey to malaria
for more than 2,000 years, Greece is now virtually rid of the scourge. But case-spotting teams still do house-to-house visits in thousands of villages
like the one shown here, and over 1,100 rural and communal dispensaries play their part in the complete eradication of malaria from the country.
15

who had somehow slipped through the malaria defence
network. The antimalaria service is very much on the
alert at Skala. Since spraying operations finished, the
mosquitos have come back in the same numbers as before,
ready to act as carriers of any malaria that may appear.
The greatest care is therefore necessary.
It was at Skala, too, and in Nauplia a little further
north, that mosquito resistance to insecticides appeared
for the very first time. This was in October 1951 when
spraying was still going on; mosquitos began to be seen
again in the houses, and the country folk blamed the
spraying teams for not doing their work properly.
While on a visit to London, Professor Belios went to see
the experts at the Ross Institute, but they at first refus¬
ed to believe that the insecticide had ceased to act. The
facts soon compelled them to admit that the Greek mos¬
quitos had won a real victory. Fortunately it proved
possible to replace the insecticide by others which were
still effective for a certain period. Then followed the
attack on the malaria parasite by tracking down and
treating the remaining sick people.
Since that October day in 1951 some 19 species of mala¬
ria-carrying mosquitos in different parts of the world
have developed resistance to one or other of the insec¬
ticides used. Up to now, however, only three species have
proved resistant, to a greater or lesser degree, to all the
insecticides that can be used in the world campaign
against malaria.
Since October 1951, laboratory research has been speed¬
ed up so that before launching an eradication campaign,
antimalaria services can obtain accurate information as
to how their enemies, the mosquitos, will react to the
insecticides that are to be used against them.
Photos © F. Barzilay
With the virtual disappearance of malaria there has been a vast impro¬
vement in the life of people in the Greek countryside. In some areas
there are now great rice plantations and vast cotton fields where only
ten years ago half the land lay fallow, and malaria was generalone
million cases in 1938. The country's general mortality rate has dropped
by nearly two-thirds as compared with 1921 ; it was then 1 7 per 1,000.
THE GOAL FOR EUROPE :
MALARIA OUSTED BY 1962
IN Europe, does malaria still matter? It this not one
of those outmoded diseases long banished from the
continent? In a good many countries it is true that
malaria has been driven out, in some at great cost.
The honours list includes Italy, the Netherlands, France,
Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the Ukraine and
Byelorussia.
Around the shores of the Mediterranean, the battle
is still sharply contested. Eleven countries in the Euro¬
pean Region of WHO, which includes Morocco, Algeria
and Turkey, are still in varying degrees infested with
malaria. A severe problem is faced in the three countries
named where great efforts will be needed to get rid of
the infection. On the European continent, the situation
is more favourable: it is expected that by 1962 malaria
will have disappeared for good.
As little as a decade ago, malaria still claimed hun¬
dreds of thousands of victims in certain areas where 'it
had reigned supreme for centuries. In Rumania, Spain,
Portugal, the Soviet Union, Greece and other countries,
malariologists and the governments that supported their
work are on the eve of a victory that will bring great
benefit not only to the national populations but to
Europe as a whole.
The matter is indeed one of concern to Europe, for
both the mosquito that transmits malaria and the man
who carries the malaria parasite in his blood can easily
cross a national boundary and reintroduce the infection
in areas laboriously cleared of it. This is one reason
for pursuing the battle with vigour and ridding the conti¬
nent in its entirety of the danger as soon as possible.
Mopping up the last cases is the task facing European
malaria workers today.
