X-RAY OF THE RACIST
by Marie Jahoda
Photos Ian BeTy © Magnum
24

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
T
n contrast to other forms of violence between
individuals, the ultimate justification of racial
-^^»- violence is given in terms of who the victim is
rather than what he has done. Physical violence against
an individual because of his race often meets with
a curious condonement and silent approval from other
members of the aggressor's race, even though they
themselves do not engage in it. And even where racial
violence is officially frowned upon, there are many who
admit to a sympathetic understanding of acts designed
to humiliate a member of another race, of discrimination
against him, or of the expression of wholesale dislike for
the members of another lace.
In Brazil, Jamaica, Cuba and Hawaii, for example,
several races live without signs of overt conflict. Yet it is
a comment on the general state of affairs that these few
examples should be so well known as exceptions to the
Photo Werner Bischof © Magnum
A COUNTRY DIVIDED. South Africa today is a country
divided against itself. The government's "apartheid" (apart¬
ness) policy and the racial segregation decrees through which it
is applied have provoked riots at home and condemnation abroad.
Using such criteria as the shape of noses, kinkiness of hair, the
apartheid system classifies Negroes, mixed-blood Negroes and
Asians by race, then allocates to each a rigid, underprivileged
place in society in which residence, travel, employmentand
even drinkcan be determined by government officiais. Photos
show: opposite page, top, white South Africans hold mass meet¬
ing in support of apartheid policy; bottom, Negroes demons¬
trate as armoured car stands by. In protest against apartheid,
signs like that above have appeared in hotels in Asian countries.
rule. What is the meaning of racial antagonism for those
who feel it?
There exists a large body of research on the reasons
people give for their dislike of various racial groups. If
one asks certain people in the United States of America,
for example, to explain their antagonism to Negroes, the
odds are that they will use one or more of the following
phrases: they are inferior, they are lower class, they are
low in intelligence, they force out the whites, they are
lazy, sloppy, dirty, immoral, oversexed, troublesome,
childish, they have a bad smell and carry diseases.
If one inquires why Jews are disliked, one learns that
they have all the money, control business, are capitalists
but also communists, are clannish but also intrude on
other people's affairs, are smart, intellectuals, think
themselves better than others, work too hard but never
do manual labour, and are noisy, bad-mannered and
emotional.
Before one takes this array of statements as data for
an interpretation of the state of mind of the person who
makes them a question must be faced: are these perhaps
realistic descriptions of what the majority of Negroes and
Jews are like? The question is crucial. For if these
descriptions are broadly speaking accurate, racial anta¬
gonism must obviously be interpreted differently than if
they are figments of the imagination.
There is every reason to believe that groups which do
not intermingle freely with members of other groups,
which have traditions of long standing, their own way of
bringing up children and special social institutions, norms
and values will develop common characteristics. The fact
of belonging to a group which is the target of strong
racial antagonism must be assumed to be a particularly
weighty influence on the behaviour and character of
members of that group.
It is conceivable that many Negroes are lazy because
the assertion of white supremacy denies them the fruit
of industriousness; that some crave for sex relations with
white women because the white community has establish¬
ed a taboo against such relations, a symbol of their
alleged inferiority against which they rebel. Equally, it is
possible that centuries of persecution have made some
Jews clannish while others try to enter the Gentile world
in an effort to escape their fate.
T
here is a steadily growing body of evidence to
^ show that inadequate reality-testing is charac¬
teristic of many who feel hostile to racial outgroups.
A drastic demonstration of this was given by Professor
E.L. Hartley who included in a study of racial anta¬
gonism three non-existent groups whom he called the
Danireans, the Piraneans, and the Wallorians. A large
proportion of those who disliked Negroes and Jews also
expressed a dislike for these fctitious groups and advo¬
cated restrictive measures against them.
The idea that racial antagonism is determined from
within rather than by adequate reality testing is support¬
ed by Robert Merton's argument that the very same
qualities which are given as reasons for disliking another
racial group the "out-group" as the sociological jargon
terms it are often highly appreciated when found in a
member of the "in-group."
In comparing current beliefs about Jews and Japanese
in the United States with those about Abraham Lincoln
he says: "Did Lincoln work far into the night? This
testifies that he was industrious, resolute, persévérant and
eager to realize his capacities to the full. Do the out-
group Jews or Japanese keep these same hours? This
only bears witness to their sweatshop mentality, their
ruthless undercutting of American standards, their unfair
competitive practices. Is the in-group hero frugal, thrifty
and sparing? Then the out-group villain is stingy,
miserly and penny-grinding," and so on.
Several psychoanalytically oriented studies have taken
the problem a step further by actually investigating the
nature of the experience with members of the disliked
group. In some cases it was found that the antagonism
persisted without any personal contact whatsoever. In
others, the antagonistic person maintains that his judge¬
ment is based on direct experience with members of the
disliked group; yet his descriptions of such contact are
bare of all individual characteristics; it is as if he had
met not an individual human being but the incorporation
of his idea manifesting only the allegedly typical qualities.
But perhaps more interesting are -those who were able
to evaluate the individuals whom they met correctly
without letting such an experience interfere with their
general judgement of the group. In a study of army
veterans by B. Bettelheim and M. Janowitz one man was
quite explicit on his general dislike for Jews, and then
continued: "There was one Jewish fellow in our outfit
whom I liked especially, he wasn't like the ordinary run
of Jews, that's why I remember him."
This is a typical case of the notorious remark "Samp
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE RACIST MIND (Cont'd)
COUNTERFEITERS OF REALITY
of my best friends are Jews, but..." Even more remark¬
able is the case of a man included in another study who
when not quite in control of himself would call an
opponent "dirty Jew" and generally complain that Jews
take advantage of others. His first contact with Jews
occurred in childhood when he established a friendship
with a Jewish boy and his family which lasted for years.
As an adult he had several Jewish friends. His anti-
Semitism existed notwithstanding such friendly contacts.
In these cases reality is assigned the place of exception;
the rule is established by untested preconceptions.
It is claimed by most who defend their prejudices that
adequate reality-testing has led them to assert the
inferiority of certain races. This may be a logical
possibility. It is, after all, conceivable that a man may
meet a whole series of exploiting Jews or unintelligent
Negroes. These qualities exist in all races sufficiently
often to make such a chance occurrence possible. Granted
this logical possibility, the arguments used in the defence
of prejudice give little support to the idea that it is often
based on such statistical misfortune in encounters with
people belonging to another race. Let us examine some.
In the stupendous dilemma in which the Union of South
,
îr If?
imr, i ü.»*
United Press International
FIRE HOSES are turned on a crowd of Whites and Negroes following
recent sit-in lunch counter demonstrations in Chatanooga, Tennes¬
see. A movement against food service segregation in department stores
and other establishments has been spreading through the American
South in recent months, and has been marked at times by violence.
26
Africa finds itself with regard to its racial problems one
might expect the apartheid policy to be based on the
assertion of adequate reality-testing. But this is not the
case. Gwendolen Carter says in summarizing her sober
and extensive studies: "They [the Nationalists] admit,
somewhat reluctantly, that there are more highly de¬
veloped Africans: . . . Beyond this, there is something
irrational, but none the less compelling, in the Nationalist
attitude toward non-Europeans, an instinctive distaste,
even horror at the thought of being associated with them
on equal terms	 The most extreme example of this
sentiment is bound up with the phrase: Do you want
your daughter to marry a Native?"
"One of the most surprising features of Nationalist
arguments is the frequency with which they justify
apartheid measures on the ground that they are necessary
for preserving an acute colour sense. In other words,
it almost seems as if Nationalists fear that close proximity,
rather than intensify distaste, may blur the differences
felt between Europeans and non-Europeans. . ..
"But the fear of a white minority lest it lose its
distinctive identity is a sentiment which may override
more mellow considerations based on personal experience.
European South Africans, and Afrikaners in particular,
are often devoted to individual Africans with whom they
have an easy and mutually satisfactory relationship, but
this is very different from the attitude they hold towards
Africans in the mass, who somehow tend to take on the
worst features of savagery and unreliability of the most
drastic stories about Africans they have ever heard."
This account of the irrational elements in the idea of
white supremacy captures the way and even the language
in which some white Southerners in the United States
express their antagonism against Negroes.
1*
H ^Between the two lists of stereotyped beliefs
J^^^r about Negroes and Jews there is a significant
difference. While the Negroes are called lazy, dirty and
oversexed, that is without control over their instincts, the
accusation against the Jews that they control industry,
.have all the money, are ambitious and push aheadgo
in the opposite direction: they have too much control.
These two types of accusation correspond to two types
of neurotic conflict: the conflict which arises when man
cannot master his instinctive drives to fit into rationally
and socially approved patterns of behaviour; and the
conflict which arises when man cannot live up to the
aspirations and standards set by his conscience. In such
conflicts, shame over one's untamed nature or guilt over
one's unachieved standards impede the functioning of
the ego and, in severe cases, the conflict becomes para¬
lysing.
This parallel between the content of racial stereotypes
and the basic conflicts of man is not fortuitous. Here,
it is worth noting that under the National-Socialist
regime in Germany, where the Jews were the major target
for out-group hostility, the stereotyped beliefs about them
combined what the existence of two target groups on the
American scene permits to be separated.
Ample evidence for this latter type was found in a study
using detailed case histories of persons under psycho¬
analytic treatment who also happened to be anti-Semitic.
One of these patients, for example, disliked the Jews
because they were "emotional and untamed" but also
"shrewd, capable and industrious." The life history of
this man showed that he, too, was shrewd, capable and in¬
dustrious, but unable to experience any warm emotion.
This inability was actually one of the reasons which
made him look for help in psychoanalytic treatment.
There it emerged that very early in life this man had
found himself in a conflict of loyalty to an overstrict, rig¬
idly joyless mother and a happy-go-lucky father who
spsnt little time at home, perhaps not surprisingly con¬
sidering the atmosphere of gloomy righteousness which
pervaded it. For the little boy the conflict between the
parents presented itself as an irreconcilable dichotomy
between being happy and being good. Under the dominant

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
HAWAII has been called a laboratory of human relations. The mingling of numerous peoples, notably from Asia but also from
Europe, the Americas and Oceania is one of the most remarkable features of the 50th State of the U.S. where the colour bar and
racial prejudice are practically non-existent. Photos above show some of the women of Hawaii. From left to right
they are: pure Chinese, Nippo-Portuguese, Dutch-Hawaiian, girl of Chinese descent, Hawaiian-American, Sino-Hawaiian.
influence of his mother he chose the path of goodness and
success, trying valiantly to suppress, as she did, all tender
and warm feelings. Yet the suppression did not wholly
succeed, and as a result he suffered from loneliness and
emotional emptiness in an outwardly successful life.
The culturally prevalent stereotype to the effect that
Jews manage to combine emotions with success was a
fearful reminder to that man that he had built his life
on a false premise. By despising the Jews for the com¬
bination of qualities that he had denied himself, he tried
to defend his own unsatisfactory device of a way of life.
Since he could not satisfy his own longing for emotional
warmth, the burden was easier to carry if he found emo¬
tionality in others despicable.. He acted like a thief who
joins the crowd shouting "Stop thief" in an effort to divert
attention from himself.
For him, it would have made little psychological sense
to rationalize his anti-Semitism by accusing the Jews of
being capitalists, communists, or bad-mannered. Neither
would it have made sense to hate Negroes or Catholics,
for the very combination of qualities which he needed to
hate in order to make bearable their absence in himself,
are not easily attributed to either of these groups.
Since it is often reality which threatens to destroy the
defensive bulwark of the prejudiced person, it is reality
which he tries to manipulate so that it will better fit his
psychological needs. Thus, prejudiced persons use what¬
ever social power they have at their disposal to create
conditions which compel the target group to become as
the stereotype prescribes. A vicious circle is set in motion,
an example of what Merton has called the "self-fulfilling
prophecy".
In some southern parts of the United States, for exam¬
ple, the Negroes are rejected because they are lower class
and uneducated. Because they are so regarded, oppor¬
tunities for advancement and better education are denied
to them; as a consequence many Southern Negroes do
indeed suffer from low status and low educational level,
thus apparently justifying the original act of discrimi¬
nation.
Much the same could be said about the apartheid poli¬
cies in South Africa: while the native populations are
rejected because of their different culture, the means of
reducing the difference are nevertheless eschewed. In¬
stead, all policies are designed to intensify the difference.
It may well be, however, that South Africa is about to
demonstrate that such manipulation of reality does not
constitute an effective support for the psychological
defence mechanisms at play. For the inexorable fact of
the South African economy is that it depends largely on
African labour, thus requiring contact between the races
which apartheid aims to destroy.
27
