Documentation Centre on Ancient Eçjypt, Cairo
Eaten away by the elements, lashed by sandstorms, the "Marriage stela" cut Into the sandstone rock on the terrace of the Great
Temple at Abu Simbel recalls some aged and yellowing document whose words can hardly be made out, yet whose story, once
deciphered, is all the more moving. The Stela tells of the marriage of Rameses II with the daughter of the King of the Hittites in the 13th
century B.C. On the fragment shown here, the princess is seen arriving followed by her father (right) wearing the ancestor of the
Phrygian cap. Rameses is on extreme left under the marriage dais. The marriage took place on a dull winter's day, but when the
pharaoh appeared the sun pierced the clouds. So the princess was named "She who sees Horus, the life force of the Sun God."

THE SUN WAS A WITNESS
AT PHARAOH'S MARRIAGE
by Jaroslav Cerny
Professor of Egyptology, Oxford University
W~W n immortal text graven in stone is one of the
M^M, precious records of the past threatened in
Nubia. It is the so-called "Marriage stela" of
W § King Rameses II of the XEXth Dynasty, Who
F ' reigned from 1290 to 1223 B.C. It is cut in the
vertical sandstone rock on the southern side of the
terrace of the larger rock temple at Abu Simbel and is
one of the copies of a document composed at Rameses II's
court and sent to various Egyptian temples to be
immortalized on their walls.
The copy at Abu Simbel is the only one to have come
down to us in its entirety; three others are known from
the temples of Aswan and Karnak in Egypt and from the
temple at Amara in the Sudan. None of these versions,
however, can vie with the one at Abu Simbel from the
point of view of preservation, though even at Abu Simbel
the inscription has not escaped some damage. To start
with, the sculptor who had been instructed to carve the
document in the rock did not find the available surface
sufficient. He succeeded in cutting only forty-one lines
of the inscription, and though he made his signs smaller
and smaller as he proceeded, he was forced to stop when
he had reached the bottom of the rock wall and so left
out the end of the story. Moreover, the inscription was
subsequently exposed to the weather for a long time
for centuries probably until it was finally completely
sanded up. By then sand driven against the inscription
had considerably obliterated the surface of the stone.
No wonder, therefore, that the German scholar Carl
Richard Lepsius, who was the first to study the stela in
December 1843, and again in August of the following year,
copied only eighteen lines, and these with many gaps,
the bottom of the stela being probably still beneath the
sand. It was only towards the end of the last century
that the French Egyptologist, E. Bouriant, recorded,
however imperfectly, the whole inscription. Much of the
original is badly mutilated by corrosion and often whole
words, even whole lines, are so indistinct, especially in
daylight, that a scholar can only hope to obtain a
satisfactory result by having enough time and strong
electric lighting by night at his disposal.
Such conditions were afforded to the scholars sent by
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PHARAOH'S MARRIAGE (Continued)
THE WALLS SING
THE GLORY
OF RAMESES II
tfcyfcjfrf'
Cut into the rock walls of the first hall of
the Great Temple at Abu Simbel are the
stories of the exploits of a king who was
also a god for his subjects. The principal
story is told in the poem of Kadesh, scene
of the battle where Rameses II by his
personal courage saved his army from utter
defeat by the Hittites. These works are
considered to be among the most out¬
standing examples of narrative poetry of the
period and the figurative representations
are of a beauty worthy to accompany the
poems. Right, from the southern wall,
in another of his campaigns, Rameses in
his war chariot pursues the enemy. To
leave his hands free he has tied the reins
round his waist, guiding his team of horses
by movements of his body. Beneath the
enemy citadel (bottom left of the bas-relief)
a shepherd flees before the Pharaoh (detail
below). Opposite page, below, a warrior
dies, pierced by the Pharaoh's spear, in a
scene from another battle on the same wall.
Unesco during the past four years to co-operate with the
Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, in Cairo.
Moored for weeks in front of the temple, they had both
time and strong electric reflectors, but even so, many
hours of night work were required before the inscription
yielded all its contents. The story which the inscription
has to tell is remarkable enough to deserve the attention
of anyone interested in ancient history.
The "Marriage stela" records the marriage of Rameses II
with a princess sent to Egypt by her father, the king
of the Hittites, to strengthen the peace between their two
countries, whose relations had been far from peaceful in
the past. Ever since the reign of Rameses IPs father,
king Seti I, the Hittites, whose ¡kingdom was situated in
Asia Minor, had been pushing south into Syria, a country
which the Egyptians always considered as lying within
the sphere of their interest.
A military expedition led by Rameses II in the 5th
year of his reign (1285 B.C.), had resulted in the battle
of Kadesh, a town of great strategical importance on the
river Orontes in Syria. The Egyptian army still on the
march and not in closed ranks had been taken by surprise
by the Hittites and their allies, and only Rameses II's
personal bravery had saved the Egyptians from a
disastrous defeat. Despite the Egyptian claim, the battle
must have been undecisive, and fighting probably went on
for some time until a peace treaty was concluded between
Rameses II and the Hittite king, Muwattali, in the 21st
year of Rameses' reign, that is in 1269 B.C. The text
of the treaty was drawn up in two versions, "one' in
Egyptian and in hieroglyphs, the other in the Babylonian
language and in cuneiform writing. Both versions are
still preserved.
One would expect that the conclusion of the treaty was
the right moment for the diplomatic marriage. The
"Marriage stela" is not, however, dated in Year 21, the year
of the peace treaty, but in Year 34 when Rameses II was
already a man of about sixty.
It is best to leave it to the stela itself to recount the
event as well as all that had led up to it. After a long
32

I
The Unesco Courier. February 1960
"TrTT,
M ÄS5£M if * '
CZ
1
!'^^.'?
/-
m
r'-;
~--¿
£1 2
lit
ai*
y ^\ / \
'"VV.'-'V V" rí
*' W¿- "»
Photos Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
M.1:'
introduction filling the first twenty-five lines and
containing the customary adulation and praise of the
Egyptian king, the text continues:
"Then he (that is, Rameses II) equipped his infantry
and chariotry so that they might strike against the land
of the Hittites. He seized it alone by himself before the
eyes of his whole army. He made a name for himself in
it for ever. They will remember the victory of his arm.
Who escaped his hand, those he abuses; his might is
among them like a burning torch. And after they had
spent many years, while their country was perishing and
devastated by disasters from year to year through the
might of the great living god Rameses, the great king
of the Hittites wrote appeasing his
majesty, magnifying his might,
extolling his victory and saying:
'Desist from thy discontent, re¬
move thy punishment, let us
breathe the breath of life. Thou
art the son of (the god) Sutekh in
truth! He ordained to thee the
land of the Hittites and we bring
tributes consisting of whatever
thou desirest. We carry them to
thy noble palace. Behold, we are
under thy feet, O victorious king,
it is done to us according to all
that thou hast ordained.'
"'And the great king of the Hitti¬
tes wrote appeasing His Majesty
year after year, but he never
listened to them. And when they
saw their country in this bad con¬
dition under the great wrath of
the king of Egypt, the great king
of the Hittites spoke to his soldiers
and his notables saying: 'It is a
long time that our land has been
in decay and our lord, (the god)
Sutekh angry with us. Heaven
does not send rain upon us, all countries are enemies
fighting us all. Let us despoil ourselves of all our
property, my eldest daughter at the head of them, and let
us carry gifts of propitiation to the goodly god (Rameses),
so that he may give us peace and we may live.' Then he
caused his eldest daughter to be carried and splendid
tribute before her, consisting of gold, silver, common
metal, slaves and horses without number, oxen goats and
sheep in tens of thousands...
"One went to give the message to His Majesty saying:
'Behold, the great king of the Hittites has caused his
eldest daughter to be brought with many tributes
consisting of all (kinds of) things. They cover her who
is at the head of them, the princess of the Hittites, and
the great notables of the land of the Hittites who carry
them. They have behind them many mountains and
difficult passes and have reached the frontiers of His
Majesty. Let the army and notables go to receive them.'
And His Majesty was delighted and the palace was in joy
when he heard this marvellous event which had never
before been experienced in Egypt...
"When the daughter of the great king of the Hittites
proceeded towards Egypt, the infantry, chariotry and
notables of His Majesty were in her following, mixed with
the infantry and chariotry of the Hittites, foreign
warriors and Egyptian troops alike... And the great kings
of all countries which they passed were puzzled, and
turned back discomfited when they saw psople of the
land of the Hittites joined with soldiers of the king of
Egypt."
Here the text of Abu Simbel abruptly comes to an end,
but some idea of the sequel is conveyed by the
fragmentary versions of Karnak and Amara. From
these it can be gathered that when the princess and her
convoy reached the residence, Rameses found the Hittite
princess very beautiful; he installed her in his palace and
was seen every day in her company... From then on, the
great enemy of old, the people of the Hittites, were like
subjects of Egypt, whose people could live in peace and
without fear because of the victories of Rameses II.
33
