Stamps to honour
& help the blind
by C. W. Hill
Although by its very nature philately is one of the
cultural pursuits which the blind are unable to
enjoy, the philatelist can make an interesting and ithought-
provoking collection of stamps which have been issued in
aid of funds for the blind, or in honour of those who have
devoted themselves to helping the blind.
One of two stamps issued in France last December in
aid of Red Cross funds portrayed Valentin Haiiy who,
inspired by the efforts of his contemporary, the Abbé de
l'Epée, on behalf of the deaf and dumb, opened a school
in Paris for the education of young blind persons. The
work which he began in 1784 is now carried on in France
by the Valentin Haiiy Association and his school has
become the National Institution for the Young Blind.
Haiiy's experiments with the printing of books in a
raised type which the blind could read with their finger¬
tips were continued by Louis Braille, a pupil and after¬
wards a professor at the National Institution. Braille's por¬
trait is shown on a French stamp of 1948 which paid tri¬
bute to his work and the 150th anniversary of his birth
was marked last year by the issue in the Soviet Union of
a stamp which also bears his portrait. The universal bene
fits of the Braille type are illustrated on a Brazilian stamp
of 1954 issued to celebrate the centenary of the founda¬
tion of the Benjamin Constant Institute for the Education
of the Blind in Brazil. The design shows a portrait of
Constant and the hand of a blind person reading a book
in Braille.
Many countries regularly issue stamps bearing a pre¬
mium in aid of social work among handicapped persons,
including the blind. One stamp of the Netherlands charity
series issued in 1956 appropriately showed a Rembrandt
etching of "Old Blind Tobias", and the two French Red
Cross stamps of 1957 reproduced engravings by the seven¬
teenth century artist, Jacques Callot, in which the miseries
of poverty and blindness are portrayed with the realism
typical of his work. The provision of radios for the blind
is another branch of social work for which a French
stamp was issued, this being in 1938.
When the new underground Basilica was consecrated at
Lourdes two years ago, Monaco celebrated the occasion,
and the centenary of the Apparition of the Virgin Mary,
by issuing a series of commemorative stamps. One of these
recalls the miracle of the workman Bourriette, who had
lost the sight of an eye in a mining accident and claimed
the complete restoration of his sight when he bathed his
eyes in water from the spring of the Massabielle Rock.
A collection of stamps connected with the blind would
be incomplete without the issues which honour blind men
who have contributed to our cultural heritage. Many
Greek stamps recall the epics of Homer, who by tradition
was blind, and a bust of the poet forms the design of two
recent Greek issues. One of Britain's greatest poets, John
Milton, was also blind and his portrait is to be found on
a stamp of the Soviet Union issued in 1958 to mark the
350th anniversary of his birth.
¡5
