THE UPS & DOWNS OF FAME
by Juan de Contreras, Marquis of Lozoya
Professor of the History of Art, University of Madrid
and author of "Historia del Arte Hispánico"
Good fortune always attended the
affairs of Diego Velazquez. And
this year's tercentenary of his
death comes at a time when his work
is . attracting widespread attention
throughout the world. His few au-,
thentic paintings now fetch fabulous
prices and his works are reproduced
and commented upon in albums and
art books of high standard.
Yet world fame neither came swiftly
to Velazquez nor remained constant
and unfluctuating as was the case
with such artists as Raphael, Titian
and Rubens; it has, in fact, known
many ups and downs.
During his lifetime, Velazquez en¬
joyed both in his art and his everyday
life the satisfying knowledge that he
was greatly esteemed. In his early
youth while a student in the cele¬
brated art school of Seville under
Francis Pacheco, he was the "favour¬
ite" of the noblemen and scholars
who were drawn to his master's stu¬
dio, and the idea of sending him to
the Court of Philip IV certainly origi¬
nated here.
At the Court of the King of Spain,
master of the greatest monarchy the
world had ever known, the paintings
of Velazquez, as the preferred artist
of so discriminating a connoisseur as
Philip IV, were extolled by the pam¬
phleteers and sung by the poets who
abounded in Madrid during" the reign
of the House of Austria. Velazquez
also knew fame abroad. During his
second visit to Roane several of his
works were exhibited in the portico
of Agrippa's Pantheon, and astound¬
ed the city's art lovers.
Though the esteem of his contem¬
poraries was undoubtedly .the most
powerful stimulus in the artist's life,
the practical effects were limited and
transitory. The immediaite impact of
Velazquez's work was slight and
short-lived even in Spain itself, where
only a few of his pupils, such as Juan
del Mazo, continued his style of
painting for a brief period. Outside
the Peninsula he exerted no influence
whatsoever.
Velazquez lived at a time when the
power of the Spanish monarchy was
in decline. Spain withdrew into her¬
self, allowing the glory of Louis XTV to
spread over Europe. With Louis XIV
came, the triumph of official "Acade¬
my" art. With the kings of the Bour¬
bon dynasty in Madrid came French
and Italian painters Rano, Houasse,
Van Loo, Giaquinto, Amicoini, Tiepolo
and anany others 'and the surviving
heirs of ¡the olid Spanish school were
completely ignored.
Thus the art circles of the 18th
century were unaware of the work of
the genius of Seville, for most of his
paintings remained locked away in
the palaces of Madrid and Vienna.
No more than a few were glimpsed by
some discerning minds and aroused
interest. One great painter, Sir
Joshua Reynolds, declared the por¬
trait of Pope Innocent X to be the
finest painting in Rome.
The works of -Velazquez became
better known and appreciated in the
19th century following their dispersal
during the Peninsula War. Yet the
Spanish painter who enjoyed the most
esteem among critics and collectors
during the first half of that century
was Murillo. But then travel became
easier and it was possible to study
and copy the pictures of Velazquez
hanging in the Prado and the galle¬
ries of London and Vienna.
During .the second half of the 19th
century, when realism predominated
in art and literature, critics and ar¬
tists came to realize that, in terms of
placing subjects in an authentic
setting, of illuminating them with
'true and natural light and of cap¬
turing the essential qualities of ob¬
jects, Diego Velazquez was the great¬
est painter of all times.
It has been said that all who paint¬
ed well at that period had learned
from him. Solomon Reinaeh went so
far as to say, in a work as well known
as his "'Apollo", which became a text¬
book in every European art school,
that from the professional point of
view Velazquez represented the sum¬
mit of world painting.
Towards the turn of the century,
interest in Velazquez's paintings be¬
gan to decline. Critics and painters,
strongly influenced by contemporary
literature, found the Spanish painter
cold and lacking in emotion; they
would concede only that he was a
superb exponent of "photographic
art". Among the artists of .the Span¬
ish school the long-forgotten El
Greco became the favourite painter
and within a decade his renown had
spread with astonishing rapidity
among all art lovers. This period too
marked the beginning of the world¬
wide acclaim for Francisco Goya.

In our own time when art is exclu¬
sively preoccupied by the balance of
volumes and masses and by chromatic
harmonies, the paintings of Velaz¬
quez, who resolved these problems in
incomparable fashion three centuries
ago, are being studied with growing
interest.
Three centuries after Velazquez,
another Andalusian artist, Pablo Ruiz
Picasso, has taken Las Meninas, and
in a totally different atmosphere,
dissected the composition in a series
of nuore than 50 paintings.

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Rapid Strokes of brown and gold
reveal Velazquez's technique in this
detail of "The Jester, Antonio The
Englishman". Antonio, a dwarf,
carries a hat decorated with long
white plumes and in the full painting
is seen beside a huge dog, almost as
high as himself. Prado Museum.
Anderson © Editions du Diman-
, che, from the album "Velazquez"
Little White Dog is a detail from
a portrait of Prince Philip Prosper
óf Spain which was painted by Velaz¬
quez in 1659. Vienna Museum.
Dominguez-Garcia, Madrid
Still Life Study is a detail from
Velazquez's "Christ in the House of
Martha". Velazquez situated his painting
in the kitchen of the house with a
woman and young girl attending to the
preparation of a meal. The religious
subject, Christ talking to Martha and
Mary, he placed in the background as
a picture hanging on the kitchen wall.
Now in the National Gallery, London.
Anderson © Editions du Diman¬
che, from the album "Velazquez''
33
