k<*4MttULki V' kV
©Albert Raccah
THE SACRED BOAT of the goddess Isis, depicted here on a bas-relief in the Isis temple of
Philae. On all holy occasions, the idol of the goddess Isis was taken from her tabernacle,
embarked on the river and landed at the nearby island of Bigeh, where she presided over
the solemn libation ceremonies at the tomb of the god Osiris, her husband and brother.
38

THE STEPS OF GREECE & ROME
by André Bernand
French National Council for Scientific Research
and Abdullatif Ahmed Aly
Professor, Faculty of Letters, Cairo University
A tragic paradox today presides over the destiny of Egyptian
Nubia. This region rich in relics of the Graeco-Roman period
I with oyer 1,200 Greek inscriptions, 16 free-standing temples,
and seven hewn out of the living rock, and with that
I architectural gem of the New Empire, the temple of
Rameses II at Abu Simbel, where one of the oldest Greek texts in the
world is to be found, is doomed to disappear for ever beneath the
waters of the High Dam.
The hand of man, which built these temples, carved these statues and
reliefs, and engraved these inscriptions, will, within a few years, undo
the work of ten centuries, to speak only of the Graeco-Roman period.
In point of fact, the geography and history of Nubia are stamped
throughout by paradox. Paradox of the Nile which unlike any other
river, widens as one approaches its source, and instead of flowing
straight, as is erroneously imagined, winds interminably round the Jebels
of Africa. Paradox of the valley, sometimes narrow, as at Bab-el-KoIab-
sha, where the cliffs form a kind of rocky gateway, under which the
waters of the Nile rush tumbling with a loud roar; sometimes, as in the
plain of Dakka, spread out to the width of a lake, where violent storms
sometimes blow up. Paradox of the desert land so barren that it is
difficult to imagine its supporting human life, yet bearing countless
traces of Graeco-Roman military and religious establishments.
Even the history of the region is paradoxical. Here, on the confines
of the Greek world, in these distant "marches" of the Roman world, the
mercenaries of King Psammetichus, of the Ptolemies and of the Roman
Emperors have left their imprint. What were they seeking in this far-off
land reaching almost to the' countries at the source of the Nile?
Inscriptions in verse
We can glean little about the history of Graeco-Roman Nubia from
the writers of antiquity. Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Agathar-
chides, Pliny and Ptolemy seldom give us any historical facts,
confining themselves mainly to ethnographic details, and much of what
they tell us is vague or fanciful.
Fortunately, the Greeks left behind over 1,200 inscriptions in Nubia,
but they have never been recorded in a Corpus and many of them are
little known, as few photographs have been taken of the sides and texts.
For the whole of Nubia, only about a dozen Latin inscriptions have been
traced; much still remains to be done, since the Roman occupation of
Nubia lasted from the time of Augustus to the end of the Roman Empire.
This epigraphic material, which is our chief source of information
about the history of Graeco-Roman Nubia, cannot be fully utilized until
all the texts have been deciphered from the stone itself, but they have
already been severely damaged by their annual immersion, particularly
those at Kalabsha, most of which were painted.
Thanks to Unesco's assistance and the work of the Documentation
Centre on Ancient Egypt, copies, rubbings and photographs were taken
of the inscriptions at Abu Simbel in April 1956 and of those at Jebel
Abu Duruah in September 1959. But all the other inscriptions will have
to be inspected again before the dam is completed.
It is particularly important to assemble these texts because Greek
inscriptions in Nubia are not usually, long. Seldom do we find inscrip¬
tions of more than a few words. Among these are the decree of Aurelius
Besario, the civil governor of the nome (ancient Egyptian province) of
Ombos and Elephantine, at Kalabsha, dating from the second third of the
Third century A.D. and giving the people of Talmis (the present day
Kalabsha), at the request of the high priest Myro, fifteen days to clear
the village of the swine that were polluting the temple; and the famous
inscription of King Silko, also at Kalabsha, dating from the Christian
period and commemorating the victories of the "king of the Nobatae
and of all the Ethiopians" at Talmis and Tophis over the Blemmyes who
had invaded his territory. At Abu Simbel, the longest text runs to no
more than five lines and records the expedition led by the mercenaries
of Psammetichus II in Upper Nubia.
However, the most striking and interesting inscriptions are a series
of epigrams or inscriptions in verse ten at Philae, five at .Talmis and
two at Pselhis. Elusive though their meaning often is, some of these
epigrams have great charm and reflect the high cultural level of the
pilgrims who used to visit the shrines of Isis.
One of them reads: "Our journey has brought us to the beautiful and
sacred island belonging to Isis, in furthermost Egypt, on the borders of
Ethiopia (i. e. Nubia) ; on the Nile we can see swift vessels bringing
(stones for) temples from Ethiopia to our country, a fertile granary, well
repaying a visit and revered by all mortals." The epigrams of Nubia
packed with delicate imagery in this vein, are difficult to decipher, and
it is to be hoped that a specialist on such inscriptions will be able
to come and read them on the spot before they disappear for ever.
Prayers in stone
The other Nubian inscriptions are either dedications of temples or
shrines, the names of priests or military leaders, or else pros-
cynemata, that is prayers by pilgrims to a god to recommend a
beloved one to his care. Many of these texts are dated, and most of the
others can be dated by analysis of the writing or archaeological study
of the building. Brief though they are, these relics provide some basis
for a history of Graeco-Roman Nubia, which has never yet been written,
for want of a Corpus of inscriptions. (1)
Yet what a stirring history it would be! At Abu Simbel, as we stand
dwarfed by the towering figure of Rameses II, our thoughts are carried
to Psammetichus' expedition to Nubia, the story of which is related on
the leg of one of the colossal statues, a precious record giving us insight
into the complex organization of the Egyptian army:
"The King Psammetichus came to Elephantine and those who accom¬
panied Psammetichus, son of Theokles, and made their way upstream
from Kerkis as far as the river was navigable had this inscription engra¬
ved. The foreign legion was under the command of Potasimto, while
the Egyptians were led by Amasis. This inscription was engraved by
Arkhôn, son of Amoibickhos, and Pelekos, son of Eudamos."
At Philae, with its countless inscriptions covering not only the faces
of the pylon but many other parts of the temple, we can picture the
throng of pilgrims at the splendid festivals in honour of Isis, who conti¬
nued to be worshipped long after the issue of Theodosius' decree (end of
fourth century A.D.). From the top of the citadel of Ibrim (the ancient
Primis), the Eastern gate of which is Roman, and where, to the north
of the plateau, rises a building dating from the time of Emperor Septi-
mius Severus (193-211 A.D.), our eyes can follow, from the dizzy slope
of the hill, the course of Queen Candace's desperate flight from the
armies of the Roman prefect, Gaius Petronius, in 22 B.C.
Desert garrison towns
From 29 A.D. onwards, the Romans established their protectorate of
Lower Nubia, but here again, they seem merely to have followed
the example set by the Ptolemies. It was under the rulers of the
Egyptian dynasty preceding the Ptolemies that Greeks came to settle in
the region extending from Philae southwards to Tachompso.
This part of the country never seems to have formed a separate nome
but was a territory attached to Philae. Judging by the inscriptions and
remnants of military structures, it was only in exceptional circumstances,
as during the war against Candace, that the Romans seem to have
driven further into Nubia.
The texts from Kalabsha (known as Talmis in Graeco-Roman times)
bear witness to the soldiers' cult of the Nubians' god Mandulis, who also
had his shrine at Philae, in the second century A.D. From those at
Pselkis (modern Dakka) we learn that the worship of Thot (Hermes)
was much practised. Both towns were obviously garrison centres guarding
the road to Africa and protecting Egypt against the southern "barba¬
rians."
Kertassi was both a military station and a quarrying centre supplying
(1) The only general reference work on Graeco-Roman Nubia h La Nubia
Romana by Ugo Monnerei de Villard (1941), running to a mere SO or sa pages.
CONT'D ON PAGE 50

IN THE STEPS OF GREECE & ROME
(Continued from page 39)
stone for the Philae temples. The guild of agents, known as Hie
"gomos," which was responsible for the transport of the stones, had its
priests and dignitaries who made a point of engraving their names on
the tablets cut into the façade of the speos. At Abu Duruah, about
three miles to the east of Dakka, we find proscynemata dating from the
time of Antoninus Pius (middle of second century A.D.), proving that this
rock shrine with its Pharaonic decoration, far from having fallen into
disuse, was a centre of worship for the god Min and Hermes Peithnuphis.
All these texts shed a great deal of light on the life of the Roman
garrisons, their composition and dates and the cults they practised.
The material already available proves that Nubia, for all its aridity,
played a not inconsiderable role in antiquity. To begin with, from the
military point of view, the region was both a bastion of defence and
an operational base. Then, from the economic standpoint, hunting must
have flourished, as indicated by the many names of elephant and bird
hunters to be seen at Abu Simbel, and by the engravings at Jebel Abu
Duruah, representing giraffes, oryxes, ostriches and buffalo.
Down the Nile sailed convoys loaded with the treasures or the gold mines
at Wadi Allaki, facing Dakka, or white stones quarried at Kertassi.
Viticulture and the use of sakieh or water wheel, of which there is
evidence in Nubia, bear witness to the flourishing state of agriculture.
Lastly, from the religious point of view, the Nubian gods went to swell
the Graeco-Roman pantheon. It was in the first and second centuries
A.D. that Philae reached the pinnacle of its glory with the construction
of the gateways of Augustus and Tiberius and the Trajan kiosk.
And so Nubia, from the days of antiquity, has stood as an example
and a token of what man can achieve when his toil and ingenuity are
pitted against the elements and an unfriendly climate. The Greeks and
Romans sought, in ancient Nubia, to convert a barren, thankless region,
doomed, it might have seemed, to everlasting poverty, into a source of
spiritual and material wealth, strength and pride a goal that is still
being pursued by the architects of modern Nubia.
50
