THE STORY
OF PLACE
NAMES
by Mario Pei
Professor of Romance Languages,
Columbia University, New York
TALE OF
THREE CITIES
STRASBOURG, today dominated by
its soaring cathedral spire (630 feet),
was once more famous for its streets. In
the early centuries of the Christian era,
Germanic tribes called it Stratarum Bur-
gum (the community of streets) from which
its present name comes. BAGHDAD,
(right), today capital and largest city of
Iraq, is said to be named after a holy man.
Dad ("The Garden of Dad"). Founded in
762 by the Caliph Al-Mansur, the city
became a centre of culture and learning
and is today, as always, a great trading
centre. MONTEVIDEO (opposite page),
capital of Uruguay, has a strange meaning:
"a mountain saw I." This name was be¬
stowed by Magellan in 1 520, when he
anchored at the mouth of the La Plata
River, and saw a single hill rising high
out of the midst of universally flat lands.
Photos, taken from "La Découverte Aérienne du
Monde" published by Horizons de France, Paris, are
copyright. Strasbourg (Spehner), Baghdad (Aero-
films Ltd.), Montevideo (Government Information
Office, Montevideo).
26

In the story of mankind, When other sources of
information are lacking, important clues to the move¬
ments of races of men and the spread and progress of
civilizations can often be found in the names of places
and peoples. Such names reflect the history, culture and
-thought of the people who inhabit a country, as well as
that country's development.
If we let our imagination run back to prehistoric times,
we can visualize small groups of wanderers, still living in
a semi-savage state, but with each group speaking some
sort of primitive language, out of which will evolve the
great languages of yesterday, today and tomorrow. While
these languages are different, they all contain one word,
a word that signifies something without which the tribe
will perish "Water". One group calls water ab, another
says da, a third uses akwa.
As the tribe comes to a promising watercourse, the
headman triumphantly points to the stream and exclaims
"Ab!", and all his followers echo the word. Centuries
later, when all memory of the wandering tribe is lost, its
Word for water will be reflected in the stream's name,
Avon. Another tribe that calls water da bestows that
name upon streams that will later become the Don of
England and Russia, the Danube of the Balkans, while
early Greeks dwelling on the coast will call themselves
Danaoi, "'water people". The akwa tribe will give its name
for water to places like Aquileia in Italy and Aquisgrana
(later Aix or Aachen) in western Germany.
But another group of nomads, of entirely different
language habits, coming across a region of hot, burning,
waterless sands, will bestow upon it their name for "'wide",
"'burned out", sahra, and today the world's largest
desert still bears the name of Sahara.
The process is the same, regardless of race or group.
Many centuries ago, the Anglo-Saxons of England found
a suitable cattle crossing in a river and called it Oxford.
Thousands of years before them, the Greeks had found a
similar passage and called it Bosporus, which is Greek
for "Oxford". The Arabs called their burnt-out region
Sahara; the Papago Indians of the American Southwest
called a region not quite so waterless Arizonac, "'place of
few springs".
But "water" alone was often not deemed sufficient. A
The Unesco Courier. April 1960
more specific word was used, like '"river", as is the case
with India's Ganges. Or an adjective was added, like the
Grande that in Spanish modifies Rio, or the kabir that in
Arabic modifies wadi, turning it into the Guadalquivir
(wadi al kabir) of Spain. Often religious imagery played
a part, as in India's Brahmaputra, the "son of Brahma",
chief god of the Hindu Trinity and creator of the universe,
or the Brazos of Texas, which is short for Brazos de Dios,
"arms of God".
The naming of mountains also lent itself to descriptive
or poetic imagery. On the one hand |we have the Celtic
pen, "head", which enters into the Pennine Mountains of
Britain and the Appennines of Italy, the Sierra Nevada
which means "snowy range", the Caucasus which means
"icegleaming". On the other we have Switzerland's Jung¬
frau ("maiden"), Africa's Ruwenzori ("cloud king"),
Mexico's Popocatepetl ("mountain of he who smokes").
Seas and oceans are latecomers in the race for names.
A name like Mediterranean, or Mare Internum ("Inner
Sea"), as the Romans called it, could have been devised
only after people had sailed around it and discovered
that it is almost entirely surrounded by land. Even
names like Atlantic and Arctic, drawn from mythological
Atlas and from the Great Bear constellation, make their
appearance in historic times, and Pacific is due to the
accident of its having been peaceful at the time of its
discovery in the sixteenth century.
Names of countries, continents and regions were also
largely bestowed in historical times. Continent names are
often the continuators of names originally given to much
smaller land units (Asia, for instance, was in ancient
times merely what we now ,call Asia Minor, and Africa
was restricted to a strip of the North African coast).
Some countries and regions bear names which are des¬
criptive of physical characteristics: Finland, for example,
is Fen-land, a translation of the Finnish Suomi, meaning
'"swamp" or "'marsh"; Poland gets its name from a root
meaning "'flat" or "level", which also appears in the
Slavic Iword for '"field", "meadow" (pole or polje) ; India is
the land of the river Hind or Sind; Panjab is "five rivers";
Dekkan is "'south" or "what lies on the right hand";
Mesopotamia is "between rivers".
Other countries bear the names of the people that
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PLACE NAMES (Continued)
From Aa to Llanf airpwl Igwyngy llgoger-
ychwyrndrobwll I landysi liogogogoch
settled in them: Gaul, land of the Gauls, turned into
France when the Franks occupied it, (just as Britain,
land of the Britons, later became England, the country
of the Angles). Still other names reflect historical epi¬
sodes: the Soviet Ukraine means "'frontier district", and
refers to the period when it was a no-man's-land between
the Russians and the Turks; Honduras means "'depths",
and was applied at the time of its discovery because its
coast had deep waters that made good anchorages;
Venezuela was named "little Venice" because the explor¬
ers found the people living in villages built over the
water on stilts, something that reminded them of the
canals of Venice.
Then there is the thoroughly historical process of
naming places after individuals,' usually famous ones.
The channel island of Jersey and the American State of
New Jersey take their name from Caesar (Caesarea was
"'Caesar's town") ; so does Zaragoza in Spain, which shows
the addition of Augusta to Caesarea; while the Italian
region of Friuli, northeast of Venice, is Forum Julii, the
"Forum of Julius Caesar", which he fortified in that area
to prevent barbarian invasions of the Italian plain.
Cairo's name came
from outer space
There are many cities that bear the name of Alexander
of Macedón: Alexandria in Egypt and Alessandretta.
or Iskanderun, in Turkey, are two of them (Iskander
is the form assumed by Alexander in Turkish) . Barcelona
bears the name of the Barca or Barak family of Carthage,
to which Hamilcar and Hannibal belonged (Barak, "light¬
ning", was an appropriate name for one who invented the
ancient version of the Blitzkrieg). Constantinople bears
the name of Constantine the Great. France's Orléans
and America's New Orleans are named after the Aurelian
emperors of Rome.
In the Soviet Union, Stalingrad is only one of many
localities that bear Stalin's name. An entire region,
Lotharingia or Lorraine, bears the name of one of Char¬
lemagne's grandsons, Lothaire, who was its ruler. Other
examples are Washington, Christiania, Pretoria, Monro¬
via, Charleroi, Leopoldville, Port Saïd, Gibraltar (the last
is Jebel Tarik, the "Mountain of Tarik", the Moorish
leader who successfully led the invasion of Visigothic
Spain in 711). Among names of countries we have Rho¬
desia, named after Cecil Rhodes, and Bolivia, bearing the
name of Simon Bolivar.
A name that is unique, since it comes from outer space,
is that of Cairo, the Arabic El-Qahirah, "the Victorious
One", which is the Arabic name of the planet Mars,
clearly visible at the time the city Was founded in 970 A.D.
Among the earliest place-names on record are the
ancient name of Egypt, Kern, "the Black", probably
bestowed because of the color of the rich soil of the Nile
valley; Babylon, Bab-Ilu, "the gate of the god"; Jeru¬
salem, the Akkadian Urusalim, "city of the god of peace".
Assyria Was named after the god Assur. Smyrna, the
modern Izmir, has borne its name over three thousand
years; it is said to have been named after an Amazon
warrior-maid. Phoenician Gaddir, oldest town in Europe,
turned into the Roman Carteia and the modern Cádiz.
Strabo, the Greek geographer, calls present-day Afghanis¬
tan by its ancient name of Aryana, "land of the Aryans".
To offset these very ancient place names, we have very
new and modern ones: Canberra, capital of Australia;
Brazilia, the new capital of Brazil; the great continent
of Antarctica, once mapped as Incognita, or "Unknown".
There are place names so short as to consist of a single
syllable, like Ur of the Chaldees, the Aa river of Denmark,
the Po of Italy, the literary Ys and Yf of France. There
are others so long that they take up most of a line, like
the Törökszentmiklos of Hungary, the Llanfairpwllgwyn-
gyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllandysiliogogogoch of Wales, the
Taumawathakatangihangakoauauatamateapokaiwhenu a -
kitanatahu of New Zealand, the Chargoggagoggmanchau-
gagoggchaubunagungamaugg of Massachusetts.
23
There are animal names, like the Eriga or Erie that
means "'wildcat", the Les Ecureuils of Québec that means
"the Squirrels", the Alacranes ("Scorpions") of Cuba, the
Camarôes or Cameroons ("'Shrimp") of West Africa, the
Canary or Dog Islands, so named by Columbus because
of the wild dogs he found there, the El Tigrito ("Tiger
Cub") of Venezuela, the Gatico ("Kitty-Cat") of Chile.
There are vegetable, and even mineral place names,
like the Los Alamos ("the Poplars") of New Mexico, the
Naranjito ("Little Orange") of Honduras, the Barbados
("Bearded Fig-Trees") of the West Indies; and the Altai
("'Gold") Mountains of central Asia, the Andes ("Cop¬
per") Mountains of South America, the Iwo Jima ("Sul¬
phur Island") of Japan.
In the United States are many cities and towns named
after abstract qualities: Liberty, Independence, Hope,
even Decorum, Defiance, Competition and Candor.
Similar uses appear in Colombia's la Gloria, Cuba's
Consolación del Sur, Bulgaria's Sofia ("Wisdom"), Ruma¬
nia's Bucaresti (from the word that means "'pleasure").
Poetic names include Minnesota's Lac Qui Parle ("'Speak¬
ing Lake"), Argentina's Buenos Aires ("Good Winds"),
Chile's Canto del Agua and Viña del Mar ("'Song of the
Water", "'Sea Vineyard"), Brazil's Belo Horizonte and
Très Coraçôes ("Beautiful Horizon", "'Three Hearts"),
China's Tien Tsin ("'Heavenly Place"), one of the alter¬
native names for Korea, Chosen, which is "'Land of the
Morning Calm".
The southern tier of South American countries are
dotted with places bearing the names of relatively obscure
people, but these names are historically significant
because they trace the streams of European immigration
to those countries. Englishmen are represented in Chile's
Stokes Bay and Wollaston, Uruguay's Canning and
Chamberlain, while Italian immigration is evident in
Peru's Bolognesi, Paraguay's Fassardi, Argentina's Cipol-
letti, Rufino and Ingeniero Jacobacci.
Honeymoon and Prosperity
Worry ÄWidowville, U.S.A.
If one were asked to name the word that most fre¬
quently appears in place names, regardless of the
language, that Word would have to be "new". On the
one hand, this indicates a desire to mark a place as
newly founded or discovered; on the other hand, it
shows the natural desire for people migrating to a distant
country to remind themselves of their original homeland.
So We' have New England and New York, New Zealand
and New Guinea, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Novaya
Zemlya, even Nueva Armenia in Honduras. We have
Newton, Naples (the Greek Neapolis, or "'Newtown"),
Novgorod, Neustadt, Civitanuova, Villeneuve.
Joy and sorrow occasionally appear in place names.
In the United States are towns named Honeymoon, Pros¬
perity, Wealthy and Bountiful. Italy has Bellagio ("Fine
Ease") and Benevento ("Fine Wind" or, perhaps, "Wel¬
come"). But the United States also has Worry, Drab,
Great Misery Island, and Widowville, in Ohio, where
many Civil War widows settled down. . Latin America
has such dismal names as Isla Desolación ("'Desolation
Island") and Punto Maldonado ("Ill-Given Point"),
France has Mont Dolent ("Sorrowful Mountain") and
Italy has Monte Disgrazia ("Mount Misfortune").
The Hindu Kush Mountains of India mean "Hindu
Killer". Bab-el-Mandeb is "'The Gate of Tears", and the
Kalahari Desert of Southwest Africa is "Those Who Are
Tormented by Thirst". Possibly the most despondent
place name of all is Crèveo "'Big Heart¬
break", in France's Department of the Oise.
Misnomers in place names include, first and foremost,
America, named after its supposed discoverer, Amerigo
Vespucci; Yucatán and the Aleutian Islands, which are
mere inquiries in the native languages ("What are you
saying?", "What is this all about?"); Rio de Janeiro, so
named in the erroneous belief that it was the mouth of
a river; Nome, Alaska, which resulted from a misreading

The Unesco Courier. April 1960
TOWN WITHIN A TOWN.
The colleges of the ancient univer¬
sity of Oxford are a town within a
town, their beauty and unity a
fitting framework for a tradition of
learning that dates back to the
early 12th century. The town is
considerably older than the univer¬
sity. It owes its name to the fact
that centuries before, the Anglo-
Saxons found a spot across a river
that was suitable as a cattle crossing
and called it Oxnaford. Oxford
just appears in history when Ed¬
ward the Elder, in A.D. 912, "held
Lundenbyrg (London) and Oxna¬
ford and all the lands that were
obedient thereto" as flanking for¬
tresses of his Thames Valley frontier.
Photo © Aerofilms Ltd., taken from "Our
World from the Air" by E. A. Gutkind,
published by Chatto & Windus, London.
of a pencilled inquiry "Name?" on an incomplete map.
Then there are names which are distortions of an
original in another language, like America's Picketwire
(Purgatoire), Smackover (Chemin Couvert), Low Freight
River (l'Eau Froide, at a time when froide was still pro¬
nounced fraide), and Loose (l'Ours) Creek; or Britain's
Teddymore (Tête de Mort) and Marylebone (Marie la
Bonne). Repetitiousness in place names is frequent:
Mount Ararat is "mountain" said twice; "Ganges River"
is a repetition of "river". The two most striking examples,
perhaps, are the fortress in the Russo-Turkish War of
1878 iknown as Krepost' Redoute Soukhoum Kalé, where
the first word is "fortress" in Russian, the second in
French, the last in Turkish; and Britain's Torpenhow
Hill, "'hill-hill-hill-hill" in four different languages.
Then there are humorous names, in which the humour
is sometimes deliberate, sometimes accidental. Deliberate
are America's Double Trouble, N. J., Whynot, N. C, Igo
and Ono, Cal., Punkeydoodles Corner, Ontario, Accidental
are Beaucoup, 111., Pastoutville, La., Upper, Nether and
Middle Wallop and Great Snoring, in England. There is
something a little humorous in Peru's Caballocoche
("Horse and Carriage") and Reventazón ("'Big Bust");
Paraguay's Puerto Casado ("Married Port"), Bolivia's
Torotoro ("Bull-bull") and Haiti's Trou ("Hole"). Ger¬
many's Irrendorf ("Madmen's Town") has recently
changed its name.
Confusing' place names are Georgia, common to the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.; Santiago (de Compostela, de
Cuba, de Chile) ; Tripoli (in Syria and in Lybia) ; Ragusa
(in Sicily and in Dalmatia, though the latter is better
known by its Serbo-Croatian name Dubrovnik). Some¬
times a very slight difference in spelling and pronuncia¬
tion leads to confusion, as in the case of Darien, in
Connecticut and Panama, and Dairen, in Manchuria;
Burgos, in Spain, and Burgas, in Bulgaria; Acre, in the
Holy Land, Accra, in West Africa, and Agra, in India.
Sometimes the confusing names are within the same
country, as is the case with Falencia and Valencia, Spain,
or with Calcutta and Calicut, India.
It is also surprising how many repetitions of the same
name appear in different lands and diverse languages.
Tifus (or Tbilisi) in Soviet Georgia is duplicated by Ame¬
rica's Hot Springs; New York State's Stony Point is Vene¬
zuela's Punta de Piedras; Mississippi, Río Grande and
Guadalquivir all mean "'Big River"; Nepal and Piedmont
are both "at the foot of the mountains". Other samples
are the Cape of Good Hope and Greenland's Godthaab,
Britain's Land's End and France's Finistère, Malaya's
Singapore and India's Hyderabad ("Lion City"), Le Havre
and Ceylon's Colombo.
There are many place name endings that have identical
meanings: Britain's -ham, Germany's -heim, Scandina¬
via's -hjem, are duplicated by Hungary's -haz and the
Persian-Urdu -abad; Britain's Anglo-Saxon -ton and
France's Celtic -dun have as their equivalents the Greek
-polis, the Slavic -gorod or -grad, the Sanscrit -pur, the
German -stadt, the French -ville, the Hungarian -vár.
There is little question that a knowledge of place names
leads to a better understanding of the world we live in.
But a study of such names also teaches us that the
human mind displays the same traits of imagination,
ingenuity, humour, regardless of the locality where it is
at work, or of the colour or race of its possessors. It
indicates universal respect for what has been accomplish¬
ed by individuals or groups, appreciation of the physical
features of a World which is, in the main, bountiful,
understanding of human feelings and emotions all
qualities which pertain to the human race as a Whole
rather than to any of its parts.
It also shows that all human beings are subject to
errors and mistakes, and this, too, is a universal attribute
of mankind; but our place names also show a striving
toward higher and better things, a world in which there
will be more peace, tolerance and mutual understanding.
This article is based on "The Book of Place Names", by Eloise Lam¬
bert and Mario Pei, fust published by Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Co.,
Inc., New York ($3.00). A companion volume, "The Story of Personal
Names" is scheduled for publication shortly.
29
