NEW HORIZONS FOR ASIA'S
MOSLEM WOMEN
By Anne-Marie Hussein
&*£&Q£' *M:
UtS's'
ILO
A WOMAN'S PLACE in Moslem society has traditionally
been strictly in the home. But a new wind of social change
sweeping through Moslem countries is giving more women
the chance to train for careers and professions. Right a
young woman sociologist in Pakistan studies model of pro¬
posed building for her country's future capital, to be named
Islamabad. Traditional work in tea field is shown in photo
above of Moslem woman from Indonesia on Java plantation.
Indonesian women have always had a large degree of free¬
dom and the veil of Purdah is practically unknown there.
18

hat does the average westerner think of
when he hears the words "Moslem women
Vof Asia?" More likely than not he conjures
up a vision of princesses straight out of One
Thousand and One Nights, clad in diapha¬
nous veils and spending their lives nibbling sweetmeats
while confined in harems guarded by great silent eunuchs.
How much truth is there in this legend? How much
of it can survive in comparison with real life, say in
Karachi or Djakarta, two great capital cities which,
though far apart and different in many respects, are both
Asian and Moslem. For, in these two Asian countries of
Pakistan and Indonesia, live eighty million Moslem
women.
At the outset we should say that the fact that she
may be Moslem is no handicap for a woman, paradoxical
as that may seem to those nurtured on the legend of
storybooks. On the contrary, there are few communities
where women's rights are so carefully protected, at least
in theory, as they are among Moslems.
"Paradise is at your mother's feet," proclaims an old
Islamic proverb. It sums up the position a woman occu¬
pies in Moslem society. She is in the centre of her world,
The Unesco Courler. Morch 1961
and indeed, that Is her position according to the tra¬
ditional laws of Islam.
Fourteen hundred years ago the Koran decreed that
women's rights should be "the same as men's" and that
they should "receive as much as they give." What was
the effect of the equality taught by the Prophet himself.
It meant that as far back as the Middle Ages a Moslem
woman was free to choose her own husband, and to
govern the terms of her marriage contract. She could
even reserve for herself the right to divorce! She could
own property and therefore go Into business and handle
financial and legal matters without having to have
authorization from her husband.
She was also entitled to inherit half the share set aside
for male descendants, and at her husband's death, she
had the right to an eighth part of his property. If ehe
were divorced, she had sole custody of all daughters of
the marriage, and sons remained in her charge until the
age of seven.
The interests of married women were as well protected.
Marriage was a civil contract, freely accepted by both
parties and concluded In the presence of two witnesses.
It is true that a man was entitled to have four wives at
the same time, but only on condition that he obeyed the
CONT'D ON NC XT PAGE
(Q Paul Alfriasy, Par!

MOSLEM WOMEN (o*'*)
Deprived of rights
by a web of customs
Prophet's explicit Injunction to place them all on a
footing of absolute equality, both in matters of affection
and money.
We are told that the Prophet Introduced this provision
in the Interest of women themselves, and supported it by
his own example. In those days, when war was endemic,
destitute widows were so numerous that to marry several
at a time was one means of alleviating the problem. It
must be admitted that the generous motives which
prompted this custom degenerated over the years.
But according to law, what was true fourteen hundred
years ago remains so today.
Too shy to stand for election
Political rights have been granted to Moslem women
without a struggle. Faithful to the traditions of
Islam, the modern states of Indonesia and Pakistan,
from the moment they came Into being, recognized the
political Independence of their women. They also took
steps to ensure that women should by law remain the
equals of men in their working life. Pakistani and
Indonesian women have the vote, and may stand as
candidates In any kind of election. In Indonesia it is
not unusual for women to be members of municipal and
departmental councils, and there have been several
women Cabinet Members.
The Pakistan government has taken special steps to
encourage women to enter into public life and
affairs, fearing perhaps that they might otherwise be
prevented by shyness or inexperience from assuming their
share in the direction of community affairs. In each of
the local councils, only recently elected, the Government
has reserved a number of seats which will automatically
fall to women after the elections should they not be
adequately represented.
Although Pakistani women may be too shy to present
themselves as candidates, they are by no means in¬
different to matters of public interest. In some provincial
elections, for example, 12% more women went to the polls
than did men.
In theory the same equality holds true for working
women. Nearly all civil service posts are open to them,
and salaries must be exactly the same as for men.
Married to an unknown suitor
This rosy picture of women's rights does not hold true,
however, for the condition in which the majority of
the women of Indonesia and Pakistan found them¬
selves at the beginning of the century, and in which many
of them still find themselves today. For we must always
bear in mind that one of the chief consequences of coloniz¬
ation was the moulding of the community in such a way
as to arrest and paralyse its normal evolution. In such
circumstances, the role of woman became insignificant,
and a splderweb of customs prevented her from exercising
even the most trivial rights, which, theoretically, at least,
were hers.
Women were still respected as mothers, but chlldbearing
was regarded as virtually their only function, and it
occupied the greater part of their time and energy.
Many women were uninterruptedly pregnant from
the age of fourteen on, and it was not unusual for them
to give birth to a score of children during their lifetime.
That, however, was all a woman did. She had no part
in the education of her sons, and as for daughters, she
simply trained them for a life like her own.
She took no part in activities outside the family circle,
and even there, her situation was often precarious. She
was married at a very young age, without being- consult¬
ed, to an unknown suitor chosen for social or economic
reasons. And during her married life she was in constant
fear of being rejected by her husband or supplanted by
Paul Almasy, Paris
Pakistani women journalists, above, exa¬
mine their notes at a press conference in
Karachi. Below, student nurses atop roof of
Lahore clinic discuss anatomy lesson against
backdrop of mosque cupolas and minarets.
United Nations
20
CONT'D ON PAGE 22

Unesco-Pierre Pittet
Above, Moslem girls and boys mix freely at Gadjah Mada
University in Djakarta, Indonesia during break in class
schedule. Below, Moslem women parade in tho stroots of
Indonesia's capital during a recently-held political rally,
Cartier-Bresson © Magnum

MOSLEM WOMEN (Confd)
In Indonesia the veil is unknown
another woman. Her fear was doubled if she failed to
present her husband with a male heir. Possibly the worst
feature of her life, however, was the utter seclusion in
which she was forced to live, without the slightest
opportunity for education.
This was really her chief cause for complaint. A great
deal has been said about Islam's indifference to the fate
of its women. Divorce and polygamy are most frequently
mentioned as evidence of that indifference. In actual
fact, these practices were mostly confined to the wealthy
and powerful.
Polygamy is not easy to practise in a community with
a very low standard of living. It is a luxury in which
few men can afford to indulge. In recent years there has
been a growing tendency to reject the custom of polygamy
entirely, as evidenced by the criticism heard in both
Indonesia and Pakistan a few years ago when two
statesmen President Soekarno of Indonesia and Mo¬
hammed All, the former Prime Minister of Pakistan each
decided to take a second wife.
As for divorce, it is true that it is very easy for a man
to reject his wife. He need only repeat the prescribed
words three times. Still, census returns show that the
number of divorces registered is negligible. This may be
because there are very few divorces, or possibly because
divorced couples are afraid to declare their new status.
For, to be sure, divorce Is severely frowned upon.
The custom of arranged marriages, still widely
prevalent, undoubtedly contributes to stability of the
union for It creates links between families which are gen¬
erally less vulnerable than those formed between two
Individuals. Most divorces occur today among those
classes who have been thrown off balance by too rapid a
social evolution. Traditional values have been undermin¬
ed and the Western concept of love and marriage has
not yet been assimilated, although this concept has spread
widely in both countries since the Second World War.
The Koran and purdah
The situation of a woman today In both Indonesia and
Pakistan depends largely on what class of the com¬
munity she belongs to.
Peasant women in the villages cannot indulge in the
luxury of a quiet, idle life. They work in the fields side
by side with the men. They go to market, sell their
produce, and some of the very poorest of them work as
servants in private homes or shops. Economic necessity,
in their case, takes precedence over tradition. So it is
that many peasant women enjoy greater freedom and
more consideration than many of their women compatriots
who are financially better off.
One should bear in mind in this respect that both
Indonesia and Pakistan are mainly agricultural countries,
and farmers form the majority class. Woman's im¬
portance in a village family is singularly illustrated by a
custom widespread among Indonesian peasants. When a
young man cannot afford to pay the traditional bride-
price, he enters the bride's family and pays his debt by
working for his in-laws (See "Wedding in Sumatra,"
p. 23).
It is the middle class which has the greatest difficulty
adapting itself to a modern way of life. A mistaken
interpretation of the spirit of Islam leads some of its
followers to believe that accepting any change in a
woman's status is tantamount to disobedience to the laws
and traditions of the Koran.
There is no better example of this attitude than the
survival in Pakistan of the custom of "purdah." This
term which has come to signify the complete segregation
of women takes its name from the curtain which is hung
between the women's quarters and the rest of the house
as an Impassable barrier.
The world of Islam has often been reproached for this
custom with all its many consequences, and yet its origin
22
cannot be traced to sacred texts. True enough, the Koran
orders men to have "authority over woman," Allah having
made them her superior, and enjoins women to be modest;
but there is no verse requiring women to wear the veil or
to live in retirement. These practices are not based on
any religious" teaching.
"Purdah," under various names, was common in pre-
Islamic societies of the Orient as an essentially middle-
class custom with nothing compulsory about it. If the
Prophet lent it any authority, it was by not discouraging
it. He even adopted the custom for his own wives. It
thus became firmly established in the countries converted
to Islam, and where it was already practised it grew into
a regular institution. That is the case in Pakistan.
Looking like a walking tent
A woman is not allowed to show herself unveiled
except to her husband. She may not go out unless
she is hung from head to foot with a stiff drapery
that makes her look like a walking tent. It has a slit at
eye level so that she can find her way about, but even this
small aperture is covered with crocheted mesh which
conceals the lustre of her eyes. In this way she is barred
from all social life, and she Is taught nothing except a
few domestic virtues, the most important of which Is
obedience.
Some women of strong character have undoubtedly held
great power, been feared and obeyed even from behind
the veil. But "purdah" has engendered a kind of atrophy
of isolation that cannot be cured overnight. It is difficult
to shake off an apathy which has endured for centuries,
and which men, themselves, have been reluctant to
change. An Englishwoman travelling in Pakistan in 1954
reported that in one village she saw a woman about. to
die in childbirth. Her husband adamantly refused to
allow the local male doctor to attend her because no
midwife was present.
Such extreme cases are becoming increasingly rare,
but even when women have set aside the veil and emerged
from "purdah," they seem to retain a certain mental
attitude, a shyness and reserve, which set limits to their
participation in life outside.
Unfortunately there are no statistics to show the extent
to which "purdah" still prevails in Pakistan and how
much the position has altered since 1947. The fact that
increasing numbers of girls are attending co-educational
schools and universities is evidence of a gradual change.
Pioneers of women's rights
It is not women belonging to the wealthier classes who
are most faithful to the old traditions, for they were
the first to admit the liberal ideas. One result pro¬
duced In these rich families a generation of daughters
who scornfully refused to interest themselves in purely
domestic subjects and embarked instead on more intellec¬
tual studies.
Their studies were seldom carried very far since
marriage soon intervened. More often than not, they
were neither good housewives, nor real intellectuals. And
this situation lent some weight to the attacks of the old
die-hards who were anxious to preserve traditions.
Fortunately this was only a temporary phase, and in any
case many pioneers of the feminist movement in
Pakistan are found among these women.
One factor sharply differentiates the Moslem women of
Pakistan from those of Indonesia. It is the practice of
"purdah." In Indonesia it is virtually unknown. That
is true in part because Mohammedanism is a relative
newcomer to the country and it was long resisted by the
Hindu courts of the various principalities. Thus it is that
Moslem traditions as practised by the upper levels of Java
society are less orthodox, even today, than those of the
rest of the population, especially city dwellers such as
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

WEDDING
IN SUMATRA
H ,-*:
' *
Vi*. . \
The photos on this page
show a traditional Moslem
wedding in Sumatra, often
a lavish affair lasting about
six days. The bride wears
an elaborate diadem (pho¬
to above). Great quantities
of food are prepared and
are set on brass trays piled
high with plates of many-
coloured cakes and sweets
(left). These will be served
at the bride's home where
the couple will take up
residence. The groom, or
''borrowed man" as he is
called, plays but a minor
part at the ceremony
which starts with a reli¬
gious service. In photo be¬
low the whole party takes
a jungle path to the bride's
house. Traditional dances
are an important feature
in this as in many other
ceremonies in Indonesia.
Unesco. Marc Riboud

MOSLEM WOMEN (Cont'd from page 22)
A startling goal: back to the Middle Ages
tradespeople and government employees, whose numbers
are constantly increasing.
Notwithstanding this, the seclusion of women (by no
means the exclusive prerogative of Islam as so many
people think) was also practised in aristocratic circles of
Indonesia although not with the same austerity found
in other Islamic countries. This is evident from the long
struggle that Adjeng Kartlni, the pioneer of Indonesia's
emancipation movement, had to wage early in the
century. A vivid account of her struggle is given in her
Letters which will soon be published in French and
English translations in Unesco's Collection of Representa¬
tive Works (Indonesia Series). Her example has inspired
many upper class Indonesian women to follow in her
footsteps and these women are now among the leaders
of their country's emancipation movement.
With the great mass of Indonesia's women, however, the
problem is less acute, for they have remained more or
less free, despite the fact that there is a good deal of
traditionalism found in most villages. On the whole,
however, one can say that Indonesia has not known the
strictness and severity that Islamlsm assumed in the
Middle East. It is not at all unusual, for example, to
see a woman in Indonesia seated by the roadside pub¬
licly breast-feeding her child.
We have seen how important divorce, polygamy and
purdah have been as retarding factors in the lives of
Moslem women, but these pale almost to insignificance
when compared to the isolation which the women of both
Indonesia and Pakistan have suffered as a result of
ignorance and total lack of education.
Education unfeminine ?
This situation affects even the well-to-do. Until very
recently, most fathers considered education superflu¬
ous and even harmful for their daughters. A good
marriage, they said, was the only suitable career, and they
feared that education would make them less feminine.
Nowadays, education for women may be accepted, but it
is still often regarded as a mere ornament, a plus-factor
that sends a girl's stock up on the marriage market. Few
girls advance beyond secondary schools. Those who do
are often tempted into continuing by the Domestic Science
course offered as bait for future housewives.
We should not jump to the conclusion from this that
Indonesian and Pakistani women never train for a
profession. They do, but their choice is sharply limited
because of a still prevalent feeling that women should
have no contact with the masculine world. The favourite
profession for women is teaching. Next in popularity is
medicine, but all her patients must be women. When
a young lady enters such professions, neither her father or
her husband feels that he is losing prestige, and these
are not considered big money-making positions. So far
there is little competition between the two sexes. Like
their European brothers a few years ago, Moslem men
have long frowned upon the emergence of women into
their own workaday world.
Art careers still taboo
But today things are changing. The Moslem woman
now has a status which, though still modest, affords
her ever expanding opportunities. Indonesia has
already had a woman Minister of Labour. Pakistan has
a woman ambassador. And more and more Moslem
women from both countries are now studying science in
Europe on fellowships.
At the same time, office work and secretarial employ¬
ment still attract large numbers of women. "Air Pa¬
kistan" is extremely proud of its air hostesses, and their
attractive and picturesque uniforms, green tunics over
ample white trousers, are symbolic of the present transi
tional period. There is still one profession, however,
which remains taboo even today. Anything concerned
with art Is still kept squarely within the male domain.
We might say that middle class people seem to be
following the same line of development as one has found
in Europe, but among the poorer classes the situation is
markedly different.
In 1940, 90% of the population of Indonesia was
illiterate. According to official figures, that high propor¬
tion has been reduced to 57%. In Pakistan in 1951,
official figures indicated that 25% of the men could read,
but only 11.4% of the women. School attendance among
the poorer » Inhabitants of both countries is still far too
low despite efforts made by governments and women's
groups. There is still a great shortage of schools for girls,
but there is much improvement over the situation 60
years ago when neither country had any such institution.
No gossiping matrons
Efforts already made In this field have been consider¬
able. But the effort still required is tremendous.
Take for example the statistics from the State of
Punjab In Pakistan which are fairly typical although
overall figures are lacking. In 1949, with a population of
19,000,000, the number of girls attending school was a
bare 6,145. By 1953 this number had risen to 102,369 and
today it has doubled.
But despite the improvement, girls from poor families
have very little prospect of continuing their education
beyond primary school which they leave at the age of
ten. Taking again the Punjab figures, there were
1,845 primary schools as against only 145 secondary
schools.
Progress in the education of women has been slow, re¬
tarded by the indifference of the wealthy, the timidity of
the middle class and the extreme poverty of the humble
people. Yet the improvement has been sufficient to en¬
courage those who have tackled this gigantic task
principally government departments, aided and abetted by
a number of courageous voluntary organizations.
The latter are worth our attention. Most of them are
women's organizations, but they should not be confused
with either frivolous social meetings of gossiping ma¬
trons, or suffragette groups stridently proclaiming their
rights. They devote themselves with great energy and
efficiency to social welfare work.
Age-old rights of Islam
Some of the chief aims of the Federation of Indonesian
Women founded in 1928 are to improve the social
status of women, particularly those who are married ;
to eradicate prostitution; to prohibit child marriages, and
most important of all, to open schools and establish
funds for education. The All Pakistan Women's Associa¬
tion has similar aims. Under its sponsorship teaching
centres have been established where mothers are taught
to read and write, and social centres have been formed
where they can obtain free medical and legal advice.
In simple fact, the work being done by these associa¬
tions is really rehabilitation, for most of the rights for
which Western women waged such a long struggle, have
always been part of the traditional heritage of Moslem
women.
These associations are battling to restore the age-old
rights of the Islamic woman. They are determined to
ensure that in this twentieth century, she will be worthy
of all the rights enjoyed by her eighth century predecess¬
or. They strive, above all, to make her capable of exercis¬
ing these rights. They are revealing to her the ever
broadening horizons now open to Asia's Moslem women.
32
