HOW PHILAE
WILL BE SAVED
by Michel Conil Lacoste
Mr. Conil Lacoste is fine arts columnist for the Paris daily newspaper
"Le Monde". He has also been a frequent contributor to the "New
York Times Sunday Magazine", and the French art magazine, "l'sil".
From 1951 to I 953 he was a teaching fellow at the University of Cairo.
or 60 years the island of Philae has been
waging a desperate battle against the waters
of the Nile. This famous shrine of antiquity which, with
its temples dating back to the Ptolemies and the Caesars
has long inspired historians of art and religion and tra¬
vellers the world over, has thus far escaped the death
which Pierre Loti predicted for it years ago. But now its
reprieve from the waters of the Nile is gravely threatened
for all times.
The crux of the problem can be summed up in a few
words:
The island of Philae is located between the old Aswan
dam downstream (that is, to the north) and the new High
Dam under construction upstream. When it is completed
the island will be permanently covered by water and the
temples will be submerged all year long to half their
height, the water level fluctuating daily by as much as
20 feet.
Unless protective measures are taken the temples, which
at present emerge completely from the waters of the Nile
for three months each year, will never again be visible
in their entirety and the harmonious ensemble will be
permanently destroyed. But even more important, the
erosion caused by the daily rise and fall of the waters will
be more harmful to the monuments than their nine-
month total immersion now caused by the old dam. In
the long run the movement of the waters will cut into the
buildings like a knife, causing them to crumble and
spelling their certain destruction.
A;disaster of such magnitude appeared unthink-
-able. As soon as the dangers were realized,
technicians set about to seek ways of saving Philae. In
1955, an Egyptian engineer, Osman R. Rostem, formulated
a plan which was afterwards to serve as the basis for the
adopted scheme to preserve the island. In a study entitled
The Salvage of Philae he wrote: "The most effective solu¬
tion to the question of Philae is the Isolation of the island
from the rest of the reservoir by building a series of small
16
(1) Osman li. ¡{ostein: The Salvage of Philae, Supplement to the
Annals of the Antiquities Service. Published by the imprimeries de
l'Institut français d'Archéologie orientale. Cairo, 1955.
(2) Xetherlands ¡engineering Consultants Xedeco, The Hague: Report
on the safeguarding of the Philae monuments, prepared for Unesco
by order of the Xetheriands Government. Xovember 1%0.
dams round it and thus preventing the water from sub¬
merging the temples without disturbing them by removal
or raising" (1).
The plan put forward last year by the Netherlands
Engineering Consultants (NEDECO) on the initiative of
the Government of the Netherlands is inspired by the
same principle (2). It was adopted earlier this year by the
United Arab Republic Consultative Committee concerning
the safeguarding of the sites and monuments of Nubia.
Coming up the Nile, the traveller finds Philae about five
miles upstream (or south) from the city of Aswan, a little
beyond the First Cataract. This "City of Temples", as
Champolllon called it, seems to be floating on the Nile
near the eastern bank where the river forms a small bay
strewn with tiny islands, each rich in history, beneath
rocky heights which rise from the shore.
Just west of Philae lies the islet of Agilkia, and beyond
it the large island of Biga. The two Islands together form
a north-south chain which almost isolates this area of the
river from the rest of the waterway, and Philae lies
within their protective shield.
Mr. Rostem's scheme, carefully studied and
elaborated by NEDECO, completes this natural
isolation by a series of three dykes or dams, linking the
islands together and each one to the river bank. The
entire system of islands and dams would thus form a
continuous protective arc to the west of Philae separating
it from the main stream of the Nile. The level of the
reservoir within the protected area would not be affected
by the fluctuations of water between the two dams, and
could thus be kept as low as required so that the island
of Philae would always be visible in its entirely.
It was Herodotus who first referred to Philae as the
"Pearl of Egypt", but the phrase has now become a cliché,
and it is perhaps time we dispensed with it. But there
can be no doubt that the spectacle offered by the sacred
island of Isis with its pylons, its porticos and temples all
reflected in the irridescent waters of the Nile is a sight
which never fails to move the beholder.
Poised on the edge of the Aswan desert, Philae, the first
stop in Egyptian Nubia, is unequalled in beauty except for
Abu Simbel, the last stop before entering Sudanese Nubia
if I can be permitted to compare such widely differing
examples of architecture.
CONT'D ON PAGE 18

Unesco-Van der Haagen
WHEN THE NEW ASWAN DAM is completed, the Island
of Philae will be submerged by the Nile to the height shown
in the photo above. At present, the Island's monuments are
completely covered by the Nile, save for the tops of the main
pylon, nine months of the year. Diagram, below left, shows
the present situation, the future situation If nothing is dono,
and finally how the temples will be saved by tho construction
of protective dykes. Map of Philae and surrounding area shows
new and old dams and the position of dykes which will bo
built to protect Philae from the waters of the Nilo.
PRESENT SITUATION
From "Report on Safeguarding Philae Monuments", NEDCCO, I960.
17

PHILAE
(Continued)
INTERIOR COURTYARD
of Temple of Isis at Phi¬
lae with famous colon¬
naded "mammisi" or
Birth House of Horus.
The monuments of Phi¬
lae will be saved by a
system of three protective
dykes, a plan proposed
by Netherlands experts.
Unesco - Albert Raccah
Before the first Aswan dam was built, a palm grove
(now ruined by the waters) added a note of cool enchant¬
ment to this "Vision of Paradise", as the French Egypto¬
logists, Georges Bénédite and Canon Drioton, called It.
Though deprived of Its vegetation, Philae has maintained
its grace and youthful beauty "like a bird perched on an
island pointing straight south."
Philae is young not only in beauty but also in time,
for none of its temples dates back beyond the 4th century
B.C. This is a short period indeed when compared to the
470 million years of the natural granite amphitheatre
which forms the setting for the "pearl" which is Philae.
But the island is not merely a prodigious site; It is also
a sanctuary, and "an open air museum of Egyptian archi¬
tecture and art."
A sanctuary, because it was from here that the cult of
Isis, the universal goddess and mother of Horus, spread
during Roman times far beyond the realms of Egypt ;
here that "the last refuge of dying paganism" knew its
long twilight and defied the Christian faith long after the
triumph of the new religion had closed the gates of all
other temples along the Nile.
At every step one stumbles upon the sacred at Philae,
on nearby Biga and even beyond, on the large island of
Hesa where funeral steles mark the remains of an ancient
necropolis In which the faithful were buried at a respect¬
ful distance from the tomb of Osiris.
Philae is a museum, or more exactly a city of five
temples, the largest of which is dedicated to Isis. It is
fronted by two gigantic pylons and the famous mammisi
or "birth house" devoted to the annual mystery of the
birth of Horus, the Son-God.
To the east lies Trajan's celebrated Kiosk, to the south
the Kiosk of Nectanebo from which an avenue of sphinxes
(or dromos) leads to the first pylon of the Temple of Isis.
These buildings are completed by the famous gate of
Hadrian with its chapels and three colonnades.
All these monuments with their delicately moulded pil-
.jg lars, their exquisitely intercolonnaded walls, recall the
influence of Greek architecture and form a unique ensem¬
ble in Egyptian art.
In the light of its artistic and cultural importance, it
is not difficult to understand that the experts who
examined the various proposals for saving Philae were as
often swayed by aesthetic considerations as by the tech¬
nical factors involved.
One project proposed that a giant wall or earth dam
30 to 40 feet high be built to isolate the island from the
rest of the Nile. This was rejected as unaesthetic, for the
charm of Philae as a floating island would have been
destroyed. Besides, the scheme was as costly as the pro¬
posal to create an artificial lake.
A second idea proposed the silting up of the area
around Philae by building a low dam between the nor¬
thern end of the island of Biga and the shore, but if
adopted, half of the monuments would have probably
been buried in silt. A third solution called for dismantling
the temples and re-erecting them on the same site after
the ground level had been raised 30 to 40 feet. Such an
operation would have been very costly and difficult, and
entailed risk of damage for the sculptures and inscrip¬
tions. Furthermore it could not have been completed
within the required time limit.
A;Nother plan involved dismantling the temples
-and transferring them to the island of Biga or
to the mainland. In addition to the disadvantages just
indicated, this scheme was ruled out for aesthetic and
archaeological reasons. As Mr. Rostem pointed out as
early as 1955, removing all the temples was out of the
question, while choosing two or three of the most beau¬
tiful ones meant destroying the present architectural
ensemble of the island. Philae's unique character lies in
its subtle blending of stone and water against the back¬
ground of fantastic stones and "elephant-feet" boulders
on the neighbouring islands and river banks. To disturb
this balance and association would be to ruin everything,
or almost.
As to the tränier of the monuments to Biga ; it would
have destroyed the precise historical and mythological

TOPS OF PILLARS are
all that show of the Birth
House on Philae when
the gates of Aswan dam
are opened in the month
of October and the Nile
slowly submerges the is¬
land's monuments.
Photo Christiane Desroches-
Noblecourt
relationship between the two islands. Philae was the tra¬
ditional abode of Isis, Biga the sacrosanct realm of Osiris,
unapproachable to humans. Regrouping the monuments
of both divinities on Biga would have been an act of
sacrilege in the eyes of Egyptologists, and at the very least
would have deprived them of their present significance.
Actually two of the proposed solutions mentioned, i.e.
the raising of the monuments and their dismantling and
re-erection elsewhere, had been envisaged at the time of
the construction of the first Aswan dam in 1902. Fortu¬
nately, the final decision was to leave the island as it was
despite the risks involved, which were further increased
by the successive raisings of the dam in 1907-1912 and
1929-1934. But this brave decision resulted in two vital
measures being taken on the initiative of the then director
of the Egyptian Antiquities Service, Gaston Maspero: the
systematic recording of all the monuments and inscrip¬
tions on the island (just as this is now being done in the
whole area threatened by the new Aswan Dam); the
consolidation and reinforcement of the foundations of all
the monuments. It is to this latter, providential precau¬
tionary measure that Philae probably owes its survival.
Egyptologists were for a time panic-stricken when the
first effects of the temple's long months of submersion
became known. When the monuments emerged from the
waters, the sandstone walls had become "so soft that a
finger could be stuck into them", and the tourist boats
indeed caused a certain amount of damage by scraping
against the supporting columns of this artificial Venice.
But this damage was insignificant compared to the havoc
which might have resulted had not the foundations of the
temples been solidly reinforced.
All in all Philae has stood up well to the waters. And
in one sense the annual immersion has even done some
good. For though the flood waters have effaced the poly¬
chrome blues and whites which formerly adorned certain
capitals, the same waters have cleansed the stone of
destructive salts.
Thus, paradoxically, the total immersion of the temples,
which was expected to lead to disaster, now appears less
harmful than the partial immersion which will result
from the construction of the new High Dam. What is
more, the 1902 decision to allow the temples to be sub¬
merged part of the year, taken only as a last resort, now
proves to have been the one solution which did not com¬
promise the future. Had the monuments been raised or
removed to another site, today's "ideal" solution (which
apparently was not studied or foreseen 60 years ago)
would now be out of the question. Thus the drama of the
1900s has made possible the rescue operation of the 1960s.
The NEDECO plan, submitted by the Netherlands
Government and now adopted, will safeguard the Isle of
Philae in its original setting and splendour by the cons¬
truction of three dykes, creating a low lying artificial lake
within the high Aswan reservoir. In other words Philae
will be protected by an artificial lake within an artificial
lake something like a "double-boiler". The "inside boiler"
will be the protective barrier formed by the continuous
chain of islands and dykes abutting on the shore.
In the summer of 1960 a Netherlands team carried out
a preliminary investigation on the site gathering prccLse
data on topography, water levels, meteorology, geology,
building materials, and the alignment of the dams. Valu¬
able topographical data, results of soundings and aerial
photographs were made available to the mission by
various Government ministries of the U.A.R.
T,he team also took advantage of the prelimi¬
nary studies previously carried out near the
Sadd el Aali dam site. They examined vital questions such
as water evaporation, wind speeds and the resulting waves
in Aswan lake, water seepage and capillary action. The
local Nilometer -was called upon to furnish much informa¬
tion concerning water levels, while the river bed was thor¬
oughly sounded and vertical exploration carried out
systematically in the vicinity of the sacred island.
On the basis of this preliminary research, the following
proposals were put forward. The level of the Philae lake
was set at 323 feet, the top of the works at 330 feet. The *q
north and south dykes would be built first from the bank
abutments outward. Rock fill would be used near the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PHILAE (Continued)
ITS TEMPLES WILL
AGAIN BE MIRRORED
IN THE WATERS
banks and sand in the centre part, reinforced by concrete
caissons or a double row of steel sheet piling.
Last of all, the dyke joining the two Islands would be
built. Though presenting less problems from the tech¬
nical point of view, this dam is the one that will close
the lake and it will have to withstand currents of 10 feet
per second. As the gap ls reduced, at the final stages, the
pressure of water will steadily Increase. So this centre
dam will be of the rock fill type. During the actual
closing, the authorities will be asked to keep the level of
the Aswan Dam constant.
The alignment of the dykes proposed in the draft pro¬
ject is a tentative one; the final alignment can be deter¬
mined only after further soundings have been carried out.
At the end of last year the authors of the report were
in favour of the shortest span for the northern dyke
(though this ls not always the cheapest in public works).
This dyke would join Agilkla Island to the mainland at
Tabyet el Sheikh. They were even more strongly in favour
of this course for the centre dyke the one joining Agil¬
kla and Biga Islands. For the southern dyke further
soundings will be required to determine whether a slightly
crooked alignment may not be technically preferable.
This is a question to be discussed and carefully studied.
The plan Mr. Rostem prepared' six years ago provided for
somewhat different alignments from NEDECO's.
WATERTiGHTNESs is another problem. Up to a
point seepage can be prevented by protective
blankets on the upstream slopes. Grout-curtains will also
be used to filter out sand and silt. But the Dutch consider
that it would be more economical to allow for a pumping
station than a costly array of devices to prevent seepage,
for these would raise the costs considerably. Having re¬
gard to the water balance due to infiltration and evapora¬
tion closely calculated for the proposed Philae Lake
works the engineers have determined that a pump
discharging 350 litres a second would be the most
economical solution for the annual surplus of from 50 to
100 million square feet of water seepage over evaporation
losses. Similarly, the lake waters could be changed, and if
the pumping capacity were increased to 465 litres a second,
the pump could also be used for discharging seepage from
Shellal on the east bank, in the event that the Egyptian
authorities decide to put that area under cultivation.
The Netherlands plan, briefly described here, will thus
be executed under optimum conditions. Elaborated by
engineers of a country specialized by its geographical
situation in hydraulics, it has been unanimously approved,
and no alternative plan is under consideration. The
Government of the Netherlands has offered to perfect it
and the estimated total cost of TJS56 millions now seems
assured since the President of the United States last April
recommended that the equivalent of this sum in Egyptian
currency be appropriated for the salvage of Philae. And
yet, actual operations are not scheduled to begin before
1968...
This may appear to be an astonishingly long delay, until
one realizes that at present the island and its sur¬
roundings are under water for most of the year. It is
only when the new Aswan dam is finally completed in
1968 that the waters of the Nile will be contained and
engineers will be able to pitch their tents on dry land
and move forward their equipment.
*0~
yy i
, íirfC'
'jb J
Photos Unesco-Van der Haagen
VIEW FROM PHILAE looking toward Biga Island with its
tomb of Osiris, husband of Isis, whose great temple and
pylons dominate Philae.. Below, one of the pylons of the
Temple of Isis showing the wealth of carving on Its walls.
