STELE UNDER A TREE with Tagore, at the age of
44, seated beside it, marks the lonely spot where his
father stopped to meditate while going on a pilgrim¬
age towards the Himalayas. Here years later, Tagore
created his experimental school which won world
renown as Santiniketanthe Abode of Peace.
- »V
.:*
>ra
m $
SM
»».*«,«*,'

«*A*
**-;¿ J»^*îîr5
«rrJi
"^t
<* *
r » .st*»
K-r-
< i
s --.
..*_-. -tK -
..-"
~í*.>-v r
a*: ->>
VïàirtAu
k*i
'^
à* o;;
f
«»^
y > ^ - ?
He named his school
'Abode of Peace'
REBEL WITH
A UNIVERSAL
CAUSE
by Humay¡in Kabir
Tacore believed and everyone who ponders the
question must believe with him that educa¬
tion ls the foundation of society; that the teachers of
today are the arbiters of the destiny of society of to¬
morrow and the day after. How men arc trained, what
ideals they imbibe: what type of character they develop,
what knowledge Ls Imparted to them: what are the dis¬
ciplines through which they go; what Ls the way In which
their mind is formed these are the things which ulti¬
mately shape the destinies of man.
Tagore's Ideal of education was at the same time
revolutionary and traditional. He had the wisdom to see
that revolutions are successful only if they grow out of
the past. A revolution which seeks to break away
completely from the past, a revolution which totally
denies tradition, ultimately defeats Itself. Revolutions
are successful only when values of the past arc re¬
discovered and reshaped to meet the needs of changing
times.
Tagore was an educational revolutionary In both theory
and practice. His own experience he left oil formal
schooling quite early in life convinced him that the
routine of the school, In particular the dull imposition of
textbooks and subjects In which the chlJd ls not Interest¬
ed, is more a hindrance than a help to the unfoldment
of its spirit. He realized that the child's mind does not
blossom in that way. From his own experience Tagore
learnt that education divorced from social life and
cultural traditions, and, more important still, bereft of
contacts with nature became for the child an imposition
and a burden.
Tagore held that education must allow the child to
develop in the context of nature. He believed that the
sweep of the earth and the expanse of the sky, the
quietness of the evening and the promise of the morning,
the beauty of the stars and the radiance of the sun must
permeate the personality of the child. Gradually they
must become a part of his being so that there may be
harmony in his inner nature as there is harmony in the
outside world.
Tagore knew that there are plenty of clashes and
conflicts in life, but he held that there Ls a larger harmony
In which the smaller clashes and conflicts always find
reconciliation. We must strive to attain the same
harmony among our faculties. Tagore taught that the
intellect should be developed along with the emotions and
HUMAYUN KABIR is minister for Scientific Research and Cul¬
tural Affairs of the Government of India and a former Minister
for Civil Aviation. A distinguished imiter and educator, Pro¬
fessor Kabir was president of the All-India Education Con¬
ference in 1955 and of the Indian Philosophical Congress. All-
India Writer's Convention in 1956. His many works include :
Men and Rivers, The Indian Heritage, Education In New India,
Science, Democracy and Islam, and Immanuel Kant.
13
Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A UNIVERSAL CAUSE (Cont'd)
Far-seeing pioneer of modern education
14
the volition, and all these aspects should grow
harmoniously through activity of many kinds.
Tagore did not believe In any narrow or rigid
educational formulae. His conception of education was
in broad human terms. In his system, art had its place
along with mathematics and science. He believed, and
he tried to carry out his beliefs in his school, that all
aspects of the child's personality must develop harmon¬
iously. He was one of the earliest among modern
educational thinkers to emphaslve activity as an
essential principle of education.
Many of his Ideals have been shared by educational
thinkers In all countries of the world, but Tagore's
special contribution lay In the emphasis on harmony, on
balance, on all-sided development of the human
personality. He felt that if any aspect was submerged,
It would warp the entire human outlook. For Tagore
beauty had to be moral, and morality had to be imbued
with the spirit of beauty. The pursuit of truth, beauty
and goodness was the end of human life and the purpose
of education was to train men and women to seek,
recognize and achieve them.
Tagore established Santiniketan as a school in 1901.
He started with hardly a dozen pupils and one of them
was his own son. It was natural that Tagore's son should
come to study in his own school, for he was not one
of those educational politicians who talk much about new
systems but send their own children to traditional schools.
Tagore's son came to Santiniketan because Tagore believed
In it, but some of the other pupils came because they had
proved misfits In the existing schools. In the beginning,
recruits to Tagore's school were sometimes the neglected
children of the family, and yet these very children have
turned out to be some of the most distinguished sons of
modern India. In its short life of sixty years Santiniketan
has given us a Chief Justice of India, Chief Ministers and
Minister of States and Judges of the High Courts, great
educationists, scientists, artists and philosophers.
T1 1
acore believed that every individual has In
him or her the seed of divinity. Every man
has the promise of greatness if only we know how to
develop his potentiality. Santiniketan has justified his
faith and proved that if the educational approach be
right and imaginative, and if there be a spirit like
Tagore's to inspire and guide, there is no height that the
individual may not reach. It is only because we do not
recognize our powers, only because we allow our person¬
ality to be warped by lesser considerations, that human
beings do not grow. One word of caution is however
necessary. A Socrates or a Kalldasa, an Ibn Khalidun
or a Rabindranath Tagore is rare, even in the best of
circumstances but given the proper education and envi¬
ronment, everyone can become a useful and creative
member of the community, a member who contributes as
much as he receives, a citizen of whom any country can be
proud.
These are the educational ideals which Tagore
preached; the ideal of harmony among the different
subjects, of harmony among all aspects of the personality,
with a proper emphasis on emotions, Intellect and volition
of harmony of man with nature. These ideals of Tagore
are now the common currency of the educational world.
I have sometimes felt that if Tagore had only formulated
his educational ideals and carried them out in
Santiniketan, he would have been honoured as one of
the greatest educational thinkers the world has known in
the last 100 years.
Tagore did not believe in blind conformity. He always
protested against what he called Achalayatan, the
Institution which has become immobile, customs that have
become out-moded, beliefs that have become dead.
Schools which do not allow the free development of the
mind were for him prison houses and not centres of light.
Tagore revolted against rigidity and believed that it is
only through change, only through a forward march that
the values of the spirit can be maintained.
Every country, every community has Its own peculiar
culture, Its own peculiar needs. Every age, every period
has its own requirements. Tagore held that our pro¬
grammes must change with changing times. Values are
eternal but their expression in institutions, traditions and
practices must change if we are to remain true to their
spirit.
One of the things of which modern India is proud, one
of the things in which we have great hopes pride in
what has been achieved, hopes in the promise they hold
is what we call the community development pro¬
gramme. This programme has become a symbol of hope
in our villages, and it is not accidental that it flows out
of what Tagore taught and did. More than sixty years
ago, Tagore said that the greatest misfortune of modern
India is that Shree (grace and beauty) has left the
villages.
Modern culture has become predominantly urban. The
very word "civilization" suggests that it has always had
something to do with cities,, but in the modern age
concentration on cities has become even greater.
Throughout the world there is today a drift of the abler
and more enterprising men and women, men and women
of will and vision, away from rural areas to the towns.
In consequence, village life becomes steadily more
impoverished and the gap between the town and the
village continually grows. In spite of the admonitions of
many great men of Ruskin some 100 years ago, and of
Tolstoy, and Gandhi In the present century nobody goes
back to the village.
Tagore saw the answer to their problem more than sixty
years ago. He said that this vicious circle can be broken
not by admonitions, not by speaking in lyric terms about
the beauties of village life, but by improving the villages
till they again become the home of culture and grace.
If we can change the pattern of rural life and make
the villages more like towns, if the great gap which exists
today between village and town is 'gradually overcome,
then and then only will the drift to the town stop.
Villages today do not have the health services, the
communication and the social amenities and the hundreds
of other things which make the town such an attractive
place for young men and women. Tagore said that able
men will stay in villages only when village life is re¬
constructed to provide educational facilities, health
services, improved communications and adequate and
wholesome water supply. Able men and women will
stay in the villages only if there are opportunities for
the fullest development of their personality. The pro-
TAGORE'S BELIEF that education is the foundation of society led him in
I 90 I to create an experimental school at Santiniketan. It was given a new
status and a new nameVisva Bharati, the World Universityin 1918. Be¬
low, Sylvain Levy, the French orientalist and close friend of Tagore, lecturing
at Santiniketan in 1923, with Tagore listening intently in the background.

gramme of rural reconstruction that India has undertaken
today, the community development programme which is
being accepted also by other countries of the world, is a
direct outcome of Tagore's teaching.
It is I think true to say that after 3,000 years, the
Indian village ls today on the march. For almost 3,000
years our agriculture had hardly changed, our ways of
living in the villages had hardly changed, and the little
changes that had taken place were often for the worse.
6,000 years ago we had in India the great civilization of
Harappa and Mohenjo Daro. This civilization was marked
by a pattern of planned towns with planned streets and
drainage which would compare favourably with some of
the most modern towns of Western Europe and America.
But during the last 3,000 years something happened
which changed things for the worse. We in India lost that
knowledge and energy so that today conditions of sanita¬
tion in rural areas are such that the less we speak about
them the better.
Village housing is so poor that we are ashamed
of it. Roads, water supply and other social
services in the villages are completely inadequate. Misery
and squalor, poverty, ignorance and disease continued for
oyer 3,000 years, but in the course of the last ten years
since India became free a massive effort is being made
to remove these evils. We are today seeking to revive the
old spirit of initiative and enterprise and bring back
conditions of new life to rural areas. We aim to bring
water to villages where there was no supply before, to
transform old and traditional methods of agriculture and
develop new roads and civic centres, in a word, build a
new system of rural economy and rural life.
It will come as a surprise to many that this is a
programme which Tagore spelled out some 60 years ago.
Sixty years ago, around Santiniketan where he started
his school, he drew up the first blueprint for the recon¬
struction of village life. And it is remarkable that he
sought to carry out the programme by evoking the
interest and the initiative of the villages himself. The
work which began on a very small scale grew till In 1921
it developed into the Rural Institute at Srinlketan through
the help and co-operation of an enlightened English
friend and admirer.
Even before the advent of the twentieth century,
Tagore had declared that there can be no question of
economic regeneration or political freedom for India,
there can be no question of raising the standard of life
of the people and building a new humanity in India,
unless the villages changed. He pleaded that we must
create conditions so that the villages may again become
creative, and rural people find satisfaction In life. He
pointed out that there ls a close link between economic
and cultural Ufe, between political and moral urges.
The Indian people will again become creative only when
their social and economic problems have been solved.
Tagore declared that political bondage ls merely an
external symptom of an Inner disease. He held that It
is a mistake to fight political bondage on a merely political
programme. Such attempts, he said, are doomed to fall.
When Indians regain their character and develop moral
purpose and aesthetic perceptions, when they begin to
strive for economic self-sufficiency and personal dignity,
political bondage will drop like the slough off the snake's
back when the winter ls past.
I wish to refer to one other element In Tagore's
economic ideal. He was no obscurantist and knew that
the day of the machine had come. He loved handicrafts
and knew that some of the most beautiful things have
been made by manual labour, but he also knew that in
the modern world, there ls no alternative to the machine
if we are to provide necessary goods and services for
millions of human beings. All that Tagore wanted was
that the machine must be the slave of man, not his
master. Subject to this condition, he accepted the
machine freely and without any mental reservation.
The economic pattern which one is seeking to develop
in India today is in conformity with this Ideal of Tagore.
It ls an economic pattern in which heavy Industry will
grow side by side with consumer industries, a pattern in
which certain trades, certain industries will be under
public control and management, but side by side there
will be other spheres of economic activity where private
enterprise will have freedom and initiative.
Tagore Is largely responsible for the growth of a
universal outlook in modem India. We Uve in an age
when great differences divide great nations, when sharp
conflicts reach down to the bases of society, when
philosophical, religious and moral differences threaten
the future of man. Catastrophe can be averted only If
we learn to tolerate differences and develop an attitude
of respect for and acceptance of diversity and change.
Borrowing the language of Buddhism, we have called the
principle underlying such an attitude the principle of
Panchsila. We may call it co-operation, we may call It
co-existence, but in fact It is nothing but another name
for the basic principle of federalism, in which there ls
recognition of the dignity of every unit and of loyalty to
the whole based on loyalty to the unity of society.
(Address delivered In Rome In June, 1901.)
Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati Courtesy Christine Bossenec
GANDHI AND TAGORE differed greatly in physical appearance, personal
habits and In general outlook. At several moments of crisis In India's political
history, the two had disagreed over the course of action to be taken. But these
were on the surface; their deeper affinity transcended all occasional barriers.
Below, Mahatma Gandhi Is received by Tagore at Santiniketan In 1940.
15
