THE CHANGING
FACE OF
LATIN AMERICA
by Dr Alfred Métraux
I t has become commonplace to speak of Latin
America as a land of contrasts and to
compare its strikingly modern aspects with its archaic
rural life. Some years ago, André Siegfried wisely observ¬
ed that the cities of Latin America were still not Integrated
Into the surrounding country-side. Indeed, it would often
seem that they are islands of civilization encompassed by
vast wildernesses which deny the very presence of man.
Just a few miles from Lima, for example, one finds a
desert as formidable as the Sahara. Not far from Rio de
Janeiro vestiges of the dense tropical forests still remain
which are as isolated from the world as the heart of the
Amazon. It ls contrasts such as these which proclaim
Latin America as a "new" land.
Yet, it is also a very ancient land. Long before the
white man set foot on these shores, great cities had been
built. Within walking distance of Trujillo on the
Peruvian coast lie the remains of a great metropolis
(Chanchan) whose ruins cover six square miles and show
regularly spaced streets and squares which compare with
our great modern cities. A short bus ride away from
Mexico City rise the great pyramids of Teotihuacan and
the ruins of another large city, both far older than the
gigantic modern capital of Mexico today.
But we need not return to the time of the Incas and
Aztecs to find the past in Latin America. The little
provincial towns of Peru, Guatemala and even Argentina
provide us with a picture of Old Spain more faithful than
one can find in many cities of the mother country. Vast
areas of Latin America have preserved the feeling of
18th and 19th century Europe virtually intact. Not only
the settings are there unchanged, but so too are many of
the attitudes, customs and festivals of the people. Even
today, tales of mediaeval chivalry are still read en¬
thusiastically in small provincial towns, and Charlemagne
and the twelve peers of his kingdom are familiar figures to
the village folk of rural Brazil.
It is easy to understand that many Latin-Americans
show annoyance when visitors concentrate all their
interest on the vestiges of the past and describe with
such great relish the customs of bygone days. For Latin-
Americans are very proud, and well they may be, of their
great modern cities which stand as testimony to their
determination to build a new world civilization. Does not
Rio de Janeiro, and even more so the new capital city of
Brasilia, give a glimpse of the world of tomorrow? In
Caracas, Mexico City or Rio, the visitor coming from
CONT'D ON PAGE 26
SKYSCRAPER SKYLINE In centre of Bogotá is symbolic of Colombia's
rapid modernization and industrial development. Founded in 1538 on the
site of the ancient Chibcha Indian capital, named Bacati, It still has narrow
cobblestone streets overhung by balconies but as is seen in this photo, taken

GLASS TOWER topped by TV transmitter aerial (above) looms
above turn-of-century buildings and busy street scene In the centre
of Mexico City, built In the I 6th century on the site of a lake. Though
much of Mexico's industrial potential is centred on the capital, many
aspects of the city still reflect the meeting of Spanish and Indian cultures.
SIX MILLION INHABITANTS make Buenos Aires the most popu¬
lous city In South America. From the start of the century and until
recent times, Argentina's capital was unrivalled as the Continent's
most modern and bustling metropolis. Photo shows entrance to a
station on its underground railwaythe only one In South America.
from one of the mountain slopes encircling it (Bogotá lies on an Andean plateau
8,660 feet high), towering buildings of concrete, glass and aluminium are
swiftly replacing the traditional old houses with their red-tiled roofs and iron-
barred windows. Colombia's National University was founded here in I 572.
25

CHANGING FACE OF LATIN AMERICA (Cont'd)
T*S POPULATION INFLUX TO THE CITIES
Europe is overwhelmed and
bewildered. Standing amid
their bold, soaring sky¬
scrapers, he will feel that he
has suddenly not only crossed
the Atlantic but been trans¬
ported in time and space far
into the future.
These "cities of tomorrow"
are a recent phenomenon in
Latin-American life. Only
fifty years ago, her great
capitals looked to France with its dignified and opulent
18th and 19th century styles, for their inspiration. In
certain sections of Buenos Aires today, a visitor will be
reminded of the Auteull or Passy districts of Paris.
Santiago de Chile recalls Germany during the era of the
Weimar Republic. Mexico City presents an assortment of
styles ranging from Colonial Spanish and late 19th
century French to 20th century Callfornian.
However debatable some of the results of Latin-
American architecture may be, they do confirm a concern
for town planning which is often missing in many North-
American cities. Latin-American architects have made
particular efforts to relieve the chess-board monotony
of city streets with sumptuous public buildings and a
great abundance of parks and plazas.
Any consideration of the continent of Latin America
must inevitably be made in terms of her cities. Although
the economy of most of the republics is based on
agriculture, the strong urban tradition which the
Spaniards and Portuguese brought with them from the
Old World still prevails.
Since the beginning of the colonial period a sharp
division has existed between the city and rural areas.
The effect of this cleavage on the growth and develop¬
ment of the young nations has often been disastrous.
The rural areas and their inhabitants were formerly
considered to exist for the sole benefit of the cities, as
the purveyors of essential commodities and those
amenities which made life more agréable for the towns¬
folk. This explains the striking contrast that still
exists today between the cultured society of the cities
profoundly European in taste and the unpolished, often
wretched rural population.
Spain and Portugal bequeathed to their former
colonies a heavy bureaucracy and a small minority of
people who held a monopoly of land and wealth. During
the 19th century, a middle class slowly began to develop.
But it has succeeded in exerting real influence only in
the most economically advanced coun¬
tries. It is with the appearance of this
middle class that the new face of Latin
America is being moulded. The trend
has been favoured by the rise of indus¬
trialization which many Latin-Ameri¬
cans see as the solution to their mul¬
tiple problems.
In Mexico, Brazil and Argentina,
industrial development has produced a
city working class far different from
the one which existed in the days when
great landowners dominated the
political scene. A militant trade union
movement has emerged, and on every
hand governments are faced with the
same difficulties which marked in¬
dustrial development during the 19th
MOUNTAIN ROAD, twisting and turning along the slopes of the Peruvian Andes, illustrates one of many communication problems in Latin America
terrains, vast distances, immense, unpopulated regions. Five centuries ago a complex network of roads built by the Incas criss-crossed
the Andes. Some of the highways hacked out of the mountainside during this prodigious feat of construction are still in use today.

century in Europe and elsewhere. As
a result, political antagonisms have
grown more bitter. But the rhythm of
industrialization has been so sharply
accelerated that its results are now
evident everywhere. Brazil, for example,
today manufactures its own automobiles
which can be seen streaming along the
nation's newly constructed super¬
highways
The industrial "explosion" has been
accompanied by a mass influx of
peasants to the cities. Although when
they arrive they feel out of place in
their new surroundings, it is probably
only a matter of a few years before
their whole concept of things changes.
The fact is that the isolation in which
great masses of Latin Americans once lived is now broken.
Today they have become conscious of their position and
are voicing their demands for a higher standard of living.
This change is strikingly apparent in the Andes region.
There for centuries the Indians lived in isolated
communities, refusing all contact with the towns and
cities. Today they are abandoning their former homes
and settling in the outskirts of Lima, La Paz and Quito,
where huge shantytowns have sprung up. Lima, which
was once a city made up mostly of European stock, now
counts an Indian population of half a million.
It will not be long before the consequences of this
population shift to the cities will be felt everywhere. The
Indian who learns Spanish has made a break with his
past and taken a step toward integrating himself
into the rest of the country's society. He realizes the
extent of his poverty and knows that a better life is
possible than the destitute and humiliating existence
which was formerly his lot. A similar development is
taking place in Brazil where Negro farmers are flocking
to the great industrial city of Sao Paulo in the south
to find work in the factories.
The Unesco Courier. June 1961
With these migrations an archaic way of life, yet rich
In artistic traditions, ls adding Its stamp to the traditional
modes and manners of the city. To the cities of Peru
the Indians have brought their deeply melancholy music.
Every Sunday, under great circus tents erected for the
occasion, and before a gaudily dressed throng, Indian folk
groups play the mountain tunes which until now were
practically unknown to all but a few fortunate travellers.
In Brazil, the Negro has brought to the cities his African
cults with their ecstatic dances and ritual music. From
these extraordinarily fertile sources writers, musicians and
painters are drawing rich Inspiration.
The people of Latin America dislike being lumped
together into a single homogeneous group. They take
pleasure in pointing out, even in stressing, the differences
which distinguish them. The differences, in fact, arc
very real.
On one hand there is the Andes region and the plateaux
of Central America whose populations are basically Indian
and upon which the great Indian civilizations have left
their mark. On the other, In the plains and pampas of
the far south In Argentina and Uruguay, the European
descendants have almost completely replaced the Indige¬
nous races. Elsewhere in
Latin America are the great
forests and tropical savannahs
farmed by the descendants
of Negro slaves. There, more
often than not, the country¬
side takes its character from
single crop agriculture. Every¬
where throughout Latin Ame¬
rica we come upon these
contrasts of people and
differences of terrain and
climate. Yet, a visitor im¬
mediately senses the feeling
of unity among Latin Ame¬
ricans as a whole, a feeling
which Latin Americans them¬
selves are fully conscious of.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FARMING FAMILY on its way to market in the highlands of Colombia. Women wear distinctive feodora-like hats and shawls and the men, ponchos
or blanket-like cloaks. Colombia, fourth largest country in South America, has both Pacific and Atlantic Ocean coastlines. Most of Its people live
on the high plateaux and in the^valleys of the western highlands-three great arms of the Andes crossing the country from north to south
27
Photos '© Piul Almwy, Pirii

CHANGING FACE OF LATIN AMERICA (Cont'd)
CAFES AND BOOKSHOPS
This basic unity she owes to Iberian traditions which
have proved to be stronger than the diverse natural
settings and the whims of history. For three centuries,
the people of Latin America have lived the same kind
of life and shared the same traditions. From this has
come a social order and a view of the world which is
very similar among them. The Mexican and the Argentine
may be separated by thousands of miles, but they still
react much the same way under the same circumstances.
In fine nuances of expression they may differ somewhat,
but at heart they possess the same sensitivities.
It ls difficult in trying to sum up the problems
of an entire continent In a few words, not to
lose sight of the simple human realities. Life in all great
cities follows a familiar pattern and the large cities of
Latin America are no exception.
Every morning, people get up, have their breakfast,
crowd into buses or trams or get into their cars and join
the stream of automobiles making for the centre of town.
In the evening the same process is reversed when office
and factory workers return to their homes and the
business and commercial districts fall silent. People seek
relaxation and throng to the theatre; cinemas, showing
New and Old World films, are always crowded. Argentina,
Brazil and Mexico have long had a thriving cinema
industry and all over Latin America the seventh art is
coming into its own displaying new and vigorous talents.
Modern art In which many Latin American painters
and sculptors excel is extremely popular in most of the
large cities. New art galleries are opened daily, holding
vernissages and exhibitions in the true Parisian fashion.
One thing which never ceases to impress travellers is
the abundance of bookshops, their spaciousness and
modern presentation, and the huge number of people
always browsing through them. The same can be said
of the many cafés Latin America's delightful legacy from
the Mediterranean world where everyone gathers to talk
of literature, art, and especially politics, and all can find
refuge from loneliness, and take part in the pulsating
life of the city.
Any attempt to describe the artistic and intellectual
life of South America in such brief space would be im¬
possible. Except to a select few, the literary and artistic
achievements of Latin America remain a closed book.
Yet the continent has produced works of literature which
deserve a place alongside the great masterpieces of world
letters. For many people, though, names such as Sar¬
miento, Machado de Assis, Euclides da Cunha, Romulo
Gallegos, Gabriela Mistral, Ruben Dario, still draw a blank
stare. Unesco, and many private publishers, are attempt¬
ing to remedy this situation through the Latin-American
series of Translations of Representative Works (see The
Unesco Courier, June 1957), but much still needs to be
done to give Latin-American arts and letters their just
due.
P;Perhaps the most characteristic attitude of the
younger generation is a feeling which they
themselves call "Inquietud" (anxiety) and which reflects
their dissatisfaction with the state of things around
them. Dissatisfaction with the political and economic
situation, but above all with the possibilities available to
creative artists. In the absence of a substantial and cul¬
tivated middle class, the groups which can give more than
lip-service support to artists are still small in number.
Few writers or artists in Latin America are able to live
28
CONT'D ON PAGE 3 0
Arts d'aujourd'hui, Paris
MODERN SCULPTURE by Henry Laurens is one of the works by Euro¬
pean and North American artists who were asked to contribute to the deco¬
ration of the new University City at Caracas, Venezuela. Caracas itself has
been virtually rebuilt and enormously extended during the past I 5 years. It
is now a city of green spaces and striking modern architecture.
BOLD APPROACH in architecture is found in all types of buildings in
Latin America today. Less unconventional than the Cathedral of Brasilia
(see centre pages) this newly built church in Santiago de Chile is nevertheless
a magnificent example of contemporary architectural treatment. In Chile,
architects must also incorporate earthquake-proof qualities in their buildings.
Paul Almasy, Paris

OPEN-AIR THEATRE In Guatemala City. Mosaic figures recall ancient carvings on Pre-Columbian Mayan stelae. The theatre is
in a spacious park arranged with varied decorative elements. Close by is an unusual monument to modern industry (not shown).
29

CHANGING FACE OF LATIN AMERICA (Cont'd;
UNIVERSITIES OF ASTONISHING VITALITY
by pen or brush alone. The most striking social
characteristic of intellectual life in Latin America today
ls perhaps Its isolation. The struggle the artist and
Intellectual must wage gives their professions an intensity
and nobility of purpose which ls reminiscent of the revival
sparked by the Romantic period in early 19th century
Europe.
Writers and artists have become the self-appointed
interpreters and champions of the silent masses. Many
have launched into politics and used pen and word as
weapons. In this respect, the universities of Latin
America play an important role. They are, of course,
Influential centres in all spheres of activity but particul¬
arly so in politics. Ever since the great university reform
movement took place In Latin America in the 1920s
these institutions have resembled small states where
studies lead not only to a profession but also to an active
career in political life. It is from this that they draw
much of their astonishing vitality.
What tasks must Latin America prepare to undertake
if she is not to remain a marginal land? First and
foremost is education. She can hope for no real progress
If illiteracy continues at its present level. Civilization has
become too complex to be carried forward by men and
women who cannot read or write.
The obstacles to education are formidable. First of
all, there are the problems of the distance, Isolation and
poverty of many of her peoples. In the past, govern¬
ments have often failed to provide sufficient facilities for
the training of teachers.
The desire for education is strong throughout Latin
America, and this holds true among the Indians as well
who have often been described as "primitive." In many
parts of the Andes, in villages built at altitudes of 12,000
to 14,000 feet above sea level, the people have built schools
of their own accord and collected funds to pay the
teacher's salary. Indian villages have scraped money
together to permit a particularly gifted student to
continue his studies away from home in the hope that
he would return later with this knowledge to help his
village. For the great mass of the people education is the
one road to salvation.
These countries badly need trained executives and have
a shortage of technicians. The liberal professions, such
as medicine and law, still attract the greatest number of
students while other professions are scorned. This no
doubt is a tradition going back to colonial days, but a
change must come about, if these countries are to survive.
Education must do more than simply banish illiteracy.
A great effort in community development is needed -to
wipe out ignorance which is the greatest obstacle to
productivity. Similarly, communications and transporta¬
tion must be modernized and enlarged to free communities
from their isolated positions and make possible a more
rational system of distribution.
These transformations in Latin-American life will only
be possible when the great mass of people are no longer
condemned to a life of stagnation and when education
has fostered in them the hope for a better life. To this
task Unesco has long devoted its efforts.
Alfred Metraux is a noted anthropologist in charge of
"Human Rights" in the Department of Social Sciences of Unesco,
and is professor of South American Anthropology at the Ecole
Pratique des Hautes Etudes in Paris. Born in Switzerland, he has
travelled and worked extensively throughout Latin America. He
was former director and founder of the Ethnological Institute of
the National University of Tucuman (Argentina). One of his
major interests has long been cultural diffusion in Latin America.
He is the author of many scientific and popular works including
Easter Island (L'Ile de Pâques), Voodoo in Haiti (Le voudou
haitien), and The Black Peasants of Haiti (Haiti, la Terre et les
Hommes). His latest book, The Incas (Les Incas, Editions du
Seuil), will shortly be published.
30
STUDIOUS ARTIST attending classes in Guatemala City design
school uses articulated "Pinocchio" as model for the human figure.
INTENT SCIENTIST checks the incidence of city smog with a special
recording device placed on the roof of a building at Mexico University.

ENGROSSED READERS in Bogota, Colombia, pore over books in
Luis Arango Library, one of the country's most modern institutions.
FRIENDLY LIBRARIAN In San Salvador helps schoolchildren who
have come to her library for information to supplement classroom work.
RELAXED FARMER curls up with his newspaper in a Mexican village. Hammocks are widely used in towns and villages In all parts of Latin America.
31
