RAYS FROM OUTER SPACE
by Alexander Gusev
T:he phenomenon of cosmic rays was discovered
some fifty years ago but still remains .in
many respects a puzzle to science.
We know that an inexhaustible stream of these rays
pours down on our earth from all directions, invading
us day and night with never a moment's rest.
This was the case when scientists first discovered the
rays ; this was the case before man existed on earth
countless millions of years before the earth itself was
born. And it will continue to be the case far into the
future.
The mysterious source of cosmic rays and the
amazingly constant state of the phenomenon have
remained undiscovered because they . "shine" simul¬
taneously in all directions. If it were possible to imagine
that they really did shine as brightly as the sun, we
should be imagining eternal daylight everywhere on the
surface of our planet. Cosmic rays, however, are invisible
and their "brightness" is about that of the night sky
when there is no moon.
P'hysicists have been making a careful study
of the rays ever since they were discovered.
Scientists have learned quite a lot. They have learned,
for example, that cosmic rays are not really rays at all,
such as, light rays or radio waves. They are a stream
of the tiniest particles moving at terrific (cosmic) veloci¬
ties, tens of thousands of times faster than our rockets
or artificial satellites.
There is nothing unusual about the particles that
constitute cosmic rays they are the atomic nuclei of the
lightest gases, hydrogen (known as protons) and helium
(alpha particles) which are well known to physicists.
These nuclei make up 85% to 90% of the stream. The other
part also consists of atomic nuclei, but they are those
of the heavier elements lithium, nitrogen, iron...
These particles are so small that if they could be
compared with a grain of sand they would look like
that grain of sand compared with the earth. Some
of them possess colossal energy, sufficient to melt the
grain of sand.
As soon as physicists discovered this, they asked dozens
of "whys".
Why is the stream of cosmic particles made up
precisely of these elements, how are the particles formed,
where are. they, how does the gigantic generator work
that for thousands of millions of years has been
producing these cosmic rays; where does the energy that
feeds them come from?
Science has not found conclusive answers to all these
questions. They can only assure us that the cosmic
rays come to us from our stellar system, from our own
galaxy, that their origin is probably connected with the
bursting of "super-nova" stars and that part of the
stream comes to us from the nearest star, the sun.
A great deal, however, has been discovered; needless
to say, scientists can explain that which is closer to
us and available for study the fate of the cosmic
particles in the earth's atmosphere and their "behaviour"
in the vicinity of the earth.
When people who have no connexion with science
first hear of cosmic rays and their study they often
ask: Why study them? To what practical use can they
be put ?
We may say straight out that no practical use for
cosmic rays is at present foreseen, but there is no doubt
that a double benefit is obtained from the study of them.
First, the study of cosmic rays gives scientists greater
insight into the secrets of our boundless universe and
also into the micro-world of the atoms, into the secrets
of the atomic nuclei, their component particles, and of
many other particles called elementary. To know more
about the properties of elementary particles and atomic
nuclei, scientists have to find out exactly what happens
when there are collisions between particles moving at
high velocities and, therefore, possessing tremendous
energy.
For this purpose huge accelerators have been built to
drive particles at velocities of 10 thousand million electron-
volts (Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, USSR),
29 thousand million electron-volts (CERN the European
Centre for Nuclear Research, created by Unesco and
located in Switzerland), 33 thousand million electron-
volts (Brookhaven, USA). Still more powerful acceler¬
ators are being designed. None of the existing acceler¬
ators, nor those now projected, however, can compare
with the unknown cosmic accelerators.
Particles are met with in the cosmic stream that possess
energy hundreds of millions of times greater than that
obtained in the accelerators. These are the particles in
which physicists studying cosmic rays are most interested
If it is possible to learn the nature and properties of
elementary particles and, therefore, of atomic nuclei,
scientists may be able to design sources of energy so
powerful that they will greatly exceed the most fantastic
expectations of what controlled thermo-nuclear reactions
will bring; changes in natural conditions on earth and
other planets, flights to the planetary systems around
other stars, etc. will then become practically possible.
Si ECONDLY, the era of space flights, opened by
Soviet scientists and engineers on October 4,
1957 by the launching of the first artificial earth satellite
was soon followed by manned flights into outer space (1).
Cosmic rays are close "relations" to radio-active radia¬
tions, like those that cause radiation diseases. The earth
is protected by its atmospheric armour and, furthermore,
man is accustomed to the weak rays that penetrate that
armour. But in outer space? Is It not possible that future
rocket travellers, once they have left the atmosphere and
are on the threshold of outer space, will meet with death-
dealing rays? The study of cosmic rays has already pro¬
vided, the answer to this question.
The fate of cosmic particles flyng towards the earth
depends on their velocity, that Is, on their energy. Some
of them, moving at relatively low velocities, are deviated
from their straight-line flight at a considerable distance
above the earth's atmospheric layer and are caught in
the "trap" of the terrestrial magnetic field; the more
energetic of them break through the earth's magnetic
defences and enter the atmosphere.
Here they collide with atoms and atomic nuclei of gases
making up the atmosphere-oxygen, nitrogen, etc. In so
doing they destroy the atoms, converting them into ions
and, colliding with the atomic nuclei, split some of them,
Alexander Gusev is a doctor of physical sciences and a senior
22 research worker at the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. He is Scien¬
tific Editor at the Foreign Literature Publishing House, Moscow,
and he has written several works on the theory of magnetism.
(1) by Major Youri A. Gagarin April 12, 1961, Commander
Alan B. Shepard, Jr. May 5, 1961, Captain Virgil I. Grissom
July 21, 1961, Major Gherman S. Titov landed August 1, 1961
after 25 hours' flight.
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

CERN
COLLISIONS
IN THE MICRO-WORLD
Cosmic rays, the nuclear particles which come from outer
space, collide with atoms and atomic nuclei in the earth's
atmosphere creating an avalanche of nuclear "catastrophes"
right down to the earth's surface. To find out what happens
when there are collisions between particules moving at high
velocities science has produced many devices, some huge,
all ingenious. At left and above, collisions of particles are
photographed in hydrogen bubble chamber experiments.
At left, one of 49,000 pictures taken during a series of
experiments in bubble chamber at CERN (European Orga¬
nization for Nuclear Research) Laboratory near Geneva. It
shows disintegration of two particlesa lambda zero and an
anti-lambda zero. Above, photo from the Dubna Atomic
Research Centre, U.S.S.R., showing explosion produced when
a cosmic particle collides with a nuclear atom. Below, a tech¬
nician at Dubna Centre operates accelerator control panel.
Official Soviet photos
23

RAYS FROM OUTER SPACE (Cont'd)
Thousands of particles pierce us every second
lose their energy and are dissipated in the atmosphere.
The fastest of the particles, those whose velocity is close
to that of light, are of the greatest interest. There is
nothing that can stop them they are not affected by the
magnetic field and even penetrate the thousand-kilometre
thickness of the atmosphere as easily as a bullet penetrates
a sheet of paper; and they "perish" only when they
reach the depths of the earth. Particles that enter the
atmosphere at such velocities may collide with atomic
nuclei but they do not change course and scarcely feel
the force of the collision. If, however, the fraction of
energy lost and transfered to the nucleus is an infinites¬
imal part of the particle's tremendous energy, for the
nucleus the collision is a catastrophe. The nucleus, in
a way, explodes. "Splinters" of it, the particles of
which it is composed, fly out in all directions. The
particles knocked off by the collision then collide
with other nuclei and cause countless new catastrophes,
although each successive one is of lesser power than those
that preceded it. This is called a cascade process; the
particles so formed are like an avalanche, constantly
increasing in number until they eventually reach the
earth's surface.
T he fast-moving particle from outer space that
sets the whole process in motion, therefore,
arrives on earth accompanied by its countless "progeny",
a suite that sometimes numbers thousands of millions
and covers several square kilometres. Physicists call these
streams cosmic showers.
Cosmic rays are sometimes studied by "capturing" one
of the particles in a pack of photographic plates made
with extra thick emulsion. When the fast-moving particle
is caught, one of the nuclei of the emulsion layer bursts,
leaving a bunch of traces or a "star" that is visible when
the plate is developed. The lower the energy of a cosmic
particle entering the earth's atmosphere, the fewer its
"progeny". All of them together, however, form the
shower that saturates the atmosphere and is constantly
descending on to the earth's surface; this incessant
stream was given the name of "cosmic rays" when it
was first discovered. Obviously, however, the fragments
resulting from collisions are secondary rays; the primary
rays are those that pierce the outer space.
The intensity of the secondary rays is such that one
particle per second passes through every square centi¬
metre at sea-level. Since we live at sea-level, or near it,
on the surface of the earth, every one of us is pierced
by thousands of cosmic particles every second. In the
course of the millions of years that life has been develop¬
ing on earth, the plants, animals and people have grown
"accustomed" to the particles and pay no particular
attention to them; biologists even believe that cosmic
rays are an important factor in evolution: that their
influence on heredity has caused the mutability of fea¬
tures thus assisting in natural selection.
The era of space rockets and artificial satellites marks
a new stage in the study of cosmic rays. Physicists have
now been able to send their instruments into outer space.
The earliest observations produced results of basic
significance. Belts of fast-moving particles were found
to encircle the earth one of them at a height of 600 to
5,000 kilometres from the earth's surface and the other
much higher, at about 12,000-60,000 kilometres. They
were called the inner and outer radiation belts. They
were formed and are maintained by the earth's magnetic
field, that field which causes the compass needle to deviate
(the earth itself is a gigantic magnet whose poles are
close to but do not coincide with the geographic poles).
It had long been known that this magnet causes the
deviation of the slow-moving particles from their path,
producing the latitude effect (the intensity of cosmic
rays on the earth's surface varies with latitude, being
weakest at the equator and increasing towards the higher
latitudes). Nobody, however, suspected the existence of
radiation belts. The discovery resulted from Soviet and
24 American observations carried out by artificial satellites.
Research in this field has been carried out by Prof. S.N.
Vernov in the U.S.S.R. and Dr. James A. Van Allen in the
U.S.A. Not only were the belts themselves discovered but
their origin was explained as being due to the effect of
the terrestrial magnetic field on cosmic particles.
Particles possessing relatively low energy, that is, those
whose energy is less than 10 thousand million electron-
volts (energies that we can obtain in our accelerators) are
captured by the magnetic field and revolve round the
earth, following a spiral path. When they reach the
polar area where the magnetic field Is stronger they are
reflected like light rays from a mirror and sent off
towards the opposite pole. Since the space in which
they move Is practically speaking a vacuum, there is
nothing to hinder their movement and they expend very
little energy; they are, therefore, able to make millions
of journeys back and forth from pole to pole, each of
which again reflects them as a mirror would. They cannot
fly off into outer space because they are held by the
magnetic field. They are, as it were, caught in a trap in
the vicinity of the earth. This is what we mean when we
speak of magnetic traps. The edge of the outer belt
approaches the earth in the region of the two poles where
it causes the phenomena of Aurora Borealis, magnetic
storms and radio interference.
The outer belt is "inhabited" mainly by electrons. The
inner belt consists mainly of protons and extends from
the plane of the equator to 40" latitude north and south.
It is higher in the southern than in the northern hemi¬
sphere. This is because the magnetic and geographic
poles do not coincide.
The intensity of the stream of particles within the belt
is very great so that their discovery has important prac¬
tical as well as purely theoretical significance. Flights to
outer space are being envisaged by scientists and en¬
gineers. Before much longer man, as well as instruments,
will fly into outer space to visit, first the nearer worlds
and then those that are more distant.
Among the thousands of dangers that lie in wait
for man in outer space one is very well known
radiation disease. We know that In "empty" space the
radiation level (two particles per second per square centi¬
metre) is not dangerous to man. Flight through a radia¬
tion belt will be dangerous. There are probably similar
belts around other planets that possess magnetic fields.
We now know that the radiation belts turn inwards
towards the poles, like the surface of an apple towards
the stalk on which it hangs. The poles, therefore, may be
regarded as conical funnels through which a rocket may
fly in safety and thus avoid crossing the radiation belt.
We also know that there are areas in outer space in
which fields of magnetic force exist. There must also be
a concentration of cosmic particles in those places. It is
possible that clouds of particles, captured by magnetic
fields, are moving in outer space. If a rocket should
accidentally pass through one of those clouds its crew
might die from radiation disease. In addition to this,
when a rocket is moving at a high velocity outside these
clouds the number of collisions with cosmic particles and
the energy of the collisions greatly increase. The walls
of the rocket become a source of secondary radiation of
great intensity.
These are all phenomena that must be investigated so
that the necessary protective measures can be effected. It
is, therefore, important to study the magnetic fields of
other planets together with their radiation belts in order
to find the funnels that will ensure freedom from radia¬
tion during a landing. So far the only measurements that
have been made are those that concern our immediate
neighbour, the moon. Information received from the
Soviet cosmic rockets shows that the moon has no
magnetic field and no radiation belts. We now know,
also, that the radiation belt depends on the magnetic
field.
It is possible that we shall soon learn a great deal about
the moon and other planets such as Mars and Venus,
especially about their magnetic fields, and shall be able
to start work on the first projects for a safe landing on
their surfaces.
