24

SS ABEL ABOUL-WÉFA i
1 --LMt:^hff(1^ .i-*M.:iiv %
.*- ».i
? - '
Ç
j piRALs in space, graceful whorls rising in the
^J monumental architecture of our time, billow¬
ing honeycombs and cubist dreams are all on exhibition
in a museum which, even though it is located in Paris,
has nothing to do with art.
The museum is the Palais de la Découverte just off the
Champs-Elysées and Its "sculptures", easily the rival of
avant-garde art, are nothing but mathematical forms
projected in three dimensions.
A walk through the Mathematics Hall of this "Palace
of Discovery" is quite an experience for the layman.
Accustomed to abstract art, he experiences the shock of 25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Apparently works of abstract sculpture, these forms present two of
the infinitely many possible shapes representing third degree equations.
Photos © Paul Almasy
encountering its forms as expressions of the basic reality
of mathematics.
The result is a head-spinning world in which lines
intersect harmoniously, mountains rise out of a lunar
surface and curves seem to have been moulded by the
loving thumb of the sculptor shaping clay to conform to
an image in his mind. It is a gallery of forms, some
beautiful, some perhaps nightmarish, but all with an
emotional content for the spectator.
The most amazing aspect of these "works of art" is
that they could have been produced by a robot an elec¬
tronic computer capable of plotting equations in space.
26 Their beauty lies in their abstract mathematical order
liness, the very effect to which so many modern artists
strive in non-figurative works.
Obviously, this is not art for art's sake and the layman
is somewhat of an intruder in the Mathematics Hall. The
Palais de la Découverte is a science museum widely used
by students in Paris and its "sculpture" illustrates basic
mathematical formulae.
Take, for example, the case of a honeycomb structure
whose jutting prow might well be the façade of some
experimental housing project. The honeycomb is com¬
posed of curves constructed according to Gauss' law,
which lays down the so-called normal distribution
encountered in many problems of probability and statis¬
tics. A dancing spiral of wire is, in mathematical terms,
"a canal surface generated by moving a sphere of constant
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

ART IN MATHEMATICS (Cont'd;
Moving straight lines in space can generate curved surfaces of unusual beauty. One of these
surfaces is Plücker's conoid (above), named after one of the inventors of projective geometry. 27

ART IN
MATHEMATICS
(Cont'd^
Mathematical title of
this composition : "a
canal surface genera¬
ted by moving sphere
of constant radius
along circular helix".
28
radius along a circular helix"... which is one way of
saying "winding a length of wire around a circular rod."
An abstract basket ls Plücker's conoid, produced by
moving straight lines through space in differential geo¬
metry.
Models of these equations have been known to mathe¬
maticians for three centuries, but they usually remained
on their desks as esoteric objects reserved for the ini¬
tiated.
In 1937, the Palais de la Découverte introduced them to
the Paris public and this mathematical art show has been
a steady success ever since, both for budding mathemati¬
cians and visitors who happen to encounter a strange
world created by man's genius a world in which poetry
and harmony are produced by nothing more than equa¬
tions.
This sculpture-by-formulae is a classical example of
how science and aesthetics can meet to produce art. This
same meeting has been brought about more recently in
such fields as microphotography, crystallography, the
study of cosmic ray images on photographic plates, or
even in nuclear physics (the architectural symbol of the
Brussels World Fair was a gigantic atom).
And, paradoxically enough, while scientists are pro¬
ducing art, many present-day artists are turning to
science and technology in their efforts to reflect the
reality of this new and unexplored era in which we are
living. One can only conclude that the so-called divorce
between science and art between the humanities and
technology, if you prefer is not as irrevocable as it may
first appear.

Two mathematical models
shown here illustrate (left)
solids which permit an equi-
partition of space and (be¬
low) a third degree surface
on which 27 "real" straight
lines 'are possible.
Photos © Paul Almasy
29
