MEN OF THE LAND
Latin America today faces two pressing problems
o The need for agrarian reform
o The challenge of industrial expansion
by Tibor Mende
Afew years ago on a visit to Latin America 1
was admiring the capital city of a certain
Latin-American Republic. A local official informed me
that about once every minute a new building was
completed.
Several days later while travelling only a few hundred
miles west of this great metropolis, I was informed that
in that region the consumption of candles for lighting
was steadily on the increase. The modern city was one
of the world's fastest growing capitals, but the country¬
side I visited was probably among the last remaining
regions anywhere in the world where the sale of candles
is still growing.
Anyone who travels in Latin America will come across
similar contradictions. They will find rural areas of
abject misery not far from scintillating, skyscraper-
studded cities where wide avenues are packed with
luxury cars and bordered by sumptuous villas complete
with their own swimming pools.
It is said frequently that Latin America is a continent of
contrasts. It is an attractive phrase for the tourist
brochures, one that promises picturesque scenery and
plenty of opportunity for unusual colour photographs.
In reality, however, these contrasts mean a disequilibrium,
an uneven development, and all the tension and suffer¬
ing that implies. The main cause of such disequilibrium
in Latin America is an unequal development between
industry and agriculture.
This disequilibrium is so great in several Latin-Ameri¬
can countries that the slow progress of agricultural
development is beginning to hamper further industrial
development.
The traditional pattern of Latin-American economic
development has been in the form of concentric circles.
In the centre there is the minority with high incomes,
and it is on the needs of this group that industries are
based. This circle tends to broaden as it generates
industrialization and economic progress.
As the prosperity spreads, other groups enter the
privileged circle. As the incomes of these new groups
increase, they also begin to contribute to the nation's
savings and thus the progress of the economy continues.
The circles enlarge and growing numbers are absorbed
into the ever-widening field of the modern economy.
But, too often these circles stop dead once they reach
CONT'D ON PAGE 38
LANDSCAPE IN TRANSITION. From modern industrial com¬
plexes, like this one' in Mexico, to the timeless labouring of the soil
with a primitive wooden plough in the Puno region of Peru (opposite
page) and from llama transport to travel by jet aircraft, Latin America
is a continent of striking diversity. One of the major obstacles to its full
economic development is the present land distribution the existence
of vast estates (latifundia) owned by the few and not fully exploited.
36

m
m
TT*'
Photos © Paul Almasy. Par 37

MEN OF THE LAND (Cont'd)
38
LANDLESS FARM WORKERS
AND RURAL DISCONTENT
the world of the rural inhabitants who, we must re¬
member, form the majority class throughout Latin
America. So it ls that the large peasant class fails to
benefit, In the most part, from the burgeoning blessings
of an expanding economy. How to remedy this situation
ls rapidly becoming the number one problem throughout
Latin America.
Both natural and man-made causes are responsible
for the abject poverty and general inertia found in rural
areas. The nature of the soil itself is a primary natural
cause of this disparity. The major part of Latin America
lies in tropical and sub-tropical zones. Soil erosion,
excessive rainfall, prolonged drought, and crop yields far
below those in temperate zones, all combine to limit
productivity of the land.
Another natural cause is the uneven distribution of the
population. Much of Latin America resembles islands of
densely settled Inhabitants, divided by seas of wilderness.
This archipelago of islands of population has always
suffered from inadequate communication and an irrational
division which cuts them off from the necessary centres
of modern economy. A striking example is found in
Brazil where not much more than two per cent of the
country's surface is cultivated, and only half of that is
devoted to the production of foodstuffs.
Agriculture in Latin America is hindered as
well by man-made causes. Some are the
legacies of history, but others have their roots in existing
Institutions. Rural modernization suffers mainly from
two such obstacles monoculture and land tenure.
Often the most fertile regions are devoted to the produc¬
tion of industrial crops, most of which are intended for
export. In this way a large part of the best land grows
crops whose prices on the world market tend to change
frequently, and sometimes disastrously, causing great
economic uncertainty. This system of monoculture,
though it may bring in needed foreign currency, seldom
ever helps directly to alleviate malnutrition or famine.
The problem of land tenure is of greater importance.
In a number of Latin-American countries, a tiny fraction
of landowners hold the overwhelming proportion of
cultivated land. Huge and wasteful estates sometimes
co-exist with extreme poverty on the part of the rural
workers. In some cases large land holdings are exploited
along modern lines and assure a reasonable living
standard for the worker, but more often they do not,
and the standard of living of the workers is far below
what the yield of the land ought to sustain.
There is also the problem of the landless labourers.
They depend on seasonal work or are simply unemployed.
They are yet another aspect of the bottomless reservoir
of rural discontent found throughout Latin America.
It ls this rural majority of landless, low-income people
who are prisoners of the vicious circle of poverty, low
productivity, apathy and backwardness. It is their lack
of purchasing power that fatally limits the scope of
indigenous industries and, in the long run, tends to slow
down their development.
To make matters worse, the problem is rendered even
less tractable due to rapid population increase.
Perhaps nowhere in the world today is population
growing faster than in Latin America. The increase is
about 1.5 per cent in Asia as a whole. It is around 2 per

The Unesco Courier. June 1961
THE FASTEST GROWING
POPULATION IN THE WORLD
cent in Africa. Over Latin America as a whole, popula¬
tion growth ls believed to surpass the 2.5 per cent. Nor
is it likely that It will slow down in the foreseeable future.
On the contrary, progress In public health and the
effectiveness of the battle against epidemics are likely to
speed It still further. Yet, even now, Latin America
produces less food per head than before the war.
It is generally admitted that merely to maintain the
existing living standards of a population expanding at
such a rate, the Latin American countries ought to Invest
in their future 10 to 12 per cent of their national Income.
To go slightly further and to raise the present level by
only one per cent each year, such Investments ought to
reach 13 to 15 per cent of the national income.
Investments in most Latin-American countries, however,
are well below that level. Even large-scale foreign aid
could not fill the gap. Only by industrialization and the
modernization of agriculture, so that the peasant masses
become consumers of domestic Industries, can such des¬
irable investment levels be reached.
That, in essence, is the Latin-American dilemma.
Capital is scarce. It is, therefore, all the more urgent
to utilize fully all available resources. The two most
important among these are land and manpower. This
implies, first of all, the expansion of cultivated lands.
Hitherto uncultivated land which is potentially fertile
must be brought under the plough. It also implies all
the measures which would diversify the production of
the land, improve the efficiency of agriculture, and help
increase yields.
Many development and land reclamation proJets
are being launched all over Latin America to
speed the progress of agriculture. In Argentina, a Na¬
tional Institute of Technology has been functioning to
promote better practices on the farms. A subsidized wheat
expansion programme is gathering momentum in Brazil,
and large-scale irrigation schemes are under way in the
northeast of the country.
Chile has launched an eight-year agricultural develop¬
ment programme. Colombia ls co-ordinating her various
measures aiming at agricultural modernization, Mexico is
improving her rural marketing facilities and Ls pushing
ahead with irrigation programmes. Venezuela is launch¬
ing a five-year plan for Increasing meat production. And
in Peru a large-scale development programme is under
study, aimed at the opening up of the country's interior
to serve the welfare of the Andean Indians.
It would be impossible to list in a brief article all the
projects and schemes taking shape. Nor would the
generalization be justified that all of them have produced
the expected results. Desirable and helpful as these
projects may be, practically none of them affect the
systems of land tenure.
The land holding system In most Latin-American
countries has changed but little since colonial days.
Though the importance of land reform has repeatedly
been admitted by Latin America's political leaders, two
or three countries excepted, little has been done about it.
Several Latin-American countries have already reached
a stage in their economic development where further
expansion demands a measure of income redistribution
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
39

WINNING BACK WASTED LAND. Agricultural reforms and better exploitation of the land are both vital to Latin America
according to a recent U.N. report published in New York. Certain countries, says the report, though predominantly agricultural
must nevertheless import much food from abroad. They could obtain at least part of this from their own land if they used more
modern methods and put wasteland under cultivation. Lack of available land has provoked a mass exodus from rural areas to
towns as peasants search for work. Above, Paraguayans clear away trees and brushwood to win back wasted land for cultivation.
A NEW APPROACH THROUGH COMMON ACTION
40
which would widen the potential home market for the
products of existing industries.
Among the arguments advanced in opposition to such
measures, most frequently one hears the claim that the
mere carving up of large estates, as happened in Bolivia,
would tend to decrease production rather than help to
raise it. The simple slicing up of the land appears to
clash with the modern trend towards large-scale, mech¬
anical farming.
Indeed land reforms in a number of Asian countries
tend to confirm that the mere distribution of land without
simultaneous measures to provide the new owners with
basic equipment, with rural credit, with access to educa¬
tion, or eventually with the incentives to form co¬
operatives, may have an adverse effect on production.
In the prevailing political context of economically un¬
derdeveloped countries, however, the first purpose of land
reform is not to get more out of the soil but rather to
spread agricultural incomes and so to disarm political
passions generated by rural discontent. Only recently,
Latin America has been the theatre of political develop¬
ments which tend to underline the urgency of such
conclusions.
Fortunately, there are signs of growing awareness that
this political aspect is fast becoming the central theme
of Latin America's land problem. More and more, land
reform is viewed as an immunizing measure against
revolutionary temptations. At the September 1960 meeting
of the Organization of American States the need was
clearly recognized.
The final resolution, which has become known as the
Act of Bogotá, called for a re-examination of legislation
"with a view to ensuring a wider and more equitable
distribution of the ownership of land." In the same text,
new legislation concerning the system of land tenure,
rural credit and taxation policy was specifically
referred to as an indispensable preliminary both to
encourage foreign aid and investments, and to render the
countries of Latin America better prepared to make the
best use of such aid.
Such reforms would no doubt help to encourage rural
initiative and would greatly contribute to political
stability. To that extent, they would also encourage
foreign investors and help the flow of foreign aid.
Such a new approach to the land question in Latin
America could become decisive in providing the required
stimulant to revive and to modernize the region's agri¬
culture and to permit it to support, rather than to lag
behind industrial development. Finally, such a new
approach might herald Latin America's final offensive
against her intolerable heritage of rural poverty, mal¬
nutrition and famine.
Tibor Mende, author and journalist, has travelled widely in
Latin America and the Far East. His many books include
L'Amérique Latine entre en scène (Latin America enters the World
Scene), China and Her Shadow and South-East Asia between Two
Worlds.
