Photos Norwegian Embassy, Paris
Fridtjof Nansen, the centenary of whose birth is being celebrated this year, was an Arctic explorer of original
genius. His revolutionary ideas were derided and greeted with scepticism by other experts of his day.
Yet all his projects met with resounding success. Above, the Fram, Nansen's ship drifted locked in the
Arctic ice three years and then came safely home. Inset, Nansen in 1897, after his Polar Sea expedition.

THE SAGA OF
FRIDTJOF NANSEN
by Robert Gladwell
Aman shall and must be valiant; he must march
forward and quit himself like a man."
These words, written by the English historian, Thomas
Carlyle, serve well to introduce Fridtjof Nansen, for
during the 68 years of his life (he was born near Oslo in
Norway in 1861 and died in May 1930) Nansen can be
said to have lived up to all they mean and imply. He
himself, in 1926, in an address to the students of St.
Andrew's University, chose to quote these words from
Thomas Carlyle : "The first of all problems for a man is to
find out is what kind of work he is to do in the universe."
And then Nansen added: "But even this little problem
Robert Gladwell is a prominent British TV and radio writer and
producer. He has written a number of biographical radio documentary
programmes for Unesco including the one commemorating the
100/A anniversary of Nansen's birth from which the article on this
page has been adapted.
I had not been able to solve. I had a leaning to science;
but which science? Physics and chemistry interested me
most; but Master Irresponsible over whom I had no
control at that time did not like that kind of life much.
One day he suddenly took it into his head that zoology
would be better, as that promised more fun more
shooting, and outdoor life. Consequently we went In
for zoology.
"Then one day the irresponsible creature suddenly
suggested we should go on a voyage to the Arctic Sea,
under the pretext of studying the animal life of the
Polar Regions. I was twenty then and off we went!
That was the first fatal step that Jed me astray from the
quiet life of science."
Nansen ended his speech to the students of St.
Andrew's with this statement: "The first great thing is
to find yourself, and for that you need solitude and
contemplation; at least sometimes. I tell you deliverance
will not come from the rushing, noisy centres of civiliza¬
tion. It will come from the lonely places."
25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Norwegian Embassy, Paris
MOUNTAINOUS GLACIERS of
Greenland, the world's largest island
(left). The interior of this barren terrain
had never been explored when Nansen
decided to cross it on skis from east to
west in 1888. His hazardous and
exhausting journeyat times the thermo¬
meter dropped to 45 degrees C
took two and a half months. Above, Nan-
sen on an Arctic hunting trip in 1896.
Paul Almasy
NANSEN (Cont'd)
Champion of starving and homeless peoples
By the time he had spoken those words, at the age of
64, Fridtjof Nansen could claim not only to be familiar
with, but also an expert on, the lonely places. At the
age of 26, he had made the first successful crossing of
Greenland, on skis.
When he proposed to his first wife, the singer, Eva Sans,
he is reputed to have added: "But I must get up to the
North Pole." In 189.3 his polar ship, the Fram, built to
his special design, set sail for Arctic waters, and it was
another three years before Nansen saw civilization again.
Years later, too after the 1914-1918 war in his work for
the victims of famine and refugees, he often stood alone,
fighting a fearless battle against the indifference,
hypocrisy and prejudice of politicians.
Fridtjof Nansen had two great claims to fame. He was
an Arctic explorer of original genius who defied tradition
in his expeditions across Greenland in 1888, and in the
polar ship Fram (which significantly means Forward)
during 1893 to 1896. His second claim is symbolized in
the award to him of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1922.
Between 1896 and 1914 he gave himself to the scientific
research he loved so much, with a brief interlude as
Norwegian Minister in London, after his country had
gained its full Independence by leaving the union with
Sweden due in no small part to his efforts and advocacy.
After the end of the first world war he devoted himself
to humanitarian work and to the League of Nations.
His first great task was the repatriation of half a million
"lost" prisoners-of-war: and then, indefatigably, he
turned to the far more difficult task of finding homes for
refugees.
Thousands and thousands of men and women came to
bless the introduction of the Nansen Certificate, the
Nansen Passport, as the key to citizenship. One of the
causes he embraced with typical compassion and vigour
was that of the Armenian people. This was after the
near extermination of large groups of the Armenian
people in 1915.
By 1928 Nansen had settled no less than 7,000 refugees
in Armenia, and in 1922 he signed an agreement which
ensured 12,000 new dwellings there. That was a great
joy to him, but he had to inform the Council of the
26 League of Nations that, in view of the apathy of the
Great Powers, he had been unable to raise the loan
necessary to carry on the work.
Nansen's faith in the League of Nations was often
shaken, but not his faith in the Armenians and their
future. Eight years after his death, Michael Hansson,
the then head of the Office which carried on Nansen's
work, in a speech, accepting the Nobel Peace Prize on
behalf of the Nansen Office, said:
"I remember on a visit to Aleppo, a dinner that was
given in my honour by the Armenians there. Of course,
I had to make a speech, and at the first mention of
Nansen's name the entire company rose to its feet and
stood for a minute or two in silent prayer. Later when I
mentioned this incident to one of my Armenian hosts,
he said: "We Armenians believe that Nansen sits at the
side of our Lord watching over the Armenian people."
In his twenties, Nansen himself had spoken with
homage of another people, the Eskimos; and his
experiences among "that brave little people," as he
called them, and his deep affection for them, was reflected
and turned to practical account years later in his work
on behalf of refugees, such as the Armenians, and other
homeless minorities. After the Greenland adventure in
1888 he wrote:
"The Eskimo considers his foremost social duty is to
help others. They find it unthinkable that some should
live in plenty while others suffer want. They live lives
of constant danger and suffering, and yet they take joy
in life. And yet this Is the people that we Europeans
have thought ourselves justified in looking down upon.
"The purpose of our mission and civilizing work in
Greenland should be to benefit the natives. But what
have we done? All we have achieved with our reforms
is to demoralize this natural people, ruin their health
and destroy their freedom and independence."
These were brave words for a young man of twenty-
eight. But then Nansen was never lacking in bravery,
just as he never lacked moral courage, determination or
enterprise. When, for instance, he first put forward his
plan for crossing Greenland on skis he was greeted from
quite a few knowledgeable quarters with scorn and
derision.
The very method, remarked one Danish explorer, by
which Nansen proposes to reach the coast, that is to say,
by abandoning the firm ship's deck and creeping like a
polar bear from one rocking icefloe to another on his
way to the shore, shows such absolute recklessness that
it is scarcely possible to criticize it seriously.
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

Viollet Collection
Taken from "Great Norwegian Expeditions", Dreyers Forlag, Oslo
ARCTIC ENCOUNTER of Nansen and Johansen with the
British explorer Frederick Jackson and members of his party
(above), took place in 1896 when the two Norwegians were
travelling south after journeying on foot to within 200 miles
of the North Pole. Left, icefloes in the polar night, a drawing
by Nansen, who was a talented artist. After the first world war,
Nansen added to his already world-famed achievements by
devoting himself to the repatriation of prisoners and relief of
refugees. Below, the steamship "Baghdad" arrives at Stettin
loaded with prisoners of war repatriated from Russia. Inset,
the Nansen medal, awarded annually in recompense for excep¬
tional services to the cause of refugees. It bears the words
taken from Nansen's writing: "Love of man is practical policy."
jzWÊp^,
UNHCR
- i
27

NANSEN (Cont'd)
Drifting for three years on the Arctic ice
What, exactly, was Nansen's plan for crossing Green¬
land? He published it in the Norwegian journal, Naturen,
in January 1888. "The points on which I wish to lay most
emphasis "he wrote," are that the party should consist of
three or four expert skiers. And that they should land
as near to the east coast of Greenland as possible and
cross over to the settlements on the west.
"I feel certain from my own experiences as a skier
and from the results of Nordenskiold's Expedition of 1883,
that where the snow conditions are favourable greater
progress can be made on ski than by any other means.
By crossing from east to west one will burn one's boats
behind one; there will be no need to urge one's men on,
as the east coast will attract no one back, while in front
will be the colonies of the west coast with all the allure¬
ments and amenities of civilization."
This policy of cutting off the line of retreat was typical
of Nansen. It can be seen in much of his work as an
explorer. He preferred to work with small parties so that
risk of loss of life might be minimized in fact no life
was ever lost on his expeditions and then to take the
most straightforward, even if most hazardous, course of
action.
He was sometimes criticized for the apparently
foolhardy risks that he ran, but there was more than
boldness in his schemes; there was also infinite care and
labour in the preliminary arrangements. He was no
impractical dreamer. The problems that faced him in
planning his Greenland expedition were no simple ones.
He had to consider how to reach the coast, how to
surmount the difficulties of the rugged costline and how
best to prepare for crossing the ice-sheet. Nansen's
careful preparations show that he had clearly visualized
each of these problems.
In May, 1888, Nansen and his small party set
sail for Iceland. They then boarded a sealer
(called the Jason) that was to take them through the
Denmark Strait to the east coast of Greenland. Once on
the ice, it took Nansen two months to reach the highest
point 9,000 feet but the party still had to labour hard
against a head-wind as they hauled their sledges over
the bad surface.
It was at this moment of the journey on September
5 that one of the Lapps in the party exclaimed:
"O, Satan, no one can know how far it is from coast
to coast, for no one has ever been here before!"
Nansen himself was not quite certain how far they still
had to go. He was beginning to fear that they had over¬
estimated the day's marches. On September 17, 1888,
two months had elapsed since they had left the Jason,
but it was also the first morning that the inside walls
of their tent had not been thick with hoar frost. Then,
all at once, they thought they could hear a bird twittering.
They leapt from the tent and there was a snow-bunting.
Soon they caught sight of another.
Later Nansen recalled "we blessed the two snow-
buntings: the one which gave us a last greeting from the
east coast and the other that bade us welcome to the
west coast."
The news of the first successful crossing of Greenland
reached Europe on November 9, 1888, but as no ship dared
risk coming that far North to take them back to civiliza¬
tion, the members of the expedition had to settle down
to a winter In Greenland. It was not till May 30, 1889,
that Nansen and his party sailed back into Oslo Fjord,
with the sun shining, to be greeted by hundreds of sailing
boats, a whole fleet of steamers, and wildly cheering
crowds. Fridtjof Nansen suddenly found himself world-
famous.
Nansen's expedition established that Greenland Is a
land covered with ice, and provides a fairly accurate
picture of what conditions were in Northern Europe and
North America during the Ice-Age. It was Nansen who
discovered that the interior of Greenland constitutes a
28 pole of maximum cold that is of the greatest significance
for large parts of the Northern Hemisphere. The expedi
tion supplied other valuable scientific information and
also an impetus to further exploration.
Fridtjof Nansen's reaction to fame was typical of the
man. He summed it up this way: "Now that I have had
a taste of fame, and can see what its real value is, I
aspire after it no more."
On his return to Norway, Nansen again took up his job
as curator of the Zoological Museum in Bergen and he
toured most of the countries of Europe giving lectures.
But while still in Greenland he had been working on
another plan. He had dreams of another expedition, a
plan to cross the North Pole. It was a bold and original
idea based on two bits of evidence.
In 1884, Nansen had read of how an American yacht,
having become frozen in the Arctic, had drifted with the
ice across the polar regions; and a piece of Siberian
larchwood was also known to have drifted right across
the Pole. He therefore planned a ship so strong and of
such a shape that instead of being crushed by the ice
when the sea froze, she would rise above it, like an orange
pip when pinched between the fingers.
The result was his famous polar vessel, the Fram.
Schooner-rigged, and fitted with engines, she was a ship
of 400 tons, 128 feet long, 36 feet broad and with sides
two feet thick.
In November of 1892 Nansen journeyed to London to
lay his sensational North Pole Plan before the Royal
Geographical Society. Most of the Society received it
with scepticism, even alarm. It was, exclaimed the
President, the most daring plan ever put before the
Society.
According to Nansen's daughter that famous evening
was of minor significance as far as her father was
concerned. She wrote: "The expedition had to go
forward. Mother believed in him and everybody else
could think what they liked. Four years later he was back
in London, this time to report on the results of the Fram
expedition. Most of those who had been at the meeting
of November 14, 1892 were among the several thousand
assembled in the Albert Hall. Everyone stood up as
Nansen came in, and the orchestra struck up the victor's
hymn from Handel's 'Judas Maccabeus.' Nansen said that
was probably the proudest moment of his life.
"It was not the hope of fame or material gain that
impelled Nansen, but it was certainly in his nature to
want to know and see. He would gladly hazard his life
to lift the fringe of the veil that hid the secrets of the
Arctic Ocean. Many had tried to do so before him, and
many had perished thereby. But they had been working
against the forces of nature, not with them, and it was
that which was decisive."
"The idea of using the ocean current had come to
Nansen in a flash of inspiration and had grown into a
mighty plan which he could no longer give up without
being untrue to himself."

The Fram sailed from Oslo, then called Chris¬
tiana, in June 1893, with a crew of thirteen
and thirty sledge dogs. By September she had got as
far as Chelyuskin, the most northerly point of Siberia.
Soon the ice was 30 feet thick. Then came the 'nip':
the ship groaned and trembled and then, as Nansen had
predicted, she broke from the terrifying grip of the ice
and rose upward till she was safe on top of it. The drift
of the Fram had begun and there was no going back.
This, Nansen knew, was a time when all his crew must
be fully occupied, so the scientific instruments were set
up, a camp built on the ice for the dogs, and hunting
expeditions organized. The ship drifted slowly northward
for a year; and then began to drift westward. It was
then, Nansen decided, that the moment had come to
leave the Fram and make a dash for the Pole. He tells
of his plans himself: "With Johansen as my one compan¬
ion, and twenty-eight dogs, three sledges, carrying our
two kayaks, our Eskimo canoes, a tent, sleeping bags,
scientific instruments and stores, we parted from the

Fram and set off across the ice. By April, 1895, Johansen
and I had reached a point only 200 miles from the Pole,
farther North than any previous explorer. The
temperatures were forty below zero, our clothes and
sleeping bags were frozen stiff: the dogs were exhausted.
I decided to turn back, to give up the attempt to reach
the Pole."
Nansen and Johansen travelled for four months, during
which time the Fram was drifting. More than once they
were in danger of their lives. At one point they were
suddenly attacked by a polar bear. Another time as they
climbed on an iceberg to get their bearings, their kayaks
went adrift, and were only saved by Nansen's plunging
into the icy waters to retrieve them. Another time
Nansen's canoe was attacked by a huge bull walrus and
nearly destroyed. Finally the two men had to dig
themselves in for the winter, which they did by building
themselves a hut with tools made from walrus tusks.
When eventually Nansen and Johansen got back to
Norway, after their winter in the ice, they had been away
for more than three years, and they got back to be told
that there was no news of the Fram and her crew. A
week later she turned up, having drifted right round the
Pole and come safely back, just as Nansen had hoped and
predicted.
The greatest geographical result of the expedition was
the unexpected discovery of a deep polar sea. It was the
Arctic deep with its covering of ice and extraordinary
temperatures that interested Nansen most. As a trained
zoologist, he devoted his energies to the physical problems
of oceanography, a science that was growing rapidly then,
at the turn of the century, and which he did much to
promote.
While the Fram was drifting, he noticed that the ice
always moved to the right of the direction of the wind
and concluded that this must be due to the effect of the
earth's rotation. He expanded this idea; it was the wind
that sets the ice in motion. The rotation of the earth
causes every movement on the earth to be exposed to
a stress that in the northern hemisphere works to the
right. Because of this stress the ice does not drift in the
direction of the wind but to the right of it. Thus it was
Nansen who was the originator of the modern theory of
wind-driven currents.
Like so many of Nansen's new ideas, that of wind-driven
currents encountered opposition from many experts. But
today most manuals of oceanography give Nansen the
honour of being the first to have thought out a solution
to the problem.
Nansen would have preferred to have pursued his
scientific work, 'the quiet life of science,' but after the
first world war, he felt that his greatest duty lay in serving
the victims of that war. In 1922 he was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his untiring work for
the benefit of mankind. He made many speeches at
the League of Nations on behalf of distressed peoples,
but his pleas for the victims of famine and political
discrimination, were not always successful.
With the years Nansen, the scientist, became over¬
shadowed by Nansen the humanitarian. His polar
explorations, as was natural, were better known than his
scientific activities though both the Greenland and Fram
expeditions were for scientific purposes. Nevertheless a
scientist he was heart and soul.
In 1930, he planned to celebrate his 69th birthday by
flying to the North Pole in Dr. Eckener's Graf Zeppelin.
He saw the Zeppelin as an aid to scientific investigation,
but he died that year at the age of 68. On his death
tributes came from all over the world; and by many
thousands his name was remembered as that of the man
who had brought them home from exile.
In the Eleventh Assembly of the League of Nations his
achievements were recalled with gratitude and pride.
Here are the words of the British delegate, Lord Robert
Cecil: "We all remember his striking figure when he came
to the tribune, with that rugged eloquence so peculiarly
his own, to support some cause in the interests of peace
and humanity. It is no exaggeration to say that Dr. Nan-
sen was the very embodiment of truth, candour and
upright feeling. Every good cause had his support. His
work for refugees was characteristic of the man, and was
admirable work done without regard to the interests of
himself, or even his health, work which conferred
immense benefits on some of the most helpless of his
fellow men."
Nansen was buried on May 17, Norway's Constitution
Day, an anniversary that had been celebrated in the
Fram, out on the Arctic wastes with Johansen, and in 1905
by his great speech to his countrymen when Norway
gained her independence.
The above article is an abridgement of a radio pro¬
gramme produced by the Radio Division of Unesco in the
Studios of Unesco House in Paris.
SAMPLING THE SOUP at a children's relief feeding centre in Armenia, Nansen demonstrates the
devotion with which he shouldered the tremendous problem of caring for millions of refugees and displaced
persons. Below right, a young Greek refugee doing justice to a meal supplied by "Nansen Relief". The
work carried on by Nansen right up to his death saved countless lives including those of six million
children who would otherwise have perished during the great famine which occurred in Russia in 1921-22.
Norwegian Embassy, Paris UNHCR
29
