Detail of metal screen around tomb in
the Church of the Archangel, Moscow.

IN THE
LIFE OF
MAN
by Dr. d'Arcy Hayman
Head of Arts Education Section
Arts and Letters Division, Unesco

S? 'Treating the commonplace with the
sublime gives art its true power'
Jean-François Millet
Anatomical study, Leonardo da Vinci.
Photo © Anderson-Giraudon, Paris
Jn
very child, every man, every culture gives
'form to its feelings and ideas through art.
Art is the essence of that which is human ; it is the embo¬
diment of the human experience and goal. From the
moment in our history when man became distinguishable
as man, art was the mark that distinguished him, and
ever since, man has continued to be an artful creature.
The art act and object provide constant evidence and
demonstration of the human act and objective.
In this contemporary world of growing technology, man
views his place along the path of human activity with
mixed feelings of pride and doubt. The promise of a
tomorrow liberated by human imagination and devotion
yet threatened by narrowness, coldness, disintegration,
puts man at a crucial point in time and space at which
he must carefully re-examine and re-assess the values by
which he lives. It is especially important now that we
carefully examine the vital functions of the arts in culture
and give renewed attention and emphasis to the inherent
contributions of the arts to the survival and development
of man.
A culture gives evidence of the will and participation
of the individual. Art functions in a society much as it
functions in the life of an individual. It becomes the
emblem of a group, just as it is the mark of a single man.
It is a universal and personal implement with which men
protect and liberate themselves. It is a plan by which the
crowd and the man apart from the crowd can make cohe¬
rent the fragments of existence. It is an all-embracing
sentiment that brings men together, preserving for them,
still, their uniqueness. It is a moment in time when every
child and every man is beautiful and fulfilled. Art is a
dynamic, ubiquitous source which serves human need and
manifests the human potential.
A;RT can and should be an experience shared by
-all men every day of their lives; this does not
mean that all men must be painters, architects, authors,
composers, nor does it mean that men must spend all
their evenings in theatres and concert halls. Rather, it
means that man's innate sensitivities to the arts must
be allowed to develop, and, by early encouragement and
education, must be given opportunity for growth so that
the whole man can emerge.
The art experience embraces all " forms of involvement
with art: the production of works of art on the part of
the professional artist, the primitive craftsman, the lay¬
man, the child, as well as the active appreciation of art
on the part of the universal art audience which looks at,
listens to, reads and uses the work of art with personal
interest, understanding and love. The ultimate dimension
of the art experience is that which enables each man to
become aware of the aesthetic of his own environment,
brings to his attention the endless excitement of form
and colour, the richness of texture, the force, rhythm and
sound of human interaction, the poetry of nature and
man.
In the complexity of a modern world, it has become
necessary for men to "specialize" in their vocations, their
work. As a result, the human disciplines of art and
science, of philosophy and technology, have been sepa¬
rated, to the detriment of each. This twentieth century
phenomenon is at the peril of man, himself. It is as if
man had attempted to sever his head from his body in
order to isolate one faculty of his being from another.
Leonardo da Vinci lived in an age when one man could
embrace both fields of investigation simultaneously. In
the tradition of most oriental cultures, we find that a
man, whether he be statesman, businessman, or scientist,
in order to be considered a complete man, a whole man,
must have an intimate understanding of and sensitivity
to the arts. As art and science reach their purest form,
the parallel objectives, experiences, procedures, and end
products, almost merge into a single image, with the
scientist crediting his own intuitive senses and the artist
discussing problems of energy and matter.
Albert Einstein has said :
Man tries to make for himself in the fashion that
suits him best a simplified and intelligible picture of
the world; he then tries to some extent to substitute
this cosmos of his for the world of experience, and
thus overcome it. This is what the painter, the poet,
the speculative philosopher and the natural scientist
do, each in his own fashion. He makes this cosmos
and its construction the pivot of his emotional life,
in order to find in this way the peace and security
which he cannot find in the narrow whirlpool of per¬
sonal experience.
But in these words of Einstein, we cannot overlook the
phrase "each in his own fashion", for here is the key to
the difference between art and science. It is true that the
realm of science, like art, offers man an area in which his
imagination is given free rein, and it is even possible for
the man of science to arrive at his answers intuitively,
just as the artist does. But the paths to scientific and
aesthetic solutions differ greatly, and the final products
of each effort manifest these basic differences. The fact
that art is different from all other fields of human endea¬
vour makes it irreplaceable and indispensable in the life
of man.
Art functions in man's life in many nameless ways. In
any analysis of the role of art in human existence, one
can only attempt to describe those qualities of the art
experience that appear, at a specific moment in time and
space, to be of particular value to man. Each individual,
each culture, each age, will arrive at different points of
CONT'D ON PAGE 9

Detail of Old Man Seated, by Rembrandt. From the Gulbenkian Museum, Lisbon.

--,'
«sszik;
rfIN/ THE
A '
Tine art is that in which the hand,
the head, and the heart go together'
John Ruskin
ma
1\H^
Aàm /
In a graceful line-up, young Danish ballet
students execute a difficult tip-toe exercise.

© Paul Almasy, Paris
As they work, craftsmen like this designer
producing a floral motif on glass, discov¬
er new possibilities within their materials.
Painting offers these children of nursery-school
age a medium for free and uninhibited expres¬
sion. For children art is a way of discovery.
USIS
'Art is science in the flesh'
Jean Cocteau
emphasis according to its own need and history. It ls
even true that a work of art produced to satisfy one
human need in one period of time can function in an
entirely different way in another culture.
The best one can do when one hopes to verbally clarify
and classify the functions of art, is to attempt to single
out those ways in which art seems to be of significant
value to human existence and development at a particu¬
lar moment. Other men In other times and places have
described and will continue to describe the functions of
art differently, for art, like man, is ever changing, ever
evolving and becoming, ever new. But let us now (speak¬
ing out of our own frame of reference) consider those
ways in which art functions in the life of man.
To be alive is to be aware, curious, active, sensitive, pro¬
ductive, adventurous, concerned, involved. To be dead is
to be none of these things. Art increases our state of
aliveness by expanding and deepening our state of
awareness. Jean Cocteau once commented that to write
is to kill something of death. Art discovers, heightens,
and refines life experiences; it brings our emotions to our
attention and makes us fully feel them. Art is a selection
and examination of the physical and social world in order
that we may apprehend in ideal simplicity the selected
properties and values usually evident only obscurely, if at
all, in ordinary experience. Art serves to clarify our
feelings. Until we express emotions we do not know what
they are. The artist's vision, both analytic and panora¬
mic, makes perceptible at once the parts and the whole.
It has been said that man does not create; he regene¬
rates. Perhaps this means that man does not actually
create new forms, new orders, new life; rather, he dis¬
covers the fundamental forms and processes of his uni¬
verse and gives them new energy and function. What we
call "creativity" in human beings may, in fact, have to do
with that human discovery of a pre-existing fact, a
"cosmic truth".
P
JL i
'erception involves that discovery which man
makes about his environment conditioned by
his past experience; it is the combination of the physical
make-up of the object in relation to the symbolic asso¬
ciations made by human minds and senses. Discovery in
and through art includes not only that finding the artist
makes about his work, but the discovery the work of art
makes about him. The work of art sums up and reflects
the discoveries the artist has made about his environment
and about himself. For the child, as for the man, art is
a way of discovery which leads to new understanding of
the physical world in which he lives and of the self; it
gives new meaning and significant form to his life.
The life experience of man is a concert of involvements.
The degree to which a human being involves himself with
life differs according to the kinds of things that determine
and shape the moments of his existence. Art intensifies
man's involvement with life; it gives evidence and symbol
of human energy; it clarifies, vivifies human experience.
Art deals with the emotional realm of man; it supplies
stimulus for his capacity to feel and react, it expands his 9
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

'All arts are brothers each
one a light to the others'
Voltaire
area of sentiment. The art experience sharpens and
rewards the senses, and thus it develops all human
faculties.
It is the function of art to develop man's ability to feel
and to know beauty. Delacroix wrote in his diary: "In
many people the eye is untrue or inert; they see the
objects literally; of the exquisite they see nothing."
But when we speak of beauty we must be careful to
point out that concepts of beauty change and manifest
themselves differently according to the culture, the time,
the individual. Both classical Greek and African primi¬
tive art are beautiful; both Oriental and Occidental music
are beautiful. But concepts of beauty in these cultures
differ. We can easily appreciate standards of beauty that
are familiar to us, but it is with more difficulty that we
develop an appreciation of other kinds of beauty than
our own.
We meet the same difficulty when we consider,
the difference that time makes upon our no¬
tions of what is beautiful. It is well known that many
of the artists whom we now list among "the great
masters" were considered radical, ill equipped, even mad
for their own daring to express an individual concept of
beauty which was too advanced for their time. Rem¬
brandt, El Greco, Blake, Rodin, Van Gogh and countless
other artists, composers, poets were criticized, ridiculed
or ignored in their time. Whole periods of art were simi¬
larly berated: "Gothic" was a name applied to the art
and architecture of medlaevel times in depreciation by
Renaissance scholars who considered it crude and ugly.
The problem is ever the same. Today, that which is
called "modern art" or "abstract art" is met, in many
parts of the world, with public indignation and bewilder¬
ment. It is true that new forms of art are difficult to
evaluate because they often require new criteria for eval¬
uation, new standards for judgment. Surely not all of
our contemporary paintings, architectural structures,
musical and literary works will survive the critical per¬
spective of time. But we must trust that time will select
out of our age those key works which intensify our
moment in history and become part of the next genera¬
tion's visual landscape.
One of the greatest problems in our contemporary civi¬
lization is the inability of large numbers of people to
commit themselves wholly and intensely to an ideal, a
cause, an objective. Where once the mark of youth was
vitality, courage, energetic involvement, we now find
growing numbers of the young people of the world drifting
carelessly into a gutter of nothingness and decay.
Art is among the human disciplines that allow for and
depend upon the intense commitment of man to cons¬
tructive action.
A problem assuming gigantic proportions in our new
technological world is that of "mass leisure". Men once
dreamed of the day when physical slavery would be abo¬
lished, when the common man would work at the
necessary tasks of the society for a minimum amount of
time, to be released from these chores to enjoy a great
10 portion of his life in leisure. That day is gradually coming
CONT'D ON PAGE I 3
I i>
Bahnar cemetery statues, in southern Viet Nam.
Mosaic from the Sforza Castle Museum, Milan.

Woman in Tears, by Pablo Picasso
Collection Roland Penrose. London.
African wooden statuette.
Classical Kabuki dancer, Japan.
Mythological figure, Pre-lnca
Chimu civilization, ancient Peru.
Woman at work.
Indonesian wood carving.
Basel Ethnological Museum,
Switzerland.
Bulloz, Paris
11

'Man is tougher than iron, harder than
stone and more delicate than the rose'
Turkish proverb
/
« o
Joan of Arc. Painting by Georges Rouault. Museum of Modern Art, Paris.

Indian National Museum, New Delhi
The love story of Radha and Krishna is an epic theme of Indian miniature painting. Thousands of
works were done recounting this story. Here, a 17th century work in northern Indian style
for a large measure of the world's people. Instead of
bringing the utopia it promised, new problems are grow¬
ing. Men feel an emptiness and bewilderment at suddenly
acquiring large blocks of leisure time without the psycho¬
logical preparation and education for it.
As a result of this new technological gift, television sales
have zoomed, entertainment has become a four thousand
million dollar a year business in America alone, but along
with these statistics we can find that the rate of alcoho¬
lism, drug addiction, mental illness and juvenile crime
has risen to alarming proportions. The "threat of
leisure" is the result of a new class of people who have
successfully fought and won the battle of rights and pri¬
vileges for the working man only to fall into the aimless
and decadent pattern of playboys.
The role of art in education has great meaning here.
The art experience which involves the feelings of children
and men encourages incentive and allows for commitment.
Art makes leisure time and all time a thing of meaningful
excitement and beauty. The challenge of art is to enríame
and intensify in order to evoke deep emotional and in¬
tellectual responses united with those responses felt by
human beings in their relationships of man to nature and
man to man.
Art is that area of human experience which encom¬
passes expressive activity. Storytelling, celebrating,
acting, singing, painting and dancing are the fruits
of man's need for expressive activity. We often
classify cultures upon their expressive activity alone.
Different societies may have the same mores and the same
work habits, but if their art is different, the societies are
different.
Self-expression, as manifested in art, distinguishes in¬
dividuals, as well as cultures. Man's life differs from that
of most other organisms in that individualization has
become more important to him than strict conformity to
type. Individual capacity, viewpoint, choice, and action
are qualities that make us human. Sartre in his exis¬
tentialist philosophy presents a strong plea not to forget
that Individual men and women and children are neither
machines nor logical terms. We cannot find them, nor
can they find themselves merely in systems, either poli¬
tical or metaphysical. We cannot explain them by stereo
types. Each individual living with "nothingness" at his
heart must fill that void in his own way.
The human individual is solitary and unique. As such,
each is irreplaceable; to understand him is each time a
new problem. We must come to a place where we are able
to apprehend a person in his uniqueness, to understand
what makes him different from everyone else. Sartre has
established one absolute value for man: freedom. Free¬
dom and free choice are man's duty as well as his natural
condition. A person not only may make his life significant
by living according to meanings and values which he has
chosen, but he ought to do so.
Man can and should renew himself each moment
through his capacity for free choice. Chekhov once said
that his aim in Ufe was to squeeze the slave out of him¬
self. In a letter to a friend he described himself in youth
as one who was brought up to fawn on rank and accept
without questioning other people's ideas, one who behaved
hypocritically toward God and man without the slightest
excuse but that he was conscious of his own worthlessness.
As a man, Chekhov was able to find his worth, his pur¬
pose, in his art and the opportunity it gave him for per¬
sonal expression.
Art expression enables man to see himself and com¬
municate with himself for it gives voice to the self. The
artist's product makes the man unique as much as his
thumb print and signature single him out. The artist does
not deal in categories but in particulars, and he deals
directly with them. This individuation of experience, of
emotion, is made possible through art.
Anthropologists and archaeologists have estimated that
it was just about a million years ago, at the beginning of
the Pleistocene period, that man emerged from the world
of primates. There have been many attempts to describe
and identify the human characteristics of man. But
whatever the historian's conclusions, they are always
based, in large measure, upon the artifacts and aesthetic
expressions which automatically reflect the individual and
his particular time and culture.
One of the distinguishing features of the human spirit
is its need to record personal and group experience. The
finger-tracings, drawings, engravings, bas-reliefs and
paintings on the wans of caves inhabited by earliest man
tell a clear and direct story about the dawn of human
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 13

'Art is the one way possible
of speaking truth*
Robert Browning
culture. The historian knows that the art of every age
and every culture is an outgrowth, an extension of that
age and culture. There is no more accurate description
of a certain time and place than is given to us by the
artifacts we find from the remains of that civilization.
When we trace the history of man up to current times
we can find recorded and reflected in the art work of each
period the life and death, the beliefs and fears, the joys
and sufferings of human beings.
The work of art stands as summary and chronicle of
human experience. Man still has need of leaving a
record of his life experience. But many a man or child
is frustrated in his attempts to manifest his observations
in the complicated and abstract signs and symbols of a
highly technical society. Record making in the natural
and personal symbols of art enables all men, all children
to record the uniqueness and significance of their own
lives.
One of the greatest of human gifts is the highly de¬
veloped capacity to communicate; it is in the act of
communication that men can relate themselves to other
men near and far in time and space. For the purpose of
communication men have invented symbols, and this
symbol-making function is one of man's primary acti¬
vities; in fact it is the fundamental process of the mind
and goes on all the time. This process actuates human
aims, fancies, consciousness of value, awareness and
enthusiasms.
»
Chinese landscape painting, now
in the Musée Guimet, Paris
S:
14
kl. Hayakawa has said that the task of art is
"perpetually to search for emblems with which
adequately to symbolize and thus to enable us to cope
with our experience. Symbol making is basic to man.
Man must record his experiences and feelings in symbols
in order to communicate them to other men. A whole
system of communication sprang from the earliest draw¬
ings and paintings. The alphabet and all written lan¬
guage are outgrowths of these earliest recorded images.
The visual and musical arts offer man means of com¬
munication that go even beyond the scope of words. The
painter, the composer have invented symbols that can be
passed from man to man so that concepts and feelings
can be conveyed directly.
Just after the turn of the century, Kandinsky wrote
one of the first explanations of "non-objective" art as a
means of communication. Kandinsky drew upon his own
first art experience in music as a basis for his argument
that form and colour in themselves constitute a language
adequate to express and communicate emotion just as
musical sound acts directly on the soul. He believed that
it was not necessary in the visual arts to have the kind
of material subject matter found in literature. Form itself
is the expression of inner meaning.
Art as a tool, as a medium of communication has many
implications for the life and education of man. In these
times when the development, even the survival of man,
depends upon full and successful intercultural commu¬
nication we cannot afford to overlook or ignore any area
or form of communication. The aesthetic level of human
interaction is one which is Indispensable in the life of all
persons.
CONPD ON PAGE I 6
Executioner preparing the cross.
By Albrecht Dürer, Bonnat Collection

Starry Night, by Vincent van Gogh, now in Museum of Modern Art, New York, Giraudon, Paris
Unesco - Marc Riboud Buddhist sculpture, on wall of Borobudur Temple, Java.
15

Hieroglyphic carvings,
Great Temple of Abu Simbel, Egypt.
Interior with Egyptian Curtain, by Henri Matisse. The Phillips Gallery, Washington Intention, a painting by Paul Klee.
'Art hath an enemy called ignorance*
Ben Jonson
16
If, in the human order of things, each man is an indi¬
vidual with a particular set of senses and special arrange¬
ment of capacities, then each man's vision is different,
and the record each makes of his life and. environment
will be a unique interpretation.
All of the arts are formed upon a set of basic symbols.
Music, language, painting, involve abstractions that live
as separate and self-contained entities, but when these
symbols are long studied and learned, they act as a mag¬
nifying glass, a microscope which is turned back upon
ourselves. Art makes fundamental relationships visible
to the half-closed eye. Caught up in the complexity of
civilizations man often loses sight of his human objective.
The artist then not only records the physical facts of his
being, but must act as interpreter, translator of the
human experience. Art acts as diagnosis, definition, and
rationale for the human condition.
The Pyramids of Gizeh, the Parthenon, the temple of
Vishnu, the cathedral at Chartres, the United Nations
buildings stand, not only as a record of the time out of
which they were built, but as translations of that time.
The paintings of Giotto, Rembrandt, Tung Yuan, Grune
wald, Miro, Pollack, de Kooning are highly personal, yet
they become universal interpretations of human expe¬
rience.
Art does not stop at recording natural facts; art, as
the Swiss thinker Amiel once said, reveals nature by in¬
terpreting its intentions and formulating its desires.
Artists do not merely record what they see; they have
always put themselves and their culture and their age
into their art. African sculpture is filled with the great
power and dignity of the African people. We can look
back at the magnificent art of Egypt and see how the
artist's pictorial representation took in all he saw and
believed; we see how the Greeks breathed life into their
schematic forms, how mediaeval man brought his own
passion and devotion to the art forms he produced, how
Chinese and Japanese artists have reflected the contem¬
plative quality of their culture. And the contemporary
artist in all cultures endeavours to select out of his expe¬
rience those salient observations and felt responses in
order to interpret them for others through his craft.
In speaking about his friend, Picasso, Jean Cocteau
once said: "...he never let himself be bothered by external

M
lililí '!!'
Woven cloth design, Tlingit
Indians, Alaska and N.W. Canada.
1 '{i
Painted canvas, Chimu
Indian civilization, Peru.
Arabic lettering on the grave of Shah Zindeh, a. 14th century shrine in Samarkand.
views: they are after all simply the field which he har¬
vests, for he is a harvester. He is an inspired ragpicker,
the king of ragpickers. He picks up whatever lies in his
path and makes it serve him." The artist acts not only
as translator of his individual experience, but as inter¬
preter of the whole human experience as well.
The artist consciously or unconsciously seeks to change
and improve upon the human condition. When all
things as they are please a man, the stimulus toward
creative activity is absent. Whatever the designer's area,
the painter's subject, he, as a member of the human race,
is concerned with the betterment of mankind. The ar¬
chitects of our time, Le Corbusier, Mies van der Rohe,
Frank Lloyd-Wright, Nervi, Neutra, Buckminster, Fuller
and others, are profoundly concerned with human pro¬
gress. They devote their energies to the study and
meeting of human needs and problems.
Schiller wrote this shortly before he died: "One of the
most important tasks of culture is to submit man to the
influence of form... to make his life aesthetic by intro¬
ducing the rule of beauty wherever possible; because only
from the aesthetic can morality develop".
The painter and the sculptor have long been actively
engaged in social and spiritual reform. Goya and Dau-
mier and Orozco, who etch upon our eyes and mind
appalling moments of man's treachery; Kirchner and
Munch and Bacon, who point out the problems of a civi¬
lized society all contribute, along with the philosophers
and statesmen and scientists, to social reform within the
human society.
The artist traditionally has taken part in many kinds
of reformation, for it is the very essence of his craft to
"re-form" his environment. When we view the word in
this original sense we can see that the artist is the master
of reform; he takes the pigments and fibres and wood
and clay and rook and metal from their natural organic
and inorganic states and gives them new form; he takes
the everyday visions and values of men and "re-forms"
them as well.
Perhaps the most elusive quality of man is, that which
we call the spiritual. We cannot locate its source in the
physical make-up of men, but we know that the human
spirit is one of the things that defines the human being.
Spiritual reform is one of the tasks of the artist. Today's
painter attempts to escape the superficial, to penetrate
the façade, and to enter into the realm of the spirit of
man. Just as the Haiku poet endeavours to express a
cosmic truth in seventeen syllables, the painter, with
poetic economy, strives to capture the universe in a rain
drop.
Charles Morris has written: "Art is the language for
the communication of values... art does not, except inci¬
dentally, make statements about values, but presents
values for direct experience ; it is not a language about
values, but the language of value."
Art enhances life. Just as the artist, by his very act,
attempts to alter his environment, he also seeks to enrich 17
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IMTpE
'All the arts relating
to human life are linked
together by a subtle bond*
Cicero
18
it. Art can touch every phase of human life and make
it that much more comfortable and beautiful. The art
products that serve our physical needs, our clothes and
furniture and automobiles should function as utilitarian
as well as art objects. The art products that meet our
Intellectual-emotional-spiritual needs, paintings, sculp¬
ture, the ceremonial vase, the tapestry, the book illustra¬
tion, the film, the flower garden, serve other human
requirements. But all of art serves man's aesthetic needs,
and aesthetic needs are common to all. Thomas Aquinas
said: "The senses delight in things duly proportioned as
in something akin to them; for the sense, too, is a kind
of reason as is cognitive power."
Aesthetic pleasure has been the source of productivity
in art since prehistoric times. The "home art" of Mag-
dalenian man included delicate engravings on utensils
and tools; at the same time Central and North American
men dyed and decorated the animal skins, they wore,
painted intricate motifs on their canoes. Wood carving,
basketry, pottery, leather work, and jewellery making are
among the first accomplishments of man. When we look
at the magnificent use of colour and form in an ancient
Peruvian textile or in a Zuni jar of the North American
Indians we become aware of man's earliest need to act
upon, control, change and enhance his environnent.
The gardens of Villa d'Esté, the canals of Venice, Len¬
ingrad and Bruges, the tapestries of the Lady and the
Unicorn, the Angkor Wat carvings of Cambodia, the Ja¬
panese Nô drama robes give glowing evidence that man's
need to beautify has persisted. Today, the artist still works
to make the moments of our life more pleasurable: a
Scandinavian chair, a Parisian gown, a New York stage
set, Japanese packaging are the contemporary designer's
contribution to the visual excitement and reward of our
daily lives.
Mass production, made possible by the technological
progress of our times, has been the cause of many of our
societies' current problems. One of these problems is that
of the badly-made object, mass-produced by insensitive
or irresponsible persons, and forced upon an innocent
public through the vicious misuse of advertising and
other forms of propaganda, so that the public level of
taste is consistently lowered until it actually selects the
poorly constructed object in preference to the well de¬
signed one. The machine age has given us cities that
look like prisons, highways and streets vulgarized by
endless signs, billboards, neon lights.
But the machine in the hands of an artist can become
a miraculous tool. The industrial designer, a product of
Venus du Mas, antique marble
statue found in 1 876 at Mas
d'Agenais, south-western France.
© Giraudon, Paris
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

I Bulloz, Paris
IH
Virgin and St. John, detail of The Crucifixion, painted by the 15th
century German artist, Grunewald. Now in the Colmar Museum, France.

'Art is the conveyance of spirit by means of matter'
our modern world, has been working to make "good
design" available to all men through mass produced fur¬
niture, textiles, utensils, buildings, automobiles, clothes,
etc. There are many problems to be solved in this field,
but we can look to the future with enthusiasm.
In consideration of art as enhancement we must come
again to the question: What is beauty? We know that
beauty is "relative"; for what may be deemed "beau¬
tiful" by one person, one culture, one age, may be con¬
sidered "ugly" by another. But this is the very factor
that makes the aesthetic object a human thing: it brings
men together in agreement and at the same time separ¬
ates them as individuals who see things in their own way.
This is one of the major tasks of artists in society: to
discover and establish new forms of beauty. When the
day comes that all men are educated through art, as
Herbert Read advises, they will learn to understand and
respect the varying nature of beauty while at the same
time maintaining a selective eye in -their standards of
aesthetic quality. And they will learn, as well, how
aesthetic awareness can give new incentive, new enrich¬
ment to their Uves.
Another factor to be considered when we look at the
way in which art functions to enhance life is that which
embraces the "pleasure principle." Running parallel to
man's need for self-discipline, control, "denial," is the
human need for fanciful escape, distraction, release from
the self-inflicted tensions of civilized living.
We need only to look at the long and fascinating history
of games, to find evidence of this fact. "Play" assumes
an all important role in the world of the child; in the
adult's life, the need for play persists, but the quality
of play, the complexity of the games change and increase
as the individual matures.
T
20
he arts offer man an opportunity for play.
Schiller has described this function of art in
man's life in this way: "In the midst of the awful realm
of powers, and of the sacred realm of laws, the aesthetic
creative impulse is building unawares a third joyous
realm of play and appearance, in which it releases
mankind from all the shackles of circumstance and frees
him from everything that may be called constraint; to
grant freedom by means of freedom is the fundamental
law of this kingdom."
There is an international relatedness, a coherence of
things. The physical world, the universe, provide a
highly structured and intricately formed environment for
man. And man is a unit in the endlessly complex
pattern; he is a form, within a form. Man's need for,
search for relationship, order, springs from a primordial
sense of consistency. This is the motive of inquiry, dis¬
covery, creativity; this is the basis for logic. But some¬
times we see man, in his paradoxical attempt to destroy
himself, deny and work against this innate sense of order.
We find evidences of this contradiction in highly civilized
societies where men inflict chaos upon themselves and
then retreat in escape to overcrowded mental hospitals
and psychiatrists' couches.
The superstructure of modern day man's institutional
life is marked by a spreading disintegration. Specializ¬
ation in occupations, compartmentalization in social acti¬
vity separate human need from related human need and
divorce human capacity from its use and fulfilment.
The aesthetic experience enables man to bring the bits
and particles of his life into an ordered structure, and it
provides for the interaction of the human organism with
environment.
Man, the artist, seeks to disentangle the most essential
strands of existence and weave them into a beautiful
fabric of intense validity, characteristic of himself and his
culture and his time. The order and form we find in a work
of art are not superimposed; they originate in the human
act of creation and are an organic event.
Greek philosophy was deeply and inherently connected
with Greek art, for it embodied not only rational thought,
but also vision (theorica) which apprehends objects in
relation to each other, and sees the idea in everything,
namely visible pattern. Giotto, like his contemporary,
Dante, saw life as a connection of parts. And later,
Leonardo da Vinci sensed the same order in the universe
and in the life of man. Paul Klee has commented that
the artist is so well oriented he can put order into the
flux of phenomena and experience. All men of art at
all times are concerned with the total web of relationships
among the parts of their existence.
Just as philosophy is characterized more by the for¬
mulation of its problems than by its solution of them
(incomplete patterns possess their own inherent élan),
and mathematics by a tendency toward completion, so the
realm of art is a condition of this tendency toward
completion, a search for order and harmony. Thus,
when we speak of art as order, we really cannot narrow
our thinking to some formula for peace and serenity that
the realm of art offers man as a way of life.
The art experience, for child and man, is the manifes¬
tation of the human and universal search for order out
of chaos; the work of art is the embodiment of this
search. We can respect it and be grateful for it as
such, in these times when the tendency toward order
© Giraudon. Paris
Gold necklaces and jewellery, India.

Salvador de Madariaga
and form is more and more frustrated and inhibited.
Involvement in art gives incentive to our forming power
and makes dynamic the order that we may find.
Our twentieth-century existence is marked by a
growing disintegration: the child is separated from his
parents, the parents are separated from each other, the
family members are separated from the community,
labour Is separated from work and further separated into
parts, each compartment is again separated, science is
separated from art, philosophy from religion, and religion
is splintered into opposing bits, formal education is
separated into endless departments, the senses are
separated from the intellect, and man is separated from
man.
Man is, basically, filled with the urge to form, with the
need to find harmony and build order. But it can happen
that as societies and civilizations become more organized,
more compartmentalized, more categorized, man becomes
more confused, defeated, and dehumanized. For there
can be order without integration; man can establish a
system that puts the fragments of his existence into a
rigid order. He can tightly regiment the moments of
his life, thus making for himself an orderly plan by which
to live. But the very neat and precise order he builds
can become a series of separate prisons that divide and
hold the many aspects of his being apart, and thus lead
to his disintegration. Man not only needs to establish an
orderly arrangement of the parts of his life, but he must
integrate the parts into a meaningful whole, and the
whole must become even more significant than the orga¬
nization of the parts.
The synthesis of intellect and emotion is possible only
on an aesthetic level of experience. Establishing rela¬
tionships between the world of fantasy, imagination,
thought, and the physical world of objective reality then
is another of the functions of art. For, when the artist
externalizes his visual image, he gives form to it and it
Decorative tassels made in France.
CONT'D ON PAGE 23 Traditional decorations of wooden
dwellings in Batak village, Sumatra.
mm¿ '

tfflS
wkwi
Composition in Red,
Yellow and Blue, by Mondrian.
Detail of exterior wall design
of modern Mexican skyscraper.
I Paul Almasy
) Paul Almasy Traditional decorative designs, Ndebele tribe, South Africa.
22

'Great art is an instant in eternity'
James Huneker
IH I ii
Bulloz, Paris
Supreme poetic masterpiece of Gothic art, the six tapestries known as "La Dame à la Licorne" (The Lady
with the Unicorn) are supposed to have been made for an early I 5th century French nobleman as a gift for
his bride-to-be. Five of them represent the Allegories of the Five Senses while the sixth shows the Lady
under a canopy. Above, a detail from the Allegory of the Sense of Taste. The Lady is seen taking a sweet
from a bowl proffered by her attendant. The exquisitely woven animals and flowers are set against a red
ground and a blue carpet. The mythical unicorn symbolizes purity and stability. Cluny Museum, Paris.
becomes a fact. The great artist is one who has success¬
fully Integrated vast areas of human experience.
The problem of the integration of man, of society, is one
that has long, concerned philosophers, psychologists,
educators, and all who study human need and behaviour.
Eastern cultures have given emphasis to this problem of
man's oneness, selfhood, union. Zen Buddhism, which is
a culmination of several ancient Indian, Chinese, and
Japanese philosophies, attempts to liberate the energies
stored in each man, which are, in ordinary circumstances,
cramped and distorted so that they find no adequate
channel for activity; Zen develops the art of seeing into
the nature of one's own being.
Zen Buddhists have long known and respected the
power of art as integration; they know that when a man
is intensely involved in his craft, he is at one with It, and
thus he is at one with nature and with himself. The
form of painting practised in Zen is known as Sumiye; it
attempts to catch the Spirit as it moves; everything
becomes, nothing is stationary; the artist must follow his
inspiration as spontaneously and absolutely and instantly
as it moves. Sumiye painting, like much of the abstract
painting of contemporary occidental cultures, calls upon
the whole man at once; his physical, his emotional his
intellectual, his spiritual selves are integrated into one
act, one moment, one man.
Today the entire society of man, threatened with
spiritual and physical disintegration is becoming aware
of its own separateness, emptiness, purposelessness. We
are a human race in search of meaning, in need of form
to shape the welter of incoherent fragments that enter
our experience. Only when art has reintegrated, re-
humanized society will the human race be ready, in
Goethe's words, to live manfully in the whole, the good,
and the beautiful. If we are to find new motivation, new
direction, new harmony for our life, we must turn to art,
for the plan and model is there.
Dr. d'Arcy Hayman, who directs the Programme in Art Education
for Unesco, has been a member of the Faculties of Art and Art
Education at the University of California, New York University
and Columbia University. She is an American educator, author,
and painter. 23
