UNIVERSITY CITY. Mexico's
National University near to its
capital, is one of the architectural
landmarks of modern Latin Ame¬
rica. Inaugurated nine years ago,
the campus is a bold integration
of striking buildings, paintings,
mosaic murals, sculpture and land¬
scape planning. The university
accommodates 60,000 students.
18
O

s MODERN ARCHITECTURE
TRIUMPH OF LATIN AMERICA
The Unesco Courier. June 1961
by Enrique Mindlin
All modern architecture In Latin America has
stemmed from two main sources. From
Europe came the inspiration of the masters who created
the so-called International Architecture after the First
World WarLe Corbusier, Van der Rohe, Groplus, Aalto
and others. From North America came the brilliant Ideas
motivating the highly personal work of Frank Lloyd
Wright.
Yet in Latin America it did not follow the same lines as
in Europe or the United States. In most Latin-American
countries, the impact of the new architecture imported
from abroad by a few "avant-garde" architects was
forceful and fruitful because It was generally enhanced by
concurrent movements of cultural nationalism.
Although modern architecture In Latin America began,
in a way, as an Import from abroad, it soon acquired a
motivation of its own, a fighting quality and a banner-
bearing approach which finally found its particular
expression in every Latin American country. The kind of
"missionary" touch marking most early work in this part
of the world ls a parallel to the idealistic striving for a
better and happier existence which fed the countless
political uprisings in the hemisphere and the Innumerable
developments in art and literature.
Architecture was thus given a deeper meaning as an
indispensable part in the building up of the young na¬
tions of the New World. It was thus led along special
paths in whatever direction this striving towards a kind
of Utopia was most strongly felt. The impact of plastic
forms created an emotional quality which became often
more important than the functional or economic aspects.
Broadly speaking, modern architecture In Latin
America may be said to have played a greater role actually
expressing ideals and aspirations of the people than in
effectively solving, in one way or another, Its day-to-day
problems. Economic conditions in most Latin American
countries make this almost inevitable. When so much Is
still to be done, stimulating courage and determination
and "keeping lit the sacred flame" may be Just as nec¬
essary as doggedly pursuing the rather meagre practical
results which are all that can be hoped for at present.
Among the striking examples found in many countries
are the ambitious and Impressive "University Cities".
Throughout Latin America everyone feels strongly and
definitely that illiteracy must be wiped out. Yet no one
asserts that in order to achieve this goal, less effort should
be expended in trying to reach the summit of academic
development. Architecturally, the happy results of this
typical Latin American attitude are magnificent works like
the university cities of Mexico, Caracas and Rio de Janeiro.
The same idealistic approach is found in public housing.
Although national resources make sweeping solutions to
the problem of housing the underprivileged classes out of
the question, in most Latin American countries one finds
alongside the rather cheap and drab workers' housing
areas, buildings which belong in a much better world.
Handsomely integrated housing areas in Santiago, Lima,
Caracas, Mexico City, and Rio de Janeiro underscore the
valid possibilities of creating, architecturally, community
dwellings of a truly humane social character.
A constant undercurrent In Latin American archi-
19
CONT'D ON PAGE 21

/ f %>
Paul Almasy, Paris
CAMPUS CONTRASTS are shown in these views of two Latin
American universities. Above, Indian style designs blend happily with
modern architecture on facade of University of Mexico Library. On
right, students cross University's 1,000 ft. long campus. Building in
rear is part of the Science Faculty. A team of I 56 architects and
Mexico's leading painters, sculptors and designers combined their
efforts to create this University City which cost some S 50 million.
Left, ladder-like clock tower at Caracas University. Below, exterior
and interior aspects of the new Caracas University auditorium.
Suspended ceiling decorations were designed by Alexander Calder.
L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui, Paris
E
<

TRIUMPH OF ARCHITECTURE (Cont'd;
AN ART AS MUCH AS
A NEW TECHNIQUE
tectural thinking ls the Idealistic formulation of
problems coupled with an almost single-minded devotion
to artistic perfection. Today, it has found Its most
dramatic and far-reaching expression in the creation of
Brasilia, the new capital city of Brazil. (See pages 22/23.)
Where others might have started with a small civic
centre, with sensible temporary quarters and with
commonplace pre-fabrlcated dwellings, the builders of
Brasilia decided that an exactly opposite approach was
the only possible answer. They felt that nothing less than
the daring vision of a perfect capital city could capture
the imagination of the Brazilian people and command
its support in the herculean efforts required to complete
the building of this metropolis In record time.
Building Brasilia did, In fact, put a heavy strain on the
economy of the country, but It also catalyzed with mag¬
netic power the will of the people, tapping Its dormant
potentialities to a degree unprecedented in the history of
Brazil. Through this capital, risen as If by magic from
the bare ground, fundamentals in architecture and city
planning were brought home to the man-in-the-strcet as
never before, creating among formerly Indifferent people
a new awareness of artistic standards and Ideals.
I have already said that a certain feeling of kinship
uniting much of the continent's modern architecture also
reaches Into apparently typical and characteristic
differences from one country to another. The reason for
this seems to originate, once more, in the distinctive Latin-
American vision of architecture as, first and foremost, an
art and not merely a deeply complex technique. Regional
differences in basic conditions are therefore not approach¬
ed by architects with the exclusive idea of finding
satisfactory answers to strictly functional problems. They
use these same conditions as so many excuses or sources
of Inspiration to advance into the higher levels of
architectural expression.
One example ls the modern "brlse-solell," a
device designed to protect parts of a building
against overexposure to the burning tropical sunlight,
which quickly became just as important as a means of
creating rich textual patterns and pleasant modulations of
light and shade in the architectural composition.
The need to reduce the effect of excessive rain or dust
on outside walls led to many kinds of ceramic surface
treatments which in turn brought about a characteristic
development of mural compositions. The azulejos of Brazil
(blue and white glazed tiles which echo the Colonial tra¬
dition), the multicoloured glass or tile murals typical of
Mexico, Venezuela or Brazil, and similar types of wall
surfacing stress a basic identity In architectural thinking.
Yet these too, through a varied approach to colour and
subject and the relative Importance given to them in the
overall design, emphasize regional differences, in terms of
climatic conditions and in artistic outlook and purpose.
There would be much to say about the most important
works of today's architecture in Latin American countries.
Briefly, it must at least be affirmed that Its works already
make a definite contribution to modern civilization.
We must remember too that these accomplishments
have been made against tremendous obstacles of all kinds,
far more so than in any other part of the Western World.
Now that these obstacles are being gradually removed by
mass education, by economic and Industrial development
and by the ever-growing need to face the challenges to
architecture inherent in modern life, architecture in Latin
America will develop at an even faster pace.
If, in the process, its characteristic strains of idealism,
lyricism and artistic endeavour are preserved, then this
same architecture is destined to make a growing interna¬
tional impact, offering its own particular gift for har¬
monizing daring reality with the vision of a better world
Enrique Mindlin is one of the leading architects of Latin America.
Born in Brazil, heis the author of Modern Architecture in Brazil
21

22
Brasilia, the new capital of Brazil, is the first
large city of the world conceived entirely
according to the principles of abstract archi¬
tecture. But it is more than a marvel of
modern architecture, a skyscraper city sprung,
in less than five years, from a desert plateau
in the interior. It is an act of faith, of the
determined pioneering spirit of a people bent
on conquering its untapped lands and esta¬
blishing a new Brazil of the 20th century.
In the words of former president Juscelino
Kubitschek, who built Brasilia: "In the world's
fifth largest country enormous fertile lands
are as empty as the Sahara, while millions of
Brazilians cling to the crowded shoreline."
Above left, Brasilia's cathedral during cons¬
truction. Its 16 concrete pillars, 130 ft. high,
form a circle 220 ft. across. Great sheets of
tinted, sun-filter glass fitted between them
will form the cathedral "walls". Left, several
of the ten-storey ministry buildings. In fore¬
ground is part of bowl-shaped Chamber of
Deputies. Above right, Government Centre,
known as the Plaza of.jhe Three Powers, with
dome-shaped Senate (lip), Chamber of Depu¬
ties (right) and twin skyscrapers for congres¬
sional offices. Right, stóie offices as seen from
between wing-shaped Columns of presidential
office building. Tapered columns are used in
various arrangements to unify design of key
public buildings. Brazil's first capital from
1549 to 1763 was Bahia on the north-east
coast. Afterwards Rio de Janeiro became the
seat of government, it remained so for the
rest of the colonial period, during the achie¬
vement of independence (In 1822), and
throughout the Brazilian empire and the
republic which succeeded it. The transfer of
the capital to Brasilia last year opened a new
era in the history of the largest and most
populous of the South-American countries.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

