
SAVING OUR
VANISHING
FORESTS
by K. H. Oedekoven
As far back as the unknown origin of mankind,
the path of human activity has been marked
by the thoughtless destruction of forest and vegetation.
In the course of history, civilizations have flourished
and disappeared with a resultant depletion of trees and
plants, leaving only steppe and desert behind. Only in
recent centuries has man begun to realize that he was
cutting off the branch that he was sitting on.
Man is becoming more aware today of nature's ven¬
geance and, at the same time, of the challenge which
confronts him in preserving his dwindling natural assets
while endeavouring to extend the fertile earth which is
the very basis of his existence. The demands of an ever
increasing population make his task more and more
insistent.
The forest, our largest and most durable soil cover, was
once regarded as only an obstacle to settlement, agri¬
culture and communications. It was recklessly burned
or exploited until it suddenly became a focus of intense
human interest.
Man has come to learn that the two most important
elements of his existence soil and water owe their
stability and availability to the presence of sufficient
forest cover. In many countries, this knowledge has not
been confined only to a few informed specialists, but is
today appreciated by a majority of the citizens.
After visiting the denuded mountains of Natal, the
former Prime Minister of South Africa, Jan Smuts,
declared in Parliament: "This is the vital problem of our
people, it is more Important than all politics!"
In some distant future, this change of mind, this great
turning back from the destruction of forests to reaf¬
forestation, may perhaps appear to the historian as a
more important landmark in the development of mankind
than all the great wars of our age.
But awareness alone does not solve problems. Ministers
of agriculture in most countries are deeply perplexed.
World population increases by more than 50,000 people
daily but the available area of productive land steadily
declines.
Three quarters of the world's population are under¬
nourished. There is only about one acre of land per head
for food production and no less than twice this area is
needed to ensure satisfactory nutrition. The true Enemy
No. 1 in the world is not a political or military opponent,
but the deterioration of the soil, the dryness, the irres¬
istible progress of semi-deserts and deserts.
Karl Heinz Oedekoven is Regional Forestry Officer in ¡he Near
East Regional Office, Cairo, of the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Organization. For the past 20 years he has closely studied
problems of world forestry. In 1958 he was Vice-Chairman of
the European Forestry Commission.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAG E

Arid deserts
replace Babylon's
golden harvests
In some countries, like the United States of America
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, soil conser¬
vation has become almost a "State religion. " In
Southern America, all over Africa, Asia and Australia
there is great concern over the manifold dangers which
threaten the soil.
While international rivalries change, while political
leaders come and go, this destructive process of soil
deterioration remains a permanent menace. Each
government inherits this problem from its predecessor.
Yet, even today, the efforts of many countries to remedy
the situation are merely in their infancy.
Only a few years ago the streets of Swakopmund in
South-West Africa were swept over by a sandstorm that
piled up sand dunes 20 feet high. We know from the
experience of 500 years that the Sahara desert progresses
towards the south at the rate of over three feet a year
on a wide front of 2,000 miles. Lake Chad, which, some
decades ago was still an Ideal refuge for migrating birds
from Europe, is steadily diminishing in surface area and
depth and its shores are turning from fertile green to
steppe brown. All far-reaching plans for the development
of Africa as the "Continent of the Future", all plans for
water use and industrialization will fail unless the neces¬
sary attention is paid to the importance of trees and
forests.
In classifying the great list of lost or endan¬
gered productive lands we find first that two
extensive desert belts have developed along both sides of
the equator. The one in the south reaches from Australia
to South Africa and South America. The one in the
northern hemisphere spreads north from China, all across
Asia, North America and Mexico.'
The northern belt includes those nations which, as we
learned in our history classes at school, were once rulers
of the world. We were puzzled to hear in geography
class that large areas of these once powerful nations are
now sterile. The truth is, of course, that in ancient times
they were not so.
Ctesiphon and Baghdad, . once centres of concentrated
power, were described by Herodotus more than two
thousand years ago: "Of all the countries we know this
is the most suitable for growing grain. It is so well
favoured that it yields two hundredfold and, where condi¬
tions are best, even three-hundredfold. The ears of
wheat and barley grow to the width of four fingers. But
to the height of what tree millet and barley grow I shall
not disclose, though I know it exactly. No one who has
not seen Babylon would believe me."
NATURE'S VENGEANCE on man for his thoughtless destruction
of forest and vegetation has been terrible. A natural forest canopy,
like the richly timbered Russian hillside (top of page) maintains water
infiltration at a maximum and keeps erosion down to a minimum. But
without the protective cover of trees and the firm grip of their roots
"-<-<«* -ï^-*~~:x^ÊÊÊÊi
ïïmmm m

a topsoil layer becomes loosened and is eventually carried away by
water and wind. Thus the disastrous chain reaction is set in motion
network of veins and then slight gullies appears in the soil, finally
deepening into real gorges. Eventually there remains only bare rock,
the kind of lunar landscape shown below, in an eroded area of Bolivia.
Official Soviet photo
For Herodotus, Babylon was the essence of fertility. He
also accorded the same honour to Cinyps, a region in
North Africa: "This country produces grain equal to the
best I have seen, for it has black soil and springs water
it. The yield is equal to that of Babylon, three-
hundredfold under the best conditions."
Soldiers in the sand and torrid conditions of this region
(part of modern Cyrenaica) during the last war would
have had difficulty in imagining that a now desolate
desert was 'the richest of farming land two millennia ago.
Mankind has lost a considerable part of its cultivable
soil during the course of recorded history, and through
this process, nations which once ruled the world have
gone down to poverty and misery.
There are three zones on the globe which successively
were homes of dominating civilizations but where the sou
became progressively devastated in proportion to the age
of their settlement.
T¡he first zone is the desert of North Africa. In
the Sahara, hundreds of archaeological finds
and cave paintings indicate that this was once a flour¬
ishing country of many lakes and rivers. One cave
painting shows men swimming. Imagine swimmers in the
Sahara desert today !
A second zone is the continuous range of stone, salt
and sand deserts which spread from West China, across
Turkestan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Sinai and up
to North Africa. In ancient times these latitudes were
inhabited by Sumerians, Babylonians, Persians, Mace¬
donians, and Phoenicians names which are all connec¬
ted with world power and wealth.
The third zone covers Palestine, Syria, Asia Minor,
Greece, Italy and Spain. It is true that the Southern
European States, Greece, Italy and Spain, are neither
steppes nor deserts, but their deforested mountains justify
the statement once made by Henry C. Wallace, former
United States Minister of Agriculture: "Nations live as
long as their humus !"
These countries to which for centuries numerous
foreigners came in search of fertile land, nowadays see
their own inhabitants emigrating to all parts of the world
to find better living conditions.
Zones of depleted land extend slowly from the south
to the north, and this epidemic of devastated soil seems
to be a contagious one. Attempts at reafforestation in
Spain, Italy and Greece would certainly have been more
successful had the opposite shores of the Mediterranean
still been covered with a wide belt of fertile land as once
they were. But the terrible desert has already reached
the shore of the Mediterranean on a wide front and sends
out its drying winds to the European countries.
The ever-blue sky of Italy has not always been as blue.
Some 2,000 years ago it was just as grey and cloudy as in
northern parts of Europe and the complaints of the old
Romans about frost and snow-fall which seem so
strange to those who know Italy today were probably
justified.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

^iitf:;~-^^
A RICH HARVEST OF TIMBER, sufficient to supply a population larger than now exists, can be taken
from the world's total forest area estimated to cover about 10,000 million acres. But to use up this amount
of wood without endangering future needs means that present productive forests must be treated as
"renewable crops", those not at present accessible must be opened up and present devastation must cease.
A continent swept away by its rivers
Much of the world's population (except in East and
South Asia) has left its earlier home and shifted more
and more to the north. What caused this change from
paradise to desert? Is this dreadful development un¬
avoidable, or is man himself to blame?
While once it took millennia, or at least centuries to
deplete fertile land, modern history offers a striking
example of how man can start and complete this
disastrous chain-reaction in only a few decades. Hardly
a hundred years, ago the American farmer moved into
the Middle West, full of initiative and energy.
At first, the existing forests seemed inexhaustible. They
were cut down, houses and bridges were built, the wood
was burned in locomotives, on ships and in stoves. Great
quantities were felled and burned on the spot to make
large areas of ash-fertilized farming land. A little later,
monocultures and tractors cleared away those clumps of
trees and hedges which had survived.
The result was that water ran off the land too rapidly,
soil was eroded, floods occurred and drought appeared
between rainy periods. This process was accelerated
8 during the First World War when large areas of what
remained of tree-covered prairie were ploughed up for
more intensive wheat production .
After the war, part of this land was left idle,- but there
was no longer any deep-rooting grass or other soil cover
to conserve the moisture and stabilize the soil. Storms
swept the land from the Mexican Gulf and Canada
unchecked, for there were no forests to break their force.
The wind carried away the fertile topsoil leaving only
sterile layers and rocks.
The same thing happened to former forest areas.
Without the protection of the trees, without the firm grip
of their roots, without humus, the soil was carried away.
In the South, where the frost which usually stabilises the
soil during winter seldom occurs, and where there is
seldom snow cover to prevent the damage, soil and wind
erosion had the same detrimental effect.
Like a network of veins the first small gullies appeared
in the soil, gradually deepening to real gorges. The
process was repeated a million times all over the country
until finally only the naked rock was left in some regions.
Even today American rivers carry away so much fertile
soil that an old Indian once said: "Our country is a new
Atlantis; one day it will disappear in the Ocean! " It
is significant that the Americans, aware of their
responsibility for this destruction of their productive land,
call their deserts "man-made."

WASTELAND OF STUMPS was a luxuriant evergreen forest in the Magallanes Province of southern
Chile before fire raged through it. Such outbreaks are not always accidental. Many forest fires hereabouts
have been started by isolated farmers who find flames an easier tool than the axe when they wish to clear
the land for cultivation and have thus caused the loss of hundreds of thousands of acres of Chile's forests.
If we were to summarize the direct repercussions of
the destruction of forest land on human society the list
of wasteful and harmful effects would be a long one.
They would include soil deterioration, increased difficulty
of watershed management, climatic deteriorations, lack
of wood for many purposes which it fills in man's daily
life, heavy expenditure for imported timber for countries
whose supply has disappeared, loss of employment and
Income which forests and forest industries naturally
provide, shortage of recreation areas, loss of additional
incomes from small woods which help small farmers
make ends meet, lack of shade for livestock and animals,
to mention only a few. These effects in turn set off a
whole chain of other negative reactions far too numerous
to set down In detail.
But to state the problem in general terms, all measures
and efforts must be combined and incorporated in a
sound forest policy. Each country must define for itself
the role which forests, primary forests, forest and ancillary
activities must play in relation to the physical, economic
and social environment. Physical environments alter
little with time, but economic and social conditions, on
the contrary, change as a country seeks to improve the
living standard of its people. Hence, forest policy must
be a continued creation. This makes it all the more
difficult since the objectives set are for the future. It
always takes a long time for any action on the forest to
show appreciable results.
The protective and indirect influences which forests
provide is a comparatively young branch of study, greatly
neglected by our technical age. It is true in many places
that schoolchildren can identify almost any type of auto¬
mobile at a glance but are often unable to distinguish
an oak tree from a beech. It is thus all the more
necessary to inform the public of the beneficial functions
of trees in nature.
The forest has many indirect effects upon the economy,
the prosperity and the well-being of a country and Its
people. One of Its most Important actions is the pre¬
vention or reduction of soil erosion. This protective
action results from the fact that forest cover increases
the degree of precipitation and checks run-off. Even
small forest plants like shrub and bush in hot arid regions
offer valuable defence if they are reasonably dense.
In many parts of the world where forests have been
destroyed or depleted, all the fertile humus and topsoil
has been washed away and only sterile rock has been left
on the slopes. Not only these slopes are thereby con¬
demned to sterility, but also vast areas in valleys and
plains are overlaid with sterile sediment, not to speak of
damage to roads, buildings, etc. The cost of such losses
and outlays involved in repairing the damage dons by
erosion in the world reaches a figure of incredible size.
Erosion is only the first phase of a serious chain reac¬
tion which starts with the regression or disappearance of
forests. Sediment deposited in reservoirs, water-courses,
fields and cities is an important part of the total damage.
This damage seldom comes to public attention because
It is often invisible. Sediment increases the total volume
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TRADITIONAL TREE of the Lebanon, the cedar, has been replaced (above) near Beirut by these umbrella
pines, descendants of those planted a century ago by a far-seeing emir, to prevent encroachment of sand
dunes. In ancient times cedar wood was used in the building of Solomon's temple (a cedar still figures
in the flag of the Republic of Lebanon). But many forests that once flourished in the Middle East
and North Africa have disappearedvictims of man's improvidenceand are replaced by invading sands.
Plant a tree to feed a man
and weight of flow in water-courses thus raising the
height of flood peaks and their destructive power. In
drainage basins and reservoirs, sediment can reduce
water capacity in a short time.
Investigations made into the effect of silting on the
capacity of dams in Algeria, show several dams lost 100
per cent of their original capacity in a period of 74 to 96
years. Similar findings In the United States with respect
to annual storage depletion in numerous dams indicate
that from 0.09 to 31.53 per cent of the original storage
capacity is lost as a result of silting. Recently a mono¬
graph on the Arno river basin in Italy revealed that
2,670,000 tons of solid material are carried away annually
by the water flow, thus causing an average lowering of
land surface of almost one-inch a year.
Silting Is almost always associated with deforestation.
Dams fed from completely wooded watersheds practically
never silt up. Experiments carried out by the Tennessee
Valley Authority in 1955 showed that after reafforestation
and protection works had been completed, the volume of
sediment carried down by the river was reduced by 90 %.
The forest also plays an Important part in protecting
the soil against wind erosion and sand encroachment.
Dune stabilization by tree planting is a well-known
10 practice in many parts of the world. It is true that
almost any vegetation cover will stabilize loose soil and
prevent it from being eroded by wind and rain, but
forests are probably more effective because of their
height, density, deep-reaching roots and permanency.
It is a keenly debated question whether or not the
forest can bring about increased rainfall, or, at least,
make for its better distribution. There are indications
that the presence of forests may increase local rainfall,
though effects on a regional or continental scale have
not been demonstrated.
The denser the forest, the greater will be its power to
reduce wind velocity. One authority has proved this
protective effect and noted reductions in velocity of over
85 per cent. In Italy, tests have shown that the Cecina
forest reduced wind velocity by 56 per cent and a
hardwood coppice In the same region was responsible for
reductions of 89 per cent.
The importance of such protection against wind erosion
can hardly be exaggerated. In dry periods and on bare
land the particles of certain types of soil become so
severed from each other that a strong wind can easily
carry them away. The finer particles form clouds and
the coarser particles, whipped by the wind, roll and
bounce over the surface of the soil. Their movement is
halted whenever the wind slackens and they bank up In
pits, ditches, canals and sunken roads, or in the neigh¬
bourhood of sheltering objects where they may suffocate
crops. This is only one of the perils of strong winds.
Drying out of soil, direct damage to delicate products like

REBUILDING A FOREST. Arab schoolboy plants a seedling tree during a reafforestation campaign
near Gaza. Here, Palestine Arab refugees, young and old alike, have helped to reclothe these sandy wastes
with shrubs and trees. Campaigns of this kind are only one of the multifold efforts made by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) during the past 12 yearsprovision of food, living accommo¬
dation, schools, work, training facilities, etc.to help nearly one million refugees rebuild their lives.
fruit, and the distortion and stunting of exposed trees
can all be traced to this cause.
In countries where forests have to be restored, reaffor¬
estation offers an excellent opportunity to provide tran¬
sitional employment for workers who may find their
ultimate destination in forest industries which do not
yet exist. In Greece, for example, the proposed reaffor¬
estation programme could absorb several thousands of
people, mainly from mountain districts where work is
often hard to get. In Spain, the government's forestry
programme employed between 30,000 and 100,000 men,
according to the season, in 1956. A bold reafforestation
programme for the Eastern Mediterranean would provide
employment for some 145,000 to 200,000 men annually
over the next 10 to 20 years.
It is a striking fact that a number of countries have
never formulated a forest policy or passed a forest law,
in spite of evident symptoms of soil deterioration and in
spite of repeated warnings about the results of a further
decline.
One of them comes from Professor Flatscher, scientist
of the Academy for Soil Cultivation in Vienna. He has
estimated that the world's forests produce about 1,600
million cubic metres of timber a year whereas the volume
cut annually amounts to between 2,200 and 2,600 million
cubic metres. This indicates that the annual fellings are
about 50 per cent above the allowable cut.
Any private individual who sanctioned such improvid¬
ence would be held responsible for bad management and
would certainly be heavily penalized. But mankind as a
whole, It seems, can indulge in prodigal waste of this kind
without being in conflict with any law. The only explan
ation is perhaps that the inevitable results of violence
against the laws of nature seldom fall directly on those
who commit the offence.
Though forest areas and timber reserves are still
decreasing, there are a few bright spots where we may
confidently expect steady progress. The total forested
area of the world is estimated to be about 10,000 million
acres and these forests should be capable of providing
reasonably adequate supplies for a population larger than
now exists. But the provision of such supplies will entail
the treatment of all productive forests as renewable
crops, the opening up of forests which are not yet
accessible and the cessation of the widespread devasta¬
tion of forests which still continues.
Of the 4,000 million acres of the earth's original forest
area which man has destroyed, 1,000 million might well
be replanted especially since much of this land Is to be
found in places where the population is in greatest need
of the products of the forest.
The cost per day of the second world war was a little
over $500 million. The cost of one day of this war would
reafforest, at least, 20 million acres, and the cost of
50 days would be sufficient to reclothe the entire 1,000
million devastated acres with proper tree cover. Of
course, no one is so naive as to believe we are on the
verge of any such undertaking. But we are in possession
of scientific knowledge, industrial skill and technical
equipment which could be used to spread the potential
benefits of the forest to the uttermost ends of the
inhabited earth.
Condensed from Unesco's quarterly review "Impact of
Science on Society" - Vol. XI, 1961 n" 1.
11
