Havana
(HONDURAS
"Belize
.HONDURAS
ealpa
HAITI DOMINICAN
JAMAICA "¿^PUBLIC
K/n?îton au-Prince
udad Trujillo
GUADELOUPE
cs
MARTINIQUE
VENEZUELA
N&TftERLANDS
1'GuHna
i » >a
|t is a remarkable fact of history that all of the countries of
Spanish and Portuguese speaking America achieved national
independence between the years 1811 and 1830, with the
exception of the Dominican Republic (1844), Cuba (1898)
and Panama (1903). On the occasion of the 150th anniversary
of this great struggle for freedom, The Unesco Courier
is proud to devote an entire special issue to the lands and
people of Hispano-America.
With its dramatic contrasts in geography, climate, ways of
life, races and cultures, the world of Latin America offers
us a vast and varied mosaic. The Unesco Courier has
attempted to open a small window on this part of the worldits
past history, some of its current problems, and the enormous
strides it has been making for its future development.
To produce this issue, The Unesco Courier has had the
help and guidance of the countries and Unesco Nationa
Commissions of this vast continent, and sent its photographic
reporter, Paul Almasy, on a 32,000 kilometre journey across
Latin America, from Ciudad Juarez on Mexico's northern
frontier, to Punta Arenas at the extreme southern tip of the
hemisphere. The University City of Mexico, the historical
sites of the ancient civilizations of the Aztecs and Mayas,
various scientific institutions in Central and South America,
the High Plateau of the Andes, the great industrial towns
of Argentina and the pampas are some of the important
phases of Mr. Almasy's voyage. Throughout his trip,
Mr. Almasy paid particular attention to achievements in
architecturea domain in which Latin America stands in
the forefront of progress, to the problems of agrarian reform
and to the broad field of education ranging from the struggle
against illiteracy to advanced scientific education. Only a
portion of his photo coverage is presented in this special
number. Other photo stories will appear in future issues.

PRELUDE TO INDEPENDENCE
-*
^
Paramaribo
Cayenne
<
GUIANA 

Y
1>
O
O
o
THE PEN BEFORE
THE SWORD
by German Arciniegas
Jhlrty years before Jean-Jacques Rousseau
wrote his Social Contract, José de Antequera
and Fernando Mompox, two Panamanian criollos (des¬
cendants of the original Spanish settlers) living in
Asunción, Paraguay, set down the fundamentals of a
doctrine of human rights which was a forerunner of
Rousseau's.
"The people have the right to oppose a ruler who docs
not act ex aequo et bono (according to what ls Just and
good)," wrote Antequera. "Not all his commands must
necessarily be obeyed. Defending this right, the various
peoples have created and commissioned councils to speak
in their name."
His colleague, Mompox, continued by writing that the
power of the people (común) of any state, city, town
or village is greater than that of the king himself. It
rests with the people to have the laws or the governor of
their choice. "Even though the ruler so decrees, if it be
against the will of the people, they may justly resist and
cease to obey."
We might wonder how much such theories had pene¬
trated the minds of ordinary people in the Paraguay of
that day. One historian, Father Lozano, provides us
with an insight in recounting the history of the wars of
the comuneros or early patriots In Paraguay. He tells
of a country worker who had heard Antequcra speak.
Later he returned to his own village and repeated the
story to the peasants.
"By heaven, brothers, what wonderful things I heard
the learned man in town say about the power of the
people. He said they could do more than the king, and
sometimes more than the Pope. So you see, brothers,
how strong we were and never knew it. We know now
that they kept quiet because they didn't want us to know
that the people could just stop obeying the viceroy."
Antequera was eventually defeated at Asunción by
authorities loyal to the crown, but five years later, in
1725, a new movement against the evils of mlsgovernment
sprang up, thanks to the efforts of Mompox.
Of this movement, the historian Lozano relates one in¬
cident. A militia of the comuneros entered a town and
the "chief of police came out on the balcony to exhort
them to withdraw and return to their homes in orderly
fashion."
A voice from the crowd interrupted him. "Señor Pro-
visor, what is the meaning of Vox Populi Vox Dei? You
may answer what you will, but we want you to know that
we, gathered here, are the people!"
Later when the writings of Rousseau appeared, they
attracted immediate attention in the Spanish colonies in
America. A sympathetic attitude on the part of the
ministers of Charles III aided their circulation. Under
the system of "enlightened despotism" the writings of
the authors of the Encyclopaedia were received and distri¬
buted in Spain.
Ships of the Guipuzcoan Company which sailed regu¬
larly from the Basque country to Venezuela carrying
French literature and returning with cocoa came to be
known as "the ships of enlightenment." Smuggling was
the method by which such literature reached the colo¬
nists once the "enlightened" ships docked.
Publications in Mexico began discussing the works of
CONT'D ON PAGE 7

COLOMBIA SALUTES
COLUMBUS
Twin obelisks tower above figures of Chris¬
topher Columbus and Queen Isabella of
Spain in this striking modern monument in
Bogota, the capital of Colombia, raised (by the
people to honour the navigator who disco¬
vered the New World, and his royal patron.

PRELUDE TO INDEPENDENCE (Cont'd)
The Unesco Courier. June 1961
THE 'ENLIGHTENMENT' CROSSES THE ATLANTIC
Rousseau almost at the same time as publications in his
native France certainly long before such commentaries
appeared in Spain. It is recorded that the Bishop of
Trujillo in Peru quoted from Rousseau's Social Contract
in explaining the relations between the ruler and the
Indian people. The Contract was published both in Chu-
quisaca and Buenos Aires by Belgrano. In Venezuela,
readings from Rousseau were used by Picornell to instruct
the conspirators of La Guaira. According to one historian,
so many copies of Rousseau's books were received from
Trinidad that pages of Le Contrat Social were being used
in Cumana in 1807 to wrap up food in the shops.
The war of independence was not just the fruit of mili¬
tary imagination in the Spanish colonies. It had been pre¬
ceded by a revolution of "enlightenment", and even
before that by the development of a popular conscience.
Its full force was felt in the Paraguayan revolutions, in
the Tupac Amaru uprising in Peru, among the comuneros
of New Granada all during the 18th century.
F iNALLY there came the resort to arms by
forces composed of criollos, Indians, Negroes
and half-castes. Between 1809 and 1810 all the colonies
rose in armed revolt. It was the last chapter of a move¬
ment which had been developing for forty years. In¬
dependence was first a popular idea. Later it was
accepted by the era of "Enlightenment." In its final form
it became an armed expression of Romanticism.
The armed revolts came after two and a half centuries
of peace, an almost unbelievable record by comparison
with Europe during the same period. As the idea of self-
government began to take shape, there were risings of
the settlers, the Indians, and in some cases the Negroes,
against misgovernment. It was a note of warning, a
prelude to the final movement for emancipation.
A new study of the true situation in America was ini¬
tiated under the auspices of both the university reform
movement of the 18th century and its contemporary
counterpart instituted in Spain by the Ministers of
EnlightenmentJovellanos, Campomanes and Florida-
blanca.
The expulsion of the Jesuits from the Spanish colonies
accelerated this movement. As the Jesuit Fathers left,
colonial authorities were compelled to take over their
empty colleges. New curricula were drawn up and for
the first time, physical and natural sciences were given
unexpected pride of place in all academic syllabuses.
Within the Church itself, eminent figures supported the
new policy. The most severe criticism of the old curri¬
cula came from Archbishop-Viceroy Caballero y Gongora
in New Granada. In sponsoring the reform of university
studies he gave the following explanation:
"The whole object of the plan is to teach the exact
sciences in place of the merely speculative, upon which,
unfortunately, time has been wasted hitherto."
Again in New Granada, it was a priest, José
Celestino Entis, a doctor of the University of
Seville, who founded a Botanical Mission, later to become
a Natural Science laboratory. In 1764, Entis had to face
the Court of the Inquisition at Santa Fé, Bogotá, for
teaching the theory, never before expounded, that the
earth revolved round the sun. A bold reformer, he even
brought out a mission of Swedish Protestant miners to
transform the old mineral works in New Granada.
There are two outstanding works which tell of the
circumstances in which scholarly creóles worked to pre¬
pare the way for independence: the Memorias Secretas,
by the Spaniards, Jorge Juan and Antonio Ulloa, and the
writings of Alexander von Humboldt.
Jorge Juan and Antonio Ulloa made a penetrating and
detailed report to the Crown giving the facts about mis-
government, the abuses of the magistrates (corregidores)
and doctrinaire priests, the deficiencies in education, the
state of the roads, and local customs and economy.
Humboldt presented a grandiose picture of the natural
wealth of Mexico and Equatorial America, showed n
passionate interest in its historical problems, encouraged
creóle scholars, and made the second discovery of the
New World.
"Enlightened despotism" authorized Humboldt to make
his journey to the colonies, and it also allowed scholars
from other European countries to travel there. The Paris
Academy of Science was thus able to organize a great
expedition, led by three of its members, Louis Godin des
Odonnais, Pierre Bougner and Charles Marie de La Conda-
mine. Its Immediate purpose was to check the exact
measurements of a degree along the Equator. The result
of this expedition was to arouse new ambitions in a
colony already predisposed towards emancipation.
An Italian navigator, Alessandro Malasplna, received
definite support from the Spanish Crown for an ambitious
plan to make a hydrographie exploration of the rivers
and sea-coast of the whole of Spanish America, check
the level of the two oceans, study the botany and zoology
and report on social conditions.
The Government of Charles III not only opened the
doors of the Colonies for the first time to study by
Europeans, but also tried to sec that Spanish students
or scholars were Included in the scientific missions. At
the same time they made preparations for expeditions
of their own. In New Granada, Mutis set up the
Botanical Mission while in Peru and Ecuador the
botanists, José Pavón and Hipólito Ruiz, were the authors
of the best known works on the cinchona tree.
Humboldt was surprised to find university movements
in all the colonies he visited. In Mexico he admired Don
Joaquin Velasquez, who had built the Santa Ana Obser¬
vatory himself and made his own instruments. Velasquez's
precise calculations astonished the learned German, the
French Abbé, Chappe, and the Spanish astronomers, Doz
and Medina. The astronomer had drawn his knowledge
not only from European science but also from that of the
Indians, particularly the Aztec scholar, Manuel Asentzio.

The Mexican Mining School which they visited
was a study and research centre, with a labor¬
atory, a museum and science rooms better than could be
found in Spain. In Venezuela, Humboldt had discussions
with Don André Bella, who was later to organize the juri¬
dical systems of the Republics which had won their in¬
dependence from Spain. In New Granada, Humboldt was
amazed by the knowledge of the scientists at the Botanical
Mission, prominent among whom was Francisco José de
Caldas, the most scholarly man In Spanish America,
passionately Interested In mathematical research and
natural science. This great educator's life ended
abruptly in 1816 when he was shot by the "pacifying
forces" during the time of the "Reconquest." It was the
independence movement's darkest hour.
In Quito, scholars who had inherited the teachings of
La Condamine, continued their scientific and political
research. Eventually, one of them, a priest named Miguel
Rodriguez, translated the Declaration of the Rights of
Man, the "Ten Commandments" of the French Revolu¬
tion, following in the footsteps of Narino In Bogotá, who
had already translated it, and Picornell who had publi¬
cized it in Venezuela.
Quito also produced Eugenio Espejo, a revolutionary
doctor and satiric journalist, who not only criticized the
rhetorical metaphysicians but also devoted himself to the
study of epidemics and protection from them.
Among the great scholars of Peru, Don Pablo Olavido
is a famous figure. Olavido went to Spain and took a
leading part in prompting the reforms carried out under
Jovellanos. In Chuquisca (Peru) and Cordoba (Argentina)
the writings of the Encyclopaedists were well known.
The O'Higgins family in Chile was the product of a
similar background. In Uruguay, Artigas was formulating
basic democratic doctrines during the years of the Inde¬
pendence movement. It is surprising that men were found
in these remote settings who were familiar with the
essence of a political philosophy which in Europe had not
yet toppled a single monarch from his throne.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ORNATELY CARVED PILLARS adorn façade of the church of St Francis in La Paz, Bolivia. Outstanding feature of architecture in
Spanish America during the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries was the number, quality and character of the religious buildings that rose
through the co-operation between monks and Indian craftsmen and artists. Indian motifs figure among carvings on church above.
The awakening of the press in Spanish America is yet
another instance which contributes to our understanding
of this drive towards emancipation. Here again there were
links between Spain and America. The most important of
these, deserving a whole study in itself, was a certain
gazette, El espíritu de los Mejores Diarios, published in
Madrid, about the time of the French Revolution. It
was an abridged selection of the best articles from the
main periodicals of the world, on science, history, politics
and letters.
Charles Ill's Ministers, who were anxious to bring
enlightenment to Spain, inadvertently let in a flood of
Information that was to open up new horizons for those
engaged in the struggle for democracy, both in Madrid
and in Spanish America. It was through this publication
that Spanish Americans became acquainted with what
they called the philosophy of Philadelphia, received clear
and concise accounts of the revolt of the North American
Colonies and were aware of those developments which
in Paris were to lead to the storming of the Bastille.
Collections of this little review are still to be found in
Spanish American towns, carefully bound and preserved
in libraries as treasures of great value. Small publications
on similar lines began to appear in Mexico, Guatemala,
Caracas, Bogotá, Quito, Lima and Buenos Aires. In some
cases Mexico for example they pre-dated the Spanish
gazette. As the new trend gained momentum, studies of
Spanish American problems began to appear in the form
of small articles, cleverly drafted in order to avoid risk of
censorship. They were mild at first but they increased in
harshness as the Crown authorities became aware that
they had opened a breach which was destined to enlarge
itself until the full tumult of revolution engulfed the
entire continent.
On a par with such publications were the Sociedades de
Amigos del Pais (Societies of Friends of the Country).
These societies first existed in Spain, the earliest being the
Sociedad Guipuzcoana in the Basque country, which later
set up business in Venezuela.
At Vergara, where they were first founded, they took
the form of very small academies of science where experi¬
ments were carried out in chemistry, physics and the
social sciences.
For the first time, countries were studied in the light
of possible economic revolutions. As models the Spanish
American Colonies could not have been better, for pro¬
duction there had not yet been developed, a failing already
criticized by Jorge Juan, Antonio Ulloa and Humboldt.
The idea of forming such societies spread from Vene¬
zuela to almost all the other Spanish American countries.
Perhaps the most important work of Eugenio Espejo,
written in Bogotá and published in instalments in Las
Primicias de Quito, is the one referring to the foundation
of one of these societies. This publication alone would be

BAROQUE PALACE, shown here, adjoins Cathedral in the Plaza de Armas, the vast central square of Lima, Peru. Façade has
twin wooden 18th century balconies with rich Baroque designs. Spanish American architecture left monuments of great beauty as
it underwent Renaissance and Baroque influences and finally developed into the striking ultra Baroque style of the 18th century.
enough to place Espejo among the heralds of the new
revolutionary times in his country.
El Papel Periódico of Santa Fé published articles about
the Sociedades de Amigos del Pais similar to that published
in Quito. In Havana the movement was of such impor¬
tance that it continued into our own times. The far-
reaching influence of these societies may be judged by
the fact that not long ago, when a survey of the economic
life of Colombia was to be made, the Society was revived
after more than 150 years which is the highest tribute
that could be paid to the memory of those early patriots.
If we examine Spanish America before Independence
with this background in mind, we can see that the ardent
intellectual movement which preceded independence and
was intensely active over a period of forty years was
not merely the product of an intellectual unrest but the
result of existing economic and human circumstances.
These circumstances were studied so earnestly and
thoroughly at the time that the roots of the Spanish
American revolt can best be found in contemporary
writings.
Obviously they received stimulus from the revolutionary
ideas introduced by the "Enlightenment", but the main
impetus came from the study of actual local conditions,
which in its turn led to the birth of what might be
called a patriotic sensitivity.
Certain decisive actions, such as the experiment of
opening the ports to European trade, were a revelation
to theorists in merchant shipping. Under the magic power
of this stimulus, Buenos Aires acquired for Itself not
merely an Independent existence, but also a place In the
international world. The whole of Spanish America began
to realize that the traditional monopoly exercised by
Spain was an obstacle which it must remove either by
reason or by force.
To students of Spanish-American history, this period of
formation, awakening and enlightenment is perhaps more
attractive than the war which followed. It is to those
years, throbbing with the revolutionary spirit, that we
must turn in order to discover the real beginnings of the
republics. It is that period which explains the appearance
of the first libertadores Francisco Miranda, Antonio
Narino, Mariano Moreno, Fray Servando Teresa de Mler,
and any and all throughout the colonies who sought first
to mobilize minds before calling out troops.
German Arciniegas is one of Latin America's leading historians and
thinkers. Through his many books in translation, he has intro¬
duced Latin American history and present-day social conditions to
the English-speaking world. Among his works in English are: The
State of Latin America, Caribbean: Sea of the New World and
Green Continent, an anthology of works by leading Latin-American
writers which he edited. He is co-author of the Unesco book,
Freedom and Culture (out of print).
