They call their telescope
Java's puppet hero, they say, was so tall he
straddled the Milky Way. What better name for a
telescope ¡n Indonesia's modern Bosscha observatory
by
Victor M. Blanco
; Estled on the western hills of the Island of
I Java, with a semi-dormant volcano as a
I backdrop, lies the Bosscha Astronomical
I Observatory, a unique nstltutlon in South-
I East Asia. There amid meticulously kept
gardens rises a monumental dome-shaped building
housing two of the large refracting telescopes of the
world. The telescopes, manned by young Indonesian
scientists are actively helping to widen man's scientific
horizons. The publications of the Bosscha Observatory
are read and collected In hundreds of scientific centres
throughout the world.
The Republic of Indonesia, while struggling with some
of today's most difficult socio-economic problems,
maintains the observatory. This shows that Indonesia
has in sight high cultural goals for its youth. The
Bosscha Observatory is a symbol of the opportunities that
the Republic envisions for Its young scientists. Thousands
of students of all ages visit it every year. Astronomy
often awakens a child's first scientific curiosity.
H The observatory is thus not only a symbol of future
goals but a busy centre of present-day popular education.
This rôle Is ntenslfled by the visitors from the city of
Bandung that flock to the observatory during holy days.
Bandung, a city of nearly one million inhabitants, is
spread like a carpet in a valley twelve kilometres distant
from the observatory. From the spacious lawns at
Bosscha, the public can view a striking panorama while
enjoying the cool mountain air.
The geographic position of the observatory, seven
degrees south of the equator, is important from the
astronomical point of view. Bosscha's telescopes can
sweep across some of the most important constellations
In the sky. The nucleus of our galaxy or Milky Way, for
example, lies in Sagittarius, a constellation that can not
be observed to advantage from the northern hemisphere
where most of the large telescopes are concentrated.
The solutions to many problems regarding the life
history and distribution in space of stars, such as our
own sun, involve studies of the nuclear regions of our
galaxy., Besides geographic convenience, Bosscha Obser¬
vatory enjoys a remarkably steady atmosphere. Astro¬
nomers iwho must study a star's light from the ground
are keenly aware of the vagaries of the atmosphere and
how often these spoil their viewing.
H The observatory owes its origin to the financial help
of a tea plantation owner, Karel A.R. Bosscha. The
principal instruments were installed in 1928 and 1929.
From the time of its founding and up to World War II,
several distinguished Dutch astronomers worked there.
The war and subsequent conflicts were disastrous to the
observatory. Not only did three leading members of the
staff perish, but the various military occupations resulted
in plundering and all-round deterioration of the
observatory's facilities.
The rehabilitation work started in 1947 and still
continues. In 1950, Unesco joined the Indonesian
government in the acquisition of a new telescope for the
Bosscha Observatory. An optical design developed by the
German optician Bernhard Schmidt (1879-1935) was
selected. A Schmidt-type telescope would be particularly
advantageous at this location, benefiting greatly from
the geographic position and good observing conditions.
32
This project developed during the last decade, and it
involved the co-operation of astronomers, opticians, and
engineers from Indonesia, the Netherlands, and the United
States. The optical parts for the telescope were donated
by Unesco and were prepared at the Yerkes Observatory
of the University of Chicago. The mechanical parts were
contracted for by the Indonesian government with the
engineering firm of Rademakers In Rotterdam. In the
spring of last year the glass or optical components of the
telescope met the metallic parts for the first time. The
assembly, adjustment and testing were completed by May
28 when the telescope was officially inaugurated.
An instrument of this kind requires the utmost delicacy
of adjustment in order to operate properly. Mechanical
difficulties were to be expected In the assembly work.
Fortunately the Bosscha Obervatory has a well-equipped
machine shop staffed by able specialists, and thanks to
them the difficulties were ironed out as they arose. It
was not always easy to obtain the materials required by
the machinists. However, in the city of Bandung there
are numerous junk shops where with luck one can find
suitable supplies. Some of the aluminium pieces for the
new telescope were carved out of wartime airplane
propellers. The Unesco optics are supported in the tele¬
scope's mounting with pads of sheet lead originally
intended for household plumbing.
HThe optical parts donated by Unesco for the new tele¬
scope include a delicately polished mirror twenty-eight
inches In diameter. The mirror Is used to converge the
rays of starlight to the focus. Telescope mirrors are made
by depositing on polished glass a thin layer of an alloy
of aluminium. For this purpose the aluminium alloy is
vaporized inside a vacuum chamber sufficiently large to
contain the glass, and the vapour then coats the glass,
giving It high reflectivity. The coating tarnishes with
time, however, and in normal use such mirrors must be
periodically re-aluminized.
Fumes from the nearby volcano Tangkuban Prahu,
whose crater is only five kilometres from the observatory,
may cause the new telescope mirror to tarnish or deterio¬
rate more rapidly than, is normal, or desirable. This
problem had to be solved during the assembly of the
telescope. Consultations between the astronomers, the
geologists and the chemists of the Bandung Institute
of Technology resulted In the building of an air purifying
system. This system frees the air of its sulphurous fumes,
pumps clean air into the sealed telescope and thus pro¬
longs the mirror's life.
Early in the planning, the new telescope was named
Bima Sakti. Blma Saktl, whose initials are also those
of Bernhard Schmidt, is one of the heroes of the Javanese
wayang or puppet plays, which are based on the great
Hindu epic Mahabharata. In Javanese mythology, Blma
Sakti is so tall that when he stands with feet resting on
opposite sides of the earth his legs form the arch across
the sky that we know as the Milky Way. The name of
this ancient hero is thus particularly appropriate for a
telescope that will be devoted to Milky Way observations.
The new telescope is regarded with endearment by the
staff and workmen of the observatory. One might say
that some of the ancient hero's personality has rubbed
off on the telescope. Blma Sakti, who fought against
evil in the old epics, is thus active again, helping to
advance science in Indonesia.
