ALL OF NUBIA IS TODAY AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP. HERE EXCAVATORS ARE SEEN AT WORK AT THE ANCIENT SITE OF ANIBA.

NUBIA TODAY: A VAST
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP
by Louis A. Christophe
Louis A. Christophe, a well-known French Egyptologist, is
Unesco Representative for the Nubian Campaign in Cairo,
and Assistant Secretary-General of the Institut d'Egypte.
H UNDREDS of archaeologists from more than 15
countries are today working against time to
survey, explore and excavate the complex and long-buried
vestiges of countless civilizations which, from the be¬
ginnings of man's history, have left their marks upon the
Nubian valley. As early as 1955 when the announcement
was made that the Aswan High Dam would be built, both
the Governments of the United Arab Republic and the
Sudan Immediately began to consider ways in which the
archaeological sites situated in the area to be flooded
could be fully exploited before they are covered by the
lake waters.
A priority list of sites to be excavated In the Sudan
was drawn up on the basis of a thorough aerial survey.
In Egypt, excavations which had been halted 25 years
ago along the Nile near Ballana and Qustul were resumed.
At the same time, the Egyptian Antiquities Department
suspended excavation work in other areas in order to
concentrate solely upon the Nubian valley. A request
was sent out to all foundations and institutions already
engaged in work at Pharaonic sites in Egypt to concen¬
trate on the Nubian portion of the Nile valley.
The first response was disappointing. Only two scien¬
tific expeditions were sent to Egyptian Nubia one by the
German Institute at Cairo, and the other by Milan Uni¬
versity. In addition, the Egypt Exploration Society of
London undertook excavations at Buhen In the Sudan.
With dozens of other sites still to be excavated, it
became more and more apparent as the months passed
that some new action was needed to ensure that all
archaeological features oí Nubia would be thoroughly
explored In the relatively short time which was left.
The Minister of Culture for trje UAR, faced with this
pressing problem, out of all proportion to his nation's
resources, appealed to Unesco. The Sudan, whose sites
in the Nubian valley have been scarcely touched before,
made a similar appeal.
In answer to this appeal, a Unesco mission of experts
was sent to Nubia and on the basis of their report, the
21
CONT'D ON PAGE 25

TOMB
YIELDS
CLUE
TO NUBIAN
PRINCE
Prince Heka Nefer of Miam,
spent his childhood in the
palace of King Tutankhamon
three thousand years ago and
has long been known to Egyp¬
tologists because of inscrip¬
tions telling his life's story and
a well-preserved painting on
the wall of Huy's Tomb at
Thebes (right) which pictures
and names him as the foremost
in a long column of tribute
bearers before the monarch.
But the whereabouts of his
kingdom in Nubia and his
burial place had never been
discovered. Recently, an expe¬
dition from' Yale and Pennsyl¬
vania Universities, whileexplor-
ing and excavating ancient
ruins in the Aniba area which
will be flooded when the Aswan
dam is completed, discovered
a tomb which is believed to be
that of Heka Nefer. Although
it was long ago plundered of
its treasures, Yale archaeolo¬
gist William Kelly Simpson
discovered five small funer¬
ary statues (inset) bearing the
name and title of the prince.
Inscriptions on the wall of the
tomb, as well as rock carvings
nearby also identified the tomb
as that of the Prince of Miam.
For another important find by
a Polish expedition, see p. 40.
FORMER CAPITAL of the viceroys of
the Pharaohs, Aniba has yielded impor¬
tant finds for archaeologists from Cairo
University who are excavating here
24

Unesco - Rex Keating
under the direction of Dr. Abdel Abu
Bakr. Mummies 5,000 years old, in a
good state of preservation, have been
discovered within an ancient necropolis.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CAMP (Cont'd from p. 2I)
Dividing up the sites
among the searchers
appeal was made by the Director-General to save the
monuments and sites of ancient Nubia.
This appeal met with an Immediate response. Both the
UAR and the Sudan received generous offers of co¬
operation. Archaeological work began almost at once and
now, less than 18 months after the appeal, the results are
so encouraging that It ls almost certain that the great
bulk of archaeological work will be accomplished before
the lake waters bury this area forever.
Because Sudanese Nubia ls less well known than
Egypt, the Sudanese authorities decided to begin with a
general archaeological survey of all the threatened
territory. The Antiquities Department, with the help of
three experts made available by Unesco, has now pros¬
pected the whole of the west bank from the Sudanese-
Egyptian border down to Buhen. A general survey of the
east bank from the border down to the northern outskirts
of Wadi Haifa was made by a Joint mission from the
Scandinavian countries. By the end of the forthcoming
winter campaign, all the archaeological sites of Upper
Nubia threatened with submersion will very probably have
been explored and Identified.
When the original Aswan Dam was raised, first In the
years 1907 to 1912, then again In 1929-1934, the Antiquities
Department in Egypt excavated all the ancient sites In
Lower Nubia. (The Sudan was not affected then as It will
be by the new dam.) Nevertheless, as an additional pre¬
caution, another general archaeological survey was
recently organized In collaboration with London Univer¬
sity to make sure that no sites still remained burled under
the sand. As a result of this survey four Important sites
have already been discovered between the Sudanese
border and Korosko. Next season the expedition expects
to complete Its survey In the northern part of Lower
Nubia.
Yiet another vital problem had to be solved.
Nubia's prehistoric cultures had never been
thoroughly Investigated on the spot. Now, Columbia
University, USA, has organized an expedition which will
make a general survey of the prehistoric sites of Sudanese
Nubia and the southern reaches of Egyptian Nubia.
This mission ls expected to cover the whole of the
threatened area before the flood waters arrive.
These general surveys are invaluable. Not only do they
give a true picture of the archaeological terrain, but they
serve as a guide to Institutes and foundations which have
not as yet participated In excavations in Nubia.
As offers of help have streamed In from all over the
world, most Institutes and foundations have already been
allotted the concessions they requested. Nearly all the
sites in Egyptian Nubia have already been conceded and
In Sudanese Nubia the position will doubtless be the same
long before the time for submersion.
Listed In geographical orderstarting from the First Cataract and going up
the Nile to the Second Cataractthe following sites have been allotted
for excavation:
Debod - Under the temple. Polish Centre of Mediterranean Archaeology,
Cairo
Dehmlt - Egyptian Museum, Turin
Khor, Dehmlt, Kalabsha - Oriental Institute, Chicago, and Swiss Institute of
Architectural Research, Cairo
Taffeh - South chapel. Czech Archaeological Institute. Cairo
Kalabsha, Gerf Hussein - Czech Archaeological Institute, Cairo
Sabagura - Milan University
Dakka and Wadi Allaql - Academy of Sciences, Leningrad
Kuban - Milan University
Maharraqah, Ikhmlndl - Milan University
Sayala - Vienna University
Medlk and route to Tomas - Strasbourg University
Sheikh Da'ud - Spanish National Committee for Nubia
Afya - Leyden Museum
Aniba - Cairo University
Ibrlm - Fortress and cemeteries. Egypt Exploration Society, London
Ermenneh-Tockhe - Yale and Pennsylvania Universities
Tamlt - Milan University
Abu Simbel - East bank. Milan University
Jebel Adda - Necropolis. German Institute, Cairo pc
Jebel Adda - FortresB. Alexandria University, Yale and Pennsylvania Unlver- '"
sities.
Ballana and Qustul - Antiquities Department, UAR
CONT'D ON PAGE 40

TWO MAGNIFICENT MURALS, their colours
as fresh as when they were painted, have been
discovered at Faras West by Professor Michalowski
heading an expedition from the Polish Centre,
Cairo. One picturing St. Michael (left) is now
at the Wadi Haifa Museum. The Polish expedition
also unearthed two Christian chapels in this area
dating from the fifth century. Below, recently
excavated Christian pottery kilns at Faras North.
© M. T. Biniewski, Warsaw Unesco - Keating
ARCH/EOLOGICAL CAMP (Cont'd from page 25;
SPADES REVEAL CITIES UNDER CITIES
Sites not previously allotted between Ermenneh and Sudanese border - Oriental
Institute, Chicago.
Faras West - Polish Centre, Cairo.
Aksha - Franco-Argentine Mission.
Serra-East - Oriental Institute, Chicago.
Argin - Spanish National Committee for Nubia.
Sites between the Egyptian border and Gemai (north of Wadi Haifa) - Joint
Mission of the Scandinavean countries.
Buhen - Egypt Exploration Society, London.
On the other hand, some finds have filled important
gaps in history generally or the history of art.
While excavating cemeteries of various periods at
Aniba, Professor Abdel Moneim Abu-Bakr of Cairo Uni¬
versity made some interesting discoveries concerning
methods of burial and the occurrence of epidemics which
ravaged Nubian villages. The most diverse objects were
retrieved from tombs. Unsophisticated in style and cru¬
dely finished, they tell us much about the beliefs and
artistic talents of the people who made and used' them.
The discovery of the tomb of Heka Nefer, Prince of
Miam, at Toshka East, was a disappointment. It proved
to be in a very bad state of preservation. It did at least
yield some details concerning a high-ranking contem¬
porary of Tutankhamon whose name was known to us
solely by a rock inscription, also at Toshka, and a picture
on Huy's Tomb at Thebes. Now we know that Prince
Heka Nefer was buried in Nubia as was Pennut two
centuries later, under the 20th dynasty. The leader of
the Yale and Pennsylvania Universities mission, Mr.
William Kelly Simpson, was unable to find the Prince's
remains at the bottom of the tomb well, but he did
unearth five of the funerary statuettes. The two finest
are of stone and bear classical inscriptions. (See p. 24.)
The lengthy list of allotments (see p. 25) gives some idea
of the importance archaeologists attach to excavating in
Nubia. Egyptologists all over the world interrupted lec¬
ture series and personal research and even sacrificed
vacation time to respond to the Unesco appeal. The
main attraction, was the possibility of filling in some of
the gaps in our knowledge of a region which has harboured
so many different civilizations.
Very often new cities were built on top of or beside old
ones. After Debod and Taffeh Temples were removed,
for instance, excavations were begun under their found¬
ations. Cemeteries and fortresses are also being excav-
40 ated with the hope of bringing to light older buildings.
As a result of international co-operation the history of
Nubia's various civilizations may at last be elucidated.
No extraordinary finds were expected at least in
Egyptian Nubia. The excavations carried out from 1907-
1912 and from 1929-1934 undoubtedly yielded the most
important in Egyptian Nubia. Similarly, at Buhen fort¬
ress in the Sudan, Professor Walter B. Emery had already
been excavating over a number of years. Furthermore,
Nubia was never the centre of an original civilization,
except when the rulers of Ballana-Qustul controlled the
route between Upper and Lower Nubia. Yet already
within a few weeks the efforts of scientific expeditions
produced archaeologically interesting results.
Some results have been negative in the sense that so
little was discovered e.g. Khor Dehmit-Kalabsha, Wadi
es Sebua, Amada, the east bank of Abu Simbel but it
was at least proved that the previous excavations had
been thorough.
Fragments of a long inscription were also found at
Akasha, in the Sudan, by the Franco-Argentine mission.
Professor Rosenwasser believes that it is a copy of the
famous decree of Ptah engraved on the wall between two
pillars in the Osirian hypostyle hall of the Great Temple
of Abu Simbel.
The main finds made by Professor Leclant, leader of the
Strasbourg University mission at Tomas, concern the
Meroitic culture (6th century B.C.), of which much evi¬
dence had already been brought to light, especially at
Ballana-Qustu, and even in the Sudan. Professor
Leclant's finds include a big stele with a 24-line inscrip¬
tion and a sacrificial table inscribed on its whole circum¬
ference. These texts are still being studied, but it is as yet
impossible to judge their importance.
At Faras, Professor Michalowski, head of the Polish
Centre in Cairo, found two Christian chapels. Of the
four steles he discovered, two indicate that Sudanese
Nubia was being Christianized at the end of the 5th cent.
The oldest commemorates the first bishop of Faras or
one of the first. It is dated 606.
Archaeologists are understandably reassured with every
season. Their enthusiastic response to the Director-
General's Appeal was not inspired by a desire to rewrite
the history of Nubia, already known in outline. Their
sole aim was to salvage the remaining documentary
material and to elucidate certain obscurities by con¬
ducting thorough excavations before a field so rich in
vestiges of successive civilizations was forever engulfed.
In this they will soon have succeeded.
