SCIENCE, I
30
Scientists take advantage of every important
eclipse to make solar studies with specialized
instruments and thus discover more about the
nature and activity of our giant, life-giving sun.
Photo shows an eclipse being recorded at Kuwait.
George Rodger © Magnum Photos, Paris
_

MAN AND SOCIETY
By Sir James Gray, F. R. S.
Former President of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science
A British scientist
looks at Our world
through a biologist's
spectacles
i
One of the most important aspects of modern
science is its repercussion on International re¬
lationships, and when it begins to threaten the existence
of the whole human race, it really does seem to be going
just a step too far. There will always be danger and
appalling waste of human effort until individual nations
can be persuaded, or are forced, to think in terms of the
welfare of humanity as a whole. It is not our job to
suggest how this might best be achieved by moral or
political agreement. A scientific approach must be com¬
pletely dispassionate, but we shall not make much im¬
pression on public opinion so long as men's minds are
biased by fear and suspicion. Frightened or angry
politicians, like frightened or angry animals, cannot be
trusted to react wisely.
There is not the slightest doubt, however, that the
discoveries of physics have frightened mankind and that
there are far too many intelligent people looking askance
at Science and wondering where it is leading them. In
trying to link Science to the humanities our primary
objective should be to depict Man's position in the world
of Nature as a source not of fear or doubt, but of cou¬
rage and inspiration.
Our second main objective should be to demonstrate
the place of Science in a general philosophy of life. To
be of real value, such a philosophy must rest on
knowledge and experience which has already proved
acceptable over a very wide range of local environments
and national interests, and it must, at the same time,
be closely concerned with problems of everyday Ufe. In
these respects Science is unique.
Except when subjected to political restraint, scientists
of all nations have always co-operated in solving Nature's
jig-saws, and as Professor A.V. Hill has said, "The funda¬
mental principle of scientific work is the unbending
Integrity of thought, following the evidence of fact
wherever It may lead within the limits of experimental
error and honest mistake."
This attitude of mind is not peculiar to scientists; it
is common to all who have a respect for the truth.
But in the fields of law, language, history, literature and,
above all, politics, our general outlook and our individual
range of knowledge depend to a very dangerous extent
on local environment and national tradition. By freedom
from such limitations Science provides ground perhaps
the most solid ground for wider co-operation.
But the gap between a scientific and a humanitarian
outlook cannot be bridged by the statistical laws of
physics and chemistry ; we are forced to apply less precise,
but not necessarily less important principles from the
world of living organisms. The challenge is, therefore,
to the biological sciences, especially those which deal, at 31
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND SOCIETY (Cont'd;
THE PROPER STUDY
the borderline of sociology, with the behaviour of orga¬
nisms and their relationship to their environment. The
extent to which they can yield broad principles applicable
to Man may well decide how far Science can claim to be
of direct cultural significance.
Man's position in the world of Nature is brought most
sharply into focus by the concept of natural evolution.
Cosmic, biological and human evolution can be regarded
as phases in a continuous natural process and, from this
point of view, astronomy, geology, biology, archaeology
and history form a continuous spectrum of knowledge.
To pass through many millions of years from a primaeval
nebula to modern man without any sudden break in
continuity of thought gives a feeling of intellectual tidi¬
ness, but quite apart from this it enables us to visualize
Man against the background of his past and to regard
him as Nature's supreme masterpiece. At the same time,
he must not get too big for his biological boots or tend
to exaggerate the gap between himself and the rest of
the animal kingdom.
N o animal can manufacture aeroplanes, or
I Asdic ; but the prize for aeronautics must go
to the shearwater which navigated the Atlantic without
compass or chart, that for Asdic to the ears and vocal
cords of our nearer relatives, the bats. By surrounding
themselves with an electric field, some fish (e.g. Gym-
narchus) can, in total darkness, detect foreign objects in
the surrounding water with very remarkable precision.
The total weight of the mechanism involved including
the animal's brain amounts only to a few grammes;
a man-made instrument of comparable performance
would involve at least a ton of highly complex electronic
machinery. Again, there is no laboratory in the world
which can compete with the biochemical skill of even
the smallest living organism.
In fact, as delicate and precise pieces of machinery,
Man's Inventions so far compare very unfavourably with
those which have come into existence during the natural
course of biological evolution. On the other hand, we
may fairly claim that we have accomplished in a few
centuries things for which Nature required many millions
of years. Nevertheless, we need not be in the least
ashamed of the older members of our evolutionary
family; we have still a great deal to learn from them.
To visualize Man's position in the animal world, it
may be useful to define his main diagnostic characters.
He is a highly gregarious bipedal mammal with unspe-
cialized limbs but a very large brain. He is the only
animal which has developed the symbolisms of speech
and writing, and he may well be the only animal capable
of rational thought. He is, therefore, the only organism
which can hand on patterns of acquired learning from
one generation to another. To these advantages he owes
his dominant position in the world today.
They have enabled him to exploit his environment
and increase his numbers and his range of distribution
far more quickly and far more extensively than any
animal of comparable size. He has eliminated some of
his competitors and exploited others for his own use,
but the time has now come when different races of men
are competing with each other within the closed arena
of a limited environment, and it is not easy to see where
it will end.
There is nothing equivalent to this in the Inanimate
32 world; but, when a biologist looks at the general trend
of events, he is inclined to say, "Where have I seen
something like this before, what is it due to, and how
does it usually end?"
Nature has made, not one, but two great experiments in
the design of social animals. The first was carried out
in Mesozoic times when Man's mammalian ancestors
were beginning to emerge from reptiles. The results of
this experiment are represented today by the social
Insects notably the ants.
There are a very large number of different species of
ants, none of which interbreed; among them is found
a range of complexity of social behaviour which is not
only unique in the animal kingdom but which forms
a very remarkable parallel to different races of human
beings.
At one extreme are species forming small communities,
restricted to localized or specialized environments and
exhibiting relatively little subdivision of labour between
individuals.
At the other extreme are large and often aggressive
communities with marked differentiation of structure
between different grades of individuals; populations of
this type display high levels of co-operative effort involv¬
ing, in some cases, the rudiments of agriculture and
husbandry. In all cases, however, ant societies are orga¬
nized on a straightforward totalitarian basis, the
contribution made by each individual towards the welfare
of the community is determined from the time of birth;
each grade of individual is structurally adapted for pre¬
determined tasks.
How far ants can communicate with each other may
be doubtful, but it is tolerably certain that members of
the same community recognize each other by a charac¬
teristic smell, and as the brain of an ant is about the size
of the head of a pin, it is perhaps not surprising that
ants should attack or kill an individual from another
colony with a smell slightly different to their own. It
is much less easy to understand why a man, with a brain
of an entirely different order of complexity, should, at
times, react almost equally violently to skin pigments
different to his own.
But it is not only in respect to individual relationships
that the study of ants is relevant to Man. Ants are the
only organisms which apart from Man indulge in orga¬
nized warfare raiding the nests of other species and
incorporating captives into their own societies. But
perhaps the most striking facts relate to species which
have changed their habits and distribution within recent
times.
T;wo instances of territorial expansion are
known to have occurred in the last 150
years. Early in the nineteenth century an Eastern
species (Pheidola megacephala) , having spread rapidly
over North Africa and South Europe, managed to reach
the islands of Madeira and Bermuda; in both places it
exterminated the smaller native races.
Meanwhile, a similar policy had been carried out by
another species (Iridomyrmex humilis), from the Argen¬
tine, which, having landed at New Orleans, very rapidly
overran the southern United States; in due course, it

OF MANKIND IS MAN
too reached Bermuda, where it proceeded to eliminate the
earlier invader.
In the world of ants there is no place for small peaceful
communities unless they can isolate themselves effect¬
ively from larger and more powerful neighbours, nor does
there seem any lasting peace between large aggressive
communities. Solomon's advice has, I suspect, been
misinterpreted. It should read: "Consider the ants, and,
if you use your intelligence, you will see how not to deal
with International problems."
Having designed the ants, Nature waited for about
150 million years before embarking on her second or
human experiment. She waited, in fact, until it could
be carried out with a species in which an individual's
contribution to society was no longer based on inherited
structural characters but on the power of inter-commu-
nicatlon with other individuals; In other words, until
Man's brain had reached a level of development which
enabled him to control his environment, and to deal
rationally with the subdivision of labour between indi¬
viduals and with the distribution of natural resources
between different groups of individuals.
At the same time she arranged that such groups should
not be physiologically isolated from each other. Different
races of men can interbreed, or they can, if they wish,
come to mutual agreement about the distribution of world
resources. The first policy would seem to lead to a
world state with uniformity of social pattern and of
material interests; the second involves territorial limita¬
tions and economic agreements. Both, as we know only
too well, involve great practical difficulties. All the same,
men ought to be able to do something better than ants.
The second basis of comparison between Man and
animals concerns the factors which control his behaviour.
The past 50 years have produced a very great increase
in our knowledge of animal behaviour. For present
purposes, however, attention may be focused on two
problems: the extent to which animals can profit from
extraneous instruction, and the extent to which they
are able to learn for themselves.
ê
We can explore the first of these fields by
means of the conditioned-reflex technique,
whereby an animal learns to associate a specific visual, or
other sensory stimulus with forthcoming food or impend¬
ing danger. In order to establish this result it is necess¬
ary to conform with five basic principles all of which
have their counterpart in the training of human beings.
(1) The response expected from the animal must not
be unduly complex; the animal must be able to
reach the food or escape the danger by making
reasonably simple movements. In other words, the
problem must not be too difficult.
(2) The lesson must be presented to the animal under
conditions which ensure freedom from extraneous
disturbance. It will not learn If its attention ls
constantly diverted by other changes in its envi¬
ronment.
(3) The problem must be presented to the animal on
an adequate number of occasions; the more fre¬
quent the lesson, the fewer the mistakes become.
(4) There must be an "incentive" to learn a reward
for success or a punishment for failure. Further,
the "reward" must be related to the needs of the
animal.
(5) Finally, the experimenter must possess adequate
skill and patience. The ability of an animal to
learn depends to a very large extent on the per¬
sonality and enthusiasm of the teacher.
These five principles apply equally well to the education
of human beings if we make suitable allowances for
Increase in complexity of the lesson and for changes In
the nature of the incentive to learn. But we can go a
little further, for, as with men, different individuals of
the same animal species learn at very different rates.
Curiously enough, however, there does not seem to be any
clear correlation between an animal's ability to learn
and its position on the evolutionary tree.
It is possible to trace the structural evolution
of the human brain through each of the main
classes of vertebrate animals; the large paired hemi¬
spheres of our brain arose in the Devonian lung-fishes
and the cerebral cortex in the early Permian reptiles.
It would be very convenient if step by step with an
increase in size and complexity of the brain It were
possible to trace a corresponding Increase in complexity
of behaviour and in ability to learn. This is not the
case ; some fish without hemispheres or cortex can exhibit
behaviour patterns which seem just as complex as those
of reptiles or even of some mammals.
In due course this difficulty will be resolved, but for
the time being one can only say that there seems to
be one feature common to all species which learn easily,
namely, a vivacious but not unduly excitable tempera¬
ment rats, monkeys and children all have a natural
tendency to explore their environment and they are inter¬
ested in anything new or strange; they are all, perhaps,
potentially good scientific observers.
But the value of the instruction given to human beings
by a teacher is largely judged by the extent to which it
enables a pupil to make use of his acquired knowledge
and to go on to learn more by himself. Within the animal
world there is very little evidence to suggest that expe¬
rience acquired from one pattern of environment or from
one problem can be readily applied to others of a some¬
what different nature. An animal's own approach to a
problem, like that of a very young child, is very largely
one of random exploration; once it has found the solution
by chance, the number of ineffective responses on future
occasions becomes less and less until the correct response
is stabilized.
How far animals display evidence of the higher levels
of mental analysis associated with "intelligence" in
human beings is not too clear, for it is extremely difficult
to subject intelligence to an agreed standard of measure¬
ment. When judged by human standards the I.Q.s. of
all animals are, undoubtedly, very low; but, it may be that
we are not always setting them quite the right type of
examination.
Although it is difficult to correlate an increasing capa¬
city to learn with an increase in size and complexity of
the brain throughout the main classes of vertebrates, it
seems clear that there is a substantial increase in 33
CONT'D ON PAGE 36

ARE MEN NO BETTER
THAN ANTS?
r.
^ w 'ta '
34

WAR IN THE ANT WORLD. In the world of ants there is no place
for small peaceful communities unless they can isolate themselves from
larger and more powerful neighbours, nor does there seem any
lasting peace between large aggressive communities. Warfare in the
world of ants is graphically shown in these photos taken from a new
Walt Disney film, "Secrets of Life." Left, a black ant overcomes an
opposing red ant by crushing him against the roof of his underground
tunnel. Above, pitched battle between red and black ants. The fight
forsurvival in Nature's teeming world of insects becomes open warfare,
even between families of the same species, and the battles that rage
between the red ants and black ants are among the deadliest. Below,
the headhuntera red ant returning with four heads, his own and
those of three rival black ants who lost theirs in battle.
Photos taken from " Secrets of Life " ©Walt Disney
y
35

SCIENCE AND SOCIETY (Cont'd;
MAN VIEWED THROUGH
BIOLOGICAL SPECTACLES
learning ability as soon as an animal's brain reaches a
level of structural complexity comparable with that of
man.
The young chimpanzee, like a human baby, is typicaUy
a friendly, playful creature dependent on and with an
affection for its mother. But as it grows up, it begins to
show marked signs of individuality; some become morose,
unfriendly and vicious, others retain a friendly dis¬
position towards their neighbours and a co-operative atti¬
tude towards human teachers.
The abiUty to respond to training shown by the latter
type of Individual is, of course, very remarkable, but when
left to itself a chimpanzee seems to rely on an initial
process of trial and error. Like many other mammals, it
can give audible and visible signs of fear, anger or pain ;
but there is no evidence that a chimpanzee can make au¬
dible or visible signs which other individuals associate
with specific material objects; the mental development of
the adult ape seems roughly equivalent to that of a
human baby before the latter has learnt to speak.
I
36
JN short, nothing can possibly disguise the
enormous difference between an adult ape
and an adult man in ability to learn and to control their
environments, but it might be argued that a relative test
of the brains of the ape and of Man as computing instru¬
ments should be conducted on the basis that neither
pupil nor teacher should be allowed to speak, read or
write: the gap between animals and men might narrow
very appreciably.
The third and perhaps most important biological aspect
of Man's behaviour concerns the gregarious habit. Here
again the distribution among vertebrate animals is
curiously unrelated to their evolutionary history: it is
weU marked in certain species of fish, birds and mammals
but absent in others. In some cases the existence of a
herd or flock is clearly of survival value; a pack of wolves
has a wider choice of food than an individual operating
by itself.
But it is not always clear why one species should be
more gregarious than another to which it is closely
related. In the present state of knowledge it may be
safer to say that some animals are restless or uneasy
unless in close proximity to individuals of the same
species that they have, in fact, a deep-rooted antipathy
to isolation or loneliness. In any event the resultant
grouping establishes the herd as a unit which responds as
a whole to an external stimulus applied to one or a few
individuals.
The response is most clearly marked when the stimulus
evokes an emotional reaction of fear or anger in the
individuals directly concerned, and one of the most dis¬
tinctive features of herd behaviour is the speed at which
these emotions spread throughout the community. If
certain individuals are more highly susceptible than others
to external stimuli the response of the group is deter¬
mined by the most timorous or the most belUgerent mem¬
bers of the community.
The majority of the herd subjugate their own individual
behaviour to that of a few, and in the long run the in¬
dividual benefits by greater security from predators or
greater certainty of obtaining food. If an individual is
unduly insensitive to emotional stimulation by its neigh¬
bours, it is likely to be eliminated by natural selection the
sheep that walks by itself gets eaten and the solitary
wolf may starve.
These principles were applied to the analysis of human
behaviour by Wilfred Trotter (described in his book, "The
Herd Instinct in Peace and War"). In order to avoid phy¬
sical or mental isolation men are prepared to subjugate
their own immediate needs or predilections to those of
society as a whole. Antisocial activity is kept in check by
fear of inteUectual or physical isolation; feelings of in¬
creased security and greater freedom from personal doubts
and fears are set off against loss of individual freedom of
action.
How far psychologists have developed or rejected
Trotter's suggestions I do not know, but there can be
little doubt that they opened up a useful biological
approach to sociology by suggesting that our instinctive
reaction to something new or strange is, as in animals, to
conform with our neighbours, and that, at moments of
crisis, it is better to follow a leader than rely on personal
judgments. These and allied problems belong to the
domain of psychology. All I wish to stress is that the
phenomena of mass psychology in Man, like other aspects
of his behaviour, have their roots far down in his evolu¬
tionary history.
Perhaps the most striking difference between the social
habits of Man and those of animals is the existence of a
hierarchy or grading within human society. Only in a
very few cases does this appear to exist within the animal
kingdom. The nearest approach seems to occur in birds;
a flock of jackdaws feeding in a restricted area resolves
itself into a well-marked order of feeding priority.
Konrad Lorentz has recently reported that If a high-
ranking male decides to mate with a low-ranking female,
the latter rises In social status and feeds with her
husband; all this sounds reasonably familiar to human
ears.
This is perhaps as far as a zoologist ought to go in
trying to view mankind through biological spectacles. But
one does not need to be a professional biologist to appre¬
ciate that the rates of change in the pattern of human
behaviour and in the nature of our environment have,
during the past five thousand years, been incomparably
greater than those of any other organism at any period
of its history; our clothes, houses, habits and social orga¬
nization change with successive generations.
The fact is that if one were forced to choose
the organism which best displays the pheno¬
menon of persistent evolutionary change one would
undoubtedly choose Man.
In suggesting further points at which biological
principles seem to be applicable to the evolution of
human society, a zoologist can only look towards
Archaelogy and Anthropology and hope that his spec¬
tacles are not completely out of focus. In its very
early stages human society must have been organized
into quite small units, each dependent on the natural
resources of a small circumscribed environment.
The discovery of fire and development of agriculture
must have increased the range of the environment and
the optimum size of the population required for its exploi¬
tation, and the stability of the group would become more
and more dependent on the maintenance of an effective
subdivision of labour; but the larger the population and
the greater the degree of specialization, the greater the
limitations imposed on individual freedom of action.
A new and very important social factor seems to have
come into action when natural phenomena became linked
with supernatural concepts fear of isolation or reprisals
from fellow-men being reinforced by fear of a super¬
human agency and a sense of greater security inspired
by reliance on supernatural support. Such beliefs had
no material basis but they would be the cement which
held society together and, as such, be of immense survival
CONT'D ON PAGE 38

Although the difference in ability to learn between man and
ape is enormous, scientists are now not too sure towhat point
animals can actually carry put high-level mental analyses asso¬
ciated with "intelligence." In I.Q. tests animals usually rate
very low, but many scientists believe that present methods of
testing may be wrong. Photo shows research worker
studying the reactions of a chimpanzee to different situations.
Unesco-Marc Riboud
37

_
1 9 t il
*~\ rj <> '.:#-£
.£ £.
The drive ¡n ail modem countries to develop trade and a higher standard
of living for all depends largely on the ability to make and exploit new
scientific discoveries. In many countries a large percentage of higher
educational resources Is now being used to train professional scientists
and highly skilled technicians. Photos show, from left to right,
students at Moscow University listening to a lecture on organic chemistry.
HUMANITIES AS A COMPLEMENT TO SCIENCE
value. But it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that
such beliefs, like scientific theories, must undergo change
as Man's knowledge increases and his environment alters.
It is easy to say that Science should be welded to the
humanities, but much less easy to suggest how this should
be done. Each of us has a different view according to
our particular Interests. I confess that my own approach
is based on personal experience.
About fifty years ago I chose to specialize in biology,
and from time to time I have been asked "If you had
known that you would spend a good deal of your later
life studying the movements of animals, what subjects
apart from biology would you have read at school and at
the university?" The answer is simple: Apart from
modern languages, I would have read physics, chemistry,
mathematics and mechanical engineering.
The moral is that no young scientist should be allowed
to forget that new discoveries tend to arise from the
borderland between different subjects where the disci¬
pline of one is applied to another. Had I appreciated this
I would have been a much better biologist, but whether
I would have been a better human being is another
matter.
If I am asked the 64 thousand dollar question, "Had
you known that you would have had to adjust yourself
to a rapidly changing and somewhat uneasy world, what
additional training would you like to have had?", I think
my answer would be that I would like to have been trained
to think dispassionately about social and political affairs
in the light of experience drawn from the past, and to
have been taught to appreciate beautiful things.
But could I have acquired this knowledge whilst train¬
ing as a scientist? Perhaps not, but I still think that I
could have been shown a wider picture. Having been
taught to visualize the spectrum in terms of the wave-
38 lengths of light, could not I have been encouraged to
learn a little about colour as a source of aesthetic plea¬
sure? Why learn about the properties of iron and carbon
without reference to the Industrial Revolution? I might
even have developed a taste for the classics if I had
known that Aristotle had written a very good textbook
of zoology.
Perhaps I expected too much in hoping to appreciate
an artist's view of Nature from the standpoint of a scien¬
tist. But I am not completely convinced. A scientist's
attitude towards his observations does not seem to me
to be so very different from that of a poet towards his
words or a painter towards his colours; isolated observa¬
tions have no more value than single words; it is only
when they fit into a satisfying pattern that the scientist
feels he has achieved his end.
If this argument is unconvincing, and if it still seems
impossible to combine the vision of the artist with the
outlook of a scientist, I can only suggest that Leonardo
da Vinci and Sir Christopher Wren seem to have had
pretty good shots at it.. It would be very interesting to
know the sort of training they had in early life.
But a plea for a wider outlook in the teaching of
Science ls nothing new. It was urged again and again in
Great Britain by Sir Richard Gregory. In 1933 the
declared aim of the London County Council was that they
"wished their pupils to obtain a broad view of nature,
to study mankind and his environment from various
standpoints, more particularly from the point of view
of both the biological and physical Sciences."
In 1946 the Advisory Council for Secondary Education
in Scotland was even more explicit: "The study of man
in his world, like the study of science, is a unity which
should not be broken by any sharp division into 'sub¬
jects'... the theme must be one."
In 1958 a committee of the Science Masters Association
urged that "The schools have the duty of presenting

N
: -*
\ 1
/ 7
^&1
/
Student engineers using electrical equipment at the University of
Grenoble, France, and a Japanese chemistry student concentrating on a
laboratory experiment at Kelo University. How to reconcile specialist
training with a good all-round education the kind that moulds opinions
and equips to the greatest advantage the average boy and girl for
later life is one of today's problems discussed by Sir James Gray.
Science as part of our common cultural and humanistic
heritage; it should be taught In harmony with and not
in opposition to the various Arts subjects..." It seems
fair to say that this is a goal towards which we would
all wish to strive; but when we try to approach it the
road proves extremely hard, and most of us, In practice,
fall by the wayside.
We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that our national
economy depends on our ability to make and exploit new
scientific discoveries. If we wish to maintain or extend
our standards of material comfort we must have more
professional scientists and highly trained technicians
and we must be prepared to devote an adequate fraction
of our educational effort to get them.
But highly trained specialists form only a very small
proportion of the population, and we may be paying for
them in very hard currency if we have to deny to a very
much larger fraction of the community a reasonable
chance of "seeing life steadily and as a whole." A demo¬
cracy has to decide how much of its total educational
effort should be devoted to an ever-increasing standard
of living and how much to raising the intellectual
standards whereby the majority of the population forms
its judgments on things which involve personal prejudice
or political propaganda.
It is not easy to assess the factors which mould public
opinion, but a recent enquiry indicates relatively clearly
that the attitude of mind of an individual towards a
changing environment is directly related to the nature
and extent of his full-time education and that it is this
training which largely determines, in later life, his res¬
ponse to other potential sources of education such as
libraries and broadcasts.
If we wish to awaken a widespread interest in Science,
or still more, wish to contribute toward the formation of
an enlightened public opinion, we must sow our seeds in
the schools and in organized centres of adult education.
But the key to the main problem lies In the schools,
and the responsibility resting on schoolteachers can
hardly be exaggerated. Too many are asked to do two
jobs at once to provide a training for potential specia
lists and at the same time give a training which will best
equip the average boy or girl for later Ufe.
If we are to pay more than lip-service to the belief
that a good all-round education is the best means of rais¬
ing the intellectual level of the community, we must
recognize that our most urgent need is for good general
practitioners in the art of education. Really inspired
teachers working with adequate but simple equipment
will achieve more for general education than specialists
in highly equipped laboratories.
But the scales have been heavily weighted in favour of
specialization. Almost exclusively, our universities are
producing specialists. Some of these return to the schools
where they in turn teach on a specialized front. So the
spiral of specialization has gone on. It is only natural
that able teachers get an intellectual stimulus by prepar¬
ing boys and girls for scholarship examinations and so
providing recruits for fields of research in which they
themselves are interested; but it is by no means clear
that their work is necessarily more important, or more
difficult, than that of those whose primary object is to
persuade people that they cannot live by bread alone.
Much can be done by relatively formal teaching, but if
I may judge from personal experience more depends on
the extent to which people are given the time and oppor¬
tunity to educate themselves by contact with men and
women of entirely different interests and outlook.
But when all is said and done, Science can only make
its full contribution to the welfare of mankind if it is
used as a means of encouraging a dispassionate but opti¬
mistic attitude towards all aspects of human affairs. To
move from national traditions and aspirations to others
based on international welfare may prove less painful if
we are prepared to look on Man and all his problems as
a phase in the evolution of the universe and if we have
the courage to believe and to teach that he can, by means
of his intellect, control and direct his own evolution and
destiny.
This text is an abridgement of an address, "The Proper
Study of Mankind is Man", delivered in Sept. 1959 before
the British Assoc, for the Advancement of Science. 39
