LINC
CENTER
AMERICA'S CAPITAL
FOR DRAMA
MUSIC
& DANCING
by Peter D. Franklin
Photos © Ezra Stoller, New York
PANORAMIC VIEW of Lincoln Center for the Performing
Arts as it will appear when completed is realistically repre¬
sented (top of page) by latest architectural model of the
$140 million project. Above, the center's section spanning
New York's 65th Street. On the left, is the Philharmonic Hall ;
in background, is the new Metropolitan Opera House.

Acultural renaissance is taking place in New
York City on a fourteen acre site once dotted
with slums. It is embodied in a bold and
imaginative project, called the Lincoln Center
for the Performing Arts, undertaken to satisfy the rebirth
of interest in the arts, an interest generated not only by
New Yorkers and Americans but by peoples of other lands
as well.
"Here will occur a true interchange of the fruits of
national cultures," said President Eisenhower at the
groundbreaking ceremonies for the center on May 14, 1959.
"From this will develop a growth that will spread to the
corners of the earth, bringing with it the kind of human
message that only individuals, not governments, can
transmit."
Upon its scheduled completion in the spring of 1964,
Lincoln Center will offer seven theatres, concert halls and
educational buildings in which the world's greatest music,
drama and dance will be performed before more than
3,200,000 people a year. Costing more than $140,000,000, it
is probably the most ambitious civic project ever un¬
dertaken anywhere for the arts.
The concept of a cultural center has been discussed for
years by many individuals and organizations but the seeds
of the Lincoln Center were sown in 1955 when the Metro¬
politan Opera and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra
each sought a new hall to better their existing facilities.
Their joint eight-month study revealed that performing
arts audiences were larger than ever before and the point
had been reached on the American scene when advance¬
ment of these arts must become a community responsibili¬
ty, in the same way as health, education and welfare.
Under the chairmanship of John D. Rockefeller III
further studies were undertaken to determine Just what
problems would lie In a cultural center's path and where
that path should lead. The following June, Lincoln Center
formally came into being to provide New York, the United
States and other countries with "a new landmark... a
symbol of our national regard for the arts and our recog¬
nition of their importance in the lives of the American
people," the center's new president said.
A site was bought from the city at public auction on
Manhattan's Upper West Side under a Slum Clearance
programme. More than 1,600 families were relocated to
apartments better than or the equal of those they had
left. One hundred and eighty-eight buildings were reduc¬
ed to rubble. And a fund raising programme was
undertaken to solicit grants and contributions from
foundations, corporations and individuals. The initial
campaign goad was $75,000,000, but because of rising costs
and expanded concepts this was recently increased to
$102,000,000.
Finally, in May 1958, the architects were chosen.
Wallace K. Harrison, who had designed the United Na¬
tions Secretariat, Rockefeller Centre and Idlewlld Airport,
all in New York, was named co-ordinating architect for
the center as well as the designer responsible for the new
Metropolitan Opera House. The other architects are Max
Abramovitz, for the Philharmonic Hall; Eero Saarinen,
collaborating with Jo MieMner, on the Repertory Drama
Theatre; Dr. Pietro Belluschi, dean of the School of
Architecture and Planning at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, who will design the new Juilliard School of
Music; Philip Johnson Associates, for the Theatre for the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LINCOLN CENTER (Cont'd;
NEW YORK'S NEW
SKYLINE
OF ART
Dance and Operetta, and Skidmore, Owings and Merrill,
preliminary design consultants for the Library-Museum of
the Performing Arts.
To get the best possible sight lines, acoustics, stage
areas, etc., for each of the performing halls, a team of
experts, led by Mr. Harrison, toured more than thirty of
Europe's finest concert stages and interviewed dozens of
star performers to get their opinion on what was best.
In addition a group of European authorities in the field,
such as Walther Unruh of Germany, Alvar Aalto oí
Finland and Sven Markelus of Sweden, came to New York
to consult with the center's designers.
So detailed was this survey that it included a report that
American hip sizes had grown larger in the last century.
Therefore each theatre chair had to be designed bigger
and, for the sake of comfort, the theatres became larger,
too. "Urufortunateily, the voices of the artists haven't
become any bigger," Mr. Haralson said.
The prima donna of the center will be the $32,000,000
air-conditioned Metropolitan Opera House at the head of
a giant plaza. It will be fronted by ten-story high
columns separated by glass wauls. Behind the lobby and
stage areas (there will be at least four stages) will rise a
twenty-story tower, housing a central air-conditioning
system for the entire project, office space, and shops for
GENERAL VIEW shows, clockwise from lower left,
Theatre for the Dance and Operetta, Damrosch
Park and bandshell, Metropolitan Opera House,
Repertory Drama Theatre and Library-Museum,
the Juilliard School, and the Philharmonic Hall.
the opera's productions, such as wig and costume rooms
and scenery storage.
Although revered Carnegie Hail has now been saved
from destruction, it will no longer be the home of the New
York Philharmonic Orchestra which is scheduled to open
its 1961-1962 season in a new $13,200,000 " hall within
Lincoln Center. Construction has already begun on this
2,600 seat auiditoráiuim, second only to the 3,800 seats at
the Met. Here, too, the time-tested recipes for fine
orchestral music from Europe have been incorporated in
Photos © Ezra Sto'ier, New York
FOR OUTDOOR CONCERTS, a bandshell overlooking Damrosch Park (foreground) will be an attractive feature of the Lincoln
Center. Flanking the park (left) is the Metropolitan Opera House with its façade of ten-storey columns separated by glass walls.
On right is the Theatre for the Dance and Operetta, a " not so small opera house " with enough room for 2,500 patrons.
10

the modem design with the latest structural and
acoustical developments. The highly flexible stage area
will be able to accomodate with equal ease solo artists,
dance recitals, small instrumental groups as well as a full
symphony orchestra with chorus.
Competing with Old Vic, Comédie Française and The
Abbey Theatre will be Lincoln Center's Repertory Drama
Theatre, designed to seat 1,100 persons and to capture the
true spirit of the theatre with great intimacy and
closeness of the entire audience to the stage. The Theatre
TERRACE overlooking the North Plaza is formed
by bridge running over 65th Street. In the back¬
ground is the façade of the Philharmonic Hall whose
2,600 seat auditorium will incorporate all the
very latest acoustical and structural features.
The Unesco Courier. Jonuory 1961
for the Dance and Operetta, "a not-so-small opera
house" for 2,500 patrons, will serve the center as an Opera
Comique and bring to audiences major repertory
companies and light opera groups from the United States
and abroad.
"But the center must be more than performance halls,"
affirms its president. "It must place an Important
emphasis on education and creative work." Therefore
the Juilliard School of Music, one of the finest institutions
of its kind In the world, will be a major constituent devot¬
ed exclusively to advanced training of highly gifted
students in the performing arts.
Along these same Unes a Library-Museum of the Per¬
forming Arts was incorporated Into the center offering
hundreds of thousands of books, records, sheet music and
other memorabilia on the arts to encourage creative
scholarship. Here, too, will be facilities for viewing
motion pictures and slides, playing records and tape re¬
cordings and a children's theatre for puppet shows and
the like.
For outdoor concerts a band shell overlooking a park
will be an attractive feature, especially in the wann and
humid summer months. And underneath the entire site
spaces for the parking of 800 cars is planned.
New York may not be the only city in the United States
which ls undergoing a "cultural explosion," as one writer
has put it. But "nowhere else are premier performing
institutions in all the performing arts joined together
with artistic education in one dynamic union dedicated to
the service of the people," says the center's president.
The major task still lies ahead, that of actually putting
the brick and mortar together for artistically perfect
results. But when that work is done and the house lights
go down for the first production, then New York will be
the centre of the cultural renaissance of twentieth century
America.
Pho'.os t) E* Stoller, New York
PRIMA DONNA of the Center is S32 million air-conditioned Metropolitan Opera House at the head of a giant plaza. Behind the
lobby and stage areas (there will be at least four stages) there will be a 20-storey tower housing a central air conditioning system
for the entire project, office space and shops for the opera's productions such as wig and costume rooms and scenery storage.
