IN THE FACTORY
SAFETY IS
UEAHC Modern safety helmet, complete with
MLAUJ lamp, protects miner's head; breathing
mask defends his lungs against dust. Comprehen¬
sive safety regulations are required for coal-min¬
ingstill one of the word's most hazardous jobs.
UAKinC Heavy gloves protect workers handling
llAliLO radioactive materials. This danger is
now understood, and due to stringent precautions
proportionately fewer accidents and injuries
occur in atomic plants than In ordinary industry.
AND FEET Wooden clogs (below left) protect steelworker from
searing heat of coke ovens beneath him. Protectors,
slipped on over ordinary shoes, are a vitally important item of safety
equipment in atomic plants where floors may be contaminated by radiation.
ILO Photos
20

THEIR FINEST PRODUCT
In terms of the kinds of accidents that can kill, disable
or injure him, the industrial worker is his own worst
enemy. Evidence shows that a "human factor" is in¬
volved in more than 80 % of occupational accidents. The
man, therefore, and not the machine he operates is the
chief culprit responsible for the tremendous annual toll
of deaths and injuries among Industrial workers.
One International Labour Organization (ILO) report
published shortly after the last war showed that between
1939 and 1945, Industrial accidents in the United States
and Great Britain had killed more people than the war
itself. Yet these two countries were already at that time
well advanced In industrial accident prevention.
Figures for industrial accident rates since 1938 reveal
a strikingly small improvement over the pre-war situation.
Even in the United States and Britain the incidence of
accidents only decreased by 38% between 1938 and 1958.
Today's figures are equally disturbing. Each year in
Europe, between one-ninth and one-quarter of all workers
have a disabling accident. On an average between one
and four workers and sometimes as many as ten out of
every 10,000 are killed while at their jobs.
In the United States of America, out of a total of 91,000
accidental deaths from all causes, almost 14,000 are due
to industrial accidents. In France, a serious accident,
causing death or permanent invalidity, occurs every two
minutes, and even a small country like Switzerland has
an annual toll of over 200,000 occupational accidents, bet¬
ween 300 and 400 of them fatal ones. In countries that
are in the process of rapid Industrialization the problems
are totally different both in magnitude and urgency.
Between 1938 and 1958 in India, for Instance, the accident
rate increased in the proportion of from 100 to 240.
Already a vast amount of statistical research has
been made to ascertain what kinds of accidents
occur, in what numbers, to what types of people
and from what causes. The first and most surprising fact
revealed by an analysis of all types of industrial acci¬
dents is that only one in eight is caused by machines.
Vehicles, electricity, sources of heat and similar causes
are responsible for more than one-quarter of the total.
More than half are caused by what one expert has called
the Big Five: falls from a height; falls on the level;
handling materials; falling objects; hand tools. The
claim by one technician that today there are fewer risks
in manufacturing a sensitive explosive like nitro¬
glycerine than in transporting a heavy crate is perhaps
not as astonishing as would appear.
Statistics are indispensable for measuring the success
of preventive efforts and discovering the weak points to
which these efforts should be directed.
Here is how one of the largest chemical firms in Britain
deals with this problem. Every day from the firm's 110
factories and works, a sheaf of pink forms arrives on the
desk of Mr. J. St. Brown, who is head of its Safety
Division. Each one reports a "dangerous occurrence."
Copies of these reports are circulated to the Safety
Committees in each of the company's factories, together
with precise recommendations in each case.
The results of this company's far-sighted policy speak
for themselves. Among the 73,000 workers in the 110
factories for whose safety Mr. St. Brown Is responsible,
there were in 1959 only 386 accidents causing temporary
absence from work, nine serious accidents and five fatal
ones. These were the lowest figures in the company's
history and showed more than an 80% Improvement on
1945, and 25% improvement on the 1957 figures.
On the national scale it is much more difficult to
collect such exact Information as this. As Mr. Marcel
Robert, Chief of the Occupational Safety and Health
Division of the ILO, said recently: "In compiling
statistics, an accident is generally attributed to only one
cause, the most obvious one. In the great majority of
cases this is completely misleading because potentially
important accident factors are left out of account."
Two different lines of approach have developed In
Industrial safety efforts. One Is towards more and
more detailed legislation and towards measures to
improve the physical conditions of work.
The other Is towards education. According to partisans
of "education first," preventive measures should rather
be directed towards the worker. Moreover, they say, when
legislation and inspection procedures become too complex
and cumbersome, they are no longer respected.
These two approaches are of course complementary. No
accident is entirely due either to an outside cause or to
a human failing. Most experts on the question agree
today that industrial accidents, like all other accidents,
have multiple causes.
"Most of these," says Professor Victor Raymond, Medical
Adviser to the French Institut National de Sécurité, "arc
potential causes, they exist only as possibilities. No
accident will actually happen unless in one given place
and at one given moment, the different potential causes
come into operation together."
One day at a certain moment a man falls Into a hole.
The hole Is certainly a cause of the accident, for had
there been no hole there would have been no accident.
Yet it Is only a potential cause, for plenty of people pass
by unprotected holes without falling In.
For the accident to cease to be potential and become
actual, there must be this conjunction between the
victim and the material cause, which supposes a
precipitating factor. This factor may be Independent of
the victima falling stone or other object, a plank that
gives way, or a machine that breaks down. But frequent¬
ly this factor Is simply a movement or act of the victim
himself. For this, Professor Raymond has coined the
phrase le geste néfaste "the fatal action."
Most often, this fatal action Is an uncorrected condition¬
ed reflex. By their very repetition, many work movements
become stereotyped. The man becomes a kind of robot,
slave of the machines and objects he works with. His
work movements become mechanical, and always follow
the same pattern. Now suppose that the machine or the
objects the worker is concerned with suddenly present
some departure from the usual pattern. Unless the
worker's conditioned reflex is quickly corrected, the "fatal
action" will be made.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

ACCIDENTS IN THE FACTORY (Cont'd)
Fortunately, the human being possesses protective
mechanisms against these "fatal actions." First there are
the primary reflexes which produce an "instinctive"
withdrawal from a danger usually perceived through the
sense of touch. Conditioned reflexes can also produce
similar protective reactions. "Once bitten, twice shy" says
the proverb. Reaction to fire is the classical example.
A child who actually touches a burning object will
withdraw his hand by a primary reflex action. An
association between the sight of fire and the sensation of
burning is established, and a conditioned reflex is created
which lasts throughout his life. Whenever he sees a
burning object getting too close, he withdraws.
Such protective reflexes can be developed by creating
associations between a danger and certain sights and
soundswarning by sirens or bells, and, very important,
notices and labels.
Finally the instinct of self-preservation that everyone
possesses can be strengthened and trained so that it
corrects, checks or co-ordinates habitual actions and
prevents them from becoming "fatal actions."
Yet this Instinct of self-preservation cannot be relied
on absolutely there will always be occasional eclipses.
When these happen, technical and mechanical safety
measures can often save the situation. To be effective
such measures should protect all workers alike and should
require no effort or co-operation from the individual.
They are based on the elimination of all risk. An example
is the prohibition of the use of white lead in paint, which
has automatically prevented white-lead poisoning among
the people working with paint.
Safety devices built into machines relieve the worker to
some extent of the need to be careful. Of course the
workers know about these safety devices and their role,
and it sometimes happens that they resent them because,
they say, they complicate their work. So they sometimes
remove them or put them out of action, temporarily or
permanently. Machines should therefore always be
provided with an automatic stop that operates whenever
their safety devices are not working. The less such a
device interferes with the worker's habits, the more
easily it will be accepted and used by him.
These safety measures are collective and do not require
the co-operation of the individual. There are others
which do require this. It is difficult enough to obtain
even the worker's passive co-operation, for instance in
following certain rules or going for a medical check-up.
If he is asked to take more active precautions, like
wearing gloves, special glasses or a mask, experience
shows that the results are usually unsatisfactory.
It is essential for each worker to know and understand
the risks to which he is exposed. Instructions must be
complete, detailed and precise in order not to create
simply a vague, uninformed fear of accidents. For
example, everyone knows vaguely that electricity is
dangerous. But it is not enough for someone to know
the dangers of lightning, or of high tension currents, if
he does not realize the dangers of the common 110 volt
or 220 volt household electricity supply.
Again, it is not enough just to tell people about such
risks they must really understand their nature. It is
for this reason that too much dependence cannot be
placed on rules, warnings, "forbidden" notices, etc. They
become so familiar that after a while they have no
further effect in preventing the "fatal action."
None of these "individual" safety measures can be
really effective unless the person they are intended to
protect is made to feel a partner in the scheme, and this
will depend largely on the attitude of the works manager.
He must set the pace. If he is genuinely concerned about
safety measures, the engineers and foremen will follow
suit, and the accident rate will soon reflect the success
of their combined efforts.
22
CAREFUL
WORKERS HIT
THE JACKPOT
Workers in a cement plant near Paris
nave an extra incentive to avoid acci¬
dents. Each year the management puts
up one million francs (10,000 New Francs)
into a special fund. For every man-day
lost through accidents 135 francs are
deducted and, at the end of the year,
the remainder is divided among the
workers, excluding office staff and fore¬
men. Left, how the plan pays off. In
1951 a total of 7,411 working days were
lost through accidents. But during the
first half of 1952, the total was only 209
and there were still over 970,000 francs
in the jackpot. Sign below says there
has been no accident tor past 24 days.

EVERY POSTER
TELLS A STORY
Graphic, dramatic and hard-hitting, posters are ideal for transmitting the
safety-first message in factory and workshop. Busy workers have no time
to read detailed or long-winded explanations. But a quick glance at a
poster whose message has been expressed simply and directly, immedi¬
ately brings home an essential safety rule in a form that sticks in the mind.
Sometimes a wordless poster is equally effective and offers a practical
solution to a problem in rapidly developing countries where countless
people work efficiently with modern machinery but still cannot read.
7fc\
"Watch out for the hoist" says this Polish poster, using
an ant and elephant to symbolize a common threat to
workersthat of heavy objects falling on them from above.
"Bad scaffoldings make good crutches" is the reminder
of French poster (above) and "Don't walk under
overhanging loads" warns the Italian one (below).
"Watch where you put your feet." A Spanish poster illustrates some common
hazards for the worker, from open trapdoors to nails sticking out of planks.
23
rrrsoTToi
snSDFSI
