CALAMARi, Poulpe, Inkfish: most travellers have
met these on menus, especially in Mediterra¬
nean lands. Yet how many know exactly what
they are eating: fish, sea-mammal, crustacean
or what? Actually they are members of the
octopus family, which means they are molluscs, that large
branch of the animal kingdom to which the snail and
oyster belong.
Scientifically, octopuses and similar animals, belong to
the Cephalopoda, which comes from two Greek words
meaning "head-footed". The "'foot" refers to the arms
or tentacles which spring from the head. Cephalopods
are found in all the oceans of the world, living in waters
ranging from those inside the Arctic Circle to those on
the edge of the Antarctic Continent. They are especially
abundant in the Mediterranean.
Altogether there are some 650 known species, ranging
from midgets that can perch on the end of a finger, to
the giant squid which sometimes reaches 50ft. and weighs
a ton or more. This is the largest invertebrate on earth.
In European waters the best-known cephalopods are
three in number. There is the common octopus which has
eight arms and a globular body. It has a maximum span
of about 10ft. Then there is the common cuttlefish which
has, in addition to eight arms, two long tentacles which
shoot out like a pair of living tongs to seize its prey. It
has a shield-shaped body strengthened internally by a
large calcareous cuttlebone. With tentacles extended a
large common cuttlefish may measure three feet.
Finally, there is the common squid which also has eight
arms and two tentacles. It has a torpedo-shaped body
supported internally by a delicate horn-like shell. When
fully grown it measures some three feet with extended
tentacles, although larger specimens have been taken.
Cephalopods are among the most interesting creatures
in the sea. Just look at their specification and perfor¬
mance. They have three hearts which pump blue blood
through their bodies. They possess greater powers of
12

by Frank W. Lane
CO P.lul Trink jus. Wilhrlm'.hjvrn
LIKE JET PLANES in formation, a group of squids (lolt)
swims lei su rely across a tank in the Naples Aquarium. Squids,
the Pearly Nautilus (drawing below), tho cuttlefish (above)
and the octopus (bottom of page) are all members of that
division of molluscs called cephalopods. Many of theso
"head footed" creatures with writhing muscular arms set
with rows of suckers, are quite small ; others are tremendous
monsters like the Giant Squid which can weigh over a ton.
Drawing by Pjtitnce lofrn.in
Franz Thorbecke, Lindau/Bodensee
colour change than the chameleon and have luminescent
displays which out-rival those of the fire-fly. They emit
rockets as well. And they shoot through the sea, and some-
tames sail out of it, by the most modem means of travel,
jet-propulsion.
It is a humbling thought to realise that one of man's
latest inventions has been ante-dated by relatives of the
snail. Squids were jetting itheir way through primeval seas
millions of years before man appeared on this planet.
The jet's propulsive force is sea-water, shot in fast-
repeated pulses from a single nozzle, called the funnel,
beneath the head. Water enters a cavity in the body, the
inlet is then sealed, and the heavily muscled walls of
the chamber contract, forcing the water out through the
nozzle at high speed. By the law of action and reaction,
as the jet shoots one way, the squid is driven in the
opposite direction.
Not much is known of the soeed but there is evidence
(Ç) Laurence E. Perkins, London
WL^/Zà
OfeMf' ^" ~^^H
Kfc** B^^^ ^^Bk^^^A.
<t^^' v-^Si
E^rit^' ^^^ ^^ Jd
n^^^v ¿Bt^ ^F
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

© Walt Disney Productions
BATTLE with a giant squid which has attacked the submarine
"Nautilus" was filmed in the Walt Disney production of Jules
Verne's "20,000 Leagues Under the Sea". Giant squids, largest
Invertebrate's on earth, sometimes reach 50 feet in length.
Drawing by Gustave Doré
CAVE COMBAT between man and squid was vividly des¬
cribed by Victor Hugo in his novel "The Toilers of the Sea".
Squids are sometimes called "devil fishes", incorrectly so for
this name properly belongs to a skatelike tropical fish.
Wilhelm Schafen
DUMMY SQUID is formed by a blob of ink ejected from the
squid's ink sac which helps to draw an enemy's attack away
from the squid itself. The ink also acts against the olfactory
sense, of eels which are among the squid's worst enemies.
KINGDOM OF THE OCTOPUS (Cont'd)
that the fastest squids may reach a speed of 20 m.p.h.,
although most cephalopods travel much more slowly.
While the sole means of locomotion of cuttlefish and
squid is swimming, octopuses frequently ramble about the
ocean floor, using their arms to move like outsize spiders.
It is then that they truly live up to their scientific name
and "walk on their heads".
The ability to change colour is due to tiny pigment
cells, called chromatophores, which are filled with diffe¬
rently coloured pigments embedded in the skin. By
expanding and contracting ithese, thus spreading or reduc-
the pigment, colour changes flow over the skin. These
changes sometimes occur so fast that G.H. Parker, the
American authority on colour changes, says they "must
involve a complexity of communications and of controls
such as are present in the modern electric sign over
whose surface an ever-changing design may be made to
pass".
Miss Joyce Allan, an Australian zoologist, saw some
small cuttlefish swimming slowly about an aquarium
coiiitadning variously coloured objects. As the cuttles pass¬
ed over dark, reddish-brown rock they matched its col¬
our perfectly. A few inches away there was some dead
coral, and as the cuttles passed over it they turned a
light grey. Then, in turn, light brown for sand, green-
brown for weeds, and back again to the reddish-brown
of the rock.

C_-._._-
à ^H the defences of cephalopods against their nume-
^^^ rous enemies : another is ink discharge. This used
to be thought of as a simple smoke-screen but today it
is known to be more complicated. The ink acts against
the olfactory sense of eels the worst enemies of the
octupus and, strange as it may sound, without olfactory
stimulation the eels won't attack. The ink also forms
shapes or dummies, which simulate the form of the
cephalopod and draw an enemy's attack away from the
animal itself.
D.N.F. Hall, a marine zoologist, had an interesting
object-lesson in cephalopod escape tactics when he tried
to catch a small squid in a wooden tub aboard a ship.
When his fingers were about nine inches away, the
squid turned dark and seemed to stay still. Hall made a
grab and seized a small blob of ink. The squid was
at the other end of the tub.
Hall tried again, and this time he watched exactly
what happened. After turning dark, the squid ejected
ink which simulated its body, simultaneously turning pale
and shooting away round the perimeter of the tub.
Hall had the advantage of watching the squid and its
ink discharge from above in an enclosed space; in the
open sea the squid's chances of escaping would have
been much greater.
Luminescence may not have the same defensive quali¬
ties as colour change but it renders some cephalopods
among the most beautiful creatures in the animal king¬
dom. The British marine zoologist, Sir Alister Hardy,
once said of the small deep-water squid Lycoteuthis
diadema: "It is one of the most beautiful animals I
have ever seen."
The luminescence is produced in several ways but the
most frequent is by small organs called photophores,
which become luminous by minute chemical reactions.
For the technically minded, the source of the light is
an enzyme-catalysed reaction, luciferase acting on luci-
ferin.
The effect of the luminescence is well described by the
German marine zoologist, Carl Chun, in the following
remarks about Lycoteuthis diadema:
"Among all the marvels of colouration which the
animals of the deep sea exhibited to us nothing can be
even distantly compared with hues of these organs
(photophores). One would think that the body was
adorned with a diadem of brilliant gems. The middle
organs of the eyes shone with an ultramarine blue, the
lateral ones with a pearly sheen. Those towards the
front of the lower surface of the body gave out a ruby-
red light, while those behind were snow-white or pearly,
14

CHAMELEONS OF THE OCEAN
except the median one, which was sky-blue. It was
indeed a glorious spectacle."
Think of that the next time you eat a calamari!
A few squids fire phosphorescent "rockets" the
best-known being Heteroteuthis dispar, which is about
the size of a man's thumbnail. The light-giving secretion
is a form of mucus, and comes from a gland near the
ink-sac. When the mucus meets the oxygen in the
water it glows brightly, sometimes for five minutes. The
"rocket" may serve to startle a pursuer thus giving the
tiny squid time to escape.
I suppose the aspect of cephalopods, especially of octo¬
puses, which has captured popular imagination more than
any other is their alleged danger to man. Let a bather
especially if she be a pretty woman have a slight
encounter with an octopus and the newspapers carry
j> '"7 s-
^S^^^^Bi
Paul Bartsch (1931)
LIVE OCTOPUS is being used here by a Japan¬
ese fisherman as a living grapple to recover
sunken pots. In Japan, octopus flesh is an abun¬
dant and important item of diet. The octopus is
caught by lowering earthenware pots to the
bottom of the sea with cords. These are entered
by the animals (on left of drawing) which, when
once settled, are reluctant to withdraw, so the
pots may be pulled up before the animals escape.
a story of a near-escape from a watery grave in the
arms of a loathsome sea-monster.
What is the truth? When I was writing Kingdom of
the Octopus (1), which is the first general popular book on
cephalopods to be published in any country this century,
I went into this question carefully. I read widely, I cor¬
responded with scores of people in various countries, and
I asked in the Press for people able to give authentic
(1) Published by Jarrolds, London; price 30/-
accounts of attacks to get In touch with me. From the
results of my research, I believe that the vast majority
of cephalopods which are normally encountered are
harmless, but that some of these have occasionally killed
people, and that there are rare outsize cephalopods (giant
squids) which have sunk small boats.
I had a letter from a woman who was an eye-wit¬
ness of an incident in which a bather was seized in
shallow water by an octopus, and would probably have
been killed had not help been at hand. The octopus span¬
ned less than six feet and weighed only a few pounds.
And in "The Medical Journal for Australia" in 1955
there was a detailed account of the death of a young
man after he had been bitten In the neck region by a
small octopus. It ls not generally realized that some
octopuses can bite and Inject poison.
fH
^1 EPHALOPODS are useful to man In various ways.
^^^ J They are the favourite bait of many sea-
* fishermen; they are fed to animals and spread
on the land as fertilizers; their bone sharpens the beaks
of cage-birds and their ink has provided pigment for
artist for thousands of years; and their brains and
nervous systems provide valuable material for .sclentlllc
research.
Throughout the world thousands of tons of cephalo¬
pods are eaten every year. When I was researching for
my book I made numerous enquiries about cephalopod
fisheries and eventually I complied the first published
table showing the world catch, country by country.
By far the largest catch In Europe Is In Italy. In 1953
22,000 tons were taken. In China the annual catch ls
around four times this figure. But In Japan, the annual
catch averages some half a million tons!
Here ls a fruitful field for Investigation by world
food organizations. Today the annual catch of cephalo¬
pods throughout the world ls probably In the region of
one million tons, about one pound for every man, woman
and child on earth. But what would the catch bo If a
really intensive effort like that In Japanwere made by
the world's fishing fleets? A thought well worth pon¬
dering in terms of the world's desperate food shortage.
What do cephalopods taste like? Opinions vary from
"fishy india-rubber" and "a sort of marine tripe" to
"better than oysters" and "delicious eating". I think
It ls fair to say that If cephalopods are not prepared
and cooked properly they may well taste like "india-rub¬
ber." For anyone who Intends to eat themboiled,
baked or fried there is one invariable rule for all except
the smallest specimens : pound them until the muscular
tissues are beaten to a pulp.
T
n Spain one delicacy ls stulled octopus with choco-
H late flavouring. In Portugal octopuses and cuttlefish
-JBfc-are cooked In their own Ink and canned for export.
A Japanese delicacy ls toasted octopus cooked in oil over
a charcoal brazier.
Since the 1930s another, and potentlaly most valuable,
use has been found for cephalopods. Physiologists and
medical research workers have been studying the action
of the nervous system in animals for many years. But
the work suffered from a severe handicapthe tiny na¬
ture of the material available, for In most mammals a
nerve-fibre is only l/l,000th of an Inch or so in diameter.
And that Is the value of cephalopods for some of the
nerve-fibres In, say, the common squid are about 1/20 th
of an Inch thick, thus Increasing fifty-fold the width of
the physiologists' basic material.
It has become possible to insert tiny electrodes into
the living nerve-fibres of squids and obtain electrical
measurements hitherto Impossible with other animal
material. This Information has helped considerably in
discovering how nerves work Including human nerves.
And that is an essential step in learning how to care for
them in sickness and In health. Who knows, maybe there
are people today who owe their mental health to a squid !
15
