WHERE TIME STOOD STILL
The Galapagos Islands and
their prehistoric creatures
by Dr Jean Dorst
Assistant Director, Museum of Natural History, Paris
iUNG RED-FOOTED BOOBY (shown here) and
cousin, the blue-faced booby, flourish on Tower
and in the Galapagos archipelago. They are so tame
Wat they allow people to approach close to their nests
without taking flight. Legend has it that their name was
given to them by sailors on the Pacific because they
wo¿:^|,light on the decks of passing ships and allow
Paves to be caught without trying to fly away.
© Philippa Scott, Siimbridge, U.K.

ei* Tmí 4
7k -m
Philippa Scott, Slimbridge, U.K.
«L
BLACK LAVA CLIFFS are typical of the Galapagos Islands, Pacific archipelago of thirteen main islands
and many islets, 600 miles off the coast of Ecuador. To conserve and study the unusual flora and fauna of
these islands, Unesco helped found the Charles Darwin Foundation in 1959. The field station's labora¬
tory has now been built and an ambitious biological research programme is expected to get under way soon.
MELVILLE'S DESCRIPTION
Herman Melville, the author of "Moby Dick", visited the Gala¬
pagos Islands in 1841, only a few years after Charles Darwin.
His description of the "Enchanted Isles", published in 1854
under the title Las Encantadas, makes fascinating reading.
A few paragraphs are published below.
Take five-and-twenty heaps of cinders dumped here
and there in an outside city lot ; imagine some of them
magnified into mountains, and the vacant lot the sea ;
and you will have a fit idea of the general aspect of the
Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles. A group rather of
extinct volcanoes than of isles ; looking much as the
world at large might, after a penal conflagration.
...Cut by the Equator, they know not autumn, and they
know not spring ; while already reduced to the lees of
fire, ruin itself can work little more upon them. The
showers refresh the deserts ; but in these isles, rain never
falls.
...Little but reptile life is here found; tortoises, lizards,
immense spiders, snakes, and that strangest anomaly of
outlandish nature, the iguana. No voice, no low, no howl
is heard ; the chief sound of life here is a hiss.
On most of the isles where vegetation is found at all,
it is more ungrateful than the blankness of Atacama.
Tangled thickets of wiry bushes, without fruit and without
a name, springing up among deep fissures of calcined
rock, and treacherously masking them ; or a parched
growth of distorted cactus trees.
In many places the coast is rock-bound, or, more pro¬
perly, clinker-bound ; tumbled masses of blackish or
greenish stuff like the dross of an iron-furnace, forming
dark clefts and caves here and there, into which a cease¬
less sea pours a fury of foam ; overhanging them with a
swirl of gray, haggard mist, amidst which sail screaming
flights of unearthly birds heightening the dismal din.
Nor would the appellation, enchanted, seem misapplied
in still another sense. For concerning the peculiar reptile
inhabitant of these wildswhose presence gives the group
its second Spanish name, Galapagosconcerning the
tortoises found here, most mariners have long cherished
a superstition, not more frightful than grotesque. They
earnestly believe that all wicked sea-officers, more
especially commodores and captains, are at death (and,
in some cases, before death) transformed into tortoises ;
thenceforth dwelling upon thèse hot aridities, sole solitary
lords of Asphaltum.
From Complete Stories of Herman Melville,
Random House, New York, 1951.
R:ecent celebrations marking the centenary of
.Charles Darwin's famous work, The Origin of
Species (published in London in 1859), turned a world
spotlight on the Galapagos Islands. On this occasion
people in all parts of the globe heard about these islands
whose scientific importance had, in any case, long since
become known to a wider audience than that of the
world's biologists.
The Galapagos Archipelago, lying on and near the
Equator, some 600 miles out in the Pacific to the west of
the coast of Ecuador, to which it belongs, directly inspired
the famous British naturalist. As early as 1837 Darwin
wrote in one of his journals: "In July I opened my first
notebook on transmutation of species. Had been greatly
struck from about month of previous March on character
of South American fossils and species of Galapagos Archi¬
pelago. These facts origin (especially latter) of all my
views."
There is no doubt that the Galapagos Islands were a
determining factor in the development of Darwinism.
But what were the reasons for this profound influence?
Superficially, this tiny archipelago appears to have
nothing of particular interest to the scientist. A handful
of dots on most maps (their total area covers less than
3,000 square miles), the 13 islands of the Galapagos group
include five which are fairly large (the largest is Albe¬
marle Island, 60 miles in length), numerous islets and
rocks. Of volcanic origin, they are the peaks of a range
of submarine volcanoes thrust up from the sea by suc¬
cessive eruptions. It is more than probable that they
were never" joined in any way to the American continent.
The visitor finds mountains of black or red lava which
has poured out of the archipelago's 2,000 craters. Some
of these mountains are over 5,000 feet above sea level.
Curiously, the Galapagos Islands, though so close to the
equator, are washed by fairly cool seas. Unusual océano¬
graphie conditions exist in the east Pacific because of the
famous Humboldt Current, which brings cold water from
the Antarctic along the coasts of Chile and Peru, then
turns west at the equator and runs towards the Galapagos
Islands, after which it loses Itself in the ocean depths.
The low temperature of the water in the region of
14 °c produced far-reaching effects in the climate of
the islands. As along the shores of Peru, and for the same
reasons, rainfalls are sparse, occurring only between
January and March, and drought conditions often prevail.
The vegetation is in keeping with this arid climate.
The lowlands are covered with a vegetation adapted to
dry conditions, with an abundance of giant cacti (Opun¬
tia and Cereus) and spiny shrubs which lose their leaves
in the dry season.
29
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

GALAPAGOS (Cont'd)
LIVING
LABORATORY
OF EVOLUTION
The hilly slopes exposed to the more humid south-east
winds and often shrouded in fog are clothed with thicker
vegetation and, in a few areas, veritable forests of trees
laden with parasitical vegetation. This natural environ¬
ment makes a sharp contrast with the more usual land¬
scape in the islands a barren prospect of naked lava with
nothing but a few cacti here and there.
The fauna living in the archipelago is limited to very
few species. The reason for this is quite simple. As these
species were isolated by large stretches of ocean right
from the beginning, they form what is, in fact, a world
on their ownwhich has followed its own evolutionary
laws shut off from the world outside. Plants and animals
arrived there from the American continent as best they
could, swimming, flying or borne forward by the winds on
natural rafts composed of a tangle of tree trunks and
deadwood like those often carried along by many big
tropical rivers.
T
30
AKing into account the theoretical existence,
at one period, of an American continent
jutting out further into the ocean than it does today, it
is reasonable to assume that these means of locomotion
were then easier than they are now. But even so the
ocean crossing would have been a difficult enterprise and,
in fact, only a limited number of creatures made the
voyage safely. This explains the starling paucity of the
Galapagos fauna and flora, especially as compared with
the luxuriance of tropical America.
It may thus seem surprising that biologists regard these
apparently barren islands as a scientific wonderland. But
the scientists are right, for the Galapagos Islands are
no less than a natural laboratory in which evolution has
been made manifest. As the botanist, Howell, so rightly
said they are the workroom and show-window of Evolu¬
tion. They are important for the study of this funda¬
mental problem for three reasons.
Being so remote, the Galapagos Islands have served as
a refuge for animals of an archaic type and for a bio¬
logical complex which has disappeared everywhere else
in the world. As mammals could not reach these islands,
the reptiles developed unhindered by their natural com¬
petitors and the animals to which they fall prey.
A visitor setting foot on these shores for the first time
feels as though he has gone back to the secondary period,
the age of the reptiles. Along the beaches live marine
iguanas 3 1/2 feet long, the only sea-bound sauria still in
existence. They feed on sea-weed, grazing at low tide,
and bask in the sun in colonies sometimes running into
hundreds.
In the interior, land iguanas of a different type live
amongst the cactus along with the giant tortoises which
are such a characteristic sight that their Spanish name,
"Galapagos", was applied to the islands. These giants,
whose shells alone measure 3 1/2 feet, are now found only
in the Galapagos Islands and the Seychelles, though
fossilized remains extend over a vast area encompassing
North America and Europe. This example is typical of
the prehistoric character of so much of the wild life of
the Galapagos Islands, which are truly a Noah's Ark for
animals that have disappeared from the face of the earth.
But this is not all. On the Galapagos Islands an evolu¬
tionary differentiation occurred isolated from the currents
in evolution taking place on the continents. This explains
the presence of such a high proportion of endemic ani¬
mals sometimes over 50% in one single group.
Owing to the remoteness of the archipelago, the num¬
ber of ancestors is of course very limited. Hence a sim¬
plification in the fauna which makes the laws of evolution
much easier to distinguish than in the rest of the world,
where the complexity of natural phenomena and the
multiplicity of ancestors complicate inextricably the
tracing of relationships. The Galapagos Islands thus
stand out as Nature's experimental station.
THE ANIMALS of Galapagos are unique in the world. The
islands, now believed to be of oceanic origin, received flora and
fauna that either drifted there on ocean currents or flew there
through the air. Thus isolated, the animal and plant life has
followed evolutionary patterns of its own. The photo below
of the Galapagos iguanas basking in the sun might have come
from the earth's reptile age. They are found exclusively in this
tiny archipelago. The giant tortoise above is found in only one
other place in the world the Seychelles. At right a flightless
cormorant, also found only in the Galapagos, regards a sea lion
as a marine ¡guana retreats from the water. The most surpris¬
ing thing about Galapagos animals is their lack of fear of humans.
Photos © Philippa Scott, Slimbridge, U.K.
v

m
8m2£
M
-^' <
^K
--^
*$ .
Dr. I. Eibl-Eibejfeldc
REPTILES
OUT OF
THE PAST
This is particularly true of the famous Darwin finches,
or Geospizidae, sparrows indigenous to the Galapagos
Islands and belonging to the Fringillidae or finch family.
The Islands' 14 species are all derived from a common
ancestor, which obviously arrived there at a time when
there were no other birds. Several lines then evolved in
such a way as to make the fullest use of available food¬
stuff. The group as a whole thus fills all the ecological
niches normally held by birds of very different families.
Accordingly some Darwin finches resemble granivorous
sparrows with their big beaks for crushing seeds, while
others are not unlike warblers with their tiny pointed
beaks and insect diet. The Darwin sparrows illustrate in
striking fashion the whole process of the evolution of
sparrows. Such an evolution was of course made possible
by the absence of any competitor. It will be readily,
understood that the study of these birds lends weight to
Darwinian theories.
So the Galapagos Islands are an ideal spot for studying
the dynamics of evolution. A more recent evolution may
also be witnessed. Owing to the paradoxical conditions of
the natural environment; mainly due to the presence of
cold currents at the equator alongside masses of warm
water fauna of very diverse origins has mixed in the
islands.
Here penguins, usually connected with Antarctic climes,
rub shoulders with frigate and tropic birds and other avi¬
fauna found near warm tropical waters. The combined
presence of creatures having such widely different origins
and ecological preferences is an important factor in the
evolution now taking place. These peculiar circumstances
enable us to study at first hand the adaptation of animals
to their environment.
Here are but a few of the research possibilities of the
Galapagos Islands, though they already give some idea of
the importance of the islands to biology. Discovered (in
terms of science) by Charles Darwin in 1835 when he
made his famous voyage on the "Beagle", their scientific
value has in no way diminished. Yet the situation of
their fauna and flora is so precarious that this unique bio¬
logical complex is threatened with extinction. Up till the
sixteenth century the islands remained untouched by
man. Then came successive waves of pirates, buccaneers
and settlers mostly mutineers or ex-prisoners.
F1 ORTUNATELY the present population is made up
of law-abiding and friendly settlers, but like
many elsewhere, they are not always aware of the imper¬
atives of nature conservation. Furthermore, they have
thought fit to introduce animals previously unknown in
the islands, most of which are now overrun with goats,
pigs, dogs and cattle bred from domestic animals turned
wild, not to mention the rats and mice introduced
accidentally. So in addition to the direct depredations
of Man, the natural fauna finds itself up against the
vigorous competition of animals better equipped for the
struggle for life than are reptiles.
Everywhere in the islands the reptiles have regressed
especially the tortoises. In former times they were
massacred for their fat; now their eggs and young are
devoured by the dogs and pigs. Some species are already
extinct, while others are in a perilous situation. The
fauna as a whole is seriously threatened. We are in
danger of seeing a priceless natural heritage disappear
before our very eyes.
As early as 1934 this state of affairs alarmed the Ecua¬
dorian Government, which passed laws placing the Gala¬
pagos fauna and flora under its protection and setting
aside much of the islands as national parks. Unfortu¬
nately these regulations were hardly applied at all. So,
after the Second World War, Ecuador contacted Unesco
and the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature and asked them to send a mission to study
31

Philippa Scott, Slimbridge, U.K IN DANGER of extinction is the colourful Frigate bird on Galapagos. The males of the species
display brilliantly red inflated throat sacks during the mating season (above) and seemto com¬
pete for the attention of females with this flamboyant show. Because these birds breed in only
one or two concentrated areas and frequently nest on the ground, they are quite vulnerable.
A NATURAL COMPLEX
UNIQUE IN THE WORLD
32
the islands, and to suggest how best the Galapagos fauna
and flora might be preserved.
Dr I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt, an expert named by Unesco, and
Dr. R. Bowman (University of California) went on a
mission to the Islands in 1957." On their return it was
decided to set up a field station on the Galapagos Islands
to be run by an international body with the support of
Ecuador, which declared its intention to promulgate more
effective laws and to see that they were respected.
Following a mission on which I was sent by Unesco in
1958, a preliminary agreement was reached with the Ecua¬
dorian Government and construction of the biological
station began in 1960. The site chosen was on Indefati¬
gable Island (Santa Cruz) close to the little village where
most of this island's settlers live. The work, a large and
complicated scientific and technical task, is being super¬
vised by M. Raymond Lévêque, a biologist entrusted with
the mission by Unesco in 1960.
The Charles Darwin Foundation for the Galapagos
Islands was formed in Brussels in 1959, under the presi¬
dency of Professor V. Van Straelen, to put all these
plans into effect. Sir Julian Huxley, who was one of the
first to defend the cause, became its honorary president,
and Dr L. Jaramillo, permanent delegate of Ecuador to
Unesco, accepted the vice-presidency. All countries
directly concerned in research in this part of the world
are represented on the executive board.
The Foundation immediately set about collecting funds
to defray the cost of building the Charles Darwin Station.
It succeeded so well that we now have two buildings
one to be used as a laboratory, the other as residential
quarters as well as basic equipment, purchased largely
with the credits made available to us by Unesco.
The first research-workers are now able to begin their
investigations. However, there are still many improve¬
ments to be made in the present organization. Additional
buildings, scientific equipment and an océanographic-
research vessel are urgently required to enable scientists
to work effectively in a difficult natural environment.
Following close consultations with the Charles Darwin
Foundation, satisfactory legislation has now been in¬
troduced by the Ecuadorian Government. Large areas
have recently been decreed natural reserves, notably Nar-
borough Island (Fernandina) , which has retained its ori¬
ginal appearance, and the western part of Indefatigable
Island (Santa Cruz), where tortoises are still fairly nu¬
merous. The foundation will continue to suggest to the
Ecuadorian authorities measures aimed at protecting and
conserving a natural complex found nowhere else in the
world.
The Foundation has mapped out an ambitious research
programme. It includes geological and pedological stud¬
ies, which thanks to the structure and origin of the
islands, should yield interesting findings. In the bio¬
logical field, the work has hardly begun insofar as soil
biology and invertebrata are concerned. It may even¬
tually reveal some hitherto unknown aspects of the laws
of evolution. This fertile field of investigation is now
open to scientists from all over the world thanks to the
founding of the new biological station.
Economic aspects will not be forgotten. The seas
around the Galapagos Islands abound in marine life,
especially fish, which could provide Ecuador with much-
needed proteins. Our biological station, though primarily
devoted to basic research, will thus play a part in the
economic development projects for the Galapagos Islands
without compromising the survival of their natural
wealth.
The combined efforts of scientists from all over the
world will in this way make up in some measure for the
depredations committed by other men. The Foundation
will also stand as a monument to Charles Darwin, whose
evolutionary theories were conceived on the desolate
shores of this tiny volcanic archipelago.
