The curse of the Albatross
A MARINER'S
MYTH
by David Gunston
Illustration by Gustave Doré
Not long ago the British cargo liner Calpean
Star arrived at Liverpool from South Georgia
carrying In addition to its usual cargo a
consignment of live penguins and other local
fauna secured by a professional animal-
collector and destined for a German zoo. Among the
other specimens was an albatross, said to be a wandering
albatross, the largest of the known species and the
biggest of all sea-birds. At the time this was claimed,
probably correctly, to be the only live albatross in Europe
or in captivity anywhere.
Soon after the ship docked the albatross died In its
cage, allegedly through being given a sausage-roll to eat
by a well-meaning but misguided sailor, but more probably
because of the impossibility of keeping a large oceanic
bird in confinement for more than a brief period.
At once, a cloud hung over the Calpean Star. Her
crew blamed various misfortunes of the voyage just
ended on the bird's presence on board, and rather than
man the ship for the return trip they went on strike.
This attracted a good deal of attention, and in subsequent
press and TV interviews various members of the crew
and the captain all professed their belief that the hapless
albatross was a creature of Ill-omen, responsible for their
troubles, that never ought to have been shipped.
The master himself admitted that the bird had been
taken on board against his better judgment, and
that he had regretted its very presence on his ship,
vowing never to repeat the mistake. Some of the crew
swore never to sail the ship again, and on every hand
there was firm proof of the power of the ancient legend
of the albatross.
Public interest in this odd case was centred not only
upon yet another strange reason for a strike in a strike-
torn land, but also upon the indisputable fact that here
were tough, grown men so afraid of the consequences of
a sea-bird's death that they refused to return to their
ship. Now sailors are by long tradition superstitious folk,
but this seemed to be carrying things rather too far.
All through, there was much mention of The Rime of
the Ancient Mariner, and how that famous character In
English literature had killed an albatross and lived to
regret it. Even the cynical few who felt that not all
merchant seamen read poetry, believed that these other¬
wise normal men were simply responding to a deep-
seated, age-old belief that to kill one of these noble birds
meant bad weather at sea, mounting misfortune, and
worse.
Yet the odd thing is that such a familiar legend is in
fact suspect. There is hardly any evidence whatever for
including it among the superstitions of the sea. On the
contrary, sailors generally have never had the slightest
compunction in destroying albatrosses. Could it be that
twentieth-century mariners were superstitiousand to
such lengthsabout a piece of eighteenth-century liter¬
ary invention? Let us examine the facts.
Many sea-fowl, notably gulls, petrels and gannets, have
for centuries been believed by seamen to be creatures of
ill-omen, chiefly because they were thought to be the
doomed souls of dead sailors transmigrated Into lonely,
restless denizens of the sea. Few mariners, even to this
day, would willingly kill a storm-petrel, devll-blrd, or
"Mother Carey's Chicken" for this reason. But careful
research among accounts of nautical credulities and
superstitions over several centuries fails to reveal any
mention of albatrosses.
In fact, whatever the period of history, albatrosses were
regarded as Just another creature met with at sea, to
be killed, if need be, without turning a hair. During
Drake's circumnavigation of the globe, 1577-9, large num¬
bers were encountered and eaten as food. The stomachs
of the first Elizabethans were clearly stronger than those
of today, but even In this century albatross flesh has
been eaten in South Georgia, particularly from the young
birds taken from their nests.
Dr. L. Harrison Matthews, Director of the London Zoo,
writing In 1951 of earlier experience In these far southern
albatross breeding-grounds, said:
Albatrosses, like all sea-birds, must be skinned soon
after they are killed If they are to be worth eating... It Is
the fat under the skin and round the Intestines that
taints the meat with a fishy flavour.
And his first-hand accounts of the butchery by Nor¬
wegian whalemen of nesting albatrosses, to say nothing
of the large-scale thefts of the birds' single gigantic eggs
(each fills a large frying-pan) during the 1930s, dispel
any lingering belief in the traditional superstition.
Old-time sailors often had great sport "fishing" for
albatrosses, especially when becalmed in those
lonely waters. After Drake's day, albatross flesh was
less commonly eaten, though another great voyager, Cap¬
tain Cook, writing in 1775, described how : "a few alba¬
trosses and petrels were shot as a necessary treat for our
table."
A mariner of his experience and wisdom would never
have allowed such a thing if there had been any deep-
seated feeling amongst his men against it. Most of the
birds were captured and killed for sheer wanton sport.
They are absurdly easy to secure with a large hook baited
with salt pork, or with a brass triangle baited with meat
and proffered at the end of a cod-line. On grasping the
CONT'D ON PAGE 3 I

A MARINER'S MYTH (Cont'd)
'I shot the albatross'
When in 1798 the English poet and philosopher Samuel Coleridge wrote "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner", a long poem in
ballad form, he little guessed the extraordinary repercussions it would have. By telling the story of a sailor who killed an
albatross and thus brought down misfortune on his ship and its crew, he created the legend of the albatross as a bird of ill
fate and the strong superstition of mariners against killing albatrosses. When Coleridge wrote the poem he was collaborating
with William Wordsworth on a joint volume in which Coleridge was to treat supernatural subjects. It was Wordsworth who
suggested the idea for the poem after having read an English navigator's account of the killing of an albatross in the South
Seas, and later Coleridge admitted his Rime to be "a work of pure imagination". Since then dictionaries and encyclopaedias
have further perpetuated the fallacious fable of the sea, quoting Coleridge's poem as following the legend, not creating it.
Above, how Gustave Doré, depicted the shooting of the albatross in one of the. first French translations of the poem.

The Unesco Courler. March 1961
This was no bird of ill omen
meat, the bird refuses to let go and is readily pulled down
on the deck though some accounts speak of two men
being needed to haul in the larger species.
Once on board, the line may be released, for the huge
almost entirely aerial creature cannot rise again easily,
even after dropping the bait and "lightening ship" by
bringing up the oily contents of Its stomach. This is a
natural reaction of many sea-birds when they require
increased manoeuvrability in the face of danger or
difficulty, and not a symptom of albatross sea-sickness as
was formerly believed.
Anyway, most sailors were ready for such sport,
laughing at the helpless bird's inability either to walk
properly or to take off again, and captured albatrosses
were put to a number of ingenious uses. The oily vomit
was saved and used to waterproof sea-boots, but the
feathers and feet were most in demand. The downy
breasts made handsome muffs, surpassing in beauty the
once-fashionable grebe muffs, while two or three sewn
together made a very beautiful cape that was sure to
meet with feminine favour at home.
Skins of the birds also made excellent feather-rugs
(hence perhaps the nickname "Cape Sheep" for alba-
trosses), and sometimes the complete head, neck
and beak were preserved as trophies. The webbing from
the large feet was always in demand for making tobacco-
pouches: it seems that the slight oiliness of the skin kept
the tobacco agreeably moist. The wing-bones, cleaned
and blown hollow, made excellent, unbreakable pipe-
stems, much enjoyed for cool smoking. In South Georgia
to this day, albatross wings, cut off at the elbow, are used
as sweeping-brushes.
Nevertheless, during the nineteenth century in
particular, even after the Ancient Mariner's debut, there
was much wanton shooting of albatrosses from the in¬
creasing number of ships that were sailing the oceans.
Passengers having little else to do would often take pot
shots at the trusting birds that followed their ships.
According to the famous scientific explorer William Sco-
resby, voyaging in 1856, this was "'a prevalent usage in
many ships travelling to Australia," while another
observer of 1862 spoke of what he called the "murder
of the innocents."
How, then, did the albatross legend arise? The man
chiefly responsible seems to be the English poet, Samuel
Taylor Coleridge (1772-1834), solely through his most
famous poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, first
published in 1798.
The genesis of the story in the poet's mind is of
relevant interest. In the autumn of 1797 he set off on
a walking tour in Somerset with his friend the poet
Wordsworth, and his sister Dorothy. Each poet decided
to write a poem to meet the expenses of the trip, and
Coleridge planned his narrative of what he afterwards
called his "old navigator," partly from a dream
experienced by another friend.
Coleridge discussed this idea with Wordsworth who at
once delighted in It and suggested additions. Re¬
counting to a friend in later years, Wordsworth revealed:
"Much the greater part of the story was Mr. Coleridge's
invention; but certain parts I myself suggested... I had
been reading in Shelvocke's Voyages, a day or two before,
that, while doubling Cape Horn, they frequently saw
albatrosses in that latitude... "Suppose," said I,"you
represent him as having killed one of these birds on
entering the South Sea, and that the tutelary spirits of
these regions take upon them to revenge the crime?"
This appealed to Coleridge's strong sense of the su¬
pernatural, and with his own extensive reading of the old
voyagers, his powerful gift of words, and his individual
dream-fantasies (doubtless partly due to his addiction to
opium), he at once created in the lengthy Rime a
masterpiece of English literature, little guessing the
extraordinary results it was to have.
The book that started off Wordsworth's thought-trails
towards the subject of albatrosses was In fact Cap¬
tain George Shelvocke's A Voyage Round the World
by Way of the Great South Sea, published In London In
1757, and in it the author describes the seals, penguins,
petrels and albatrosses his ship encounters in those
southerly latitudes. He goes on to tell how, one day in
October 1719, his vessel, the little Speedwell, was subjected
"to continuous squalls of sleet, snow and rain" for days
on end, with the heavens overcast and not a single ilsh'or
sea-bird to be seen:
Excepting a disconsolate black Albitross (.sic), who
accompanied us for several days, and hovered about us
as if he had lost himself, till Hatley (my second captain)
concluding, In a gloomy fit, that the company of this
melancholy blrd^ brought us 111 luck, resolved to destroy
him In the hopes we might then have better weather,
and more favourable winds...
Hatley did in fact shoot the bird, but Shelvockc
mentions no particular result either way, and the
Speedwell continued her voyage as before.
It is strange that whereas Shelvocke's albatross was
considered to be a creature of 111 omen, that killed by the
Ancient Mariner was a bird of good omen. In fact,
there Is strong evidence that Coleridge intended his poem
to be a strong parable, not only teaching a love of animals
as is usually supposed, but inculcating a love of God. Ills
use of the albatross was symbolic a messenger of God
and the Mariner's crime the very real one of blasphemy.
When later in the story, the Ancient Mariner", his penance
done, repents in prayer, the dead bird falls from his neck
"like lead into the sea," never to trouble him again.
Writing a few years before his death, Coleridge
admitted his Rime to be "a work of pure Imagi¬
nation", but it is almost Incredible how such a work,
dreamed up on holiday by two enthusiastic young poets,
should have created a fallacious fable of the sea.
Yet the legend of the albatross is deeply engrained.
Almost every dictionary and reference book includes
under "Albatross" some such remark as: "It is a su¬
perstition among sailors that it is disastrous to shoot
one," while the world's great encyclopaedias further
perpetuate the misconception. For example, the En¬
cyclopaedia Britannica: "Sailors are fond of them and
have a strong superstition against killing them; and the
Americana: Sailors' superstition about killing them was
used In Coleridge's Rime of the Ancient Mariner.
In every case, Coleridge's poem is quoted as following
the legend, not creating it. Of course, the albatross is
particularly suited to such a legend the largest of sea-
birds, gliding for miles over ships' sterns with scarcely
a wing-flap.
So whether the crew of the Calpean Star ever read
Coleridge and his Ancient Mariner is irrelevant. The
legend he created is now, after over 150 years, so deep-
rooted that they, and doubtless others as well, believe in
it so strongly that they are prepared to go on strike over
Here, surely, is the strangest of all the many strange
superstitions of the sea.
31
