© Willy Ronis, Paris

98 NATIONS CHART
A TWO-YEAR PLAN
FOR WORLD ACTION

Unesco's programme of action
for the next two years is the
most ambitious since this U.N.
Agency was created 15 years
ago. What Unesco hopes to
achieve in 1961-62 and how its
programme and budget were
decided by the organization's
General Conference last Dec¬
ember are highlighted below
by Daniel Behrman
Under the flowing concrete drapery of a hall
resembling a timeless temple, a heartening
and almost unusual spectacle has been enacted
on a stage for all the world. This stage was
the Eleventh General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
Paris, and its actors were the delegates some in business
suits, others in flowing robes from ninety-eight nations
scattered over the face of the earth.
What was unusual about this spectacle was that It
produced a harmonious finale even though It overlooked
none of the realities and the facts of International life
upon which agreement has yet to be found. Such issues
as racism, disarmament, colonialism, and neighbourly
relations were faced squarely during some lively sessions
which led to Important resolutions (1). But from this
stage, where conflicting Interests met and compromised
with each other, has emerged a two-year programme for
Unesco which Is both the most ambitious and the most
realistic In the history of this United Nations agency.
It is ambitious because it Is by far the biggest series of
undertakings which Unesco has ever been called upon to
carry out. Corresponding to these obligations is a budget
of $32,513,228 for 1961 and 1962, the highest ever voted
by a Unesco General Conference. It Is realistic because
It faces squarely some of the world's major needs, parti¬
cularly In education and more particularly In Africa, that
sleeping giant of a continent now awakening with dra¬
matic speed.
Symbolically, the Conference met for five weeks In
November and December under the presidency of a
representative of Africa, Mr. Akale-Work Apte Wold of
Ethiopia. Africa also accounted for 16 of the additional
(1) One calls on Member States "to encourage and support... utili¬
zation of the means of information as a contribution to better mutual
understanding between peoples and t/iui to counteract any attempts
to use press, radio, televison, cinema and other means of information
for propaganda which deliberately or insidiously incites violation of
peace or acts of aggression"; a second states "thai colonialism in all
its forms... must be speedily abolished and that accession to freedom
and independence must not be delayed on the false pretext that a
particular territory has not reached a sufficiently high standard in
economic, social, educational and cultural matters ; a third resolution
calls on Unesco Member States "to include in their educational pro¬
grammes provisions for bringing up the rising generation in the
spirit of peaceful and neighbourly relations and mutual international
understanding and co-operation" ; a fourth condemns "any display of
intolerance among the different races or peoples as a violation of the
high principles which prompted the creation of the United Nations
and of Unesco."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd)
Above, vast hall of Secretariat building, main artery
leading to delegates' lobby and Conference building.
Below, delegates at a committee meeting; in fore¬
ground, Mr. Mahmoud Haju Ahmed, Director of Edu¬
cation of Somalia, one of the new African nations.
'IN TERMS OF EDUCATION
NONE OF US IS RICH'
countries which have become members of Unesco since
the last General Conference in 1958, attended by repre¬
sentatives of 81 nations.
To carry out the programme adopted in Paris, Unesco
will not only have its regular budget, but additional
resources In 1961-62 from two other sources : $12,000,000
from the United Nations Technical Assistance programme
and $11,000,000 from the United Nations Special Fund.
Impressive though it may sound, this total of more than
$55,000,000 would have to be spread very thinly to cover
Unesco's obligations in the world.
That is why the General Conference wisely decided to
place a priority on education. Schools, schooling and
schoolteachers have failed to keep abreast of the present-
day rate of progress. This is true in countries with old and
established systems of education, but it is nothing less
than tragically true for new nations where the urgency
of needs is equalled only by the paucity of resources. And
It takes on dramatic proportions in Africa where the ink
has barely dried on a dozen declarations of Independence
and nationhood.
The immediacy of this problem brought forth a healthy
reaction from the conference: a reaction of universalism
which was stressed by Unesco's Director-General, Mr. Vlt-
torlno Veronese. It was universalism In deeds as well as
words. The director-general of Unesco had the pleasant
and almost startling experience of submitting a budget to
98 nations and having it rejected as... too low. Unesco
Member States first raised this proposed budget by one
million dollars and then pledged more than another
million dollars In a moving display of solidarity. This was
universalism in action: an International gesture by the
rich, the not-so-rich and the poor alike to further the
progress of education, particularly In Africa.
This priority on education Is reflected in a resolution
unanimously adopted at the conference. It states that
priority should be given to education in Unesco's pro¬
gramme and that the United Nations and its specialized
agencies should place the same stress on education for
the less-developed countries as Is placed on economic
development in a more narrow sense.
Delegates from all nations emphasized the need for
more and better teachers, schools, universities and tech-

. '«V *
Photos <0 Willy Ronis, Paris
Above, General Conference Session in progress in
Plenary Hall, seen from one of booths used by simul¬
taneous interpretation staff. Above right, delegates
meet in committee room donated by Switzerland.
Eight other countries have furnished and decorated
rooms. Many other gifts have been made to the
Unesco H.Q., and during the General Conference, Iran
presented a magnificent carpet for delegates' lobby.
nical colleges In their own countries. Their plea was
summed up by Sir David Eccles, British Minister of Edu¬
cation, and head of the United Kingdom delegation, who
stated :
"In these fields, we are all underdeveloped. In the field
of education, we are all poor and some are poorer than
others. Unesco stands for Education in the broadest sense
as WHO stands for Health and FAO stands for Agri¬
culture. We have the right and duty to proclaim the
urgent needs of education and to press these claims
on our own goverments and on the whole family of the
United Nations."
Specifically, Unesco's education programme for the next
two years consists both of studies and services for the
general advancement of education, along with activities
aimed at helping countries develop their own educational
systems. In both cases, an accent Is placed on educational
planning and regional development.
These trends are to be seen In the services Unesco is
rendering to national systems of education. According to
decisions taken by the General Conference, It will be in
a position to offer assistance in these main fields:
Improvement of teacher training programmes and
school curricula.
Development of methods for teaching science and
modern languages.
The use of audio-visual aids.
In this last respect, mention might be made of a Confer¬
ence resolution calling upon Unesco to explore the possi¬
bilities of using the most recent advances in electronics
and communication in order to bring education to the
widest possible audience an audience limited only by
the range of television transmitters and Hertzian cables.
At present, the idea of man-made satellites girdling the
earth and beaming school television programmes to
hundreds of thousands of classrooms Is still in the realm
of science fiction. But It may not stay there very long.
In all, Unesco will send out more than 200 international
specialists to its member states to work In national
systems of education. Obviously, a '"system of education"
runs from the kindergarten to the graduate student work¬
ing towards his doctorate. Just as obviously, Unesco
Delegates converse between Picasso mural and one
of six giant gracefully-shaped concrete pillars which
support the Conference building roof at its centre.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SILHOUETTES IN THE NIGHT
Formal session and informal talk are framed in these photos by windows of Unesco's
Conference Building. Below, conversation piece against window of delegate's
lounge. Far right, peeping Into Commission Room, night-roving camera finds
delegates in session. Right, activity on three levels, from press rooms (bottom)
to committee room with Its "halo" lighting over round table for delegates.
Photos © Willy Ronis, Paris.
PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd)
could not hope to span the full range of education without
diluting Its efforts.
This Is why stress Is being placed on primary and
secondary education, both technical and general, in
regional programmes for Africa, the Arab States and
Latin America. Universal primary education Is the target
In Asia. Here, Unesco is to create a regional education
office and two regional centres for research in school
buildings and for the training of school administrators.
The same goal Is to be found in Latin America where,
since 1957, Unesco has been operating a ten-year major
project for the extension of primary education. In the
Arab states, It Is planned to set up a network of associated
teacher training colleges.
Pressing though needs may be in these regions, the
situation in Africa Is nothing less than an emergency.
Here, Unesco's education department has to become a fire
department. As one example of the calls made upon Its
resources, it must recruit several hundred teachers for
secondary schools in the Congo Republic (Leopoldvllle) as
well as numerous experts in education and school admin¬
istration. This emergency assistance Is being financed by
the U.N. under its programme of aid to the Congo.
But the call of the new Africa for education is being
heard elsewhere as well. Unesco plans to move ahead with
assistance In school constructions, the production of
teaching materials, the providing of teachers, the sur¬
veying of educational needs and the awarding of fellow¬
ships.
Even before the General Conference ended, nations
made a number of generous offers. The United States of
America pledged to donate up to $1,000,000 for assistance
to Africa. The Federal Republic of Germany announced
a contribution of $100,000 to this programme. And, within
a few hours, representatives of a dozen countries offered
130 fellowships to Africans while ten more delegations
promised to make specific offers known In the near future.
This priority on education will also see an increase in
the scope of Unesco's activities In technical and vocation
al education during the next two years. Here, thanks to a
financial transfusion from the United Nations Special
Fund, Unesco will be able to participate in the founding
or the operation of a number of technological Institutes
throughout the world.
Among other measures in the field of education too
numerous to list here was the adopting by the General
Conference of the text of an international convention
and recommendation against discrimination In education.
This convention is intended to implement one of the
fundamental principles in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights: the right to education. It defines discri¬
mination as any factor which "'has the purpose or effect
of nullifying or impairing equality of treatment in
education.1"
Turning to the natural sciences, the General Conference
approved an international plan of action to cope with
scientific problems of an urgent and worldwide nature
over the next ten years. These problems Include the ex¬
ploring of the world's oceans about which it has been
said we know less than we do of the moon and the
rational harnessing of science and technology to Indus¬
trialize the world's developing countries. (See Unesco
Courier July-August 1960.)
Perhaps the most dramatic aspect of Unesco's work in
the natural sciences will be Its collaboration in the Inter¬
national Indian Ocean expedition organized by the Spe¬
cial Committee on Océanographie Research. This expe¬
dition will see twenty océanographie research vessels from
fourteen nations at work in what is both the world's
least-known ocean and perhaps its most important one
in terms of the needs of the hundreds of millions who
live on its shores.
Through Its collaboration in this expedition and
through its own programme, Unesco hopes to be able to
assist in the training of oceanographers. In addition,
the Conference voted to set up an Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission with headquarters at Unesco.
On land, Unesco's programme for the development of

natural resources will see the continuation of Its work In
such vital fields as the humid tropics and the world's arid
regions. In Arid Zone research the next two years will
see a gradual transition from Unesco's Major Project
which ends in 1962 to greatly Increased national activities.
A perfect example of the type of problem which no one
country can hope to solve on its own is to be found in
seismology. Without "discrimination" by border or
region, earthquakes have struck harshly In recent years
in the Middle East, North Africa and South America. No
one can predict when an earthquake will occur, but a
great deal can be done to reduce Its devastation through
earthquake-proof construction and precise mapping of
seismic zones. This year and next, Unesco will send
missons to earthquake zones in the Andes and in the
Mediterranean basin.
The earth's crust is also the subject of another Unesco
plan of action aimed at taking an up-to-date inventory
of all the many methods now used in prospecting for
natural resources. At the same time, steps will be taken
for a long-term study of that most precious of all
resources, the soil Itself.
Another Important phase of Unesco's science pro¬
gramme concerns the role of science and technology in
the industrialization of new countries. Here, Unesco
has been called upon by Its member states to prepare an
international conference to be held in 1963 or 1964.
The purpose of this meeting will be to take stock of the
lessons of the past for countries which are now changing
over to an Industrialized society. In particular, a study
will be made of the delicate problems of helping agricul¬
tural countries to make this changeover without paying
the price of social and economic maladjustment.
Industrialization of developing countries is one of three
Unesco priority fields in science laid down by the General
Conference for the next decade. The two others are the
exploration of the earth's resources and the co-ordination
of scientific action on national and international levels.
Education and science were the two most prominent
features of Unesco's programme as it was carefully
discussed by the General Conference. But Unesco's
mission goes even further than this.
For example, under the heading of cultural activities
In the programme adopted by the General Conference arc
to be found specific and practical tasks In such fields as
research In the humanities, the spreading of knowledge
of art and literature, the safeguarding of cultural heri¬
tages and the development of museums and libraries.
For the next two years, the most Important of these
cultural activities will be the continuation of the Interna¬
tional Campaign for Safeguarding the Monuments of
Nubia, those priceless architectural and artistic treasures
of ancient Egypt which will be threatened by the rising
waters of the Nile once the new Aswan Dam has been
completed In the United Arab Republic (See Unesco
Courier Feb., April 1960). During the Conference, plans
for preserving the temple at Abu Slmbel, the largest of
these monuments, were presented.
In Southeast Asia, Unesco's cultural activities depart¬
ment will meet a problem which crops up everywhere as
a result of mass literacy campaigns for adults and more
schools for children. The "new literate" often tends to
become a "new Illiterate" ici a very simple reason: he
has nothing to read. Books and other publications are
either not readily available in his own language or else
they are offered at prices which he cannot afford.
This Is why Unesco will assist national book centres
and publishing associations in Southeast Asia, mainly In
Burma, Ceylon, India, Iran and Pakistan. Included In
this assistance will be production of reading materials at
a regional centre In Karachi and the awarding of prizes
for authors and Illustrators.
Unesco's major project for the mutual appreciation of
Eastern and Western cultural values will also be conti¬
nued during the next two years. Here. Unesco plans to
undertake studies In co-operation with Institutes In
Japan, India and Lebanon while research will continue
on the civilizations of the Orient and the Occident.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PLAN FOR WORLD ACTION (Cont'd;
UNESCO TO SUPPLY STAFF FOR
KEY POSTS IN NEW NATIONS
Distances between cultures and distances between men
are also being shortened by the social sciences, which
represent an Important sector In Unesco's activities.
Here, two main fields are to be stressed: the teaching of
the social sciences and fundamental research; and the
study of problems resulting from economic and social
development. This latter theme will lead to studies on
urbanization and population problems in South Asia and
Africa. Research is to be conducted by two Unesco cen¬
tres: the Latin American Regional Centre for Social
Science Research at Rio de Janeiro and, at Delhi
University In India, the Research Centre on Economic
and Social Development Problems In South Asia.
At the same time, Unesco's social sciences department
will continue its work on the question of race relations
and on the study of discrimination between men and
women. After studying the nature of prejudice in past
years, it will now take up deep-seated causes of outbreaks
of racial hatred, particularly among youth. (See page 28.)
In mass communication, Unesco is to concentrate upon
three main tasks laid down by the General Conference:
aid to countries in developing or improving their
information media (newspapers, radio stations, etc.) ;
use of mass communication techniques in education;
the use of mass media to promote international under¬
standing.
In this respect, it should be mentioned that The Unesco
Courier, which Is now appearing in six languages-
French, English, Spanish, Russian, German.and Arabic-
will soon be published In seven. A Japanese edition is
scheduled to appear In April.
1,700 fellowships offered
during next two years
Under the programme adopted by the General Confer¬
ence, Unesco will continue to operate Its two Interna¬
tional centres for higher studies In journalism (one
at Strasbourg. France, and the other at Quito, Ecuador),
but It will also extend Its assistance In the training of
qualified professionals for the press, the cinema and the
rado to South-East Asia. Assistance will also be offered
Asian countries in the study of news agencies and the
problems of news transmission.
One Important aspect of UnesCo's programme Is Its
International exchange service which will administer more
than 1,700 fellowships during the next two years, in¬
cluding 1,200 financed directly by Unesco. Another Is its
financial aid, amounting to nearly one million dollars, to
non-governmental organizations working along lines
parallel to its own.
Finally, the General Conference approved a plan to
enable Unesco to supply developing countries with top-
level officials In education and science. Known as "ope¬
rational or executive personnel" they will be civil servants
of the goverments which have requested them, although
Unesco will be responsible for paying part of their
salaries. The United Nations has been operating a
similar service for several years In public administration.
Here, in summary form, we have endeavoured to pre¬
sent the highlights of Unesco's programme for 1961 and
1962 as approved by an International assembly of virtually
one hundred nations.
A speaker at the Eleventh General Conference stressed
the awakening of Unesco's member states to the needs of
Africa. Africa was the symbol of this conference, It was
pointed out. But Africa, perhaps, was also the symbol of
an even wider awakening by the nations of the world to
the fact, as stressed by Director-General Vlttorino Vero¬
nese, In his final remarks to the Conference, that "man
does not live by bread alone" and that ignorance in the
most remote corner of the globe represents a blight on
the sum of human knowledge and must be eradicated if
humanity is to survive.
10
Ground level view of a corner of the hall in the Conference
building taken from beneath .the overhead passage leading
to committee rooms. On far wall, section of Picasso mural.

The Unesco Courier. . Fcbruory 1961
Photos © Willy Ronis
Right, a delegate from one of the new
African states and another from Asia at
work during pause between meetings
in one of the sound-proof booths of the
Conference building hall. With their
benches upholstered in black leather,
these small hexagonal booths are used
by delegates for private talks. Left,
delegates' lounge with stairway and
terrace leading to committee rooms
decorated by Switzerland and the
U.S.A., and lower stairway to basement.
Above, in foreground, are basement windows of Conference
building In which press room, radio and TV studios and
committee rooms are housed. Lighted windows in centre
of photo are those running along wall of delegates'
lobby leading from the Conference building to Secretariat.

IN THE CORRIDORS..
On these pages our candid camera photographer has caught delegates as they chatted Informally between sessions in the
lounge and main hall of the Unesco Conference building. (1) Head of Moroccan delegation and Unesco Executive Board
member Mohamed El Fasi. (2) Two Liberlan delegates admire photo-exhibition of flood-menaced Nubian monuments. (3)
G.P. Malalasekera (left) head of Ceylon delegation and ambassador to Moscow with Indian poet and writer Baldoon Dhingra.
(4) Two delegates from India. (5) Senegal delegate, Mrs. Madeleine Sar (with hat). (6) Austrian delegate, Alexander
Philippovich (dark suit). (7) Head of Ghana delegation and Minister of Education, A-J- Duwuona-Hammond (draped gown).
; '
i

Il
...AT THE CONFERENCE
CAMPAGNE
INTERNATIONA
.POURLASAÜV
[DES MONUf
îE LA NUBIE,
MESSAGE FROM DWIGHT
D. EISENHOWER
Dedicated to broadening man's
understanding of himself and the
world about hint, Unesco encou¬
rages the peoples of many lands to
open wide the doors of educational
opportunity. Achievement of this
goal will speed the progress of
mankind and strengthen the foun¬
dation for a just and lasting peace.
In this critical hour, as nations
press forward to assure the highest
development of their peoples,
Unesco can provide an outstanding
service for all...
NATIONALISM
The age of nationalism has gone
it belongs to the past, even if
there are still people who do not .
know it yet... Nationalism is but
one of the forms of self-centredness
which makes us blind to other
human beings, other nations, other
social and cultural systems... For
the first time no single nation can
any more afford to neglect the
sorrows, the difficulties, the needs
political, economic and cultural
of any other nation.
Arnold BERGSTRAESSER
German Fed. Rep.
BOOKS NOT GUNS
Unesco must do everything to lay
the foundations of true peace based
on a profound intellectual and moral
renaissance of mankind. Such an
enterprise will, of course, be a costly
affair since it implies that the entire
population of our planet Will be en¬
sured of the basically needed school¬
ing at all levels. But how much less
costly will this be in the long run
compared to the ever-rising and un¬
productive expenditure on modern
armaments.
Paulo CARNEIRO, Brazil
THE NEGRO'S NEW ROLE
Whatever well-being we have
.received from the cultures of modern
countries... let us make no mistake:
a new society is emerging in which
we, as negroes, will have a far from
minor role.
A. RAKOTO-RATSIMAMANGA
Malagasy Republic
MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING
If Unesco wants to go ahead, it
must take account of the fact that
in our changing world its first
mission is to adapt its structure and
activities to the imperatives of the
times, to grasp the importance of
the great contemporary problems
and to contribute as best it can to
their solution. It must cast aside
all prejudices and fearlessly tackle
the question number one of our
time: understanding between peoples,
mutual knowledge and international
co-operation through education,
science and culture.
Mihai RALEA, Rumania
MESSAGE FROM
NIKITA KROUCHTCHEV
w
... All peoples are fundamentally
interested in the prevention of war,
In the rapid abolition of the ab¬
horrent colonial system, and the
consolidating of the principles of
peaceful co-existence In International
relations Unesco, tin- United
Nations Agency which deals with
education, science and culture, can
make a considerable contribution to
a lofty aspect of the creation of a
world without war, without arms,
of a world without oppressed and
enslaved peoples. It Is only under
a stable peace that really fruitful
collaboration of scientists, scholars
and educationalists of all countries
is possible collaboration aimed at
discovering solutions to many prob¬
lems of importance to humanity...
FRATERNITY OR DEATH
One is nonplussed that, despite
so much unhappincss and so many
catastrophes, men still cannot realize
that they are racing towards an
abyss and that in the face of all
the forces of nature they are in the
process of unharnessing their only
chance of salvation is not to fight,
but to unite...
Never has it been more obvious
that humanity is being driven inexo¬
rably to the inescapable alternative
fraternity or death.
Jean BERTHOIN, France
MEN'S MINDS EMANCIPATED
Culture is nothing more than a
perpetual attempt to eliminate
prejudices, to emancipate the
minds of men from all kinds of
prepossessions.
Sir Sarvepalli RADHAKRISHNAN
India
FABLE OF THE ELEPHANT
In a world in which men's minds
are shrouded in the darkness of
collective and individual vanities no
one can claim to see clearly. Seven
centuries ago one of our great
thinkers told the tale of a group of
people who, through curiosity,
penetrated a very dark room in
which an elephant was shut up. As
it could not be seen, each member
of the group tried to find out what
is was by feeling it. But each one
could only touch a single part of
the enormous body. So a discussion
took place in the dark. One thought
that the elephant had the shape of
a column, another that it looked
like a trump, a third that it
resembled a great leather bag, and
so on.
Similarly, in the obscurity of our
own time, whenever we hear diame¬
trically opposed definitions or
interpretations of the words, Peace,
Freedom, Democracy and Justice,
we should remember the story of
the elephant.
G.A. RAADI, Iran
Photos © Willy Ronis.
13
