REVELATIONS
OF A
NOBEL PRIZE
IN LITERATURE
by Mahmud Shah Qureshi
Bronze bust of Tagore
made by Jacob Epstein.
H. Roger Viollet, Paris
Among the modern thinkers of the Indo-Pakl-
stan subcontinent Tagore is undoubtedly
the most widely known to Western Intellectuals. The
reason Is obvious: he himself translated his exquisite
thought into English just as other writers rendered it in
divers tongues.
The award to him of the Nobel Prize in 1913 was probab¬
ly of little Importance in the West, but for the Oriental
intelligentsia its effect was considerable. It was not
Tagore a poet of the East or of Asia, of India or of
Bengal who was honoured, but rather a regional
literature which, although the most developed among its
Indian contemporaries, remained unnoticed by the world
until this dramatic recognition of its maturity.
In fact, since the early nineteenth century Bengal
spurred by the impact of Western civilization was heading
towards a Renaissance, reflected particularly in its
literature. Now, after eight-hundred years of a
predominantly agrestic character, Bengali literature
acquired a fresh sophistication.
The literary efforts of Ishwarchandra Vidyasager,
Michael Madhusudhan Dutt, Dinabandhu Mitra, Tekchand
Thakur, Bankimchandra Chatterji and Mir Musharraf
Hussain not only satisfied the new Bengal middle class
but are still regarded as the classics of its literature.
Bengal had already adopted Western literary forms
which it employed to give a new vitality to Indian
thought. Born in one of the families of Calcutta which
was active in furthering this Renaissance, Tagore directly
understood that it was his task to create a synthesis bet¬
ween old and new, between Eastern thought and Western
expression. This mission he brilliantly discharged.
T he living avatar of the Bengali Renaissance,
Tagore naturally drew his inspirations from
its old literature, from its religious and folk songs and
Sanskrit classics, but he also remained assiduously aware
of modern Western thought.
What did Tagore add to this rich heritage in the course
of a literary career protracted for more than sixty years?
MAHMUD QURESHI, Pakistani writer and poet in the
22 Bengali language, is professor of Bengali literature at
Chittagong University, Pakistan.
He wrote more than one thousand remarkable poems,
more than two thousand enchanting songs, nearly two
dozen plays, eight novels, eight or more volumes of short
stories in addition to several travel books and essays on
literary cultural, political or linguistic subjects.
Besides his humanitarian or educational services,
Tagore's paintings (1) and the abundance and variety of
his work evoke for Bengali critics the three universal
geniuses: Leonardo da Vinci, Goethe and Victor Hugo.
Every one has his personal predilection for Tagore as
poet or prose writer. Nevertheless his prose writings
such as the memorable short stories in Galpagucha,
novels like Gora, Choker-Bali, Ghare-Baire (The Home &
The World) , Shesher Kabita (The Last Poem) are epochal
events in Bengali literature. The rich personality of
Tagore, his warm human sympathies, his narrative gifts
are to be found only in his short stories.
DI eriving inspiration from Tagore, the novelist
Sharatchandra Chatterji was to give a new
orientation to the craft of fiction writing. Sharatchandra
and his followers had the signal advantage of greater
intimacy with the Bengal middle class and thus could
depict the insistent reality of its sufferings and joys better
than Tagore whose aristocratic upbringing constituted in
this respect a serious obstacle.
Among others who gave or are giving new directions to
Bengali prose literature, a few important names may be
mentioned: Pramatha Chowdhury (a great connoisseur of
French literature who exhorted Bengali prose writers to
follow French literary precedents) Rajshekhar Basu,
Bibhuti Bhushan Bondopadhyaya (author of Pother
Panchali, and Aparajita), Banaphul, Tarashankar,
Humayun Kabir, Annada Shankar Roy, Manik
Boudopadhyaya and Kazi Abdul Wadud.
In the domain of the novel and short story, Bengali
literature seeks to attain a level comparable with that of
the West. Yet it must be admitted quite frankly that
the greater part of its corpus lacks major stature because
of a certain sentimentality and an unduly restricted vision
of life.
(1) It is still a matter of controversy whether Tagore started
painting at the age of 65 or 70.
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

%JL tW* PLtJft id Y^K
23
Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati Tagore at work in his study in I 93 I, the year he celebrated his 70th birthday.

REVELATIONS (Cont'd)
Renaissance
of Bengali letters
Let us return to Tagore. This time let us observe the
mystery-world of his poetry. All Tagore's life constituted
an immense creative effort to communicate his most
sublime Intuitions to the world. The manifold variety
and profound depth of his poetic universe are so
remarkable that It seemed he was "redeeming the debt of
the world," a world which Induced all the anguish and
ecstasy of creation. It is not enough to have read
Gitanjali or Balaka (The Swan) to understand this
mysterious world; it is also necessary to read the poems
that reflect the different phases of his poetic career.
In addition to his personal experience and the associa¬
tion of his great father, Debendranath, who had a
profound understanding of the Persian mysticism, it is
the influence of the Upanishads which left the decisive
Imprint upon his poetic vision his love of nature, search
for truth and for humanity; to him these are nothing but
the characteristic signs of the Infinite.
This quest for the Infinite, as revealed in the Upanishads
"Bhumaiva sukama naipe sukhamasti" (Beatitude
reposes in the Infinite, not in the Finite) became the
motto of his poetic philosophy. It is astonishing to
discover that Tagore's patriotism, under the influence of
the Upanishads, was frequently at variance with public
opinion. His predecessor Bankimchandra said:
Do not forget that love of one's countrymen ranks
above all religion.
Rabindranath wrote:
Build high the throne of your nation
But remember it is not higher than truth
If you really love your country,
You must not rise above it,
Not place your country above humanity.
In his last years Rabindranath understood that with all
his philosophical pretensions and poetic illusions he was
inhabiting an ivory tower and suddenly felt the need to
draw closer to plebeian reality. Now he wrote:
Sweet is the earth, sweet the dust of it,
I've taken it in my heart,
This great hymn
Is the precept of my life.
Day after day, I've received
The gift of the truth,
And its sweetness has no end...
Or,
On the shores of Rupanarayan
I awoke
And I realized the world
Is not a dream.
I beheld my image
In letters of blood.
And I came to know myself
Though profound wounds
And through countless sufferings... (2).
Although Balaka had been written in a new style and
published before the First World War, Tagore realized
that all he had written before then was highly conven¬
tional. Thus, with the changing situation, he started
writing prose-poems on unconventional but quotidian
subjects.
This new direction Tagore gave to Bengali poetry by
his later writings served as a model for the young writers
while the writers of his generation were still imitating
his earlier style. Because of their conventional style and
poor poetic techniques they were soon eclipsed by the
brilliant achievement of Tagore.
Nonetheless two poets Satyen Dutt and Mohitlal
Majumdar (also a great critic) deserve particular men¬
tion. Satyen Dutt, besides his innumerable poems on
nature and patriotism which reveal extraordinary metrical
24 (2) The French version of the last poems of Tagore, trans¬
lated by Mahmud Shah Qureshi and André Guimbrétière was
published in the Revue Générale Belge, June, 1961.
Drawing by 1. Ross, Rumanian National Commission for Unesco
Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati
.AfMr^fôt*"^-*- r ,,
f \:^jN^$rbTVn^'árír faw<^n^ %ïsffy~ ~
\4jjfc$t¡r '.wfafàs íiTírtf *t*t- -xniôr
«<*, f£rjlr»f-j$4? a»?¿far -
At y jlfcîfv** - wY, W-- .aV*/** -
ffiLT^SL'»***^ ¿*wr **>?C
«? otff c>r*r.*rr, inn- j*f"^«r^i^-I
¡ysjrSYy- <yiv>f-sns-~ xriQ0&kJ*t*Jn*' saifbr
tft&hr *«?f»v '&&>- &&Ç fié&HOiPfâ^J
Atixirf vffirtyp/ iSffSir -*a*r fcy-Aa/- / ', ,
-3 *w^ vrnr .- J Mil
y f :
les'
Q
)&*rrtri
H
*Qa
^,\
-/?(& Anyy-jr
V**"'
<* rH
fit
i.\s

C) Rdbindra-j-idana, Visva ßhufali
A GREAT DAY in the life of Tagore was the laying of the foundation stone of Vlsva Bharati, tho Inter¬
national university which grew from the school Tagore founded in 1901 at Santiniketan, as an experiment
with only twelve pupils, including his own son. Photo above, was taken in 1921 at a Vlsva Bharati ceremony
and shows, seated from left to right, Sylvain Levi, the French Orientalist, Tagore, and scholars who colla¬
borated closely with him including, foreground, famous philosopher Brljendranath Seal. Loft, a striking
portrait of Tagore drawn by I. Ross and taken from "Tagore In Rumania", a selected bibliography published
this year by the Rumanian National Commission for Unesco. The poet went to Rumania in 1926 during
a long trip through Europe when he visited Italy, France, England, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Czecho¬
slovakia, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria, before crossing the Danube into Rumania. Below left, the first extant
manuscript written by Tagore aged 17, It is a Bengali poem in which the young poet calls on the muses.
skill, translated more than five hundred poems from
different languages retaining all of their initial flavour
and content. His translations of Victor Hugo, Ezra Pound,
Verlaine, Maeterlinck, Baudelaire, Valéry, etc., preserve
the original rhyme and rhythm yet offer the savour and
qualities of true Bengali compositions. Satyen Dutt also
re-introduced many Arabo-Persian words which are
currently used In modern society or once were In medie¬
val literature. This gave new vitality to poetry, particular¬
ly in the passionate poems of Mohitlal Majumdar.
The new literary fashion reached its height with the
advent of a soldier-poet, Nazrul Islam, who accomplished
a synthesis between the revolutionary tradition of Islam
and the cult of Shakta (worship of the god of power).
These two thought currents are absent in Tagore, yet,
with the true generosity of genius, he acclaimed young
Nazrul. Indeed, Nazrul set off a veritable explosion in
the halcyon sweetness of Bengali poetry. The new
awareness which he reflected quickly gained the attentive
respect of the young writers. Thus he expressed himself
in his famous poem Vidrohi (The Rebel):
J am a rebel, a hothead,
I do what my heart desires,
Good, bad, true or false
I grapple with Satan himself
I welcome death with a song...
I am the rebel, weary of struggle
Still I will not rest till the day
The aggressor's sword be sheathed
In the field of battle
And the cries of the oppressed
No longer rend the air, etc. (3).
In addition to a great number of poetic works, short
stories and journalistic writings, Nazrul composed more
than three thousand songs which are still extremely
popular.
Jlvanananda Das and Buddhadeva Bose, two great
modern poets, derived their first Inspiration from Nazrul.
The genius of Tagore, In fact, offered an Insuperable
challenge to the young writers of the thirties, yet thanks
to the example of Nazrul and to the new poetic creations
of Tagore, they finally articulated a mature poetic idiom
which is still In vogue. Western symbolism certainly has
occupied a prominent place In the new poetry. Blshnu
Dey, Sudhln Dutt and Samar Sen are names indlssolubly
linked with this movement. Besides these examples,
Amiya Chakravarty in the tradition of Tagore, Jashl-
muddin (4) in the folklorique style and Farrukn Ahmad
in the footsteps of Iqbal (5) added new chapters In the
history of Bengali poetry.
In spite of that, whether in day-to-day activities or In
intellectual pursuits, the Bengalis still remain dazzled by
the luminous achievement and magnificent personality of
Tagore. For the Bengali Intelligentsia of India and
Pakistan, perhaps Tagore's greatest contribution lies in
the universal intellectual citizenship this achievement has
so lavishly conferred upon their literature.
(3) Luce Claude Maître in "Les Poètes Rebelles du Bengale"
(Revue Europe, May, 1954), dealt with Nazrul and some other
young poets.
(4) Two poems of Jashimuddin have been translated into
French by Jacques Stepowski. An English translation under
the title, The Field of Embroidered Quilt was published by
Oxford University Press. Another book will constitute a
Unesco Translation Project.
(5) Muhammad Iqbal (1873-1938) i3 the greatest Urdu poet
and most original thinker of Pakistan.
25
