ACCIDENTS IN THE HOME
WHERE RISKS ARE GREATEST
BHE kitchen, the stairs or the bedroom of a modern
house hold more dangers than the fastest car or
plane, the steepest mountain, or a ship In a storm.
Simple things like a tube of aspirin left lying on
a table, a kettle of boiling water, a forgotten edge tool,
will make more cripples and kill more children this year
than will poliomyelitis and tuberculosis together.
Perhaps it is because the dangers are so commonplace
that accidents In the home seem hard to avoid. Even
the absent-minded or reckless will look before crossing
a road; even the most prudent will unthinkingly run
across a polished floor to answer the 'phone.
Take Mrs. Ruth Galley, 75 years old, living alone In
her room In Lewlsham, England. She Is in perfect health,
yet every day for years she has risked a fatal accident.
Like many English houses, hers has a coin-ln-the-slot
gas meter. For some mysterious reason, the meter Is
so fixed that she has to climb on a chair to put in
the shilling. There she was one day when a health visitor
called. A telephone call to the gas company, and the next
day, Mrs. Galley's meter was fixed where she could reach
It easily. At the same time, the rubber pipe of her gas
cooker, which was just as old and even more fragile than
Its owner, was replaced. All free of charge of course.
So her name will probably not be among thr 4,500 or
so persons above the age of 65 who die every year In
Great Britain as the result of a fall or among the 1,500
Beware of
leaving irons
and other heavy
objects
lying about
persons who die as the result of poisoning by gas or other
substance.
In the United States of America, there were nearly four
million home accidents In 1959, whereas the total of road
and Industrial accidents for the same period was reckon¬
ed to be only 3,350,000. If we take Into consideration the
2.000.000 victims of accidents occurring outside their
homes but not at work, or in automobiles, it would seem
that twice as many people are hurt In the United States
during occupations that are commonly supposed to be
more or less safe than at their Jobs or In traffic. It Is
true that proportionally as well as In absolute numbers,
there are more deaths In Industrial and traffic accidents
(50.000 In the United States of America in 1959); yet
there were no fewer than 43,500 deaths In accidents of
other kinds, of which 26,000 occurred In homes.
A survey made In 1955 In Stockholm showed that of
the Swedish capital's 227,000 children, 24,466 had had acci¬
dents oí which 29 were fatal; I.e. a proportion of one fatal
accident to 340 less serious ones. Previously it was esti¬
mated In Sweden that there were between 100 and 400
less serious accidents for every fatal accident. And
Sxeden has one of the world's lowest accident rates.
Safety of the home Is a question of at least national
tí«T.en3lons. In the view of the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Accidents, whose home safety department
extends Its activities throughout the United Kingdom.
The people whom it Is Important to reach are those who
are naturally careless. It Is usually the very poor who
need help most those who do not go to safety meetings
organized by the 135 local home safety committees In
Great Britain. They neither read the pamphlets nor see
the films nor visit the exhibitions. These potential victims
of accidents must be sought out In their own homes. A
neighbourly visit by a member of the local home safety
Always take
proper
precautions
against scalds
committee or an inspection of the gas and electricity
Installations will do more good than all the public lectures
In the world.
Door-to-door visiting Is not always enough however.
Some problems require a more massive attack on old in¬
grained habits. In 1958, for example, the Royal Society
for the Prevention of Accidents with backing from the
Home Office launched a nation-wide campaign to provide
all open fireplaces with safety screens In order to bring
down the number of serious burns, which over the years
had been remaining fairly constant.
Similar campaigns could well have been launched In
many other countries, for a bad burn is one of the most
horrible accidents. The pain suffered by the victim,
whether burnt by fire, acid, boiling water or steam, Is
only the beginning. Then comes treatment lasting on
an average from one to three months, while subsequent
operations and grafts are sometimes spread over several
years. Furthermore any permanent Infirmity or mutila¬
tion may lead to psychological consequences, the serious--
ness of which Is only now beginning to be realized.
Every year, five to ten times as many children as adults
Smoking In bed
is a
serious
fire-hazard
suffer burns. In Great Britain, only 700 persons die of
burns every year, but 550 hospital beds are permanently
occupied by the victims of burns, and 126,000 persons
alive today have at some time been In hospital for the
one single reason that their clothes caught fire.
The problem is even more severe in some of the rapidly-
developing countries because of the widespread use of
gas and explosive substances (acetylene, butane or pro-

The Uncico Courier. April 1961
pane lamps, fireworks, etc.). Everywhere, boiling liquids
claim Innumerable victims.
After the children, it is the elderly who most frequently
suffer these terrible accidents. Indeed the number of
fatal burns is even higher among the old than among the
young. In Great Britain, victims of burns over the age of
65 are three or four times as numerous as those among
young adults. Twice as many women as men suffer burns
from clothing that caught fire: dresses, skirts and night¬
gowns, particularly when made of cotton, are much more
likely to catch fire than men's clothing.
In Great Britain today, a highly developed system of
rules and regulations provides some guarantee of safety.
Every heating appliance electric, gas, oil or other has
to meet certain well-defined standards of safety, and it
is against the law to expose a child to an insufficiently
protected fire.
Dr Leonard Colebrook, who is one of the pioneers of the
prevention of burns, In England, considers, however, that
this Is not enough. He has expressed surprise that certain
highly flammable textiles have been put on sale without
the public being warned of their potential danger; for
the quicker the material burns, the worse the damage.
Says Dr Colebrook, "If we want to fight effectively, we
should collect maximum Information on the most flam¬
mable textiles, reach international agreement on ways of
Indicating the degree of flammabllity of each textile and
the rapidity with which It burns, and get the safest tex¬
tiles used for children's and old people's clothing."
Dr Joan Woodward, a psychiatrist attached to the Burns
Research Unit In Birmingham, England, considers that
after the accident has happened no effort should be
!
The proper way
to lift pans
is with
a potholder
spared to soothe the anxiety and guilt feelings of the
parents. She recently examined 200 children that had
had severe burns two to five years previously. Accord¬
ing to their mothers, 80 per cent of the children still
suffered emotionally from the effects.
But during her survey, Dr Woodward was to realize that
many of the mothers suffered In this respect at least as
much as their children. "They all without exception feel
guilty and ashamed," she says. "Many mothers read In
the newspapers about accidents caused by fire. But they
cannot believe that such a thing could happen in their
own family."
It cannot be said too often: watch that fire, careful
with that boiling water. And an absolute rule for baby's
bath: always put the cold water in first before the hot
water. If possible, do not have children around the
kitchen when the meal is being cooked. The handles of
pots and pans on the stove should not point outwards.
Do young girls really have to wear nightdresses? A pair
of pyjamas, which catch fire much less easily, may mean
the difference between life and death. Spot removers,
floor polish, paraffin oil or petrol should be kept in a
safe place and in small quantities only. Such simple pre¬
cautions can save life and prevent ruined lives.
This Is even more obvious when one comes to another
great class of home accidents: poisoning. Again it Is the
children and to a lesser degree the old people who are
the main victims. Unlike other home accidents, poisonings
generally Increase in number with a rise in the standard
of living. Enforcing strict regulations concerning the
description and packing of poisonous substances Is one
obvious way of helping to prevent poisonings in the home.
But even here much remains to be done. International
standards are urgently necessary In the description and
labelling of poisons, whether they be medicines, cleaning
fluids, insecticides or other dangerous chemicals. Paint
used inside the house should be free of lead, as should
all toys. This already is a law In a number of countries.
A country policeman in southern Sweden recently In¬
vented a special kind of latch for closing a cupboard.
To release It, two separate movements are required. All
the tests have shown that this Is too difficult for a child
under four. The device Is quite Inexpensive and has ad-
Bo sure your
children
know how
to call
the Fire Dept
vantages over the key that so often gets lost, or that
people sometimes, perhaps on the fatal occasion, forget
to turn in the lock.
Working along similar lines, a young pediatrician has
invented a stopper for a bottle that simply goes on turn¬
ing round with a cllckety-click noise when a child tries
to open it, and an aspirin tube made of plastic which
has to be squeezed slightly before a tablet will come out.
These two Inventions stood up very well to tests with
children.
It is necessary to know which products to keep out of
children's reach. Who thinks of locking up cosmetics and
perfumes? Barbiturates and the family pharmacy in
general should be carefully tidied away where they are
inaccessible to a child. The same is true of polish and
cleaning products. On no account should toxic substances
such as paraffin oil, petrol or acids be kept in containers
originally intended for other purposeslemonade bottles,
jam jars, etc.
Falls, burns and poisonings are not the only risks that
must be guarded against. The greatest enemy of family
safety, and one from which the others stem. Is negligence,
A house with
no lightning
rod is exposed
to danger
with its corollaries, untidiness and dirt. A badly-lit room
may cost much more than would a brighter lamp. A prop¬
erly Insulated electric plug, a step repaired in time, a
safety bar or wire netting fixed in the windowIt Is on
"details" such as these that the life of a child may
depend.
Turn off the mains switch before mending a fuse, wipe
up Immediately a spot of grease fallen on to the kitchen
floor, leave the window ajar in a room where a gas or
coal stove Is alight attention to these seeming trivialities
will transform a house Into a true home where a family
can live in security Instead of In constant danger.
