Karen Juliane, Copenhagen

The Unesco Courier. March 1961
îles of pages and millions of words have been
H^^HH written in the past thirty years about the
W effects of the cinema on children. No one
W disputes the obvious fact that children flock
I 1 T 1 eagerly to the cinema the world over. But
111 «from there on the arguments come thick and
kA|AJ ~ast. A new bibliographic study just pub-
I .ished by Unesco (1) now helps us to an
understanding of conclusions reached by the abundant
research and studies into this subject which so actively
interests parents and educators.
Books and articles by some 400 writers from nearly
30 countries are dealt with in this volume and on reading
it, one fact quickly becomes clear: if one thing is known
with certainty about children and the cinema, it is that
very little is known with certainty as one writer
jokingly puts it.
But once this note of caution has been sounded, some
broad, significant trends can be discerned.
At various points in this world debate on the cinema's
influence it is possible, without taking a show of hands,
to gauge "the feeling of the meeting".
Studies on the educational film that is, on the use of
the film strictly as a teaching aid have been excluded
from this bibliography in order to keep the publication
within manageable proportions, but such action does not
rule out the topic of film education or, as it is called in
several countries, "film appreciation". In point of fact,
the growing interest in film education, allied with the
development of ciné-clubs for the young, the production
and distribution of special children's entertainment
films, and the presentation of special programmes, rep¬
resents the most noticeable of the trends which can
be detected.
Large numbers of writers advocate that teaching
about the cinema should not merely be encouraged
but that it should be given formal recognition in
the school curriculum.' In several countries (e.g. the
U.S.S.R., and the United Kingdom) even before the period
covered by this book, this attitude existed. Any attempt
to classify a collection of data such as this into positive
and negative categories would have been "unscientific",
yet, as against those viewpoints which are plainly anta¬
gonistic towards the cinema and its effects on the young,
one cannot help being impressed by the volume of opinion
in favour of the educational aspects and practical
measures which are considered as positive influences of
the film.
The largest sections of the book, in fact, are those
dealing with these topics, and even censorship, tradi¬
tionally regarded as essentially negative, is represented
as capable of being a positive factor. For example, in
a country such as New Zealand the Censor, who is a statu¬
tory official, is able, in effect, to certify not merely that
a film is harmless for children to see but even that it is
entertainment which they should particularly enjoy.
The individual opinions expressed by writers are often
sharply contradictory, but nowhere more so than in the
field of "juvenile delinquency". However, two or three
assumptions can safely be made after an examination
of material published on this tendentious and contro¬
versial subject. One is that, on the evidence so far
available, it is extremely difficult indeed, virtually im¬
possible to establish that the cinema has a direct
influence on juvenile delinquency. While a great deal of
research has been carried out to decide whether or not
films corrupt youth, what has been done is conflicting
both as to methods and results.

There are a number of psychiatric theories on the
subject, but the evidence in support of them is incon¬
clusive. At the one extreme it is claimed that films acti¬
vely incite young people to delinquency; at the other
that they are safety-valves which may help to prevent
it: on the one hand, that they supply first-hand know¬
ledge of how to commit criminal acts; on the other that,
by keeping children off the streets, they prevent Juvenile
misbehaviour and crime. A "half-way" attitude is that
the Influence of films on young people cannot be isolated
from other social factors and that criminal and amoral
behaviour is to be imputed to deeper and more subtle
influences than the film alone; although much that is
shown on the screen is unsuitable for children.
Possibly It will be said that anybody who wants support
for his pet theory will find It somewhere In this
survey. There is no doubt that a good many hobby¬
horses are ridden through Its pages. Nevertheless, while
there is no unanimity about the direct Influence of the
cinema, a majority of authors do speak of indirect and
unconscious Influences. The consensus of their opinion
Is that such Influences are rarely the product of a single
film or even of several, but are much more likely to be the
outcome of a succession of movies with similar themes
and tendencies, causing by repetition a new state of mind
or change of outlook in the young spectator.
To put it another way, it is widely argued that the
repeated presentation of certain themes and behaviour
patterns on the screen Is much more likely to produce
a long-term indirect effect than the immediate, overt
influence of any individual film, however specific Its
message. The broad generalization which might be made
is that the film has mainly a provocative effect but Is
rarely a basic cause of delinquent acts.
It would seem to be accepted now as almost beyond
doubt that boys and girls get Ideas from the movies on
such superficial and generally harmless matters as dress,
hair-styles, speech, recreations and games. So far as
harmful influences are concerned, the factors most fre¬
quently cited as responsible are over-emphasis and dis¬
torted presentation of crime, cruelty and horror, and of
those elements which may be put under the generic label
of "sex".
However, as the evidence of the bibliographical entries
reveals, considerable concern Is also felt among parents
and educators about the effects of a number of rather
less obvious elements in cinema entertainment. There
is a prevailing objection to the artificial conception of
life in the world of the cinema (where what is extreme
is presented as normal) which is said to endanger the
sense of values of the immature.
Among aspects in this category that draw critical fire
are: the recurrent portrayal of luxury and of the
"easy life"; the "glorification" of revenge as a
motive; the unrealistic solutions put forward when
difficulties arise; and the artificial patterns of the "boy-
meets-glrl" situation. Several writers draw attention to
the stereotyped Images which the screen creates both of
characters (e.g. the cowboy and the gangster) and of
modes of behaviour; and the question is raised whether this
stereotyping may give a wrong conception of national life
and customs to young audiences in other countries. There
Is some evidence that In the case of racial attitudes or
prejudices, these can be influenced in one direction or
the other by a few striking films only.
It might have been expected that the entries in the
section of the bibliography headed "juvenile delinquency"
would all be of comparatively recent vintage. But this
is not so. There are studies on the subject dating back
to 1933 and 1929; and the opinion of one writer is quoted
to the effect that study in this field began soon after
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CHILDREN AND THE CINEMA (Cont'd)
DO YOU KNOW THEIR
FOUR CINEMA AGES?
1910in other words practically as soon as the cinema
started to make an Impact on the general public.
Furthermore, writers and theorists appear to have been
divided from the outset as to whether the film has any
direct influence on the youngand if so, why. Even the
Increased availability and use of scientific research
techniques has not noticeably clarified the situation in
this branch of the subject. In this context it is justi¬
fiable to draw attention to the wish expressed by one
writer that there should be closer co-operation between
the different investigators in the field of film and youth.
In other sections of the Unesco survey the issues are
rather more clearcut than they are in those devoted to
juvenile delinquency and other of the cinema after-effects.
For instance, in the sections on cinema attendance and
film preferences, several trends emerge fairly clearly. . .
Some of these trends may seem obvious: nevertheless
it is useful to find confirmation, from many quarters, of
the view that children in general go to the cinema more
often than their parents and that as they grow older
they go less and less in parental company; that boys
tend to go more often than girls; and that the children
who are most frequent attenders are (to generalize) those
who are unhappy or lonely, those who want "to escape
from daily life" and therefore are seeking distraction,
and those who have least interest in other activities.
Rather more specifically, there is evidence to show
that attendance is affected by standards of income, intel¬
ligence and education, with children at the lower levels
in these three aspects going to the movies more fre¬
quently than children who are well off, of high intelli¬
gence, and carefully educated.
In very many works on the influence of the cinema,
the age of the audience under review assumes first-rank
importance, because of its bearing on their habits and
behaviour as fllmgoers, on their understanding of the
medium and the effects it has upon them, on measures
of censorship and legislation, and on the production and
selection of what are regarded as suitable programmes.
From a perusal of the items in this bibliography, four
significant stages or periods in the development of young
people's filmgoing can be distinguished reasonably clearly,
even though it will be realized that one should not be
arbitrary about age- grouping and that one phase will
merge into another.
The first stage is that up »to the age of 7 years, the
so-called, "fairy-tale age" in which children live in
an imaginary world. It may be noted here that a
substantial body of opinion Inclines to the view that the
movie theatre is no place for infants and therefore, in
general, that children should not start picture-going
before the age of 7, and certainly not without the
company of a parent or some other responsible adult.
The second age-group covers the period between 7 and
12. This is what is known as "the Robinson age", when
experience of realism comes more and more to the fore
and children are mostly interested in adventure and
action. But it is also noticeable that they can already
adopt an objective attitude, and can follow the main
lines of action in a story.
This period merges into the third stage, that of the
age of puberty, between 12 and 16, when the child's
personality Is markedly developing and tensions are
rising. By this time the average child is strongly
attracted towards the cinema, although aware of its
fictitious nature. He can not only comprehend the film
26
FILMS BOYS PREFER

FILMS GIRLS PREFER
t¿ s-
MUSICALS
The Unesco Courler. * March 1961
as a whole, but can also form some Interpretation of the
screenplay's internal structure and meaning.
This view is supported by those writers who claim that
"film language" cannot be understood by children before
the age of puberty. A variation of this Is the theory that
two phases can be distinguished in the development of
the child's understanding of the cinema, a«-mcntal level
of 10 years being necessary to keep pace with sequences
and with the various techniques of film expression, while
a proper grasp of a film's real significance demands a
mental age of at least 12 years.
Most writers consider that the fourth stage in film
comprehension starts at about 16 or 17 which, in a num¬
ber of countries, is the age when young fllmgoers are
legally regarded as having reached adult status and arc
therefore no longer subject to censorship restrictions.
Their Interest in the cinema is largely Influenced by the
desire to penetrate the mysteries of the adult world
which they themselves are now entering.
LOVE STORIES
EVERYDAY LIFE
But it Is the age of 12 or 13 which Is seen as the
crucial dlvlding-Une. The problem of the film
begins at 12 years, it is said, and among the writers
on the subject whose works are represented In the
Unesco. bibliography it is fairly generally agreed that the
reactions of adolescents at the cinema are noticeably
different from those of children, the onset of puberty
producing not only a new outlook on films and a better
understanding of what films are saying, but also sharper
impressions and stronger effects on Imagination and
sentiments, with the consequent appearance of new
problems. It Is, for example, In adolescence that the cult
of "star worship" becomes most evident.
So far as preferences In screen entertainment are
concerned, it is a commonplace to say that tastes in films
mature as the individual himself matures. However, it
may safely be adduced from the evidence available here
that boys prefer films of adventure, action and violence,
while girls like those concerned with love, private Ufe,
and "glamour".
These categories may be broken down a little further, '
as follows: for boys Westerns, war films, comedies, ani¬
mal films, musicals, detective and crime thrillers, sports
stories; for girls musicals, nature and animal films,
comedies, stories about love, everyday life and human
relations.
One may sum up these particular trends by saying
that in addition to levels of education, intelligence, age
and income, the social milieu and conditions at home
exert an influence on the frequency of children's visits
to the cinema and on their preferences, tastes, and re¬
actions to films. But It would be hazardous to make a
more precise statement than I have here attempted.
It seems to be generally agreed that there is such a
thing as "film language" and that educators must take
account of its existence, for the reason that films cannot
be properly understood and appreciated without some
knowledge of this visual language and Its "grammar".
Similarly, as regards production, there appears to be
little doubt that simplicity is a prerequisite in the making
of films for children, particularly young children, who
have difficulty in following "film language" (camera
movement, time symbols, etc.) which involves a different
process from that required for reading and understanding
a book.
Those writers and there are many who favour en¬
couragement of "film-teaching", especially through
ciné-clubs and film discussions (either at the club or in
the classroom Itself), have a generally consistent idea
about the broad lines along which such activities should
be conducted. Again, there is virtual unanimity that it
is highly desirable for films to be made and distributed
specially for children, just as there are few divergences
of opinion about the pitfalls which will be encountered
if this valuable task is attempted or the ways in which
difficulties might be avoided.
27
NATURE
Photos Hoveyda Collection

WORLD'S
YOUNGEST
CINEMAGOERS
Small children will watch the shooting down of scores
of Indians in a Western film with perfect equanimity,
but the sight of a sick horse or bird in a film immediately
upsets them. This is one of the findings from a special
study carried out over a period of ten years by Danish
educators on the effects of films on kindergarten chil¬
dren aged 3 to 7. The study was carried out with govern¬
ment support and Denmark is one of the few countries
in which kindergarten children visit government granted
film performances regularly. Here they are supervised
by Mrs. Ellen Siersted, a child psychologist attached to
the Danish Government Film Office (above right). Some
of the findings: Contrary to common belief many car¬
toons and Tarzanlike films frighten very young children ;
some cried and tried to leave the cinema, others had
nausea, and parents later reported cases of bedwetting
and nightmares. Yet the same children said they thought
the films funny and at first, refused to admit they were
scared. Child audiences get particularly upset when
they see small animals or children get lost. They become
frightened and cry and ask if the animals or children
will get back to mother again. Equally significant are
the positive impressions revealed in the classroom
where children recapture the ¡mages with pencil and
brush. Drawing (below right) was made by a five-
year-old girl to explain a film she had seen about a little
ship and its crew. (Photos on this page, on front
cover and page 26 were taken during the Danish study.)
Photos © Karen Juliane, Copenhagen
28
