THE CANADIAN CARIBOU
A DISAPPEARING SPECIES
by A.W.F. Banfield
Chief Zoologist, National Museum of Canada,
Dept. of Northern Affairs & National Resources
Arelict species from the Ice Age is waging
what may be a losing battle for survival
against the relentless advance of modern civilization.
That species is the barren-ground caribou (Rangifer ta-
randus arcticus) of northern Canada which is closely
related to the reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) of northern
Europe and Asia. It Is a mammal particularly well adapted
to withstand the rigours of an arctic environment with its
long, dense fur, short ears and tail, furred muzzle and
feet, and widely splayed hooves. The latter act as
snowshoes to bear the animal's weight on the crusted
snow In winter.
The time and place of origin of the world's reindeer is
quite naturally unknown. However, the geological and
anatomical evidence points to the mountainous regions
of north-western America or north-eastern Asia. We do
know that the reindeer was a characteristic mammal of
the colder phases of the Last Glaciation associated with
a tundra and taiga vegetation on the edges of the advanc¬
ing or retreating continental glaciations (about 75,000-
10,000 years ago.) Its companions were the woolly
mammoth and musk-ox on the subarctic landscape, of
western Europe. During intervening warmer phases when
deciduous forests and meadows covered the land, the
reindeer was replaced by aurochs (ancestral cattle), bison,
horses and red deer.
The reindeer was closely associated with man during
the Early Stone Age of Europe and northern Asia. Early
Europeans have left a clear record of the reindeer, bison
and woolly mammoth in the powerfully simple cave
drawings of the Dordogne Valley of France and Altamira
Cave of Spain. Those drawings Indicate an intimate
knowledge of the reindeer's life history born from their
pursuit for the staples of human life. The drawings,
models, tools and fragments from those early cultures
indicate that reindeer provided food, clothes, fuel, thread
and tools for our species so long ago.
At the time that reindeer were so important in the
economy of Europe, the ancestors of the American barren-
ground caribou were thought to have been penned-up in
an unglaciated refugium in Alaska and the Yukon
Territory. The gradual eastward retreat of the Keewatin
Ice Cap during the past 10,000 years permitted, the caribou
to colonize the tundra of northern Canada. It is likely
that the early Eskimos were quick to follow the caribou
and to migrate eastward across northern Canada
eventually to reach Greenland.
While the reindeer gradually withdrew northward and
disappeared from the economic picture of Europe, the
barren-ground caribou continued to serve as the
cornerstone of the comparatively Stone Age cultures of
the Eskimos and Athabascan Indians until recent times.
The Chipewayan Indians of the Athabascan language
group, who live in the boreal forest region were practically
dependent upon caribou for the basic necessities of food,
clothing, fuel oil for lamps, sinews for sewing and tools.
They earned the name "caribou-eaters."
Modern Eskimos were less dependent upon caribou and
more upon marine mammals such as seals, walrus and
smaller whales. However, caribou were always cherished
game of the chase for winter clothing. The summer
caribou hunt held certain connotations -of recreation or
spiritual renewal. However even among . .the Eskimos,
bands remained inland and were primarily dependent
upon caribou.
These races relied upon a primitive hunting culture for
their sustenance. They speared the migrating caribou
24 from canoes and kayaks. They captured them in pounds
constructed of spruce trees, or guided them to slaughter¬
ing points at natural defiles by the construction of long
M tmrn
A SNOW-DEEP
PROCESSION
of Canada's barren-
ground caribou
forms striking sil¬
houette against
mountain backdrop.
Photo National Museum
of Canada, Ottawa
drift fences (or stone columns on the treeless tundra).
They sometimes stalked them with bow and arrow, the
hunters 'disguised in caribou hides and antlers, or
constructed pitfalls on caribou paths in the forests or of
frozen snow blocks in winter.
Such hunting methods were probably similar to those
used by our Stone Age ancestors and could be observed
in northern Canada until quite recently. The domestica¬
tion of the reindeer developed in north-eastern Asia about
3,000 years ago and was brought to northern Europe by
the Lapps. However the Eskimos and Indians of North
America never developed a similar form of animal
husbandry .with their caribou.
One can well imagine the sights of natural bounty
which greeted the first European explorers to northern
Canada in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Great herds of caribou roamed the arctic tundra in
summer in seemingly countless numbers. In winter they
migrated in massed columns, distances up to 1,000 kms.
to the subarctic taiga. While nomadic bands of Eskimos
and Indians followed the caribou herds across the forests
and tundra for their livelihood.
It is difficult to remember now in highly organized Ca¬
nada, that a century ago, vast herds of bison and caribou
roamed across plain and tundra, rivalling in number
the teeming antelope of the African veldt. The bison
virtually disappeared from the plains as a result of
excessive hunting in the nineteenth century. Saved from
extinction it survives in National Park sanctuaries. Its
place in the ecological scheme of things has been taken
by beef cattle. The caribou still lingers on in its arctic do¬
main in numbers only suggestive of its former abundance.
The advent of Europeans upset the centuries-old

_
3M
' \. .,
^tok
*t¿fc^ '« %>w >\ >*.
balance which had existed between caribou herds and
their human predators. For the primitive weapons of
the Eskimos and Indians scarcely gave them any advan¬
tage over their swift wide-ranging prey. The introduction
of the fur-trade to northern areas indirectly tipped the
balance against the caribou. The natives became trappers
and for the new pursuit increased their dog teams for
winter travel. This led to larger caches of caribou meat
to feed both the trappers and the dogs on the trail.
With these changes were introduced the tools ne¬
cessary to facilitate the killing of caribou the white
man's firearms. For the first time the Indian and Eskimo
found themselves able to kill at will. The ease with which
the unwary caribou could be killled by the rifle led to great
wastage of the resource. The seemingly numberless
caribou herds began to melt away, while the northern
people seemed unable to adopt the conservation concept.
The remoteness of the caribou range, together with the
sparse and primitive human population, hindered a really
accurate appraisal of the animal's population. Exaggerat¬
ed estimates ran as high as 100 million. The famous
Canadian naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton estimated the
caribou numbers at 30 million in 1911. As late as 1938,
the population was estimated at 2 1/2 million.
With the increased post-war tempo of development in
Canada's northern regions fears grew for the fate of this
important natural resource. Federal and provincial game
authorities recognized the urgent need for an intensive
investigation and undertook a co-operative preliminary
survey in 1948 and 1949.
Previous attempts at estimating the caribou population
had been handicapped because of the slowness of the
traditional northern transportation methods of dog team
and canoe. Now full advantage was taken of the aeroplane
and an aerial survey technique was developed for nor¬
thern big-game animals. During the spring migrations
caribou herds travel in closely packed columns. They
tend to follow the frozen waterways and on sunny after¬
noons rest on the snow covered lakes. At that time they
are easily photographed and counted from the air.
The preliminary aerial survey of 1948 and 1949 dis¬
closed an estimated population of about 670,000 barren-
ground caribou between Hudson Bay and the Mackenzie
River. The annual crop of calves was estimated at 145,000.
The number killed every year by hunters, based upon
hunting returns, was about 100,000. -Wolf prédation,
diseases, accidents and severe spring blizzards at calving
time caused losses that appeared to exceed the annual
increment and to result in a declining population. A con¬
tinuing caribou research programme disclosed a series of
poor calf crops during succeeding years and a similar
aerial resurvey in the winter of 1955-1956 indicated an
alarming drop in the population to an estimated 275,000.
This crisis led to a second co-operative caribou research
programme jointly sponsored by Federal Government agen¬
cies: Canadian Wildlife Service and Northern Adminis¬
tration Branch of the Department of Northern Affairs and
National Resources, the Indian Affairs Branch and the
Game Departments of the Provinces of Manitoba, Saskat¬
chewan and Alberta. Whereas the first project had been
extensive in nature, the second was an Intensive study
of all the factors affecting caribou mortality.
One large herd numbering approximately 100,000 ani¬
mals was chosen for intensive study from April 1, 1957 to
August 31, 1958. During that period teams of game bio¬
logists, range managers, veterinarians, physiologists and
ethologists kept constant contact with the herd as it
migrated approximately 2,000 km. between summer and
25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CANADIAN CARIBOU (Cont'd)
STRYCHNINE TRAPS
FOR MARAUDING WOLVES
winter ranges. The biologists lived in tent camps under
Canadian subarctic weather conditions. The scientists
leap-frogged after the migrating herds by means of light
aircraft. This was certainly the most intensive research
programme on any Canadian mammal yet undertaken
and significant contributions to our understanding of the
caribou decline were achieved.
The human kill was verified as the most important fac¬
tor in the caribou decline. Although the kill declined to
73,400 in 1955 and to 15,000 in 1957-58, those figures repre¬
sent the decreasing availability of caribou rather than
the effectiveness of conservation methods. The high rate
of human utilization was unfortunately coupled with a
series of years with low calf crops so that 1956-57 the calf
crop was about 8.1 per cent of the herd and the human
kill 9 per cent, resulting in a further decline.
Steps have been taken to restrict the killing of caribou
in northern Canada to those families living in the remote
areas. At the same time a conservation programme has
been initiated in the schools and among adults by means
of posters, cartoon booklets and fllmstrips. Additional
sources of meat have been sought to relieve the drain on
caribou. In this connexion, bison, whale and walrus
hunts have been organized where the stocks were suffi¬
cient. Frozen food lockers and natural storage facilities
in the permafrost have been developed where practical.
Unfortunately conservation programmes are woefully slow
and the caribou population has continued to decline. to
about 200,000 animals by 1960, in spite of two unusually
favourable calf crops in 1958 and 1959.
It was not difficult to convince northern resi¬
dents of the need for increased wolf control.
Bounties had not been paid on wolves in the North-West
Territories for many years, and the decline in fur prices
in recent years has discouraged wolf-trappers.
For that reason an intensive co-operative wolf control
programme was organized over the barren-ground caribou
winter range. Advantage was taken of the wolf packs'
habit of travelling on the broad frozen lakes. Lesser fur-
bearers seldom ventured so far from shore. Strychnine
baits were placed at sites carefully marked to protect
trappers and their dog teams. The sites were revisited
and biological information gathered. During the 1953-58
programme, over 6,500 wolf carcasses were tallied. The
wolf population was effectively reduced over much of the
caribou range.
Other corollary research programmes have clarified the
role of snow depth and texture in controlling caribou
movements in winter. It was found that caribou chose
areas of shallow, light snowfall. Crusting severely handi¬
capped the caribou's ground feeding habits. It was also
confirmed that severe wind chill caused by strong winds
at low temperatures could place a strain upon a new-born
calf's resistance.
Fortunately some pressure has been taken off the cari¬
bou by new economic developments in which Eskimos
may participate. Work in mining and military establish¬
ments, in government services and air transportation has
reduced the need for caribou as the main source of suste¬
nance. This change came at a fortuitous moment, for
the disappearance of the caribou herds resulted in star¬
vation in some remote Eskimo camps in Keewatin Dis¬
trict, and caused grave hardship over a much larger area
of northern Canada.
Some say that northern development has doomed the
caribou in any case to a subordinate role. But the stunted
subarctic forests and tundra pastures underlaid .by perma¬
frost are of little use for modern agriculture or forestry
practices. The native caribou is the animal best adapted
to utilize this environment and transform it to proteins
available for human consumption. The wide-ranging cari¬
bou lends itself to an open type of animal husbandry, and
26 if properly managed could continue to provide bounty
"on the hoof" to northern people remote from supplies
of domestic meats.
ismJffS^mÑ
BARREN-GROUND CARIBOU spend the summer in
the arctic tundra of Canada and the winter in the subarctic
taiga (above) some 800 miles south. Below, they are
seen crossing the frozen lakes of the taiga, where they
often rest on the ice. When migrating, they average
19 miles a day. Hunted by Indians and Eskimos as a
source of livelihood, they dwindled from 30 million at
the beginning of the century to a mere 200,000 in 1960.
Right, abandoned carcasses of slaughtered caribou.
National Museum of Canada, Ottawa

m^m^mm^^iM^^ s I~
i hi ,,.
J mjtMwtmww*
ÏSmkWfMMiïrMÏ?.
27
