In Arab Lands
LEARNING ME
by Georges Fradier
This is the second of three articles on
the educational situation of Asia, the
Middle East and Africa by our special
correspondent, Georges Fradier. The
first, on Asia, appeared in our Novem¬
ber issue. Georges Fradier now des¬
cribes the problem in countries of
the Arab world from Iraq to Morocco.
I
n the third century of the Hegira, around the year
840, a genial moralist with a taste for writing on every
imaginable subject included in his Book of Exposition
and Demonstration the portraits of various teachers in
Baghdad, Kufa and Basra. He carefully differentiated
between the eminent lecturers in law and theology whose
discourses enthralled distinguished gatherings and the
mass of enthusiastic and half-starved schoolteachers who
grappled with hordes of children.
In the days of Abu Utman al-Djahiz there was indeed
no lack of schoolteachers in Islam. Long before the con¬
quests and conversions there were undoubtedly many more
teachers in the Middle East than there were in Europe,
teaching in Greek at one place, in Syriac at another, in
Hebrew, Persian or Arabic. By propagating "the world's
most read book", the new faith had stimulated the spirit
of study and research. Every mosque had its school
where the Koranic adage was inculcated: "He unto whom
wisdom is given, he truly hath received abundant good"
or that injunction of the Prophet's to "Seek knowledge
even if it be in China, since the seeking of knowledge
ls obligatory upon every Moslem, man or woman."
Until the fifteenth century, elementary education the
teaching of reading, writing and arithmetic which was
virtually general in the towns advanced side-by-side
with the vast expansion of Arab science and culture.
The latter, even when they had declined in the Iraqi and
Syrian towns from which they emerged, continued to
grow stronger and to proliferate in Central Asia, in Sicily
and above all in Europe and North Africa.
But at the end of this period, the great historian Ibn
16
?7±
\ i^-í «PK
~y¿:
.'ÄN^
r.
y*^- j-*}»4*"'«-'' fe
in the Arabie speaking countries there are now nearly
5,000,000 children in primary schoolsdouble the number of
a decade ago. But a wide gap will have to be closed before
there are enough schools and teachers for all the 15 million
children of school age, like the Arab boy (above) on a hillside
overlooking his native village. Often the only kind of edu¬
cation available is in the traditional Koranic schools (below).
.,£) Paul Almasy, Paris

The Unesco Courier. Jonuory 1961
». .*
Ä.J-
Khaldoun ended a chapter on the "philosophic sciences"
with the statement, "We are told that in the country of
the Franks and in the land of Rome and the neighbouring
regions of the northern coasts (of the Mediterranean) the
philosophic sciences are greatly in favour, their princi¬
ples have been revived, there are many groups to teach
them and there is an increasing number eager to study
them..." Thus, the European Renaissance was proclaim¬
ed in Tunis at the very moment when Arab culture and
education were about to enter a long period of stagnation
and even decline. Economic depression, loss of inde¬
pendence, cities sunk in apathy . . .
During four centuries, the cultivated population was
barely able to do more than maintain the tongue of the
masters of the Golden Age. Their doctrines and their
works together with their universities became lifeless.
Elementary education itself became rarer and rarer and
less and less valued. The small schools survived, gene¬
rally kept going by religious foundations: under the direc¬
tion of ignorant teachers, themselves a vestige of the
Middle Ages persisting into the nineteenth century, the
children the male children were given an education
consisting of learning verses from the Koran by heart.
Nevertheless, the Arab revival had begun in the nine¬
teenth century. Among the Christians of Lebanon and
the Moslems of Egypt, thinkers, statesmen and poets shook
the dust from the old books. Reformers introduced the
disciplines and sometimes the methods of "modern" edu¬
cation into the ancient universities of Al Azhar, of Cairo
and of Zaitouna in Tunisia. Thenceforward the move¬
ment developed with astonishing speed. Under the
influence of the new universities in Cairo, Alexandria
and Beirut, education at all levels has recovered the vigour
and prestige which had been lost for so long. Taking
the Arab countries as a whole, it might seem the solution
of fundamental educational problems was already In sight.
Unfortunately, the Arab world ls enormous and progress
has been made at a very different rate In the various
countries. Some Arab countries lag a good many years
behind others. In more than one country, hampering
tensions arise from the co-existence, and some times rival¬
ry, of the traditional schools which are almost wholly
religious in nature and the undenominational schools mo¬
delled on the Western pattern. By way of compensa¬
tion, in other countries State educationwhich, inci¬
dentally, provides for regular religious Instructionhas
been able to develop unhindered. But In all Arab
countries alike, from the derricks of Kuwait to the
pasture lands of the Atlas region, from the banks of the
Orontes to the banks of the Upper Nile, the longing for
education merges with the will to play a part in the Arab
renaissance.
here are grounds for believing that this longing
H will be fulfilled. Indeed, taking all Arab coun-
-^ÊL. tries together, one finds that the annual rate of
Increase in the number of children at school ls about 10
per cent, whereas the annual rate of Increase In the
number of children of school age ls only about 3 or 4 per
cent. Plainly, the race between population Increase and
the schools ls going to be won by the schools If this trend
persists.
In those Arab States which are the best-equipped and
the best situated In the field of education there are still
thousands of children for whom there is no accommo¬
dation in the schools or whose villages still have no
school worthy of the name. In yet other countries which
were only recently able to begin their educational pro¬
gramme, the majority of the children must still be left
to one side or temporarily forgotten about.
Sometimes It ls necessary to consider emergency mea¬
sures, the mobilization of available resources in order to
speed up education; sometimes the authorities are above-
all preoccupied with reforming the content and the tools
of teaching where these are thought Inadequate to the
needs of the young and of the community as a whole.
Almost Invariably they are forced back to the same great
problem: how to train the masters who arc now needed
and who will be needed even more tomorrow?
An enquiry recently carried out by Unesco In
10 Arab countries (1) reveals that the most
urgent problem today is the "shortage of qua¬
lified teachers."
In the Lebanon, for example, authorities describe the
present situation as "particularly disturbing." In the
whole country there is only one primary teacher-training
school and one secondary teacher-training school which
graduated 97 student-teachers in 1958. But the number
of posts which must be filled yearly ls approximately
two hundred In respect of primary education and seventy
in respect of secondary education. In these circumstances,
it is hardly surprising that a number of classes are
conducted by teachers whose qualifications are more than
a little vague. "About half the teachers in the primary
schools have had a training inferior to a complete secon¬
dary course."
The situation is perhaps most serious in Libya where,
in order to press ahead as rapidly as possible, it was
found nece.ssary to employ a number of primary school
teachers who themselves had received little more than
primary education. In Morocco where at least 2,000 new
(1) Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, United Arab Republic.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20

BOXING LESSON
A box with six compartments is teaching young Tunisians all
about the sort of foods they should eat. As they open it in the
classroom, they find inside models of six typical foods which
they need for growth, good health and energy. The hexagonal
box is one of the audio-visual teaching aidsfilmstrips, posters,
flannelgraphswhich are being used in a special nutrition education
drive that the Tunisian Government is making in collaboration
with UNESCO, UNICEF (The United Nations Children's Fund) and
FAO (U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization). Photos show:
(1) Tunisian artists preparing posters. Those on walls show the
"right diet" box. (2/3) Children answer questions after a "good
food means good health" lesson. Each has been given a "diet
box". (4) Pupil cuts out drawings of different food items similar
to those shown on the blackboard. (5) Youngsters are served
"right diet" meal in canteen decorated with nutrition posters.
Photos Unesco-Paul Almas/
18

The Unesco Courier. Jonuory 1961
Photos Unesco-Paul Almi'.y
19

LEARNING MEANS LIGHT (Cont'd from page 17)
TEN MILLION CHILDREN IN SEARCH OF TEACHERS
teachers a year will be needed, the number of student-
teachers supplied by the teacher-training schools in 1959
was only 500. In the Sudan, the qualifications required
of a teacher consist of the diploma granted after the
first secondary stage plus two years' professional training;
but the eight institutions which offer this training are far
from able to meet current needs since in 1959 they were
only able to supply the country's 2,000 schools with 632
men teachers and 177 women teachers.
In this regard, one of the great difficulties confronting
Ministers of Education ls to find teachers for provinces
located far from the capital and, for that matter, for
villages which are close to the capital but which are
still only villages. The young teachers, accustomed to
the comfort of their colleges and the luxury of the big
cities, find living conditions in the villages intolerable.
Attempts have occasionally been made to solve this prob¬
lem by providing the teacher with living quarters in
accordance with his needs and tastes; but the cost of
building such quarters, even the least luxurious models,
is far beyond the financial means of almost all the Arab
countries.
Payment of indemnities provides no solution since the
teacher, however modest his requirements, is often unable
to find a reasonable house in the area to which he has
been appointed. The solution generally envisaged in these
countries today is one which has been repeatedly sug¬
gested in other regions: namely, that the ministers
concerned should recruit more young student-teachers in
these less attractive areas in the hope that, once their
training has been completed, they will want to return
there to teach.
It is, however, in the secondary and vocational schools
and in the trade training centres that the shortage of
teachers seems especially critical. In some countries the
full gravity of the situation is not yet apparent because
many of these Institutions were founded and are still
maintained by private groups, religious missions and even
foreign countries which provide a large proportion of the
staff and equipment. But with few exceptions, this aid
does not go far to meet the development which the
economic progress of these countries requires.
At the present time, 16 in a hundred pupils go to secon¬
dary schools and the proportion in secondary vocational
schools is 2 per cent. Thus, without noticeably increasing
these proportions, it is estimated that secondary institu-
Arab refugee boy is among thousands learning
trades in UNRWA-UNESCO school workshops.
tions in Iraq in 1965 will have 235,000 pupils, necessi¬
tating the training of 850 teachers per year. As things
stand, however, the total number of those graduating from
Iraq's teacher-training colleges barely exceeds 300.
In Libya, a number of secondary schoolteachers come
from neighbouring countries. In the Syrian province of
the United Arab Republic there is small hope of meeting
the needs of secondary institutions for several years to
come, even though private education at this level copes
with a large proportion of pupils. Egypt, in fact, would
seem to be the only country at present able to meet the
growing needs of secondary education.
Pause for reading
as a Saudi Arabian
boy kneels on the
rocky ground to pe¬
ruse his textbook
of short stories.
Paul Almasy, Pans
UNRWA
Even Egypt is short of qualified teachers for certain
subjects, especially mathematics, science and modern lan¬
guages. Other countries make the same complaint and
generally with still more cause. It may be possible to
find first rate students in literature, history or even law,
philosophy or social sciences who, despite their hopes
for a different career, nevertheless become satisfactory
teachers of grammar, literature or the social sciences.
Their friends who have specialized in science, in English
or French, are not likely to accept to become teachers.
Unless they have a positive vocation for teaching, they
are more likely to take one of the infinitely more attrac¬
tive jobs offered by industry or commerce or the civil
service.
In countries, in the process of development which still
lack top-level men for the most Important sectors of the
national economy, it is useless to count on university
students turning to teaching as a last resort. The teacher-
training colleges must provide a full training for teachers
specializing in the different disciplines where neither
incompetents nor enthusiastic amateurs can be accepted.
Additionally, the State and public opinion must treat
teaching with the seriousness it deserves. A bad book¬
keeper is dismissed ; but too often an incompetent teacher,
whose shortcomings may have serious consequences, is
allowed to retain his position. From another point of
view it would be wholly unreasonable to argue that
teaching is such a noble profession that anyone who
abandons it for a better paid job is blameworthy.
"'Material advantages" cannot anywhere be neglected
for long. And in every one of the Arab States, the
Minister of Education realizes regretfully that teachers
20

The Unesco Courier, Jonuory 1961
are Inadequately paid. The salary scales may be the
same, by and large, as those for other civil servants with
comparable qualifications and seniority; but authorities
recognize that the teacher's modest pay is no longer pro¬
portionate to the amount of work and the professional
qualities which are required of him. His salary is a
hangover from the days when it was thought fitting
that the schoolmaster should be as poor as he was
respectable.
Some governments openly deplore the fact that the
salaries paid to young teachers are "slightly lower" than
those paid to other civil servants. Nobody in these
States denies that the remuneration received by teachers
is inadequate; on the contrary, there is a real desire to
improve their living conditions ; but so far the burdens
involved in expanding education have made it impossible
for most of the States to change things.
Over recent years, the educational authorities in almost
all the Arab countries have outlined their aims in docu¬
ments which have been as carefully thought over and
drawn up as the constitution of a new republic. Despite
significant variations in regard to one or another aspect
of the various tasks of education, all agree as to the basic
objective: to equip the child to play a full part in the
political and economic life of his country.
Most of these lands regard themselves as new countries,
in spite of the antiquity of their traditions. They know
that they are in the midst of an evolutionary process.
The citizens of tomorrow are expected to make their
country stronger, more prosperous, better qualified to play
a useful role in international life.
It may be asked whether the education provided in
primary and secondary schools is linked with and, indeed,
actually assists the achievement of this ambition.
No educator on earth can be completely sure that the
Study in concen¬
tration as two Jor¬
danian schoolgirls
share a bench in the
sun at the Hawara
Education Centre.
Hawara Fundamental Education Centre
programmes which he recommends or is called on to
follow are in every way ideally adapted to pupils' needs,
especially to their future needs as citizens and followers
of a career. To take an example from among the coun¬
tries with which we are dealing it is likely that there is
some doubt in the United Arab Republic as to the desi¬
rability of sharply divided "'streams" which result in
half of all secondary pupils completing two out of three
years without learning anything at all of mathematics,
physics, chemistry or natural sciences. On the other hand,
their fellow-students in the scientific stream have nothing
to do with history or geography. The programmes in
Libya, which have been drawn up on another basis, devote
20 hours a week during the last year (classical option)
of a five-year secondary course to the teaching of lan¬
guages, and not one hour to mathematics and science.
A graver defect which Arab educators have pointed out
In various educational Institutions ls the abstract, bookish,
not to say boring, nature of the teaching. The teaching
Dressed up and painted for dancing and miming,
two smiling Moroccan girls entertain classmates.
iQ Gerda Böhm. Rabat
methods used in these schools, which vary in number and
size from country to country, rely overmuch on learning
by heart in order to pass examinations. Such methods,
Inherited perhaps from the old Mosque teachers who
concentrated on memorization, no longer suffice: they run
the risk of developing memory at the cost of logical
thinking, critical sense, the spirit of research and Indi¬
vidual Initiative. There are signs that the new generation
of teachers ls being trained in the modern teacher-
training colleges and universities to use very different
methods.
Unfortunately, this defect is reflected in the textbooks
which are still used by young schoolmasters both for
their own studies and in teaching their pupils. The
books providedor forced onthe pupils are all too often
sketchy and dogmatic, dry or ponderous and badly Illus¬
trated: it is rare indeed that they Introduce readers to
the "joy of reading" and the excitement of discovering
things for themselves. They supply a set of bleak abso¬
lutes which must be humbly imbibed In order to give
satisfaction and achieve success.
Additionally, In almost all the Arab States, secondary
educationand even vocational and technical education-
has long been synonomous with "Western" education,
wholly taught in English or French. This ls still the
case in a number of countries where the increased use
of Arabic in education is the order of the day. This
is not aimed at the abandonment of the European lan¬
guages currently used ncr even at the systematic substi¬
tution of Arabic as the teaching language at every level
and for every subject; but the curricula cannot much
longer remain based solely on those which emerged from
another culture, another history, a whole series of different
factors, In another country.
In certain cases, the subject-matter itself should be
radically modified geography and history, for example.
In other cases, the relative importance given to different
subjects is in need of revision: the ancient and modern
literature of a given region or nation cannot be left
in the background. Finally, there ls no doubt that.
Irrespective of the subjects studied and the final aim of
schooling, the study of Arabic should be made general
and deeper.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LEARNING MEANS LIGHT (Cont'd)
AN ANCIENT LANGUAGE GETS A MODERN DRESS
Some countries go further and envisage educational
reforms which are not only concerned with the national
language In relation to foreign languages. Education is
sometimes hindered, to a greater or lesser extent depend¬
ing on the region, by the differences between classical
or "literary" Arabic and the popular language spoken
by pupils and masters.
Between a language spoken by very different peoples
scattered over great areas and the classical form of that
language fixed 1,300 years ago In sacred writings, there
ls an inevitable gulf but it does not seem to hamper
literary studies In any way. Moreover, the durability of
the classical language has undoubtedly helped prevent
the growth of great differences between the various dia¬
lects and thus helped ensure the cohesion of the Arab
world.
One proof ls the use made after some adaptation, of
this form of the language
by press and radio. None
of this applies, however,
when the language is used
to teach and study scientific
subjects, using that term
in its widest sense, which
have only emerged during
the last two centuries and
which may even date from
as recently as yesterday.
Possibly because there are
still not enough original
works on physics, biology,
chemistry, sociology or poli¬
tical economy in Arabic,
the Arab student is often
puzzled by the vocabulary
and style used in these
sciences.
A number of groups or
institutions have therefore
taken on the daunting task
of adapting to the needs
of modern education the
language which the old
masters restricted to poetry,
prayer and law yet which
nevertheless once excited
the greatest admiration
when used in the fields of
logic, history, astronomy
and algebra. The Moroccan
Minister of Education
recently announced the
setting-up of an institute
for the development of
Arabic which, in co-operation with experts from various
countries, would work for the modernization and uni¬
fication of the different forms of spoken Arabic so as to
provide a single working language for both students
and researchers, for laboratories and schools, for news¬
papers and scientific journals.
The educational void which must be filled most urgent¬
ly in most Arab countries is to be found in technical
and, generally speaking, vocational training. The pro¬
portion of secondary pupils to primary pupils throughout
the whole region ls 16 per cent. This is, relatively, a high
proportion, even If the secondary education sometimes
seems unduly rapid. But the proportion of pupils enrolled
in institutions for training technicians in industry, agri¬
culture and commerce amounts to only 2 per cent of all
school enrolments.
All States which have laid down development plans to
ensure that their educational system is geared to their
economy envisage a very substantial Increase in technical
education at both the post-primary and secondary
22
Unesco-Paul Almasy
ON A SHADY TERRACE, secondary school girls at Omdur-
man, Sudan, receive an out-of-doors lesson in home eco¬
nomics. A Unesco specialist is an adviser at this school.
levels. Morocco, for instance, expects that 44,000 pri¬
mary school pupils will go on to this type of educa¬
tion in October 1964: eight times as many as in 1959.
Several years ago the Arab States underlined the neces¬
sity of basing the future of their educational systems on
rational planning to meet their educational, social and
economic requirements. Some have already taken the
necessary steps; others still lack qualified staff.
The representatives of nine countries who studied these
problems at the Unesco Beirut Conference in February
1960, devoted themselves in particular to educational
planning and the relationship between such planning and
over-all economic and social planning. This conference
recommended the setting-up, with Unesco assistance, of
a Centre for the Advanced Training of Senior Personnel
in the preparation, execution and continual adaptation of
educational plans, within the framework of overall
planning.
This is one of many pro¬
jects which will unques¬
tionably help the Arab
States, and especially the
poorer ones, to overcome
the obstacles still hamper¬
ing the carrying out of
basic reforms. Certain ty¬
pes of limited, temporary
assistance are decisive if
provided at the right time
and in carefully selected
sectors. This would apply
to the training centre ; it
also applies to the techni¬
cal assistance missions
which the United Nations,
the Specialized Agencies
and particularly Unesco
continue to send to most
of these countries; an¬
other example is the Funda¬
mental Education Centre at
Sirs-el-Layyan in the Egyp¬
tian delta which has been
in operation for seven years
under the joint patronage
of the United Arab Republic
and Unesco.
Mention should also be
made of the work carried
out by UNRWA in the refu¬
gee camps of Jordan, Leba¬
non, Syria and Gaza: the
382 UNRWA-UNESCO
schools which have gradu¬
ally been developed in recent years have more than
100,000 pupils. Finally, the aid provided by the U.N. Spe¬
cial Fund to secondary technical education and higher
technical education will have far-reaching effects.
Whether for planning and statistics, school building or
teacher training, trade training centres or engineering
institutions, most of these States need assistance if they
are to overcome the barriers. It would be wrong to
exaggerate the seriousness of all these difficulties
(temporary shortage of staff and financial problems) but
they do prevent advances at the very moment when the
impulse towards progress is at its height.
Freed of these Initial concerns, the Arab States them¬
selves will do the rest and the rest, as they well know,
is gigantic. They will have to rid themselves of the
thousand and one difficulties which long years of isola¬
tion, poverty and sometimes dependence have placed on
the road leading to the economic, cultural and intellec¬
tual revival which they are determined to achieve.
