NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA
By
Georges Fradier
Unesco-Piul Almasp, Pari»
ULTRA-MODERN GIRLS' SECONDARY SCHOOL AT AKUAPIM IS ONE OF SEVERAL BUILT UNDER GHANA'S NEW EDUCATION PROGRAMME
The face of Africa has changed. Its rhythm
has changed. When we look at this huge
continent with its sharply contrasting
countries there is no single yardstick by which
to measure their dimensions, their resources,
and their history. The nations of tropical
Africa range from the old empire of Ethiopia to the
smaller territories on the west coast which were carved
out In the course of colonial partitions. They have
striking social, industrial and cultural differences
depending on whether they were influenced by Europe or
the Arab world. Yet despite all the differences, every
one of these countries is today launched on an extra¬
ordinary undertaking the provision
of full education to hundreds of
thousands of children whose fathers
never so much as saw a school.
Nowadays few persons are likely to be surprised by the
fact that there are currently 112,000 boys and girls in
Nigerian secondary schools and teacher-training schools,
that 1,600 pupils entered the secondary school sixth class
last year In Guinea and that there are 20,000 secondary
pupils In Madagascar. But what Is significant is that
most of these schools were hardly dreamt of a generation
ago. The visitor to an African university library or
scientific laboratory or trade training centre Is s*ruck by
the fact that everything is new; had he come to Africa
10 years ago he would have found very little. Today
he Is confronted with a sudden burgeoning; he sees not
a mere advance In education but an acceleration so
dynamic that it is virtually a crea¬
tion from the ground up.
Nowhere at any time has there
been so rapid a development in the
field of education. In 10 years the
number of schools and pupils in cer¬
tain regions has increased by 300 per
cent. At the end of the second world
war it would have been hard to
foresee that an independent republic
called Ghana would have more than
600,000 pupils at school by 1960; or
that there would be 130,000 school¬
children in Senegal and Mali.
Unesco has carried out a
survey of educational prob¬
lems in 22 countries of Africa.
In this third and concluding
article on education in Asia,
the Middle East and Africa,
Georges Fradier our roving cor¬
respondent, sums up his own
as well as Unesco's findings.
Fifteen years ago, eyebrows would
have been raised at the suggestion
that Addis Ababa would possess a
great university college and that the equipment of the
lecture rooms, libraries and laboratories of the univer¬
sities of Ibadan, Accra, Leopoldville, Fourah Bay and
Dakar would put that of some European cities to shame.
Today, students at these African universities are hardly
aware that their countries were forced to do without any
universities at all up until a few years ago.
This explains why African educa¬
tional authorities are ready to
discuss freely and optimistically the
problem of the number of children
still not attending school. In cer¬
tain cases the figures are gigantic.
In Ethiopia, Somalia, Mall, the Niger
and the Upper Volta, it Is not yet
possible to provide primary educa¬
tion for even a tenth of the school-
age children. Schooling is available
for fewer than three children in ten
In Sierra Leone, Liberia, Dahomey
and Tanganyika.
Even those countries which, edu¬
cationally speaking, are the richest
and most favourably placed will
have to take Seven-League-Boot strides to reach the goal
of education for all children in any way comparable to
that of Europe and America. At present all the schools
of the Federation of Nigeria, for example, have a total
enrolment of 2.7 million pupils of which primary schools
alone account for 2,6 million. But Northern Nigeria, a
vast region of 18 million inhabitants, lags far behind the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA (Cont'd)
VAST UNESCO ENQUIRY SURVEYS 22 COUNTRIES
rest of the country In education with almost 4 million
children growing up uneducated.
Thus, although the countries of tropical Africa may see
their problems In similar terms, they can hardly be said
to be In a position to solve them in the same manner,
within the same length of time or with the same ease.
The fact Is that between the different regions of the
continent the disparities are enormous, and they are no
less so within each Individual country.
The largest cities of Africa compare favourably with
equivalent cities elsewhere in terms of comfort, amenities,
architecture and transport. Generally speaking, there Is
no shortage of schools in these capitals or rather there
Is a shortage only to the extent that the cities grow too
fast: it Is not easy to provide for the education of shanty-
town children.
Yet Africa remains and will continue to remain rural:
the vast majority of Its people will continue to live and
work In innumerable villages which seem all the more
scattered on account of the scarcity of roads. When, as
often happens, a school Is built in one of the markets
which spring up by the roadside, Its influence extends
for only a short distance around. Education Is still
Impossible for most young Africans unless they are ready
to travel great distances or quit their homes altogether a
solution which Is accepted as a last resort for boys but
rarely for girls.
The situation is particularly serious in sparsely populat¬
ed regions. In a large part of Ethiopia, in Somalia and
in the huge semi-arid plains which stretch from the Nile
to the Atlantic between the Sahara and the forest zone
there are less than five inhabitants per square kilometre.
No heating problems and
no window panes needed
UNDER-popuLATioN is disastrous in its effect on the
development of an effective and complete network
of schools. It may be said that the percentage of
African children attending school is always related to the
density of the population. Educational authorities,
however limited the funds available, are always ready to
provide a school and teachers if asked to do so by a town
with a population of 10,000, but they admit their helpless¬
ness when asked to provide the same facilities for 50 vil¬
lages of 200 inhabitants.
These 50 villages are not demanding that someone be
sent at great expense to build schools; most of them are
quite ready to build the school themselves and even to
build a home for the master. In most African countries
a school building can be of a very modest type: there Is
no heating problem and the windows can easily be left
without glass.
During the conference of education ministers and
directors which was organized by Unesco at Addis Ababa
in February 1960 (1), the representative of Somalia
declared: "Let us leave aside the building problem. If
necessary, a tree is enough to prop a blackboard up and
provide a little shade. It is the teacher who makes the
school, not the building. The real problem is the problem
of teachers."
Textbooks on African
history, people needed
If one considers the requirements in qualified staff for
Africa as a whole, the question of resources inevitably
assumes disturbing proportions. Some idea of what is
involved was given by the Emperor of Ethiopia in opening
the Addis Ababa conference: to provide the millions of
young Africans who still lack schools with the education
they are entitled to "more than 345,000 teachers" must
be trained, provided with accommodation and given the
means to live properly in the course of the next few years.
Thus the regional co-operation which several African
nations have decided to institute should give priority to
teacher training. This co-operation, to which the inter¬
national aid factor should be added, can also help to solve
the problem of textbooks.
Even when there are enough books they are not always
(1) The following countries took part: Republic of the
Congo, Belgium, the French Community (represented
by Dahomey, France, Madagascar and the Mali Federa¬
tion), Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, United Kingdom.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris
The tiny villages of Africa are as eager as larger towns to have schools. But
education authorities admit they are often helpless to do anything about it. Most
villages though are ready to build their school themselves. Below, village council
-

suited to the pupils' real needs. There are African publish¬
ers and textbooksat least in East Africabut books are
mostly Imported from Europe. Designed for children with
a completely different social and geographical back¬
ground, they present young Africans with an additional
problem: the mastering of texts which, though excellent
according to English or French pedagogic standards, are
not designed for African needs.
Accordingly, all African educationalists urge that, at
least for certain subjects, publishers should produce books
which take Into account the history and the national and
ethnic characteristics of each country. Some action
along these lines has already been taken, notably in
Ghana, Nigeria and Guinea.
Adapting textbooks for primary school children raises
another vitally Important question, the need for language
reform and unification. Today, all the nations of
Africa irrespective of size face this problem of the Babel
of tongues. There Is not a single country in tropical
Africa where the same language Is spoken by all the
inhabitants, for in each country the different peoples and
provinces all speak different languages. No African today
can hope to make himself understood by all his fellow-
countrymen when speaking his native tongue.
In some countries children starting school begin by
learning to read in an African language which is not
necessarily their mother tongue but which is the most
common in their district or province. This language
introduces them to the basic rules and teaches them that
signs on paper represent sounds, pictures and Ideas. In
other countries they learn to read and write In their own
language much later (and If they particularly wish to):
from the first year, reading is taught In French or,
elsewhere, in Spanish, English or Portuguese.
In any case, those who begin by spelling out stories and
poems in Asante-Twi, in Yoruba, in Ibo, in Lingala or in
Ki-Swahlll know that the real medium of Instruction will
be a European language and that unless they learn it,
they will only have at best four year's primary education.

Visiting new schools,
a startling experience
One of the most serious problems of African education
is the lag in secondary education. It is a rather dis¬
concerting experience to visit some secondary
schools in Africa. They range from venerable ones
like Mfantsipim on the Cape Coast or King's College in
Th« Unesco Courier. February 1961
Legos to the new and luxurious Queen's College at Yaba
(245 young ladies are given a finished education at a cost
of £60 a year to their parents and 11250 to the govern¬
ment). There are the modern schools of striking architec¬
ture such as the Gabré Marlam Secondary School of Addis
Ababa and the stark, almost industrial Institutions like
the excellent secondary school of Conakry.
Everything here Is "like In Manchester" or "like In Tou¬
louse", Just as on crossing one frontier, schools and their
appearance, the curriculum, the regulations and atmo¬
sphere the whole life of these schools recalls
Liège or Cadiz. The only difference Is that the pupils
are African. In exceptional cases as many as 30 or 40 per
cent of the teachers and administrators are African, but
usually the proportion Is closer to one per cent. Sec¬
ondary education In Africa depends In the main on the
foreigner. Civil servants, missionaries, representatives of
"voluntary agencies", and teachers, come from Europe,
America or Asia (In Ethiopia and on the East coast many
teachers from India are to be found).
Only one child in twenty
reaches secondary level
All this is to the goodand the work accomplished by
these institutions cannot be minimized. They have
helped Africa to take its place In International life
and It would hardly be an exaggeration to say that It Is
in the lycées, in the secondary and high schools that the
independence of the young African nations was born.
Today the whole educational system of the new States still
relies on these schools- and will do so for a long time to
come. Nevertheless, they are Inadequate; there arc too
few of them and, except In a few countries, their develop¬
ment would be extremely difficult.
A Unesco inquiry carried out In 22 countries of tropical
Africa has shown that In 17 of them the proportion of
secondary to primary school pupils Is less than 5 per cent
and in only four countries Is the proportion higher than
7 per cent. Yet even this does not mean that out of 100
pupils more than seven complete a secondary course and
can pass the examinations corresponding to the British
General Certificate of Education or the French baccalau¬
réat. There are approximately 5,000 Africans In Kenya
secondary schools against 580,000 In the primary schools,
yet of these, In 1959, only 605 boys and 49 girls obtained
the Cambridge Oversea School Certificate, which must be
followed by another two years' school before It is possible
to enter a university or technical college.
discussing such a project. About 17,000,000 children In Africa have no chance to go
to school. As Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia recently explained, one of the
reasons is that "more than 345,000 teachers" are lacking and must urgently be trained.
CONT'D ON PAGE 27

NEW SCHOOLS FOR AFRICA
(Cont'd from page 23)
The existing secondary schools would probably be
sufficient to train suitable candidates needed for higher
education. But It is a mistake to regard secondary
education merely as as preparatory stage for college and
to assume that only as many students are needed as can
be absorbed by the universities, medical schools and
technical institutes.
Secondary education must be conceived rather as a
type and level of education on Its own, even when It does
not necessarily lead to higher education. As African
leaders point out, it has an Important part to play in
raising the cultural level of a nation as well as in promot¬
ing economic, social and political development.
Secondary education Is a necessary qualification for
those who hold many posts In trade and the civil service
and in the rural development programmes which are so
vital to Africa today. The need Is growing everywhere
for administrative and technical senior officials, for
skilled and semi-skilled workers, but this need cannot be
met by the present rate of secondary school graduates.
Even more serious is the lag In technical education on
the secondary level. Ghana, for example, with more than
500,000 pupils at school In a population of five million,
has been unable thus far to set up and maintain a single
technical school. And this despite Its many other second¬
ary schools and shop training centres (like those of the
Cocoa Board), despite its 500 students at Accra Univers¬
ity and almost as many at the Kumasi School of Technol¬
ogy and despite its admirable school radio system.
It is not difficult to discover the reasons for these
shortcomings. Few people believed that Industrial deve¬
lopment would take place so rapidly In the Independent
African nations. Then too, It has always been easier to
find good foreign teachers In languages, mathematics,
Latin grammar and similar subjects than In mechanics,
foundry techniques or electricity, Industrial design or
applied science.
Machines arrive faster
than do the instructors
Today, the equipment, the machines and the
material are arriving much faster than the
teachers. Already in general secondary as well as
in .technical education, the lack of qualified teachers has
created an alarming situation. Teachers are needed by
the hundreds for science, mathematics, English, French
and, in such countries as Somalia, even Arabic. It is to
be hoped that all nations in a position to send teaching
staff abroad will heed the appeal for help that the
countries of Africa have made.
But in the long run, this help, however generous It may
be, will not be enough. So long as independent Africa
has to rely entirely, or just about, on outside aid, it will
not obtain the complete educational system It needs and
wants. At best this will only keep education at its
present level. Future bilateral or multilateral assistance
would best be devoted primarily to the training of African
secondary teachers for general and technical education.
In all of tropical Africa there was only one training
college for technical and vocational teachers as of
January 1961. As to teachers of literature and science,
they must come from the universities, which are only
now beginning to provide the graduates needed for Indus¬
try, hospitals, the big plantations and the civil service.
Of the thousand students at the Ibadan university, 600
are studying science, medicine and economics; of the
remaining 400 there are many who will not become
teachers.
This is only one example but it is typical of most of the
countries in Africa. It is therefore urgent that teacher
training be speeded up by every possible means if a very
serious crisis in secondary education, and in education at
all levels, is to be avoided.
There was full awareness of this situation when the
Ministers and Directors of Education of the countries of
Tropical Africa met In Addis Ababa last February. They
made an urgent appeal to Unesco for help In the creation
and operation of regional teacher training Institutions,
chiefly for secondary schools.
Unesco has answered this appeal. Its programme for
1961-1962 provides for the creation In Tropical Africa of
two regional centres which will train educators for future
teacher-training colleges and also to carry out educa¬
tional research.
Furthermore, through the United Nations Special Fund,
Unesco will be able to help In the development of second¬
ary education. For example, In Nigeria It Is proposed
to set up a federal teacher-training college for secondary
schoolteachers, with the fund contributing $800,000 and
the Nigerian Government $1,800,000.
Most people simply do not realize the scope of the
gigantic tasks confronting the countries of tropical
Africa. Many believe that once the basic essentials are
achieved everything In the garden will be rosythat
education will develop automatically and quickly with the
smoothness of a well-oiled machine. The truth is that
most of the countries of Africa are going to be at their
wit's end to provide teachers for the thousands of schools
that need to be built.
Girls will go to school
when Dad is convinced
Nor can It be said that the children currently at
school are really receiving adequate primary
Instruction. Attendance figures are somewhat
misleading. Out of a thousand pupils In a given town or
district, how many will actually complete their primary
schooling? How many will give up after two or three
years in the lower classes?
Even for those who do go on until graduation, the use¬
fulness of the education provided Is often placed In doubt.
This Is particularly the case for girls. Relatively few
girls go to school except In two or three countries, they
account for barely 30% of the attendance. This Is some¬
times due to cultural, religious or traditional obstacles, but
Is more often economic In origin. Parents see the mate¬
rial advantages which education can bring to a boy, who
can thus obtain well-paid and socially desirable Jobs; but
they have no such hope regarding their daughters, and
besides there Is useful work that they can be given to do
at an early age.
Worse still, some families tend to feel that they are
making a useless sacrifice In sending their daughters to
school. What Is the use, they say, of bookish knowledge
requiring four to six years of study at the age when young
African girls are preparing for marriage a few years off?
And what good will It do them later, they add, when they
do assume the tasks and responsibilities of womanhood?
If the education of girls Is to gain wide acceptance, parti¬
cularly In farm areas, It must first prove Its usefulness,
economically and socially. Once It Is felt that because
they have gone to school women are better housekeepers,
better mothers, and even more prosperous shopkeepers,
then and only then will we see girls as numerous as their
brothers In the classroom.
No better investment than
money spent on education
Independence In Africa has seen the new countries
buckle down to the problems of education without
delay. The governments are perfectly aware that edu¬
cation, In the present circumstances of their national life,
calls for the same effort and vigilance as social stability
and economic prosperity and they do not hesitate to say
so bluntly. It may be trite and hackneyed to say that the
future of each country depends on the education given
the younger generation, but In Africa today It is being
said with firm insistence. It would Indeed be a pity If
the states or organizations responsible for the aid offered
to these countries were to think of development only in
terms of Industry, equipment and finance and were to
overlook the fact that there is no better. investment than
expenditure on behalf of education.
27
