Ahundred years ago a poet who was one of the
world's great champions of freedom died in St.
Petersburg. This year, his centenary is being celebrated
not only in his own land, Ukraine, but throughout the
Soviet Union, and in many great cities of the world
including the American capital, Washington, where a
statue is to be raised in his commemoration. This man's
name is Taras Shevchenko, the Ukrainian poet and patriot
who not only established his country's literature high
among world letters, but who actually lived his poetry.
A torchbearer of liberty, his whole life mirrored the suf¬
ferings of his oppressed country and the unconquerable,
indomitable will of its people to freedom.
The vast territory of Ukraine with its population
of 40 million stretches from Poland and Czechoslo¬
vakia to the Black and Azov Seas, and is the second
largest nation within the U.S.S.R. Of it Voltaire wrote
"L'Ukraine a toujours aspiré à être Ubre", for Its his¬
tory Is one of endless Invasion and national effort to
throw off oppression. Its literature goes back to the
tenth century but at that time it mostly made use of an
artificial language based on the ceremonial Church Sla¬
vonic; only in 1789 (the year of the French Revolution)
did the Ukrainian writer Kotlyarevsky introduce the
spoken language in literature and so lay a foundation
for Shevchenko to elaborate on.
Taras Shevchenko was born in a village near the
banks of the Dnieper in 1814; he was born a serf, a
scrap of humanity without rights or privileges, belong¬
ing entirely to the local landlords. It is perhaps diffi¬
cult to imagine what harsh misery the enslaved poverty
of serfdom meant to the Ukrainian peasant at this time,
but the waves of change which had brought American
Independence and the French Revolution, which had
washed away the old autocratic orders in Europe and
North America, had rippled to stagnation before reach¬
ing the East.
In 1814 Ukraine was still a feudal land under Tsarist
tyranny. The fertile beauty of the countryside of Taras'
childhood stood in cruel contrast to the living conditions
of his people but both these aspects of the life around
him affectedl him deeply ; from one he learnt a passion¬
ate patriotism, a love of his country which was to
remain uniflmmed by exile or absence, and from the
other he.- learnt a hatred of tyranny, of oppression and
injustice: Which inspires his poetry with the divine fire
of llberttE...
O dear and quiet land
O my Ukraine
Why do they plunder thee?
Why has death come to hut and lea?...
... Break your chains and live as brothers.
In a foreign country
Do not seek and do not search for
What is non-existent...
In your home, you'll find your justice
And your strength and freedom...
The world has only one Ukraine
Dniepro cannot be found elsewhere...
As a boy Taras showed early a vivid Imagination and
a passion for drawing. When he was left an orphan at the
age of twelve, he sought a teacher and from a brutal drun¬
ken clerk did learn to read and write though this man's
harshness finally drove him elsewhere. He quickly
exhausted the meagre local sources of learning open to
him and after a disconsolate speU of village cattlemind-
ing, he was summoned to work as scuUion in the manorial
kitchens. From there he attended the young master,
Pavel Vasilyevitch' Engelhardt, who took him as part of
his retinue on his travels.
A new world opened up before Taras; he won-
deringly absorbed all he could of this unaccustomed gran¬
deur, and secretly studied the art treasures housed round
him. One night in the Engelhardt establishment at
Wilno, the master returned late to find Taras absorbed
in copying a print by candlelight. He had the boy flogged
next day for his temerity but was so impressed by the
quality of the copy that he decided to allow Taras to
study with the Wilno painter, Rustem, and later, on
moving to St. Petersburg, apprenticed Taras to the painter
Shirayev, a harsh and cruel master who turned his pupils
into drudges.
Taras had little leisure, but in the white nights of the
early summer he would go to the Summer Gardens of
St. Petersburg to sketch the ancient statues there for his
own pleasure. It is on such an occasion that he is said
to have met a fellow Ukrainian, Ivan Soshenko, who was
studying at the Imperial Academy of Arts. 53
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

POET OF A PEOPLE'S SUFFERING
Soshenko introduced Taras to his friends, to the Imper¬
ial Academy circle and the famous painter Bryulov, who
at once decided that Taras must study at the Academy
too. As a serf, Taras was ineligible to do this. Engel¬
hardt proved unwilling to part with his talented protégé
and finally only agreed to sell him his freedom for the
almost prohibitive price of 2,500 silver roubles.
To raise this sum, Taras' new friends rallied round;
Bryulov interested the celebrated poet Zhukhovsky who
commissioned a Bryulov portrait of himself and had it
auctioned by private lottery. On April 22, 1838 (a year
after the death of Pushkin) Engelhardt received his
2,500 roubles; Taras Shevchenko became a free man for
the first time in his Ufe.
From the grime of Shirayev's garret he was transported
to the enchanted halls of the Academy where his work won
him acclaim and whence he graduated honourably in
1845. He made many friends in the open-hearted
Bryulov circle, including the actor Shchepkin, and he
began thirstily to fill the gaps in his education, absorbing
all he could of literature and the arts, but underneath all
his sophisticated activities he could not forget Ukraine, the
sufferings of his people or the family he had left there
unable to share his freedom.
There arose in him a new passion, to express all his
homesickness and love for his country in Ukrainian verse.
Years later he wrote of this period spent in Bryulov's
studio in these words, "And what did I do in that holy
of holies? It is strange to think of it. I occupied myself
with writing Ukrainian verses ... I cherished In my
heart my blind Kobzar and my bloodthirsty Haydamaks
as In the shadows of the wild steppes I saw pass before
me the shades of our good hetmen.
"Before me stretched the steppe, studded with burial
mounds. Before me lay my fair, my unhappy Ukraine in
all Its chaste loveliness. And I mused, lost in thought;
I could not tear my inner eye from that enchanting
beauty. It was a vocation, that was all."
It was a vocation. In 1840 an enthusiastic Ukrainian
merchant found Shevchenko's verses while sitting for
his portrait in the artist's studio and immediately
published them at his own expense. Shevchenko called
the Uttle book Kobzar, after the name of the old Ukrai¬
nian wandering folkbards. Keeping to the traditional
folksong form and within the Romantic current of the
day, he idealizes the stern and bitter conflicts which the
Kozaks of old had waged for independence, glorifying the
Kobzars who alone had kept alive the memory of Ukraine's
heroic age.
Kóbzar marks an epoch and the beginning of a new
Ukrainian literature; it throws a bridge between its
ancient treasures, the later work of Kotlyarevsky, and
modern literature. For the first time a major poet emerges
to pour out his heart In his native tongue and express
the sufferings of his people and their past. And because
he lived so deeply in their thoughts and feeUngs, they
accepted his poems as their own songs and composed
music to them: today his works are in almost every
Ukrainian home and are sung throughout Russia.
But his poetry is more than just folksong; it has the
magic simplicity' and melody of pure verse. "Owls are
calling/ sleeps the forest/ stars are shining brightly . . ."
"Like the sea the field whitened/ by the driving snow-
flakes ..." Countless country images reflect the poet's
mastery of his art. Together 'with this evocative lyricism,
his poems are permeated with his innate humanism.
No one knew better than he the harshness of the
peasant way of life. In the theme for instance
of the village girl transgressing the moral code, he
poignantly and repeatedly makes a plea for compassion
and tolerance. In his long epic poem The Haytlamak,
which came out in 1841 and recalled the 1768 revolt of the
Ukrainians against their Polish overlords, he writes "Why
should people destroy each other? . . . Only see, they are
the same kind of people, they could live, they could be
friends."
In 1843 he gave way to his intolerable longing and
returned home to Ukraine; he was welcomed everywhere
as a national poet, portrait commissions flowed in, all
doors were open before him, but the terrible sufferings
he saw among the peasants on his travels throughout
the country brought about a sharp change in his work.
His idealization of the Kozak epoch gave place to stinging
Shevchenko knew from his own personal experience the
kind of harsh treatment meted out to political prisoners by
authorities determined to crush the spirit of freedom. He
wrote of it in his poems and depicted it in paintings like
those below taken from his series entitled "The Prodigal
Son", showing (left) punishment by the insertion of a
heavy stick into the mouth to prevent speaking, and
(right) the despair of prisoners chained together in a cell.

castigation of the enslavement, despotism and tyranny
he saw everywhere exercised on behalf of the Tsar
Nicholas I. He became openly rebellious to every institu¬
tion, whether religious or civil, which seemed to tolerate
such terror, cruelty and injustice as were suffered by the
Ukrainian serf. He began a series of poems which from a
literary standpoint are considered his most perfect. Poli¬
tically they were dynamite ; they could not possibly be
published in the Russia of that time and their circula¬
tion even in a private album which Shevchenko called
Three Years figured greatly in his arrest in 1847.
Among these poems, The Great Grave recounts in
mystical terms the immortal freedom-loving spirit; The
Dream, written in a form of fantastic satire, contains an
acid attack upon the Imperial family in which the poet
ridicules the Court and likens the Empress to a dried
mushroom; the whole poem is one of his bitterest attacks
against tyranny.
"The people's loud cries and their laughs are not
[heard . . .
They strip the patched clothing from off of the beggars
They strip with the hides for the poor must find shoes
For youthful young princes. They pummel the widow
To pay her poll taxes; they fetter her son
Her son, her one son, the only child that she has;
Her hope and they send him away to the army
But for a while yet in filth and in mud
The boy is soon bloated from hunger he dies,
His mother is reaping the wheat at forced labour . . ."
In another poem, The Caucasus, Shevchenko celebrates
the struggle of the mountain people for their freedom.
He sent this poem to Paris to the Polish revolutionary
and poet Adam Mickiewicz, a follower of Mazzlni, and
it shows his widening interest in the cause of freedom
not only In Ukraine but everywhere.
"And our human spirit dies not
And our freedom dies not . . .
It is for us to keep on weeping
With bloody sweat and bitter tear . . .
And mix each day with our daily bread
Truth will rise and so will freedom . . .
And meanwhile the streams are flowing
Streams of blood are flowing."
At about this time appears the poem The Feeble Minded
(Jorldyvyl) in which Shevchenko, a contemporary of
Abraham Lincoln, wrote
"When shall we receive our Washington, '
With a new and righteous law
And receive we will some day . . ."
In Kiev during this period he found sympathetic friends
among a group of young Pan-Slavic revolutionaries called
the Society of Saints Cyril and Methodius; their revolu¬
tionary ideals for peasant enlightenment and emancipa¬
tion encouraged him to write The Heretic, a poem hon¬
ouring the Czech reformer Jan Huss and glorifying him
not so much as a great scholar but as a representative
of the common people.
"Seer you caught the glimpse of freedom,
Freedom and of truth,
And the Slav wide-scattered family,
Sunk in dark and slavery,
You collected all together . . ."
The existence of this Society was betrayed to the
authorities In February 1847 and they acted swiftly and
savagely suppressed It. By AprU Shevchenko and his
friends were arrested and sent to St. Petersburg. In
prison there the poet produced a number of verses in
which he expressed his concern for the future of his
country and the fate of his people. His main indictments
were the "outrageous and to the highest degree insolent"
poems and the Three Years album confiscated at his
arrest.
On May 30 he was sentenced to serve as an ordinary
soldier in the bare Orenburg steppe, "a broad, unlocked
prison." On his sentence file papers Tsar Nicholas I wrote
in his own hand, "under the strictest supervision with
a prohibition of writing and sketching."
Shevchenko had been free for only nine years; now
he was back in a bondage more terrible than before,
torn away from Ukraine and condemned to live among
rough and brutalizing soldiery in the remotest area of
Eastern Russia. At first sympathetic officers allowed
him clandestinely to draw and write,
"Am I to live in this sad plight,
Still many years, forever wasting . . .
But I am looking, while my heart's flying,
To a dark garden in Ukraine . . ."
When the St. Petersburg authorities got to know of
this, the Tsar's instructions were carried out to the letter.
Shevchenko Was sent to a still wilder place, the fortress
of Novopetrovsk on the Caspian Sea. Of this place he
wrote, "Sand and stones; if only there were one blade of
grass, only a tree, but nothing." The endless drill, the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
From childhood Shevchenko showed a vivid imagination
and a passion for drawing. As a serf he was ineligible to
enter the Imperial Academy of Arts and was only able to
do so after friends had bought his freedom for 2,500 silver
roubles. Then the painter also began to fill in other gaps
in his education and became a poet and writer too. Below,
two of Shevchenko's works: left, an illustration for his
poem "The Prisoner"; right, the village girl, Katherine.
p-^äf5¡
55

TARAS SHEVCHENKO (Cont'd)
POWER AND PROTEST
absolute deprivation of any creative work or interests
wore him away. "There is nothing more bitter than to
recaU freedom in captivity", he wrote at this time, but
even though his health was affected, his spirit remained
unbroken and he was able to note in his diary, "all
this unspeakable grief, every kind of degradation and
harshness passed as if without touching me . . . Not
a single aspect of the inner me was changed."
He was to languish nearly seven years in Novopetrovsk
since, even after the death of Nicholas I, Imperial feelings
were still tender from the "dried mushroom" episode.
The new Tsar Alexander did not include Shevchenko in
his general amnesty, and not until two years more had
passed did friends finally secure his release, when he
returned to St. Petersburg to enjoy great moral and poli¬
tical prestige.
One of his first compositions after being freed was
The Neophytes, a daring comparison of the Tsar with
Nero, for Shevchenko had returned from exile with his
hatred of Tsarism equaUed only by his hatred of slavery
Taras Shevchenko's first
fame came as a painter,
especially for his por¬
traits (see self portrait
at left). But his fame
today rests with the poe¬
try in which he captured
the heart, soul and ¡mage
of his native Ukraine.
As early as I860, trans¬
lations of his poems
appeared in Poland, and only a little later Czech
and Bulgarian translations also appeared. In 1870,
Georg Obrist translated his poems into German
and six years later they were published in French.
By 1903 his works were translated into English. In
the past fifty years, Shevchenko's poems have been
translated 400 times into 41 languages, numbering
12,000,000 copies. In the poet's native language,
for Ukrainians around the world, his works have been
published 245 times in almost seven million copies.
56
for him these two evils were related and he never
counted the cost in fighting them.
No other European literature has a comparable protest
against serfdom and there is no other poet of genius
sprung from the serfs who has shown up the ugliness
of serfdom with such powerful effect as Shevchenko.
He contributed much to the abolition of serfdom by
influencing liberal public opinion which played a large
part in inducing Alexander to initiate liberal reforms.
He interested himself in etching at the Academy,
becoming an Academician in 1860, and achieving work
which caused other artists to call him .the "Russian
Rembrandt." A Negro actor, Aldridge, cam.s to the city
and played Othello there: Shevchenko had always been
deeply influenced by Shakespeare; he was much moved
by Aldridge's performance and the two men became
friends. And he continued to write, raising the flaming
banner of his verse in the same causes of justice and
liberty as before. Although he risked immediate retalia¬
tion, he did not hesitate to sign a statement defending
the civil rights of the Jews which where in question, and
he consorted openly with the leading radicals of the day,
King Lear and his Fool. Illustration by Shevchenko
for a Russian edition of Shakespeare's tragedy.
including Chernyshevsky who spoke up for a new edition
of Kobzar, which was allowed to be published in 1860 pro¬
vided none of the post-exile poems were included in it.
But despite his valiant spirit, Shevchenko returned
broken in body and weary from his exile. Personal
unhappiness and loneliness weighed heavily upon him
and his last poems, including Mary in which he deliber¬
ately changes the sacred story to that of an ordinary
peasant woman, have more austere, often Biblical,
sources; they carry a message emphasizing mankind's
need for truth and love and brotherhood.
Against the day of peasant emancipation he wrote a
primer for use in schools, but his very last poem is a
swansong and a testament of faith that he will in another
world	 "on Phlegethon, or on the Styx in heaven, or
on Dniepro, that mighty river . . ." find a happiness which
this Ufe denied him and which, towards the end, he most
patheticaUy sought.
He died on March 10, 1861, and was buried as he had
asked
"in a lofty tomb
out upon the steppes unbounded
in my own dear Ukraine;
so that I can see before me
the wide stretching meadows
and Dniepro, its banks so lofty,
and can hear it roaring . . ."
His grave lies near the small town of Kanev where
in 1939 a memorial was raised to him which has been
called "an object of special reverence among his country¬
men, the Mecca of all Ukrainian patriots." So it is,
but this poet of Ukraine, who took his language as it had
been developed, and by the power of his genius ensconced
it in modern literature, this apostle of liberty, enemy of
all oppression, Taras Shevchenko, goes beyond the narrow
limits of one country. He is a poet of humanity; his
message of brotherhood and love, truth and justice, and
above all, of freedom, is worldwide in scope, universal in
significance. Other poets have sung his song, other poets
are perhaps better known, but none by the pure identifi¬
cation of his life with his inspiration deserves greater
homage or recognition.
