FLOATING LABORATORIES
ON THE NILE
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt, Curator of the Egyptian Antiquities
Department at the Louvre Museum, Paris, is Unesco Consultant to
the Egyptian Documentation Centre set up by the UAR In Cairo.
F;
26
the beginning of 1955, the normally all
but deserted banks of the Nubian Nile
suddenly quickened with life. Archaeologists arrived and
commenced operations. Teams from the Documentation
Centre on Ancient Egypt in Cairo worked unremittingly
from dawn to dusk, winter and summer alike, oblivious to
their isolated surroundings.
For the past fifteen years or so, Egyptological studies
had been at a standstill in the region above the First
Cataract of the Nile, stretching as far as the Second
Cataract close to the Sudanese frontier. It seemed as
if no excavation or archaeological survey had the power
to lure the successors of Champollion. Only a sparse
handful of archaeological missions were at work, either
in the Sudan to the south of the area threatened by the
High Aswan Dam or in the north of Aswan in that land
so richly strewn with temples.
The launching of Unesco's appeal brought a sudden
change in the scene of operations. Investigators working
in accessible sites wound up their studies, packed their
equipment and, spurred by a sense of duty, feelings of
loyalty to a common cause or an urge to equal or excel
their fellow archaeologists, set off for parched and mys¬
terious Nubia. From now on they were initiating them¬
selves into the archaeological story of Nubia which,
though often seeming to be a distorted image of the
Egyptian parent state, had also many lessons to teach
them.
Those who today follow the course of the Nubian Nile
are no longer likely to have the same feeling of solitude
which, even a few years ago, was a common experience
for anyone returning to the camp of the Documentation
Centre where Egyptians and Europeans, latter-day
pioneers In a modern adventure, together built the
foundations of a new collaboration in Egyptology.
Nowadays it is hardly possible to travel 15 to 20 miles
without finding a boat moored to the bank. Passengers
in the regular weekly mailboat which serves this distant
land are always surprised and fascinated by these floating
camps, which also excite the curiosity of tourists who,
thanks to the international appeal for the safeguarding
of Nubia's monuments, are now rediscovering the great
forgotten sanctuaries.
E1 ach boat encountered is practically certain to
i be the floating home of an archaeological
expedition: Spanish, Italian (from Milan or Rome);
Austrian, Yugoslav, American (from Chicago, Yale or
Pennsylvania) ; Polish, Swiss, German, Dutch, Czecho¬
slovak, Belgian, English (from Oxford, Cambridge or Lon¬
don), French (from Paris, Cairo, Lyons or Strasbourg).
Others again have been chartered by fact-collecting
missions Russian, Japanese, Indian and others.
The teams from the Documentation Centre are thus no
longer working alone in Nubia. Many other investigators
have brought unaccustomed animation to the sun-parched
river banks. Today too the activities of the Centre
have been redoubled. Though it has entrusted the
Oriental Institute of Chicago and the French Institute
of Oriental Archaeology in Cairo with the completion in
extenso of the final surveys of the temples of Beit el
Wadi and Wadi es Sebua, it has itself shouldered the
immense task of surveying, down to the smallest detail,
all the other sanctuaries of Nubia.
During the first meeting of the Consultative Committee
of Experts set up by the Government of the United Arab
Republic, the Egyptologist members spontaneously under¬
took to follow a set of rules designed for the common good.
The system used by the foreign missions for recording
information about the various monuments is based on the
techniques developed and perfected by the Cairo Centre
and follows the demands of Egyptological fact-finding.
The Documentation Centre which is, in fact, the na¬
tional archives of Egyptian archaeology, is to receive a
copy of all the monument surveys completed by foreign
missions, the missions naturally retaining the publica¬
tion rights for these reports for a pre-determined period.
The Centre, however, is making itself responsible for
nearly all the surveys. It has already boosted its activities
tenfold thanks to the construction of a magnificent
floating-laboratory in which it is possible to go on working
in the hottest weather (summer temperatures sometimes
reach 140 degrees Fahrenheit) and which also solves the
water problem. Heavily impregnated with silt in summer,
the water must be constantly filtered and cooled for all
purposes including photographic development.
D| uRiNG every season nowadays there are always
several of the Centre's missions operating
from fully equipped vessels. Egypt's technical and scien¬
tific teams, well versed in this specialized and delicate
work of collaboration, also are receiving help on an
appreciable scale from other countries. Unesco continues
to provide an adviser and several specialists. At this
phase of the campaign foreign assistance comes indivi¬
dually from countries responding to the appeal. They
have sent specialists in philology and archaeology and
also technicians, and have provided the funds to maintain
them.
The results of all the surveys are centralized at the
Documentation Centre and following the 1961 summer
missions a satisfying volume of work has been achieved.
Surveys on the temples of Abu Simbel are virtually com¬
pleted as are those on the small temples of Abu Oda and
Jebel Shams. The list of other surveying results is im¬
pressive: the tomb-chapel of Pennut at Aniba, the Amada
temple, part of the Dakka temple and the rock-hewn
chapel at Ellesya, part of the Wadi es Sebua temple and
the temple of Gerf Hussein; the immense cliff of Ka¬
labsha with its adjoining chapels, the Beit el Wali temple,
the Taffeh chapels and those of Kertassi (not forgetting
the astonishing Kertassi quarries) and finally the Debod
monument.
At the gateway to Egyptian Nubia, the island marvel
that is Philae, with all its sanctuaries, has not yet been
completely surveyed. Long before the Aswan High Dam
created a threat to the island a French mission and then
a German one had begun to publish the results of their
surveys. But these results were minute in comparison
with all that remains to be done.
Now, at any rate, the work of systematically examining
the island, is under way. Last year two French epigra¬
phers sent by the French National Council of Scientific
Research, joined their Egyptian colleagues in making as
complete an inventory as possible of the Greek epigraphs
on the Sacred Island.
At the same time a mission from the French National
Geographic Institute, including five photogrammetry
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

.^T*-**1 » -¿.-No*. - v », ,.-. r?^^.-
:Äf
Paul Almasy
Unesco-Van der Haagen
WADI ES SEBUA (below) one of the most beautiful of Nubian temples, was built by Rameses II more
than 3,200 years ago. Its graceful row of sphinxes lead to the shore of the ,Nlle. Like many other tem¬
ples in the Nubian valley it is threatened by the waters which will rise 200 feet after the completion of the
Aswan Dam. Above, a colossal head of Rameses II found in the interior court of the temple of Gerf Hussein.
27

TEMPLES IN BOXES
EXOTIC SCULPTURED capital from
the Kertassi Chapel is made ready for
crating and shipment. Below, temple at
Debod in process of being dismantled.
NUBIA'S SANCTUARIES are being
crated up all along the Niîe. Above,
a block the from Kertassi temple is
numbered and boxed for shipment.
FLOATING LABORATORIES (Cont'd)
RACE AGAINST
THE RISING WATERS
28
specialists worked alongside the team of the Docu¬
mentation Centre and an Egyptian photogrammetry tech¬
nician, to make a complete record (architectural mea¬
surements and photographs) of all the monuments on
the Island and of the Island Itself.
Working In the oppressive summer heat, they continued
their task in the temples which are only freed by the
Nile waters during this season. They finished making
surveys of the sanctuaries of Debod, Taffeh North and the
small kiosk of Kertassi only a few days before these
monuments were dismantled for removal. This would
have been the last year in which these sanctuaries would
have appeared above the waters.
They went on to make surveys of all the quarries
at Kertassi, and of Belt el Wall; they completed the work
at Kalabsha, begun two years earlier, and continued
operations at the temple of Dendur, at Gerf Hussein
and at Dakka.
They even made full surveys of the Byzantine citadel at
Sabagura which had only been brought to light a few
weeks earlier. Classical epigraphers carried out research
and verification work, made impressions, photographed
and copied all the Greek inscriptions in the Kertassi
quarries and on the temple of Dakka.
In this race against time the work has called for perfect
precision and has raised multiple problems. It has
demanded from all those engaged upon it a rigorous sense
of accuracy, great physical resistance and, above all, an
attitude of complete unselfishness the ability to sink
all personal interests in a task for the common good.
Altogether it has been an extraordinary example of Inter¬
national collaboration producing unhoped for results.
Some of Nubia's sanctuaries can only be pre¬
served in the hallowed sites chosen for them by
priests and deities for they fit so perfectly into their
surroundings that It would be difficult to imagine them in
any other lieu. But there are others, less famous or whose
meaning is not so closely associated with their settings,
and these can be moved and preserved for posterity.
In contrast to the two major monuments of Philae and
Abu Simbel there are other temples which must be
uprooted and taken away if they are not to be lost for
ever. Some are hewn from the solid rock and their trans¬
fer raises multiple problems, some of which have already
been resolved. Others are built on the banks of the Nile
and can most likely be removed piece by piece along with
their foundations.
Yet even this operation is not as simple as it sounds,
particularly when a building is made up of regular stone
blocks coated with plaster. The plaster, moulded on the
outlines of the ornamental reliefs, is itself covered with
paintings which do not correspond in size or form with
the surfaces beneath them.
It is thus impossible to remove the stones one by one
without destroying an essential decorative element or at
the very least seriously damaging something that has-
come down to us, despite religious feuds, wars or neglect,
through thousands of years. A case in point is the

*a^_
> '** V tllf"":1í3¿^
MASSIVE STONES from
Debod temple are moved by
cranes and manpower (above).
Both Debod and Taffeh tem¬
ples have found a temporary
home on Elephantine Island,
opposite Aswan, where they
have been boxed and stored
(right) awaiting eventual re¬
construction at another site.
Unesco Van dor Haagen
charming temple of Amada. To plan the safety of this
rare treasure France recently set up a special mission
supervised by an Inspector General of Historic Monuments.
Another country, the Federal Republic of Germany, has
decided to carry out the complete removal of the great
Graeco-Roman temple of Kalabsha an ambitious
operation likely to pose many problems. Kalabsha, like
other temples dating from the Graeco-Roman period in
Nubia, is built close to the river bank and for the past
50 years or so it has been swallowed up for nine months
out of every 12 by the waters of the Nile. The fact that
its paintings have not survived the annual immersion has
at least disposed of one of the dismantling problems.
It was to monuments of this type that the Antiquities
Service of the United Arab Republic turned its attention
when it discovered that two small Graeco-Roman temples
situated near the spot height 100 metres above sea level
would be freed by the waters for only a few days during
the next two or three summers. They had to be saved
while they were still accessible.
Without waiting for a foreign mission to embark on the
rescue of these sites, the Antiquities Service, helped by
the Documentation Centre and several Polish, Belgian and
French specialists, undertook to dismantle the Debod
temple and to uncover in a basin at the Kalabsha channel
the remains of the Taffeh North chapel which had long
since collapsed and was hidden under the mud of the Nile.
Between July and September 1960 the teams hastily sur¬
veyed and collected information at these two sanctuaries,
while specialists numbered the blocks of stone, traced
their positions on reconstruction plans, packed every
painted or inscribed stone in cases, established index cards
for each piece and then took away all this material.
In many cases the cement used in the restoration work
dating from earlier this century and supervised by Gaston
Maspero, the then Director of the Egyptian Antiquities
Service, which held the blocks together during their
annual immersion, was found to be more solid than the
rocks. This made dismantling even more delicate.
Working all day under the pitiless sun in the stifling,
airless desert atmosphere, harassed by the knowledge that
the waters would soon rise again and forced to live In
overcrowded conditions on their boats, the teams never¬
theless finished their task in time and brought to Ele¬
phantine Island the cargos of stones in their wooden cases.
These temples of Debod and Taffeh have been design¬
ated by the Government of the United Arab Republic as
gifts for countries which contribute actively to the work
of saving Nubia's monuments. They are not to be recon¬
structed in Egypt. Instead their stones together with all
the scientific and technical documentation concerning
them will be handed over to new guardians.
In addition, the Ministry of Culture decided to dis¬
mantle and carry away the Kertassi chapel, taking advan¬
tage of the equipment that had been brought to Nubia
for the original removal operations (boats, scaffolding,
etc.) and of the presence of specialists used to handling
large blocks of masonry.
This operation was completed in September 1960, but
before any of the walls and colonnades were dismantled
teams of photogrammetric specialists made complete
recordings of the chapel. Kertassi is now carefully stored,
stone by stone, in packing cases. It will be raised again
not far from its original site on a cliff on the west Nubian
bank, overlooking the great lake.
All that can now be seen on the former sites of these
three sanctuaries are traces of their foundations and
beneath these the remains of earlier temples.
It is now the turn of the diggers. The recording, inch
by inch, of these buildings ls to be followed by studies
and searches on and under the ground.
Thus a new archaeological phase is due to begin.
Fresh facts in the story of the great religious edifices
of the Egyptians kings in Nubia are about to be revealed.
And whether or not the archaeological prize Includes gold
and precious stones does not really matter. Those who
search are pledged to rescue priceless artistic treasures 29
from oblivion and to bring to light the buried pages of
history.
