reasures from
the Parthenon
For twenty-four centuries the Parthenon has reflected the
glory of ancient Greece in her Golden Age of artistic achieve¬
ment. Conceived and constructed by Pericles and the
sculptor Phidias in the 5th century B.C., it was completed in
only 15 years in a frenzy of creative activity involving hundreds
of architects, sculptors and artisans. Today, although it
is partially destroyed and bereft of almost all its sculptures,
the purity of its lines and its harmonious proportions still
bear witness to its former splendour. The world's great
museums now house statuary, the bas reliefs and friezes
with which it was once richly ornamented. Many of these
sculptures have been photographed by F.L. Kenett and
gathered into a handsome album entitled "Classical Greece:
The Sculpture of the Parthenon" (1). Few of the pieces of
sculpture are undamaged, but even in their present state they
provide an imposing array of Greek plastic art at its finest.
On the following pages The Unesco Courier presents a few
of the Parthenon's former treasures, which are reproduced
from this album with the kind permission of the publishers.
(I ) Published in I 960 by Oldbourne Book Co., Ltd., I 28 Fleet St.. London, E. C. 4 and, under
the title, Clástica! Greece : The ESgin Martlet cf the Parthenon, by the New York Graphic
Society, Greenwich, Conn., U.S.A. Text by Nicholas Yalouris, all photos F.L. Kenett.
Philips Lumière, Paris
27

28
demeter and
persephone
Next to Dionysius are the seated
figures of Demeter, goddess of earth,
and her daughter Persephone who
reigned over the underworld, (left),
both carved out of the same block of
marble. Although they faced outward
In their original setting, in this rear
view one can see the painstaking
detail in flowing robes, arms and
cushions which no one but birds was
intended to see. Phidias is believed
to be the sculptor responsible for
some of the statues on these pages.

east pediment
iris
The goddess Iris (right) approaches the seated
Demeter and Persephone, one of whom turns
toward her. The central section of the pediment
exists no more. It was destroyed along with
the central figure of Zeus enthroned (not
shown in the drawing above) during the time
when the Parthenon became a church in the
early Christian era. Other figures which appear
on the far right of the drawing are now in the
British museum. Of the west pediment, nothing
now remains except fragments of statuary.
All photos © by F.L. Kenett. Published I960, by
Oldbourne Book Co., Ltd., London and New York
Graphic Society, Greenwich, Conn.. U.S.A.
centaur
and laplth
The metopes, or bas reliefs,
like the one at left, originally
surrounded the entire Parthe¬
non in five foot square blocks
fitted between the capitals of
the outer doric columns. Only
about a dozen of these still exist,
all depicting battles between
centaurs and men of Lapith.
Most of them are attributed to
the school of Krites or Myron,
but a few like the example shown
here have such fluid lines they
are believed by some authorities
to be the work of Phidias himself.
29

TREASURES OF THE PARTHENON (Cont'd)
a heifer lowin at the skies
30
When Keats saw this section of the Parthenon frieze in
London, he was moved to write, in his Ode on a Grecian
Urn, "To what green altar, O mysterious priest/ Lead'st thou
that heifer lowing at the skies/ And all her silken flanks with
garlands drest ?" The scene, depicting two Athenian citizens
leading a heifer destined for sacrifice, is one section of more
than 400 feet of the Parthenon frieze still in existence, most
of it In the British Museum. The frieze.which originally was
five hundred feet in length circled the inner wall of the
Parthenon above the capitals of the second row of columns.
It depicts a long procession of warriors, charioteers, bearers
of food and wine, virgins, citizens and mythological figures.
The frieze contained more than three hundred human
figures, and many animals. Although it was done by many
different sculptors, it retains a harmony of line, movement
and detail, and is unique because of its single theme.
