WILD LIFE AS A WORLD ASSET
On this and the following page we present excerpts culled from the
forthcoming Unesco book on East African wild life by Sir Julian Huxley
T HE European in Africa often starts not
unnaturally from the assumption that
African soils and African habitats can
stand up to the same kind of treatment that
has led to successful agriculture and stock-
raising in his homeland. The error of such
assumptions was disastrously illustrated by the
failure of the notorious groundnut scheme in
Tanganyika. Similar assumptions hare led to
the temporary or permanent ruination of
large habitats elsewhere in many drier parts
of South Africa, in the shortgrass prairies of
North America, in the once-fertile lands
of North Africa, in the Western Highlands of
Scotland.
11 UCH the same is true of the tropical rain-
forest. The European sees the astonishing
bulk of vegetation growing in it, and
jumps to the conclusion that the forest soils
must be very rich. This, however, is unfounded.
The trees are rooted in something more like a
sponge than what we think of as good soil.
When its vegetation cover is removed, and it is
put under cultivation, it rapidly deteriorates;
and the process is virtually irreversible.
N South Africa there has been a remarkable
change in the attitude to wild life. In the
early days, almost every farmer, Boer or
Briton, habitually killed wild game for meat
and hides, or less usually for sport. Now that
almost all large wild animals have been exter¬
minated in the farming areas, the process is
being reversed. Various National Parks autho¬
rities, provincial governments and even muni¬
cipalities are managing Nature Reserves partly
as game-farms, to build up stocks of game.
Some of the stock may be converted into meat
for the local market, but most of it (which
includes Bles-bok, Springbok, Impala and
Zebra) is sold to farmers and transported "on
the hoof" to the farms, sometimes up to
1,000 miles distant. The wild species breed
on the farms, and the surplus animals are
cropped for their meat and hides. The value
of the products from the wild animals may
equal that obtained from the domestic stock,
and in any case constitutes an important
addition to the farmer's livelihood. This me¬
thod of utilizing the productivity of wild ani¬
mals is now being practised on a large and
increasing scale.
Qi/e/ea quelea provides an example of human
interference with the habitat resulting in
an indigenous species becoming a pest.
This species of colonial-nesting Weaverbird is
widespread and abundant in inter-tropical
Africa. It originally fed on the seeds of wild
grasses; but wherever extensive cultivation has
taken place, and especially where monoculture
of crops like millet and rice is practised, it has
multiplied excessively and is now often a serious
pest. One colony near Birchenough Bridge in
Southern Rhodesia is estimated to contain
11 million individuals. This exceeds even
Tokyo and New York, and must be the largest
single community of any higher animal in
existence. Shooting, poison, even flame¬
throwers, are being employed against Queleas,
but no satisfactory method of control has yet
been discovered.
11 OST tribal Africans regard wild animals
either as a pest to be destroyed or simply
as meat on the hoof to be killed and
eaten. This latter point of view is semantically
fostered by the fact that in Swahili, as in
several other African languages, the same word
Uyama in Swahili does duty both for wild
animals and meat; and it is physiologically
encouraged by the shortage of animal protein
in the area and the prevalent meat-hunger of
its African inhabitants.
A"\ NCE local Africans understand that orga-
^^ nized game-cropping can provide them
with more and probably cheaper meat
than organized poaching, and that illicit indi¬
vidual shooting is killing the goose that lays
the golden eggs, they will begin to see wild life,
and all the measures designed to conserve it,
in a very different light.
I N some areas, wild game is not merely shot to
provide meat, but hunted by Africans as a
sport. This is natural enough and experience
in many lands (e.g. with fowlers in Great Britain
and deer-hunters in the U.S.A.) show that,
with goodwill and understanding, widespread
hunting and shooting can be enjoyed without
detriment to wild life, indeed with advantage
to it, when reserves are established for the
express purpose of conserving the numbers of
game animals and birds for the hunter.
p DUCATED and politically-minded Africans
tend to have rather different attitudes.
Some of them regard National Parks and
Controlled Shooting Areas as relics of white
"colonialism'", or merely as places for white men
to indulge their peculiar habit of enjoying the
sight or the pursuit of wild animals; and accor¬
dingly to be abolished or at any rate not encou¬
raged. Others retort in ways like, this: "You
white men have killed all your wolves and
bears: why do you want us Africans to preserve
our lions and elephants?" This type of argu¬
ment often accompanies a more deep-seated
attitude the feeling that emergent Africa must
at all costs become "modern", and that large
wild animals in a country are the reverse of
modern, and indeed o badge of primitmsm.
\A/ ILD life is today a Cinderella: the gloo-
' * ~ mier prophets wonder if Cinderella may
not come to be regarded as an unne¬
cessary nuisance, and simply liquidated.
n ESPONSIBLE African opinion is becoming
' ^* aware of the political and prestige value
of wild life. In the modern world, as
Africa is beginning to realize, a country without
a National Park can hardly be regarded as
civilized. And for an African territory to abo¬
lish National Parks already set up or to destroy
its existing wild life resource would shock the
world and incur the reproach of barbarism and
ignorance.
I N the past, the cause of wild life conservation
' has been fighting, and usually losing, a
series of rearguard actions against economic
and social pressures and general human
thoughtlessness and blindness. It is certainly
encouraging to see it stepping into the centre
of the political stage in Africa and demanding
attention. But conservation must become a
central feature of policy. The emergent Afri¬
can nations must come to learn the harsh lesson
that without proper conservation of soil and
water and natural vegetation their lands vrili
become unprofitable and useless, and also the
hopeful lesson of the positive values of their
natural resources, including wild life and natural
beauty.
T HE first thing needed is to make Africans
' at all levels aware of the wild life that
they possess. The interest is there, only
waiting to be aroused. In Uganda, visits of
students and townsmen and chiefs to the Na¬
tional Parks have been organized by the autho¬
rities, with encouraging results. Most of them ,3
have never seen any large wild animals and
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WILD LIFE AS A WORLD ASSET (Cont'd)
AFRICANS CAN BE PROUD OF THEIR HERITAGE
they are deeply interested and excited when
they do so. "These are our wonder animals
our elephants, our lions, our zebra, our ante¬
lopes. We must protect them and help other
Africans to enjoy the sight of them" that, I
was told, is the usual type of reaction.
I N Britain, a Conservation Corps of young
' volunteers has been organized under the aegis
of the Council for Nature. Its members take
part in schemes for improving Nature Reserves
and similar areas. If something of the sort
could be organized to harness the enthusiasm
of young Africans, it could be of great ser¬
vice. Such schemes could be affiliated to the
International Youth Federation for Nature
Conservation.
T HE African Crocodile is a freshwater verte-
' brate of considerable economic importance.
Long regarded only as a pest, its skin has
recently provided the basis for a valuable trade.
However, unregulated and illegal shooting has
virtually exterminated the species in some
areas, and seriously reduced its numbers and
its size in many others. The African crocodile
is clearly a valuable natural resource deserving
of scientific management, whose cropping must
be carefully regulated.
N 1934 C.R.S. Pitman estimated the total
Lechwe Antelope population of the Kafue
River Flats at a quarter of a million: today it
is less than 30,000. Their numbers could
readily be raised to at least 100,000 by proper
management; 20,000 Lechwe a year could prob¬
ably be safely cropped, and would yield
2,000 tons of meat or more.
T HE Lechwe Antelope is easily hunted and
' killed by African spearmen and their dogs.
In comparatively recent years, the local
Africans organized large-scale hunts or chilas,
described as "Lechwe blood-baths" in which
men, women and dogs drove large herds into
the water and speared thousands at a time.
The large majority of those killed were females,
most of them gravid. This cruel slaughter was
also wasteful, as it rapidly reduced the total
Lechwe population. If it were replaced by a
carefully organized cropping system, selected
local tribesmen could presumably still partici¬
pate in the operation.
I T will be difficult to get Africans to abandon
their traditional practices, even when these
are flagrantly inimical to good land use and
*e their own prosperity, but it can be done. Some¬
thing has already been accomplished in per¬
suading pastoralists to limit their stocks and
sell their surplus beasts; and the new agricul¬
tural revolution in the Kenya Highlands, which
has produced an array of prosperous individ¬
ually-owned African farms and smallholdings,
has been an outstanding success. It has also
had the rather unexpected result of alerting
this new class of African farm-owners to
the dangers of over-population. However, in
Africa as elsewhere, men must be brought to
have respect for land theirs and their coun¬
try's; and the importance of right land use for
the prosperity and indeed the economic and
social viability of African territories must be
urgently impressed on public opinion, both Euro¬
pean and African.
I N Uganda, there are now about 5,000 visitors
' to the National Parks each year, and it has
been estimated that they bring in a revenue
of about £300,000 gross from expenditure on
Park fees, transport, and curios (to which I
would add a considerable sum for expenditure
on photographic, camping and other equip¬
ment).
I N Kenya, tourism already provides the second
* largest source of revenue some £8 million
a year. Not only does Kenya possess its
own famous National Parks and Reserves but
it has always been the headquarters of East
African tourism in general, and Nairobi the
main centre where the tourist outfits himself
for game-viewing and other tours, in Ken
itself and also in Uganda and Tanganyika.
Q OME people dislike the idea of making a
** profit out of rich men's desire to kill ani¬
mals for sport. However, in East Africa
as in almost all African territories, there are
strict bag limits, and most of those who go on
safari to shoot are sportsmen who, though they
enjoy the excitement of hunting big game in
wild surroundings, are genuinely anxious to
conserve it. Furthermore, an increasing number
go on safari in order to take photographs and
to embark on adventure in the African bush,
far from crowds and civilization.
HE shooting of a limited number of wild
' animals for sport is essentially another
form of game-cropping, and equally legiti¬
mate as a mean of utilizing and conserving
the country's wild habitats and wild life
resources. However, safaris should always be
subsidiary to National Parks in a territory's wild
life policy.
Il OUNTAINEERING is another pursuit which
'" could expand spectacularly in East Africa
during the rest of this century. As the
Alps and the Rockies become increasingly
crowded, we may expect that more and more
mountaineers will want to attack noble peaks
like Mount Kenya, Mount Mikesco and those of
the great Newenzori range. Kilimanjaro is not
a mountaineers' mountain, but its vast height
and portentous crater will always tempt
climbers; and volcanic peaks overtopping
13,000 feet, like Meru and Elgon, Karissimbi
and Muhavura, not to mention lower volcanoes
like Suswa, Longonot, and Oldongo Lengai, will
attract an increasing number of adventurous
mountain-walkers.
T HE Victoria Falls are one of the natural
wonders of the world, already enjoyed by
thousands of visitors. Beautiful lakes like
Bunyoni with its fringe of blue water-lilies in
the cool green uplands of western Uganda
could be made into excellent tourist centres.
Proper development of access and accommo¬
dation could bring in a greatly increased
number of visitors, not only to the foothill
regions of eastern Africa, but also to the lovely
cool uplands like those of Inyanga in eastern
Southern Rhodesia, of the Aberdares in Kenya,
or of the Nyika Plateau in Nyasaland.
T HE total revenue from tourism in the four
' territories of East Africa together is today
well over £10 million. I would prophesy
that this could certainly be increased fivefold,
and quite probably tenfold, within the present
decade. So long as western prosperity con¬
tinues, with Western populations (and their
revenues) increasing and Western industriali¬
zation being intensified, it is safe to forecast
that more and more people will want to escape
further and further from it and its concomi¬
tants, in. the shape of over-large or over¬
crowded cities, urban sprawl, noise, smog, boring
routine, deprivation of contact with nature, and
general over-mechanization of existence.
T HERE must be hundreds of thousands of
' people in the world who, though they may
not be able to travel to see African wild
life in nature, are yet deeply concerned over
its future, or whose concern could readily be
aroused. The Fauna Society's appeal for "Ope¬
ration Noah1" to save the wild life of Kariba
from destruction met with an immediate and
generous response. I believe that a well-
planned international appeal for a continuing
campaign to save the world's wild life from
destruction and to establish an array of Natio¬
nal Parks and other areas devoted to the pro¬
tection of nature as a kind of world-wide
Green Belt for our over-mechanized civilization
would meet with an equally immediate and
generous response.

HEY TAXI! Once a formidable ex¬
pedition, a trip to Kenya's Nairobi
Royal National Park can now be
made in 20 minutes by taxi from
the capital. Covered with' open
plains and tree savannah, the park
is one of the most famous places
in Africa to see wild life. In 1958,
110,000 people visited the plains.
© Almasy, Paris
Í ./ *QF:
