KALINGA PRIZE
A SCIENCE
REPORTER
SPEAKS OF
'BABELOLOGY'
46
by Ritchie Caflder
On June 20 during an impressive ceremony
in Unesco House, Paris, Ritchie Calder, the
British science writer, became the ninth winner
of the annual international Kalinga Prize for
the Popularization of Science. At this cere¬
mony, Ritchie Calder was told by Mr René
Maheu, Acting Director-General of Unesco:
"You . have the gift of describing the most
intricate scientific problems in a way that
appeals both to the reason and feelings of the
public and arouses curiosity and surprise."
Some of Ritchie Calder's books, said Mr Maheu,
had been translated into 12 languages and dealt
with every aspect of scientific research from
tropical medicine to the hydrology of arid zones
and the biology of the Far North. His reports
had appeared in over 1,000 newspapers in
some 40 countries. The Kalinga Prize, donated
by Mr B. Patnaik, of the Orissa Legislative
Assembly, India, offers, recognition to
leading interpreters of science whose works
have shed light on the social implications of
scientific progress. The winner is chosen by an
international jury of scientists and editors of
popular science journals appointed by Unesco.
Previous winners include: Louis de Broglie:
(France), Julian Huxley (United Kingdom),
Waldemar Kaemppfert (United States), Au¬
gusto Pi-Suner (Venezuela), George Gamow
(United States), Bertrand Russell (United King¬
dom), Karl von Frisch (Germany and Austria)
and Jean Rostand (France). Traveller, writer,
journalist, film-maker and lecturer, Ritchie
Calder was science editor of the "Hews Chro¬
nicle" in London, 1945 to 1956, and of "The New
Statesman and Nation" from 1945 to 1958.
Aged 54, he is now Professor of International
Relations at Edinburgh University. His books
on scientific subjects include "Men Against
the Desert", "Men Against the Jungle",
"Science Makes Sense" and "Profile of
Science". His latest work, "The Inheritors",
tells the story of man and the world he made.
Many of his articles have appeared in The
Unesco Courier. On these pages, we publish
salient passages from Ritchie Calder's address
at the Kalinga Prize ceremony.
I regard myself as a reporter, re¬
cently translated to academic life
but claiming none of the academic distinction of the
eminent scientists whose names emblazon the roU of the
KaUnga Prizewinners. Rather do I count myself in the
succession of my late friend Waldemar Kaemppfert, the
third (recipient of the award. As science-editor of the
New York Times, he was the doyen of our craft, who
set the standards of integrity and lucidity which I have
tried to follow and who faithfuUy respected the interna¬
tional character of science, and who beUeved as I do that
the mere explanation of science is not enough; its
meaning has to be translated into the Uves of ordinary
people.
I have long since given up apologizing for the fact I had
no formal scientific education or training. If someone
with- an education as limited as my own could, in time,
understand the mysteries of science, so with patience and
the use of the cûmmon-tongue, laymen the world all over
can have the veils of science lifted. There have to be in¬
terpreters. They may be academic scientists, of whom
notable examples are to be found among the Kalinga
Prizewinners; or they may be scientists who, with a fuU
training and with degrees, turn to professional science-
writing as a career; or they may be trained journalists,
who, like myself, discover an interest in science, and learn
to explain it to that much-maUgned, misunderstood,
anonymous creature, "The Average Reader."
But exposition is not confined to the written word;
there ls the spoken word, of the platform and the radio;
and there ls the power of the visual, of the film and of
television, with the capacity to share the experience of
the scientists with the millions of viewers, to bring to
them some of that excitement and the awe which comes
to the experimenter in the laboratory or in Space
when the unknown becomes visible under the microscope
or on an oscillograph. We are only at the beginning of
this shared adventure which is science-exposition.

It needs patience patience on the part of the scientist
who has to explain; patience on the part of the expositor
who has to win and pass on that explanation; and
patience on the part of the reader or the viewer who has
to be wooed into an understanding of the discoveries and
developments which are dominating and revolutionizing
his life and the society in which he lives.
The tools of my trade as a science-writer have been
apart from a typewriter three questions: "What are
you doing?" "How are you doing it?" and "Why are
you doing It?" With patience on the part of the
scientist and patience on the part of the inquisitor, there
are few things in science, however apparently abstruse or
novel or difficult, which cannot be explained in compre¬
hensible terms.
One of the major difficulties is the terminology the
jargon of science. The scientists in the various branches
and discipUnes of science have invented their own
language of convenience. Where once the terms were
descriptive they are now cryptic sometimes one feels that
Uke the code names for military operations, they have been
deliberately invented to mislead and, like the sign lan¬
guage of the mediaeval crafts, designed to preserve the
inner mysteries for the few.
Sometimes Uke "barn" in nuclear physics or "hard¬
ware" in the jargon of the electronic engineer they are
survivals of common-room jokes. Sometimes they are
borrowed, like the confiscation of the word "plasma" by
the physicist from the biologist. What the scientist, who
in the restricted company of his colleagues uses them as
commonplace terms, does not always realize is that such
words are like index cards; to him they convey a whole
filing cabinet full of meaning but he- forgets that others
do not have access to that filing cabinet.
This is, alas, inevitable. With the proliferation of
science, the scientist is entitled to his "language of
convenience" but he must, when necessary, define those
terms. A century ago, any man of science was intelligible
to any educated man that educated men were an élite
is another matter; terms had a common-root etymological
meaning and in that sense were descriptive. Today, I
repeat, they are cryptic.
I have sometimes described myself as a "babelologist,"
a student of that babel of tongues which is science. I also
boast that I am an expert on experts one who knows
to whom to turn for the information one has not got. In
that I personify the science-reporter, who is the trustee,
for the common man for whom he seeks enlightenment in
the common tongue: who never relies on what he knows
but turns to the expert sources for current guidance; and
who does not make the mistake which many academics
do of confusing ignorance with lack of intelligence.
I have, after thirty years of trying to explain
science, a reinforced confldence'ih the capacity
of ordinary people to grasp what is made inteUigible
provided that their interest has been enUsted and their
imaginations iUumined. But that after all is surely the
essence of all good teaching.
May I be more profound? The crisis of our times is the
break-down of communications not just in the sense
of political barriers, but in this all important area of
science. Our lives, our hopes, and our survival depend
upon the uses which are made of science. To progress,
we have to use scientific knowledge and discovery to its
utmost advantage. Science, in the advanced countries,
is developing so fast that it is almost impossible to keep
pace with the knowledge and the gadgets which are
aggregating. I believe that some 3,000,000 original scien¬
tific papers a year are published. No one can compass so
much information.
The various branches of science are out of step. Cults
of science are developed and encouraged by dispropor¬
tionate budgets. Large areas of science are enclosed in
the compounds of military security; others are segregated
merely by over-specialization; the fences are up. One
set of scientists does not know what another set is doing,
and yet there may be an important affinity of material
value to mankind.
There are too few communicators within science and the
bridges are -broken between the humanities and science.
Those who have to make the social judgments about
science have usuaUy no scientific training worse, their
own education makes them feel that anything which
involves such intensive training is beyond their compre¬
hension and that they must "rely on the expert". But
there is Uttle in the training of the scientist, preoccupied
with all that has to be learned in his own subject, which
gives him the capacity for social judgments.
We are in danger of being subjected to the tyranny of
the experts faceless men at the elbows of the uninstruct-
ed. They are not tyrants by disposition but by our default.
How are we to teach people enough about science to
allow them to make judgments, to decide priorities,
instead of encouraging cults by gusts of emotion, and
to see that, with the inalienable rights of curiosity and
the quest for knowledge unimpaired, science, with all
its potential for good or evil, is directed to the advantage
of mankind?
H ow much more resources and attention should
we be giving to the problems of this planet on
which 4,000,000,000 people wUl have to contrive to live
20 years from now? Is space adventure more important
than the food and population problem, for instance?
This is not a question of one or the other but of how
much? And how, with aU the spectacular advances of
today, can we close the widening gap between the pros¬
perity of the scientifically advanced countries and the
impoverished ones?
These are social judgments fraught with stupendous
consequences, and they must be based on the understand¬
ing of science and what it can make available.
Without arrogating to the science-writer all the wisdom
of the world, it is true that he has the opportunity for
better understanding. He is a "synoptic scientist"; he
travels across the advancing fronts of all branches of
science and can see, at first hand and in survey, what
preoccupied scientists cannot see for themselves and
what men of affairs can never see panoramically. His
job is to pass that knowledge on either along the line of
science or to the pubUc. He is, by the accident of his
trade, as a collector and disseminator, the prototype of
what should exist in academic and public life, the
communicator of information on which judgments can be
made.
In his own working Ufe, his function is to convey to the
mass of the people the facts about science but also, I
suggest, to convey an interpretation of the social
implications of new developments. I know that many of
my colleagues think that they should confine themselves
to description and explanation and leave the value
judgments to others. I disagree profoundly. Our access
to information, our point of vantage on the scientific
scene gives us responsibilities which, in the present
situation, we must not shirk.
I am still by instinct and by training a reporter. My
work as a journalist opened the once-closed doors 'of
science, but the insight and experience which I gained
opened for me doors on to a wider world. For the past
15 years, I have had the privilege and opportunity of
traveUing round the world, mainly for the United Nations
and its agencies, to see how science and technology can
help the less-developed countries to achieve material well-
being for their people.
That combined experience is what I am now taking
into university life as Professor of International Relations
at Edinburgh. The only "international relations" I am
qualified to teach is how by the common understanding
of science, and by the proper application of that
knowledge to the common needs of mankind, we may
achieve a greater common understanding between
peoples. In that purpose, I am confirmed by the Kalinga
Prize, awarded to me because that is what its founder
hoped to encourage. 47
