A centenary tribute to
RABINDRANATH
TAGORE
Rabindranath Tagore, philosopher, educator, novelist, poet and painter, is
without challenge one of the greatest and most noble figures of modern
times. Not only was he awarded the rare honour of the Nobel Prize for Literature, but
he also won the distinction far more rare, less spectacular but much more significant,
of having his works translated into different languages by writers of equal glory, Nobel
Prize winners in their own right, such as André Gide in French and Juan Ramon
Jimenez in Spanish.
India today does not celebrate merely the thinker and writer. Above all, India reveres
Tagore's generous, universal soul, open to the problems not only of his own land but
of the world, the son of the Maharshi Debendranath Tagore, who had been one of the
guiding spirits of the Brahma-Samaj. For one of his greatest works, the monumental
novel Gora, Rabindranath was to choose as theme the trials and problems of this
movement. It is not merely by chance that Unesco, among its many undertakings
towards the celebration of Tagore's Centenary, has decided to publish the first French
translation of this very novel. For in this book the poet stresses with great fervour
and by moving scenes depicted with all his skill as a writer, his zealous devotion to the
¡deal of a casteless world, a world without cruel, irrational discrimination between
one human being and his fellow men. His hero, Gora, cries out: "It is you who are
my mother. The imaginary mother whom I long sought during my wandering and
vagabonding was sitting at home, waiting before my own room. You have no caste,
you make no distinction between men, you know no hatred, you give flesh to nothing
but the good that is in all of us. It is you who are India." And then come these words
of Gora, which one might well apply to Tagore himself: "No longer is there opposed
within me the Hindu, Moslem and Christian. Today all foods are my food." For indeed,
Tagore took nourishment from what all the world had to offer, and his message of
mutual understanding and tolerance is directed far beyond the boundaries of India,
to all cultures and to all men. A message of freedom too, not merely freedom for
oneself, but for all: "He who wishes freedom for himself", he affirmed," yet fears
freedom for his neighbour, is not worthy of freedom."
It is only fitting that the entire globe should unite with India in rendering solemn
homage to a man whose glory ennobled ¡ndissolubly both his own country and the
world.
Writing days after Tagore's death in August I 94 I, Jawaharlal Nehru said : "Both
Gurudev and Gandhlji took much from the West and from other countries, especially
Gurudev. Neither was narrowly national. Their message was for the world." Tagore
was in truth a living link between East and West. And so he willed it. His entire life
he fought against narrow distrust of foreign cultures. He had faith in the fruitfulness
of cultural intercourse and friendship. With this message he was and remains a Guru
to Unesco, and it is both fitting and imperative that Unesco's homage to Tagore should
join that of the rest of mankind.
VITTORINO VERONESE
Message from the Director-General of Unesco, to the
Tagore Centenary celebrations in Bombay in January.
