A WORD OF WARNING
FROM STAMPS
by C.W. Hill
^BBSHm
1 ARGENTINA
Exhibitions, radio and television pro¬
grammes, newspaper advertising and
poster campaigns are used regularly
in many lands to promote the cause of safe¬
ty in the home, on the road and at work.
Few methods of publicity, however, reach
so many people at so small a cost as the
postage stamp and the postmark. In
recent years several countries have issued
stamps in aid of accident prevention and a
collection of these, when displayed at a
Safety Exhibition, always arouses consid¬
erable interest.
Argentina, in 1948, was the first country
to issue a stamp proclaiming the need for
care on the road (l). The design showed
a raised hand, familiar symbol of caution,
and the inscription "June 10 Road Safety
Day."
When the United States issued a stamp
commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of
the American Automobile Association, the
opportunity was taken of including in the
design a young safety warden holding back
two schoolgirls, while cars of 1900 and
1950 pass on the road. Two children
correctly using a road-crossing are depict¬
ed on a Swiss stamp of 1956 (2), but a
provocative West German stamp underlines
the perils of the road by showing a mother
mourning over her injured child (3).
"Care on the Road," symbolised on an
Italian stamp of 1957, is a message which
has also appeared in slogan postmarks
from many countries. "Motorists Care¬
lessness Kills!" says New Zealand; "Keep
Death off the Roads!" asks Great Britain;
HONORING WAItRQAO HC IX UBS 01 AMERICA
NITK1) STATKS POSTAIÍK
UNITED STATES stamp issued in
I9SO pays tribute to American
railway engineers. It bears the
portrait of Casey Jones, the famous
American engine driver who met
his death in a railway accident
which occurred in 1900. Heroic
Casey ordered his fireman to jump
to safety while he remained at
the conti uls of his locomotive.
26
"Stop Accidents before they stop YOU!"
warns Australia; while Rhodesia's postmark
message is a little kindlier: "Drive Safe¬
ly Rhodesia needs you alive!".
Railway signalling equipment, which
plays so important a part in the preven¬
tion of accidents, is featured on many
stamps. There is an interesting link be¬
tween safety on the railways and safety in
the coal-mines, for George Stephenson, the
British builder of the first successful rail¬
way locomotive, also invented a safety
lamp for miners. A portrait of Stephen¬
son (4) and one of a coal-miner with a
modern safety lamp are to be found on
Hungarian stamps.
Many accidents in the home are caus¬
ed by fire, and several stamps have been
issued to give warning of its perils. Brazil
marked the centenary of the Firemen's
Corps in 1956 with a large stamp, print¬
ed in fiery red, showing a fireman
rescuing a child from a blazing building.
The International Fire Brigades' Congress
in Warsaw in 1957 was also marked by a
series of three Polish stamps, all in vivid
designs depicting the tragedies which may
be caused by fire (5).
A collection of stamps symbolising acci¬
dents and their prevention ought perhaps
to end on an optimistic note with some of the
many issues which illustrate the efficiency
of the Red Cross and hospital services.
These range from the speeding ambulance
on a Finnish stamp of 1944 (6) to the
nurse giving a blood transfusion shown on
a Yugoslav stamp of 1953.
JflUl SARCIA y*
O caKocwooma
SO SOANIVSRSAIMO
&t
CORREO-AEREO-
MEXICO has honoured heroic con¬
duct of Jesus Garcia, a railwayman
who drove a burning train loaded
with explosives out of the goods
yai'd at Nacozari, in north-west
Mexico, half a century ago. As the
stamp shows, the trvin blew up and
Garcia was killed, out his action
saved the greater part of the
town of Nacozari and many lives.
20 HELVETIA
2 SWITZERLAND
3 FED. GERMAN REP.
