THE VANISHING HERDS
by Professor F. Bourlière
Professor at the Faculté de Médecine, Paris
Vice-President of the International Union for Conservation
of Nature and Natural Resources
Among all the continents, Africa is remarkable
for its wealth of large mammals, representing
at the same time a zoological community unmatched
elsewhere in the world and a traditional source of protein
food for the human population.
Prior to the European penetration of the continent,
there was a balance between this fauna especially
abundant in the savannah regions and Man. The
hunting methods then in use could not seriously endanger
any wild species, and domestic livestock, their only
possible competitor, was extensively raised only in certain
parts of the continent, mainly in the east and the Sudan.
The drying up of the Sahara at the end of the
Pleistocene era had, of course, driven many species
southwards; yet, even in 1750, Michael Adamson noted the
presence of elephants and hippopotamuses in the lower
valley of the Senegal, and hippopotamuses were .still to
be found in Egypt- about 1815. At the other end of
Africa, the first Dutch colonists who landed in the Cape
region saw a kind of zebra the quagga now extinct, as
well as elephants, black rhinoceros, hippopotamuses and
countless antelopes, as was testified by Van Rlebeck in
his comments in 1653.
The extension of European influence rapidly destroyed
this delicate balance, which had been maintained for
thousands of years and had been chiefly due to the
small size of the human communities, to demographic
stagnation and static technology. The decline of wild life
came earliest and was most rapid in South Africa. The
development of colonization by whites very soon drove
many species northwards, and this tendency increased in
pace during the nineteenth century and at the beginning
of the twentieth. Road building, the advance of stock
farming, and the fencing of grazing lands completely
did away with the large ungulates (these are chiefly
grazing animals) in most of this region.
In East Africa, the same causes produced the same
effects, though at a later date. In these regions, however,
as well as in some places in Central and West Africa, the
spread of certain methods of combating human and
animal epidemics resulted in a sharp decrease in the game 5
animal population; game eradication campaigns, for
instance, destroyed hundreds of thousands of ungulates.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE VANISHING HERDS (Cont'd;
Network of protected zones
More recently, in all the savannah zones, the increase
in the human population, and consequently in the
number of cattle, sheep and goats, accentuated the
tendency, since all these domestic animals came into
direct food competition with the wild species. Meanwhile,
the use of firearms and the practice of poaching with
wire snares had spread all over the continent.
All these demographic and technological factors have
combined to produce a considerable reduction in the area
of distribution and in the density of the wild animal
population. In the last twenty years, it has become
possible to cover hundreds of miles in Africa without
seeing any of the animals so closely associated in our
minds with the very name of that continent.
This situation soon began to alarm many far-seeing
people. In 1933, the first Conference for the Protection
of the Fauna and Flora of Africa was held in London, to
study methods of dealing with this problem, without, of
course, in any way prejudicing the necessary improvement
in the standard of living of the human population.
As a result of the conference, a convention was
signed, to which most of the countries then
responsible for the administration of African territories
officially acceded. This London convention provided for
the establishment of nature reserves and national parks
in all the territories of the signatory governments; it also
laid down a set of principles relating to the trade in skins
of wild animals, to certain prohibited hunting methods
and practices, and to the special protection to be given to
some particularly threatened species.
Provision was also made for periodical meetings to
consider how the convention was being applied and to
improve it if necessary. The first of these meetings took
place in London in 1938, and significant progress was
recorded in the conservation of wild life. Because of the
Second World War, it was impossible to hold the next
meeting before 1953; it then took place at Bukavu
(Congo) , on the initiative of the Commission for Technical
Co-operation in Africa South of the Sahara. Important
amendments to the 1933 convention were proposed, in the
light of twenty years' experience and of the advances
made in animal and plant ecology.
Apart from its provisions relating to hunting and
forests, the London convention had, then, implicitly been
mainly concerned to ensure the establishment of a
network of national parks and nature reserves in which
the flora and fauna would be entirely protected and
which would thus preserve for posterity as complete a
sample as possible of the various African biotic commu¬
nities.
This policy, was the logical outcome of the ecological
concepts prevailing at the time, according to which a
"natural balance" was capable of maintaining the flora
and fauna of a region unchanged, provided that Man
and his train of domestic animals were kept out. What
happened later in the best studied large national parks in
Africa was, paradoxically, to prove the falseness of this
concept; this result alone would justify the existence of
such parks and reserves, for they are as indispensable to
research in pure and applied ecology as are hospitals to
medical research.
The list of African national parks and nature reserves
is a long one and cannot be given here. Readers interest-
ed in this question may consult Derniers Refuges (Last
Refuges), a remarkable Atlas of the world's national
parks and nature reserves, prepared in 1956 by the Inter¬
national Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources. It should be mentioned, however, that the
parks there referred to are not all comparable as regards
their statutes, their objectives, the extent of the work
carried out in them, or even the effectiveness of their
surveillance.
6 The parks which have enjoyed the most efficient su¬
pervision and where the most intensive research has
taken place are unquestionably those of the former
Belgian Congo, and especially the Albert National Park.
No part of the tropical world has been the subject of such
long, careful, and exhaustive study, by specialists of 15
different nationalities. This research is still continuing,
and decades will be needed before all the material collect¬
ed can be fully examined.
The Nimba Reserve, in Guinea, is the best known
among those in West Africa. It has been continuously
explored since 1942, and has formed the subject of a
number of. important publications. Next comes the
Niokolo-Koba National Park in Senegal, which protects
a fine sample of savannah fairly near to Dakar.
The famous Kruger Park, in the Transvaal, began to
be the subject of systematic scientific study only in 1958,
although it is the oldest of the African parks, having
been established in 1926.
In East Africa, most of the ecological research has been
done especially by a series of Fulbright research scholars
from the United States in the national parks of Uganda,
the Queen Elizabeth National Park and the Murchison
Falls National Park. We should also mention the game
census made by the Grzimeks at the Serengeti National
Park in Tanganyika, and the ecological studies and
research into animal behaviour carried out at the Nairobi
National Park and the Mara Reserve by various English
and American naturalists.
In Madagascar, the ten nature reserves established in
1927 have been studied mainly by zoologists from the
Scientific Research Institute of Madagascar. Most of
the ecological work, however, still remains to be done.
Apart from the important Institutions mentioned above,
which have played a notable part in the history of
African biology, there are a number of parks and reserves
which have not as yet been systematically prospected;
they are chiefly known as tourist attractions and as
economic assets for the countries which own them.
Among these are the parks of Kenya (Tsavroand Am-
boseli), the Wankie and Kafue National Parks in the
Rhodesias, Waza in Cameroon, St. Floris, Zacouma and
Baningi-Bangorram in the' Central African Republic, etc.
All these reserves now form an irreplaceable network
of protected zones within which most of the interesting
species of African savannah fauna have been able to
maintain themselves; at the same time, they are in¬
comparable laboratories for the study of tropical ecology
and all its implications; agricultural, zootechnie, and
medical.
But nature conservation is not merely a matter of
protecting species and environments and constituting, in
the form of national parks, a series of "standard" natural
habitats through which it becomes possible to appraise
the good or bad effects of the transformations imposed by
man on nature. It must also be deliberately dynamic,
for progress in ecology makes it possible to give mankind
effective help in its fight against hunger and to contribute
towards better living conditions.
Tihere are now, besides classical conservation
techniques, new methods of wild life manage¬
ment which have already yielded remarkable results in
other parts of the world, notably in North America and
the Soviet Union. These techniques would appear to be
applicable to game animals of the African savannahs,
even perhaps under particularly favourable conditions.
A quantitative study of the wild African ungulates-
counting their numbers, analysis of their structure by
age and sex, determination of birth and death rates4ias
demonstrated something that had previously been only
suspected and the full importance of which had not been
grasped: namely, the vast size of the mammal game
population and its domination of the whole savannah
community. The tonnage of live animal matter (still
called standing crop biomass) they represent per acre is
such that these grazing animals normally make up
almost the whole of the consumers of the plant food
produced by the savannahs.
CONT'D ON PAGE 34

Unesco - Alain Gille
Uganda Dept. of Information
STRONGHOLD OF THE WILD. East Africa has been called "The Stronghold of the Wild", yet
even here where 28,000 square miles of territory have been declared as National Parks or Reserves,
the wild life resource has been shockingly reduced from its past abundance. Below, bathtime for
hippos in Murchison Falls Park, Uganda's largest national park, which is bisected by the Nile.
Above, the world's tallest grazing animal. Giraffes, which may grow to be from 16 to 20 feet tall,
are splendidly adapted to the tree-browsing habit. The giraffe's tongue may be a foot and a half
long and using this and its long upper lip, it can quite easily wrench loose mouthfuls of leaves.

THE VANISHING HERDS (Cont'd from page 6)
. Wild African ungulates are capable, on poor natural
grazing land, of reaching a biomass as high or almost as
high as domestic cattle on excellent artificial grazing
lands. What is the reason for this?
The principal one, already suggested by Lebrun in 1947,
is that wild grazing animals really use all the food re¬
sources of their environment. Some species, like the
elephant, eat practically anything, leaves, grass, bark,
roots and even graminaceous plants on which other
animals do not graze. The various species of ungulates
inhabiting the savannahs use absolutely all types of
vegetation: young shoots (many small antelopes), thorny
bushes (black rhinoceros), foliage of average sized trees
(giraffes, elephants). The total load of grazing animals
Is therefore spread over the whole plant biomass.
The natural resistance of wild ungulates to many para¬
sites also gives them a great advantage over their
domestic competitors. The same applies to their better
adaptation to high tropical temperatures. All this no
doubt explains why the assimilation of food and the rate
of growth are generally higher among wild herbivores.
Riney observed that the Cape eland can attain a weight
of 320 kg. in two years on pastures where domestic cattle
would literally starve to death.
These facts have led ecologists to wonder whether it
would not sometimes be economically more profitable to
"manage" this wild ungulate population, adapted for
thousands of years to the hard conditions of its natural
surroundings, rather than try to acclimatize domestic
cattle, at great cost, in areas ecologically unfavourable
to them, where they use only part of the meagre re¬
sources available and where they also do much to
accelerate the processes of erosion.
The great objection to this view has, until now, been
the obvious practical difficulty of "managing" wild ani¬
mal populations. To take a sufficient number of head
annually for the production of a large quantity of meat,
while maintaining the herds at a constant level, in bal¬
ance with the food resources of the environment, is easy
in theory, but infinitely more difficult in practice. The
cost price of this "wild" meat might for the most part
be higher than that of "domestic" meat, because of the
bad transport facilities and preservation difficulties.
But new techniques are now under study which will
probably change the whole basis of the problem. Long-
hurst has shown that it is perfectly possible to use light
aircraft to head back certain large species such as ele¬
phants, thus making It possible to guide them, at certain
times of the year, to corrals where the selection and
slaughter of the animals would be easier than in the
heart of the bush. The development of drugs immobili¬
zing large ungulates at a distance, for a certain period
of time, without danger for them or for the consumer,
also offers new possibilities of transporting live animals
to zones which need restocking or even to slaughter
houses with modern equipment and cold storage.
The research done in Uganda by Buechner, Harthorn
and Lock is highly encouraging in this connexion. Field
spraying with antibiotics in order to help preserve meat
is also being studied. It is therefore not unreasonable
to envisage rational exploitation of the large wild ungu¬
late population in the near future, and under profitable
conditions. A few "pilot operations" are now under way
in Kenya and Uganda; their outcome is eagerly awaited.
In what areas can this new conservation policy for
African ungulates be applied? First and foremost, in all
marginal areas where agriculture and stock breeding are
possible only by heavy investment over a long period.
Such zones cover vast stretches of Africa: Fraser Darling
estimates that 90% of Northern Rhodesia cannot, because
of the poverty of its soil, support intensive agriculture
and stock farming, and this is, unfortunately, not the
only example. This means that the traditional source
of animal proteins represented by large game animals may
therefore play a great part in feeding Africa tomorrow.
The establishment of areas of fauna exploitation
around the national parks is also quite conceivable. The
parks would then, in addition to their invaluable services
as natural laboratories and tourist attractions, become
restocking grounds for neighbouring regions.
Thus a dynamic and radically new conservation policy
is being worked out for the large animals of Africa,
opening up prospects undreamed of until recently.
