The Unesco Courier. Jonuary 1961

WORLD LEPROSY DAY
by Raoul Follereau
I
I EPROSY is the oldest disease In the world. It appears
Mm to be as old, as man himself, and can be traced back
to the remotest ages.
In India it was known as early as 600 B.C., under the
name of Kustha. About the same time, in Persia, it was
called Pisaga. Herodotus tells us that no one with leprosy
might enter a town or have any dealings with other people,
for his disease proved that he had sinned against the sun.
Besides these taboos, he was forbidden to own... white
pigeons !
Moses, who had been an Egyptian priest, enforced the
most stringent measures against those with leprosy. They
were obliged to live apart, to veil their faces, and to warn
anyone of their presence by crying out "Unclean,
unclean!"
Even at that time, leprosy meant neglect and social
ostracism for its victim. It would be consoling to find
that the lot of the leprosy victim had improved with the
passage of the centuries. But even now, leprosy remains
one of the greatest scourges of mankind.
The statistics we have are incomplete and mostly un¬
derestimate the real situation. The number of people
with leprosy in the world today may be reckoned at
between 12 and 15 million. This means that there is one
to every 200 inhabitants, and one to every two T.B.
patients.
The highest Incidence of the disease is in Asia, in every
country of which leprosy claims its victims. Africa, has
between two-and-a-half and three million victims, while
in the South Pacific region all the islands, with the
exception of New Zealand, are contaminated. America,
too, has its sufferers mainly in the West Indies, the
Gulanas, Mexico and South America.
From time immemorial leprosy has been regarded as a
terrifying and accursed affliction, thus causing those with
it to be segregated from their fellows. At times they have
been driven from their homes and villages. I have seen
them thrown together with mental patients or else held in
what are nothing less than concentration camps, behind
barbed wire, their guards armed with machine-guns.
I have even found lepers shut up in a cemetery! Some
tribes have also been known to make them commit suicide.
hy this ostracism and cruelty? Because, until re¬
cent years, leprosy was regarded as contagious and
Incurable. It was a "danger" against which protective
measures had to be taken. The man with leprosy was a
"hopeless" case, a total loss for the tribe and the city.
Hence this "social excommunication" which made him
an outlaw and set a curse on him. Nowadays, leprolo-
glsts are unanimous in their opinion that leprosy is only
slightly contagious and can be effectively cured.
In many cases and in many countries, leprosy is not:
or has ceased to be contagious. In others, it can be
contracted only through close, and oft repeated contact.
The children of parents with leprosy are not born with the
disease. In fact, according to WHO, "the risks of
contracting leprosy by association with a leper are far
fewer than in the case of tuberculosis." There is therefore
no reason for condemning the leprosy patient in¬
discriminately to isolation, and still less for driving him
out of society.
The 1958 WHO Conference at Belo Horizonte and that
of 1959 at Brazzaville, solemnly condemned segregation
once and for all, for the following reasons:
If the diseased person fears that he will be forced
to go to hospital, he will conceal his disease;
Isolation leads to a break-up of the family;
Isolation gives rise to serious difficulties in controll¬
ing contacts;
Isolation stigmatizes the patient by delaying his
reintegration into society;
Isolation is too costly a health measure, in that it
absorbs the funds needed for the development of
up-to-date methods of combating leprosy;
Isolation helps 'to keep popular prejudices alive;
and, above all, it is utterly inhuman.
Accordingly treatment for leprosy victims should
generally be provided in the same way as for any
other kind of sick person: as an out-patient in mild cases;
and in special centres or '"sanatoria," if this is required
by the form or virulence of the disease exactly as for
tuberculosis.
This liberal, humane system of treatment which has at
times been criticized as incautious, but which recent
scientific discoveries have proved to be sound, has been
applied in recent years in the former territories of the
French Union. Two sets of figures are enough to illustrate
its scope and success. In what was formerly French
Equatorial Africa, at the end of 1951, the known number
of people with leprosy was 37,508, and the number of
patients treated was 2,268 or approximately 6%; at the
end of 1956, the known number of sufferers was 140,000,
the number of patients treated was 120,000 or 85%.
These figures reflect action going beyond the
experimental stage and are more than encouraging.
Regarding the children of leprous parents the Brazza¬
ville Conference stated that:
In countries which have set up "preventoria" for
the children of leprous parents, these establishments will
be converted as far as possible into crèches;
! It is considered dangerous to take children away
from a leprous mother from the day of their birth and
to place them in institutions. When this has been done
the result has been a high infant mortality rate and
disastrous psychological effects among those children
who survive;
It is essential not to deprive these babies of their
mothers' milk.
The Conference further stated that day pupils might
continue to attend their schools, provided they were given
regular treatment; health education should then be given
to their fellow-pupils and their families.
Lastly, congresses and conferences have formally
concluded that leprosy is a disease which can be
completely cured by sulphones, which are inexpensive and
easy to apply. The VHth International Congress of Lep-
rology (Tokyo 1958) recommended that the widest possi¬
ble publicity should be given to the fact that leprosy was
a curable disease and that the existence of a few perma-
28 CONT'D ON PAGE 3 0

The Unesco Courler. January 1961
EM*
Pierre PiUet
'YOU HAVE LEPROSY', a World Health Organization doctor tells this youth from Luzon in the Philippines. But as the doctor
gives the bad news he drops a kindly hand on the youth's shoulder and tells him that a course of treatment with sulphone tablets
will cure him. Today, treatment for leprosy victims is being provided more and more in the same way as for any other sick
personas an outpatient in mild cases ; in special centres only in cases where this is required by the form orvirulence of the disease.
29

WORLD LEPROSY DAY (Cont'd)
© Pierre Putei
NO LONGER CUT OFF
from other people simply
because of their illness
these leprosy patients in
the Philippines ,are able to
farm and do other work.
Attitudes towards leprosy
are beginning to change.
Those who have suffered
from the disease but who
are no longer contagious
are now being given the
chance to return to society.
nent after-effects in certain former -victims did not mean
that in these cases the disease was contagious or had not
been cured.
Leprosy sufferers should thus be treated without being
subjected to any special regulations, and, in the view of
modern medical science, most of them will be freed from
what today is no more than an ordinary disease which has
foolishly been exaggerated into a spectre of horror.
But can those with, leprosy be saved merely by curing
them? From time immemorial, the victim of the
Bacillus leprae has suffered from two afflictions: he has
leprosy, and he is a "leper."
He has leprosy. But this can be cured by present-day
science. Yet what is the use if, once healed, he still
bears the stigma of the "leper," and still remains an
outcast?
e must see to it that, as soon as the doctors have
pronounced him to be non-contagious, he should
immediately regain his place and employment in society.
There must be no question of punishing him permanently
for some inexpiable crime, of continuing to condemn him
to "perpetual leprosy."
This is the purpose of the petition which I have
addressed to the United Nations, with a view to securing
the preparation of a Charter for adoption by all civilized
countries.
It can be summed up in two points: those with leprosy
are human beings like the rest of mankind, subject to, and
protected by, the same laws; no one has the right to place
any restriction whatsoever on their freedom when they
suffer from a non-contagious form of leprosy or hold a
medical certificate stating that, after treatment, they
present no further risk of contagion.
These proposals were approved by a unanimous vote of
the French National Assembly on 25 May 1954.
A distinction must be made between the following three
categories of patients:
Those who are contagious. In their case the fullest
possible Isolation will be necessary. If this cannot be
arranged at home, they will have to be placed in a special
centre for treatment. Such a centre need not be a
hospital for leprosy patients; it can be a sanatorium, or
simply a special ward of an established city hospital.
These people are ordinary patients, who should be plac¬
ed on the same footing as any other patients temporarily
suffering from a contagious disease. And, like other
patients, they must be fully assured that their isolation
will not last a day longer than the doctor considers
necessary.
Society itself owes them fair compensation. To begin
with, they should be sure that once their health has been
restored they will be able to go back to their former jobs.
It is for the State to set an example by granting long-
term sick leave to any of its officials suffering from lep-
prosy, without letting this be any handicap to them in
their careers.
Non-contagious patients who have so far been isolated
indiscriminately. They should be free to go where they
like, but this does not mean that they should be removed
by force from where they are at present. They must be
given both the means and desire to return to society.
But they should not be forced to do so.
To give them a chance to readapt themselves, it is
both right and necessary for them to receive a financial
allowance for a period of, for example, two or three years.
The amount might be the same as what would have been
spent on them had they remained in the sanatorium.
This would mean no extra expenditure; nor should any
"economies" be made on patients who, leaving of their
own volition, will accordingly feel less apprehensive about
starting life afresh.
The crippled and maimed. Those whose faces, for
example, will permanently bear the mark of the
disease, need special homes set up in the form of small
villages where they will live together, with every measure
being taken to ease their lot and help them forget the past.
Though the damage done to them can never be repaired,
they remain none the less human beings; and society
which came too late to their aid, owes them its respect
and a friendly helping hand.
This Charter should be proclaimed by all countries
which believe in human values and pay more than lip
service to the ideal of freedom.
This was my aim in instituting the world-wide Leprosy
Day, which will be celebrated for the eighth time on 29
January 1961. Its purpose is to ensure that lepers are
treated in the same way as other sick persons, with full
respect for their freedom and dignity as human beings;
and to "cure the sound in body" of the absurd and
sometimes criminal fear which they, show in regard to
this disease and those stricken with it.
Last year, 88 countries were associated in World Lep¬
rosy Day. Let us make no mistake. The emancipation
of the victim of leprosy, who has been held in terror for
2,000 years, will go down in history as a victory comparable
to the emancipation of the slaves.
30
