AN AFRICAN LOOKS AT THE WORLD
An educator from one of Afri¬
ca's newly independent coun¬
tries raises challenging issues
which affect all men everywhere
by F. I. Ajumogobia
Federal Ministry of Education, Nigeria
I have heard the year 1960 described as Africa's
year. I am not sure that I agree with the
description, for In my view, no single year
can be properly described as the year of des¬
tiny of any people. Human evolution, whether
biological or sociological is a gradual and continuous
process; and so, significant as the year 1960 may appear
to be in the history of Africa, I would regard It as merely
the beginning of the many changes that must inevitably
follow the great wind which Is now blowing through the
continent.
During the year we have seen new States emerge In
Africa; but we have also witnessed, and are still
witnessing, an emergency In Africa.
In 1945 a world war, which like all wars had generated
Its own momentum, ended. Men were sick of war and
there was general talk of peace. And men of goodwill
from many lands said that never again should this evil
thing happen. It was In that atmosphere that this great
organization for peace, for education, for science and
culture was born. But memory appears to be short.
However, according to the Constitution of Unesco the
Governments of the States Parties on behalf of their
peoples declared: "That since wars begin In the minds
of men, It Is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed; that ignorance of each other's
ways and lives has been a common cause, throughout the
history of mankind, of that suspicion and mistrust
between the peoples of the world through which their
differences have all too often broken into war"...
The greatest means at our disposal Is education, and
I am using the term in Its widest sense. There can be
no peace In a world of Inequality and of unequal oppor¬
tunities and prejudices, whether of race, colour, religious
persuasion or ideology: I believe too that wide differences
In the provision of educational facilities may well lead
to discontent and hence to disharmony and Instability
In the world. For there can be no true peace in a world
in which one part Is living in ignorance, in poverty and
stricken with disease, while the other part Is living In
plenty, in comfort, utilizing all the amenities that modern
science has placed at man's disposal.
All of human knowledge
is indivisible & universal
But true knowledge Is indivisible and universal and
should remain so. For example, what does it matter
if we give credit for the discovery of the calculus
to Sir Isaac Newton or to Dr. Leibnitz? To my mind what
matters Is the fact that a great and powerful tool has
been bequeathed to mankind. Surely a gas thermometer,
whether constructed in a well-equipped laboratory in the
Jungle of Tropical Africa or constructed in a modern
laboratory in Europe or America is fundamentally the
same instrument, and If suitable correction factors are
available it can be used in Africa with the same preci¬
sion as it can be used in Europe or America or Asia.
Again, It Is just over 60 years ago that the electron was
discovered In the famous Cavendish Laboratory of
Cambridge University by the eminent English scientist,
Professor J.J. Thompson. The follow-up work by Lord
Rutherford and others In the United Kingdom and
elsewhere in the next years led to the splitting of the
atom. No longer do elementary -science teachers describe
the atom as the smallest, indivisible particle of matter.
The atom has been split and what a tremendous source
14
of energy Is at man's disposal? But what a pity that the
first use to which the knowledge was put was in war, and
that the common man first came to hear of the atom in
terms of the atom bomb. One is not so sure that modern
man is altogether fit to use the tools nature is revealing
to him, no doubt through his own inquiry. Nuclear
power is a challenge of our times.
I believe that Unesco has a great rôle to play In world
peace. I agree with the head of the delegation of the
United States of America that Unesco is the most
promising organization for world peace. I also agree with
the quotation of Tolstoy given us by the head of the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:
"preparation and arms for war are as bad as wars them¬
selves".
In our shrinking world
we must unite or perish
We have heard great and forceful words spoken in
the name and the cause of peace. One can only
hope that these beautiful words have been spoken
not merely from the lips but from the hearts, and that
all leaders everywhere will spare no energy or effort in the
pursuit of peace and harmony in the world. How many
of us can genuinely repeat the wise words of the great
Mahatma Gandhi: "I cannot derive any pleasure from
living in a world which is not united"? In Unesco
we presume to be united. All our efforts should be
directed to strengthen that unity.
The ;chief weapon in the cause of peace is education
and the Unesco provision for educational projects in the
underdeveloped countries is most gratefully appreciated
by the peoples of those countries; but the needs are so
great that the present efforts do not even scratch the
surface. The whole of Unesco's programme and budget
for 1961-1962 is just over $31 m. We have been told that
some countries spend many times that amount on their
national education and at least as much as that for aid
in the territories dependent on them. It is obvious that
the resources of Unesco are at present very limited since
they depend almost entirely on contributions from
member states and associate members.
Most of the countries of Africa, especially Tropical
Africa, are in various stages of transition from tradi¬
tional economies based on subsistence agriculture. But
they are, by and large, the important suppliers of
primary products which serve the machines of the
Industrialized countries. Africa, for example, supplies
about 20% of the world's output of copper and manga¬
nese, about 25% of the world's antimony, over 50% of
the world's gold and cobalt and about 90% of the world's
diamonds. Tropical Africa supplies over 60% of the
world's cocoa and about 75% of the world's vegetable
oil, principally palm oil and palm kernels.
The -wheels of the world's machines would turn rather
slowly If these primary products were not supplied by the
countries of Africa and Asia. We live in a world In
which the countries are Interdependent: our world is
rapidly shrinking, in time If not in space. No one section
of the human race can now afford to be Independent of
the others. We so much depend one on another that
unity Is necessary for our survival. l
This article is an abridged version of an address delivered by
Mr. F. I. Ajumogobia, of the Nigerian Delegation, to the Unesco
General Conference on November 25, 1960.

The Unesco Courler. februorf 1961
Young couple from Dahomey
