The violin and the melodious sounds which
virtuosi extract from it are familiar to us all.
But casting off the blinkers of habit, let us take a fresh
look at this modest wooden case. How extraordinary it
is that a few plates of thin wood, and the friction of
horsehair on four strings should be able to produce the
quivering strains which lead and dominate an orchestra,
the powerful and moving voice that holds large audiences
in thrall. The miracle of the violin is indeed a miracle
of human art and ingenuity, which has never yet been
fully explained by science.
When the great Italian violin-makers of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries constructed models of string¬
ed instruments which have never since been rivalled,
they received no help from acoustics, a science which did
not then exist. Yet, by a process of trial and error,
repeated experiments and empirical research, and thanks
to the kind of Intuition which rewards tenacious effort,
they managed to achieve remarkable results and to
create sounding-boxes that correspond in every way to
the laws of modern acoustics.
The making of a stringed instrument is more than a
matter of technique. There are so many subtle rela¬
tionships between its component parts, between the
choice of the wood and the way in which it is worked,
between the capacity of the resonant box and the
thickness of its wooden plates, and between the wood and
the varnish, that no formula can be a guarantee of
success.
The instrument-maker's personal talent is all-impor¬
tant; his experience and skill cannot be conveyed in writ¬
ten Instructions, but must be passed on from man to man
in the course of a long apprenticeship. As a matter of
fact, this is unfortunate, because the old instrument-
maker's art is in great danger of being lost.
The quality of stringed instruments, of which violins,
violas and violoncellos are the most important, depends
primarily upon the wood of which they are made: epicea
excelsa for the upper part or belly, .maple for the back
and the "ribs" which form a violin's sides, ebony for the
finger-board, and Guiana "bees' wood" or Pernambuco
wood for the bow. Epicea, a variety of pine, is found in
Switzerland; maple is scattered through some valleys
of Central Europe. The wood must be compact and fine¬
grained, without knots, but with the "ripples" which
make the varnish shimmer.
Exposure, soil and climate have as much influence on
a crop of wood as they have on vines; the wood must be
cut "di quarto", that is, not longitudinally, but from the
bark to the heart, like the lith of an orange; only the
central part of the trunk not too near the roots, where
the wood would be too damp, or too near the top, where
the sun would have dried it out is considered satis¬
factory; and, lastly, the part exposed to the south is
held to be the best. All these prescriptions give an idea
of the care taken by stringed-instrument makers in
choosing their raw material.
The work of a master violin-maker is done entirely by
hand, and by the same craftsman, except for the bow,
The Indian ravanastron is
believed to be the oldest of
instruments played with a
bow. It may have travelled
to Arabia to become the
rebab (1). The rebab was
perhaps the father of the
rebec, reconstituted versions
of which are shown here (2),
though this mediaeval strin¬
ged instrument may be a
descendant of earlier Wes¬
tern ones. .Most widely-used
bowed instrument of the
Middle Ages was the viol.
Shown here are three "love
viols" from Germany and
Italy (3). The instrument ma¬
kers of the Tyrol and Cremo¬
na, in northern Italy, trans¬
formed the viol into violins
I ike this Stradivarius(4) dating
from 1724. This v¡olin(5)once o
belonged to Johann Strauss. £ V
THE
ANCESTORS FROM THE EAST

MUSIC
ON
A STRING
by Claude Marly
Young gipsy fiddler
i Goldner
Carved head decoration
on a "Viola d'Amore",
literally "love viol", made
by Nicolas Lupot (1758-
1824), a craftsman who
has often been called
"The French Stradivarius".
© Marcel Arthaud.
executed by a skilled bow-maker. Despite the simplicity
of its outline, a violin is composed of 83 to 85 parts, all
of which must be fashioned with the utmost care.
The violin-maker, with the help of a mould, cuts out
the back, which is generally made of two pieces glued
together so that the graining of the wood corresponds.
He fines down the arch of the belly so as to give it the
necessary convexity, forms the curve of the ribs with
a hot iron, calculates the size of the neck, which he fits
to the instrument, uses a penknife to cut the sound-
holes in the belly S-shaped holes which give the Ins¬
trument its resonance and elegance mounts the pegs
and bridge.
Lastly, with a little tool inserted in the sound-holes,
he fixes that essential part of the instrument which the
Italians and French call the soul and the Germans the
voice of the violin. This ls a wooden cylinder, designed
primarily to keep the belly firm under the pressure of
the strings; but It also seems to Influence resonance of
the Instrument, since a millimetre's difference In Its
position ls enough to alter that resonance.
Up to this point, however, the violin ls still unfinished;
It awaits Its finest adornment the famous "varnish", so
much appreciated by the connoisseurs, which enhances
the instrument's elegant curves and enables the light to
play on the grain of the precious wood. The purpose
of the varnish ls to protect the violin against the ravages
of time and climate; It ls highly Important because, even
though a bad violin cannot be Improved by a good
varnish, a bad varnish can "muffle" an excellent violin.
Unfortunately, the famous varnish of Cremona which
combined depth with transparence and gave the
CONT'D ON PAGE 7
VIOLI
CELTIC OR ARAB ORIGIN ?
FAMILY TREE
MUSIC OF THE MIDDLE AGES FOR VIRTUOSOS TOKEN OF REMEMBRANCE

MUSIC ON
A STRING
(Cont'd)
In the early days of the
Renaissance, there were two
groups of stringed instruments
in Europe: vielles, which were
once used to accompany trou-
bador songs (and later evolved
into organistrums, or large
hurdy-gurdies) and the nobler
family of the viols, bowed
instruments whose gradual
modification no doubt pro¬
duced the violin, the most
Important of modern stringed
instruments. The legendary
name of Stradivarius domi¬
nates this branch of Instru¬
ment-making, which demands
great manual skill and a
perfect ear for tone. Below,
a well-known French violin
maker, Emile Français, in his
Paris workshop. Left, violins
drying after being varnished.
Varnish protects a violin but
can also affect its resonance.
Photos © Goursat

A lost secret of the Cremona craftsmen
Instruments their Inimitable golden or reddish tortoise-
shell colour, ls a lost secret. No chemical analysis has yet
revealed its composition. Some plants in the Tyrolese
woods are said to have produced a gum which, collected
In special bags, supplied the vlolln-makers of Cremona
with the main Ingredient of their oil varnish.
The last person able to secure these bags of gum
appears to have been Carlo Bergonzi, disciple of
Stradivari, who bought the master's workshop after his
death. Once the trees yielding It had been felled, this
gum could no longer be found, and the varnish has never
since been the same. However, time, which mellows
the tone of old Instruments, has probably also given their
wood its Inimitable patina.
Strings are quite, or almost, as delicate a matter.
Those used by the Italian craftsmen were produced in
the central and southern parts of the peninsula, especially
in Naples; the gut was derived from the intestines of
seven or eight-month-old lambs. This gut was left to
soak for a long time In alkallnized water before being
dried and twisted. It was believed that the exposure
of the pasture-lands, the season at which the lambs
were slaughtered and the kind of water used influenced
the quality of the strings and especially their resistance.
In fact, that resistance ls extraordinary, considering
that the four violin strings are subjected to a total
tension of over 50 pounds. 	
Thus we see what subtle alchemy of plant and animal
matter and what intuitive, meticulous craftsmanship
are needed in order that wood, gut and horsehair may be
transformed into that great, enchanting voice, with Its
infinite modulations, which by another miracle of human
genius, can be heard today in every home.
The first stringed instrument was a gift of nature, a
tortoise-shell converted into a sounding-box by a few
strings stretched across It. That ls why the lyre retained
the name of chelys In Greek and testudo In Latin. And
according to classical tradition, the first stringed-ins¬
trument maker was Orpheus, who replaced the Unen
threads of the lyre with strings made from the Intestines
of animals.
Stringed Instruments are found among primitive
peoples: the Negro viol of Nyasaland has a bow made
of two strips of willow, one straight and the other curved.
But musicologists generally agree that the earliest
ancestor of the violin ls the ravanastron, which has all
the same features: resonant box, neck, bridge, pegs,
strings made of gazelles' Intestines and bow. This Ins¬
trument ls said to have been Invented over five thousand
years ago by Ravana, king of Ceylon, a ten-headed giant.
It ls still sometimes seen In India, In the hands of certain
mendicant Buddhist monks.
The story goes that the ravanastron, transported from
India to Persia and thence to Arabia, became the Arabian
rebab, which, in Europe, engendered the rebec, a small,
three-stringed bowed Instrument played by the ministréis.
On the other hand, Breton bards before the Moorish
Invasion used a bowed Instrument called the crwth,
which was an Improved version of the rebab. Was the
latter Imported Into the East by the Crusaders? Or did
they bring It back from Palestine? Or else, as ethno-
musicology would seem to testify, did the various forms
of bowed stringed Instruments make their appearance
as Independent Inventions In different countries?
At all events, by the beginning of the Renaissance in
Europe, there were two groups of stringed Instruments:
vielles, which, alter being used to accompany troubadour
songs, evolved Into organistrums, or large hurdy-gurdies,
worked by a handle and employed for dance music or for
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
THE VIOLIN CURIOSITY SHOP
Viol with five strings
copied from an ins¬
trument In a paint¬
ing by Cimabue,
the 13th century
Florentine artist.
Photos © Arthaud.
Viol with three
strings reconstitut¬
ed according to a
13th century sculp¬
tured figure in
Chartres Cathedral.
Violin marked with the mono¬
gram of Antonio Stradivari
Stradivarius in Latin -»the most
celebrated of the great violin-
makers of Cremona (1644-1736).
Photo © Goursat.
The names of the different kinds of viols are as musical as
the sounds they make: viola d'amore (love viol), viola di
gamba (placed between the knees for playing), vloletta
marina (for which Handel wrote pieces), viola di bordone,
viola pomposa (said to have been invented by Bach; his VI
suite for violoncello was actually written for the viola pom¬
posa) and viola bastarda which at first had 6 or 7 strings
and later, fitted with 14 strings, became the "English violet".
Almost all the great violin concertos (for example, those of
Mozart, Beethoven, Paganini, Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Lalo,
etc) are written in D.
One of the most strange-looking of all musical instruments
was the tromba marina (marine trumpet) which was very
popular in Germany from the 14th to the 17th centuries.
It has been suggested that one part of its name came from
the use made of it for signalling in the British Navy.
Tho octobassc, an
immenso strlnped
double-bass, 10 feet
high Invented by tho
19th century French
Instrument maker,
Jean - B. Vuillaume.
THE INCREASING USE OF STRINGS IN THE ORCHESTRA
HAYDN BEETHOVEN WAGNER STRAVINSKY
(as used in his 78th
Symphony)
4 Basses.
4 Cellos.
4 Violas.
8 First Violins.
6 Second Violins.
(as used in the 5th
Symphony)
8 Basses.
8 Cellos.
10 Violas.
1 4 First Violins.
1 2 Second Violins.
(as used in "Parsifal")
10 Basses.
1 2 Cellos.
1 2 Violas.
18 First Violins.
1 8 Second Violins.
(as used in the "Rite
of Spring")
10 Basses.
12 Cellos.
13 Violas.
18 First Violins.
1 8 Second Violins.

MUSIC ON A STRING (Cont'd)
Masterpieces from
a prison cell
the entertainment of drinking parties; and the nobler
family of the viols, bowed instruments which may or may
not have been derived from the vielle. The gradual
modification of early viols doubtless produced the violin,
the most important of modern stringed instruments. '
The first violins are generally attributed to Gasparo
da Salo, who, together with Maggini, founded the famous
school of Brescia in Lombardy. Yet a few years before
Salo's birth in 1533, Francis I of France was already
travelling with eight violin players in his train. There
was probably an uncertain period during which various
modifications of the viol were called violins, although
the proportions of the violin had not yet been established.
Such hesitation is evidenced by the fact that the French
word violon means "large viol", whilst the Italian violino
means a small-sized viol.
The Brescia school later seemed primitive in comparison
with that of Cremona, founded in the seventeenth
century by the Amatl dynasty, the most famous member
of which, Nicola, lived to be eighty-eight (1596-1684)
and was the master of Stradivarius. His small violins,
with their strong voice and brilliant, transparent varnish,
were already masterpieces.
Astrange legend surrounds Giuseppe Guarnieri
(1683-1745), known as "del Gesù", because,
in order to distinguish himself from the other violin-
makers of the family, he adopted a label on which his
name was followed by the three letters I.H.S. (Iesus
Homlnum Salvator) surmounted by a cross. His violins
have acquired such a reputation that a "del Gesù" has
become a common expression. It was, for instance, on a
"del Gesù", which he donated to his native city of
Genoa, that Paganini played.
The story is that, despite his pious nickname, Guarnieri,
who only began his career as a violin-maker at the age of
thirty-eight, produced his best instruments while in
prison. Some of them are called "prison violins" or
"the servant-girl's violins", in memory of the goaler's
daughter who is supposed to have supplied him with the
material he required.
The greatest and best-known of the violin-makers of
Cremona was Stradivari Stradivarius in Latin whose
name has become synonymous with the finest and most
valuable violins. He lived to be ninety-three and had
two wives and fourteen children, only two of whom took
up the craft. Starting as a pupil of Nicola Amati, he began
to sign his instruments, using his own label from 1670
onwards, and had very soon surpassed his master.
After this first thirty-year period, known as the
"Amitized" period because of the influence of Amati's
models, he developed his own style through passionately
keen and unremitting labour; and It was to remain
unrivalled. He designed his model with sober grandeur,
the height of the vaulting was reduced, the volume of
air in resonating bodies methodically refined, the thick¬
nesses accurately calculated and the exact intonation of
the woods ascertained. The Magginls had a veiled, mel¬
ancholy voice, the Amatis a soft, silvery one; but Stra¬
divarius was the first to be able to combine strength
and sweetness, vigour and tenderness.
The Cremona master chose his woods with the greatest
care and tried to use the same piece for the back and
the ribs. His backs were often in one piece. He rounded
off angles lovingly and decorated them with faultless
profiling. His angles were cut In an elegant manner
all his own; the paraph of the sound-holes was exquisitely
fine. His varnishes were Incomparable, thoroughly
resistant, sometimes amber-coloured, sometimes tending
towards a russet shade called rossino, and always highly
transparent.
The whole of Stradivari's long life (1644-1737) was
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

Photos © Goursat
For almost three centur¬
ies, French violin makers
have been carrying on
the great traditions they
inherited from the crafts¬
men of Italy. In the small
town of Mirecourt, on
the borders of Lorraine,
veteran violin makers
like this one examining
a finished instrument
(above) still hand on the
secrets of their craft to
new generations. Left,
a violin back is prepared
and (below left) finished
parts are fitted together.
The work of making and
assembling well over 80
parts for each violin Is
done entirely by hand.
When meticulous skill
and loving care have
done their utmost, the
result is an Instrument
worthy of concert artists
like the Czech violinist,
Alexander Plocek (right).

MUSIC ON A STRING (Cont'd)
Stradivarius inspires
French violin village
devoted not only to making instruments violins, viols,
violoncellos, double basses, lutes and pocket-violins but
also to research and experiment. Those who knew him
have described his tall, lean, figure. He always wore a
white cap a woollen one In winter and a cotton one in
summer. While working, he wore a white leather apron
and, we are told, "since he was always working, his
costume hardly varied". Corelli may have given him
advice for the perfecting of a violin ;but no virtuoso could
advise him about the violoncello, then considered as an
instrument of secondary importance, and yet his 'cellos
are the best ever made.
Artists such as Boccherini, Tartini, Kreutzer, Kramer,
Lafont, Rode, Pugnani and Sarasate made the sound
of Stradlvarlous violins famous. Some of these, the
"Rode", the "Messiah", the "Dolphin" and the "Dawn"
are considered to be the Cremona craftsman's master¬
pieces. Henceforth, the power and range of stringed
instruments made it possible for them to leave the
drawing-rooms of the aristocracy and reach an in¬
creasingly wide public In theatres and big concert halls.
Although Stradivarius was to give the violin its final
form and style, the instrument had already been known
and even popular In France, England and Flanders since
the middle of the Sixteenth century. Violin-makers
worked In those countries; in Paris, they fashioned the
instruments under the supervision of musicians and were
sometimes classified with braziers. The following century
witnessed the appearance in France of great violin-
makers, such as Nicolas Lupot, who made a very careful
study of the Stradivarius proportions, and Médard, who
set up his workshop at Nancy.

T;Hus France inherited from Cremona. Paris
violin-makers are all grouped in the "Euro¬
pe" quarter, but it ls, above all, the small town of Mire¬
court, on the borders of Lorraine, which has long
specialized in the art of stringed-Instrument making. The
first historical document concerning Mirecourt violin-
making dates from 1637 and ls a contract binding an ap¬
prentice to his master. For over three centuries, therefore,
the people of Mirecourt have been teaching or learning
how to cut, adjust, assemble and varnish stringed-instru¬
ments with the famous "Italian sonority".
There Is a historical explanation of this tradition.
When the Dukes of Lorraine, great patrons of the acts,
went to stay in their castle at Ravenel a few walls of
which are still standing they brought with them their
musicians and, in particular, their violin-maker, named
Tywersus, who had worked in Cremona. Tywersus taught
the craft to a few inhabitants of the village near the
castle, and they transmitted their knowledge to their
descendants.
In 1732, the violin-makers of Mirecourt received their
charters as a corporation from Francis II, Duke of Lor¬
raine. Today, workshops of instrument makers survive
at Mirecourt alongside modern industry; the work is
done by hand, skilfully and lovingly, and with respect
for Renaissance traditions.
There are other centres of the art in Austria, the
Netherlands and Italy, where high quality violin-making
is by no means dead, as well as in other European
countries. But heavy competition comes from mass-
produced work; the instrument market is quickly satur¬
ated, and apprenticeship is long and difficult at a time
when young people are faced with openings in less
exacting and more lucrative trades.
Will the master violin-maker of today find disciples
to whom they can bequeath their knowledge? It is to be
hoped so, for the perfection of these resonating bodies
is one of music's secret weapons, and Instrumental
music henceforth accessible everywhere, a joy and
10 comfort to all, as well as a common language has an
even greater and more vital part to play in modern times
than in the past.
