FREDERICK DOUGLASS
STILL A YOUTH, Frederick Douglass
began his campaign for the abolition of
slavery. He was himself an escaped slave
from a plantation in the State of Maryland.
by Benjamin Quarles
All photos Frederick Douglass
Historical Association
D uring the four years from 1961 to 1965,
the United States is observing the one hun-
dreth anniversary of a hard-fought war between two
sections of its country, the North and the South.
According to the man who was President when the war
broke out, Abraham Lincoln, one of the great goals of
the struggle was to give to America "a new birth of
freedom." To no group in the United States did these
words mean more than to its Negroes. And to no person
did these words mean more than to Frederick Douglass.
Frederick Douglass, the most prominent American
Negro of the nineteenth century, devoted his life to
extending the boundaries of freedom for his fellow man.
He believed that everyone was entitled to liberty: "Man
was born with it," said he. And so for half a century,
from 1845 to 1895, he made himself a spokesman for the
oppressed and downtrodden.
Douglass was devoted to the cause of freedom because
he knew what it was not to be free. For he had been a
slave. In 1817, when he was born, slavery Was a well-
established institution in the southern section of the
United States. Slavery had deep roots in America, going
back almost to the time when the British founded the
American colonies, beginning with Virginia in 1607.
When the United States became an independent nation
in 1783, it seemed as though slavery was doomed to die a
natural death. But ten years later, a machine was
invented, the cotton gin, which made it possible to
separate the seeds from the fibre. In America and in
Europe there was a great demand for cotton. To meet
this demand a labour supply was nec»sssary. Negro
slavery was the answer to this need.
In being born a slave, Frederick Douglass was like
12 hundreds of thousands of other Negroes In the United
States. But no other slave was destined to become so
well known. From such humble beginnings as his, very
few Americans ever went so far. The key to his success
was his striving for freedom, for himself and for others.
As a young slave on a plantation in Maryland, Douglass
was not satisfied with his lot. He held imaginary conver¬
sations with himself, asking himself these questions:
"Why I am a slave? Why are some people slaves, and
others masters? Was there ever a time when this was not
so?"
To prepare himself for freedom, Douglass wanted to
learn the alphabet. His masters tried to prevent him from
learning how to read and write, but Douglass was not
easily discouraged. His first »pennies were secretly spent
in buying spelling books and in paying other boys to help
him to understand them.
In 1838, after twenty years in bondage, Douglass escaped
from his master and settled in the North, where slavery
no longer existed. For three years at New Bedford,
Massachusetts, he worked as an unskilled labourer, taking
any job he could get sweeping chimneys, sawing wood,
driving a coach or waiting on table He had a growing
family to support, having married a few days after his
flight from his master.
But his responsibilities as a husband and a father did
not prevent him from taking an interest in the activities
of the abolitionists. These were a group of men and
women who were dedicated to the overthrow of slavery,
which they considered the greatest evil under the sun.
They were opposed to slave-ry for two reasons: for what
it did to the slave, and for what it 'did to such civil
liberties as freedom of speech and trial by jury. In
Massachusetts these reformers were led »by two able men,
William Lloyd Garrisson, editor of The Liberator, and
Wendell Phillips, one of the greatest orators of the
nineteenth contury.
In August 1841 the Massachusetts abolitionists held a
meeting at New Bedford, and, Douglass, to his surprise,
was asked to say a few words. He was nervous, but he
spoke with deep feeling, telling of his recollections of
slavery. His listeners were impressed by his story and his
manner of telling it, and they urged him to join their
ranks as a lecturer and agent. The young Negro gave his
consent, thus taking a step he never regretted.
SiChooled by the abolitionists, Douglass soon
became one of their prize speakers. His
imposing physique, his finely formed head, his flashing
eyes and the rolling thunder of his voice, all fitted him
for the public platform. "In listening to him," wrote a
contemporary, "your whole soul is fired."
Slavery also felt the weight of the Douglass pen. Within
four years after he had joined the abolitionists, he had
developed a forceful prose style, direct and vivid. His
"Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass," which he
published in 1845, became a best seller on two continents,
being translated into French and German.
This book was a bitter condemnation of slavery, and
it could not fail to stir up sympathy for those In bondage.
"I never saw my mother," ran one of the opening
sentences, "to know her as such, more than four or five
times in my life; and each of these was very short in
duration, and at night."
Following the publication of his "Narrative," Douglass
crossed the Atlantic, going to the British Isles. There for
nearly two years he denounced American slavery before
large and sympathetic audiences. His success abroad was
great; British admirers raised money to purchase his
freedom from his former master, and to enable him to
start a weekly newspaper of his own.
In addition to speaking and writing, Douglass took part
in another of the organized forms of action against
slavery the underground railroad. This was the name

A SLAVE WHO BECAME
FREEDOM'S TRUMPET
' r s
IN LATER LIFE, a renowned orator, writer and lecturer, Douglass saw
his own people freed ( I 863). In I 877 he became U.S. Ambassador to Haïti.
given to the practice of assisting runaway slaves by
providing them with food, shelter and money, as they
made their ' way to Canada. Himself an escaped slave,
Douglass was strongly in sympathy with those who made
the dash for freedom. The fees from many of his lectures
went to aid fugitives. '
His home in Rochester, New York, was a headquarters
for runaways. When he went to his printing shop in trie
mornings, it was not unusual for him to find fugitives
sitting on the steps, waiting for him. Such runaways
traveled at nightduring the daytime their abolitionist
friends hid them from prying eyes. Douglass knew where
to take them, to a sail loft, to an out-of-the-way barn,
or to the quiet home of a trusted sympathizer. When
darkness fell, Douglass sped them on their way toward
the Canadian border.
Douglass's Interest in freedom included woman's rights,
a movement in which he was one of the pioneers. In the
America in which Douglass came to manhood, the women
did not stand equal to the men In the eyes of the law,
being denied the right to make contracts, to testify in
court, and to vote. Douglass opposed these unfair
restrictions. His weekly newspaper, The North Star, In
its first issue on December 3, 1847, carried on its masthead
the words, "Right Is of no sex."
Seven months later, at Seneca Falls, New York, the
woman's rights movement in America was formally
launched. At this historic meeting, Douglass took a
prominent part, being the only man to do so. Many
of the delegates to the convention were hesitant about
asserting that women should have the right to vote, but
in a stirring address that changed many minds, Douglass
pointed out that political equality was vital to the
women's cause.
With the coming of the war between the North and
the South in the spring of 1861, Douglass bent his efforts
13
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Human rights for everyone
regardless of colour or sex
s»
to urging President Lincoln to liberate the slaves. To
Douglass the war was a crusade for freedom, and he tried
to impress this point of view on Lincoln on his two visits
to the White House. The Negro leader was overjoyed
when, on January 1, 1863, Lincoln issued the Emancipation
Proclamation, declaring free the slaves in the South. It
was, said Douglass, "a day for poetry and song."
Too old to shoulder a gun himsef, Douglass »became a
recruiting agent, traveling through the North urging
Negroes to join the army. The first two recruits he
signed up were his own sons, Lewis »and Charles. As a
recruiter and as a lecturer supporting the Nothern cause,
Douglass continued his labours until the South laid down
its arms in April 1865.
After the war, Douglass was destined to hold three
public offices: President Hayes appointed him as Marshal
of the District of Columbia in 1877; President Garfield
appointed him as Recorder of Deeds for the District of
Columbia in 1881; and President Harrison appointed him
as United States Minister to Haiti in 1889.
Between these last two appointments, Douglass spent
one year traveling In Europe and the Near East. He took
in all the sights, making it a point while in Paris to see
the tomb of Lafayette, the general who had helped
America win her independence. "This patriot has two
countries of his own," said Douglass, and therefore his
burial plot was "doubly sacred ground." Douglass was
especially glad to make the acquaintance of such a
champion of human liberty as the eighty-one-year-old
member of the French Senate, Victor Schoelcher, who in
1848 had framed the decree that freed the slaves in the
French colonies.
But whether abroad or at home, whether in office or
out of it, Douglass never lost his deep concern for human
freedom. He never stopped speaking and writing on
behalf of the underdog. Those who were discriminated
against at the polls or in the job market could depend on
him to cry out for them. He viewed the lot of the Negro
not as a race struggle, »but as a human struggle. He hoped
that the day would come when everyone in America would
have equal opportunity, regardless of differences in
ancestry, sex, religious beliefs, or skin color.
Douglass did not live to see that day; he died in 1895.
But to the making of a free America he gave his best and
his all. Such devotion to liberty left its mark on his
generation, and it has its lessons for our own troubled
times.
BENJAMIN QUARLES, professor of history- at Morgan State
College, Baltimore, Md., U.S.A., is the editor of the autobiography
of Frederick Douglass {Belknap/Harvard University Press, 1960),
and the author of "The Negro in the Civil War".
DRIVE TO PRESERVE
DOUGLASS' HOME
AS SHRINE
14
In this white brick house at Cedar Hill in Anacos-
tia, a section of Washington D.C., Frederick Doug¬
lass spent his last years. Here, surrounded by
his papers and books and copies of his abolitionist
newspaper, The North Star, he died on February 20,
1895. By 1961, this once beautiful home was run¬
down with unkempt grounds and in dire need of
repair. The National Association of Coloured
Women's Clubs (N.A.C.W.C.) launched a nation¬
wide campaign in February 1961 for 850,000 to restore
Douglass' home to its original state and preserve
it as a national historic shrine. In response to
this appeal, the President of the United States
wrote the President of the N.A.C.W.C, Mrs. Rosa
L. Cragg : " Frederick Douglass is a part of the
legend of America. As a successful fighter for
freedom a century ago, he can give inspiration-to
people all around the world who are still struggling
to secure their full human rights... " The National
Association of Coloured Women's Clubs numbers
100,000 women in 1,500 clubs in 40 states. It was
organized in 1896, just one year after Douglass
died. Through its national headquarters in Wash¬
ington D.C., the Association is a national clear¬
ing house for nonpartisan information and works
for better race relations and international under¬
standing. N.A.C.W.C. state federations either own
or have helped start facilities for under-privileged,
handicapped or delinquent youth in most of the
Southern states. Proceeds from an N.A.C.W.C,
drive for Unesco Courier subscriptions are to be
used to restore Douglass' home to its former state.
