JOURNEY INTO THE INACC
by Mikhail M. Somov
32
Before the International Geophysical Year began
in 1957, no scientific expedition had ever wintered
in the heart of the Antarctic Continent. Since then
the United States, the U.S.S.R. and France have
all set up research stations deep in the interior.
Below we publish an account of the arduous
journey across 1,300 miles to reach Antarc¬
tica's Pole of Inaccessibility the point furthest
removed from the coasts where the lowest temper¬
atures on earth's surface have been recorded.
Well before the International Geophysical Year
began five years ago, scientific circles the
world over were already engaged in heated discussions
about the grandiose projects foreseen as part of this
unparallelled assault on our planet.
In the sweltering summer of 1955 scientists from many
lands gathered In Paris to map out the work they were
soon to undertake in common on the frozen sixth
continent of Antarctica. Their first step was to apportion
the various tasks among the different countries
participating so that the whole of the Antarctic would
be systematically covered by a network of observation
posts.
At the time, few scientific stations existed on the sixth
continent and these were located only in the more
accessible regions near the coast. The rest of the huge
ice-covered area had virtually never been studied, except
in summer when certain zones had been visited (more
recently with the additional help of aircraft). No one
had ventured Into the heart of the continent In winter,
and hence no one had yet observed the exact conditions
prevailing there during the polar night.
The scientists at the Paris conference voiced their
DIFFICULT CLIMB is made by three members of a Soviet
Antarctic expedition up the side of a giant iceberg
which has broken off from the main continental ice-mass.
Kapitza-Tass
common conviction that It was Imperative not only to
increase the number of coastal stations but to set up a
number of new stations In the interior equipped to carry
out research and observations all year round. The four
most characteristic points in the centre of the continent
were particularly studied and it was decided to set up
scientific stations in each of them.
The first was the geographic South Pole where the
geographic meridians converge.
The second, the Magnetic South Pole, where the
magnetic needle points and where the magnetic
meridians converge.
The third was the Geo-magnetic South Pole, where the
Magnetic Pole would theoretically be found if the
magnetism of the globe were uniform which it is not.
The area is of particular interest to science because the
intensity of geophysical phenomena occurring in the
upper atmosphre varies with the distance from this spot.
The fourth was the Pole of Relative Inaccessibility, the
point furthest removed from the coasts and one of the
last blank spaces left on our planet. It ls located in the
toughest part of Antarctica to get to, where scientists
felt the climate should be most markedly continental and
the winter temperatures therefore exceptionally low.
None of the men attending the Paris meeting
underestimated the enormous . difficulties Which would
face the expeditions assigned to set up these four stations
in the far off and as yet unknown tracts of the south
polar continent.
The United States volunteered to set up a station at
the geographic South Pole. France agreed to set up
another in the region of the Magnetic Pole. The U.S.S.R.
undertook to establish two stations, one at the Pole of
Inaccessibility (about 1,300 miles from the projected Soviet

BUSTLE OF DEPARTURE surrounds Soviet tractor convoy
as it sets off at first light for one of the great |ourneysof th».¿
International Geophysical Year. Its goal: to reach the point
In Antarctica which is the farthest ^rVom the coast and study
the exceptional conditions found there during the polar night.
coastal base at Mirny),
Pole.
the second at the Geomagnetic
To head straight for the Pole of Inaccessibility
Immediately on landing In Antarctica was obviously
unthinkable. An assault of such difficulty, Into the mos"
inhospitable part of the continent, had to be conceived
as an operation in several stages.
A first expedition (1955-1957) was entrusted with
reconnoitring Antarctic weather conditions and in¬
vestigating the possibilities of setting up stations In the
interior. A second expedition (1956-1958) was to carry
out a combined operation with land transport and
aircraft to set up these stations, and a third (1957-1959)
was to complete whatever the second expedition was
prevented from doing by lack of time.
Such was the plan. And with the exception of a
number of modifications found to be necessary as the
operations progressed, It proved perfectly feasible. Even
before the Mirny base was completed at the foot of the
massive Helen Glacier, the first expedition completed
several aerial reconnaissances which produced vital
information concerning possible routes to the Pole of
Inaccessibility and the Magnetic Pole.
The first reports to come in showed that the Mirny
region was cut off from the interior to the south by an
area of impassible Ice crevasses. The danger zone was
found to be about 30 miles wide. The crevasses them¬
selves varied in width, ranging from a few inches to a half
hundred or more yards, with depths estimated at
anything from 50 feet to hundreds or even thousands
of yards.
These crevasses are particularly dangerous since they
are often covered by "snow bridges" piled up by frequent
storms. The bridges are of varied thickness and solidity,
some easily supporting the weight of a 12-ton tractor,
others giving way when a man steps on them. Sometimes
they collapse from their own weight.
A crevasse covered over by such a bridge ls completely
Invisible and hard to detect even from the air. It ls no
exaggeration to say that crossing through such a zone of
camouflaged crevasses Is like walking across a minefield.
Luckily, air pilots spotted a narrow passage through
this zone, and a land team was later able to mark out
the route with bamboo poles. Thus the vital question as
to whether land transport could be used to penetrate
into the interior to set up the observation stations was
now answered.
Other flights over the Interior revealed that there were
no landmarks on the Ice cap, thus making it Impossible
to take bearings on ,the route from Mirny to the sites
of the future stations.
Shortly after the completion of the main building sites
at Mirny, a new effort was made to obtain Information
on the inland regions. A convoy of sledges drawn by
two 80 h.p. diesel caterpillar tractors left Mirny on April
2, 1956 and headed south. Its mission was to reconnoitre
the land and gather data on the conditions likely to
confront future expeditions. The convoy covered 235
miles moving in the direction of the magnetic south pole
and reached an altitude of over 9,000 feet on the snow
plateau. Here they halted and subsequently became the
first scientific station to be set up in the Interior of the
continent the Ploneerskaya Station.
It was an arduous journey, made particularly hazardous
by long projections of ice which rose from the surface
to a height of a yard or more, and by the deep soft snow
in which the treads of the tractors sank or skidded. The 33
men on the sledges suffered cruelly from the rough going.
Such a journey requires not only tip-top physical shape
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INTO THE INACCESSIBLE (Cont'd)
WORLD RECORD FOR DEEP-FREEZE
and a talent for acrobatics, but dedicated enthusiasm as
well.
This first expedition into the interior of the continent
began in April when the Antarctic autumn is well
advanced and the slopes of the ice plateau are almost
ceaselessly swept by winds driving the snow before them.
In such weather even the briefest halt may have
catastrophic consequences. A motionless sledge is
immediately covered over with snow and what may have
begun as a momentary pause can turn into a forced halt
lasting two or three days or even a week. Only after
the storm has ended and the winds abated can the men
think of freeing the sledges and moving on.
Because of the late date of departure from Mirny the
men of the expedition and their work were plagued by
the high winds and the extremely low temperatures which
dropped well below -50° C. (-58° F) towards the end of
the journey. Moreover the intense cold severely tested
the solidity of their equipment, even those items made
of steel.
The expedition proved that another factor seriously
hampered living and working in the interior, i.e. the
sharp drop in atmospheric pressure due to the high
altitude of the ice cap. This not only put a strain on
the men but also interfered with the functioning of their
vehicles operating with internal combustion engines.
r,he second Soviet Antarctic expedition, led by
A.F. Trechnikov, reached Mirny at the end of
1956-early 1957. With it came ten powerful caterpillar
tractors designed for travel to the heart of the continent.
Preparations for the journey began at once. All the heavy
equipment for setting up the Vostok station on the Geo¬
magnetic South Pole including housing for the men, elec¬
tric generators, radio gear, a kitchen, etc. was loaded on
sledges ready for installation on arrival. At the same time
the new caterpillar tractors were tested under Antarctic
conditions.
On February 14 the vehicles of the second expedition
left Mirny to set up the auxiliary station of
Komsomolskaya. After many hardships the convoy
finally reached its destination. Fuel reserves were by now
exhausted and the late season made it extraordinarily
difficult for aircraft to land. It was considered too
dangerous for the party to winter on the spot, so after
the convoy had been "weatherproofed" the entire team
was brought back to Mirny by air.
On February 28, a second convoy set out to reach the
site for the future Vostok station. Again, snowstorms and
soft snow, temperatures of -55° C. and the rarefied
atmosphere hindered progress. The convoy halted at an
altitude of 10,600 feet some 400 miles from Mirny. Here
a temporary inland station named Vostok I was set up
and soon began its scientific investigations.
On October 8 a tractor-drawn sledge train left Mirny
for the geo-magnetic pole. Huts, a generating station,
a navigation post and an electric kitchen were loaded
onto six tractors and the convoy with its team of 27 men
under A.F. Trechnikov set off.
As it advanced it was supplied with fuel from the air,
and by November 4, having passed the Pioneerskaya and
Vostok I stations, it reached the point where a base had
been prepared for the Komsomolskaya station during the
previous autumn. From there it proceeded southeast and
on December 16 it reached the vicinity of the Geo¬
magnetic South Pole where the new Vostok station was
established at an altitude of over 11,000 feet, some 875
miles from the coast.
It is in this region that a new Pole the Pole of Cold
was discovered where the lowest deep-freeze temperature
of our planet was found when a thermometer reading of
-83.3° C. was recorded. The strain on research staffs
« - of living and working in these rigorous winter conditions
M during the polar night can well be imagined.
Soon a third Soviet Antarctic expedition reached Mirny
and prepared for the final push to reach the Pole of
Inaccessibility.
On December 26, 1957, a convoy from this expedition
composed of ten all-purpose tractors and 20 improved
sledges left Mirny. After delivering urgently needed
stores to the Vostok station and visiting the Komso¬
molskaya station, it set its bearings due south-easterly.
The deeper it thrust into the Interior the more powdery
the snow became until the tractors found themselves
sinking to depths of 80 inches and more.
By February 10, the convoy had travelled some 880 miles
from Mirny and had reached an altitude of 11,700 feet.
At this point the Sovietskaya station was established
and five days later was in operation. In the meantime,
the scientists and specialists at the Mirny Base had been
making full use of the winter to prepare new expeditions
for the spring.
On October 24, a convoy started up its motors
and moved off for the Pole of Inaccessibility.
Just over one month later it reached the Sovietskaya sta¬
tion and after a halt of five days set off on the final lap of
the expedition. Eighteen men led by E.T. Tolstikov made
up the group. At the end of 11 days and 1,300 miles from
the main base at Mirny, the convoy finally reached the
point designated as the Pole of Relative Inaccessibility.
Here a new continental observation post was set up. When
scientific observation had been completed the convoy
began the return journey to Mirny.
Until this venture ideas about the central area of eastern
Antarctica were largely based on conjecture. Once an
up-to-date scientific station had been set up In this
region its former mystery disappeared. Instead of merely
being able to pass on to the world's centres of science
scraps of information picked up during reconnaissance
trips, these new stations set up in the heart of the
continent were now able to transmit detailed and exten¬
sive reports on all the geophysical processes taking place
in the remotest corner of our planet.
A vast amount of scientific knowledge was also
amassed by the convoys of tractor-drawn sledges used to
set up the various stations. Observations were made
throughout these expeditions and a thorough investiga¬
tion was thus made of eastern Antarctica, the least
accessible of all regions.
Aircraft played a major part In the setting up of the
inland stations. They flew a total of 635,000 miles over
the ice-cap and their observations made it possible to
draw up a contour map of the surface of the east
Antarctic ice-cap.
The existence of the sixth continent of our planet has
only been known for the past one hundred and forty
years. Its study has proceeded at a slow pace and its
contours have only gradually been filled in on maps. Its
secrets were only truly revealed during history's greatest
science research project the International Geophysical
Year.
Although the IGY has now ended officially, this re¬
markable example of scientific co-operation continues to
develop through the international Antarctic Treaty which
makes Antarctica the only continent of peace on our
planet where not only war but every form of military
activity is forbidden. As such, its importance to hu¬
manity grows greater every day for it shines as a brilliant
example for all other continents.
M. M. Somov has been active in polar research since 1938. He
was head of the drifting ice-floe station North Pole-2 (1950-51)
and of the first Soviet Antarctic expedition (1955-57). Holder
of the title, Hero of the Soviet Union, he was awarded in 1959
the Vega Gold Medal of the Swedish Anthropological and Geo¬
graphical Society, and in 1961, the Patron's Gold Medal of the
British Geographic Society. Dr. Somov is deputy director of the
Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute of Leningrad and is
also a permanent member of the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research.

THE THREAT
OF HIDDEN
CHASMS
Trans-Antarctic Expedition
t"Hk-ß+-
¡
USIS
The vast white spaces look reassuringly smooth and safe. But tho mantle of snow
conceals deadly trapsenormous chasms largo enough to swallow up ontiro
convoys of tractors and sledges. During tho Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic
Expedition in 1958, a Sno-cat tracked vehicle in the party lod by Vivian Fuchs
broke through the lid of a deep chasm (left) and remained suspended across It
like a bridge. To guard against such dangers, American explorer-technicians
have devised a vehicle equipped with electronic detectors, (above) which reveal
the presence of invisible crevasses. Below, tho towering walls of a crevasse.
USIS
I
35
