Air France, ParisLEPTIS THE MAGNIFICENT. To the people of present-day Libya launched on a programme of economic
betterment and higher living standards, the magnificent ruins of Leptis Magna, one of the oldest cities on the
Tripolitanian coast, are a reminder that their forebears built grandly and lived well on the products of a then fertile soil.
Buildings like amphitheatre (above) with its colonnaded courts, made Leptis one of the proudest cities of Roman Africa.


WAKING THE SLEEPING LANDS
T:
by Kathleen McLaughlin
he mediterranean region has been called the
cradle of western civilization. Since the
prewar era, the cradle has been rocking again at an
unprecedented rate.
In 1937 the population was 136,000,000. By 1957 it was up
to 175,000,000. Statistics indicate that by 1975 it will have
reached approximately 275,000,000.
- From any angle, an 80 per cent upsurge in population
in less than 40 years poses grave problems. They become
graver when, as in this instance, the countries affected
can even now provide only a pinched existence for their
multitudes.
Here civilization is in a race against the calendar.
Economic progress must be accelerated, while the margin
of time still holds, between the rising generation and
looming disaster.
The challenge is to erase deterioration stemming from
a thousand years of misuse of the land; to achieve
balance between agriculture and other sections of the
economies; and to lift average per capita income to a
point somewhat more comparable to that of industrialized
nations.
For countries on the European side of the Mediterra¬
nean, conditions are less difficult and prospects brighter
than for the Middle East and African nations on the
opposite shore.
Despite severe handicaps, progress here has been
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
57

SLEEPING LANDS (Cont'd)
Where every drop of water counts
definite since 1950. In industrial phases at least,
advancement has been fairly remarkable and regardless of
fluctuations, national income has risen at the satisfactory
average of six per cent annually. To expedite improve¬
ment, United Nations experts contemplate measures
tailored to conditions In each country. For these southern
European nations the goal Is to raise gross domestic
production from $27,500,000,000 In 1956 to $69,000,000,000
by 1975, continuing the present rate of advancement of
five per cent per year.
Across the water to the south, the assets in the Middle
East and North African countries shrink in ratio as
liabilities expand. Four-fifths of this land is desert.
Inadequate communications have always hampered
efficient administration, and destructive use of the soil
continues virtually unabated.
Average per capita income in these countries at present
is just about $155 a year.
In the Middle East and North African countries the
U.N. objective is to bring their combined production to
$29,000,000,000 by 1975. The proposed annual rate of
increase of 5.5 per cent would be more than twice the
current momentum. This would double the 1956 agricul¬
tural volume, and triple the output of goods and services.
More than five years ago the United Nations began
assessment of debits and credits that would have to be
weighed, within the scope of the Mediterranean project.
Experts compiled the data and wrote the report. Its more
than 200 pages of text, tables and graphs show widely
divergent conditions, rates of progress, and future
potentials.
Water is the key to the major problems. Enough dams,
reservoirs and irrigation canals to conserve and utilize
rainfall and surface waters to the maximum would open
up and make arable extensive areas not now cultivated
and increase many-fold the yields in those presently
tilled. Systematic searches for underground Water
sources are already proceeding. Adoption of dry-farming
methods in the most amenable arid areas holds further
promise for the unfolding years. Reforestation of
suitable treeless areas is a "must".
Here is a project of proportions so mammoth that it
has taken years merely to outline what must be done,
and where, and when. There is only one executor possible
United Nations and its family of specialized
agencies.
By this time the natural priorities have been worked
out. In the van will come the United Nations Special
Fund to make the indispensable preliminary surveys,
whenever the resources of a country prove insufficient to
finance them alone. Once the findings have been
weighed, plans can be adjusted to determine which of the
other agencies will be required, and on what scale and
timing.
F REQUENTLY FAO or ILO or WMO will have had
occasion to make concurrent preliminary
reconnaissances in their particular spheres, and can
plunge forthwith into their different programmes.
Unesco will take on the educational facets and WHO will
set about prevention and control of any existing
communicable diseases, as well as teaching hygiene and
sanitation, opening clinics and instructing native
technicians.
There will be need in plenty for OPEX (Operation and
Executive Personnel), to recruit administrators for two-
or three-year contracts, to serve in and with the minis¬
tries of countries still plagued with a shortage of top¬
flight officials of their own. Each one will train his suc¬
cessor "on the job."
To forge ahead in its contest with population growth
the Mediterranean region must plan shrewdly and swiftly,
taking first things first. Encouragement for those most
hopeful of progress came recently through a decision of
co the Special Fund to help finance several long-term
development projects there.
They cover ground-water development in Greece; pilot-
programming of the Antalya area in Turkey; watershed
management and ground-water collection programmes in
Israel; soil surveys and irrigation and drainage projects in
the United Arab Republic; agricultural research in
Tunisia, and a survey for preparation of an agricultural
development plan in the Rif region of Morocco. Total
investment by the Special Fund will amount to $3,624,100.
In these cases the Special Fund leads the way for
eventual programmes which sooner or later will engage
the services of every one of the U.N. agencies, as many
are already at work in some of the countries named. They
are active on reform of land tenure systems; water and
flood control; training of additional technicians; weather
and climate recordings; civil aviation problems; transport
and telecommunications; health services; and improve¬
ment of basic energy supplies.
All these and many more aspects ' of life in the
Mediterranean countries have to march forward in
concert if the region is to be saved and restored to its
former glory as the centre of western culture and civiliza¬
tion.
S pace precludes detailed examination of the
individual countries and their pace of progress
to date, with "assists" from certain U.N. agencies. One
country closeup, however, can bring the sjene alive.
On Christmas Eve of 1951 a new and sovereign nation
emerged in an ancient land on the shores of the-
Mediterranean. Libyans celebrated in an atmosphere of
gaiety touched with solemnity.
Their ancestors in past ages had walked proudly and
built grandly, but on that December 24 of Libya's
independence only crumbling ruins were left to testify to
their imposing cities, their thriving commerce, the
productiveness of their once fertile soil. Even in decay,
the great city-port of Leptis Magna, birthplace of one of
Rome's greatest emperors, Septimus Severus, still speaks
eloquently of former beauty, culture and prosperity.
Rarely has a state raised its standard with so little on
which to rely to meet the expectations of the future.
With one of the lowest levels of living in the Middle East,
and a very high birth rate, Libya had few apparent natural
resources; a terrain 85 per cent of which is sand and rock
desert; light and capricious rainfall, and frequent
droughts.
Only 5,000 Libyans had had as much as five years of
schooling, and there were just 14 university graduates in
the entire country.
Civil service administrators were nonexistent for fairly
obvious reasons. Under the Italian occupation they were
neither required, nor trained. In the postwar period of
United Nations trusteeship the three provinces Tripoli-
tania, Cyrenaica and the Fezzan were administered by
the British and the French, engrossed with immediate
emergencies.
The most fertile soil occupies a narrow strip bordering
the Mediterranean. The rest is now arid, except for a
few oases. Yet 93 per cent of Libyan production is
agricultural, and 87 per cent of the population depends
for its living on the land. More than 90 per cent of the
people are nomadic, roving with their herds in search of
pasturage and practicing shifting cultivation.
As a "Child of the United Nations," Libya looked for
economic and financial help to the same source from
which had come its political sovereignty.
United Nations technical assistance in the average less-
developed country is confined to a few sectors of the
economy. In Libya, it has radiated out in every direction
like the spokes of a wheel.
On this largely barren land a depressed agriculture has
been and remains the crux of economic woes. At times
a score of experts from FAO have been busy there on a
wide variety of projects.
Since 1953 Malcolm Amott, an Australian sheep expert,
CONT'D ON PAGE 60

:3ító&
FROM SAND
AND DESERT ROCK
Since achieving independence In 1951, as
"A Child of the United Nations", Libya has
been striving to overcome overwhelming
obstacles to economic and social development:
a terrain 85 % of which is sand and rock
desert, sparse rainfall and a depressed agri¬
culture (on which 87 % of people look for a
livelihood). With help and advice from U.N.
technical assistance specialists, more and more
farmers are replacing outmoded farming
methods (left) with newer techniques and
better tools. Under a programme to achieve
a better balance between farming and other
sections of the economy, young Libyans
receive technical Instruction (below) In the
Vocational Training Institution at Tripoli
Unesco photos
59

THE SLEEPING LANDS (CONT'D)
Metamorphosis of a nation
has been in Libya, commissioned by FAO to improve the
breed of fat-tailed Barbary sheep as a first step toward
establishment of an industry to supply wool blankets and
carpets. These animals, believed to be survivors of flocks
that roamed the Nile valley as long ago as 2,000 B.C.,
represent the wealth of the nomads.
Tough and hardy, they are among the few beasts able
to subsist in so Inhospitable an environment. During
drought periods they live on the fat stored in their tails,
while other animals perish of thirst. This hazard has
been reduced through the sinking of tube wells, the
stocks of fodder and the re-seeding of ranges fostered by
Mr. Arnott and his colleagues.
E
60
STiMATES are that some 7,000 sheep alive today
wo,uld have died under conditions prevailing
only a few years ago, and that 20,000 others have reached
a peak of physical well-being.
On two experimental farms in Tripolitania the Austral¬
ian has scored notable gains with his work of up-grading
the strain. From Turkey he imported the superior
Karaman type for selective cross-breeding with the Libyan
Barbarys, whose short, nondescript coats held scant
promise of the quality of wool fibre demanded for rug-
making.
He Introduced inoculation against the diseases and pests
to which all sheep are susceptible; the process of the
sheep-dip to prevent their recurrence; mechanical wool-
shearing, and other modern techniques.
Nomads who paused in their wanderings for a look at
these goings-on were more than cynical at first. A
couple of years later they were inclined to be impressed,
scanning the first generation of the new strain produced
by cross-breeding, and comparing their larger, sturdier
bodies and thick white fleece with their own rag-tag and
bob-tail sheep. About 100 owners of sizable flocks have
adopted these procedures, and have been more than
gratified by the visible improvements. Converting the
nomad sheep farmers will take time, but the trend is
gaining.
Since 1956, the principal research station for sheep-
improvement has been competently operated by a young
Libyan, trained under the EPTAS fellowship programme
in a two-year course in Australia. Arnott has moved on to
establish another in the Fezzan.
On permanent farms response has been speedier
and resistance far less. At points, dry-farming
methods have been demonstrated, as they are practiced
in the southwestern Great Plains region of the United
States, and in the dry areas of Australia. Each season
they have been adopted by more of the cultivators. The
Government allocated $411,000 for the purchase of the
requisite equipment, earmarking almost one-fourth for
improved types of hand tools.
The latter were loaned without fee to the farmers
co-operating. Scythes, motor pumps, animal-drawn carts
and steel ploughs replaced many of the primitive sickles,
spades, wooden plough, stone hammers and threshing
sledges used in Libya for centuries.
They have helped materially in lifting the annual
output levels. They have also provided an appreciated
dividend, by way of their contribution toward modest rises
in rural living standards.
Heavier, powered machines were put into Cyrenaica
province in the autumn of 1958, accompanied by demons¬
trations of their use and care. In that season 6,600 acres
of forage and cereal crops were seeded and cultivated,
most of which would normally have been allowed to lie
fallow. The superiority of the yields carried its message.
In 1959 the acreage was tripled.
BLINDFOLDED STUDENTS learn touch-typing
in clerical classes of Libya's Vocational Training
Institution at Tripoli. In a country in which, ten
years ago, only 5,000 people had had as much as
five years of schooling and civil service administrators
were non-existent, clerical class students can find
jobs immediately on completion of their course.
A MATTER
The problem before us is that of overcoming grinding
povertynothing more, nothing less. The challenge
of survival bolls down to this: we must multiply today's
output of goods and services. It is food that hungry mouths
need, employment that idle muscles long for, creative
tasks that their minds and energies are eager to tackle.
Can we win this war against want ? Can enough be accom¬
plished in time to meet reasonable demands of these people
now on this planet and those of the tremendous numbers
of additional people who will be with us in the near future ?

In every phase of agriculture the gradual evolution
continues. The Government actively supports mechaniza¬
tion and newer techniques; extended use of chemical
fertilizers; dissemination of better seeds; credit plans for
farmers; anchoring of shifting sand dunes by plantings
of grasses and shrubs; the processing and marketing of
dates; the spread of veterinary services, and training of
students destined to administer the extension services
familiar in more advanced countries.
Education from the primary level on up was imperative
in Libya. But in a country with so many illiterates, few
teachers could be located. They had to be trained, and
the question arose where? Existing schoolhouses were
Unesco - Guy de Belleval
OF LIFE OR DEATH
The job before us is indeed one of appalling dimen¬
sions, of bewildering complexity and terrible urgency.
But that job is not insuperable. There is no question in
my mind that at least ninety of the hundred low-income
countries have the resources physical and human to
provide in reasonable time decent living standards for their
people. The underlying reason for underdevelopment is
under-utilization of these resources.
Paul G, Hoffman,
Director General of the U.N. Special Fund,
The War We Must Win, W.A.Y. Forum, Spring 1961.
either destroyed or badly damaged, and were in any case
far from adequate in number. Makeshift quarters had to
serve, and many Arab-speaking instructors were made
available through a cultural agreement the Government
signed with Egypt.
Improvization, under the circumstances, was a natural
alternative for one of the educators sent by Unesco
to organize a primary grade system in Libya. Dr. Ade¬
line Babbitt of the United States calmly seated her
classes of small pupils on the ground. She used the sand
for a blackboard on which to do sums, draw maps or
teach writing; date pits and small pebbles to inculcate
the fundamentals or arithmetic, and a story-hour to
convey the lessons of history in the absence of textbooks,
blackboards, paper or pencils. And the children learned.
Conditions improved gradually. Buildings were repair¬
ed, class-room equipment was provided, young Libyan
teachers managed to keep at least one lesson ahead of
their students. Enrolment grew, especially among girls,
for whom educational opportunities have traditionally
been all but nonexistent.
At the elementary level an Increase of 119.7 per
cent was registered for girls in the first five
years of free schooling, compared with 69.2 per cent for
boys. By 1957 school attendance for both was 46,299 as
against 26,269 in 1952. Libya does not yet boast a
university, but in the first half-decade preparatory school
enrollment rose from 393 to 1,954, or 497.2 per cent, and
that of secondary schools from 142 to 620, or 436.6 per
cent.
Star rating' for performance belongs to the Libyan
Government Vocational Training Institution at Tripoli,
which the International Labour Organization of the
United Nations took over in 1953. By 1957 ILO represen¬
tatives were able on schedule to turn over the installa¬
tion to Libyans they had prepared, and who now carry on
as instructors.
From the beginning, the objective was to train junior-
grade skilled workers for Government shops. Need for
the former was so intense that a veritable tug-of-war
developed over these youths. Instructors struggled to
keep them at their desks until they had finished their
courses. Administrators tried to wrest them away pre¬
maturely, to fill some of the yawning gaps in their bureau
staffs.
Yet since 1952, 500 clerical-section students have been
graduated, and snatched up promptly for waiting jobs.
Much more time and effort has been needed to place
technical-section graduates, numbering about 300,
although prospects brightened so much last year that the
United Nations Special Fund has allocated over
$1,000,000 to help establish an institute of higher
technology.
There, young Libyans will get training in mechanical,
civil and electrical engineering as well as in food process¬
ing, to meet demand for technicians in Government and
in private enterprises. The staffs to date have comprised
largely foreigners. The Government will furnish
$2,000,000 toward the $3,057,800 cost of the five-year
programmes.
Recently the whole Libyan situation took a sudden and
dramatic turn, with the announcement of oil strikes in the
desert. Government contracts with foreign oil companies
for exploration rights now promise to pay off fairly
handsomely.
If indeed, oil and gas revenues from the Libyan desert
are about to propel into relative opulence a nation so
long and so harshly buffeted, its people are better
prepared than before to sustain the symbolism of ma¬
gnificence their forbears expressed exquisitely in Leptis
Magna, 2,000 years ago.
This article is condensed from a chapter in "What's
the U.N. Doing There Some Success Stories of United
Nations Technical Assistance," by Kathleen McLaughlin,
published by the Institute for International Order, New q.
York, 1961. For copies write to: Institute for International
Order, Suite 1034, 11 West 42nd Street, New York 36, N.Y.
