AUSTRALIA'S
GIANT EYE ON
OUTER SPACE
by Selwyn Speight
All photographs Australian
News and Information Bureau
TINIEST CREVICES in the dish structure
of Australia's giant radio telescope were
sprayed with aluminium paint to stop rust
forming which interferes with reception.
HIGHASAN 18-STOREY
BUILDING and 210 feet
across its parabolic dish, the
telescope here swung into a
horizontal position makes a
space-age umbrella for a
grazier and his flock of sheep.
Apowerful radio "eye" designed to look ten
times as far into the universe as has ever
been possible before, has now come into operation ' in
south-eastern Australia thus opening a new chapter in
the exploration of outer space. A' huge radio-telescope,
of the steerable "dish" type, it is the most efficient and
versatile instrument of its kind in existence, able to scan
vast expanses of the cosmos.
The instrument, a glittering giant, stands on the plain
near the town of Parkes, about 200 miles west of Sydney.
The structure overall is as high as an 18-storey building,
and its movable saucer-shaped aerial system which forms
its effective "eye" measures 210 feet across.
The new telescope has »been built for the Australian
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (C.S.I.R.O.)' at a cost of about £800,000 (half
of which has been provided by the Rockefeller Foundation,
the Carnegie Foundation and private donors in Australia) .
There is only one other comparable instrument in
existence: the big radio telescope at the Jodrell Bank
Experimental Station of Manchester University, in
England. The English instrument is slightly larger 250
feet across the -dish but the Australian one, according to
its design specifications, will be more precise and powerful.
Although its position on the earth's surface enables it to
examine part of the northern sky, its main task will be
to search the southern heavens. Together, the two great
radio-telescopes open up a new era of scientific investi-

gation and research into the structure of the universe.
In the exploration now going on within the solar system,
the new Australian radio-telescope can play a significant
part (as the English one already has). If an "instrument
probe" is sent to land on the moon, and if the device
reports back by radio, the Parkes Instrument almost
certainly will be better, able than any other to pick up
these weak signals. If, during the next few years, similar
probes are sent to Venus or Mars, or to any other planet,
the best information may well come through Parkes.
However, this is not the principal task for which the
C.S.I.R.O. instrument was conceived and designed. Its
main purpose is simply to look further and more clearly
into the universe than has ever before been possible.
The essential role of a radio telescope is to detect the
strength and source of radio waves which reach the earth
from outer space. Some idea of the scale over which the
instrument has to work the distances and times can be
grasped from the following information given by Dr. E.G.
Bowen, chief of the Radio-Physics Division of C.S.I.R.O.,
and one of the world authorities in his field: he was a
member of the British team which developed radar in
World War II.
A radio wave, Dr. Bowen explained, goes round the
world seven times in a second. It would take eight
minutes to reach the sun; 100,000 years to go across our
local galactic system; and more than a million years to
reach the nearest external galaxy. It would take up to
5,000 million years to reach some of the distant radio stars
we are watching.
To call the telescope a radio eye is not straining a
metaphor. The Instrument "secs" a band of waves in the
electro-magnetic spectrum.
To be efficient, to "see" the picture clearly and In sharp
focus, the radio eyes must not only be very precise, but
also very big, the bigger the better, within practical limits,
and the Australian Instrument is getting near the limit
with existing structural materials and techniques. The
instruments are most useful when they can look in any
desired direction, just as human eyes do.
The design of the C.S.I.R.O. giant has thus been a major
engineering problem. The great steerable "dish" which
forms the effective eye must be able to watch and keep
watching automatically whatever is under observation
a galaxy, the sun, the planets, the moon, or a man In
space. To do this, It must move very smoothly and
exactly, compensating automatically for the spinning of
the earth on its own axis and for the earth's orbit round
the sun, and compensating also for the movements of the
object being watched. It must also be able to scan
continuously a given portion of the sky, noting anything
of interest.
The big dish must be strong enough to withstand the
fiercest gales, and stiff enough to keep an almost perfect
parabolic shape. It must shed rain without trouble and
withstand the corrosive effects of the weather.
27
CONT'DON NEXTPAGE

GIANT EYE (Cont'd)
Probing the secrets
of the universe
Another problem faced by the engineers and
manufacturers a London firm and a German factory in
Augsburgwas to control the direction Of the big dish very
precisely. The solution adopted was to place a small
master control device at the centre of motion of the whole
telescope. The small master can be "aimed" at any one
"part of the sky or made to track any celestial object with
a high order of accuracy; and the big dish is a "slave"
ingeniously linked to it and controlled by it.
The radio signals collected by the dish are reflected on
to one point, a small receiving aerial, at the focus of the
dish, and then amplified by electronic means so that they
may be examined. To avoid losses in transmitting these
faint signals, a special preliminary amplifier has been
placed at the focus in a cabin supported high above the
dish by three tubular steel legs.
This posed a physical problem for the designers: how
to give easy access to the aerial cabin from the ground.
The answer was not only ladders, but a lift big enough for
one man; it will work inside one of the tripod legs. But
the lift itself posed problems: most lifts have simply to
run up and down; this one has to run in almost any
position.
The telescope, which stands in central New South Wales,
on a bare and level plain in the Goobang Valley, about
15 miles from Parkes, is to be only one component in the
whole complex of radio astronomical devices planned for
the area. The C.S.I.R.O. has chosen a site which it hopes
will become, for several decades, the chief centre for this
kind of work in the southern hemisphere.
The area near Parkes had some obvious advantages. It
was comparatively free from radio interference (as
hampering to radio astronomers as a city's bright lights
are to optical astronomers) and it had few weather
extremes (severe weather variations can also have serious
effects).
Here, eventually, will be a big range of radio-physical
instruments intended for the study of the heavens, with
ancillary equipment, and installations of many kinds
workshops, living quarters for the permanent staff, a
small airfield (a landing strip is already in operation).
A second and smaller radio telescope (60 feet across the
dish), which can move over miles of rail track, will work
with the big one.
The fact that Britain and Australia have taken the
lead in radio-astronomy is, in Dr. Bowen's opinion, the
result of radar experience and training during the war.
"The Russians and the American," he said, "have put a
great deal of effort into nuclear research, into research
into rockets and putting vehicles into space." Neither of
these two countries possesses the most efficient equipment
for picking up signals for the rockets they are using in
space probes. Thus the collaboration of all concerned,
thanks to achievements which complement each other, will
remain an essential element for progress in the explora¬
tion of space.
Australia's radio-telescope is the only one working in
the Southern Hemisphere. In the Northern Hemisphere,
other radio-telescopes are due to come into operation,
like the one at Nançay in France whose first stage of
construction has now been completed. These new instru¬
ments are being designed to carry out specialized tasks.
Questioned about the problems which the new radio-
telescope may help to solve, Dr. Bowen had this to say:
"We don't know whether the universe is bounded or
whether It reaches to infinity in every direction; whether
it has a beginning and will have an end, or whether it has
a perpetual existence; whether there are intelligent beings
on other planets... There are any number of theories and
hypotheses about these things but very little evidence of
a factual kind. These are the ultimate problems we are
trying to solve... We hope that with the giant radio-
telescopes ours and otherswe'll get some way towards
the answer."
HUGE DISH of radio-telescope Is three-quarters of an acre in size and able to receive radio waves from the outer¬
most fringes of the universe, 5,000 million light years away. The "dish" rests on a rotating turret supported by
a massive concrete tower and can be pointed at any area of sky. Diagram, right, shows parts of the telescope.
28
Inner part of dish, 54 ft.
in diameter used for
very short wave lengths
Height, 186 ft. 6 in.
above ground level
Elevation Rack
moves telescope
vertically.
