!.< os TERNOJ E I Wî D E JB FACIEI ET V T K I I ÍKTEBIORI S
M ii"!, ¿V
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
SOLOMON'S TEMPLE WITH
A 17TH CENTURY LOOK
The description of Solomon's Temple In Jerusalem (built about 1,000
years before Christ, but destroyed and reconstructed several times)
has come down to us through passages in the Bible (particularly the
Book of Kings) from the writings of the historian Flavius Josephus
and from the Hebrew texts of the Talmud. Yet when 17th century
drawings were made of it on the basis of these texts under the direction
of a famed English theologian, Bryan Walton, who was well versed
in Hebrew, Latin and Greek, the result was the astonishing building
(above) of well-defined mid- 1 7th century appearance, standing on a
kind of enormous pedestal (below). Thanks to present-day historical,
archaeological and ethnographical knowledge we are now familiar
with the things that once existed whereas the 17th century analysts
of the ancient texts knew only the meaning of words. Right, a drawing
of Solomon's Temple made according to the specifications prepared by
two modern archaeologists, W.F. Albright and G. Ernest Wright.
£VV
Drawing by C. F. Stevens, "The Biblical Archaeologist", Vol XVIII
24
Bibliothèque Nationale. Paris

TRANSLATORS
WORDS AND THINGS
by Georges Mounin
TODAY, when translators are becoming almost
as essential a feature in the smooth-running
office as stenographers, foreign languages are, generally
speaking, learned at school. Since the XVIth century, at
least In Europe, this procedure has been so automatic
that it has destroyed any notion that languages might be
properly learned In any other way. Other methods are
looked on as incomplete and suited at best for training
amateurs or rough translators; they are accepted in the
absence of anything better. The system still regarded as
ideal is to learn foreign languages at school. Students
may be advised to live abroad for a time but this ls
treated as an optional addition to help in acquiring a
good pronunciation (since nowadays we have records and
the radio).
This attitude, linked to the development of school edu¬
cation in modern Europe, has completely transformed our
concept of the operation involved In translating. What
we learn at school is a foreign language so that if we ask
what is the essential and adequate requirement for a good
translator we are told that he must have as sound a
knowledge as possible of the language to be translated.
Those who know somewhat more about the subject will
add that he should have a still better knowledge of the
language into which he proposes to translate.
This development of the study of languages has resulted
in the loss along the way of an old view of translation
which was vigorously urged up to the time of the Renais¬
sance: merely knowing the words ls not enough In trans¬
lating, it is also essential to know the things referred to
in the text to be translated.
This was the view held by Cicero who contrasted trans¬
lation of sense with translation of words; it was the view
held by the French philologist, Etienne Dolet, who laid
down as the prime condition of any good translation a
knowledge of the sense and content of the text; it is the
well-established view held by Interpreters who contend
that In Interpreting Russian statements at a congress on
organic chemistry, for example, while It Is Important to
know Russian It Is still more Important to know about
organic chemistry.
This old view shatters the routine conception of trans¬
lation. It emphasizes, for Instance, that "knowing Latin"
signifies two quite durèrent things: It means knowing the
Latin words and Latin grammar but it also means know¬
ing the realities of Latin life which ls very dllferent from
our present reality to which those words refer us.
Translation of a text In a foreign language calls for
fulfilment not of one but of two conditions. Both are
essential and neither is sufficient by Itself: a knowledge
of the language and a knowledge of the civilization with
which the language deals (i.e. the life, the culture, the
most complete ethnography of the people who use that
language as their means of expression).
It Is not enough to study a language in order to be able
to translate It well. What ls needed ls a study not by
way of supplement but as a basic foundation and not
haphazardly but systematically of the culture corres¬
ponding to the language concerned. Stays abroad, for
example, are not a minor optional addition to the equip¬
ment of a good translator; they represent half of his
knowledge.
The suggestion that linguistic knowledge, however per¬
fect, ls not enough to ensure good translation may seem
paradoxical or banal but It can be verified almost
experimentally and in a way which ls perhaps Itself no
less paradoxical.
In 1653, the Cambridge theologian, Bryan Walton,
published the Biblia Sacra Polyglotta In Hebrew, Chai- 25
dean, Greek, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopian, Per¬
sian and Latin. In the first volume was a Latin "Triple
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORDS & THINGS (Cont'd)
Freakish animals & botanical blunders
Description" of the Temple of Salomon, based on Holy
Writ, Josephus and the Talmud. The author, a Saumur
theologian, compared the three texts and analysed each
Indication of shape, position or dimensions relating to the
Temple so as to reconstruct a picture of the building.
This Professor of Hebrew knew almost as much Hebrew,
Greek and Latin as we know today and read the texts
fairly accurately. Yet when his forty-page commentary
was given to the illustrator of the volume (undoubtedly
under the direction of Walton himself) an astonishing
picture emerged simply from a reading of the words com¬
prising his text: the Temple of Solomon, carefully por¬
trayed in accordance with the trilingual text, looks like
any English or French building in 1650. Some indefinable
element belonging to the
period leads one to think of
St. Paul's Cathedral In
London or the Place des
Vosges in Paris.
What had happened?
The translators had done a
good job of translation,
had read the words of the
text correctly. The fact
that they saw a sort of
Louis XIV edifice where we
imagine Phoenician or Ba¬
bylonian architecture Is
because we know things
where they only knew
words. No doubt we can
read Hebrew a little better
than Walton was able to
do; but, above all, we know
the whole protohistorical
archaeology and ethnogra¬
phy of Asia Minor with
which they were un¬
acquainted. Bit by bit, we
have discovered the things
referred to by words which,
even though generally well
translated, did not enable
Bryan Walton to see the
Temple of Jerusalem.
The Idea of using illus-
strators of a text to check
the element of linguistic
knowledge and the element
of ethnographic and/or
cultural knowledge needed
for translation is justifield
by the fact that. In respect
of a description, the illus¬
tration is actually a re-
translation of the words of
the text. If the illustrator
is not directly acquainted with the thing described, then
he only translates whatever has been provided by linguistic
knowledge; we can thereby measure the contribution made
by a cultural knowledge of the things themselves. There
are other striking examples of the proof of this measure.
Vilmorin Collection
Biblical errors. Throughout
history translators appear to
have stumbled over correct
botanical Identifications of the
more than ISO flowers, fruits,
trees, shrubs and herbs men¬
tioned In the Bible. We now
know that "the lilies of the
field" (Luke 12.27) were In
reality anemones (right). When
the Prophet Isaiah (35: 1,2)
declared "the desert shall re¬
joice, and blossom as the rose,"
he was actually alluding (say
present-day philologists and bo¬
tanists) to the Narcissus (above).
F
26
or example, paleontology revealed that there
once existed in Patagonia huge edentate crea¬
tures like the Megatherium which, when standing on its
hind legs, was taller than an elephant. For a long time
it was believed that these types of giant Sloth were fossils.
Then a series of discoveries of recent bones, skins and
excremential matter together with Araucanian or Pata-
gonian legends referring to the recent existence of a
harmless but invulnerable grubbing animal, hairy and of
terrifying appearance, led to the suspicion that some
species of Megatherium, far fom being extinct since the
Tertiary period, might possibly have survived almost up
to the present time.
A search was accordingly made for references to its
existence in the accounts written by early XVIth century
travellers. Among those consulted was Father Thévet's
Singularités de la France Antarctique (1558). This work
contained a remarkable description of a creature referred
to as a succarath, readily and conclusively identified with
some sort of giant fossil Sloth such as the Mylodon, a
close relation of the Megatherium, and possessing a long
tall. When it was being hunted, according to Father
Thévet, the animal would carry its young on its back and
protect them with Its long thick tail.
Since he considered the creature "very strange In
appearance", the explorer decided to include a drawing
of it in his book and it is this which makes the story
interesting from the translator's point of view.
B ERNARD Heuvelmans, from whom all the pre¬
sent details are taken (1), writes that "the
naïve picture accompanying this text shows a sort of very
thin lion with a tail like the bushy appendage of an ant-
eater and a grotesque head with a certain resemblance to
a bearded man. At least four or five little ones are
huddled on the creature's back.
"It is more than likely that the drawing was made not
by an eye-witness but in accordance with another per¬
son's description, as was customary at that period. It is
this which explains the frequent distortions in illustra¬
tions of animals which none the less seem to be correctly
described in the text..."
Here is a striking exam¬
ple of what results from a
translation of words un¬
accompanied by a trans¬
lation of things. The illus¬
trator (who had not seen
the animal) translated lite¬
rally what Father Thévet's
words, and nothing but
those words, meant to him.
The difference between his
engraving and the recons¬
truction of the Megathe¬
rium (carried out by a
Twentieth century artist
with the help of all our
present knowledge in zoo¬
logy and paleontology) in¬
dicates the difference bet¬
ween linguistic knowledge
(words without things) and
cultural knowledge (words
together with the things
to which they refer).
This view of translation
as a double operation (in which the acquisition of the
meaning of certain words by means of other words is
not enough) indicates the legitimacy of another para¬
doxical demonstration. Suppose that we were told that
the glazed brick dragons (known as sirrouches) at the
Ishtar Gate in Babylon were very probably some sort of
dinosaur and not imaginary monsters "hétéroclite com¬
positions of parts taken from four or five different
creatures" we would take this to be simply a journalistic
invention.
Yet such is not the case. The famous "scaly quadruped
with the front feet of a lion, the hind feet of an eagle,
the head of a serpent on a long neck, a forked tongue and
on the top of his head, a long horn, various fleshy excre¬
scences and even a short -mane like a horse" must be a
portrayal of some animal which actually existed. -
If the Ishtar Gate had been uncovered in 1802 instead
of 1902, says the zoologist Willie Ley, then the Babylonian
(1) "Sur la piste des bêtes ignorées." ("On the Trail of Unknown
Animals.") Vol. 11, pp. 3-53, Pans, Plön, 1955.
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

COUSINS OF THE SLOTH
The succarath, the strange animal shown
on right, was described In great detail
by a 1 6th century French priest, Father
Thévet, when he wrote one of the first
books about the natural history of
North America. Whereas a drawing
made at that time on the basis of Father
Thévet's description produced the freak¬
ish animal depicted here, modern
zoology has conclusively Identified the
succarath with some sort of giant sloth
such as the Mylodon, perhaps now
extinct (drawing, below), whose present-
day relative is the three-toed sloth
(shown in photo below with Its offspring).
Titr-rl from " jcic li IV.tr (jn V.t-lfi Ignore* '
27
i Jean-Marie Baufle

WORDS & THINGS (Cont'd)
This sirrouch (right), adorns the
Ishtar Gate, built In Babylon more
than 3,000 years ago. This monster
depicted In low relief alternates with
figures of bulls. It Is now believed
that the artists of the Ishtar Gate
reconstructed the sirrouch from
descriptions of a rare African reptile
a kind of Iguanadon or Cerato-
saurus whose existence Is still affirmed
today in the Congo Basinbrought
back to Babylon by travellers who had
actually seen it. By a series of linguistic
"translations" followed by pictorial
"translations", a species of Ceratosau-
rus (below) became the Babylonian dra¬
gon, a beast of mythological aspect.
BSTfeiai
_.	. 	-^ *-
_^. _^, ..
i -~*L f /
^oBfccL *
m. i J . ! i
SI 1 -^** ,<-?>&M
m^ma'^ú^-i&m
1
^'^'^ m%Z<M
' ~ r m : r m
"V |
n
Hpr jd ^êm m 4 m Hv^l
^. - -
..#~<ágr /& /T2*e&
«F.-L^_ i.^^^^M
From "Sur la Piste des Bêtes Ignorées"
Babylons dragon was a real African reptile
dragon would have been taken for a mythological animal;
but, during the XlXth century, the great fossil family of
dinosaurs was discovered, Including one particular group,
the Ornithopoda, which has the hind feet of a bird like
the Ishtar dragon. As early as 1918, the archaeologist,
Koldewey, recognized that if a creature resembling this
dragon were to be met with in nature, its place would be
in the order of Dinosaursand that the Iguanadon of the
Belgian Cretaceous period would be its closest relative.
Koldewey went no further than that but Willie Ley has
found the most plausible explanation so far of the pre¬
sence of this sort of Iguanadon or Ceratosaurus on the
walls of Babylon: we may be dealing with a monster,
reaching a length of some 36 feet, whose existence is still
affirmed to this day throughout the Congo basin.
H
28
ere again, Heuvelmans has scrupulously
supplied the quasi-experimental "translation"
operations whereby a rare African reptile became the
Babylonian sirrouch: the artists of the Ishtar Gate
reconstructed the dragon in accordance with accounts
given by travellers who had seen it (Babylonian travels to
the centre of Africa are a well-attested fact). It was a
linguistic description which provided the model and
supplied the basis for the styllzation which resulted in
the monster:
"If you doubt the validity of this", says Heuvelmans,
"I suggest the following experiment. Ask someone who
has never seen a reconstruction of a dinosaur a child,
for instance to draw an animal in accordance with the
foregoing sketch of the Congolese 'dragon'. There ls a
strong probability that this person will draw a creature
with a remarkable resemblance to the sirrouch of the
Ishtar Gate.
"He will first draw a quadruped with the shape of some
familiar animal (a horse, a dog, a bull or a cat), and will
then, following your indications, add a long tail and the
head and neck of a snake. When you mention the clawed
feet, he will undoubtedly draw the feet of a lion or a cat.
Then he will place on the creature's head the various fea¬
tures which you specify: the small horn and the crest of
tentacles. Finally when you make it clear that the crea¬
ture is a reptile, he will cover the body with scales.
Except for the hind feet, this will result in a very accep¬
table sirrouch."
Bernard Heuvelmans' analysis shows, us how, through a
series of linguistic "translations" followed by a series of
pictorial "translations", a species of Ceratosaurus became
the Babylonian dragon. When we follow the same series
in the opposite direction, we can fairly consider the Baby¬
lonian creature as presumptive evidence for the existence
of the African Ceratosaurus.
These curious linguistic "experiments" may seem far
removed from the concern of translators but they illus¬
trate, experimentally, the very ancient idea (and, in Its
scientific form, the very new idea) that words do not
take the place of things like synthetic rubber replacing
natural rubber. Linguistic signs do not wholly replace the
things they designate, they refer us to those things.
Speaker and listener, or author and reader, must jointly
carry out this journey from thing to sign and from sign
to thing if they are to understand each other.
At its most difficult, the whole work of the
translator consists precisely of trying to give
his readers some idea of the inaccessible things discussed
in a text written in a foreign language and alluding to a
culture which is often also foreign, either In part or in
whole. To give people in the Tropics an idea of winter
and snow; to explain the parable of the Good Sower to
inhabitants of the New Mexico deserts who plant and
watch over their seeds one by one; or even to convey to
French readers that, the Federal Trade Commission or the
Interstate Commerce Commission in the United States
have nothing in common with any ministerial or parlia¬
mentary trade commission in France: these are tasks as
skilled and as difficult as discovering the Megatherium
which is undoubtedly hidden behind Father Thévet's
Succarath or the Ceratosaurus which is probably con¬
cealed by the sirrouch of the Ishtar Gate.
The translator must not be satisfied with merely being
a good linguist, he must also be an excellent anthropo¬
logist; and this amounts to saying that he must not only
know all about the language he is translating but also
all about the people who use that language. And he
thereupon becomes a prestidigitator, a magician, the high
priest of an eighth art.
GEORGES MOUNIN is a professor of the Faculty of Arts and
Letters, at the University of Aix-en-Provence, France.
