46

A BOOST FOR PRODUCTIVITY
I N time of need, man has found ways
to win more food than he believed
possible from the soil. Switzerland, for
instance, despite its limited arable land
area, nearly doubled Its agricultural pro¬
duction during the Second World War.
1ULf OULD you like to know, for any
region of the world, which kind of
corn you can cross with another so as
to obtain a hybrid suitable for a given
climate or a given degree of humidity,
resistant to a certain kind of plant
disease or animal pest? At FAO Head¬
quarters in Rome, a young woman
presses buttons and the information you
need shoots out of a filing cabinet.
Like a huge matrimonial agency for
members of the grain family, this collec¬
tion of information has made possible
millions of successful marriages.
lUlAIZE production has been multiplied
thanks to hybrid varieties. Where
a harvest of 1,350 lbs per acre was con¬
sidered a great triumph a generation
ago, 3,500 lbs is now possible. New fer¬
tilizers have also enabled the yield of
many other cereals to be tripled or
quadrupled.
THE oceans are a vast food hamper of
practically inexhaustible resources.
The nutrient material produced annually
by the sea amounts to one hundred
million million tons, of which only a
minute proportion, the world over, is
recovered as edible fish. . .
THE upward trend of world fish pro¬
duction continued in 1961, rising to
a total of about 40 million tons, or some
7 % more than In 1960. A large part of
this expanded catch came from Peru
which has quickly become third largest
fish producer in the world, with 4.5 mil¬
lion tons in 1961 compared with only
500,000 tons in 1957. Production in¬
creased rapidly In the U.S.S.R. and also
in Japan where it Is estimated to have
reached six million tons in 1960 for the
first time. In several important fisheries
of Western Europe, however, catches
were smaller.
COFFEE, soybeans, cocoa, sugar, maize
and rice showed the largest increas¬
es in the world production of major
agricultural commodities in 1960-1961,
in comparison with average production
figures for 1953-1957.
A GRICULTURAL prices continued
to drift downwards during 1961
although more slowly than in 1960. By
the end of 1961, sugar prices were the
lowest in twenty-five years.
UiORLD meat production In 1961
(59.8 million tons) was 19% above
the average production between 1953-
1957.
|N the less-developed regions of the
world, the upward trend of food pro¬
duction has been especially marked In
Brazil, Egypt, the Federation of Malaya,
Iran, Israel, Japan and Mexico.
QCEANIA'S food production rose by
6% in 1960-1961. Australia's wheat
production was 13% more than in
1959-1960.
A surprising fact about increased food
production In Western Europe is
that the majority of countries where per
capita increases were most marked be¬
tween 19C2 and 1960 (Greece, Italy,
Spain and Yugoslavia) are in the eco¬
nomically less developed southern part
of the region.
rice production increased by
6% in 1960-1961 as the result of
abundant harvests in India, Japan and
Pakistan and in secondary producing
countries.
THE world's per capita food production
(excluding Mainland China) which
recovered Its pre-war level during the
period 1948-1949 and 1952-1953, has
now risen to about 14 % above the pre¬
war figure.
PRELIMINARY estimates show that
world milk production rose by about
2% in 1961. The largest proportional
Increase (about 4%) was in Western
Europe and Canada. In Australia pro¬
duction declined by about 5% owing
to adverse weather.
POLAND had a record grain harvest
of about 16 million tons In 1961 and
its agricultural output rose to a new
peak over 8 % above the previous year.

FIRST VICTORIES
Ihe fight against hunger has been going on
since the world began and man, until recently,
has not been well equipped for the struggle. Even
when he turned from hunting to agriculture, which did
much to secure a regular supply of food, the struggle
was still unrelenting. Droughts and floods, the vagaries
of weather and the attacks of diseases and pests often
destroyed his crops. Indeed, the history of mankind in
agriculture is marked by disastrous famines.
Records are incomplete, but we know that in the first
1,800 years of the Christian era there were 350 famine
years in Europe a famine in one year out of every
five. Even in Britain, a fertile island not usually
associated with famines, there was a recorded famine in
one year out of every ten. In other parts of the world
people suffered more severely. For instance, during the
2,000 years for which records are available in China there
have been 1,800 famines, almost an average of une every
year.
by Dr. Frank W. Parker
Assistant Director-General, Technical Dept., FAO
Real progress in the fight against hunger and malnutri¬
tion has been recent. Before 1800 most of the world
was ill-fed by the standards of today. As late as 1840
the French food supply was largely cereals and starchy
roots, with only one-third as much meat as they have
now. It had much the same characteristics as that of
some of the underdeveloped countries of today. % What
produced the change in the developed countries of the
world during the last 120 years?
Modern agricultural research may be said to have had
its beginning in the 1840's with the establishment of the
Rothamsted Agricultural Experimental Station in England
by Lawes and Gilbert and the chemical research of Liebig
in Germany. These pioneer research workers also
initiated the production and use of chemical fertilizers
and experiments that led to the understanding of the
value of legumes and their use in crop rotations. From
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
47

FIRST VICTORIES (Cont'd)
MOTORIZED FISHING BOATS and improved gear have done much to boost harvests from the
sea in areas of the world where boats and equipment have changed little since far-off times. Here,
traditional fishing craft now fitted with outboard motor shoots past sail-driven vessel off the coast
of Ghana, where fish catches have shown great increases, adding valuable protein to food supplies.
U.N.-Unesco
The spectacular example of Japan
48
this beginning, research expanded in Europe and in North
America with the establishment of the Federal Depart¬
ment of Agriculture and the Land Grant Colleges and
Experiment Stations in the 1860-90 period. The research
programme expanded from production and the utilization
of natural resources to include work on marketing, nutri¬
tion, and economic, social and organizational problems.
Agricultural development proceeded slowly throughout
the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century.
For example, in the United States the index of agricultural
production only increased about 20 per cent in the 25 years
from 1914 to 1939. In this period, however, production and
economic research, agricultural education and extension
laid the basis for rapid progress when increased produc¬
tion was essential.
World War II and the post-war period produced the
demand and the other economic incentives favourable to
increased production in North America, Western Europe,
Japan and Oceania. Throughout these regions program¬
mes were developed to make this demand felt effectively
at the farm level, and supplies of credit were provided to
enable farmers to secure the material needed to put
advanced technical knowledge into practice on a wide
scale.
In North America, despite some restrictions, agricultural
production is currently 50 per cent greater than in the pre¬
war period. That is, the rate of increase over the last
20 years has been more than three times the 1914-1939
rate. In Europe, current production is about 25 per cent
greater than before the war. These regions, and
Oceania, have attained adequate levels of nutrition for
nearly the entire population, and they are currently more
concerned with the difficulties associated with agricultural
abundance than with the means of increasing production.
This new situation may be attributed in large measure
to the wide-scale application of the accumulated store of
science and technology to agriculture, as well as to
changes in the economic and institutional conditions at
the farm level which encourage its use. The work that
was started in the 1840's is paying great dividends. Let
us now see what is occurring in the rest of the world.
Japan, the most highly industrialized country in Asia,
steadily increased agricultural production in the period
1880-1940. Current production is more than one-third
greater than pre-war. The population growth in recent
years has been about one "per cent per year. Agriculture
has made a substantial contribution to the great improve¬
ment in the national economy and diet in the last decade.
As in the West, Japan's increased production is due to
the rapid application of science and technology to
agriculture. This is reflected in the level of use of
insecticides, fertilizers, and increased mechanization by
the use of garden tractors and other machinery. This
progress was made possible by suitable institutions to
serve agriculture and economic incentives, including
agrarian reform, to encourage farmers to make the
investments required.
The example of Japan and Taiwan, which is also
increasing agricultural production at a good rate, is of
great significance for the rest of Asia. Their record shows
that the application of scientific methods and practices is
as effective in Asia as in North America and Europe.
The foregoing examples of positive achievements in the
fight against hunger show that in the more developed
and industrialized countries of North America, Western
Europe, Asia (Japan) and Oceania the battle against
hunger has been largely won, the great achievements
having been made in the last 35 years. The real question
before the world today is whether similar, or even greater,
progress can be made in the underdeveloped countries of
the world. We shall now examine some evidence that
gives at least a tentative answer to that question.
A number of the less developed countries, including
Mexico, Greece, Yugoslavia and Israel, have rapidly
increased agricultural production in the 1950's. Produc¬
tion in this group of countries has increased at the rate
of 5 to 8 per cent per year, whereas, with the exception of
Mexico and Israel, the rate of increase in population has

Almasy, Paris H. P. VERSUS OX POWER. Studies and experiments to evolve cultivation methods appropriate
to local and regional conditions and material resources have already paid big dividends in richer
harvests. Above, comparative experiment in tractor and ox-drawn ploughing takes place in same
Mexican field to ensure identical soil and weather conditions for a fair comparison of results.
been less than 1.5 per cent. In Greece, the production of
cereals increased from an average of 1.5 million tons per
year in 1949-52 to 2.5 million tons in 1959-60. In Mexico,
the increase was from 4.0 to 7.4 million tons in the same
period.
How was this accomplished? Both countries Increased
the area under irrigation, and developed and now use
improved high yielding, disease-resistant varieties of
major cereal crops. The use of chemical fertilizers
increased from 48.0 to 129.2 thousand tons of plant
nutrient in Greece, and from 21.5 to 172.5 thousand tons
in Mexico. In other words, these countries applied
essentially the same practices and technology that had
increased agricultural production effectively in North
America, Western Europe, Oceania and Japan. Associated
with the improved technology were good agricultural
research, extension, the provision of credit and cost-price
relationships that gave an incentive for production.
The countries were substantially assisted by foreign aid
programmes. Greece, for example, is estimated to have
CONT'D ON PAGE 52
THE 'ALCHEMY' OF FOOD
I N a farm in Malaya, pig raising and
fish breeding complement each other.
Pig manure Is put into the fish pond as
fertilizer for a water plant on which the
fish feed. The fish in turn are used as
pig food. Another plant called ipomoea
grows in the pond and provides the pigs
with fresh fodder. According to an FAO
specialist, "a pond suitably prepared to
receive the wastes from a pigsty can
produce, at no cost whatever, 250 lbs
of ipomoea and 7 lbs of fish per acre
daily."
BT ISH breeding has still plenty of
resources In reserve. The African
tilapia, which has been called a "mira¬
cle" fish, is now being bred on an
industrial scale in different areas of
Asia and in the West Indies.
T HE first factory for the commercial
production of fish flour was built in
Sweden in 1959. With a high (80%)
protein content, this flour is a foodstuff
five times as rich as the fish it is made
from. Added to traditional foods, fish
flour is likely to become an important
arm in the struggle against protein
deficiency.
CHLORELLA, a tiny fresh water algae,
is capable of transforming practically
all the energy It absorbs from sunlight
into vegetation. In 12 hours it increases
its weight fourfold. Its annual yield per
acre is over 100 tons ten times that of
wheat. An area five miles square can
produce enough protein for 80 million
people. Chlorella has six times as
much protein as rice, 30 times as much
vitamin A as calf's liver and four times
as much vitamin C as spinach, which it
resembles in taste.
I N the Far East noodles are now being
made of Zooplankton. In Thailand,
for example, more than 5,000 tons of
this highly nourishing foodstuff which
abounds in the sea, are eaten yearly.
Living on a diet composed almost entire¬
ly of plankton, the whale becomes
huge enough to provide 15 tons of oil,
as much fat as 500 pigs and as much
meat as 72 head of cattle.
Dr. Melvln Calvin has been awarded
the Nobel Prize for having, with the
help of radioactive tracers, worked out
the complete cycle by which the grow¬
ing plant takes the energy from the sun,
the elements from the air and the miner¬
als from the soil and converts them
into the sugars and starches of our basic
foodstuffs. Work is going on, notably in
the U.S.S.R., on the further stages by
which plants produce proteins. Perhaps
man may one day be able to start with
the elements themselves and, by-passing
the intermediates of the soil, the plants
and the animals which eat them In order
to feed us, make food as a druggist
compounds a prescription.
49

FIRST VICTORIES (Cont'd)
Modern technology opens the way
received the services of 10 agricultural experts per year
from 1955-61, and about 25 fellows were sent abroad each
year for study of approved agricultural methods. Mexico
has probably had the assistance of 30-40 foreign experts
and has sent about 50 men abroad for training in each
year of the same six-year period. Yugoslavia has had a
rather exceptional technical assistance programme in that
great emphasis was placed on sending men for observa¬
tion and training abroad at least 1,400 in the six years.
It also received the services of about 25 international
experts per year.
This assistance made it possible for these countries to
accelerate agricultural production more rapidly than if
they had had to depend strictly on their own resources.
The transfer of knowledge, together with the economic
assistance provided by foreign aid programmes, was
undoubtedly a major factor in their success, even though
they themselves had to do virtually all the work.
Another group of 10 to 15 countries, of which
Brazil, the United Arab Republic, the Philip¬
pines and India may be considered examples, made good
progress in agricultural production during the post-war
period, even though the progress was not as striking as
in the countries just discussed. Most of the countries in
this large group increased production at a rate of 2.5 to
4.0 per cent per year, while the population was increasing
at the rate of 1.5 to 2.5 per cent.
This, plus some degree of economic expansion provided
for a modest increase in per capita food supplies and
living standards. We should keep in mind that all of
these countries are predominantly agricultural; crop
yields are low and illiteracy is high. In other words, they
are in a relatively early stage of economic development.
We may now examine the progress of India in more
detail, since complete data are available in the recent
publication "The Third Five-Year Plan." During the
period of the first two Five Year Plans (in 1950-51 and
1960-61) India Increased agricultural production by 41
per cent and food grains production by 46 per cent. This
approximates to an increase of 3.5 per cent per year. During
the same period the population increased 21.5 per cent;
consequently, with agricultural production increasing
substantially faster than the population, there was some
improvement in food supplies per capita and levels of
nutrition. Of course, receipt of agricultural surpluses
from other countries has helped as well. It is estimated
that per capita food consumption increased from 1,800 to
2,100 calories per day, and that per capita consumption
of cloth increased from 9.2 to 15.5 yards per annum, or 68
per cent.
These gains in agricultural production were accom¬
panied by an increase in the area irrigated of 36 per cent,
318 per cent in the use of nitrogen fertilizers, 773 per cent
in the amount of credit provided by co-operatives, and
similar increases in other items that contribute to im¬
proved agricultural production.
Of equal, or greater, importance for long-term deve¬
lopment is the foundation that has been laid through edu¬
cation, training and the development of institutions
which support and serve agriculture. The community
development programme, starting in 1952, now reaches
370,000 of India's 500,000 villages. Some 35,000 village-level
workers were trained and placed in service during the
co ten-year period. Local government has been given grea¬
ter powers and increased responsibility for development.
A National Farmers' Organisation, with an affiliated
Young Farmers' Association, has grown and functioned
with increasing effectiveness since 1955. Many new agri¬
cultural colleges were started. The number of entering
students increased from about 1,200 in 1950-51 to 4,600
in 1960-61. This obviously provides for a substantial
increase in trained personnel to serve agriculture.
India's agricultural development has been accompanied
and supported by development in other fields. For exam¬
ple, the Index of industrial production increased 94 per
cent in the ten-year period. The installed power capacity
increased 148 per cent; general education, as Indicated by
student enrolment, increased 85 per cent, and technical
education 239 per cent.
India is believed to represent a substantial number of
countries that have made reasonably good, but not out¬
standing, progress in agricultural production and deve¬
lopment during the last ten years. Probably of greater
importance than their actual physical achievement in
production is the groundwork that has been laid for even
more rapid production increases in the 1960's. The hope
of this is indicated in India's Third Five-Year Plan tar¬
gets which call for a 30 per cent increase in agricultural
production, or at a rate of about 5 per cent per year.
India's agricultural development was assisted by the
work of about 150 foreign experts per year through various
international programmes, and by a much larger number
of Indians receiving training abroad under the same pro¬
gramme. These technical assistance programmes made
significant contributions in dairy development and animal
health; agricultural education, research and training; fer¬
tilizer requirements and use; soil conservation and fores¬
try; fisheries; and crop improvement, including the deve¬
lopment of hybrid maize.
The results of ten years of technical assistance in India
give strong support to the thesis that it is one effective
means of accelerating agricultural development. It has
made an important contribution to the development of
institutions and trained manpower that undoubtedly will
provide great assistance to future development.
There are many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America where the increase in agricultural production in
the post-war period has been unsatisfactory, especially
when considered in relation to the growth of population.
There are many technical, social, economic and political
reasons for this. However, it is not lack of technical
knowledge of what needs to be done.
Among the great positive achievements of the
last 10-15 years is the improved understanding
of the ways and means of accelerating agricultural
production and development under a wide range of
conditions. Increasingly effective use of this knowledge
will doubtless be made in the decades ahead.
A second positive achievement is the realisation in all
countries that technical and economic assistance can
make a great contribution to accelerate agricultural and
economic development in the new nations of the world.
As a result it seems probable that the level of technical
and economic assistance in the next ten years will double
or treble that of the last ten.
In 1970 and 1980 we should look back on a period of
greater growth in improvement of living standards and
levels of nutrition than in the past 10 to 15 years. At the
same time, through continued research new facts and
methods will be developed that will provide the basis for
continued progress in the fight for improved nutrition and
living standards for the increased population of the world.

E. Khaldéia, A.P.N., Moscow
THE BOUNTIFUL STEPPE. In the Soviet Union, the dread Golodnaïa, or Hunger
Steppe, has been given a new name: "The Bountiful Steppe." Between 1 949 and 1 956,
175 million acres of virgin land were brought under cultivation and produced rich
grain harvests (above). There are still vast amounts of empty space in the world. In
Ethiopia alone, more than 180 million of the world's most fertile acres lie fallow.
Brazil's Amazon basin (nearly one-twentieth of world's land surface) is still virgin soil.
53
