MUSIC OF THE ORIENT
A new language for Western ears
by Alain Daniélou
Photo A. Martin © Atljj Photo
Governed by different rules and based on other forms, the music of Asian peoples is often
unintelligible to the peoples of the West, whose musical training and tastes are too dissi¬
milar for them to properly appreciate its beauty. Above, a flute player from Sumatra.
With the greater ease we now have In making
contacts across frontiers, we are gradually
coming to know more about the ideas and art forms of
other peoples. We thereby lose any feelings of uniqueness
or superiority and this, for all of us, is an immense gain.
Yet there are always some fields in which our ideas and
tastes have more difficulty in adjusting themselves to
unfamiliar forms of expression and w<2 are apt to deny,
or at least to disparage, the value of anything that strays
too far from our own aesthetic standards. One of these
fields is music.
Several times while I have been in Asia I have been
asked, for example, to help in answering Unesco question
naires dealing with the musical life in Asian countries.
The distinguished musicians and musicologists who drew
up these forms cannot be accused of bias and partiality,
yet I have often been embarrassed by the questions which,
unintentionally yet unmistakably, left no doubt that
"music" here was being considered exclusively In terms
of Occidental forms and traditions.
This fact alone seemed to reduce anything else to a
kind of folk music which, however charming and attrac¬
tive it might be, could not be regarded as anything more
than a simple and unsophisticated musical form surviving
among peoples who had still not attained the level of poly¬
phonic maturity.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

MUSIC OF THE ORIENT (Cont'd)
Learning to accept the unfamiliar
How should I have answered these questions? "No! We
have no orchestras, no conductors, no composers, no con¬
cert halls, and yet our musical art is skilful and erudite,
refined and richly developed. It has the power to move
immense numbers of people, it lends Itself to grandiose
and complex melodic structures and, all things considered,
it is perhaps even more suited than Western music to
express human emotions at their most subtle or their
most intense those, in fact, of humanity in general and
not simply of the people in the Orient.
I have often wondered how one could possibly approach
such a problem except through a long, difficult and some¬
what pedantic statement which would strike at the very
roots of accepted musical theory and inevitably provoke
stormy reactions. As it happens I have never been asked
for an explanation of this kind since the inquiry was sim¬
ply seeking material facts and figures on which to base
a programme for helping musicians and disseminating
musical works.
Before we can hope to look realistically and effectively
for answers to questions of this kind and before we can
expect to deal with the manifold problems which a recon¬
ciliation of the world's musical cultures would involve, it
seems to me that priority should be given to putting the
facts of the case before as many people as possible. And
what better and more eloquent evidence could there be
than fine works of music taken in their purest and most
original state from the musical treasuries of countries
with highly developed cultures and in particular those
of Asia?
Already audiences in America, Great Britain and Ger¬
many, and to a lesser degree in France and Italy, have
had the chance to hear great musicians from countries
28 like India, Iran and Japan, as well as orchestras from
Indonesia. The success of such concerts has exceeded all
expectations.
Yet however great the impact of a concert (the perso¬
nality of the musician and "local colour" have to be
taken into account) the musical impression it leaves is
transitory, thus making it difficult for us either to analyze
a work or to perceive and understand the outlines of a
musical system.
If we wish to see beyond the superficial aspects of tech¬
nique and feeling in a performance, we need to hear the
same work repeated (and where improvisation plays a
major role, the same rendering) in order to grasp, little
by little, its meaning and understand its structure.
We should remember too that a concert artist, always
mindful of success, tends to "play" to his audience, to
adapt his style to what he believes to be the public's- tastes
and habits. In the kinds of music where improvisation is
all-important, this colouring of performance can go to
extremes, as many famous examples have shown.
Today, however, in the gramophone record we have an
unequalled instrument for listening reflectively, intelli¬
gently and perceptively to music which has been recorded
in its natural surroundings and for its usual audience.
Freed from any picturesque aspect, from showmanship
and the exotism which the presence of musicians with
their costumes and instruments creates, we are able to
listen to this music in complete tranquility, under con¬
ditions when we are best prepared from every point of
view to understand it.
I am sure it is through records that we shall gradually
grasp the meaning of musical systems that differ from
our own, learning to appreciate to the full their beauty,
quality and values. This too can open up vast new hori¬
zons to us, revealing fields of musical experience whose
existence we had never suspected.

Richly garbed musicians of a Japanese orchestra perform
the classical Gagaku court music whose history goes back
over ten centuries. From left to right: flutes, oboes and
a mouth organ with vertical pipes. The orchestra also
uses a kind of horizontal harp and percussion instruments.
The zither, with some variations, Is a stringed Instru¬
ment common to countries both In the Occident and
the Orient. Here two girls from Viet-Nam play the
melodies of their country on an Oriental version.
Today the economic predominance of the Occident
creates a serious problem for Asian cultures. Few indeed
are the people of the Occident capable of realizing that
modern progress and Western cultures do not necessarily
go hand-in-hand. The same mistaken idea seems
nowadays to be spreading in Asian countries.
The real problem today Is how to safeguard some Inten¬
sely precious aspects of cultural life associated with peo¬
ples who, because temporarily they are economically less
prosperous than the countries of the West, are too often
lumped together as "under-developed" when, more often
than not, the reverse Is true.
Peoples with complex social structures and "over- dev¬
eloped" cultural systems have always been at the mercy of
invaders less cultivated than themselves in so many ways.
We quickly see the absurdity of a supercilious attitude
when we are dealing with monuments, architectural mas¬
terpieces or examples of the graphic and plastic arts
which need to be saved from damage or destruction. But
the problem becomes far less straightforward when It ls
a question of the living arts and, in particular, music,
though this is of equal importance. Here we come up
against difficult problems of evaluation.
When we hear a language being spoken which we do
not understand we readily admit our ignorance. Curiously
enough this does not seem to be the case with music.
Even when we hear a musical language, whose syntax and
vocabulary are completely different from what we are used
to, we believe we have understood it all and at once feel
competent to express our views on it, more often than


not basing them on a few inferior examples of the music
in question.
Tired of hearing absurd criticisms not only from unqual¬
ified visitors but sometimes from eminent musicians whom
they admire and respect, most Oriental peoples today try
to produce musical forms which, while still based on their
traditional music, have been adapted to their idea of
International standards. What they are trying to do ls to
make Asian music more comprehensible to foreign visi¬
tors and to avoid criticism and thereby gain a place of
high repute in world music. The disquieting thing about
it ls that psychologically speaking they are not entirely
wrong, although as a technical proposition the idea ls
absurd.
In the case of art music the theoretical problems
Involved in producing skilled adaptations make the task
an impossible one. It can only be done at the lowest level
and this generally corresponds to what in the Occident
would be an adaptation Into jazz of say Bach's inventions
or Chopin's preludes.
In other words an alien rhythm is applied to melodic
forms which are not, In fact, the essentials of the
original music. In the case of Asian music the addition
of polyphonic forms and attempts at modulation are
utterly destructive to the very foundations of the musical
language. Even if the melodic forms appear to have been
preserved they no longer have the same meaning, nor in
fact any meaning whatsoever.
The only effective antidote to this strange sickness ls a
psychological one and it will come from a much wider
appreciation In other countries of the masterpieces
of Asian music presented in their true and original forms
and In an uncompromisingly traditional style.
This musical education can come initially through
recordings and be carried on subsequently over the radio.
Primarily the need is for recordings of the great 29
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MUSIC OF THE ORIENT (Cont'd)
A unique Unesco
record collection
musicians and traditional orchestras of the various
Oriental cultures made under ideal conditions so that
selected examples of the musical systems which they
represent will be available for wide distribution. An
equivalent problem for the diffusion of Western music
has already been solved to a large extent.
These recordings should have more than a simple ethno-
musicological interest. The purpose is not to enrich the
musicological records of museums with the last examples
of musical arts which are doomed to extinction. On the
contrary, records of great living artists must be made and
widely circulated to pave the way for concerts and cultu¬
ral exchanges which could not only help to preserve Asia's
chief musical systems, but also Introduce us to a musical
art of which we at present know but little.
The production of these recordings is being supervised
by the International Music Council, a UNEsco-sponsored
organization, and they are being made in collaboration
with schools of traditional music, radio organizations and,
In most cases, with the support and help of governments.
Independent specialists are also helping to create a record
library which, both as regards quality of works and level
of Interpretation, truly represents the classical traditions
of different countries in their purest forms. Modern adap¬
tations and concessions to fads and tastes of the moment
have been scrupulously avoided and arrangements of folk
music of an orchestrated kind which have become quite
common in some countries are being systematically
excluded. (See details page 35)
In assembling these collections we have tried as far as
possible to draw a distinction between the different kinds
of music. Instead of offering a fragmentary sampling of
items, it has been decided to devote several records to spe¬
cific aspects of a country's music. This provides the room
needed to present complete works and the success so far
achieved by the collection shows that even from the view¬
point of musicians and music lovers belonging to other
cultures this choice was the right one.
Musical anthologies of Iran (two records), of
Afghanistan, of Laos and of Cambodia have
already been issued. Now in production are two records of
an Indian anthology (Vedic songs and music for dancing
and for the theatre from Southern India) and a record
of Tunisian music. Three records of Tibetan music and
a Moroccan record are now being made and Japanese,
Indonesian and Korean anthologies are also planned.
A parallel series of recordings of folk music will shortly
make available important traditional forms of music
from countries which do not possess, properly speaking,
an art music for which a written theory exists. This
series will not be limited to Asian music, but will
eventually deal with the traditional music of all countries
including African and European.
This collection of recordings ls not considered as
something final or complete in itself, but rather as
the first step in the creation of constructive links between
the world's different musical cultures. Thus a larger
place will be opened up for the great Asian musicians in
international musical" life and a greater measure of mutual
comprehension created, for we can never hope really to
know another people unless we understand the kind of
music which moves and stirs them.
Harpists and cymbal players accompanying singers and dancers who are
depicted on this bas-relief at the temple of Angkor-Vat testify to the
importance of music in the civilization of Cambodia. City ofAngkor with
its masterpieces of art and architecture came to light only a century ago.
ALAIN DANIELOU is Director of the Oriental Music Study
Centre at the Institute of Musicology, University of Paris
30 and a professor at the School of Oriental Languages in
Paris. He is adviser on questions of oriental music to the
International Music Council.
Village orchestra in Thailand. Players with their percussion instruments
are grouped on the left and those with xylophones on the right.

Unations-Louis Falquet
Giraudon
Sehtar player depicted by a 1 7th century
Indian artist. The Sehtar, a kind of small lute,
is also one of the popular instruments in Iran
where it is chiefly used to accompany songs.
Ravi Shankar, a leading Indian musician, playing the vina at a United
Nations Day Concert in Paris. The vina, one of India's chiefand most
ancient musical instruments, has three drone strings and four fretted
strings on the bamboo fingerboard, and is plucked Just like a guitar.
Afghan sarlnda player (below). This bowed instrument of South
Afghanistan is used like a gypsy violin, whose ancestor It might well be.
The music traditionally played upon It has much In common with the
gypsy music that Is usually associated with Eastern Europe.
© Alain Daniálou
Unesco-L. CottrcM
31
