A GROWING THREAT to wild creatures, including
seals, penguins and graceful seabirds like those above on
the South American coast, is widespread oil pollution.
The International Conference on the Prevention of
Pollution of the Sea, convened, by the Inter-
Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization
(I M CO), ended on April 13, 1962, with the signing of
the Final Act of the Conference by representatives
of 40 nations. These countries represent over two-
thirds of the world's shipping tonnage and well
over half the oil tanker tonnage. A number of other
countries sent observers to the Conference.
POLLUTION is due chiefly to tankers washing out stor¬
age tanks before taking on a new load or through ordinary
cargo ships replacing the fuel they burn by water ballast,
and later discharging this contaminated water. Below,
petrol tankers take on oil at Kuwait on the Persian Gulf.

DANGER !
OIL-POLLUTED
9 EL tf\ 9 by David Woodward
Antonio Quintana, Chile
On the shores of the seven seas, from the
Antarctic to Florida and all along the West
coast of Europe, the pollution of the sea by oil fuel
has for years been an unmitigated nuisance to all
those who look to the seashore for their pleasure or
for their livelihood.
Oil, washed up on the beaches, and left behind by the
receding tide, is at the least unpleasant. It spoils the
enjoyment of swimmers and holiday makers, ruining
their clothes and their shoes. If these conditions prevail
over any length of coastline, the dispirited holiday maker
can pack up and go home, or if he is lucky during the
holiday season find somewhere else to go; but thousands
of people whose livelihood is provided by the seaside,
suffer a loss of trade as well as damage to the carpets
and furnishings of their hotels or lodging houses.
Inshore fishermen suffer, for It ls Impossible to wash
fish covered with oil. Lobsters do not breed. And even
the most thoughtless must deplore the plight of sea birds
whose feathers have become coated with oil and have
thus been deprived of their power to swim or to fly.
Unless they receive highly skilled help, such birds arc
doomed to a miserable end by starvation. As an Indica¬
tion, it is calculated some quarter of a million sea birds
perish In this manner every year around the coasts of
Great Britain alone.
CONT'D ON NEXT PACE
Ci Almasy, Paris

POLLUTED SEAS (ü»>W
Messages in plastic bottles
dropped by the thousand in the
In the Antarctic the plight of seals and penguins
covered with oil has touched the hearts of even the
tough whaling men. Dr. Harry R. Lillie, a former surgeon
to an Antarctic whaling fleet, said in a newspaper
interview:
"I have found half-grown seals covered In a sticky tarry
mess, their eyes bloodshot with irritation; and penguins
hopelessly clogged, waiting for a slow death."
Dr. Lillie added that he had spent a lot of time cleaning
up the birds on board the factory ship:
"I must say with respect to the whaling crews, they
were generally little concerned with the .suffering of
harpooned whales, but I never found any of the men
around me who ever felt that our butter supply was too
good to be used to clean up oiled penguins."
The fact that pollution has become a major problem is
due to the enormous growth of oil fuel used throughout
the worlda fifty-fold increase in the last 40 years, and
almost all this oil is carried about the world in tankers.
S ir Gilmour Jenkins, President of the IMCO
Conference which met in April, told the
meeting:
"Last year 500 million tons of oil were carried across
the seas and ooeans of the world. If we assume that only
a very small proportion, say one part in a thousand, of
this vast amount found its way into the sea in the form
of persistent waste, we get the terrifying total of half a
million tons."
This oil, for the most part, is the sludge left behind in
the tanks of the ships after they have discharged their
cargo. The tanks are washed out by sprays of hot water
and pumped into the sea. And there it floats. Man has
always used the sea as a vast cesspit, for such various
commodities as sewage, unwanted high explosives and
atomic waste. But the oily waste is persistent and may
well stay in the sea for ever.
A secondary source of this oil is the practice of oil-
fuelled merchant ships replacing the fuel which they
burn during a voyage by water ballast. Later, the water
ballast, now contaminated by oil, is pumped out, and
another addition is made to the pollution of the high seas.
To deal with the whole problem two approaches are
being tried. One is to limit the areas of the sea in which
oily waste may be pumped overboard. The other is the
use of machinery on board ship, known as separators,
which remove the oil from the waste water or the provi¬
sion at ports of plant to receive the tank washings. These
are both fairly expensive proceedings. A separator also
may cost between £500 and £1,000 ($1,400 and $2,800).
At one large port for oil tankers, the plant to receive tank
washings has cost some £300,000 ($784,000). At the same
time, the period spent in getting rid of the washings must
be cut to an absolute minimum. Every day's delay to a
big tanker can easily cost as much as $1,000.
Athird source of oil on the sea, happily much
rarer, is through accidents, when a ship is lost
and her oil tanks perforated, or when the oil fuel must be
jettisoned to free the ship from a position of danger. As
one example of the damage that may be caused under
such circumstances, there is the case of a tanker which
ran aground at the mouth of the river Elbe, and lightened
herself by pumping overboard 6,000 tons of oil. An
enormous floating island of oil was thus released, which
slowly drifted about the North Sea. Oil islands like this
usually last for some 50 miles before they break up and
patches float away, but the record is held by an oil island
which appeared in the Red Sea and covered a distance
of 500 miles before it began to dissipate.
As for the oil island from the Elbe, some of it came
ashore on the island of Sylt, where the authorities spent
vast sums of money to get rid of it. A little further to
the north, six miles of beach on the island of Fanoe, off
Esbjerg, were covered with oil. The Danes tried spraying
it with sawdust and then attacking it with flame throwers,
but the oil survived, and the sand that it had contaminat¬
ed had to be bulldozed into open trenches.
Another example of the difficulty of getting rid of the
oil was provided by a tanker which was in collision in the
Solent, off Portsmouth, in England, a couple of years ago.
Two months later the authorities of that town were still
trying to clean up the mess. An enormous tonnage of
oily shingle had to be taken away and four thousand tons
of clean shingle brought in to take its place.
Among recent experiments made to get rid of oil which
has accumulated in this way has been a Danish attempt
Photo Rank Organization
12
OIL-FOULED BEACHES are a major headache for swimmers, holiday makers and local authorities.
Freeing them of the slimy, black oil that sometimes comes ashore is a major operation. Below left, clean¬
ing up an oil-polluted beach at Portsmouth, England. At Rampen, Germany (below right) an oil "island"
that drifted in with the tide had to be ploughed into the sand to a depth of three feet before it was clear.
I Dr. H. Ecke

i RS PCA OIL CAKED SEABIRD Is one of countless thousands that each year pay the penalty of years of
unchecked oil-dumping at sea. They are tossed up In flocks of thousands (a quarter of a million are
believed to perish around the coasts of Great Britain each year) feathers too matted by oil to fly.
to impregnate the oil with a powder which would cause
it to sink. Some fully effective remedy of this sort may
eventually be devised, but it will always be expensive;
the logical way of dealing with most of the oil In the sea
is to prevent its deliberate discharge and to encourage the
wider use of facilities ashore. This, in fact, was what the
IMCO Conference did.
The world's conscience had already been aroused
by the oil pollution problem before 1962. An Inter¬
national Convention on Pollution of the Sea by
Oil was drawn up at a conference held In London
during 1954 and was later ratified by 17 nations, Including
many of the largest shlpowning countries. Scientific
investigation was undertaken and, in some cases, was
followed by legislative action.
To start with, it was necessary to plot the ocean
currents which carry the oil. For that purpose, aircraft
dropped thousands of plastic envelopes Into the sea.
Inside each envelope was a message inviting the finder to
say where the envelope had been found. And a piece of
cork which made certain that the envelope floated. Two
vessels of the International force of weather ships dropped
an envelope overboard every day of the year 1954 at noon.
The results of all this research were plotted by the
British National Institute of Oceanography.
S OME governments also took legislative action.
'For example, the United Kingdom Introduced
the Oil in Navigable Waters Act which forbade British
ships to discharge oil within 50 miles of the coast. But
national measures could not be successful by themselves ;
it was clearly necessary to persuade all nations owning
large merchant fleets to adopt the same kind of measures.
This was the background to the IMCO Conference of 1962
where a number of resolutions were unanimously adopted
which aim at increasing the effectiveness of the earlier
measures and at strengthening them through a new Con¬
vention. Many delegates emphasized the Importance of
mineral oils to man, but deplored his casual approach to
the fouling of seas or shores and the destruction of birds
and marine Ufe.
The new Convention has considerably increased the
areas of the sea In which it ls forbidden to discharge oil.
Formerly fixed as any area less than 50 miles from the
coast, this zone has now been increased in many parts
of the world.
Discharge is now completely forbidden in the North Sea
and the Baltic; the 50-mlle limit has been superseded by a
limit of 100 miles off the North-Eastern coast of North
America, the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Persian
Gulf as well as the west coast of Canada, the Atlantic
coast of Spain, the coast of Portugal, the Arabian Sea,
the Bay of Bengal and Australian waters.
Three years after the ratification of the agreement by
the Soviet Union and Rumania, the Black Sea and the
Sea of Azov will become a zone in which discharge of
oil ls completely forbidden. These arrangements are
probably rather more than a halfway house to an eventual
ban on the discharge of oil anywhere at sea.
Clearly the seas of the world will not become suddenly
cleaner as a result of the April Conference or the new
Convention. But« useful progress has been made. Much
will depend on the* oil companies which control a large
share of the world's tanker tonnage. And, as William
Graham, Acting Secretary-General of IMCO, said, "no
truly successful result can be achieved without the active
co-operation of those directly responsible for operations
on board ship and ashore which may cause oil pollution."
David Woodward is a documentary writer-producer for
the British Broadcasting Corporation, London.
13
