THE STORY
A centuries-old battle
against chaos
by Mme Luce Langevin
20
"FOR ALL TIMES and all peoples", says the
inscription on this medal by which France in
I 799 planned to mark the introduction of the
metric system. In fact it only became the
country's legal and compulsory system of
measurement in 1840. The metric system
has now been adopted by about I 00 countries.
Although little recognized as such, one of the
greatest contributions of the French Revolu¬
tion to Europe and to science throughout the entire world
was the metric system," wrote the American chemist,
S. French.
To appreciate the full force of this remark, we should
bear in mind the almost unimaginable confusion in the
weights and measures used throughout the world before
the French Revolution.
It was In France more than anywhere else that the
inconsistencies were greatest. Measures varied not only
from province to province but often from town to town,
and the same name frequently applied to different
measures.
Let us take a few examples from the French Encyclo¬
paedia of the eighteenth century.
The definition given for the foot is "a measure of all
articles of commerce." The "King's foot" or "Parisian
foot" equalled 12 inches, or 144 lines (since there were
12 lines to an inch.) But, so we are told, there Were
120 lines to a foot at Rouen, 150.30 at Dole, 128.27 in the
city of Strasbourg, and 130.90 in the area surrounding
Strasbourg.
There was similar confusion in regard to another
measure of length the aune (ell), which was used for
cloth and which varied not only from region to region but
also according to the kind of cloth being measured. In
Paris, for instance, there were 3 feet 7 Inches 8 lines, 1. e.
524 lines, to the aune for linen, 526.40 lines for woollen
fabrics and 527,50 for silks. At Lille, there were 305, and
at Saint-Malo, 597 lines to the aune.
Another measurement of length, the toise, Is cautiously
described as "a measure of size differing according to the
place where it is in use." The "Parisian toise equalled
6 "king's feet".
In addition to the foot, the aune and the toise, there
were various other measures in use, including the Parisian
perche (18 feet) and the French perche (22 feet). The
nautical league was common to France, England and the
Netherlands (maritime connexions between the three
countries were then close), but the land league was diffe
rent in each province, and the farther one went from the
centre of France the longer It became.
Square measures and measures of capacity were still
more confused than long measures. The word arpent, for
example, which was an old Gaulish measure, was used
for an area measuring 100 square perches; but in the case
of the Parisian arpent the perche equalled 18 square feet
and, in the case of the French arpent, 20 square feet.
Speaking of another measure, the journal the area
that a farm labourer could plough in a day the great
chemist Lavoisier, who was at that time a fermier général
(a financier, responsible for the collection of taxes), said:
"It is a frightening thought that, in the subdivision of
Péronne alone, which is comparatively small, there are
17 different journaux."
The "dry measures" boisseau, rasiere, setier, muid and
CONT'D ON PAGE 22
THE ENGLISH YARD was established by King Henry I
in 1101 as the distance from the point of his nose to the tip
of his second finger. Drawing shows monks checking this
royal measure. Britain has not yet adopted the metric
system but its meteorological services are now to publish
centigrade temperature figures alongside Fahrenheit ones.
British and U.S. scientists have long used metric measures.

OF THE METRIC SYSTEM
SIXTEEN MEN MAKE A
'ROOD'. A 16th century
German treatise describes
how to establish the length
of a "rood" (today the
English rod, pole or perch
1/2 yards in length).
"Stand at the door of a
church on Sunday and bid
16 men to stop, tall ones
and small ones, as they
happen to leave at the end
of the service. Make them
put their left feet, one
behind the other, and the
length thus obtained shall
be a right and lawful rood
to measure and survey the
land with, and the 16th
part of this measure shall
be a right and lawful foot."
Drawings from "Mass und Gewicht" by H.J. Von Alberti, Berlin. 1957
TO EVERY MAN HIS MEASURE
Thousands of different measures and
weights used in ancient Egypt have been
identified. The hieroglyphics at left
represent two measures of distance.
Hand denotes a measure of five fingers
width. Below it is a sign for a "small
span" the width of 12 fingers.
"Man is the measure of all things,"
said Protagoras, the first of the Sophist
philosophers. From far off antiquity to our own times the
human body has been used to define units of measurement-
finger, hand, cubit (from elbow to middle finger tip) foot and
yard.
Sometimes man has fixed his measures in terms of his physi¬
cal prowessthe length of a bow shot, the distance his voice
would carry. In Tibet peasants once used a "cup of tea"
measurement. This was the distance which a man carrying
a scaldingly-hot cup of tea could run before the tea cooled off
to a drinkable temperature.
In 16th century France, Jean Fernel, a reputed court dcctor,
mathematician and astronomer, used a mechanical distance
recorder of his own invention to establish the distance from
Paris to Amiens. Fernel fitted his device on a horse (above)
¿Zfftír.
but it worked equally well on a man. It was activated by each
step taken and a bell tinkled after a certain number of paces
had been covered. This pedometer created a sensation in the
16th century and was remarkably accurate. It is believed that
similar devices were used in Alexandria 1,500 years earlier. 21

METRIC SYSTEM (Cont'd)
Europe's weights varied from city to city
sac which were used for grain, and the "liquid measures"
barrique, pot, pinte, chopine and feuillette which were
used for liquids, varied incredibly both from region to
region and according to the commodity being measured.
In old French measures of weight, however, things were
less chaotic. The "marc weight" or pound was used
more or less everywhere throughout the kingdom; so was
the half livre or marc, and the quarteron which was a
quarter of a livre. These weights were in the form of
goblets which fitted into - each other and made a pile,
called "Charlemagne's pile." It weighed 50 marcs al¬
together.
Yet France was not the only country where the situation
was so chaotic. The system of weights and measures
was fairly complicated, too, in the other countries of
Europe, though to a lesser degree than in France.
In England, for example, the yard was not the only
measure of length there was also the pole, the English
ell (3 feet 9 inches) and the Flemish ell (2 feet 3 inches).
There were two standard yards, one deposited with the
Royal Society in London and the other with the Court of
the Exchequer, but there was an appreciable difference
between the two which seems to have passed unnoticed
until 1791.
In the United Kingdom there were two different
measures of weight, accord¬
ing to the commodity being
measured. Troy weight was
used for gold, silver, precious
stones, medicines and seeds.
The pound avoirdupoids was
used for metals, wool, fibre,
leather, groceries and bread.
One hundred Paris livres or
Amsterdam pounds corres¬
ponded to 109.9 London
pounds avoirdupoids, 166 Ve¬
netian pounds and 146 Ro¬
man pounds.
The most widely used long
measure, the aune (ell), also
varied in value from one
country to another.
The origin of this variety
of measures, which was
common to all the countries
of Europe, is to be found in
the institution of the feudal
system.
When the countries of
Western Europe were part of
the Roman Empire, they all
used the same system of
weights and measuresthe
Roman systemwhich had been imposed on them, and
whose standards were kept on the Capitol in the temple
of Jupiter. Later, Charlemagne realized that a uniform
system of measures was an invaluable aid in maintaining
the unity of his vast empire. The measure of length,
namely, the "king's foot" and the weights of Charle¬
magne's pile were kept in the Imperial Palace.
But after the death of Charlemagne the empire was
split into small states, principalities and fiefs, each lord
being absolute master of his own lands. He thus fixed
measuring standards exactly how he wished and this
right was one of his most cherished prerogatives as he
could modify it to his own advantage. Each fief thus
gradually became a small independent economic entity.
Nevertheless the economic development in this feudal
society, which saw the improvement of craftsmen's
techniques, the appearance of the first manufactured
goods, urban development which led to a greater exchange
of goods between town and country and great journeys
of exploration by land and sea, led to a tremendous
expansion of markets.
At the time of the Renaissance in Europe, whenever a
peasant left his own village or a merchant traded with
«p cities other than his own, he found he was dealing with
different weights and measures. This was the situation
existing in France on the eve of the Revolution. The
Musée du Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris
THE PILE OF CHARLEMAGNE was the 8th century mea¬
sure of weight of the Holy Roman Empire used in France as
late as the 19th century. The 15th century version shown
here consisted of I 3 copper weights (left) nesting in each other,
On the right the decorated case which held the weights.
bourgeoisie which ran the country's economy needed a
unification of measuring standards to encourage business
and trading which by now was being carried out on an
entirely new scale.
"The idea of standardizing" weights in France is poss¬
ibly as old as the monarchy itself," one French historian
has written. From the 13th century on, numerous royal
decrees were promulgated in an effort to standardize
weights and measures. But the only success achieved
was that the "marc weight" pound was adopted through¬
out the country for the minting of coins.
In the 17th century a council for reform set up by
Colbert was defeated by the complexities of the problem.
The following century Necker also studied the question
but had no more success in finding an answer to it.
Nevertheless the movement towards reform was gath¬
ering momentum and the basic principles of the metric
system were being more and more widely accepted among
scientists, philosophers and economists.
The need for universally accepted, consistent and
accurate measures also corresponded to the new require¬
ments of science and especially of physics. In the
hands of men like Galileo, Descartes, Huygens and New¬
ton, physics had made sudden and rapid progress and was
now a real science. If the figures arrived at in measuring
objects were to be of any scientific value, the units used
by scientist had to be clearly
defined and absolutely con¬
stant. Standard scientific
measurements were there¬
fore essential.
The time unit the second
had been fixed long before,
because of requirements of
astronomy and its practical
use in navigation. But every
scientist had long made do
with measures of length and
weight which were his own
personal property, approxi¬
mating as near as possible to
the Châtelet toise or the Pa¬
risian marc. With the rudi¬
mentary techniques for mea¬
suring available at that time,
the measures reproduced
from the standards varied
considerably.
After Huygen's famous
study of clocks and the iso-
chronism of oscillations,
scientists and philosophers
gradually came to the con¬
clusion that they should take
as the unit not an arbitrary
length such as one related to the human body such as
the toise but an invariable, universal length of which
nature itself would ensure the constancy.
In 1670, Christopher Wren put before the Royal Society
in London the proposal that this constant unit should be
the length of a pendulum which swings once in half a
second. The same year, the Abbé Picard, an astronomer
of Lyons who was renowned for measuring the arc of the
meridian in France, determined the length of the pend¬
ulum which swings once a second in Paris, and put
forward a proposal that "the length of the pendulum
swinging once in one second might be called the rayon
astronomique; one-third of this length would be a foot
and twice this length would be the universal toise.
But the experiments conducted by the astronomer
Richer at Cayenne, French Guiana, in 1672 showed that
the length of a pendulum which swings once a second is
shorter at the equator than in Paris. This, therefore
could no longer be regarded as a universal measure. But
the idea of using the pendulum was not abandoned.
In the eighteenth century, this unit was still used by
some scientists, including some of the members of the
Royal Society in London, Jefferson in the Unites States
and La Condamine in France. La Condamine was
requested by the Académie des Sciences to measure the
arc of the meridian in Peru.
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

A historic moment:
CASTING METAL FOR THE OFFICIAL METRE
On May 13,1874, a casting of 250 kilogrammes of
platinum-indium metal was made (above) at
the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers, in Paris.
From this alloy international prototypes of the
metre and the kilogramme were to be made,
but tests revealed slight impurities. A new
and purer alloy was cast in London and from
this 30 metric bars were drawn. The same
alloy was adopted for the standard kilogram¬
mes. These international metric standards are
today stored with infinite precautions in the
International Bureau of Weights and Measures
near Paris. Left, the end of an X-shaped proto¬
type metric bar and, right, the international
kilogramme under its protective glass covers,
with, alongside, tongues used for handling it.
A pioneer among the world's interna¬
tional organizations, The International
Bureau of Weights and Measures came
into being in 1875 after the Convention
on the Metre was signed by 18 coun¬
tries. These States agreed to set up
the Bureau as a permanent institution
in Paris, the birthplace of the metric
system. Right, delegates to the Second
General Conference on Weights and
Measures (1895) came from 15 Euro¬
pean countries and from Mexico and
Japan. At the most recent of these
conferences in October 1960, delegates
from 33 countries adopted a new
method of determining the length of
the metre (see photograph page 25).
Photos Courtesy Int. Bureau of Weights and Measures
23

METRIC SYSTEM (Cont'd)
Reform born of the French Revolution
On his return, in 1748, he had cast a bronze rod the
same length as the second-pendulum at Del Quito and
sealed it in marble with the inscription: "A natural unit
may it become universal!" In his report to the Acad¬
emy, La Condamine stressed both the need to adopt the
decimal division and the need to choose "a fixed,
constant measure, taken from nature itself, and one that
Is verifiable in any century."
La Condamlne's plan was not the only one put forward
by scientists. Another natural unit related to the size
of the earth also had its ardent supporters. The idea
first came from the Abbé Mouton who in 1670 suggested
that the unit adopted should be the sixtieth part of one
degree of latitude, i. e., of the arc of one minute, which
be called the mille. The centuria and "decuria were to be
multiples of the mille, and the decima and céntima
submultiples of lt.
He was the first to propose the adoption of the decimal
division and stress its importance, and the remarkable
system of measures that he suggested contains the germ
of our entire metric system as it is today.
It was not until the Revolution that the material, social
and political conditions necessary for this reform came
into being. The question was raised in the Constituent
Assembly in 1790. Talleyrand rejected the toise and the
livre. "It Is not enough," he declared, "to adopt one unit
of weight and one unit of length instead of many. . . the
system must be perfect it must be based on a constant
model, found In nature, to which all nations would be
able to resort."
The scientists had proposed two different natural units.
Of these Talleyrand favoured the length of the pendulum
with a swing of one second, at "the mean latitude of the
civilized world," 1. e., 45 degrees, rather than the unit
based on the length of the meridian. So as to win the
confidence of the peoples, he advocated that new
measurements should be taken "solemnly" and in colla¬
boration with the Royal Society of London. This
collaboration was facilitated by the fact that on Janu¬
ary 13, 1790, John Miller had proposed, In the House of
Commons, the introduction of a standardized system of
measures based on the length of the pendulum swinging
once a second in London.
T1 1
24
alleyrand's plan was adopted by the Consti¬
tuent Assembly, and the Decree of May 8, 1790
Is the first statute concerning the reform, which thus
seemed to be on the point of realization not only in France
but also in England and the United States. Moreover, plans
already existed for co-operation on this subject between
the Royal Society in London and the Academy in Paris.
In the United States, the standardization of weights
and measures had been decided upon in 1787 when the
Constitution of the Union came into being; the length of
the second-pendulum at the mean latitude of the United
States (38 degrees) had been selected as the unit. Jeffer¬
son, favourably disposed to the French philosophers,
persuaded Congress to agree to the length of the pendu¬
lum at 45 degrees latitude and to follow closely the work
being done in France and England.
For political reasons, however, the standardization of
measures between these three great countries was not to
come about. A few days after the decree was promul¬
gated, the plans were upset by a threat of war between
England and Spain France being an ally of Spain. On
November 30, England announced that the arrangement
was "impracticable."
"It is much more natural," stated a report of the
French Academy, "to measure distances from one point
to another in terms of a quarter of the earth's great
circles than in terms of the length of a pendulum."
The proposal put forward by the Academy was approved
at once, and, on March 30, 1791, the scientists' choice
prevailed. The unit of length, which was defined as the
ten-millionth part of a quarter of the earth's meridian
and was called the "metre," was adopted as the basis of
the metric system.
However, all sorts of difficulties arose in connexion with
the Implementation of the project. The work which the
academicians had estimated would take two years was
far from completed when the fixed date was reached In
1793. The production of the measuring Instruments
needed by the various commissions was considerably
hampered by the» poor quality of scientific equipment
available in France.
After the Revolution, France tried to give fresh Impetus
to the manufacture of measuring instruments, but the
commissions had in fact to wait nearly two years before
they could begin their work.
Even when the technical difficulties involved in the
production of equipment had been overcome, other disap¬
pointments awaited the scientists. The Revolution had
many enemies, both in France and abroad. France was
rent by the counter-revolution and threatened by Invasion
at the time when Delambre began, starting from Dun¬
kirk, to measure his assigned section of the meridian.
Harassed by the suspicions of the people and the local
authorities, he was continually forced to have his in¬
structions verified; sometimes even his Ufe was in danger.
In Spain, his colleague Méchain was encountering other
difficulties. Spain had agreed to collaborate in the work
on triangulation, but It refused to allow Méchain to return
to France once the two countries were at war.
On December 21, 1792, the working out of a detailed plan
for reform was given to the Comité d'Instruction Publique.
On May 29, 1793, Borda, a member of the Commission
appointed by the Academy, announced the general outline
of the system proposed by the Academy. The principle of
the basic relations between the units of long measure,
square measure, cubic measure and measures of capacity
and weight was the decimal system. The length of
the metre, calculated from the results of the measure¬
ments of the meridian carried out by the Abbé Lacaille
in 1740, was selected as the basis of the system pending
the completion of the geodesic operations.
The new measures the metre, the gramme and the litre
and the new monetary unit, the franc, were to have
become compulsory on January 1, 1794. By that date,
however, France being at war, nothing was ready. Owing
to difficulties in applying the law, it was decided to in¬
troduce the new units gradually.
The metric system was actually established by the Law
of 18 Germinal, year III of the Revolutionary calendar
(April 7, 1795) which determined its final nomenclature
and prescribed the practical steps to be taken for the
Introduction of the new weights and measures throughout
the Republic.
In September 1798, it was to Talleyrand, at that time
Minister of Foreign Affairs, that fell the task of issuing
invitations to this first international congress on weights
and measures. Denmark, Spain, the Swiss, Dutch, Ligu-
rian, Roman and Tuscan Republics, and the Kingdom of
Sardinia sent representatives to Paris to acquaint them-
Unesco

Courtesy Int, Bureau of Weights and Measures
ACCURATE TO 1,000 MILLIONTH
Up until 1960, the precise length of the metre was fixed
as one ten-millionth part of the distance between the
North Pole and the Equator (shown at left with earlier
measurements, based on parts of the body). But scien¬
tists needed more precision and on October 14, 1960,
adopted as a new unit the wavelength in vacuo of the
orange light emitted by the gas Krypton 86 when an
electric current is passed through it. The new standard
can give an accuracy of one thousand millionth of a
metre. Above, the special lamp containing Krypton
gas with which the metre can now be determined
200 times more accurately than by the previous method.
selves with the work that had been done and to attend
the official Inauguration of the new system.
The rules employed in measuring the bases were com¬
pared, geodesic and astronomical operations were proved,
calculations were checked and the value of the kilo¬
gramme was finally established.
Le Corps Législatif, meeting in solemn session in Paris
on June 22, 1799, received a commission consisting of
French and foreign scientists who handed over two bars
and two cylinders of platinum to the representatives of
France and requested the legal recognition of these
standards as the basis of the new system.
This meeting was of great economic and scientific im¬
portance. Not only was France about to achieve the
standardization of measures and bring order out of chaos,
but the presence and approval of foreign scientists gave
the new measures the universal acceptance which was the
ambition of those who had promoted the metric system.
The Dutch delegate, Van Swinden, was deputed to sub¬
mit the report to the Assembly. The closing words of the
report were: "Lastly, we hope that this excellent metric
system will be adopted by all the nations in the world."
This hope was far from being fulfilled in the next few
years. In France Itself, there was a tendency to cling to
the old names and the old customs a tendency inherent
in the very nature of the French economy, which, In rural
areas, was particularly inaccessible to outside Influences.
Finally, the metric system became legally compulsory in
France only as from January 1, 1840.
In 1872, the International Commission for the Metre,
which brought together representatives of 29 countries,
laid the foundations for an International metric system
and established Its standards, taking as a basis the re¬
markable standards established for the Republican units
by the masterly technicians Fortin and Lenoir.
In 1899, all the countries of Europe, except
Great Britain and Russia, had adopted the
system. It was instituted in Russia immediately after the
Revolution of October 1917. England, which In 1789 came
so near to co-operating with France in the international
standardization of measures, stIU clings to its old units
the pound, the foot, the yard and every scientist
knows the difficulties resulting from the use of the
English system in calculations.
The influence of the metric system throughout the
world has promoted commercial and scientific relations
between the peoples. The first systematic attempts at
international scientific collaboration date from the
introduction of this system. It was for the purpose of
inaugurating the metric system that the first Interna¬
tional scientific conferences were held and the first inter¬
national Institutions set up, suoh as the International
Bureau of Weights and Measures, at Sèvres, which has
been in operation since 1875 and whose members meet
every six years, offering an excellent example of world¬
wide co-operation, Inspired by science.
On October 14, 1960, delegates from 32 countries attend¬
ing the 11th Conference on Weights and Measures 'In
Paris, enthusiastically and unanimously adopted a new
definition of the metre corresponding more closely to
scientific needs.
According to this new "natural and indestructable"
standard, the metre is defined as the length equal to
1,650,763.73 times the wavelength in vacuo, of the orange
emission Une of the element Krypton 86.
The history of the establishment of the metric system
brings out clearly the constant and fruitful interaction
which takes place between science and technology.
The introduction of the metric system by the revolu¬
tionary Assemblies, and in particular by the Convention
shows how scientific knowledge became part of the life
and the economy of society. It is also the first example of
scientific rationalization by society itself.
Luce Langevin, agrégée de l'Université (Physics), is an honorary
member of the staff of the Lycée Fénelon, Paris, and now
lecturer in science at the Université Nouvelle in Paris. This
article is an abridged version of a study published in Unesco's
Quarterly "Impact of Science on Society", Vol. XI (1961) No. 2.
25
