NATURE'S HIDDEN
LANGUAGES OF SMELL
by Karl von Frisch
Professor Karl von Frisch,
famous for his discovery of the
"language" of bees, recounts
here some surprising facts
about the sense of smell among
insects and fish. Even in the
"language" of bees, smell plays
a vital role. Bee (left) extract¬
ing nectar from a flowering
shrub, can direct other bees in
its hive to this food supply by
"dancing". The others identify
the tree or flower by smelling
the odour on the scout's body.
J. M. Baufle, Pans
S:,ome odours please us; others we dislike. To
' most people the perfume of a bunch of roses
In a room is an agreeable odour but nobody would dream
of putting an arum lily there in a vase, for it gives off
a pungent smell of decay.
Nevertheless, men and animals do not find the same
smells pleasant or disagreable. Moreover, many animals
have a much keener sense of smell than human beings.
For example, dogs, sniffing close to the ground, can follow
a trail whose existence no man would ever have suspected.
It has actually been shown that the fatty acids which
make up a large part of the secretion of the human
skin can be smelt by a dog in a solution a million times
more diluted than that which the human sense of smell
can detect.
There is nothing surprising in this if we compare
human and canine anatomical characteristics. The
nasal cavity, in which the olfactory cells are located, is
particularly developed in dogs; the olfactory mucous
membrane covers a far bigger area than it does in the
human nose, and the nerve centres in the dog's brain
which record and assimilate smell messages are much
more developed. This is also true of many other ani¬
mals. For nearly all mammals smell is more important
than sight just as it is for many fish and for certain
insects. Smell is the determining factor in their exis
tence, guiding them just as we ourselves are guided
by sight.
We must bear this in mind if we are to understand
the behaviour of certain animals.
One particular case which has long intrigued biologists,
giving rise to some strange hypotheses, is that of the
bombyx butterfly. Entomologists have found how to
catch large numbers of the extremely rare male bombyx
butterflies with the help of a fertile female of this species
placed under a wire-mesh cover.
The abdomen of the female bombyx contains a gland
which gives off a smell quite imperceptible to us. When
the female wants to attract a male, she turns this gland
round and it diffuses an attractive scent. Now an
insect's sense of smell is located in the antennae and any
butterfly collector can distinguish at a glance a male
bombyx from a female by the male's antennae, which
are large and contain innumerable olfactory cells. The
big penniform antennae of the bombyx show its highly
specialized olfactory powers and correspond, anato¬
mically, to the well-developed "smell receptors" in a dog's
nasal cavity.
The male bombyx butterflies are attracted by the smell
of the females. They are not at all interested in their
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

Mantids generally have thin
filamentous antenna, but this
species has unusual feather¬
like ones. The increase of an¬
tenna! surface allows for a far
larger number of sense organs.
A Bandsma and R. Brandt, Wellington, New Zealand

LANGUAGES OF SMELL (Cont'd)
Perfumes for
a bumble-b
wedding
ANTENNAE CLEANING TIME.
Long-horned grasshoppers have long
sensitive antennae which are conti¬
nually waving about, "feeling" the
path of these insects. Because of
their Important function they are
kept meticulously clean. Here a
grasshopper cleans its antennae.
© A. Bandsma and R. Brandt
appearance. For them, smell alone is the quintessence
of feminine charm. This was proved by removing the
scent gland from a female, a small operation which in
no way altered her appearance, and then placing the
scent gland beside her. The males which had been
attracted to the spot turned their attention from the
female to the gland, and tried to mate with it.
Another species of nocturnal butterfly whose males
are attracted by the smell of the females is the mulberry-
eating bombyx. The caterpillar of this moth is the
silkworm, which has been bred by the Chinese for
thousands of years. Silkworm breeders supply the worms
with food (mulberry leaves) and the male moths with
females. Sheltered from their natural enemies, the
bombyx multiply freely, but as with other domesticated
creatures, their natural instincts tend to deteriorate.
The males no longer need to fly off in search of a mate.
In fact they have one put under their very noses, or
more precisely under their antennae. As soon as they
smell the attractive odour, their wings begin to flutter
and they rush towards the female.
Scientists have studied the chemical composition of
this scent. After twenty years' investigation, a team
g of research workers led by Professor Adolf Butenandt,
Nobel Prize Winner in 1939, succeeded in Isolating the
substance from the scent glands, and in analyzing its
chemical composition. This difficult task was made all
the harder because of the extremely small amount of
odoriferous substance produced by the gland. No less
than 500,000 females were needed to make 12 milligram¬
mes of a pure extract of the substance which attracts the
males. Its chemical composition is simple, being what
is known as a non-saturated alcohol.
Once the formula was known, the research workers
succeeded in making a synthetic substance which has
turned out to be just as effective as the natural product.
A minute quantity of it on the end of a glass rod brings
the males hurrying along just a effectively as the pre¬
sence of a female, which shows quite clearly that it is
the smell which attracts the male towards the female.
With other species, the males produce the odoriferous
substance which is love's messenger. One of these, the
bumble-bee, for a long time managed to keep the secret
of its amorous rendezvous, and the mystery was explained
only a few years ago.
In a forest on a sunny spring morning, a male bumble¬
bee can sometimes be seen flying towards the base of a
tree-trunk; he touches the bark here and there, and then
flies off again. A few dozen yards or so further on, he
lands oh the lower branch of another tree and goes
through the same performance. He touches the edges of
the leaves with his jaws, flies off again, makes another

puzzling halt, and eventually returns to his starting
point, after having flown round a wide circle in which
he has made a number of mysterious landmarks.
The fact ls that there ls a scent gland at the base of
the bumble-bee's jaws and the strange smell these glands
give off is perceptible even to us. The bumble-bee has
left traces of this smell on the bark and on the leaves
during his morning flight. He will go round the circuit
for hours on end, often from morning until night,
stopping for a moment at each point and adding a drop
more scent if need be. Elsewhere in the forest other
males are blazing the same kind of trail.
Bumble-bees which were captured and marked, resumed
their endless round as soon as they were set free.
Hunger eventually drove them to feed off the flowers In
the nearby fields but they quickly rushed back to their
rounds. The bumble-bee's secret is that the females
pick up the smell given off by the landmarks and wait
for their ardent suitor at one of them.
As there are several species of bumble-bee in the same
area, how can a female be sure that the "invitation card"
she finds has been left by a male of her own species?
Nature has provided for every contingency. The scent
in the jaw glands of the male varies according to the
species. As a further safeguard the various species follow
different itineraries on their sentimental journeys. Some
leave their scent on the lower branches of trees or on
roots just showing above the ground. Some go to the
leaves at the top of a tree. Others prefer gramineous
stalks or grass in the fields. Instinct tells the females
where to look for a male proposal.
The purpose of these alluring smells is the perpetuation
of the species. But the part played by odours in the hunt
for food is no less important. The attractive smell given
off by flowers helps scores of insects to find food, and
at the same time ensures the perpetuation of the plants.
Two birds are killed with one stone, as it were, for the
scent of the flower attracts the insects, which find nectar
and pollen in the calyx. Flying from flower to flower,
they carry the pollen which sticks to their bodies on to
the stigmata of other flowers of the same species, thus
ensuring the fertilization and the development of the
seed.
As honey seekers, bees play an essential role in this
fertilization. They gather the nectar not only for imme¬
diate food needs but also to build up stocks for the
winter. That ls why they fly unceasingly from flower to
flower. Bees have another peculiarity: they are
"faithful", each one adopting a particular species of
flower. This ls essential if pollenlzatlon ls to be effective,
but they can be faithful only If they are able to distin¬
guish the chosen species with absolute certainty. The
scent of the flowers, which varies with the species, plays
a decisive role In their recognition. In addition, the
scent has a special significance for the bees.
When one of the scouts finds a new supply of fooda
lime-tree in flower for exampleit returns to the hive
and announces the discovery by dancing on the cells
of honeycomb. This lively dance tells the other bees
how far away the new supply of food is and in which
direction it lies. Some of the bees gather round the
dancer, and touching the messenger's body with their
antennae, they pick up the smell of the lime-tree with
which it ls impregnated, and then fly off in the direction
indicated. The scent of the flower thus plays an impor¬
tant role in the "language of bees."
At the time when lime-trees are In flower and
full of nectar, other flowers are in bloom too.
And so the hive ls divided up into several teams of honey
gatherers, one of which deals with lime-trees, another
with robinia, and a third with yet other llowers. The
members of each team recognize immediately from the
smell of the dancers if the message ls meant for them or
for another team. The members of each team identify
one another in the hive through the scent of the llowcr
which each bee gives oif, and these specialized honey
gatherers form tightly-knit communities. They stick
together when resting, Just as they do when at work.
Not all flowers have a pleasant scent. Some give ofT
an utterly repugnant odour and thus attract files who.se
habits is to lay their eggs on rotting flesh. Scenting a
familiar odour of decay, the Hies arc lured to these
flowers and taken in in more senses than one. Here,
nature's ingenious arrangement of the flower's structure
keeps the files prisoner and does not set them free until
they are well powdered with pollen.
Yet the flies are not clever enough to learn a lesson
from this unpleasant experience. Attracted by the same
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
SEDUCTION AND WARNING. The
female of the mulberry-eating bombyx (the
caterpillar of this moth Is the silkworm) has
a scent gland which secretes a substance attrac¬
tive to the male of the species (right). Con¬
versely, a substance In the skin of minnows if
released by the slightest scratch is immediately
"scented" by other minnows and causes them
to flee for their livesa timely warning if It is
a pike that has begun to attack the shoal.
R.H. Noaillcs. Pan's.

LANGUAGES OF SMELL (Cont'd)
Mr. Wasp taken in by an orchid
smell of putrefaction coming from another flower of the
same species, they are taken in again and in this way
the pollinizatlon of the stigmata is assured.
Some orchids amongst them the ophrys are even
more perfidious in their use of insects as pollenizing
agents. The females of burrowing wasps those of the
gorytes species, for example produce a special smell to
attract the males, just as the females of the mulberry
bombyx do. The flowers of the ophrys orchid have
succeeded in imitating the smell of the female wasps.
The males are attracted, they land on the flower and,
completely deceived, they try to mate with it.
The illusion does not last for very long, but the contact
has been enough to ensure the fertilization of the flower.
The fact that these orchids produce no nectar is itself
significant. They have, indeed, no need of this bait;
their scent alone is enough to ensure the co-operation of
the Insect.
It is well-known that in the case of mammals, smell
plays a vital role in the quest for food. The exceptional
sense of smell in dogs and in other mammals has already
been mentioned. It is far less well-known that fish,
too, have a highly developed sense of smell. Their
olfactory organs are not part of their breathing apparatus
but are concerned only with the detection of smells.
Experiments have shown that certain fish can find
their food and recognize members of their own species
entirely by sense of smell, after being deprived of their
sight. It is the eel which has the most highly developed
olfactory organs, its sense of smell being on a par with
that of the dog.
Some fish migrate over great distances and during
their journeys make special use of their sense of smell.
Salmon are often born in the fresh water of small streams
and creeks flowing into rivers. The young salmon follow
the river down to the sea where they spend several years,
often far from the mouth of the river. Once fully
grown, they return to the river and we still do not know
how they manage to find their way back. Nevertheless,
it has been proved by marking young salmon that not
only do they reach the river they came from, but they
also get back to the very tributary in which they were
born.
The riddle has been partly solved today, for samples
taken from different parts of rivers show that the smell
of the water varies. This is no doubt due to differences
in the geological formation of the river bed as well as
to the diversity of water plants. It has also been proved
that salmon which have .been deprived of their sense of
smell cannot find their way back to the stream where
they were born. It is the "smell memories," then, of its
earliest youth that urge the salmon to make its way back
to its birthplace.
We have seen that smells can be used as a bait. They
can also be used as a means of scaring other animals
away.
In North America and in South America there are
several varieties of skunk, a relative of the badger.
When attacked, they squirt out a jet of foul-smelling oily
liquid, which is secreted by the anal glands. A man who
has been unlucky enough to be sprayed by this liquid is
not fit company for some time afterwards, even though
he may take a bath and change his clothes.
Many insects too have adopted this method of defence
amongst them, the stink bugs. Some brightly-coloured
species are spared by insect-eating birds, for they have
glands which secrete an unpleasant-smelling liquid. It
has recently been discovered that they very successfully
protect themselves, in much the same way as the skunk,
against such enemies as ants.
I could go on giving examples but I would
rather mention a case in which a protective
smell of this kind sowed panic amongst the members of a
same species.
I was carrying out some experiments on the sense of
hearing in fish, and had trained a shoal of minnows to
pick up sounds made below the water near the shore of
the Wolfgangsee. I had to check whether all the mem¬
bers of the shoal used the same feeding ground, so I
caught one of the minnows and, with a needle, severed
a small muscle, the destruction of which makes the tail
turn a very dark colour. I then put the fish into the
water again.
No sooner had it joined up with the other fish than
something quite unexpected occurred. The minnows
panicked, sought refuge on the bottom, grouped together
again, and then fled into deeper water in the centre of
the lake. For several days they were very timid and
wary and it was only after repeated distribution of food
that they again became as familiar as they had been
before.
\
/ im
f ^^^^^ . ^*J
v IE'i- Y ; . -
flfl
BSLJkwiff
W 41 Bb^^^^aÄ w Hi
WH
1 V
\
\
5t*
ANT DAIRY-MAIDS. Many ants
keep "cows" sap-sucking insects such
as aphids and feed on their excess
juices. They take out their "livestock"
to graze on plant stems and roots and
later bring them back to the nest in
the same way as this ant dairymaid
herding closely a tiny scarabaeid beetle.
From the film "Secrets of Life". © Walt Disney

<
IN HIVE OR FIELD the bee is an industrious worker who has many surprising lessons to teach man. The male
bees or drones are born from unfertilized eggs laid by the queen bee. Inside the hive the female worker bees keep
a strict control over the proportion of the sexes in the colony and decide when to get rid of the drones. Left,
worker bees dispose of the larva of a drone. Right, a worker bee sucks nectar from a (lower with Its long tongue.
Could the wounded minnow have told the others about
his unpleasant experience? Obviously not. A beheaded
minnow caused just the same panic, and so did one that
had been minced into small pieces. In fact, the filtered
juice from these small pieces was enough to scare the
shoal away.
I tried to find out from which part of the body this
warning came, and finally decided that it lay in the skin.
So far it has not been possible to Isolate the substance
contained in the skin. All that is known is that It must
be soluble in water and that fish can smell it. Normal
minnows are very sensitive to it whereas minnows which
have been deprived of their sense of smell are quite
unaffected. An extract taken from a tiny piece of skin
is enough to put a whole shoal of tamed fish to flight.
Even the minute quantity diffused in the water following
a needle prick as had been the case when I noticed the
phenomenon for the first time has this effect.
We can hazard a fairly close guess at the biological
significance of the phenomen. Minnows are preyed upon
by many types of fish and their greatest enemy is
undoubtedly the pike. When a pike catches and devours
a minnow, its numerous sharp teeth are bound to scratch
and tear the minnow's delicate skin, and the panic-
creating substance spreads Into the surrounding water.
Thus, any minnows which happen to be near are warned
of the danger; they flee and remain on the alert for
some time. It is for this reason that a pike does not get
a chance to destroy an entire shoal.
I was interested to find out if the phenomen is peculiar
to minnows, or if this strange form of "life insurance" is
practised amongst other fish. Exhaustive experiments
have since shown that it is unknown amongst sea fish,
but that it is very common amongst fresh-water fish,
being limited, however, to the group which zoologists
call "ostariophysl." All fish related to the carpi.e. the
cyprinides and the slluridans, many kinds of which arc to
be found in America, Asia and Africabelong to this
group. The skin of the fish of all these species contains a
warning substance which ls released by a scratch, and
which produces the same effect as the one noticed in the
case of the minnows.
It has also been shown that the warning substance
from minnows acts upon other members of the cyprinides
family, but its power decreases with the remoteness of
relationship. The same experiments have made it possi¬
ble to verify suggestions based on anatomical data
concerning the race history relationship of the ostarlo-
physi group of fish.
Whereabouts in the fish is the warning substance pro¬
duced? Recent microscope research has shown that
there is a particular type of unicellular gland in the skin
cells only of those fish which produce the warning
substance. The secretion from these glands is not
released unless the skin is scratched. We may presume
from this that the glandular cells make up the warning
substance itself, and that it is their function to send a
rapid farewell message of warning to the rest of the
shoal when one of its members is seized by some
marauding fish.
Dr. Karl von Frisch, world famous zoologist, was awarded
the Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science in
1959. Former director of the zoological institutes of Ros¬
tock, Breslau, Graz and Munich, he is the author of
"The Dancing Bees" and "Bees, Their Vision, Chemical
Senses and Language."
