A BOLD EDUCATIONAL REFORMER
AND A SCHOOL FOR MANKIND
by Henry R. Cassirer
An "educational laboratory", Paul Geheeb called
the school which he founded in 1910. He con¬
ceived the Odenwaldschule as a place for "daring, bold
experiments in educational reforms", a pacemaker for
"the enormous and therefore more sluggish organism of
public education." In this spirit, the forty-year old
educator began his work in Germany, and he maintained
this air of adventure in the world of education until he
ended his days more than fifty years later in the midst
of his community, high in the mountains of Switzerland.
When Geheeb placed his school in the beautiful coun¬
tryside of Western Germany, not far from such centres
of urban culture as Heidelberg, Darmstadt and Mann¬
heim, his choice was inspired by the philosophical tradi¬
tion of which he was an outstanding heir.
Speaking in Darmstadt in 1929, Geheeb said:
"In the 18th century, there developed among the Ger
man people an ever-growing anxiety that civilization
would destroy humanism. More and more passionately
the cry arose: We do not need priests, nor learned men,
nor officials, nor future artisans, but human beings ! At
that moment Rousseau sounded his call for a Return to
Nature! but not In the sense of turning one's back on
culture. For Rousseau did not think of retreating Into
the cave of a virgin forest; he called for a true humanism.
We know how Kant and Goethe were moved and inspired
by Rousseau's Emile, and how the young Pestalozzi avidly
read this book though It was at that time proscribed in
Switzerland. It was then that the Magna Carta of new
education was illuminated in Goethe's Wilhelm Meister."
Closeness to nature was for Geheeb not escape but a
vital force for education. In this eyes there was no great¬
er natural wonder than the child. "There is no greater
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
All photos École d'Humanité, Goldern
At the age of eight, Paul Geheeb was already a keen student of natural sciences, and In preparing
himself for his work as an educator of youth, he strove to become a teacher in whom science and huma¬
nism, philosophy and activity were blended Into a whole. Here, surrounded by boys and girls of his
École d'Humanité in Switzerland (grouping children from I 4 countries) he gives a biology lesson.
23

PAUL GEHEEB (Cont'd)
Established in 1910, Paul Geheeb's Odenwaldschule
in Germany quickly became a focal point for pro¬
gressive education with its liberal views, co-education,
family groups under a house "father" and "mother"
and a remarkable degree of self-government. Above,
students at work in the school metal-working shop.
Not equal rights but equal responsibilities
miracle," he said, "among the inexhaustible miracles of
creation, which in the strictest sense is unlimited in its
richness, than the miraculous fact that nature dispenses
Its seed every day with generous amplitude and that not
one of its fruits is exactly the equal of the other. The
younger the child the more we enjoy it because we
rejoice in the wealth of individuality and originality."
Geheeb felt that it was not possible to develop the
individual personality of the child in isolation or even
within the limitation of the family circle. A living com¬
munity of adults and children is needed. "The idea that
the community exists only to serve the individual by no
means implies that the community as such is unimpor¬
tant," he said. Every individual emerges from and
depends upon his community, and without it he could
neither come into being nor exist in isolation. Moreover,
the individual can never reach fulfillment except through
society with its Immeasurable power of love, and this can
best be promoted through the community."
"To be only governed is completely unknown in our
school," Paul Geheeb said, "for it is a community without
superiors, a school without a director... We have never
quarrelled about rights, no one was interested in equal
rights for old and young. The central idea of our com¬
munity is responsibility, responsibility of everyone, for
himself and for the community."
His emphasis upon responsibility as the guiding factor
in education, inevitably led Geheeb to adopt an aristo¬
cratic rather than a quantitatively egalitarian approach,
for "the degree to which the individual is conscious of his
responsibility depends upon his experience and maturity
in life." Though formally democratic in its constitution,
with equal votes for children and adults in the school
council, Geheeb's emphasis was neither upon the autho¬
rity of the majority nor upon that of the teachers.
As one of the teachers in the Odenwaldschule put it:
"The authority of the teacher is replaced by the authority
of those who together represent the idea of the school;
this authority is heeded by adults as much as by children."
This approach was not only in stark contrast to the
authoritarian tradition of German education but also to
the opposite extreme where undue "freedom" is granted
to children in the name of progressive education.
"The teenage child of 12 to 14," Geheeb wrote, "often
completely lacks a sense of humility, and his unchlldlike
sophistication is actually encouraged by contemporary
thinking which is based on a confused notion of the
'right of the child,' and a well-meaning reaction against
24 the inhuman relationship between teacher and pupil
which was so prevalent in the past. As a result, teenagers
frequently have no understanding of the reserve required
in one's conduct with other people: they have lost the
feeling of respect for greater maturity, and are unable to
establish a fruitful relationship with adult friends, that is,
a relationship from which they can profit and develop."
These words, written by Geheeb more than forty years
ago, go to the root not only of the problem of teenagers
but also of the harmful impact of a misunderstood "pro¬
gressive" or "child-centred" education. Geheeb valued
and respected the individuality of each child and adult;
but he called for equal respect on the part of others,
no matter what their age or alleged "rights."
In Geheeb's eyes, life in the community for each child
was therefore not only a school of democracy but a source
of personality development and an appreciation of the
true human values in the relationship between man and
man.
This approach led Geheeb to proclaim a critérium appli¬
cable to all educational communities: "The key to the
right of existence and the validity of a community which
pretends to serve young people, is whether the prevailing
atmosphere is harmful and a hindrance to the develop¬
ment of the child, or whether it promotes such growth
and favours its flowering."
Ihe human community is composed of men and
women. The school community must similar¬
ly include both boys and girls. Co-education is funda¬
mental to education, in the view of Geheeb. It took
courage and far-sightedness in 1909 to establish a school
in which boys and girls not only were taught together
in the same classroom but shared their life from morning
till evening. The school was divided into families, each
headed by a teacher, who took care of a group of children
in one of the school buildings. Each family resembled
the natural family in that it included both sex<^s.
Geheeb, who had formerly been militant in the move¬
ment for the emancipation of women, considered co-edu¬
cation so vital that the 44-page application to the govern¬
ment for permission to open the Odenwaldschule con¬
tained 30 pages on this subject. "Co-education means joy¬
fully to affirm the polarity of the sexes in both theory
and practice," he said, "in attitude and living, to in¬
tegrate pedagogically the rich sources of wealth it pro¬
duces into all fields of life and culture, and to apply
them fruitfully to the development of the child."
Geheeb saw in co-education not merely a way of edu¬
cating children by raising them together and teaching
them in the same classroom, but a directive as to how

The Ecole d'Humanité at Goldern in Switzerland
is a testament to the tenets of Paul Geheeb's philoso¬
phy of education. Formal instruction, like chemistry
(above) is kept to the mornings, and afternoons are
devoted to art, handicrafts, music and the open air.
Youngsters find a common Interest In art. For Paul
Geheeb, the education of the whole man, as he saw
it, comes first. In his school, children of all colours,
races and faiths, cultivate universal tolerance and
learn to understand other cultures and ways of life.
human beings should live with each other throughout
their life despite and because of the differences between
the sexes. He conceived co-education as a force opposed
to all contemporary tendencies which seek to destroy
respect and tolerance among men.
Life and learning must advance together but in the
view of Geheeb public education fails in either respect.
The address with which he inaugurated the Odenwald¬
schule in 1910 has a modern-day ring to It.
"I do not want to criticize the teachers in state
schools," he said. "Many of them are of course capable
and are filled with the most noble intentions. But the
government schools are teaching institutions with more
or less overcrowded classes, where contact between the
old and the young is only superficial. Yet it Is only in
communities of life and work that children can grow into
full human beings."
"There is widespread dissatisfaction with public educa¬
tion and innumerable are the vain attempts at reform.
Complaints are made that the schools arc overburdened,
and learned men disagree over whether the curriculum
should be cut in one place or another. But it is impossible
to reform the school with scissors. Today wc see schooLs
in which children sit listening passively to lecturing
teachers, and then spend the remaining free time of the
day in a painful effort to learn what has been taught in
the lesson. What needs to be done is to turn these teach¬
ing institutions into working communities where children
actually can collaborate with their teachers."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
All photos Ecole d'Humanité, Goldern
At the Ecole d'Humanité every child contributes to the communal life, In the house and garden.
The family group of about eight is the basic unit of the school. Life Is spent as far as possible In the
open air: in summer there are long tramps over the mountains: In winter there is skiing for all.
i; »V*
25

PAUL GEHEEB (Cont'd)
Respect & tolerance
transcending all barriers
A new approach to learning and to work was therefore
required. Here Geheeb built upon the ideas of Ellen Key,
expressed so forcefully in her famous work, The Century
of the Child (1903), in which she said: "Until we have
succeeded In driving the phantom of general education
out of the curricula and out of the heads of parents, and
have replaced it by the education of the individual, it
will be vain to draft plans of school reform."
Geheeb therefore introduced a new structure into the
lesson plan, the Kurssystem. Its essential feature was
that for a period of one month each child had to choose
courses in three subjects, each taught daily for 11 hours.
This made it possible for the student to concentrate on
intensive studies in limited fields. Other subjects were
then taken up during subsequent periods. The emphasis
in teaching was less upon learning facts, than upon
learning to learn, to work independently, to study and to
understand.
Another feature of the Kurssystem was that the
children were to be gathered in study groups according
to their level of maturity and knowledge, rather than
according to age groups. Thus a child might find himself
with older children in one subject for which he was gifted,
but with younger children in another subject where he
had had little previous schooling. Adjustment of pace
and content to individual interests and abilities, all within
the framework of preparation for the final state exami¬
nation was a key goal of Geheeb's educational method.
M^Êk
G
26
I EHEEB expressed his purpose in these words:
"The organization of the curriculum should
take into account equally the needs of the subject matter
and of the student. So that the material can be present¬
ed and grasped in its essence, we insist that each field
be studied coherently and with as little distraction as
possible from other subjects. But, we also require that
the pupil be given a certain freedom of choice in deciding
the field of study which he takes up at any particular
time in order to give scope to his needs and initiative."
Overcrowding of the curriculum, lack of adaptation of
teaching to individual ability and pace, the need to teach
the capacity to think and work independently rather than
merely to accumulate facts and information these ever-
present concerns of all educators were clearly seen by
Geheeb over fifty years ago and given practical solutions
in his educational laboratory.
When National Socialism carried virulent nationalism
and racialism to their extremes, Paul Geheeb turned his
back upon Germany, not in a spirit of defeatism but in
one of defiance. His School of Mankind, which he founded
under difficult conditions in Switzerland in 1934 was as
yet more an ideal and a challenge for the future than a
reality.
In his inaugural speech he stressed that this might not
appear to be the appropriate time to speak of a school of
mankind, for while the concept of humanity had lived
as an abstraction in the minds of Kant, Herder or Schiller,
history had since demonstrated that humanity did not
yet exist.
"But precisely because the idea of a school of mankind
may easily be considered untimely," he said, "our age
probably needs it most of all."
"The ideal which firmly stands before my eyes is the
economic and cultural co-operation of mankind with each
bound closely to the other. The microcosm of a living
community in a school should correspond in its essential
characteristics to this."
Out of deep respect for the personality of the individual
in his community and a profound belief in the humanism
of man as the supreme goal of all education, there grew
his amity for other cultures, including in particular those
of the Orient.
Ecole d'Humanité, Goldern
Paul Geheeb and his wife, Edith, who for nearly
52 years helped and sustained him in all his educa¬
tional endeavours. She is still serving his ideal in
the Ecole d'Humanité seen here (left centre), against
the backdrop of the snowcapped Bernese Oberland.
A community is not a contradiction of individuality, but
rather its confirmation. Similarly, a school of mankind
requires that children shall not lose their national cul¬
tural roots in favour of a synthetic hotchpotch of cultures.
"The more a child is rooted in the culture of his own
nation," said Paul Geheeb, "the more forcefully and
creatively is he able to establish his relationship with
another cultural community."
It is love that binds man to his fellows ; it is love that is
the principal source of Geheeb's force as an educator.
This was the theme of his inaugural address at Odenwald
In 1910. "If there is anything which serves eternal
values," he said, "it is the union of men attuned to each
other, it is the spiritual community which consciously
cultivates its soul and sees the true service to God in a
community in which everyone feels that he is sustained
by the love of others and carried upward toward higher
goals."
This remained the theme of his life. Love and affection
for the animals and children who surrounded him, respect
and tolerance for the concepts and religions of others,
inspired an atmosphere which transcends all barriers of
nationality or religious dogma.
Dr. Henry R. Cassirer speaks of Paul Geheeb from long
acquaintance with the educator. A nephew of Geheeb, he receiv¬
ed all his schooling at the Odenwaldschule. Dr. Cassirer is head
of the radio and television section, Mass Communication Tech¬
niques Division, at Unesco and is the author of Unesco's popular
book, "Television Teaching Today."
