Modern scientific discoveries, the appearance
of new nations on the world political stage
and the internationalizing of economic or social problems
all these have made a radical impact on school curricula
which are becoming progressively more cumbersome and
indigestible.
Faced with the painful necessity of cramming more and
more knowledge into young heads, educators have been
resorting to new pedagogical methods. Some of these
"new" techniques, many people will be surprised to learn,
were actually used centuries ago the homework of the
children of the French royal family was printed long
before the virtues of a school printing press were recog¬
nized. Others, however, are quite original and one of
these is the »method used »by a French educator, Mrs. P.
Poinsart-Chasson, to teach her pupils a wide range of
subjects.
Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson, who studied under Jiri Trnka
and Hermlna Tyrlova (two famed Czech puppet masters)
is now an official of the French Ministry of Public Health.
But she has always been an artist and an educator by
vocation and she became a convinced believer of "active"
methods of teaching long ago. Determined to make
lessons attractive, she had the idea that dolls, so beloved
by little girls the world over, might serve as friendly links
between children and school subjects like history, geo¬
graphy, hygiene, civics and others.
One fine morning (mornings are always fine in fairy
tales and this story has some overtones of fairy enchant¬
ment about it) she arrived at St. Anne's school in Mar¬
seilles, to try out her idea, with the approval of the
school's headmistress.
She took a ping-pong ball from her bag and, with a
few strokes of a brush, transformed it into a little round
92 face similar to those of Trnka's marionettes. Then,
continuing her demonstration, she showed wide-eyed
little girls that this face could wear a number of exprès-

PING-PON
GO TO SC
sions. In turn, the ping-pong ball became gay, sad,
amazed, frightened and hilarious. /
A few fragments of rabbit skin glued in the right places
lent red hair or black mustaches to these faces. A sponge,
nipped in by a stout thread in its middle, produced a
reasonable image of a slim-waisted young lady. The same
sponge, pinched slightly in the back was then transformed
into a portly gentleman. After that, wire could be used
to connect heads to bodies. Soon, under the guidance of
Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson, pupils became skillful enough to
create expressions themselves and to concoct dolls that
were gay or melancholic.
Then Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson reached the second stage
of her experiment. She read to her pupils a Chinese story,
"The Wise Man's Sigh" and suggested that they might
illustrate it by building scenery and reproducing its
characters. The girls enthusiastically began to work.
But soon they realized that they had to know how the
Chinese dressed, what food they ate, where this food
came from, what sort of houses they lived in, how they
decorated these houses, how they lived and so forth.
Soon, an intensive hunt for books, magazines and
newspaper articles about China had begun. Pupils
brought Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson a tremendous variety of
documents and materials for making costumes and
scenery. Some girls became so enthusiastic about their
research that they used .spending money to buy art books
instead of sweets.
Then, in October 19, 1958, their work was done and the
dolls made their bow at the Regional Educational Docu¬
mentation Centre in Marseilles. This exhibition was so
successful that the French television network made a
documentary film about it (the film was half-animated)
which was shown on TV screens in France. It is easy
to imagine the pride of its authors, and also the enthu¬
siasm with which twenty-one little French girls between
twelve and fourteen started to work on a second film, this
one aimed at fighting alcoholism and entitled "Dolls Go
to School in Good Health."
A new teaching method was born. Like many others,
its first aim is to arouse the interest of pupils, but what
really distinguishes it is the immediate appeal it makes
to the ever-awake imagination of children. Of course,
many educators in France and elsewhere had already
accepted the smiling presence of dolls on hitherto dark
and unattractive classroom d»esks. Implicitly, then, they
have given official recognition to dreams, accepting the
existence of that irrational and marvellous world which
awakens a child's creative powers to a point few adults
suspect.

G DOLLS
HOOL
by
Marie M. Rabecq-Maillard
Curator, Museum of the History of Education
National Institute of Pedagogy, Paris
At the National Pedagogical Institute In Paris, for
example, exhibitions had already been held on the theme
of Christmas, in which kindergarten children gave free
rein to their imagination. One exhibit in which they
reconstructed the picturesque Rue Mouffetard, a busy
shopping centre on the Left Bank in Paris, with Its old
houses and shops and its bustling crowds, revealed remark¬
able artistic talents which amazed grown-ups and won
the admiration of leading French poets.
Both in Paris and in Marseilles, children had created
dolls and exhibited marionettes. But, behind the remark¬
able work of the little kindergarten youngsters, the
shadowy impression of the baton and the inspiration of
an orchestra leader could still be felt. The children had
remained in their own little universea delightful one too.
Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson, however, had gone further by
enabling children to participate In an adult world and by
raising them to a higher level while still allowing them
to express themselves freely.
Nor had anyone else in France thought of using manual
work to approach each subject on the curriculum. Civics
and dry and theoretical ethics became alive. Mrs. Poln-
sart-Chasson's pupils produced a short film on antl-
alcohollsm and succeeded in making adults thinkand
perhaps in convincing themby such hard-hitting slogans
CONT'D ON NEXT PACE
DRESSMAKERS AT WORK: Four young girls put the finishing touches on the clothes designed for a collection
of their colourful dolls which help to illustrate lessons in history and geography in a way not found In textbooks.

PING-PONG DOLLS (Cont'd)
Lessons come alive
with Lilliputian 'teachers'
as: "Little glasses of wine grow up Into big glasses of
tears."
You really have to know your history and geography if
you want to ¡dress Chinese characters, and illustrate their
homes, their ways of life and their customs. Sewing,
drawing, modelling, embroidery and sculpture often
tedious for children who feel no aptitude for them
became fascinating because they were part of the film
production.
Besides, those few hours devoted each week to manual
work gave a child a chance to express a hidden persona¬
lity, rich in all kinds of possibilities but often suffocated
by timidity or environment. The character chosen by a
child is already quite revealing. The face a child gives
to a doll often resembles its own face. In Mrs Poinsart-
Chasson's method, there are opportunities for self-
expression which have enabled real talents to be
recognized.
Thanks to this method, too, a child comes into contact
with such techniques as sound-recording or stage direction
which may not be "in the school programme", but which
certainly awaken Interest because they are very much
in the news. This means that education can shed its
abstract and bookish nature. The child plunges Into a
real world apparently reserved to adults and, therefore,
all the more attractive to a young mind.
At the same time, working as a team develops a sense
of community living. Hunting for materials and evaluat¬
ing them »sharpen a taste for research and a critical sense:
here, the search is for precise, accurate information.
Then, too, there Is that development of taste, ingenuity
and inventlvemess which are the obvious offshoots of the
method used by Mrs. Poinsart-Chasson. No doubt others
before her have proved the value of focussing children's
interest. Ever »since St. Jerome, educators have said that
teaching should be attractive. While she deserves credit
for bringing dolls into schools and, with the dolls, a great
part of the realm of childhood with its marvels and its
colourful and charming visions, she struck out in a new
direction by enabling her pupils to participate in the very
conception of demonstrations which, up until now, have
often been too abstract.
When will we have an international exhibition to bring
together all the world's dolls in a children's dance of
friendship?
FULL RANGE OF FACIAL EXPRESSIONS
on plngpong dolls was captured by a young girl
of twelve who painted this set shown below.
Cal
24
Amused Stern Angry Hurt
>

A PING PONG BALL attached to a wire (above) becomes the head of doll with a little paint and rabbit
fur (right). Above left, the indispensable materialswire , pliers, scissors, glueand the dolls them¬
selves in various stages of development. Left, a young boy concentrates attentively on creating a doll.
_____! «
V Wl*\m\.
T^kmmmnm « ^mmmm^km^M. MM\
'¡WESSEN
%ÏW
A -jJjJùm
A CHINESE FAIRY TALE will incorporate these two dolls, above left. To faithfully copy costumes, hairdos and
facial expressions, the children had to read and study and think about Chinese customs, costumes, and life. The.
finished product shows their research time was well-spent. At right, dolls help to teach a history lesson. This
scene from ancient Gaul shows a sod hut and a Gaul verifying the vertical lines of the home he has built.
All photos courtes/ P. Poinsart-Chasson
Contemptuous Disgusted Afraid Admiring Doubtful
25
