Grave Mound near Amesbury in southern England comes to light under the careful digging of archae-
26 ologists and volunteer helpers, in foreground two students record the position of a skeleton with the
help of a string grid. The area of Amesbury is very rich in remains of prehistoric man, among the"
best-known of which is Stonehenge, the greatest surviving megalithic structure in the British Isles.

Students working on an excavation site
In Rhodesia learn to use a surveyor's level
to contour the area before digging begins.


HOW TO BE AN AMATEUR
AKvH àMLULUvld I by Beatrice de Cardi
T
Austin D. Underwood
he amateur field worker is no new phenom¬
enon in British archaeology. ' His contribution
to research dates back to the 18th century when, as a
gentleman of leisure, an appreciation of classical antiqui¬
ties led him to record and collect relics of the past which
he observed in the countryside around him.
By the 19th century, the emphasis lay firmly on collect¬
ing, the antiquary perhaps reflecting the materialism of
the age In his acquisitive attitude which saw in fieldwork
little more than a legitimate means of enriching private
collections. Barrow after barrow was dug with rarely a
thought to the circumstances of Its burial beyond the
excavated urn. Narrow as the horizon may appear, it
evoked widespread public interest, particularly as it
coincided with the broader consideration of man's evolu¬
tion proposed by Darwin. The spate of county archaeolo¬
gical societies founded in the middle of the century is
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

AMATEUR ARCH>COLOGlST (Cont'd)
From teen-agers
to septuagenarians
but one expression of the trend which led in turn to the
establishment of museums maintained at public expense.
The rapid growth of museum collections, with their
assembled wealth of artifacts, made possible the applica¬
tion of methods used in related branches of the natural
sciences and produced the typologies and chronological
framework upon which much of British prehistory has
been built up. The credit for this research rests largely
with the amateur and the museum archaeologist.
There were in fact few professionals In other fields of
archaeology until the close of the century, when the
State, lagging somewhat behind public opinion, accepted
a limited responsibility for the preservation of ancient
monuments and a nucleus of Civil Service archaeologists
was formed in 1882 with General Pitt-Rivers as the first
Inspector of Ancient Monuments of the Ministry of
Works.
The establishment of the Royal Commissions to survey
and record historical monuments followed in 1908 and
provided further openings for the professional.
T
28
he gulf between the amateur and the profes¬
sional archaeologist was already becoming
apparent as the pace of specialization quickened in the
1930's. World War II completed the process. The
leisured classes, who were once the mainstay of the
archaeological societies, found they had neither the time
to keep abreast of current thought nor the resources to
devote to archaeology. The societies in turn were faced
with serious financial problems: navvy labour for
excavation was often beyond their means and increased
printing charges made it difficult to maintain the high
standard of publication which had prevailed before the
war.
At the same time there was more urgent need than ever
before for extensive fieldwork. Agricultural and urban
development, were threatening field monuments with
destruction in all parts of the country and the commercial
exploitation of the river gravels and ironstone was
devouring the archaeology of whole regions at a rate
which made recording and examination well nigh
Impossible for the small body of professional archaeolo¬
gists to tackle single-handed, especially as many of them
had heavy teaching and other commitments. The State
has, as a result, assumed a greater responsibility for
large-scale excavation but much still remains for the
societies to do. It is here that the amateur can help,
provided he is prepared to acquire the requisite skill in
field techniques.
It is hard to generalize about present-day amateurs.
Their age may range from 16 to 70 and their background
is as varied. The retired colonel, the doctors of divinity
or medicine, town councillors and engineers, biochemists
and school-teachers, housewives, students and school¬
children can all be found working side by side upon an
excavation. Some may be members of an archaeological
society; others may be students attending an adult edu¬
cation course. A few may have no clear idea what led
them to spend their spare time tolling in a trench apart
from the general fascination which archaeology now
appears to hold for many people.
The present popularity of the subject undoubtedly
owes much to television. Broadcast series such as The
Arch introduced in 1946, have also had an effect
as the sale of 55,000 copies of a British Broadcasting Cor-
^ííjMWKmPKL-. v:
DIGGING UP HISTORY, in the Zambezi Valley, Rhodesia,
students of the Third Livingstone School of Archaeology (above
and right) set to work on a Later Stone Age mound. A specialist
in prehistoric rock art (above) shows a student how to recognize
a Stone Age scraping tool. Delicate and thorough searches call
for small tools like trowels and brushes which students (right)
are using inside each of the marked squares that have been
allocated to them. Below right, excavations at Earlswood Long
Barrow, near Salisbury, England. The word barrow (grave
mound) has been incorporated in many place-names in Britain.
poration pamphlet on Roman Britain proves. Excavations
provide an even greater attraction.
The discovery of a Roman temple in London drew a
patient queue of 30,000 visitors and 60,000 persons found
their way through the suburbs to watch the foundations
of Nonsuch Palace being uncovered in the space of less
than two months recently. Archaeology is news to the
daily press and popular magazines which turn unprompt¬
ed each spring to inquire about forthcoming excavations
from the Council for British Archaeology.
The Council was formed in 1944 to promote and co-or¬
dinate archaeology in the British Isles. It received State
recognition five years later in the shape of a small annual
subsidy. The Council was alive to the dangers of popu¬
larizing archaeology and realized that an outlet should be
provided for the growing public interest in fieldwork.
The obvious remedy was to organize training-schools for
the serious amateur and to put those who simply wanted
an archaeological holiday in touch with the director of
an excavation where their help would be welcomed.
The latter was easy enough to arrange. A brief quest¬
ionnaire to professional archaeologists likely to be
digging usually produces requests for helpers on between
70-80 sites during the season. Last year such sites in¬
cluded Bronze Age barrows within sight of Stonehenge,
Iron Age farmsteads and hillforts, . and many Roman sites
towns, temples, villas and forts in all parts of the
country. A small expedition went to Orkney and adjacent
islands to search for evidence of Scandinavian settlement
in the form of pagan burial-mounds. Work will continue
in the mediaeval towns of Winchester and Southampton,
on castles, priories, manors and on the site of long
deserted villages. Town, country or even uninhabited
island, there is something for all tastes.
Details of these sites are circulated to prospective
volunteers in the form of a Calendar of Excavations,
issued monthly from March until the end of the digging
season in September for an annual fee of 5s. The volun¬
teer selects whichever site appeals to him and writes to
the director to askJf he may help. When the Calendar
first appeared in 1950 it had a modest circulation of
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

Photos L. Titchener (Q Northern Khodrsij Information Drjit
Austin D. Underwood
29

AMATEUR ARCH/EOLOGIST (Cont'd)
Women ideal for uncovering skeletons
67 copies. Within a matter of months it had increased
threefold, and subscribers now total over a thousand and
Include students In America and on the Continent.
The success of the Calendar lies largely in the fact that
it meets the needs of both excavators and volunteers with
a minimum of correspondence or formality. The archaeo¬
logist can appeal for helpers of all kinds: trained super¬
visors, photographers, surveyors, a soil scientist or even a
cook-caterer ,and his chances of finding them are good.
The volunteer, on the other hand, is told as much as
possible about the site; its nature, period and location.
In particular, he ls warned of projects which are only
suitable for those with previous field experience and his
attention ls drawn to sites where beginners would be
given elementary training. Women as well as men are
welcomed on most sites, particularly where a delicate
touch ls needed in uncovering skeletons. And no distinc¬
tion is made unless primitive living conditions In some
Isolated spot demand it.
When the site lies near a village, the volunteer is
usually expected to find his own accommodation. In the
case of a popular holiday resort, difficulties may arise but
the organizer of the dig will usually provide a list of likely
lodgings or may even arrange a camp.
The degree of organization on these sites varies greatly.
A primary qualification of any excavation Is that it
should be disciplined. The director must have some assur¬
ance that his helpers will spend at least a week with him
if not longer, and that they will arrive on time each day.
Where the temptation of sand and surf is likely to prove
too strong, some directors, wisely recognizing the frailty
of their helpers, adjust their hours of work to allow for
a swim In the middle of the- day. Nor are such amenities
as the local pub equipped with darts-board overlooked.
Once on the site, the volunteer will be shown how to dig
and use a trowel, and the necessity for removing the soil
layer by layer will be explained to him. He will also be
told about the purpose and general progress of the work
so that he may understand developments beyond the
limits of his own trench. Heor she will be expected to
share heavy manual jobs and on the larger excavations
may even have to take a turn as guide-lecturer in show¬
ing visitors round the site..
Many amateurs return each season to the same
site acquiring confidence from their familiarity
with the stratigraphy. It is, however, difficult to gain a
thorough grounding in all aspects of fieldwork on an
ordinary excavation. The archaeological problems of the
site must take precedence over training and all too often
the director may be working against time.
Volunteers with long-term aspirations in archaeology
usually prefer to attend a training-school, returning in
successive seasons until they have acquired the back¬
ground and technical knowledge needed to work on their
own. The majority of amateurs can devote their energies
to only such limited objectives as the rescue-excavation of
sites threatened with destruction. Even so, they need an
understanding of the basic principles of excavation and
their practical application in recording stratification, the
registration of associated objects and field survey.
The past decade has seen a notable Increase in the pro¬
vision of such training facilities. In Scotland a Field
School of Archaeology was established in 1947 under the
auspices of four Scottish universities and the C.B.A. region¬
al group. Its purpose was to build up a cadre of trained
field workers to tackle emergency excavation when
needed. Ten years later, of the 171 students who had
30 received training, seven had become professional archaeo¬
logists or museum officials. Eight had conducted excava
tions on their own account and 32 had acted as assistants
on sites in Scotland and elsewhere.
The students were drawn from a wide range of occupa¬
tions which included the professions, the Forces, the Civil
Service, journalism, broadcasting, science and Industry.
Thirty-seven were teachers and it is interesting to note
that the majority used archaeology to a greater or
lesser degree in their work.
Similar groups of trained field workers are being built
up in other regions. The University of Durham has for
a number of years used the site of Corstopitum (Cor-
bridge) on Hadrian's Wall as a training-school for stu¬
dents and amateurs. The University of London is asso¬
ciated with Verulamium (St. Albans). In the east Mid¬
lands, the University of Nottingham's Department of
Adult Education has held eight successive summer schools
on the Romano-British town and neighbouring villa site
of Great Casterton, Rutland.
Ei xperience on these sites has shown that
i ideally the training-school should be envisaged
as an integral part of a more prolonged theoretical course
which could best be provided by means of university
extension or adult education lectures during the winter
months. Now, thanks to public demand, tutorial courses
can be followed in many parts of the country.
Extensive as are the facilities provided on the training-
schools, it sometimes happens that they do not meet the
requirements of the active but inexperienced members of
a local society who may wish to work on a site in their
own locality. If there is no archaeologist of suitable expe¬
rience among their ranks, such a project can best be pur¬
sued by inviting a qualified archaeologist to advise and
direct their activities. Unless he is a person with both
means and leisure, his visits are likely to be restricted to
a minimum, especially if the local society is unable to
meet his travelling expenses.
The Carnegie Trust has recently provided a solution to
this problem by making grants to meet the fees and
expenses of qualified archaeologists willing to direct
projects undertaken by societies and recommended by the
C.B.A. The Trust will also provide funds for the
purchase of tools and expensive items of equipment,
which reverts to the C.B.A. when the society no longer
needs them.
Since the project was initiated in 1958, it has been
possible to train over 200 members of some 28 archaeo¬
logical societies. Excavation was entailed in the majority
of cases, but several societies have embarked on long-
term field surveys. These included surveys of early
settlements in Northumberland and Devon, the tracing of
Roman roads in Flintshire, and the recording of early
domestic architecture in several regions.
The provision of so wide a range of training facilities
for the amateur as distinct from the student who intends
to make archaeology his profession has been one of the
most interesting developments of the postwar period.
Its full effects cannot yet be gauged and much will depend
upon the ability of the local societies to move with the
times and provide for more active participation in field-
" work than has hitherto been customary. Herein lies their
best chance of survival. There is much work to be done
both in field survey and by excavation in all parts of the
country and it is through his local archaeological society
that the amateur can most usefully contribute to research.
Beatrice de Cardi is a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries
and Secretary of the British Council for Archaeology,
London.
