f.,
THE INDIAN OCEAN which
represents 14 per. cent of the
earth's surface is the least
known of the earth's oceans.
Since 1 959 science has explored
its mysteries on three levelsat¬
mospheric, surface and under¬
water. Right, trainees from
South-east Asia at work on
the research vessel "Stranger".
Unesco - Mattson

20-nation
scientific
expedition
ILL THE INDIAN OCEAN YIELD
ITS SECRETS? by Daniel Behrman
Apeaceful international fleet of forty vessels
will be setting out over the next two years
on a voyage of discovery in which the factor of the un¬
known looms almost as large as it did to the first naviga¬
tors to venture over the horizon in the past.
This fleet is the International Indian Ocean Expedition,
history's most ambitious co-operative venture in oceano¬
graphy, a science as old in its origins as seafaring and
yet as new and as challenging as the exploration of outer
space. Twenty countries in all are participating. Since
1959 several exploratory vessels have already been cruising
the Indian Ocean as part of the Expedition.
These research vessels are to cover the Indian Ocean
which represents 14 per cent of the earth's surface and
28 million square miles, of which so little is known that
they have been only semi-facetlously termed as "inner
space." The mysteries which this expedition is seeking
to crack, sound at times as if they had come from the
pen of a Jules Verne or an H. G. Wells.
For example, in the northwestern corner of the Indian
Ocean alone, running from the Arabian Sea to a line ten
degrees south of the Equator, vessels next year will be
trying to learn if the actual geological boundary of the
African continent extends almost to the middle of the
Arabian Sea Instead of running along an offshore contin¬
ental shelf.
Others will be investigating the physical processses of
this ocean to find out why it suddenly appears to become
deadly to Its fish population. In 1957, a Soviet vessel
bound from Ceylon to the Gulf of Aden encountered a
mass of dead fish floating over 60,000 square miles, a
tonnage estimated as equal to the world's commercial
fish catch for an entire year.
At one point the expedition will become a combined alr-
and-sea operation; the atmosphere will be converted into
an open "prism," miles In height, by weather planes flying
triangles or pentagons with surface observers at the end
of each 100 mile leg. The difference in readings at both
ends of the "prism" is expected to provide clues to the
flow of heat and water vapour over the ocean. This ls
another step in the process of attempting to learn how 29
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INDIAN OCEAN (Cont'd)
Hunting the elusive coelacanth
the earth's atmosphere actually works in order to put
weather forecasting on a more scientific basis.
Generally speaking, the Indian Ocean itself is a gigantic
laboratory for studying the effect of wind on currents.
It is the world's sole ocean in which the direction of
prevailing winds and, consequently, that of prevailing
currents changes twice a year with the onset of the
northeast and southwest monsoon seasons. Oceanogra-
phers are extremely eager to investigate these reversals
because they are directly linked to the ocean's fish pro¬
ductivity.
What do currents have to do with fish? Very much,
In the case of the Indian Ocean and other tropical seas
where a warm layer of surface water blankets cold food-
laden deeper layers ' and prevents normal mixing.
Currents produce upwelllng of these deeper layers, bring¬
ing up "fertilizer" in the form of phosphates and nitrates
needed to sustain life.
The Importance of these studies in the Indian Ocean
ls obvious. Around Its shores live some of the world's
most heavily-populated countries. The possibility of
"farming" the Indian Ocean for fish protein cannot be
overlooked.
Another biological aspect of the International Indian
Ocean Expedition is even more appealing to the imagi¬
nation. In 1964, one vessel is to go out on a latimeria
hunt. The latimeria, a species of coelacanth, was believed
extinct until scientists learned, almost by accident, that
one had been caught in African waters in 1938. Physiolo¬
gists are anxious to study its waste-elimination processes
which are an intermediate stage on the path of evolu¬
tion leading to present-day fish.
These are some of the highlights of the International
Indian Ocean Expedition brought out at a recent meeting
held in the United Kingdom. Oceanographers from the
Federal Republic of Germany, France, India, Pakistan,
the United States and the United Kingdom met at the
British National Institute of Oceanography at Wormley
to co-ordinate future operations in the northwest Indian
Ocean. The meeting was called by the Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission which, together with the
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research of the Inter¬
national Council of Scientific Unions (the body which
organized a similar joint venture, the International Geo¬
physical Year) and Unesco, is sponsoring the expedition.
It was an appropriate meeting-place, even
though the British National Institute of Ocea¬
nography is high and dry in the green hills of Surrey.
It stands on a knoll as a plain redbrick structure, but it
is surrounded by seabattered buoys, tidal gauges and rows
of barrels containing whale ovaries (one of the Institute's
tasks ls to keep track of the world's declining whale popu¬
lation.)
Chart by U.S. Navy Hydrographie Office, Washington

\ 1
Unesco - BiU Simmons
.<'.
OCEAN PROFILE IN PLASTIC. A clear picture of the ocean bottom Is shown In
relief by the plastic profile (right) used by scientists in their studies of the world under
the waters. Beside it is a classic profile chart of the ocean depth. One of the new tools
which has transformed oceanography Is the precision echo-sounder capable of measur¬
ing the outline of the ocean bed to one fathom (six feet) at a depth of 3,000 fathoms.
A closer inspection of the institute in these bucolic
surroundings reveals even more startling wonders. One
entire corridor is lined like a champagne wine-cellar with
hundreds of samples af sea-water from all over the world
in glass ampules. A room no larger than an ordinary
office is occupied by the North Sea that is, by a mathe¬
matical 'model where the effects of tides and storm surges
on the flooding of coastal regions in Northern Europe are
studied.
Some of the equipment being used by oceanographers
in the Indian Ocean Expedition has been developed or
tested here. Two of these devices serve as excellent
Illustrations of the new tools which have transformed
the science of oceanography within the past decade or so.
One is a precision echo sounder, accurate to one fathom
at a depth of 3,000 fathoms. This instrument has enabled
geophysicists to study the great abyssal plains of the
ocean floor sloping almost imperceptibly (with gradients
less than one in one thousand.) Previous sounders had
a margin of error as wide as fifty fathoms which meant
they could "see" a plain as rolling hills and valleys.
The second is a deep-water current-measuring Instru¬
ment which can be set to float at a predetermined depth
where it drifts and emits a radio signal (hence its
nickname of "pinger") enabling it to be tracked. This
instrument, which has also been called an "underwater
sputnik," has helped revise many long-standing ideas
concerning the stillness of the ocean depths. For
example, it has detected a current moving twenty miles
a day at a depth of 4,000 metres.
The activities of the British National Institute of
Oceanography are under the efficient and good-natured
command of Dr. G.E.R. Deacon, who also served as chair¬
man of the meeting to dicuss operations In the northwest
ocean. Dr. Deacon, at fifty-six, is one of Britain's leading
oceanographers and he is typical of the scientist who has
had long months of patient observation at sea. He seldom
speaks and, when he does, it is in a low tone calculated
not to distract his fellow scientists working under condi
tions reminiscent In many ways of the long voyages In the
days of sail.
As a matter of fact, Dr. Deacon Is the first to remind
a landsman that the study of winds and currents was a
flourishing science during the heyday of the sailing vessel
until it fell into a state of wrongful neglect with the
advent of steam. Present-day oceanography has revived
this study with modern techniques, particularly the ana¬
lysis of waves. Precise Information on wave conditions
has enabled certain vessels to cut their time across the
North Atlantic by 10 per cent In recent years.
Oceanographers, In general, have a more than
sentimental Interest In sailing vessels. Right
now, for example, the three-masted schooner "Vema," an
American research ship operated by the Lamont Geological
Observatory of Columbia University, Ls cruising the Indian
Ocean. At low speeds or while heavlng-to for observa¬
tions, such a ship can be more comfortable than a more
modern vessel.
It ls Interesting to note that the "Atlantis II." the
new research ship now being built by the Woods
Hole Océanographie Institution in the United States,
is powered by steam reciprocating engines rather
than by turbines or diesels. This "antiquated" technique
offers less noise interference In certain studies, particu¬
larly the propagation of sound. The "Discovery," Bri¬
tain's new research vessel launched last July and sche¬
duled to cruise the Indian Ocean next year, has adopted
dlesel-electrlc drive as an economic solution to problems
of low-speed operation. Both new vessels will be equipped
with "wells" amidships allowing Instruments to be
lowered directly into the sea.
In addition to "Atlantis II" and "Discovery," a new
2,200-ton research ship now being constructed In the 31
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INDIAN OCEAN (Cont'd;
The oceans are one of the world's last
unexplored frontiers whose topography
and living things, plant and animal, are now
being revealed by patient research. Speci¬
mens like those shown here at the Nathrang
Institute of Oceanography, Vietnam, will be
studied for years before scientists find all
the solutions to their many mysteries.
Unesco - Pierre Pittet
40,000 miles
of sea-bed mountains
Federal Republic of Germany will take part in the Indian
Ocean Expedition. This means that some of the world's
most modern océanographie vessels and techniques are
to be tested there.
These new vessels offer the advantage of being able to
carry teams of scientists from different disciplines on the
same cruise which is actually the equivalent of two or
three cruises aboard smaller vessels previously used. The
largest ship to work in the Indian Ocean so far has been
the Soviet Union's "Vltyaz" listed at 5,700 tons.
The "Vltyaz" made an important contribution to the
Expedition in 1959 and 1960 by investigating layers of
hydrogen sulphide in the northeastern Arabian Sea and
in the Bay of Bengal, from depths of 125 to 1,000 mètres.
This was also found to be the most oxygen-starved layer
of the ocean and it will be the subject of further study in
the next two years to examine its influence on marine life.
In geophysics as well, the Indian Ocean Expedition has
already produced interesting findings. This was the case
of the nine months' cruise of the "Owen," a British- vessel,
which Investigated the Western Somali basin of the
Arabian Sea. Gravity and magnetic surveys of this area
seem to indicate that the African continental structure
continues more than 200 miles out to sea towards the
Seychelles Islands.
To explain the results of these surveys, a theory has
been advanced that the thick sedimentary layers of the
continent continue under the ocean. Next year, the new
"Discovery" and the "Owen" will use underwater seismic
explosions to determine the nature of the ocean floor in
this region. These two vessels, using underwater photo¬
graphy apparatus as well, will also seek to chart the
Carlsberg Ridge, part of a continuous mid-oceanic ridge
system comparable to a mountain range 40,000 miles long
linking the world's oceans.
In all, a total of nineteen océanographie research vessels
will be at work in the northwestern Indian Ocean next
year. Among them will be ships from two of the coun¬
tries directly concerned with the results of the expedition,
India and Pakistan. Both are also offering special faci¬
lities such as exemptions from harbour fees or storage
space for explosives used in seismic tesis to vessels in
the expedition.
On land, Pakistan is adding to her existing system of
tidal gauges while India has completed the building for
an International Biological Centre at Cochin to be oper¬
ated with Unesco assistance. Specimens taken by ships
will be sent to Cochin for preservation and study.
The expedition has also succeeded in enlisting the aid
of merchant and naval vessels crossing its territory for
supplementary observations. "Air support" will come in
May, June and July of 1963 in the form of meteorological
planes from the United States Weather Bureau and the
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution.
It fell to the men who met at the British National In¬
stitute of Oceanography to co-ordinate these efforts by
individual nations in order to avoid duplication of cruise
tracks and to establish agreement on such matters as the
choice of common reference stations for benchmark
observations or the maintenance by one ship of recording
buoys set out by another. Agreement was reached in a
manner as simple and as straightforward as the oceano¬
graphers themselves who are accustomed to working on
the high seas, a world without political boundaries.
And this will not be the least of the achievements of
the International Indian Ocean Expedition.
32
