IN DEFENCE
OF SCIENCE-FICTION
by
Arthur C.
Clarke
On September 27 in New Delhi, the Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science
was awarded to the British science and science-fiction writer, Arthur C. Clarke.
As tenth winner of this award, Arthur Clarke was also the first interpreter of the
space age to be so honoured. The prize-giving ceremony was held to coincide
with a meeting of the Indian National Commission for Unesco and thus took place
for the first time in the country of Kalinga Prize founder, Mr. B. Patnaik, of the
Orissa Legislative Assembly. Below we publish Arthur Clarke's address delivered
in New Delhi, in which he describes his award as a tribute to his particular field
of writing science-fiction. The idea that artificial satellites might one day be
used for relaying radio and television (now become reality with Telstar) was sug¬
gested by Arthur C. Clarke as early as October 1945 in an article "Extra-Terres¬
trial Relays", published in Wireless World.
14
Universal International

Paramount 19 54
Long before rockets and artificial satellites went into orbit around the
earth science-fiction writers had already reached the moon and other
planets, travelled to the heart of the earth and explored time. Though
such forward-looking stories have sometimes evoked their share of
scientific scoffing, some have, in fact, become reality. Novels and films
have helped to spread the ideas of spaceflight as in "Conquest of Space'-
(above) and of possible futuristic mishaps as in "The Incredible Shrinking
Man" (left) who gradually diminished to the size of a microbe.
I N addition to the pride I
personally feel on receiving
the Kalinga Prize, I would like to
think that it Is a tribute to the field
of literature in which I have specia¬
lized science-fiction. Although at
least four of the earlier prize-win¬
ners have written some science-fic¬
tion (1), it has been only a minute
and incidental portion of their output.
I can claim that it is a major part
of mine, for I have published just
about as much fiction as non-fiction.
Many scientists, I am sorry to say,
still look down on science-fiction and
lose no opportunity of criticizing it.
For example, they often point out
that ninety percent of science-fic¬
tion is rubbish ignoring the fact
that ninety percent of all fiction is
rubbish. Indeed, I would claim that
the percentage of competent writing
in the science-fiction field is probably
higher than in any other. This is
because much of it is a labour of
love, written by enthusiasts who have
considerable scientific knowledge and
who are often themselves practising
scientists.
What role does science-fiction
(1) Ed. note: Julian Huxley ("The
Tissue Culture King"); Bertrand
Russell (stories from his collection,
"Satan in the Suburbs"); George
Gamow ("Mr. Tomkins in Wonder¬
land" and "Mr. Tomkins Explores the
Atom"); Ritchie Colder ("Forbidden
City").
actually play in the popularization
of "science? Though it often serves
to impart information, I think its
chief value is inspirational rather
than educational. How many young
people have had the wonders of the
universe first opened up to them, or
have been turned to a scientific
career, by the novels of Verne and
Wells? Many distinguished scientists
have paid tribute to the influence of
these great masters, and a careful
survey would, I believe, reveal that
science-fiction is a major factor in
launching many youngsters on a
scientific career.
It is obvious that science-fiction
should be technically accurate, and
there is no excuse for erroneous
information when the true facts are
available. Yet accuracy should not
be too much of a fetish, for it is
often the spirit rather than the
letter that counts. Thus Verne's
From the Earth to the Moon and
A Journey to the Centre of the Earth
are still enjoyable, not only because
Verne was a first-rate story teller,
but because he was imbued with the
excitement of science and could com¬
municate this to his readers. That
many of his "facts" and most of his
theories are now known to be incor¬
rect is not a fatal flaw, for his books
still arouse the sense of wonder.
It is this sense of wonder that
motivates all true scientists, and all
true artists. We encounter it in the
writings of such scientific expositors
as Fabre, Flammarion, Jeans, Rachel
Carson, Loren Eisley, as well as many
of my precursors at this function;
and we meet it again in all scientific
romances that are worthy of the
name. Any man who can read the
opening pages of Wells' The War of
the Worlds or the closing ones of
The Time Machine without a tingling
of the blood is fit only for "treasons,
strategems and spoils."
The cultural impact of science-
fiction has never been properly recog¬
nized, and the time is long overdue
for an authoritative study of its his¬
tory and development. Perhaps this
is a project that Unesco could spon¬
sor, for it is obvious that no single
scholar will have the necessary quali¬
fications for the task. In one field
in particular that of astronautics
the influence of science-fiction has
been enormous. The four greatest
pioneers of spaceflight Tsiolkovsky,
Oberth, Goddard and von Braun all
wrote science-fiction to propagate
their ideas (though they did not
always get it published!).
In spreading the ideas of space¬
flight, science-fiction has undoubtedly
helped to change the world. More
generally, it helps us to face the
strange realities of the universe In
which we live. This is well put in an
article recently sent to me by a
science-fiction "fan" who also hap¬
pens to be a Nobel Prize winner
Dr. Hermann J. Müller, whose disco¬
very of the genetic effects of radia- ^5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE-FICTION
ON THE SCREEN
The fantastic imagination of science-fiction
writers of yesterday and today is illustrated in
scenes from films shown here, from left to
right : "The Invisible Man" and "The Time
Machine", both by H. G. Wells, "Satellitein
the Sky" and "Earth vs. Flying Saucers".
Transposed to the screen, in recent years this
"literature of a changing world" has made an
even wider impact on the man in the street.
Universal Pictures
Literature of a changing world
tion has inadvertently inspired much
recent science-fiction and made
"mutant" a modern bogey-word.
To quote Dr. Müller (Science-Fic¬
tion as an Escape: The Humanist,
1957, No 6.): "The real world is
Increasingly seen to be, not the tidy
little garden of. our race's childhood,
but the extraordinary, extravagant
universe descried by the eye of
science ...If our art.. .does not explore
the relations and contingencies im¬
plicit in the greater world into
which we are forcing our way, and
does not reflect the hopes and fears
based on these appraisals, then that
art is a dead pretence	But man
will not live without art. In a scien
tific age he will therefore have
science-fiction."
In the same paper, Dr. Müller
points out another valuable service
that this type of literature has per¬
formed. "Recent science-fiction," he
writes, "must be accorded high credit
for being one of the most active
forces in support of equal opportuni-
Science-fiction has encouraged the cosmic viewpoint, quickly making those who read
it realize the absurdity of mankind's present tribal divisions. In the film "This Island
Earth" (below) two inhabitants of a distant planet named Metaluna outside our solar
system return home in their spaceship with two hostages after visiting the earth. Universal International 1956

ig) Warner Brothers
M.G.M.
ties, goodwill and co-operation among
all human beings, regardless of their
racial and national origins. Its
writers have been practically unani¬
mous in their adherence to the ideal
of 'one free world'."
That, I think, is inevitable. Anyone
who reads this form of literature
quickly realizes the absurdity of man¬
kind's present tribal divisions.
Science-fiction encourages the cosmic
viewpoint; perhaps this is why it is
not popular among those literary
pundits who have never quite accept¬
ed the Copernican revolution, nor
grown used to the idea that Man
may not be the highest form of life
in the universe. The sooner such
people complete their education, and
re-orientate themselves to the astro¬
nomical realities, the better. And
science-fiction is one of the most
effective tools for this urgent job.
For it is, pre-eminently, the litera¬
ture of change and change is the
only thing of which we can be cer¬
tain today, thanks to the continuing
and accelerating Scientific Revolu¬
tion. What we science-fiction writers
call "mainstream literature" usually
paints a static picture of society, pre¬
senting, as it were, a snapshot of it,
frozen at one moment in time.
Science-fiction, on the other hand,
assumes that the future will be pro¬
foundly different from the past
though it does not, as is often ima¬
gined, attempt to predict that future
in detail. Such a feat Is impossible,
and the occasional direct hits of
Wells and other writers are the result
of luck as much as judgement.
But by mapping out possible
futures, as well as a good many
impossible ones, the science-fiction
writer can do a great service to the
community. He encourages in his
readers flexibility of mind, readiness
to accept and even welcome change
in one word, adaptability. Perhaps
no attribute is more important in
this age. The dinosaurs disappeared
because they could not adapt to their
changing environment. We shall
disappear if we cannot adapt to an
environment which contains space¬
ships and thermonuclear weapons.
Sir Charles Snow ends his famous
essay Science and Government by
stressing the vital importance of
"the gift of foresight." He points
out that men often have wisdom
without possessing foresight. Per¬
haps we science-fiction writers some¬
times show foresight without wisdom;
but at least we undoubtedly cío have
foresight, and it may rub off on to
the community at large.
Before concluding, I would like to
take this unique occasion of the first
Kalinga presentation on Indian soil,
to speak about the promotion of the
scientific outlook in the East. Though
this task is important enough in the
West, it is even more desperately
urgent here. Two of the greatest
evils which afflict Asia, and keep
millions in a state of physical, men¬
tal and spiritual poverty, are Fana¬
ticism and Superstition. Science, in
its cultural as well as its technolo¬
gical sense, is the great enemy of
both; it can provide the only weapons
that will overcome them and lead
whole nations to a better life.
For Fanaticism is incompatible
with the open-minded, inquiring
spirit of science with the readiness
Columbia Pictures
to accept the discipline of external
reality, even if it conflicts with one's
personal hopes and beliefs. The
motto of the fanatic is "Don't con¬
fuse me with the facts I've made
up my mind." This is the exact
antithesis of the Scientific Outlook.
As for Superstition most of us can
remember, though too many people
have already forgotten, the events of
last February 5. On that date a
natural and inevitable grouping of
the planets (that has happened about
twenty times since the days of the
Kalinga empire!) caused needless
fear to millions. How many lakhs
if not crores of rupees were then
expended to ward off astral influen¬
ces? And most of that money was
spent by families who could ill
afford it.
That was a spectacular example of
the evils of superstition, but there
are countless others unnoticed by the
world. Recently, not far from my
home in Ceylon, a villager was bitten
by a snake. He could get no medical
treatment, because the date was
inauspicious; and so he died.
Two years ago Monsieur Jean Ros¬
tand, referred to India as "that
great nation which welcomes the
future without rejecting the past."
That is a good policy for any nation
as long as it realizes that there are
things in the past that must be
rejected. Science, which after all is
only common-sense raised to the
n'th degree, can tell us what to pre¬
serve and what to reject. Heed its
voice if not for your own sakes,
then for the sake of the lovely, dark-
eyed children of Asia and Africa,
who are born in millions every year
and die in millions the next. Their
only hope of a better future lies in
Science combined with Wisdom and
Foresight. I shall be happy indeed *-j
if any writings of mine have helped
towards this goal.
