NEMRUD DAGH
for 2,000 years the colossal
statues of an East-West
sanctuary have guarded the
secret of an Anatolian king
TWENTY CENTURIES AGO, Antiochus I,
King of Commagene raised a mighty monument
to himself and his gods atop Nemrud Dagh (Mount
Nimrod) in the Anti-Taurus Mountains of present-
day Turkey. The colossal statues of Antiochus
and the deities worshipped by his Greek and
Persian ancestors still stand, but most have been
decapitated. Fallen heads of Herakles (on left)
and Zeus (right) are twice the height of a man.
by Pauline Bentley
S(EVEN thousand feet high in the Anti-Taurus
mountains of Turkey stands Nemrud Dagh, the
mount of Nimrod. On this parched and stony summit
there has lain for the past 2,000 years one of the great
monuments of antiquity, a sanctuary which by its beauty
outstandingly exemplifies the amalgam of East and West,
of Persian, Greek and Anatolian cultures. It was raised
in the first century of our era by Antiochus I, King of
Commagene, to be a "holy common room of all the Gods"
and a palace of pilgrimage for his people.
Hewn from the mountain »rock, the sanctuary consists
of three terraces levelled on the summit and decorated
with mighty statues of the King and his Gods which
tower on their bases to the height of a five-storey building.
Portrait reliefs of the "heroic company of the King's
ancestors" grace the terrace walls; above these and
the statues too, Antiochus I caused the rock chippings to
be piled into a tumulus, a great man-made false peak
rising in perfect symmetry for 150 feet on the mountain
top. Is this the King's burial chamber? Archaeologists
believe the rocky cairn to be his tomb, »but so far it has
defied exploration.
Today Nemrud Dagh looks out over an arid land from
which the ferment of civilization has long since seeped
away, but 2,000 years ago the little Kingdom of
Commagene spread in a rich and fertile vista at the foot
of the Anti-Taurus mountain chain from Cilicia to the
Euphrates River. It was a tempting, miniature buffer
state between the great powers of its world. To the
South and East lay the Parthian Empire, northwards the
Roman Protectorates of Cappadocea and Armenia, and on
the Aegean seaboard sprawled the Roman Provinces.
Well may both Rome and Persia have cast longing eyes
upon this kingdom which the Roman Consul Strabo once
described as "exceedingly fertile, though small."
Relatively little is known of its history, but it is recorded
that Antiochus I made treaty with the Roman General
Pompey in 64 B.C., preserving its frontiers until it was
finally absorbed into the Roman Empire under Vespasian
in 72 A.D.
Meanwhile, into Commagene poured the differing
cultures of Persia and of Greece to mingle with the
richness of Anatolian history. The capital city, Samsat,
the Samosata of today, commanded one of the epic
crossing-points of the Euphrates; the whole kingdom lay
astride the ancient trade routes of the Orient and the
West, among lands bearing two of the world's seven
wonders. . .the Temple to Diana at Ephesus and the fort of
Helicarnassus built in memory of the Anatolian ruler
Mausolus whence comes the word mausoleum. In these
4 regions Xenophon led his 10,000 to their fatal meeting
with the Persians and the Apostle Paul trod his dusty way
from Tarsus. Around Edessa, some fifty miles from
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

¿Mm
fJjß&
Ara GOler, Istanbul

THRONE ROOM OF THE GODS. Overlooking
two vast terraces on "the topmost ridge of my
kingdom" Antiochus I assembled these 29-feet high
colossi. These deities, whose multiple names reflect the
Greek and Persian cultures from which they sprang, in¬
clude a sun god (Apollo-Mithra-Helios-Hermes), the
Commagene fertility goddess (Fortuna), the father of
the gods (Zeus-Ahuramazda), thegod ofstrength(Hera-
kles) and Antiochus. Only Fortuna has kept her head.
Ara Güler
Is Antiochus I buried here?
Nemrud Dagh, there may sometimes still be encountered
a blonde and blue-eyed people, perhaps descended from the
Frankish Knights of the first Crusade who later passed
this way.
The stir of history has all subsided and time and erosion
have done their work. The Turkish Government are
now launching a land-reclamation programme which is
already showing some results in their effort to restore the
region to its former fertility, but so remote and desolate
did it become across the centuries that it was not until
1882 and 1883 that Nemrud Dagh first fell to the
archaeologist.
Reports written then on the sanctuary by Turkish and
German archaeologists in turn fired the enthusiasm of an
American woman geologist, Theresa Goell (1). After 14
years of research work and two preliminary visits she led
her first expedition there in 1953.
Even now the way to the sanctuary is far from easy;
then, it was accessible only by narrow winding donkey
tracks. The old processional way of Antiochus I leads
(1) A personal account by Theresa Goell of her investigations
at Nemrud Dagh was published in "National Geographic."
(Vol. 119, No. 3, March 1961.)
I
i -.»
BETWEEN TWO CONTINENTS. The small
though rich kingdom of Commagene lay astride
trade routes linking Orient to Occident. Gate¬
way to the sacred monuments of Antiochus is
this well-preserved Roman bridge of Septimus
Severus (left) on aformer royal processional route.
ROARING LION (right) carved from sandstone
guards a relief on the west terrace, depicting
Antiochus I and the sun god (Apollo-Mithra).
Lion looks down over barren slopes and valleys
of once prosperous Commagene. Today, through
drought and erosion, much of it is wasteland.

NEMRUD DAGH (Cont'd)
MAN-MADE MOUNTAIN PEAK.
Crowning Mount Nimrod (right) is
a giant tumulus ISO feet high, raised,
stone by stone, on the orders of
Antiochus I as the crowning monument
of his sanctuary. This may well hide
the tomb of the monarch, but all
attempts to dig into the mound have
been thwarted by avalanches of stones.
Photos © Ara Guler
^ammtff K f. » Un
from the remote village of Esikartha, reached by crossing
the river by the marvellously preserved Roman Bridge of
Septimus Severus, itself a relic of great beauty (see
opposite page).
To the south, lies Karakus, the tomb of the Royal ladles
of the dynasty of Antiochus. Their tumulus is guarded
by a limestone eagle, symbol of Zeus, standing on a neo-
Doric column. The tomb appears to have been pillaged
but there are still traces of 18 columns, once with statues
on them, of which only two now stand.
Beyond, »lies the Anti-Taurus chain, dominated by
Nemrud Dagh, with its symmetrical, man-made peak
rising sharp and clear against the sky, but to the traveller
from Esikartha the sanctuary itself remains completely
hidden from view during his journey. He must toll
upwards on an hours-long arduous climb from the ancient
Anatolian village with no glimpse of his goal to spur him
on until it suddenly bursts forth in complete and
breathtaking splendour high above him.
The havoc wrought by time, weathering and casual
vandalism cannot mar the sudden revelation of the white
cone of stones »glittering in the still and »blazing light,
silently guarded by the immense statues still sentinel
in their mutilation and displacement.
The Goell expedition settled to the examination of the
sanctuary on the rocky terrain which made encampment
a painful hazard and working conditions a matter for
sheer ingenuity. In the rigorous hardship of a climate
swinging between a daytime 130° and an night-time
freezing point; without nearby water or shade; in dust,
hall, freak torrential rainstorms and at the mercy of an
occasional marauding bear, they surveyed the shrine,
clearing It with difficulty of debris. There was no room
on the summit to put this and it liad to be carried
painstakingly down the mountain in wooden litters.
It soon became obvious that Nemrud Dagh warranted
more than one season for its thorough exploration.
Theresa Goell and her team spent five years' dedicated
work there, helped by the sponsorship of the American
School for Oriental Research and with the aid of the
Bollinger Foundation and the American Philosophical
Society. Far from being the crude product of some seml-
barbarian monarch as had been suggested, the beauty of
the shrine established It as one of the glories of the
Hellenistic world.
Not only the sculptured figures of Antlochus and hLs
Gods with their attendant eagles and lions, but also their
sandstone relief portraits cut into the walLs running the
length of the East and West terraces show the purity of
form and line of the great classical tradition.
The ceremonial heart of the shrine Is the Persian fire
altar on the East Terrace. Earlier expeditions had
described a "mighty stairway" to It, but the Goell expedi¬
tion revealed this to be a double podium cut Into the rock
with inscriptions indicating reliefs cut In its walls.
Majestically facing the fire altar, with the tumulus of
CONT'D ON PAGE 10
lb-

NEMRUD DAGH (Cont'd;
Mountain-top terrace
of a king & his gods
FALLEN HEADS OF DEITIES litter the west terrace of Nemrud
Dagh (right) giving it the appearance of a huge open-air studio of some
monumental sculptor with, as a back-drop, the bleak eroded slopes
of the Anti-Taurus mountains. Though now shattered by earthquakes,
erosion and vandalism, the deities still seem marvels of engineering
skill. Upon their platform, they rose as high as a five-storey building.
FACE OF ZEUS pitted and scarred by weather and erosion (below)
now stares sightlessly from the west terrace. Other decapitated head
In rear is that of Antiochus I who built and endowed the sanctuary.
Headdress worn by Antlochus shows his paternal links with Persia.
LION HOROSCOPE (be¬
low) was found on east
terrace. Though a similar
one was discovered 70 years
earlier, new information has
been drawn from stars and
other engravings. These
markings on this relief of
a stylized lion give the date
of the horoscope as July 61
or 62 B.C. possibly
when the shrine was built.
a,.2L' A. . >? v'-.

.
&' V
Photos O Arj CUler
TOMB OF THE ROYAL LADIES
of the dynasty of Antiochus Is at
Karakus which lies to the south of
Nemrud Dagh. The burial tumulus
here is guarded by a limestone eagle
(right) symbol of Zeus, standing on a
neo-Dorlc column. At Karakus there
are also traces of eighteen columns
that were once crowned by statues.
£
m&

NEMRUD DAGH (Cont'd;
>2*T^
Ara Güler
GUARDIANS OF THE SHRINE, these eagle and lion heads keep a faithful
vigil over the monuments and statues of Nemrud Dagh as they have done
since craftsmen hewed them from the] mountain rock twenty centuries ago.
The eagle was a familiar motif in ancient Anatolian and Mesopotamian art.
Heritage of both Greece and Persia
10
rock chippings at their back, there still sit, though shaken
and dismembered by earth tremors, an imposing array of
25 to 29-foot high statues reflecting the hybrid culture
from which they spring.
First comes the Sun God, Apollo-Mithra-Helios-Hermes ;
then the Commagene Fertility Goddess Fortuna; next to
her the Father of the Gods, the "Thunder Shaker," Ahura
Mazda-Zeus. Next to him sits Antiochus I himself,
flanked by the Hero God of strength, Herakles-Artagne-
Ares. All the statues, except the Goddess Fortuna have
lost their heads across the years, the mighty head of
Apollo Mithra being discovered when the Goell expedition
were clearing a trench on this terrace to copy inscriptions
cut into bases of the statues.
These Inscriptions give a history of the sanctuary
"I, Antiochus," reads part of them, "have raised this
place to my own glory and that of my Gods." They show
he endowed the shrine with Royal estates, staffed it
with priests and musicians and decreed "everlasting"
monthly ceremonies there. The 10th day of each month
commemorated his accession to the throne, and the 16th,
his birthday.
An important discovery by the Goell team on the East
terrace was a "lion horoscope" similar to the one
discovered on the West Terrace in 1882 which gained fame
as the first known Greek horoscope. Professor Otto
Neygebauer of Brown University, Boston has identified the
19 stars scattered on and near its body and the conjunc¬
tion of the three planets Jupiter, Mercury and Mars,
giving the date of the horoscope as July 61 or 62 B.C.

© Ara Güler
BEARDED HERAKLES (foreground) and handsome Apollo are two heads
broken off from the mighty statues at Nemrud Dagh, two members of a ruined
pantheon of the gods. Standing on the court of the west terrace, they look like
giants who have been buried to the neck in the rocky soil of the mountain sanctuary.
This may be taken as the possible date of the shrine's
foundation and has been of very great value in the dating
of other Hellenistic monuments.
Among other valuable discoveries was the sculptured
head of Antiochus, some 16 feet (5 metres) high, lying
amidst the fallen heads of his gods and guardian animals
on the West Terrace. It Is of calm and striking beauty,
and bears a strong likeness to Alexander the Great, from
whom Antiochus claimed descent on his mother's side.
The head wears a Persian headdress to remind us that he
also claimed descent from the Aechemenid dynasty of
Persia, through his father.
The relief portraits on this West Terrace show him,
adorned with the lion emblem of royalty and guarded by
a sandstone lion statue, facing Apollo-Mithra as an equal.
for Antlochus I claimed not only descent from the rulers
of Greece and Persia, but considered himself Immortal.
One of the inscriptions in the sanctuary reads "the
topmost ridge" of the kingdom "is the one in closest
proximity to the heavenly throne of Zeus."
It was this Inscription and the discovery of a rock core
under the east side of the tumulus which encouraged
Theresa Goell's conviction that Antiochus I lies buried
under the tumulus he raised. Excavations were started
but they resulted only in avalanches of stone which made
continuing impossible. Twenty centuries after its erection
the shrine of Nemrud Dagh has been brought before us
by description, photograph and film but its final enigma
remains unsolved: the great pile of rock upon its summit
keeps Its secret still.
11
