Between twenty-five and thirty million
lives could be saved each year if health
conditions all over the world were the
same as those in the most advanced
countries. For The Unesco Courier,
Jean Manevy, of the World Health
Organization, has made a special inquiry
into world health today. His report,
published here, is focussed on two
basic features of the global health
picture: the contagious diseases which
are still the greatest cause of death
and misery in the less economically
developed countries and the "killers
of modern times" which afflict the
most economically advanced countries.
IN A MAKESHIFT DISPENSARY vaccination
against smallpox is given in a village of Latin
America. Here, three generations are being
immunised against this disease which still breaks
out in epidemic proportions in some under¬
developed countries. Systematic vaccination
campaigns carried out in Latin American countries
have achieved striking success in recent years.

THE TWO FACES
WORLD HEALTH
by Jean Manevy
The challenge of disease & poverty
If the frightening toll of human lives taken
each year by sickness is to be eliminated, the
less developed countries must first wipe out contagious
disease just as the more developed countries have done
over the past 50 or 60 years.
In a recent interview In Geneva, Dr. Albert Sabin, one
of the men who conquered polio, pointed out that health
conditions in the under-developed countries today are
comparable to those which existed in Western countries
about 60 years ago. "Let us hope," he said, "that these
nations will not wait 60 years to bridge the gap since they
can take advantage without waiting of the discoveries
and experience acquired elsewhere."
Two examples illustrate this point. In Sweden a
century ago the life span of the average person was 41
years; fifty years ago it went up to 52 years; today the
average Swede lives to be at least 70. In India fifty years
ago the average person could expect to live 23 years; ten
years ago average expectancy of life rose to 32 years; today
It Ls 42 years.
The description given by Sir Edwin Chadwick (England's
pioneer of public health legislation) of living conditions
in England less than a hundred years ago might well have
been written for many of the newly developing countries
of today:
"In the courts and alleys inhabited by the poor," he
wrote, "an entire family, or more than one, living in a
single room, was by no means uncommon. Worse still, they
had inadequate water for drinking, washing cooking, no
sanitation and very often not enough light and air. In
the North, the dark satanic mills had sprung up like
weeds. Around them lay vast areas of industrial slums,
where thousands of people lived in indescribably foul and
noisome surroundings, over-worked,- under-nourished and
racked by disease."
Today deaths from typhoid fever, dysentery, diphtheria,
whooping cough and measles are as much as 30 times
higher in the under-developed countries as they are
elsewhere in the world. The death rate for tuberculosis
stands twelve times as high; the Infant mortality rate is
three to four times higher. Malaria alone strikes down
hundreds of millions of persons each year and Ls responsi¬
ble for at least half a million deaths.
The fact is that the eradication of contagious diseases
now stands as Priority Number One on the urgency list of
action required for the 2,500 million human beings who live
in the under-developed regions.
Bad health is without a doubt the most serious obstacle
to a nation's economic and social development. When
disease is rampant production drops dragging down with
it salaries, living conditions and food consumption.
Inevitably the educational level of the nation suffers a
serious blow. Increasingly larger sums of money have to
be spent on curative medicine instead of on preventive
medicine with the result that the general state of health
of an entire country begins to deteriorate and plans
for economic development are often virtually paraly/ed.
This ls the famous "vicious circle of poverty," so often
spoken about, In which poverty engenders disease which
in turn engenders even greater poverty. '
Let us look at this vicious circle as It operates in the
case of malaria, a disease allecting 140 countries and
territories of the world. Malaria is one of the chief causes
of absenteeism from work and of the physical and moral
degradation of the individual. It reduces agricultural
output, blocks the exploitation of natural resources, and
thwarts eilorts made by countries towards Industrial and
commercial expansion.
IN A TRANQUIL SETTING offered by the park of a psychiatric
hospital, an old lady goes for her daily walk, hand-ln-hand with one
of the nursing staff. The economically advanced countries have van¬
quished many deadly epidemic diseases, but now face the serious pro¬
blems of cancer, heart diseases, mental health and aging populations.
V/HO - Ji-an tlolir
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD HEALTH (Cont'd)
THE VICIOUS CIRCLE
A victim of'malaria is incapacitated for a period of at
least two months out of every year. During this period
he must be cared for and this often means that someone
from his family or amongst his friends must give up his
or her own work to do so.
Since the disease usually strikes during the harvest
season a malaria-stricken farmer finds himself incapable
of gathering in his crop of rice or maize. Furthermore
malaria saps a person's very will to work and undermines
his mental and physical energies. Unable to plough and
sow his fields the farmer finds his next year's crops
jeopardized.
But this is only part of the malaria story in the vicious
circle of poverty. Malaria is also a killer. Especially
when it strikes children. It is responsible for up to 15 per
cent, of infant mortality in malaria-infested countries.
The death of any child is a tragedy no matter where
it occurs. But In the poor, under-developed countries the
high death rate of children from malaria has economic
repercussions which reach catastrophic proportions not
only for the families directly concerned but for the
development potentialities of the community and indeed
the entire nation.
Let us grit our teeth and face some of the stark facts
squarely. If the figures and statistics about to be given
seem cold-blooded and inhuman when speaking of the
death of children, we must remember that they help to
explain the vicious circle of poverty which holds so many
under-developed countries in a tight grip.
For the family, the community and the nation in an
under-developed area, the birth of a child is considered
a financial investment in food, clothing and education.
It is generally recognized that this investment begins to
show returns only when the child has reached the age
of 15 at which time he begins to contribute to the family
and hence to the community and national economy. If
a child dies before the age of 15 his potential contribution
to the development of his country is nil.
The cost of premature deaths from malaria has been
calculated fairly accurately in a country such as Mexico.
Pocket dictionary of diseases
DILHARZIASIS: Sometimes called
snail fever. An intestinal disease
transmitted to man by a parasite found
in tiny snails living in slow-moving
streams. It attacks young people,
lowers vitality and labour productivity.
Irrigation works often help to spread
the disease into new territories. A
drug exists, but it is difficult to admi¬
nister. Prevention: if environmental
hygiene cannot be improved, then
streams should be cleared of aquatic
plants on which the snails live. Para¬
sites can be destroyed by treating water
with copper sulphate.
V«HOLERA: Intestinal disease caused
by a bacteria (vibrio) transmitted by
polluted water. The patient becomes
completely dehydrated and can die
in less than an hour after the first
symptoms appear. In the mid-19th cen¬
tury, murderous epidemics of cholera
raged across Europe. Can be checked
by vaccination. During epidemics a
"vaccinating pistol" can be used to
inject vaccine painlessly and twenty
times quicker than by a hypodermic
syringe. Long-established centres of
infection: India, Pakistan. There were
1,422 deaths in West Bengal during
the first six months of 1961. Preven¬
tion: clean water.
VjOITRE: A disease caused by
diet deficiencies. Affects 200 million
people. The remedy has been known
for a century: add iodine to kitchen salt.
Cost of this operation and some preju¬
dices against it still hinder large-scale
iodization of salt.
LEPROSY: Ten million sufferers
throughout the world, but only 20%
receive treatment of any kind. Less
contagious than tuberculosis. If
detected in time, can be cured, without
leaving any traces, by treatment with
sulphones. Treatment is nowadays
given by mobile teams or in permanent
centres not at all reminiscent of the
leprosaria of former times.
A/l.ALARIA: Transmitted by mosqui¬
toes and fought both with insecticides
(to kill mosquitoes) and drugs (to kill
parasites in the blood of sufferers).
250 million malaria patients in 1955,
140 million today. Newest danger:
certain species of mosquitoes develop
immunity to insecticides.
ONCHOCERCIASIS (River blind¬
ness): Is caused by a minute worm
transmitted to man by a fly, larvae of
which is carried by freshwater crabs.
When hordes of these worms invade
the human eye, blindness results.
200 to 300 million persons are believed
to surfer from the disease and entire
populations have been known to scatter
before it, leaving their lands depopu¬
lated. Insecticide sprays are now used
to destroy the flies.
PLAGUE: Transmitted to man by
fleas carried by rats. Current reservoir
of infection: wild rodents including
ground squirrels, prairie dogs. Dread
scourge of man for centuries. In India
alone an average of over 500,000 deaths
annually between 1898-1908. Total
deaths in Í959-60 only 19. Prevention:
anti-rat campaigns.
R>LABIES: Virus disease transmitted
to man by the bite of diseased dogs,
cats, wolves or foxes. One of the reser¬
voirs of the disease: Central American
bats. Prevention by destruction of
stray dogs, vaccination of domestic
dogs and cats.

WHO photos
Poverty breeds disease which in turn breeds more poverty. Two of the results of low produc¬
tion are poor nutrition and poor education. These result, in their turn, in sickness and a lack
of preventative and curative medical services. Chronically sick people, sapped of energy,
are poor workers. Health, education, and social and economic progress go hand in hand.
The average life span of a Mexican today is 45 years of
which 30 years are the productive period. If a man dies
at 30 then his productive period has lasted only 15 years
a loss of 15 years. Let us multiply this figure by 24,000
the number of Mexicans who die of malaria annually at
the average age of 30 and we find that the Mexican
economy is amputated every year of 360,000 potential years
of productive contribution. It has been estimated that
this amounts to a financial loss to the national economy
of 156 million dollars per year a straggering sum even
for a rich country.
Malaria, however, is only one disease in the long list
of maladies afflicting millions in the under-developed
countries. Lying as many do in tropical climates these
countries must cope with the factor of prolonged intense
heat which as we know is ideal for the spread of infection.
Hot weather favours the extension of disease in three
different ways.
1) It permits the rapid breeding of insects which
transmit the diseases they carry to man. Sleeping
sickness, malaria, yellow fever, dengue, filariasls, rickett-
siosis, kala-azar, etc... are all caused by .such Insect vectors.
2) It ls Ideal for the proliferation of microbes and tiny
parasites In water. Dysentery, cholera, typhoid and para¬
typhoid fevers, snail fever (bllharzlasls) are only a few
of the diseases caused by amoebae and bacilli found In
water.
3) Finally, hot weather ls favourable to the development
of Intestinal parasites and their eggs, deposited In damp
soil from human excrement. This accounts for many of
the dreaded Intestinal worm diseases, such as the anky-
lostomes, which are one of the chief causes of chronic
anemia and malnutrition.
While the climate of the under-developed countries
cannot be changed, the organization of hygienic .services,
the use of modern techniques, and the Intensification of
public health campaigns particularly In rural areas, have
already begun to show substantial results.
Without water there can be no cleanliness; without
cleanliness there can be no health. The .sanitary problems
of providing pure water and disposing of .sewage are
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
of under-developed countries
SMALLPOX: This killer disease is
an anachronism today, 150 years after
the discovery of smallpox vaccine.
It could be entirely eliminated if 80%
of the world's population were vacci¬
nated. Modern dangers: faked vaccin¬
ation certificates ; speed and volume
of international travel. Most afflicted
countries: India, Pakistan, Central
Africa. 60,000 cases in 1960. Impor¬
tant: booster shots at regular intervals
necessary.
I RACHOMA: Virus-transmitted eye
disease (right) can cause blindness.
WHO estimates victims at one-sixth
of the world's population (500 million
persons). In certain countries virtually
the whole population Is afflicted with
1% of all adults totally blind and 4%
"economically disabled" by blindness.
Regular treatment with antibiotics
checks the infection.
Tuberculosis : 309 million persons
given tuberculin tests and 117 million
vaccinated with B.C.G. between 1951
and 1960 in 41 countries and territories
out of a population of 800 million
inhabitants. Latest drug, Isoniazid,
WHO - Homer Page
enables patients to be treated at home.
One mother recently objected to WHO
doctor: "Your pills are fine but they
give my children too big an appetite."
TYPHUS: Transmitted by body lice.
Killed hundreds of millions of persons
in the past. DDT spraying of the body
and clothes now successfully destroys
the lice.
Y AWS: A highly contagious microbe
transmitted by simple contact. Chiefly
due to poverty and faulty hygiene.
Can disfigure and cripple victims for
life. Now cured with a single injection
of penicillin. 280 million persons
examined, 35 million treated between
1950 and 1960.
YELLOW FEVER: Transmitted to
man by a parasite-carrying mosquito.
Practically eliminated from the Ame¬
ricas. A few centres of infection In
central and eastern Africa. Prevention:
vaccination and anti-mosquito cam¬
paigns. Reservoir of infection:
monkeys, from whom mosquitoes suck
infected blood.
ZOONOSES: Scientists' name for
diseases transmitted to man by animals.
Psitticosis (parrots), rabies (dogs),
0 fever (goats and cows), Anthrax
(cows), Brucellosis (goats and pigs),
Bovine Tuberculosis (cattle), Trichi¬
nosis (pigs).

WORLD HEALTH (Cont'd)
Malnutrition - deadly enemy of children
directly linked to two major health problemstyphoid
fever and dlarrhoeal complaints whose chief targets are
children. It has been estimated that one-quarter of the
world's hospital beds are occupied by victims of polluted
water. Among the worst enemies of children, especially
in hot weather, are the dlarrhoeal diseases.. Yet 30%
to 60% of these deaths could be prevented if pure water
supplies were assured. In Asia there are periodic out¬
breaks of cholera, a scourge which could be wiped out
if clean drinking water was available. In Latin America,
of all communities numbering more than 2,000 people,
70% have no adequate pure water supplies. In Africa
water is sometimes stored underground in ostrich egg
shells.
Fetching water is more often than not a woman's job
and it ls not unusual for them to spend more than half
their day at this exhausting work. In some regions the
practice of polygamy is justified by the need for the
master of the house to have enough wives to keep htm
properly supplied with water. In Puerto Rico, there was
a dramatic drop In the incidence of deaths due to
diarrhoea and enteritisfrom 480 per 100,000 to 62- per
100,000after a modernization of the water supply system
and drains was begun In 1945.
Malnutrition, called kwashiorkor In Africa, is a polyca-
rence, or "many lacks", in diet due to déficiences of protein,
iron and vitamins A, B, C and D. It attacks children at
the time whenthey cease to be breast fed and, deprived of
their mother's milk, receive the same food as the rest of
the family. Here is how a reporter of "World Health,"
the magazine of the World Health Organization, graphi¬
cally described malnutrition as he saw it recently in
Latin America:
"Malnutrition ls as ugly as it is widespread. Ugly? The
word is weak. Monstrous. We should like to think of
children as robust, hyperactive, pink-cheeked and smiling.
A COSTLY FEVER
In ancient times...
i i 	
There is no definite proof that malaria was
ever the sole or even the major cause of the de¬
cline of ancient powers and empires, although
this has been claimed in the case of the Greek,
Roman, Singhalese and some other civilizations.
But there can be no doubt that at certain times
malaria has been an important factor in the
complicated equation of civilization decay.
This was most likely true of ancient Mesopota¬
mia when the irrigation systems began to be
neglected, thereby opening the way to an
increase in malaria. Thus appeared the fa¬
mous "chain reaction" whose costly results are
evident today neglect results in malaria
which in turn leads to greater neglect.
...and today
World-wide efforts are now being made to
break this "chain reaction". One striking
example is offered by the Philippines where
anti-malarial campaigns have opened up pre¬
viously infested areas for settlement and agri¬
culture. Within seven years, rice acreage has
increased by 20% and other grain-producing
acreage by 28%. In 1960 self-sufficiency in
rice production was achieved for the first time.
Severely malnourished infants are a mockery of this
notion. They are creatures with scabbed bodies, swollen
joints. They cringe when you touch their red, cold skin,
though seldom do 'they cry out. Their bleak faces betray
little emotion or interest or hope. Their teeth are
wretched, their hair is thin. Yet the human being has
remarkable strength, and there is no better proof of this
than the fact that such pitiable infants can be returned
to the bloom of health with nothing more than food."
The transformation can be so complete as to be
unbelievable. Indeed, doctors find it difficult to convince
parents that only food and not medicine was used to
restore their baby's health in the course of a few weeks
in a hospital. But the parents must be convinced, and
they must be made aware of the importance of nutrition.
Among the pre-school group children from one to four
years of age about half the deaths are attributable to
malnutrition, and most of the other deaths are caused
by diseases which would rarely be fatal and usually
innocuous in well-nourished children.
In that same pre-school group In Latin America,
mortality is ten to forty times higher than it is in the
United States or Northern Europe.
T;oo often, parental Ignorance prevents a child
from getting valuable foods. After weaning,
children are fed nothing but gruels containing mostly
cornstarch. Uneducated mothers frequently believe that
milk causes diarrhea, not realizing that it does so only
because it is not boiled. Even if they can afford meat
once or twice a week, many mothers believe it produces
worms and cannot be digested by children.
Certainly malnutrition can be reduced through educa¬
tion. But the hard facts of economics are basic to the
problem. When a man earns barely enough money to
feed his family tortillas, he is in no position to worry
about buying eggs for breakfast or meat for dinner. In
order to allow him to raise his children properly, his
income must be raised.
Thirty years ago about 40% of the malnutrition cases
admitted to the largest hospital in Central America, San
Juan de Dios in San Jose, Costa Rica, were lost. Doctors
unfamiliar with nutrition deficiencies were giving the
patients massive quantities of vitamins, but few proteins.
Now the treatment has been reversed. Last year the
percentage of deaths among malnutrition patients was
only two. In acute cases, children are also given the
richest protein source of all, blood. Nature is still the
best chemist.
It is also beginning to be realized that cases of mal¬
nutrition should be followed up at home by public health
people, just like cases of infection. In that way the child
or the whole family can be "immunized" with milk.
Otherwise the patient will soon be back in the hospital.
Since conventional protein sources milk, eggs and
meat are beyond the purchasing power of the poor, diets
must be supplemented in other ways. One approach, an
extremely promising one, has been taken in Central
America, where malnutrition is severe. It has been
pioneered by and ls now being applied under the guidance
of INCAP, the Institute of Nutrition of Central America
and Panama, in Guatemala City in a building provided by
the government of Guatemala.
INCAP's 125-man staff is conducting basic research in
nutrition, imparting its knowledge to doctors of many
nations through summer courses and field schools, and
applying its findings in pilot programmes.
After conducting dietary surveys to learn local eating
habits, measure food consumption, analyze foods of the
area and arrive at an accurate picture of general health
conditions, the INCAP scientists set about finding a
practical solution. They knew they had to find a cheap
protein source, one that was consonant with food habits
and within reach of families whose dally income may be
the equivalent of a dollar or less.
Their efforts have produced an inexpensive all-vegetable
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

ON THE FRONT LINE AGAINST MALARIA
In Mexico an all-out war his been going on to rid the country and its
30 million Inhabitants of malaria. In the "operations room" of the
Mexican campaign (left) which Is |ust one sector In the wider battle-
front of all Latin America, plans are made to carry the battle to every
part of the country. Below, "malarial cavalry" armed with sprayers
and Insecticides set out from their base and pass peasants at work
In the fields as they make for the villages hidden In the thick forests
of the High Sierras. Bottom of page, In village of Jacaltepec, equipment
Is unloaded and wooden-walled houses with thatched roofs are sprayed
thoroughly with Dleldrln, an insecticide fatal to the malaria-carrying
mosquitoes. Malaria eradication programmes in the Americas covering
an area of 13 million square kms., Inhabited by 88 million people,
occupy 16,000 people, Including doctors, engineers and entomologists.
WHO photos by tnc Schwib

WORLD HEALTH (Cont'd)
2,400 million doctors
still needed
mixture called Incaparina, which is developed from corn,
sorghum, cottonseed flour and yeast. Mixed into water,
which the consumer bolls, and flavoured with sugar and
clnammon or vanilla, Incaparina becomes an atole with
the same protein value as milk.
Tested with dramatic success in 1959 and found to be
wholly acceptable to Latin American tastes, Incaparina is
now being produced commercially by private companies
who received the INCAP formula free of charge and give
the Institute in return the right to control the price, qua¬
lity and advertising. Applications for production have
been received from all over the world. One plastic
package containing 75 grammes of powder, reinforced
with calcium, B complex vitamins and vitamin A, costs
four cents. It is the nutritional equivalent of a quart of
milk costing twenty cents or more. It provides a child's
daily requirements of virtually everything but caloric
Intake and vitamin C, neither of which is lacking in Latin
American diets.
T.
10
he doctor bent forward to listen to the chest
of the child. Through his stethoscope he
detected the shrill note he had suspected he would hear.
His lips spoke the blunt verdict: "Double pneumonia.
It's too late. He will die." He nevertheless gave the child
an antibiotic injection. The mother hugged her little one
to her breast. The father's fingers fumbled with the
acacia branch he was using as a walking stick. Then
the sad trio moved slowly away.
Even at midday it was not uncomfortably hot on this
plateau, ten thousand feet up In the rugged Devil's Moun¬
tain region bordering Ethiopia's northern frontier with
Sudan. The doctor, sent by the World Health Organiza¬
tion, was the very first medical man the inhabitants had
ever seen in this region. He was making an epidemiolo¬
gical inquiry, a two-year mission to find out from which
diseases Ethiopians suffer and die. In order to reach him,
the parents of the sick child had walked since the pre¬
vious evening.
As night fell the doctor learned that the child had
indeed died. First he saw several men walk by his tent
carrying picks and shovels. Then, through the dusk, came
the sound of chanting. Finally, the funeral cortege clim¬
bed the hill on which he was encamped. The child was
burled between a candelabra-shaped euphorbia plant and
a flame-of-the-forest tree on a site overlooking one of the
most grandiose landscapes in the world.
Today, the world faces a serious shortage of doctors.
According to figures published recently by the World
Health Organization there are 1,500,000 physicians for a
total population of 3,000 million.
But whereas Israel has one doctor for 420 inhabitants
(the world's most favoured country In this respect) there
is sometimes only one doctor for 100,000 people in some
other lands. Furthermore most of the doctors practice in
cities, leaving immense rural populations without medical
care. On the basis of a minimum need for 13 doctors to
every 10,000 people, a total of 3,900,000 doctors would be
required. Today the world has not even half this number.
For this reason, and following the recommendations of
the WHO, many countries which cannot afford to wait
until they have all the trained doctors they need are pro¬
viding accelerated training courses for medical assistants
who will set up health centres in country districts. The
job of these medical aides will be to report the outbreak
of epidemics, to give treatment for minor sicknesses and
ailments, to provide medical advice and, when necessary,
to send serious cases off to hospital. They are, as it were,
the watchmen of health and the first elements in a future
medical infrastructure for their countries. In Ethiopia,
for example, the training centre at Gondar has already
graduated 200 medical aides for the health centres that
have now been created in this province which had
hitherto been completely deprived of medical personnel.
WHO - Homer Page
PURE WATER A RARITY
For millions of people water is not simply something
that flows freely when a tap is opened. In Asia,
Africa and Latin America, deadly epidemics are
caused by the absence of proper drinking water.
Sometimes it has a bad taste. Often it is short
supply. When it is impure, child mortality rates
from dlarrhoeal disease rise alarmingly. Little girls
scooping up every last precious drop of water
(below) live in a Latin American suburb with
25,000 Inhabitants, where water flows from three
small taps for a few hours three days a week. In
Africa, the public water tap with a clean, cool flow
of drinking water (right) is still too often a rarity.
Even in economically advanced countries, rapid
increases in population growth call for constant
vigilance against infections. New York's water
supplies (1,100,000,000 gallons are used daily)
are checked weekly. To guard against infection
beach and harbour water is watched constantly.
Above, samples are taken in New York harbour.
WHO - Paul Almasy

s
*%
11
o
I

© Radio Times. Hulton Picture Library
12
CONDITIONS OF LIFE
THAT BREED DEATH
Above, London seen by Gustave Doré in
1870... vast areas of industrial slums, where
thousands of people lived in indescribably
foul and noisome surroundings, overworked,
undernourished, racked by disease. The same
words could well apply to living conditions
(left) in many newly-developing countries
whose health standards are still only compa¬
rable to those existing in many Western
countries 60 years ago. To bridge this gap,
the eradication of contagious diseases now
stands as Priority N° I. Diseases, like cholera,
typhus, smallpox and plague, have been van¬
quished in economically advanced countries.
They no longer spread death and terror
across Europe, decimating the population of
entire cities as did the plague in London
(100,000 deaths) three centuries ago (right).

Hazards of progress & prosperity
In the most economically developed countriesa minority of 500 million
peoplecommunicable diseases have largely disappeared, infantile mortality has
been reduced to a low level and the average length of life often exceeds 70 years.
In these countries, 60 % of deaths are due to cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
The publicity given to these two "killers of modern times" is largely due to
the absence of other important causes of mortality, to the increase in the average
lifespan up to the age when these diseases are most common and also the improve¬
ment in diagnostic skill. The "killers of modern times" are, in effect, degenerative
diseases. This is what Dr. Pierre Rentchnick, of the University Medical Clinic,
Geneva, has to say about them:
The cells of the human body, under the in¬
fluence of a regulating mechanism probably
sited in the stem of the brain, are born, live and die at a
rate that varies according to the kind of tissue involved,
the organ, certain exceptional circumstances such as acci¬
dents, burns, etc. and Anally, the age of the individual.
When, as a result of deterioration of this regulating
mechanism, the cell division rhythm is upset because of
mechanical, physical, chemical or other reasons in asso¬
ciation with a factor X (which some people think ls a
virus), cell division may occur more rapidly and daughter
cells arise which begin to form a tumour and live like
parasites at the expense of healthy neighbouring cells.
Some tumours will remain benign, in other words are
strictly localized at the site where they arise, while others
may become malignant by erupting into the blood stream,
which carries the cancer cells to different organs, mainly
the lungs and bones. This spread of cancer cells takes
place according to laws as yet not elucidated.
Nowadays, with a larger number of methods at our
disposal, early diagnosis of a malignant tumour is possible
if the patient is examined in time. This early diagnosis
is of supreme Importance, because the time between the
beginning of the tumour's growth and the dissemination
of daughter cells (metastases) in the blood stream is, in
most cases, relatively long, extending over several months
and even years.
During this period minor signs and symptoms may be
of the greatest importance and should oblige the patient
to go to a doctor. They include injuries which show no
Courtes/ of the Clarendon Press, Oxford
tendency to heal, lumps and slight thickenings In the
breast, unaccustomed lass of blood from any of the body
orifices, constant digestive upsets or difficulties In
swallowing, alternate bouts of constipation and diarrhoea
with slight traces of blood In the stool, persistent cough
or hoarseness, prostatic enlargement and repeated attacks
of bronchitis.
The doctor, by a blood test, examination of the stool
or X-rays, can study and watch the development of any
one of these symptoms, perhaps detect a cancer at Its
very beginnings,' and, depending on the site, propose that
It be treated by X-rays, cobalt bomb or surgery.
These assertions, far from being Imaginative, arc solidly
backed by statistics. The campaigns for early detection
in the United States, the compulsory check-ups In the
U.S.S.R. the organized examinations In certain other
countries, have saved many patients' lives through early
diagnosis.
Women particularly should undergo regular medical
check-ups from the age of 30 or 35 on, so that any inci¬
pient malignant tumour of the breast or uterus can be
detected and treated In good time In the U.S.S.R. where
the patient not only has the right but also the duty to
be in good health, we were able to sec, In the course of
two visits in 1054 and 1950. that the advanced stages of
cancer of the uterus were unknown, for examination was
compulsory, well organized, and accepted by the women
who were regarded not so much as members of the popu¬
lation but as active and productive elements of a factory,
an administration, or an institute.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
VWtiUk/i flvJtia from Loxclo" by \#at«r j» bentr * \avou .
!<lt I
Curtí full of Acad to bury
Mjur
Burkina »li «.ticoJ with ajhe[\J»LJpejoreí\it\.tt.SearcUerí FtVitia by land
mâsÊM
13

'TREES OF LIFE'. The venous system (left) and the
arterial system of the human body as depicted in the
Medicinal Dictionary compiled by James Robert (1743-1745).
Clogging arteries...
How can arteriosclerosis be defined? A very simple
description can be given if an artery is compared to a fine
rubber tube that loses its elasticity with the years, clogs up,
and becomes infiltrated with different substances it carries.
Its interior diameter becomes progressively smaller, and,
if greater pressure is exerted, the rubber tube may burst,
as a cerebral artery bursts in a hypertensive and arterio¬
sclerotic patient, and leads to a cerebral haemorrhage or
a stroke.
Scientifically, arteriosclerosis is the deposit of differ¬
ent fats, cholesterol and calcium, on the inner wall
of the great vessels, the aorta and the coronary and
cerebral vessels.
These arterial lesions may, to complete the picture,
be accompanied by disorders in the coagulation of the
blood, which may cause clotting (thrombosis) in the
vessels and stop the circulation in places. The tissues
normally supplied by these blocked vessels are thus
deprived of oxygen and nourishment, and may form a
completely inert area. The best-known example of this
process is coronary thrombosis.
...and cholesterol
The factors involved in the causation of arterioscle¬
rosis are many and various. One of the most con¬
troversial is the importance of cholesterol.
The most interesting arguments on its role in arterio¬
sclerosis come from clinical and epidemiological studies.
It is known that the disease is more common among the
obese, heavy eater, and in countries with a high standard
of living. Epidemiological studies have revealed the
existence of a statistical correlation between diet and
particularly the consumption of fatty foods and the
frequency of arteriosclerosis.
The first reaction was simply to lay the blame on cho¬
lesterol. But as experimental study continued, the ten¬
dency became rather to define the role of cholesterol
more explicitly and place more emphasis on that of
fats and certain combinations of fats and proteins. This
conception also relates to obesity caused by an excessive
intake of calories, chiefly from fat-rich foodstuffs.
Sedentary life has also been accused of favouring the
onset of arteriosclerosis. The sedentary person thinks
perhaps he is eating relatively little, but may be eating
far too much for his real needs. As he must take in
a certain number of calories, he should use them up
completely by some sport such as walking or by cycling.
WORLD HEALTH (Cont'd)
Campaigns to lay the bogy of cancer
14
The following statistics, published in the United States,
show how the chances of cure depend on the early estab¬
lishment of a diagnosis:
Rate of cure
where diagnosis is
early: late
Cancer of the breast	 78 % 36 %
Cancer of the uterus 70 % 35 %
Cancer of the lips 90 % 15 %
Cancer of the skin	 95 % 40 %
Cancer of the rectum 40 % 3 %
Cancer of the bladder 55 % 5 %
Cancer of the large intestine 	 85 % 14 %
By laying the bogy of cancer through educating the
public, the campaign for early detection and treatment
can be more successful. It will never be known how many
thousands of deaths have been caused by false modesty,
shyness, the fallacies of popular medicine, or even fear,
in people who went to the doctor too late.
Medical associations have perhaps their share of
responsibility here. They should play a more active part
in the cancer campaign through the press, radio and
television.
A campaign conducted on a national scale should
obviously be well organized so that the public will not be
frightened by words or descriptions which overstep the
bounds of reality and unnecessarily create a "cancero-
phobia."
Health education should therefore be continuous so that
little by little scientific and technical terms become fami¬
liar and do not create panic. At the present time educa¬
tion tends to be too piecemeal, and cancer is usually men¬
tioned in connexion with the death of a politician or a
film star. Then there is a wealth of more or less imaginary
detail, and the general view is confirmed that the diag¬
nosis of cancer Is equivalent to a death sentence.
Along with cancer (and also accidents), diseases of the
heart (or more precisely the whole cardiovascular system)
are the most common causes of death in the modern
world.
The heart uses a great deal of oxygen, and is amply
supplied with blood by two special arteries coming directly
off the aorta, the coronary arteries. When these arteries
lose their elasticity from the thickening of their walls
with deposits of cholesterolthe condition known as arte¬
riosclerosis are no longer able to supply the heart
muscle with an adequate amount of blood. The result is
tissue malnutrition, often revealed by constrictive pain in
the thoracic region. It is a general phenomenon that
every functioning muscle becomes painful when its oxygen
supply drops below its needs, as occurs for example in
the muscles of the calf when there is narrowing or
occlusion of the arteries of the lower limb.
When instead of a simple narrowing of the coronary
arteries there occurs a complete obstruction because of
the formation of a clot (thrombosis), the blood flow is
interrupted and the area of muscle receiving blood from
that artery is deprived of its supply.
This portion of the heart muscle loses its capacity of
contracting and before long becomes necrotic, a develop¬
ment called infarction. Depending on where the necrotic
area is, death may follow immediately and does in about
10% of cases. The necrosis may in fact traverse the
whole thickness of the wall of the heart, which becomes
literally perforated. But in most cases, with present
methods of treatment, the infarction is gradually cured
(by scar formation) after complete rest for perhaps six to
eight weeks.
All epidemiological investigations show that coronary
thrombosis has increased in frequency. Mortality from
this cause in the United States was 20 per 100,000 in 1930,
and 70 per 100,000 in 1949. A similar development has
been observed in European countries, with considerable
variations according to geographical area and class of
population. It has also been observed that coronary
thrombosis is much less frequent among the Bantus, the
Japanese, and the Nigerians.
On the basis of these differences, an attempt has been
made to single out factors that play a part in the deve¬
lopment of the disease: constitutional and hereditary

ANCIENT MALADY, MODERN EPIDEMIC
Often thought of as a
"new" disease, poliomye¬
litis, or just "polio". Is
known to have existed
in ancient times. The
Egyptian stele dating from
ISOO BC (right) shows
a young man with a
withered leg that Is
characteristic of para¬
lytic poliomyelitis. Dut
polio's epidemic ons¬
laught seems to have
been reserved for the
present day and age.
Gradually the disease has
come to be better un¬
derstood and research
workers have found vac¬
cines to prevent It.
Physical re-education (on
left) can often restore
use to paralysed limbs.
WHO photos
factors, factors related to ways of life and especially to
consumption of foodstuffs rich in fats and particularly
in cholesterol, physical exercise, mental stress, and the
consumption of alcohol and tobacco. Statistics in some
countries tend to show that coronary thrombosis is com¬
moner among the wealthier classestheir physical acti¬
vity is less, their diet richer in fats, and their cigarette
consumption higher.
From the scientific point of view, it was logical to pay
special attention to eating habits, for the coronary arte¬
ries in infarction are characterized by a thickening of
their inner walls chiefly due to deposits of fatty material
among which cholesterol is abundant. Among some
sections of the population it has been observed that when
the amount of fat in the every-day diet is high the cho¬
lesterol level in the blood also tends to be high, and vice
versa.
Among all the populations so far studied, those with
a diet poor in fats are those which seem to have a relati¬
vely low incidence of arteriosclerosis, angina pectoris and
infarction. In prosperous countries like the United States
and Canada, more and more fat is being eaten. In some
of the less developed countries, the proportionate increase
in fat consumption is even greater. In Japan, for example,
where very little fat used to be eaten, -the consumption
is at present five times greater than it was immediately
after the war.
Investigations into the part played by tobacco in the
causation of cancer of the lung have shown incidentally
that mortality from coronary thrombosis is higher in
heavy smokers. It is surprising how frequently sufferers
from coronary thrombosis turn out to have smoked large
numbers of cigarettes (40 to 60 a day) up to the time of
their heart attack. The action of nicotine on the arteries
of the arms and legs is known a temporary constriction
causing a cooling of the skin but we know less about its
action on the coronary arteries.
As concerns the effects of alcohol on the development of
coronary thrombosis, views at present are divided and
fresh evidence is needed.
Until the end of the last war, the doctor's concern
in the presence of coronary thrombosis was to ease
the pain by means of morphine and to order bed rest.
The pain he could control, but he was comparatively
helpless In the face of the Illness, wich often lead to death.
In the last 15 years or so, a new method has been greatly
developedtreatment with heparin and dlcoumarol deri¬
vatives. The value of these drugs lies in the fact that
they reduce the clot-forming tendency of the blood, and
today it is considered thay they have brought down the
mortality from coronary thrombosis by .v)me 25 to 40';:,.
The surgeons who have dared to violate the sanctum of
the heartformerly regarded as untouchable have tried
to supplement medical treatment by operation. Some
have tried to Join neighbouring tissues to the heart In the
hope that new blood vessels will Increase the .supply of
blood to the heart muscle. Others have gone .so far as to
open the coronary artery to remove the clot responsible
for the infarctiona bold operation that has been
successfully tried only in a small number of selected cases.
The most recent experiment In the treatment of coro¬
nary thrombosis ls not surgical but medical. With new
clneradlographlcal techniques It Is possible to visualize
the coronary arteries and localize the clot. Then, by a
sound placed in the artery, the clot itself can be injected
with flbrlnolysin; this natural constituent of blood plasma
has the property of dissolving the clot In the early stages
of its formation.
Mental illness does not figure prominently as a cause
of death, but of recent years has taken on such Import¬
ance in our lives that it needs to be mentioned along
with the "killers of modern times."
How do people become mentally ill and how are they
cured?
Warning signs: Headaches, inexplicable fatigue, change
of personality, sleeplessness, loss of memory, a lowering of
work output, all require careful consideration by the doc¬
tor to distinguish between a passing Indisposition and the
first warning signs of mental disease. If preventive treat¬
ment ls given at this stage there Ls every possibility o'
avoiding mental illness.
Mental illness: A mental patient ls a person whose abi¬
lity to adapt himself to this environment is disturbed.
Often it ls advisable to free him from the usual demands
of social life. This is the primary reason for hospitaliza¬
tion and the hospital must provide the required atmo¬
sphere.
The right atmosphere: The psychiatric hospital must
15
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD HEALTH (Cont'd)
Europe's 2,000,000
mental patients
be a therapeutic community, that is, an artificial social
environment that strengthens the adaptive faculties that
have remained healthy and allows the others, first to rest,
and then gradually to be re-educated. Group activities
should be organized in accordance with the capacities of
the majority, If not all of the patients. These activities,
whether games, self-expression in an art or craft, sports,
lectures or discussions, should preferably be developed on
the initiative of the patients themselves, so that, as far as
possible, they correspond to their needs.
The therapeutic art: It is the task of the doctor to help
patients resume their interest in the world around them
and gradually to grow away from their pathological atti¬
tudes and engage in useful activities. Once the thera¬
peutic atmosphere has been created, more precise tech¬
niques can be applied.
Psychotherapy: The aim of this treatment is to elimi¬
nate the cause of internal conflict and permit the patient
to understand himself better.
Insulin shock: The method consists of injecting in¬
creasing doses of insulin until the patient reaches a state
of coma which is finally ended by giving him sugar. The
treatment is repeated every day for several weeks. The
patient's personality, temporarily disintegrated during the
coma, tends to return to normal on awakening.
Electric shocks: This method provokes sudden loss of
consciousness accompanied by important changes in the
body fluids, often followed by recovery of mental balance,
particularly in cases of melancholia.
Narcotherapy: Also called "narco-analysis", this treat¬
ment consists in intravenous injections of an anaesthetic
to remove the patient's inhibitions and even to plunge
him into the realm of the unconscious so that he can
express himself, relive certain experiences, and thus
be liberated from painful anxieties and sometimes deeply
rooted complexes. Another method is to put the patient
to sleep with the help of various narcotics for 16 to
20 hours a day over a period of 15 to 20 days so that the
overworked nervous system may rest and emotional
balance be restored probably through dreams. This is
known as the sleep treatment.
Modern drugs: Chlorpromazlne and reserpine and
many others that chemistry is discovering in great num¬
bers, seem to be able to selectively relax those functions
which are most commonly involved in mental disease.
Prolonged application, combined with psychotherapy and
sociotherapy, even without resorting to artificial sleep,
sometimes brings about a veritable resurrection. At all
events, these drugs relieve the most painful symptoms of
mental disorder such as agitation, anxiety, aggressiveness,
in nearly all cases.
Results: These vary according to the gravity and
length of the disorder. On the whole, however, one can
say that properly co-ordinated treatment under satis¬
factory technical conditions make it possible to restore
70 to 80 per cent of mental patients to normal social life.
The average stay in hospital, for patients who are cured,
is about four months. If we recall that a few years ago
only about 30 per cent recovered and that these patients
required on the average more than a year to get well,
the progress that has been made is evident.
Those who founded the World Health Organization
nearly 15 years ago defined health as: "A state of complete
physical, mental and social well-being." In the field of
mental health particularly, much remains to be done if
this definition is to be widely applicable. There are
2,000,000 mental patients In Europe alone and more than
one-third of all hospital beds are for mental patients.
Today the battle for mental health ls being fought on
many fronts. The psychiatrist has ceased to be merely
a "doctor for the Insane." With the help of his colleagues
from other disciplines he now tries to do something for
the many people who suffer neurotic difficulties and to
contribute to the cure of psychomatic disorders like
gastric ulcers and asthma. Moreover there is an increas¬
ing tendency to introduce mental health concepts Into
16 public health practice and to seek the advice of psychia¬
trists on wider social Issues such as community develop¬
ment and industrial organizations.
S* i
BpBWBB«>*B» ^^^^^^B
Z '
.O
K
Í
-C
L»
U
UJ
Ó
5
^VtB 1 J
"The establishing of institutes and research
laboratories (concerned with problems ranging
from housing and social conditions to mental
health and epidemiology) is one of the greatest
contributions a country can render to the progress
of science", declared the World Health Organi¬
zation, in a major report on the health situa¬
tion around the world, covering I 57 countries.
Scientific research, today not only
occupies an enormous place in hu¬
man society, but is actually doub¬
ling its activity in the course of each
decade. This progress has been
charted in "Current Trends in Scien¬
tific Research", prepared by Profes¬
sor Pierre Auger, former head of
Unesco's Department of Natural
Sciences, and published by Unesco.
From this comprehensive survey of
world scientific trends and techno¬
logical research (See The Unesco
Courier, July-August 1961) we pre¬
sent here some salient facts on the
development of the medical sciences.
