A UNESCO
Tremendous strides by press,
films, radio and television have
given 20th-century man a ring¬
side seat on daily events in his
world. Yet the basic right to
know what is going on in the
world around them is still
witheld from to two thousand
million people. A worldwide
enquiry by Unesco shows that
this right can only be made a
reality through a vast program¬
me of development in the infor¬
mation media which Unesco has
proposed for the next 15 years.
WORLD
ENQUIRY
by Mary Burnet
A little more than 13 years ago, In December
1948, the United Nations adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which affirmed, among
others, the right of everyone "to seek, receive and impart
Information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers." About the same time, Unesco
launched a survey of information facilities, first in war-
devastated countries and later throughout the world.
This survey provided the first global picture of the state
of the information media the press, radio, film and
television. It confirmed what was already known in a
general way: that about two-thirds of the people in the
world were unable to keep up with events because they
lacked the material means of doing so. Where informa¬
tion was concerned, the majority of the human race were
like a big family whose right to eat has been recognized
but who are unable to get enough food.
We have come a long way since then. In countries
devastated by World War II, information facilities have
been restored. The rapid development of many other
countries has brought them increases in the means of
information along with a general rise in the standard of
living.. In African villages where a few years ago nobody
could read or write, newspapers are now being sold. Over
roads deep in mud or thick with dust, trucks carry film
projectors into Isolated districts and, after nightfall, set
them up in the open air or under the thatched roof of a
meeting hut, where the light of a kerosene lamp, flickers
over the faces of an eager audience. In more than 100
languages and dialects in India alone, the radio beams
advice to farmers and housewives along with news and
CONT'D ON PAGES

2,000 ILLION PERSONS
WITHOUT ACCESS TO NEWS

BBC, London
100 MILLION TV RECEIVERS are now in use around
the world. The Japanese who pioneered the midget
transistor radio receiver are now applying the same skill
to television. Portable receivers, shown in production
here at a Japanese factory, will run either from a mains
supply or a re-chargeable battery. A "pocket" TV
receiver has also been designed and has been put on sale.
ACCESS TO NEWS (Cont'd)
A vital minimum for all by 1975
entertainment. In 1948 only four countries in the world
had television stations; now regular programmes are being
broadcast in 65, and the number of television receivers has
increased from four million to 100 million.
In spite of all these encouraging signs, however, we still
have a great deal further to go if we are to bring to
everybody, and not just a large and fortunate minority,
adequate means of being informed.
What are adequate means? Unesco has tried to set
some standard. It concluded that any group of people
should be considered to enjoy the "vital minimum" of
information facilities if, for every 100 persons it had the
following:
Ten copies of dally newspapers;
Five radio receivers;
Two cinema seats;
Two television receivers.
Despite all the progress made since the Human Rights
Declaration was signed, the majority of the world's
population still do not have access to this vital minimum.
At the same time, greater efforts than ever before are
being exerted to make the right to information a reality.
As might be expected, the countries most lacking in
information facilities are those where the standard of
living is lowest, and most of them lie in the world's three
great underdeveloped regions Asia, Africa and Latin
America. But almost without exception these countries
are well aware of their handicaps, and trying hard to
improve their situation.
Convinced of the vital link between information and
general economic development, the UN, three years ago
asked Unesco to make a special study of information
facilities in underdeveloped regions and to suggest how
they might be improved.
Unesco organized a series of meetings, each focused on
the problems of the information media in one of the three
great underdeveloped regions of the world. These
meetings brought together representatives of the press,
radio, film and television, in Asia, Africa and Latin
America, plus specialists from outside these regions, as
well as observers from various inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations.
From these meetings, held over a period of two years,
there has emerged a far more revealing image of reality
than mere statistics could reflect. The pioneers working
in the information media and for most of them, pioneers
is not too strong a word knew not only what they lacked,
but why. They had pretty clear ideas of what they needed
and many suggestions as to how to get it. Along with
the outside experts at the meetings, they outlined the
steps to be taken if information enterprises in their
countries are to be given the initial assistance they need
in order to embark on a period of healthy growth.
Unesco then worked out an overall plan which was
presented by Mr. Tor Gjesdal, Director of the Dept. of
Mass Communication, to the Human Rights Commission
Unesco-Schwab

UNATIONS
DISTANCE IS NO BARRIER to radio and neither Is
Illiteracy. Radio has grown more rapidly In underdeve¬
loped regions than any other of the mass media. Here
New Guinea villagers tune In to news and educational
broadcasts. Recent development of a $5 transistor
receiver should bring radio to millions more people.
in April shortly after the UN General Assembly had offi¬
cially proclaimed the 1960's as the UN Development
Decade. The aim of the plan Is nothing less than to bring
the whole world up to the Unesco target of a minimum
standard of information facilities by 1975.
If this plan is carried out, the progress made in the past
13 years, however creditable, will be as nothing to the
giant strides to be made in the coming thirteen. Informa¬
tion facilities in the world as a whole will be not increased,
but multiplied. For the first time in history, virtually
everyone on our planet will have at his disposal the
means of keeping informed. Not all the means that might
be desirable, perhaps, but enough to keep him in touch
with events at home and abroad and thus give him a
chance to play as enlightened a role as possible in the life
of his community and nation.
How will the job be done?
The easiest and cheapest way of getting information to
masses of people nowadays is the radio, modern successor
to the signal fire and the jungle drum. Distance is no
barrier to broadcasting, nor is lack of roads or airfields.
Equally important to the underdeveloped regions is the
fact that illiteracy presents no barrier either. A man who
could not read a newspaper if he had one can understand
the news bulletins he hears over the radio. All these
circumstances are reflected in the fact that since 1948
radio has made more gains in underdeveloped regions
than any other medium.
There does, however, exist one barrier to the further
expansion of radio: the price of receivers. Often those
people most in need of radio for Information purposes are
unable to pay for even a simple receiving set.
Already many developing countries have tried to help
these people. In areas without electricity, receivers have
been set up In village squares. They might be run by
batteries or with a generator powered by petrol or even
pedaled by foot. To the villagers loudspeakers have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
TV IN THE SCHOOL
& A SCHOOL FOR TV
Television as a classroom aid has
developed individual forms according to
the needs of different countries. Left,
young workers in a Naples factory are
given time off daily to follow special
televised courses designed for young
people who only completed primary
schooling. Television, despite the
giant strides it has taken, is still a deve¬
loping medium and itself needs schools
and experimental centres. Right, in
Lima, Peru, future TV technicians and
producers now receive a two-year com¬
prehensive training course whose pro¬
gramme includes construction of
receiving sets, programme production,
camera work and lighting techniques.
Unesco - Almasy
*.
< 4 «
e*r.

ACCESS TO NEWS (Confd)
The trials of the struggling
backwoods newspaper
furnished news and entertainment, just as bards and
minstrels have done for ages past.
But such group listening is obviously limited by the
number of sets and operators available, and it does not
reach really Isolated people. So several years ago, the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) at
Unesco's suggestion, began working on specifications for
cheap but efficient and durable receivers a problem
which the introduction of transistors had already
simplified. The sets now being designed by the ITU can
be produced for $5 If ordered in sufficient quantity.
This is not a prohibitive price even to those and in
certain areas the case is not rare who have incomes
as low as $300 or even $100 a year.
So in its plan Unesco has given highest priority to the
development of radio. Of course there are other problems
to be solved besides that of cheap receivers. Broadcasting
in the tropics, where many of the underdeveloped
countries are located, is beset by technical difficulties
greater than those encountered in temperate climates.
But with progress in electronics these difficulties can now
be solved. There is also a much more serious human
problem: the lack of technicians, operators and mainte¬
nance men, of good radio journalists and programme
material, including a sufficient supply of news. This
shortage of trained personnel and news sources is shared
by all the Information media, and the provision of training
opportunities in all media is one of the questions to
which most attention was given when Unesco's report
was drawn up.
Despite the convenience of radio, the basic and perma¬
nent medium of information remains the written word.
A radio bulletin must be listened to when it is broadcast,
but a newspaper can be read and pondered at leisure.
Furthermore, newspapers, like radio, in a developing
country can be not only a means of information and
entertainment but a very valuable educational aid.
Most developing countries have a large proportion of
illiterates and are making great efforts to teach them to
read. Once they have learned to read, however, materials
for further practice are often scarce. If its style is well
adapted to its audience, a newspaper can do a lot to keep
up reading skills.
Newspapers In the countries covered by the
Unesco report are generally scarce, and the
ones that do exist range from complete, sophisticated
dallies printed in large cities to the one-page sheet that
appears on market day in some backwoods town. The
modest one-pager may be printed on an antiquated press
with type so worn as to be barely legible, by an editor-
publisher-reporter, making a valiant effort to keep his
readers abreast of local news and also to arouse their
Interest in more general issues.
At the Unesco meetings, colourful stories were told of
the difficulties these struggling newspapers run into. For
the smallest, merely keeping their obsolete presses running
often requires feats of ingenuity. If spare parts are
needed they must usually be imported, at high cost and
with long delays, and possibly with customs' duties added
to the price. Paper must also, as a rule, be imported, and
the prevailing system of newsprint distribution works to
the detriment of the small enterprise. Newsprint can be
bought at mill prices only in large quantities and under
long-term contract. Small publishers, with their uncer¬
tain future and modest means, cannot place orders of
this kind. So they must buy their paper on the spot
market, where they will pay up to 300 per cent more than
is paid by their larger and wealthier counterparts.
8 Except for strictly local items, they also have trouble
getting news. For many it is out of the question to
subscribe to a news agency, and communications facilities
may be so scanty that they could not take advantage of
an agency's services even if they could pay for them. So
they must depend on radio news bulletins and whatever
feature materialpreferably freethat can reach them
by air mail.
One may wonder what keeps them going. Yet the
newspaper representatives at the three Unesco meetings
were among the most enthusiastic of participants.
Obviously they have great faith in the usefulness of what
they are doinga faith that is probably increased by the
knowledge that their papers are not discarded after a
hasty glance at the headlines but passed from reader to
reader until they have become tattered and torn. They
also know that, as literacy spreads, they will have a more
and more important role to play.
So in Unesco's report a high priority is also given to
newspaper development, and a series of measures, many
suggested by the newspaper men themselves, are recom¬
mended for reducing their handicaps and encouraging
others to follow in their path.
B y a happy paradox, recent technical advances
may put these small newspapers in a relati¬
vely more advantageous position than many better-
established ones where production is concerned. New
processes, including offset and photo-composition, make
it possible to produce attractively printed small news¬
papers, of limited circulation, with a small outlay for
equipment and with operators Who do not need to be
highly trained. Clear reproduction of photographs and
drawings is now possible at a cost that would have been
unthinkably low a few years ago. This is important,
since good illustration can do much to attract newly-
literate readers and help them understand what they
read.
As for that great bugbear, newsprint, the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) has been working for the
past ten years on the problem of increasing the world
newsprint supply. Largely as a result of FAO's research,
newsprint can now be made from a variety of materials
never before used for the purpose such as bamboo, rice
straw and bagasse (sugar-cane residue). Many of these
materials are produced in the tropics.
The manufacture of newsprint, however, Is by nature a
large-scale operation. So the current problem is to find
steady markets big enough to make the establishment of
new paper mills economically feasible, possibly on a region¬
al basis. A pooling of orders by small enterprises, backed
by careful estimates of needs, could do much to reduce
the price of imported newsprint in the immediate future
and to bring nearer the day when local mills can be. estab¬
lished to provide the paper now shipped at high cost
from abroad.
There remains the problem of getting the
news a problem Which newspapers share
with broadcasting stations. To cater to both, news
agencies are needed. The number of these is growing
fast there are now 21 agencies in Africa, for instance,
as compared with two in 1948but most of them as
yet can provide only limited services, and more than
one valiant little agency still has to deliver mimeograph¬
ed news bulletins to its subscribers by bicycle. Further¬
more, throughout large parts of Asia, Africa and Latin
America, there are not enough telegraph or radio links
to provide adequately for collecting and distributing
news.
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

ACCESS TO NEWS (Cont'd)
World TV
via satellite
relays
News agencies and telecommunications are subjects
which the layman rarely stops to think about, but they
are of fundamental concern to professionals in the field.
They provide the basic means through which all of us
in Helsinki, Rangoon, Chicago or Tananarive get our
news. Whether we get it promptly or late, in plenty or in
snatches depends largely on how efficient news agencies
are and how well telegraph and telephone, cable and
wireless services function.
Years ago Unesco approached the ITU for help on the
problem of Improving information facilities. The ITU
provides expert advice to countries wishing to improve
their telecommunication networks and has already com¬
pleted plans for such networks in Asia and Latin America
in co-operation with UN and regional organizations. In
all such plans the ITU is now trying to make adequate
allowance for the expanding needs of the press and other
information media.
At the regional meetings on information problems con¬
vened by Unesco, special emphasis was laid on the need
for establishing or expanding news agencies. This need
was acutely felt by participants in all the meetings, and,
at all three, recommendations were made for fostering the
development of national news agencies and encouraging
co-operation both among them and with the great world
agencies which are the main source of International news.
Since then, at another meeting convened by Unesco at
their request, directors of national news agencies in Asia
have formed a regional association, the Organization of
Asian News Agencies, to increase the exchange of news
between them and with the rest of the world.
5 Almasy. Paris.
TOMORROW'S NEEDS IN NEWSPRINT
In many African countries today the average annual con¬
sumption of newsprint per person is only a few ounces (in
the U.S.A. it is 80 lbs). With the decrease in illiteracy,
however, tomorrow's needs in newsprint will increase consi¬
derably and world demand is expected to triple in the next
15 years. As present sources of production will be unable
to meet this rising demand and as the costly process of
importing newsprint is already a barrier to press expansion
in the less economically developed countries, efforts are now
being made to develop the manufacture of newsprint on a
regional basis, using fibrous materials found in the tropics.
Above, editor of a Dakar newspaper. Right, newsprint
production in Canada (today the world's largest producer).
P
10
eofle go to the cinema for entertainment. If
they see a newsreel or a documentary they
are receiving information as well. But so far, the role
of the film as a medium of information has been over¬
shadowed by its entertainment value, as the newsreel
Is overshadowed by the feature film. Yet this infor¬
mational role is already considerable and could be
developed much further, as is fully realized in the
developing countries of .the world. In Its report to the
UN, Unesco made recommendations for increasing the
number of documentary films produced in these countries
and Improving . their quality, and also for distributing
them in the broadest and most effective way.
There are plenty of commercial cinemas in the big cities
of Latin America, Asia and Africa, and one Asian coun¬
try which in many ways still considers itself under¬
developed India is the world's second largest producer
of feature films. (Japan is the largest and the United
States of America third.)
But the production of features is confined to a very few
countries, and these cinemas live and thrive by showing
Imported European, American or Asian films. Some of the
films are so ancient that, as one observer put it, "you
wonder how the prints can still be in existence." The
double feature is common practice, so that there is little
room on the programme for newsreels or documentaries.
But, cinematographically speaking, the back country is
a desert. It is into this desert that mobile projection units
have been making their forays within the past few years,
armed with documentaries or sometimes just educational
film strips. There is a fine art to presenting this material
as well as to making it; people who have never seen
images on a screen before cannot be approached in the
same way as city audiences.
So there is a need for all types of informational films,
from the simplest to the fairly sophisticated. While their
most important users will probably be mobile units,
schools, and community centres, Unesco has suggested,
that the showing of such films by commercial cinemas
be encouraged in the developing countries. Nor, the
Unesco report reminds us, should producers overlook the
future demand for films by the newest of all the informa¬
tion media television.
In the 13 years since the Declaration of Human Rights
was signed, television has grown from infancy to what
many people would call a turbulent adolescence whose
promises and problems are a matter for anxious concern.
So far, two factors have worked to hamper the spread of
television in the underdeveloped countries: technical limi¬
tations and expense.
But one by one the technical limitations are dropping
away. At a time when experiments are being made on the
use of communications satellites as relay stations, we may
envisage the physical possibility of providing television
broadcasts to any spot on the globe. The introduction
of transistor receivers will permit T.V. programmes to
be watched in regions devoid of electric power. There
remains the barrier of expense, but it ls not Impossible
that further technical advances may considerably reduce
costs.
One thing is certain: in regions now underdeveloped,
television will spread like a forest fire. So it is not too
soon, the Unesco report warns, to lay plans for making
the best use of it. Technical problems, like allocation
of wavelengths, and problems of policy, like how to ensure
sufficient emphasis on informational and educational
programmes, had best come under study now.
From the discussions in Bangkok, Santiago and Paris
(where the meeting of African specialists was held), it
was clear that the needs of the information media in
underdeveloped countries were essentially two: financial
means and human skills. Money may be hard to come

*
NrfIrOnjl filnt b'j4f(i ff Carndj
by, but it can be borrowed. Know-how cannot be provided
overnight ; it must be developed gradually.
Translated into concrete terms, this means that the
greatest problem of the press, the radio and the film in
three continents is for more trained workers in every
branch of their activity. Master printers, cameramen,
radio technicians, newspaper reporters are needed; so are
accountants, layout men, programme directors and film
editors.
In most of the numerous fields in which specialists are
required, opportunities for systematic training in the
underdeveloped regions themselves are now scanty or
non-existent. The Unesco survey looks forward to the
time when they can be provided on the spot or rather,
at centres serving one country or a group of countries.
Meanwhile, it suggests, the present shortage
could be alleviated by providing scholarships
in more advanced countries for promising trainees. (This
is already being done to some extent by various public
and private agencies, but the number of openings provid¬
ed must be multiplied.)
Furthermore, as the delegates to the Unesco meetings
were the first to point out, a great deal could be accom¬
plished through exchanges of personnel among news¬
papers and news agency bureaux, radio stations and film
units in the underdeveloped countries themselves. In
some of these countries the information media have
already made considerable progress and are thus in a
position to give valuable on-the-job training to colleagues
from neighbouring countries which are still in the pioneer
stage.
Such exchanges are only one of many forms of co¬
operation proposed by participants in the three Unesco
meetings. Never before had representatives of the mass
media in either Asia or Africa or Latin America been able
to get together to discuss their common problems, and
they were determined to make the most of the oppor¬
tunity to do so. They fully realized that they needed
outside help, but they were aware, too, that much could
be accomplished through their own collective clTorts.
Finally, they were deeply concerned not only with safe¬
guarding the freedom of the various Information media
but with encouraging a corresponding sense of responsi¬
bility. In the areas which they serve, this responsibility
Involves not only the usual basic requirements of accu¬
racy and objectivity, but a further special obligation to
contribute to the education of their audiences as well as
to keep them in touch with what is going on.
To carry out the programme Unesco has calculated that
a sum of about Ç3.400 million will be needed. This sounds
like a tremendous investment, but it becomes less formi¬
dable when one realizes that most of it would be shared
among the national budgets of the some 100 countries
in need of development of their information media. A
portion would also be made available through the kind of
bilateral co-operation programmes which have already
shown themselves an effective form of aid from advanced
countries to developing ones. Some capital may be
expected to be raised in the form of long-term, low-inte¬
rest loans from various International financing agencies
and through private investments from local sources.
The success of the programme will depend mainly on
the developing countries themselves, on their determina¬
tion to find the resources and skills needed. Unesco is
encouraged by the fact that the regional economic com¬
missions of the UN in Asia, Africa and Latin America
have all endorsed the plan. So has the UN Economic and
Social Council. There is hope that during the decade 11
ahead, for many millions of people the right to informa¬
tion may become a reality.

ACCESS TO NEWS (Cont'd)
GLOBAL FACTS & FIGURES
RADIO
IN the last 13 years, radio and T.V. have made giant strides. The number of
radio transmitters rose from 5,450 to 11,670 and receivers from 161 million
to 366.5 million. Despite world population growth, the number of receivers per
100 persons rose from 7 to 13.
In Africa, radio transmitters increased from 119 to 368 and receivers from
930,000 to 5.5 million. However, owing to the growth in population, the number
of sets per 100 people rose from 0.5 to 2.3 only.
Asia has tripled its broadcasting and receiving facilities and now has 1,100
transmitters compared to 398 In 1948. Receivers rose from 10 million to 31 mil¬
lion. Nevertheless, the number of sets per 100 people only increased from 0.8
to 1.9 the lowest level of all continents. South America, Oceania, U.S.S.R.,
Europe and North America have respectively 10.2, 17.9, 19, 21.3 and 69 radio
receivers per 100 persons.
I Population growth and increased prosperity are expected
to boost the demand for press, radio, film and television
facilities in the developing countries more than threefold
by 1975. A Unesco estimate, covering all media, forsees
the following increases (on the basis of 100 in 1955) :
Africa 338; Latin America (excluding Argentina) 341; Near
and Middle East, 384 ; Far East (excluding Japan and
mainland China) 382.
In some African and South American countries, the cost
of an annual subscription to a daily paper is as high as 28
per cent of average per capita income, compared with less
than one per cent in the U.S.A.
People of Lomé, capital of
Republic of Togo, take part
in recording session for a
subsequent radio broadcast.
Unesco
The first communication satellite
serving the mass media is expected
to be launched this month. An
initial exchange of television pro¬
grammes between the U.S.A. and
Europe will 'be conducted through
the satellite Telstar, orbiting the
globe in 2 hours 40 minutes. The
American programmes will be picked
up by a British Post Office station
in Cornwall and then piped into
the Eurovision network, in which
television systems of the major
Western European countries par¬
ticipate.
Charges for sending press
messages over similar distances may
vary by as much as 300 per cent
in Latin America, 600 per cent in
Africa and 700 per cent in Asia.
This is due largely to inadequate and
costly cable and radio services
which sometimes double the cost of
PRESS
sending a message in one direction
as compared with the reverse.
| Lack of telecommunication
services often force routing of
messages sent between two points in
tropical Africa through London or
Paris, instead of being sent direct.
For example, it is easier to tele¬
phone to Paris from Abidjan, Lomé
or Cotonou than to telephone from
these West African capitals to Lagos
(Nigeria), and vice versa. A cable
from Conakry reaches Accra more
quickly via Paris.
In Asia, telegraph services are
often beaten by the airmail and the
number of telephones in proportion
to population (0.1 for every 100
persons) is one of the lowest in the
world. Present development plans
should provide at least one telephone
within a radius of ten miles in all
South East Asian countries.
12
Unesco - Eric Schwab
Although the press has lost ground in North America and Europe, It
has scored gains in the U.S.S.R., South America, Asia and Africa,
since 1948.
The world total of daily newspapers rose from 6,120 to 7,660. Total
circulation, while increasing from 219 to 288 million barely kept pace with
the growth in world population. ' The number of copies of dailies per
100 persons increased only slightly from 9.3 to 9.7.
In Africa, the press registered a notable advance and the number of
dailies rose from 171 to 262, and circulation from 1.9 to 3 million. How¬
ever, the number of copies of daily papers per 100 people remained almost
unchanged: 1.3 in 1960 as against 1 In 1948.
In Asia and South America, increases per 100 people were from 2.2 to
3.8 and from 6.9 to 8.1 respectively.
Multilith press at Tamale, Ghana, prints texts for
publications in the country's vernacular languages.

m¡ Geography and politics can make or
mar the development of one means of
communication as compared to another.
Reporting to the UN Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE),
experts on telecommunication development
point out that "if a country is flat and there
is little trouble from rebels, aerial lines or
cables would be suitable. If, on the other
hand, the country is undulating or there is
danger of civil disturbances, microwave or
VHF radio links would be satisfactory."
IB Japan, which has the most highly
developed mass media in Asia, claims 77
per cent of the total daily newspaper circula¬
tion, 73 per cent of all radio sets, 40
per cent of all cinema seats and 97 per cent
of all television sets in the region of South
and East Asia. Fifty-five per cent of all
Japanese families now have television.
Three" networks are telecasting in colour.
Meanwhile, lapan is building a giant tele¬
vision transmitter which will permit retrans¬
mission of the Olympic Games in Tokyo
in 1964. Programmes will be relayed
around the world through U.S. communic¬
ation satellites.
News agencies are developing more
rapidly in Africa than in any other part of
the world. Over 20 African countries now
have national news agencies, compared with
three countries five years ago.
In many tropical countries, short-wave
broadcasting is widely used for local services.
Short-wave broadcasts in the tropics are,
however, severely affected by solar inter¬
ference from October to April. To solve
this problem, telecommunication experts
urge the introduction of frequency modul¬
ation broadcasting, combined with medium-
wave "booster" services.
Among the islands of the South Pacific,
radio services are more widely developed
than the press and have become the main
source of news and other information.
Scattered over a vast ocean area, and with
small populations, the island groups face
formidable obstacles of transport and finance
in developing their press and cinema facilities.
FILM
Unesco - Gerda Böhm
Radio has overcome physical barriers, as
well as illiteracy itself, in Colombia, where
a private educational radio service has in
ten years become the most powerful network
in the country. Over 170,000 village listen¬
ing groups receive programmes daily at
5 a.m. and late afternoon, when farmers
can most easily spare time from their work.
Similar programmes, known as farm forums,
are also being conducted in India and Japan.
Unesco's survey for the UN on the
development of the mass media in Africa,
Asia and Latin America, the first of its
kind, used the services of 400 people, includ¬
ing press, radio, film and television experts.
Some 80 Member States or Associate Mem¬
bers of Unesco also took part
M Ceylon and Thailand are to set up news
agencies and existing services in India and
Pakistan will be expanded as the result of
Villagers In the Tafilalet region of Morocco turn out
in force when the mobile cinema pays them a visit.
a meeting recently convened by Unesco in
Bangkok on the development of news agen¬
cies in Asia. The meeting of Asian news
experts also brought together representatives
of world news agencies of France, the
U.S.S.R., the U.K. and the U.S.A.
The first journalists' association, the News¬
paper Society, was founded in England in
1836. Today several million mass media
professionals throughout the world arc
grouped in over 1,200 organizations, which
play a powerful role in promoting freedom
of information, improving professional train¬
ing and raising professional standards.
A pioneer in the development of the French
cinema, the Société des Auteurs et Composi¬
teurs Dramatiques (Paris) is the oldest pro¬
fessional organization in the mass media
field. It was founded in 1777 by Carón de
Beaumarchais, author of "The Barber of
Seville."
Cinemas have increased In num¬
ber from 95,000 to 167,000
since 1948 and total annual atten¬
dances rose from 11,691 million to
15,000 million. Annual attendance
per person remained at 5, owing to
the growth in world population.
The U.S.S.R. registered the larg¬
est gains in the cinema field,
Increasing its cinemas and projec¬
tors from 15,200 to 59,000 and Its
annual attendance from 600 million
to 3,520 million. The level of at¬
tendance per person Increased
fivefold 3 to 16.4.
In Africa, cinemas Increased
from 1,335 to 2,300 and annual
attendance from 121.5 million to
250 million. Annual attendance
rate per person, although increas¬
ing from 0.6 to 1, still remains the
lowest of any continent. Asia now
has 15,900 cinemas as compared
to 6,800. There was a parallel rise
in annual cinema attendance from
1,140 million to 3,365 million
and in per capita attendance
0.9 to 2.1.
In Europe and Oceania total
annual attendance declined, but
most ground was lost In North
America, under the Impact made
by television some 9,000 cinemas
closed down and annual atten¬
dance per person fell from 24.2
to 10.7.
South America had a slight in¬
crease in cinemas and per capita
attendance (from 3.5 to 4).
Cultural and artistic subjects arc more
favoured as feature stories by Asian news¬
papers than by Western ones, says Mr. A.M.A.
Azam, editor of the Associated Press of
Pakistan, in a report to Unesco. This pre¬
ference has not so far been satisfied by
agencies serving the Asian press. "A 1,000
word feature on a Hollywood star's wedding
or divorce", he observes, "is not esteemed
as a cultural or social subject in the
Orient."
Television preferences among African
viewers arc noted in a Unesco report, "Mass
Media in the Developing Countries". "In
Nigeria," the report says, "news broadcasts
and programmes of African music and dances
are far more popular than the imported
serials favoured in Western countries."
News broadcasts also figure prominently in
Middle Eastern radio programmes.
"Pisin Niuspepa Bilong Ol Man" (Pidgin
English News) claims to be the first Pidgin
English newspaper published in the world.
It appears once a week in Australian New
Guinea and its circulation is estimated at
40,000. In outlying areas, it is read tc
groups by village headmen.
13
