OF SUNSPOTS, MAGNETIC RINGS
AND POLAR LIGHTS'
by Alan F. Moore
Antarctic research has only recently developed
because the lack of overland routes makes it
expensive and hazardous even to travel there. In the First
(1882-83) and Second (1932-33) Polar Years very few
stations were set up on the continent and no overall pic¬
ture, even of Antarctic weather, emerged from these and
subsequent pioneer studies.
Aâ the International Geophysical Year (1957-58) was
concerned with weather, radio, oceans on a global scale,
a special effort had to be made for the Antarctic region
and twelve nations set up more than 60 stations on
the ice-covered continent. Much of this work ls now
being continued on a permanent basis.
Recently, greater use of aircraft and mechanical vehicles
has given us more accurate Antarctic maps, but a million
square kilometres of the continent have not yet been seen,
even from the air.
The continent is covered by 20 million cu. kms. of ice,
and its weight has depressed and deformed the original
land surface beneath. Norwegian, U.S., Soviet and Belgian
parties echo-sounding with small explosive charges
(seismic shooting) have shown that a layer of ice (shelf
Alan F. Moore, former lecturer in Geophysics at Imperial
College, London, was largely responsible for the organization of
the Royal Society Antarctic Expedition to Halley Bay during the
IGY. He is now on the administrative staff of the Royal
Society, Great Britain.
ice) lies beyond the true coast of Antarctica and ls
grounded at others, whilst Inland the rock surface below
the Ice resembles fjords.
American geophyslclsts have shown that the coastal
mountains of Marie Byrd Land3,500 m. highare the
tops of a series of offshore Islands separated from East
Antarctica by a 500 km. wide channel filled with Ice.
This channel reaches depths of 2,500 m. below sea level
In places and Joins the Ross and Bellingshausen Seas, but
further work is needed to decide If there ls a minor
branch of it linking up with Uic Weddell Sea.
The rocks of East Antarctica, the older region, are
related to those of South Africa and India, but the
different ones In West Antarctica are similar to those In
the Andes of South America. This ls further evidence
that Antarctica may be at least two major land areas
covered by a single Ice sheet.
Measurement of the depth of the Antarctic rock surface
gives the Ice thickness and so the volume of water locked
up as Ice can be calculated. Studies of the Antarctic
rocks reveal that 160 million years ago they were in a
sub-tropical climate. If these conditions ever returned
then the ice would melt and the global sea level might
rise as much as 65 metres, as already Indicated earlier In
this Issue. In the process of melting a great weight
would be removed from the rocks and they would rise.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
TAKING THE WEATHER'S PULSE. Battery of weather anemometersfor measuring wind forcearc here
being calibrated at Little America station before Installation on towers. During the IGY, a network of weather
stations covered Antarctica for the first time and their reports were sent several times dally to the Weather Central
at Little America. Here, an International team of meteorologists worked together to produce continental weather
charts and forecasts. At one Soviet base a strange phenomenon was seen in July I 9 59: a blizzard of reddish snow.
US Nivy
29

«ft« II I» I
SOUTHERN LIGHTS, immense luminous
rays, arcs and curtains in the heavens (right)
flash and glow in the depth of the polar night.
These aurora are caused by the concentrations
of electrically-charged particles shot from the
sun's surface into two rings the auroral
zonesaround the earth's two magnetic poles.
Jacques Masson © Explorations polaires françaises
Official Soviet photo
EARS 12 MILES HIGH. A radio-sonde
balloon (left) is launched from the Soviet Mirny
Station. Such balloons can make records of
atmospheric conditions up to 12 miles in
height and report back their findings by radio.
Aurorae of different colours and shapes
The map of Antarctica might then look very different.
(See page 7.) Much more evidence is needed before we
can decide if the ice sheet Ls at present growing or
decaying, and all the information must be continually
exchanged in order to do this.
The ships which relieve the Antarctic bases at the turn
of each year visit small islands on the way and are used
to Investigate ocean depth, water circulation and fish of
all kinds. Continuous surveys can be made, such as the
Japanese radio measurements between Tokyo and Showa
Base. British scientists in late 1960 towed an instrument
behind a ship from South America to Graham Land and
made ' a magnetic survey of a submarine mountain
range the Scotia Arc. In late 1961 they exploded small
charges for echo-sounding in the same area to extend
this work on the geological similarities between Graham
Land and South America. All the work in the oceans
around the Antarctic continent requires considerable
expansion for at the moment it has a much lower priority
than the land-based studies.
R
30
ECORDS from magnetic observatories founded
before 1900 show a slow secular change in the
Earth's magnetism, regional in character consisting of 10
or more areas of increase or decrease. Recently IGY data
have revealed that one the largest regions of annual
magnetic change is in the Antarctic region and magnetic
observations must now be obtained from many more sites
there, which will make an important contribution to the
current World Magnetic Survey.
The Earth's magnetic field concentrates some of the
electrically-charged atomic particles which are shot at
high speeds from the sun's surface into two rings the
auroral zones around each magnetic pole. These
particles gradually increase to a maximum number about
every 11 years as the sunspot maximum is reached and
cause an increase in the number of nights on which
aurorae or "polar lights" are observed.
The aurorae appear in different colours and shapes, e.g.
rays, arcs and curtains, which change throughout the
night, and every few minutes all-sky cameras can record
all the shapes from horizon to horizon. Two ordinary
cameras on a known base-line give data about the height
of the aurora usually 100 km to the lower edge. Ana¬
lysis of the light from aurorae tells us about the kinds
of air molecules there are at great heights and important
work of this type has been done at French Antarctic
bases.
The location of the Antarctic auroral zone was a
primary object of the IGY sunspot maximum programme
but new inland bases are required to obtain more data
for at least one sunspot cycle before the work is
completed. This southern hemisphere work could not be
attempted until the IGY, and then it was found that
aurorae occur in the same hours, maybe simultaneously,
in both the Arctic and Antarctic zones, although not
necessarily in the same form.
The observatories recording the very slow geomagnetic
secular variations mentioned above also record the large
and rapid ones magnetic storms which often accom¬
pany intense auroral displays. These variations are
related to the large fluctuating electrical currents set up
by the incoming solar particles and their analysis helps
us to learn more about the constitution of the high
atmosphere over the poles.
Long distance radio communication is made possible
by layers of electrified particles the ionosphere in the
upper atmosphere and the E layer, about 120 km (75 mi)
high, and the F layer, about 350 km (220 mi) high. In
middle latitudes the changing height of these layers, the
maximum radio wave frequency they reflect, and the
drift of irregularities in them have been measured and
analysed for a decade or more, but little similar work was
done in the southern hemisphere until the IGY provided
a very necessary expansion.
The ionosphere can be greatly disturbed by Incoming
CONT'D ON PAGE 40
Government of Japan
PARABOLA ANTENNA for radar observation of atmospheric
phenomena at the Showa Antarctic base where a Japanese observa¬
tion party wintered for the the fourth year in succession (1960-61).

31

Sunspots and magnetic rings (Cont'd from page 30)
solar particles and its study near the southern auroral
zone ls very important. During intense magnetic storms
the radio signals are absorbed and communication becomes
impossible. During quiet periods near sunspot maximum,
radio signals on higher frequencies than usual can be
transmitted over very long distances and during 1958
European television sound signals were received in the
Antarctic.
Ionospheric phenomena are easier to analyse at stations
just outside the auroral zone but near to the geographic
pole; one such station is that of the United Kingdom at
Halley Bay. It was one of the very few Antarctic stations
equipped for detailed IGY radio studies and many more
like it will be required in the coming years to track the
Important horizontal and vertical movements of ionized
gas observed there.
The weather of the southern hemisphere is controlled
to a large extent by the ice covering of Antarctica-
temperatures of -86° C were recorded at a Soviet station.
Countries like Chile, Argentina, South Africa, Australia
and New Zealand have always sought meteorological data
from that region to improve their weather forecasts.
Since the IGY many more stations are contributing data
secured with radio-sonde balloons which transmit from
heights up to 20 km (12 miles).
During the IGY weather data was sent several times a
day, by radio, from each station to the Antarctic Weather
Central at Little America. There United States meteo¬
rologists worked with colleagues from the U.S.S.R.,
Argentina, etc., to produce continental weather charts and
forecasts.
Ozone gas, flowing at a height of about 25 km is a
valuable indicator of air movements at high altitudes.
The necessary delicate measurements have been done at
some French and British Antarctic bases, and have shown
that its annual variation differs from that in the Northern
Hemisphere. Upper atmosphere sounding rockets fired
from ships In Antarctic waters have also contributed to
our knowledge of the upper atmosphere. We are begin¬
ning to understand the general circulation of the atmo¬
sphere up to great heights over the southern hemisphere
but many more extensive and detailed measurements will
be required before major advances in forecasting can
take place.
This article has not touched on the rapidly expanding
programme of biological research that has just begun,
for these equally important activities are dealt with in
a separate article by Rear Admiral Panzarini (See p. 36).
More observations of all kinds are required from the
interior of Antarctica and in the coming years
experimenters travelling by tractor or aircraft will improve
the maps and gather data about Antarctic rocks and
ice thickness. Modern techniques, such as meteorological
satellites showing the area of ice as well as the amount
of cloud cover and radio-isotope powered automatic
weather stations (The Unesco Courier, September 1957,
page 20) sending regular radio reports, will gradually come
into greater use. However, Antarctic research will never
progress without the adventurous spirit which leads brave
men to work in lonely huts, tending delicate apparatus in
the face of many hazards.
Antarctic research became a major field of studies at
the time of the IGY and the sunspot maximum; it will
be further expanded in 1964-1965 at sunspot minimum
with the International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY)
programme and the peaceful conditions and free access
permitted by the Antarctic Treaty will guarantee further
expansion in the next few decades.
