The anatomy of underdevelopment (Part 2)
PATTERNS OF ECONOMIC CHANGE
All countries are in some respects underdeveloped for all are still in
the development process. But broad distinctions can nevertheless be
made between the different levels of development that have been ach-
ieved. These different characteristics are analyzed in the following arti¬
cle, the second of a series whose publication began in the July-August
issue of The Unesco Courier. They are taken from a new study produced
by the United Nations as part of the World Campaign Against Hunger.
Industrialization, or the opportunity for all to
partake of its benefits, is essential to economic
progress. It is not, however, an end in itself. Schools,
hospitals, museums, art galleries, theatres are built not
for their own sake, but to serve specific purposes, and fac¬
tories are no exception. They are indispensable tools in
the struggle to raise living standards among the less for¬
tunate of the world's people. This is a fundamental objec¬
tive of the United Nations and the sole purpose of
the technical assistance programmes.
Factories, mines, power stations, transport undertakings
and so on are symbols of the economic development by
which this raising of living standards can be achieved.
Economic development must go hand In hand with
the production of more food, the improvement of
health, the spread of education and the promotion
of social welfare and human rights. It will help
to put more money into the pockets of the people who
need it. Without that increase in spending power, the
people In the "underdeveloped" countries cannot know
freedom from misery and want.
The most striking difference between the developed
and the underdeveloped countries lies, as we have seen,
in the standard of living attained by the majority of
their people In other words, In the extent to which
the national income is distributed through wide strata
of the population. It is, however, possible to attempt
some more exact definition of the term underdeveloped.
An underdeveloped country might be described as one
in which the natural and human resources arc used for
economic purposes to only a very limited degree. The
trained personnel, the capital and the administrative
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
World Bank
Economic growth, symbolized by Industrialization, leads to greater employment and Increased
Incomes for workers. The foundations for progress of this kind In the world's less-developed
countries have often been laid thanks to international aid. The World Bank (International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development) for instance, has already awarded development loans totalling
5,000 million dollars, Including nearly 800 million dollars for different countries In Africa.

UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Coned)
Innovations that changed history's course
machinery necessary to make proper use of them are
partly, of wholly lacking. Such a definition is no more
than rough and ready. The word "resource" Itself needs
clarification. We might say that, in the economic sense,
a resource only becomes a resource when it can be put
to an appropriate use. Until that time, the richest
resources are valueless in themselves.
If we look back over the long history of mankind, we
see a period, perhaps lasting up to half a million years
or more, during which the food gatherers and hunters of
the Palaeolithic, or Old Stone Age, wandered countless
times across what was later to be recognized as rich
arable land without being able to make the slightest use
of it. It was probably not more than ten thousand
years ago that the first Neolithic farmers, by sowing
and harvesting grain, discovered the possibilities inherent
in such land. Thanks to this innovation, they took
to living in settled communities and so changed the
course of human history.
We can find plenty of examples nearer our own time,
In fact, the more complex civilization has become, the
more intense has been the search for new resources or
new uses for old resources. Coal was occasionally used
in the Middle Ages, but its real value as a natural
resource was discovered only when the factories of the
industrial revolution created a demand for fuel which
could not be met by the diminishing woodlands of late
eighteenth and early nineteenth-century England.
At a further stage in the industrial revolution,
oil began to taJke the place of coal as a fuel
and the vast deposits lying under the Middle East,
Central America, Texas, the Caspian Sea area and
elsewhere acquired immense economic importance for the
industrialized civilization of the twentieth century.
During the last few years, several countries have discov¬
ered that their deposits of uranium have tremendous
value. Only a generation ago, little attention would
have been paid to them. Because resources become
resources only when a use Is found for them, it follows
that new discoveries may at any moment reveal value in
hitherto neglected materials or new uses for resources
already being exploited. Even the most highly developed
countries may therefore possess natural resources which
still contribute nothing to their economic life.
As long as this is the case and as long as those coun¬
tries continue the search to improve their techniques
and to use the sum total of their natural and human
resources to better purpose, even advanced countries
are still in the process of development, or are technically
underdeveloped. Moreover, as the easily accessible
supply of certain minerals begins to fail under the heavy
demands of industry, new sources are constantly being
turned to account by technological research. An exam¬
ple would be the extraction of magnesium from the sea,
now a considerable Industry in the United States.
It looks as if two great steps forward will be taken
shortly when automation and atomic energy begin to
play a leading part in industrial life. Automation, which
is merely an extension of the use of machines to replace
workers and of electronic equipment to replace brains, is
beginning to revolutionize industrial prospects. Perhaps,
when the economically advanced countries of today look
back, fifty years hence, from the early atomic-automation
era, they will regard their present condition as having
18 been very "underdeveloped" indeed.
Bearing these facts in mind, we can still list certain
characteristic features which distinguish the countries
that have not yet set out upon the road of economic
progress or have advanced only a little way along it.
Generally speaking, most of the people living In such
countries get their livelihood from agriculture of a pri¬
mitive kind, which yields them only a bare subsistence
and little or no surplus for exchange purposes.
Industries tend to be few and their level of output
per worker is very low, as a result of the low level of
capital per worker. Transportation facilities are gene¬
rally inadequate. Such countries tend to have widespread
underemployment, illiteracy, poor housing, low nutri¬
tion and health standards and an acute shortage both
of educated people and of teachers.
It is broadly true that the economically un¬
derdeveloped countries mostly lie in the hotter
regions of the earth's surface. Many of them have
experienced colonial status, the traces of which have
often been left on the national economy. In many of
the less developed countries, an industry extracting one
specific local raw material or product has long had a
preponderating place. This may be a mineral or a vege¬
table product such as rubber, coffee or cocoa. Fluctua¬
tions in the price of such commodities on the world
market tend to make the economic life of the country
concerned unstable, and this economic instability is
another characteristic shared by many of the underde¬
veloped countries.
It would be difficult to say how many of the world's
Inhabitants live in the underdeveloped areas, because
we have seen that there is no precise definition of the
term underdeveloped. It is obvious, however, that much
of Asia, Latin America, Africa and the Middle East would
be covered by any normal use of the term "economically
underdeveloped area." These regions comprise between
them some 75 per cent of the world's population.
As only a small fraction of their inhabitants enjoy a
standard of living which could be described as high or
even adequate, and, as some people even in the more
developed areas are living on the subsistence level, prob¬
ably three-quarters of the world's men and women are
at present condemned to a Ufe of grim poverty and often
of bitter hardship.
Economic development is the means by which those
material hardships can be reduced and by which poverty
can be attacked at its root.
T hree stages in the process of economic dev¬
elopment have been distinguished. At first,
communities are primarily agricultural and mostly self-
supporting. Next, a network of commercial and exchange
activities is developed. Then follows the Introduction of
manufacturing industry.
The beginnings of exchange in an agricultural society
usually concern a surplus of local products, such as salt
or fish. When markets begin to take shape, commo¬
dities specially produced for sale acquire increasing
Importance. As money becomes more generally used,
there ls greater specialization both in producing and in
selling goods.
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

The construction of highways and railroads is opening up the road to economic development In many countries, making possible 19
increased trade and the export of raw materials. These sections of railroad line are for a new section of railway being constructed
in the Republic of Congo which will transport manganese ore mined in the neighbouring Republic of Gabon to the African coast.

UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Cont'd)
HELICOPTERS
LINK JUNGLE
BUILDING SITES
Near Bacoumba in the Republic of Gabon,
helicopters help to construct an aerial
cableway, 45 miles long, which will carry
manganese ore to a new 180 mile railroad
link. Men, equipment and cement are flown
(left and right) over the dense forest to the
almost inaccessible pylon sites. Far right
and below, iron girders are flown to a jun¬
gle clearing in which pylons will soon rise.
The slow emergence of industries
This type of society remains more or less self-contained,
but it includes the elements of an exchange of com¬
mercial economy, the promise of bigger things to come.
It ls typical of much of contemporary Africa and also of
parts of Latin America and Southeast Asia.
By organizing a system of trade, such societies take
the first step leading from the subsistence agriculture
stage to that of industry. There is, however, no ela¬
borate transformation of materials, no use of complex
machines and no employment of specialized wage earners
in a common place of work. Nevertheless, the emergence
of better transportation and the Increasing sale of goods
open the way to further specialization.
At first individuals, then organized groups,
devote themselves entirely to secondary occu¬
pations away from the land, such as the transformation,
preparation or carrying of raw materials. This early
commercial stage with its simple industries grows out
of the subsistence agriculture phase. Later, and general¬
ly much later, comes the stage of more complex
manufacturing industry, with the use of machines on an
ever-increasing scale, an increasing specialization of
many workers and the creation of more and more elabo¬
rate administrative and financial techniques to keep pace
with heavier economic demands.
Industry first appears with the processing of primary
products. Grain is milled, leather is tanned, wool or
vegetable fibres are spun, ores are smelted. These pro¬
cesses obviously call for the next level of industrial
development, when materials are transformed and not
merely processed. The grain so milled is turned into
bread, the leather into footwear, the cloth into wearing
apparel, the smelted ores into ploughshares, horseshoes
and other metal goods.
20 At this stage, goods are still produced for immediate
use by the person who buys them. The major differ¬
ence between this phase and the next, more complex,
stage of large-scale industry is that capital equipment
now begins to be produced not to satisfy immediate
consumer demand, but to help in the future production
of such goods over a long period of time and with far
more elaborate marketing facilities in mind.
Civilizations do not pass through these phases in
clearly defined historical periods. Human history is an
untidy phenomenon. It allows for much disorder and for
the existence side by side of processes of varying age and
efficiency. The so-called Industrial civilization of our
time is distinguished by a tremendous emphasis on the
third, or machine-dominated stage.
The railroad, the steamship, the Internal-combustion
engine, flight, atomic power, electronics, all of them
Western discoveries or inventions, have vastly broadened
the horizon of man's possibilities. Their advantages are
now becoming available by degree to countries which
have never experienced the preliminary stages of indus¬
trial progress.
As a result, our contemporary world presents the pic¬
ture of an economically advanced minority of peoples
on the one hand and, on the other, a highly diversified
group of peoples who make up the majority of mankind
and who, at varying stages of economic underdevelop¬
ment, are seeking to narrow the broad gap which separ¬
ates them from the economic leaders. It may be
possible perhaps to distinguish various categories among
these underdeveloped countries and the distinction will
help to make clearer both their economic problems and
their potentialities.
(a) First there are societies in which there has as yet
been practically no autonomous economic growth. Most
of the people wrest a meagre livelihood from the soil as
subsistence farmers. A very elementary marketing
system exists, but the exchange of products is on too small
a scale to allow any real division of labour into different
skills and crafts, and thus the incentive to progress is
lacking.
Great areas of Africa would be typical of this phase of
CONT'D ON PAGE 22

21

22
UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Contd)
The increasing importance
of government intervention
economic development, as would a territory like New
Guinea, hardly affected as yet by outside civilization. In
such regions, the people themselves lack all the essential
means to promote their economic growth. They must
be helped to modify the pattern of subsistence agriculture.
A more complex exchange system must be introduced . to
promote buying and selling and the manufacture or
preparation of products.
In these simply constituted economic societies (personal
and tribal relationships, like the indigenous languages,
are often far more complex than any In the "civilized"
world) this will always require both technical assistance
and capital from outside to get the static economy moving.
(b) The second category is more common In the
contemporary world. Here, we are dealing with under¬
developed countries where foreign enterprise, capital and
management, have Introduced themselves Into a rela¬
tively simple economic society and have caused a rapid
evolution in certain sectors. This situation Is to be seen
In a number of ex-colonlal countries such as Indonesia
and Malaya.
Here, valuable raw materials like rubber and tin have
been exploited through foreign technical skill and capi¬
tal. As a result, a few highly developed industries have
been set up to obtain and export such raw materials.
The coming of these industries has introduced, in part
at least, a commercial economy into the country
concerned. This has brought with It an elaborate
exchange mechanism and has provided commercial em¬
ployment for some of the local population.
Meanwhile, the primitive agricultural economy
goes on as before over the country as a whole.
The scale and complexity of local industries which may
arise to process raw materials on the spot will vary ac¬
cording to the nature of the product removed and
exported with foreign help. If this is a mineral, the local
processing plant is likely to be more complicated than in
the case of a vegetable product like sisal, for example,
which is grown and processed in Tanganyika. Much more
complex are the copper refineries in Katanga and Nor¬
thern Rhodesia and the oil refineries of the Middle East.
(c) A third category of countries differs from the rest
mainly as a result of Internal, rather than external, eco¬
nomic factors. How far will domestic demand encourage
industrial enterprise? We have seen above how the par¬
tial economic development of an underdeveloped country
may be stimulated by demand from abroad for a parti¬
cular raw material or product. Where this foreign
demand is absent, economic growth will occur only when
a local demand for goods exists.
This demand, in turn, will depend upon the way in
which income is distributed among the people and the
tastes of potential customers. If only small numbers of
the population can afford to buy consumer goods, they
may prefer imported articles. Local manufacturers will
then receive little encouragement to enter the field and
there will be as little impulse to extend the industria¬
lization process. A number of Latin American countries
are in this situation.
At this point a word must be said about the important
factor of government intervention. Government inter¬
vention has tended to increase markedly in our time. It is
World Bank
LACK OF TRUCKS in Iran encourages dangerous
overloading which, in turn, causes road surfaces
to break up and turn to powder. Iran's plan of
economic development now includes the reconstruc¬
tion and widening of existing highways and the
construction of some 1,500 miles of new highways.
particularly noticeable in countries which have recently
gained their political independence and which And them¬
selves faced with the great task of raising the living
standards of their people with a minimum of delay.
This task requires some degree of central direction.
Essential data about natural resources, both natural and
human, have to be centrally collected and assessed.
Plans must be centrally drawn up for the development of
these resources, as part of an overall national programme
of economic and social development. Priorities must be
centrally established, official encouragement must be given
to projects and industries which are likely to promote
the welfare of the people as a whole, and technical assis¬
tance and foreign loans must be applied for through
recognized government channels.
This government intervention ranges from encoura¬
gement and advice, as seen, for example, in community
development projects sponsored by the authorities in
India and elsewhere, to actual direction by the state in
the U.S.S.R., the countries associated with her and in the
mainland of China. The methods applied to achieve
economic development will reflect the prevailing idelology.
But it should be borne in mind that the conditions favour¬
ing spontaneous economic growth are present only in a
small measure in the underdeveloped countries and,
without some degree of government action, no substantial
progress could be expected In the foreseeable future.
(To be continued)
