DISCOVERY
EXPLORATION
ADVENTURE
8c COURAGE
by G. de Q. Robin

DISCOVERY & EXPLORATION (Cont'd)
First winter on the icepack
Cook's voyage farthest south by penetrating the Weddell
Sea to 74° 15 S with two small vessels, the brig Jane of
160 tons and the cutter Beaufoy of 65 tons.
John Biscoe circumnavigated the continent during the
years 1830-32 in similar ships under trying conditions,
during which the effective crew of each ship was at times
reduced to three men due to scurvy and other illnesses.
He sighted similar rising snow slopes to those seen by
Bellingshausen, but thought them caused by the freezing
of the sea. He then saw the rock peaks exposed at about
50° E which he named Cape Ann. After retreating to
Tasmania during the winter, he discovered the Adelaide
Islands near the Antarctic peninsula.
Two other sealing captains, Kemp and Balleny, made
further discoveries of land within the Antarctic circle at
60° E and 165° E during this decade, but national expedi¬
tions were responsible for the major discoveries during
the period 1837 to 1843.
The first of these was the French expedition of 1837-40
under Dumont D'Urvllle, who worked westwards around
the continent from the peninsula. On January 22, 1840,
he discovered Terre Adâie in 138° E, and landed there
to take formal possession for France. Nine days later he
sighted another stretch of coastline, but by one of those
strange twists of fortune that occur in Antarctic history,
it was found that the United States Exploring Expedition
of 1838-42 under Charles Wilkes had sighted the same
coast a few hours earlier.
This latter expedition sailed only after considerable
public pressure on the United States Government to
Initiate exploratory activities at least equal to those of
European countries. Wilkes claimed the discovery of
some 1,500 miles of coastline from around 166° E to 106" E.
Although some of the eastern stretch of this "continental"
coastline was subsequently shown not to exist, most of
his work has proved substantially correct.
The British expedition of 1839-43 sent out by the Royal
Society of London and the Admiralty under the command
of James Clark Ross, the discoverer of the north magnetic
pole, also had the joint aims of scientific investigations
and discovery. Ross was given a chart of Wilkes's
discoveries and he knew of the work of Dumont D'Urville.
Realising that he was unlikely to reach the south
magnetic pole by following their tracks, he struck farther
east hoping to find a more southerly passage which would
lead him to the magnetic pole.
Instead he succeeded in charting 500 miles of the
mountainous coastline of Victoria Land, and 500 miles of
a floating ice barrier, now called the Ross Ice Shelf, which
made further progress to the south by sea impossible. He
completed his circumnavigation by adding his contribution
to the known islands in the region of the peninsula, in
this case on the less accessible eastern coast.
These discoveries by sealing ships and national expedi¬
tions were used for Colton's map of the Antarctic In 1855
which showed the outline of an Antarctic continent much
as we know it today. In terms of the available ships and
techniques, the achievements between 1819 and 1843 were
unparalleled.
Interest In the Antarctic dropped during the next fifty
years, although commercial activity in hunting the
dwindling stock of seals and in exploiting the large whale
population continued in sub-Antarctic waters. But a
notable contribution was made during this otherwise quiet
period by the voyage of the Challenger of 1872-76. In
addition to this expedition's many contributions to
biological and physical oceanography, and its charts of
several sub-Antarctic Islands, it showed that rocks
dropped from Antarctic icebergs on to the ocean bed were
typical of a continental origin.
With the twentieth century came steam power, providing
a new means of manoeuvring ships through pack ice.
Stirring appeals at meetings of the International
Geographical Union stimulated such activity that expedi¬
tions set out from many countries during the twenty years
preceeding World War I. In 1893-94, a Norwegian
whaling expedition under C. A. Larsen mapped the east
ICE-BOUND Antarctic exploration vessel, the "Gauss", photographed from a captive balloon. The German
expedition led by Erich von Drygalski used the balloon to extend the range of observation. Filled with
hydrogen it rose to about 1,000 feet from where the observer in its basket could relay information by
telephone. This photograph of the "Gauss" in the pack ice was taken by Emile Philippi, on March 29, I 902.
From " Deutsche Sud Polar Expedition ", 1901-1903 by E. von Drygalski. Reimer, Berlin, 1912.
^CV~' '. .1*1 j *
16

James Cook F. Bellingshausen
Julian Irlzar J. Baptiste Charcot
J. Dumont-d'Urville A. de Gerlache J. Clark Ross E. von Drygalskl
E. Shackleton Roald Amundsen R. Falcon Scott Richard Byrd
TRAIL BLAZERS OF ANTARCTICA
JAMES COOK (1726-1779). British
navigator, first to cross Antarctic Circle
(1773) and map deep southern latitudes.
Failed to find Antarctic land, but believed
a frozen continent existed to far south.
FABIEN BELLINGSHAUSEN (1778-
1852). Russian explorer, first to reach
Antarctica on January 28, 1820 and cir¬
cumnavigate it between 1819- 1 82 I. His
ship, "Vostok" was accompanied by the
"Mirny" under M. P. Lazareff. He sighted
mountains thus confirming that land and
not merely a frozen sea existed there.
JULES DUMONT D'URVILLE (1790-
1842). His French expedition was first to
land on Antarctic terrain on January 22,
1840. He named it Adélie Land.
JAMES CLARK ROSS (1800-1862)'.
Leader of British scientific expedition which
charted 500 miles of Victoria Land and
500 miles of floating ice barrier (now
named after him) while searching (1839-
42) for South Magnetic Pole.
ADRIEN DE GERLACHE (1866-1934)
whose Belgian expedition (1897-99) waa
the first to winter south of Antarctic Circle.
ERICH VON DRYGALSKI (1865-1 949).
led German expedition in specially built
vessel "Gauss" to carry out important
scientific studies ( I 90 1-03). Made meteo¬
rological and magnetic observations with
Scott's "Discovery" expedition.
JULIAN IRIZAR ( I 869- 1 93 5), Argentine
naval officer, whose ship "Uruguay" rescued
Swedish expedition of Otto Nordenskjold
marooned in 1903 after its ship, "Antarc¬
tica" was crushed the ice.
JEAN-BAPTISTE CHARCOT (1867-
1922). French scientist and explorer,
charted large areas of western Antarctica
during voyages in 1903 and 1908.
ERNEST SHACKLETON (1874- 1922)
whose British expedition (1907-09) came
to within 97 miles of South Pole and
reached South Magnetic Pole. For story
of Endurance see page 1 5. Died while
leading a later expedition to Antarctica.
ROALD AMUNDSEN (1872-1928).
Norwegian Antarctic and Arctic explorer,
he led first party to reach the South Pole
(See page I 8).
ROBERT FALCON SCOTT (1868-
1912) led first parties to penetrate any
distance into Antarctica (1901-1904).
Reached South Pole one month after
Amundsen (sec page 19).
RICHARD BYRD (1888-1957). United
States explorer and leading figure in deve¬
lopment of modern Antarctic exploration
methods, employing aircraft and mechan¬
ical vehicles. Led three expeditions
between 1928 and 1941.
coast of the peninsula to 68" 10' S, and returned unscathed
a feat which has not been repeated so far south on this
coast to the present day. The coastline south of this
point has been mapped only by aircraft and dog-sledging
parties during recent years.
The first major national expedition of this period came
from Belgium under de Gerlache in the Bélgica, with an
international complement of scientists and crew, Including
the mate, Roald Amundsen, who subsequently reached the
south pole. The doctor was F. A. Cook, who subsequently
claimed to be the first man to reach the north pole,
although Peary's claim has since been generally accepted.
The Bélgica was caught for the winter In the pack ice,
and the party thus became the first men to winter south
of the Antarctic circle
Before the Bélgica returned, the first expedition to make
a planned wintering on the continent had set out in the
British vessel "Southern Cross" under Borchgrevink, the
Norwegian explorer, with a party mainly consisting of his
compatriots. This expedition carried out a planned series
of scientific observations at Cape Adare while the ship
retired out of the pack Ice and returned the following
summer, thus setting a pattern which ls followed exten¬
sively at the present time. Borchgrevink also landed on
Ross's ice barrier and sledged a short distance over the
ice shelf to reach 78° 50' S, the record at that time.
Again, this pattern was widely followed during the next
twelve years.
Due perhaps to newspaper rather than official backing,
and to some shortcomings In the scientific results,
Borchgrevlnk's contributions to the techniques of
Antarctic exploration have been overshadowed, probably
unjustly, -by the more famous nationally sponsored
expeditions of the following four years.
These national expeditions all carried experienced
scientific staffs to Investigate fields such as biology and
geomagnetism, as well as furthering geographical
exploration. The German expedition of 1901-03 under
Drygalskl In the Gauss wintered in the pack about 90°E,
close to the coastline, which was reached by sledging
parties. This expedition, and that of Scott at the same
time, sent observers aloft on captive balloons to extend
the range of discoveries, but this technique has not since
been used.
The Swedish South Polar Expedition of 1901-04 under
Dr. Otto Nordenskjold wintered on Snow Hill Island early
in 1902 off the eastern coast of the Antarctic peninsula.
Their ship, the Antarctic, under CA. Larsen, was unable ^
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A VICTORY
A
---«... *"
AMUNDSEN. On December 14, 1911,
Roald Amundsen pitched a tent at the South
Pole and took this historic photograph of his
companions standing bareheaded before Nor¬
way's flag. Amundsen's journey had begun
In 1910 when he set sail from Norway in the
From, the ship already made famous by the
arctic exploits of the Norwegian explorer,
Fridtjof Nansen. By February 19 I I, Amundsen
had reached the Ross Ice Shelf where he win
tered at a latitude of 79 degrees. In October,
at the start of the Antarctic spring, he set
off with four companions, five sledges, 70 dogs
and provisions for four months. Crossing the
Ross Ice Shelf, the party advanced Into the
interior of the continent, covering about 20
miles each day. To do so it had to pass over
the mountains of the Queen Maud Range at
heights of 13,000 feet and later the polar
plateau at over I 1,000 feet. The five men
were the first to reach the South Pole. Con¬
sidering the terrible weather they encoun¬
tered they accomplished their journey with
Incredible speeda total of 97 days outward
and return. Born In Norway in 1872, Amund¬
sen dedicated his life to exploration. On
June 18, 1928, he left Tromso by air to
help in the search for the missing Arctic
expedition of the Italian general Nobile. From
this flight Roald Amundsen never returned.
DISCOVERY & EXPLORATION (Cont'd)
to reach them the next summer and two men from the
ship set off by sledge to try to contact the expedition. The
Antarctic was finally crushed in the ice, the crew taking
refuge on Paulet Island.
The two-man sledging party finally reached the main
party on Snow Hill Island in October, 1903, after a winter
spent feeding on penguins, in a primitive stone hut.
Meanwhile the lack of news led Argentina to send out a
naval vessel, the Uruguay, to search for the expedition,
which was located on November 8. A few hours later
the first survivors from Paulet Island reached the base at
Snow Hill, just before the relief ship was due to sail. The
whole expedition was then safely extricated, thanks to
this extraordinary good fortune and the successful search
under Captain Irizar of the Argentinian Navy.
Scott's Discovery expedition of 1901-04 was the chief
British National Expedition of this period. The ship
remained frozen into the Ice of McMurdo Sound for two
years while Scott led the first parties to penetrate any
considerable distance into the interior of the continent.
He first sledged south over the Ross Ice Shelf to 77° 59' S,
and then, the following summer, through the mountains
of Victoria Land on a journey to the west. He found only
a high, featureless plateau of ice beyond the mountains.
The fourth notable expedition of this time, the Scottish
National Antarctic Expedition of 1902-04, under W. S.
Bruce, tried to penetrate the ice of the Weddell Sea and
discovered Coats Land on the eastern side of the Sea. It
was a forbidding, ice-covered land bounded by high cliffs
which prevented a landing.
The expedition started a meteorological and magnetic
observatory on Laurie Island in the South Orkneys, and
since they were unable to ensure its continued support
j g from Scottish sources, they handed it over to Argentina
at the end of the expedition. The observatory has since
been maintained continuously by Argentina, and provides
the longest run of meteorological records now available
from such a high southern latitude.
Meanwhile, the French Antarctic Expedition of 1903-05
under J. B. Charcot, was working on the western side of
the Antarctic peninsula, and from 1908-10 Charcot
continued investigations in the same area.
Edward Shackleton, the most outstanding leader of men
in the Antarctic during the twentieth century, led the
British Antarctic Expedition of 1907-09. After wintering
at Cape Royds in McMurdo Sound, he followed his earlier
path with Scott over the Ross Ice Shelf, using ponies to
draw the sledges over the flat surface. Shackleton
discovered the Beardmore Glacier, which he ascended to
the polar plateau by manhauling, and pressed on to within
97 miles of the south pole. At this point, so close to
success, he estimated that he could go no further if his
party was to return alive, so he turned around and was
just able to get back to McMurdo Sound.
His judgment in returning has never been questioned,
since most leaders would have turned back sooner.
Instead, he was widely acclaimed for the biggest advance
of any expedition towards either of the poles. His
northern sledging party under Professor Edgeworth David
reached the South Magnetic Pole for the first time while
Shackleton was making his dash.
The next five years not only saw the struggle to reach
the pole, and Shackleton's attempt to cross the continent,
but also ushered in an era of increasing scientific study.
It is little wonder after Shackleton's success that Scott's
Terra Nova expedition of 1910-13 should choose ponies as
the main form of transport in preference to dogs, which
had not performed well on the Discovery expedition.
Amundsen, on the other hand, handled dogs superbly,
and after wintering in the Fram in 1911 at the Bay of
Whales on the far side of the Ross Ice Shelf from Scott,
he was the first to reach the pole by a month.
The heroism of Scott's struggle to reach the pole, only
to find the Norwegian flag there, and his ill luck with
weather on the way back which caused the deaths of the
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

A DRAMA
«i
Fifty
years ago
FIRST MEN
REACH THE
SOUTH POLE
Photos courtesy Scott Police Reseirch Instil
SCOTT. On January 17, 1912, Scott reach¬
ed the Pole only to find the Norwegian flag
(above) which had been raised there by
Amundsen nearly one month earlier. Scott
did not follow the same route to the South
Pole as Amundsen, and he took motor-sledges
and ponies with him instead of dogs. But the
sledges were soon out of action and the
ponies had to be destroyed on the outward
journey which was made In fierce snow
blizzards and lasted no less than 79 days.
It is easy to Imagine the despondency and
disappointment of Scott and his companions
when they realized they had lost the race to
the Pole. Ill luck dogged them on their return
journey when the same blinding blizzards
lashed them, for 57 days, bringing their
venture to a tragic end. Evans and Oatcs
were the first to die. Scott, Bowers and
Wilson still steadfastly guarded their notes,
their photographs and the geological speci¬
mens which proved that a sub-tropical climate
once existed In Antarctica. They perished of
cold and hunger less than a dozen miles from
a depot of food and fuel. In the diary, which he
kept until his strength ebbed away, Scott wrote:
"I do not regret this journey... We have been
willing to give our lives for this enterprise...
Take comfort In that I die In peace with
the world and myself and am not afraid."
S
'0
u^
Il 4^/>~
7. p*"
' /t&f.
At the end of 1961 an Anglo-Norwegian ceremony took place at the South Pole
Amundsen-Scott station of the United States. To mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the conquest of the South Pole a commemorative plaque was placed there (below)
to honour the first two expeditions to reach the Pole. The plaque bears the names
of Roald Amundsen and his companions O. B|aaland, H. Hansscn, E, Hassel and
O. Wistingand those of Robert Scott and his partyE.A. Wilson, L.E. Oatcs,
H.R. Bowers and E. Evans. It was placed In position by Tore Gjclsvlk (standing
behind 'It, centre) of the Norwegian Polar Institute and, Gordon de Q. Robin (author
of this article, standing left of the plaque). Left, photo taken on December 14, 1911
at the South Pole showing Olav Bjaaland and Oscar Wisting making meteorological
observations. The photo was autographed by Bjaaland In 1 960 shortly before his death.
19

DISCOVERY & EXPLORATION (Co»«)
From dog sledges to sno-cats
members of the party within 11 miles of ample food are
well known. The scientific investigations of the expedition
set standards which many have tried to follow but few
have attained. Amundsen's example with dogs has been
widely followed, and at present many still consider them
the safest' form of transport for detailed study of difficult
mountain regions of the Antarctic.
At the same time as Amundsen and Scott were
establishing their bases, Filchner's German South Polar
Expedition of 1910-12 succeeded in reaching Vahsel Bay
at 78° S, the southern-most point of the Weddell Sea, but
was forced to winter on the expedition ship in the
drifting pack. Unlike Shackleton's, four years later,
Filchner's ship survived.
Shackleton, with the British Imperial Trans-Antarctic
Expedition of 1914-16, attempted to reach Vahsel Bay to
establish a wintering base from which to cross the
continent, but he also was forced to winter in the pack
ice. After his ship Endurance sank, his achievements In
extricating his party without loss of life were an epic.
The work of Bruce, Shackleton and Filchner at this
period resulted in the mapping of most of the eastern
side of the Weddell Sea.
Japan entered Antarctic exploration for the first time
with its South Polar Expedition of 1911-12 under Shirase,
while the Australian Antarctic Expedition of 1911-14 under
Mawson, who had accompanied David to the south
magnetic pole, mounted two bases and mapped extensive
coastal areas to the south of Australia.
This expedition was the first to maintain radio
communications with the outside world. The long radio
wave lengths used at that time necessitated an interme¬
diate station on Macquarie Island to relay messages to
Australia, and the project was a success. The extreme
winds experienced at the expedition's main base, Cape
Denison, deserve mention, as they poured down off the
slopes from the inland ice and averaged some 50 ¡m.p.h.
during the whole year.
Although the first years of this century have
been called the heroic era of Antarctic explor¬
ation, they foreshadowed the mechanical era which
followed. Shackleton in 1907-09 took the first mechanical
transport to Antarctica, an Arrol-Johnson motor car
which performed usefully over the sea ice of McMurdo
Sound. Scott took three tracklaying vehicles south, two
of which helped drag stores over the Ross Ice Shelf.
Mawson's expedition of 1911 might well have led the way
in polar flying but for an accident to the aeroplane in
Adelaide which destroyed .the wings. They, nevertheless,
took the reanainder of the plane south and used it as a
propellor-drlven vehicle for some short runs. None of
these experiments, however, proved of major benefit at
the time.
The effectiveness of mechanical transport in Antarctic
exploration, both on the surface and in the air, was
shown between the wars. The main credit for this must
go to the United States expeditions under Byrd and
Ellsworth, although British and Norwegian expeditions
also developed the technique. The first flight in
Antarctica was made by the British and United States
Wilkins-Hearst Antarctic Expedition. Wilkins, in spite of
bad weather, flew to 71° 20' S down the Antarctic
peninsula, which he concluded was not continuous, but
consisted of a series of islands.
This was disproved by the British Graham Land
Expedition of 1934-37, who used a light aircraft and dog
sledging methods to explore chiefly the west coast, where
they discovered ICing George V Sound, which was
subsequently shown by Ronne in 1941 to separate
Alexander (Is) Land from the main mass of Antarctica.
Charcot (Is) Land was also considered to be an island as
a result of flights by Wilkins' second (British) expedition.
The three United States expeditions led by Byrd in
20 1928-30, 1933.-35 and 1939-41 all made extensive use of
aircraft ana mechanical vehicles, although some dog
transport was also used, particularly on a long journey
led by Gould during the first expedition. Although he
made the first flight over the South Pole in 1929, Byrd
concentrated mainly on exploration of the sector south
of the Pacific Ocean which had defeated direct approaches
from the sea. He showed that there was no connexion
between the ice shelves at the head of the Ross and
Weddell Seas, and mapped new mountain ranges and
sections of coastline. His second expedition was the first
to try seismic shooting techniques to measure ice
thicknesses in Antarctica.
Another United States citizen, Lincoln Ellsworth, made
several notable flights over the continent, including one
crossing from the peninsula to the Ross Sea. Further
mapping was accomplished by the Norwegian whaling
fleet of Lars Christensen, by the British-Australian-New
Zealand Antarctic Expedition of 1929-31, and the German
New-Schabenland expeditions. The British Discovery
Investigations carried out extensive océanographie studies
of Antarctic and southern seas between the wars but the
war put a temporary stop to exploration by European
countries in 1939 and by the United States in 1941.
The remaining gaps in the Antarctic coastline
were filled In, largely by aerial survey, during
the five years from 1945-50. The United States Navy
operation "Highjump," a private U.S., expedition under
Ronne and the British Falkland Islands Dependencies
Survey all helped to fill major gaps. It has therefore
taken around 130 years to discover the main features of
the Antarctic coast and to open the way for more detailed
studies. Such investigations in the region of the penin¬
sula have now continued for the past fifteen years, where
the topographical mapping by the British, hydrographie
surveys by Argentina and some Chilean work warrant
special mention.
Early in 1950 two expeditions landed on the main block
of "East" Antarctica, the French near 140° E and a com¬
bined Norwegian-British-Swedish expedition at 11° W.
Their use of modern technique to study the upper atmo¬
sphere over the continent and their observations of the
thickness, nourishment and temperature of the ice sheet
showed the need for a comprehensive attack on the
scientific problems of the continent.
The subsequent planning of the International
Geophysical Year opened the way for a major inter¬
national effort, of which the achievements are too
numerous to mention in a short article such as this.
Overland parties have covered some 9,300 miles, generally
sounding the ice cover along their routes, and many miles
of aerial reconnaissance and mapping have now given us
an idea of the nature of four-fifths of the interior of the
continent, and of the principal mountain ranges. The
huge dome of ice of "East" Antarctica, rising to some
13,000 feet above sea level, contrasts with the two great
seas and ice shelves located in the western hemisphere.
Between these shelves the few mountains exposed could
better be called islands than continents since great
thicknesses of ice rest on a rock floor below the present
sea level over wide areas. In fact, should the ice sheet
be removed, it is likely that the great Antarctic peninsula
would toe a large island separated from continental East
Antarctica.
It is clear that the discovery and exploration of the
Antarctic continent cannot be credited to any one nation.
It is the result of the work of very many expeditions
a truly international achievement to the credit of a few
generations between the eighteenth and twentieth
centuries.
Gordon de Q. Robin is director of the Scott Polar Research
Institute in Cambridge, England, and secretary of the
Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research of the Inter¬
national Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). He was a
member of the Norwegian-British-Swedish Antarctic
Expedition (1949-1951).
