THE INCAS OF TODAY
by Alfred Métraux
No civilization ever dies completely. Even If its
creators disappear, they hand on to their suc¬
cessors some part of their own experience. Thus, as long
as there are people who identify themselves with the
original culture, no external pressure has the power to
erase it. The Indians of the Andes, whose ancestors were
subjects of the Incas, offer us the most striking example
of this fact.
Four hundred years have passed since the day Novem¬
ber 16, 1532that Pizarro and his hundred and fifty com¬
panions, treacherously seizing the Inca monarch Ata-
hualpa at Cajamarca, destroyed the greatest Empire ol
the New World.
During these four centuries, life has been hard for the
Peruvian Indians and they have experienced many
changes of fortune. Their economy has been uprooted,
their social order transformed and their religion reduced
to the status of dubious and unpalatable beliefs. Despite
these ruthless changes and the desperate poverty Into
which they fell, the people have preserved part of their
cultural heritage almost Intact. The old Inca civilization
is not dead. Its roots are still healthy, and It may well
one day produce new shoots. Under a European veneer,
there still survive Institutions, patterns of behaviour and
beliefs which the white man has been unable to tamper
with and spoil.
The outward signs of the highly developed civilization
so admired by the Conquistadors when they penetrated
into the Andes disappeared a few years after the collapse
of the Inca Empire. The highways, bordered by low walls
and shaded by trees, were abandoned or broken up. Sus¬
pension bridges were neglected, the palaces and even the
towns were destroyed. The marvellous organization of
this State, which has been called a "socialist" one, suf¬
fered the same fate. The State granaries were pillaged,
the relay system of communications was Interrupted, and
the inhabitants were obliged to settle afresh in towns
and villages of European type.
Thirty years after the conquest, the population of the
Empire was reduced by half, If not by two thirds. Yet
15
CONT'D ON PAGE 17

INCAS OF TODAY (Cont'd)
MARKET DAY in a tiny village on the high Andean plateau of Peru brings together Quechua Indians with
their livestock and vegetables from the surrounding countryside. In the mountains of Peru and Bolivia, the
16 Indians have retained much of their ancient systems of social organization, including the ayllu in which small
groups of families united by a common origin, soil and creed, joined forces to work the. land. Today, how¬
ever, these descendants of the Inca Empire are modernizing and developing their farming methods.
Paul Almasy, Paris

^*
Jl^^*^fc&.
. 	 ;
fit' |V
1 7m
** 9 > V
ft- ». u
l'f)1
mv
k ?
Photos © Pierre Verger RELIC OF THE PAST Is this taclla, a metal-pointed staff used for breaking the soil. Indians who live on the
mountain slopes still use this method but those deep In the valleys use ploughs drawn by oxen, the women
following to break up the earth clods. Left, Indian boy, carrying his baby brother, rests against a village wall.
these misfortunes did not break the Indian spirit. Whilst
it seemed probable in the eighteenth century that the
Andean Indians would, in their turn, disappear very soon,
the Century which followed has produced an expansion
of such magnitude that today there Is a population oí
almost six million within the borders of the ancient
Empire, from southern Colombia to central Chile. In this
expanding Indian population, the precursory signs of a
great renaissance are perceptible. The time is therefore
ripe to see what they have retained of the glorious civili¬
zation of their ancestors.
Let us first consider language, which is an instrument
of culture. The language of the Incas, called Quechua,
is still spoken by nearly five million people, although
some Indian groups have adopted Spanish. Yet some
mestizos (men and women of mixed blood) and even white
men have made Quechua their native tongue. Today,
Quechua is more widely spoken in South America than
it was when the Inca Empire was at the height of its
glory. It was imposed by the Spanish missionaries on
tribes which, though formerly under Inca domination,
had maintained their own national tongues. These same
missionaries spread it to the tribes of the Amazon region
and thus the language of the Incas conquered territories
which had never seen the armies of the Empire.
Along with the language went a whole folklore of a
wealth which Is only just beginning to come to light.
Many an old myth, thought forgotten forever, has sur¬
vived in the memory of the country people. Patient
research may enable us to discover the vestiges of legend¬
ary cosmogonies and cycles assumed to have been lost
beyond recall.
In the mountains of Peru and Bolivia, the Indians have
remained faithful to their ancient social structures. The
ayllu, or small groups of families united by a common
origin, soil and creed, which formed the multiple cells
of the Empire of the Incas, have resisted all efforts to
disperse them. They became the nuclei of the "commu-
nldades," which succeeded in regaining a legal status
and around which the life of the Indians was reorganized.
Although, today, the "communities" no longer carry
out an annual distribution of collectively-owned lands,
they continue to exploit common land and refuse to sur¬
render any property belonging to the community. Mutual
assistance between families is still a strict obligation;
each must help in tasks performed for the common good
and must take part In religious rites honouring the pro¬
tective Saints who replaced the pagan gods. They defend
the frontiers of their community as fiercely as they did
in the old days, when the Incas had not yet incorporated
DANCING MASKS are frequently ceremonial trappings
which long ante-date the Indians conversion to Christianity. 17
The many festivals of the Catholic liturgy have served as
a pretext for rich and varied forms of religious expression.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INCAS OF TODAY (Cont'd)
18
Europeanized clothing
& centuries-old fabrics
them in a single state. Village patriotism is still ardent.
As in the past, it finds expression In a rivalry which
should be turned to good account.
Some of the "communldades" have taken the initiative
of modernizing themselves, but without renouncing their
old system of organization. Many of them have founded
extremely prosperous agricultural co-operatives and large
amounts of communal money are deposited in banks.
This is a very modern aspect of the old community spirit
of the ayllu of four centuries ago.
On the other hand, economic life has greatly changed
since the Conquest. To the flocks of llamas and alpacas
which the Indians put to graze on the puna, or high pla¬
teaux, sheep have been added and most families own a
bull or a cow, and often mules or donkeys.
Nowadays cheese has become a basic food item whereas
formerly the Indians knew nothing of milk products.
Maize and potatoes are still staple. foods, but barley, corn
and beans are now grown wherever the climate allows.
On the mountain slopes, as in the days of the
Incas, the Indians are still to be seen breaking
up the soil with the taclla, a metal-pointed staff. Deep
in the valleys, however, the old Roman swing-plough,
drawn by oxen is followed by women whose task is to
break up the clods of earth with stone mallets. Although
the plough may be Spanish, the festival atmosphere at
seed-time with the songs and dances of the labourers, is
essentially Indian.
Travellers tend to imagine that the Indians of today, in
their picturesque costumes, outwardly resemble their
ancestors. In fact, this is not true at all. The native
costume has changed considerably since the Sixteenth
century. In appearance, a present-day Indian woman
would only be distinguishable from a Spanish peasant by
the wide, brightly-coloured belt round her waist and the
shawl covering her shoulders, held in place by a silver pin
on the breast.
As for the men's costume, it is entirely Europeanized:
trousers, waistcoat, jacket and felt hat. The woollen
bonnet and the poncho, which are generally considered
to be Indian survivals, were unknown before the Colonial
period. However, as in the days of the Incas, the women,
whether seated or walking, never stop their spinning.
Their spindle has not changed: it is a wooden stick,
weighted by an earthenware spindle whorl. The loom
has not altered, either, with the passing of time ; It always
consists of two wooden bars, one of which is attached to
the weaver's waist, and the threads of the warp are
stretched between them.
The designs of the woven fabrics of today recall those
embellishing the materials found in tombs. When I
was in the Indian village of Chlpay, the Indians were
astonished that I was collecting old and very dirty
fabrics, not realizing that the specimens they were exa¬
mining, and which they thought I had bought from one
of them, had actually come from prehistoric tombs.
Nevertheless, even in a sphere where traditions die hard,
Spain has left Its mark. One of the favourite designs
with which the Indians decorate their tissues is none
other than a stylized version of the two-headed eagle of
the Hapsburgs.
Despite the merciless suppression of idols and Idolaters
by the Spanish missionaries, the Indians, outwardly good
Catholics, have by no means abandoned their prayers
and sacrifices to the ancient Andean deities. These are
still worshipped on the mountain peaks, where strange
structures suggest equally strange rites. On the hill¬
tops, the motorist passes cairns, each surmounted by a
cross, to which the Indians, seeking an escape from
weariness and a means of placating the local spirits, make
CONT'D ON PAGE 21
,,
- me.--

. *-y* . ... - _
^ - ' - .
-;^r' .BLEAK ROAD TO TOWN.- Against a pano>anta of eroded
pinnacles at rbck^these -Indian women lead their mules and
-TU '" sheep to"a mar^el^towiVhigh/jn the Bolivian plateau La Paz.
r^ mUTi i *^» *~ ». i - T^ - w :»W
M - * ii" . Vai
**.-« . **~!" -A
19
« " .

20
Photos © Pierre Verger
MIGHTY RAMPARTS of fortress
near Cuzco in the Peruvian Andes
(above left) proclaim architectural
and building skill of the ancient Incas.
Using manpower on a vast scale, the
Incas raised their walls and buildings
with stones of prodigious size weighing
many tons. No mortar or other bind¬
ing material was used and such was
the Incas' skill in cutting and fitting
the blocks together that even today
a knife blade will not slide between
the joints. (Above right), mountain-
girt ruins of another Inca city, Macchu
Picchu, which remained unknown to
the outside world until 1911. Since
then, rich archaeological discoveries
have produced a revealing picture of
the remarkable civilization whose
empire spread over much of western
South America. Many present-day
Indians in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru
(like those on left, wearing diversi¬
fied headgear and ponchos) are des¬
cended from the Incas. In moving
photo (right) a Peruvian Indian father
greets his daughter. Woollen garments
are woven in ancient Inca designs,
but man's hat is of Spanish origin.

ktgßf"
i«3flttia1>»«-.-
On the high plateaux
of the Cordillera
ritual offerings of stones or quids of coca. Among the
deities of the Inca Panthéon, only the Earth-Mother, the
Pacha-Mama, and the Llghtnlng-God have kept all their
prestige. The Indian cherished the Pacha-Mama above
all supernatural beings, and In the prayers which he
addresses to her, he Identifies her with the Virgin, calling
her "Santa Maria Pacha-Mama."
There Is no church or chapel so poor as to lack a
statuette of Santiago (Saint James), the warrior saint,
patron of Spain and the Conquistadors. Portrayed as a
seventeenth-century knight, In cape and feathered hat,
he brandishes his sword and crushes the devil under his
horse's hooves. For the Indians, Santiago Is the lord of
lightning Apu-illiampu. It Is In his honour that llamas
are sacrificed at places struck by lightning. Human
beings who arc struck by lightning and survive are,
moreover, called "sons of Saint James," and are Invested
with mystical powers which turn them Into magicians and
sorcerers.
In addition to these great deities, the Indians
continue to worship countless spirits, dwelling
In the mountains, rivers, pools and lakes. Houses are
placed under the protection of a spirit which takes the
form of a wild cat or a hawk, and receives blood sacrifices.
The religion of the Incas does not hide Its face In
shame In remote valleys or the hamlets of the high plat¬
eaux. It stalks boldly abroad In the large towns of the
Interior. Thus, one sees blackish stains on the walls
of modern houses In the capital of Bolivia: traces of
blood-oiferlngs made to the local god and to the Pacha-
Mama. Similarly, at the entrance to the towns, quids of
coca are stuck to the walls of the outlying houses; these
are propitiatory offerings made by the Indians to the gods
worshipped by ancestors before they came to live among
the white men.
The many festivals of the Catholic liturgy have .served
as a pretext for rich and varied forms of religious express¬
ion. The date of the popular festivals which corres¬
pond to those of the great ceremonies of the Inca Empire
have given secondary festivals primary Importance. In
this way, Corpus Christi has replaced the inti-raymi, the
great festival of the Sun-God. The Feast of the Invention
of the Holy Cross (May 3), which coincides with the agri¬
cultural celebrations once held at the beginning of the
harvest, is a pretext for dancing and rejoicings which the
nature of the feast Itself docs not Justify. The costumes
of the religious brotherhoods for the cult of the saints
are often simply survivals of the trappings worn by the
dancers of the pagan age.
The Indians have not forgotten their ancient sovereigns.
They speak of a mysterious personage called Inca-ri, who
founded Cuzco and was murdered by a rival. "Ills head,"
they say, "was burled at Lima. For some years past, it
has been growing a new body, and soon Inca-ri will come
back and bring good fortune to the Indians." It is in
this naive and mythological way that the Indians express
their obscure hope of seeing better days.
Whilst everywhere else In South America the Indian
tribes are doomed to extinction or will merge with the
remainder of the population, there is still, in what was
once the Empire of the Incas, In Ecuador, Peru and Boli¬
via, a vital element which must be reckoned with. In
some of these countries it represents over half the
population. These people, as they become more educated,
look to their glorious past and discover in it grounds for
their confidence in the future.
ALFRED METRAUX, noted anlhropologiil, is in charge of
"Human Rights" in the Department of Social Sciences of
Unesco. His newest book, Les Incas (Editions du Seuil, Paris)
will he published this spring. He is a frequent contributor to
The Unesco »»Courier.
21
