A SCIENTIST LOOKS
AT POPULARIZATION
by Pierre Auger
The principle of the
gyroscope, whether
made as a toy or for
special scientific uses,
(at perhaps 20,000
times the cost), is
exactly the same.
That is why this re¬
search engineer can
still sometimes make
use of the toy ver¬
sion, spinning on his
fingertip, which was
once used as a play¬
thing by his daughter.
14
The notion that "science" is something
that belongs in a separate compartment of
its own, apart from everyday life, is one
that I should like to challenge. We live in
a scientific age ; yet we assume that know¬
ledge of science is the prerogative of only
a small number of human beings, isolated
and priestlike in their laboratories. This
is not true. The materials of science are
the materials of life itself. Science is part
of the reality of living ; it is the what, the
how, and the why of everything in our
experience. It is impossible to understand
man without understanding his environ¬
ment and the forces that have moulded
him physically and mentally.
Rachel Carson
(In an address in I 952 when accepting the I 95 I
non-fiction U.S. National Book Award for her
book on oceanography, The Sea Around Us)
Never in history has there been a greater
need than today for the popularization of
science. It has now become almost trite to speak of the
gap which separates the scientist and specialist from the
ordinary man in the street; and it hardly seems necessary
nowadays to repeat that the steady widening of this gap
is fraught with danger. Nevertheless it may be worth
stressing two distinct aspects of the dangers involved.
The public is usually ill-equipped to judge scientific and
technical developments adequately and so is at a loss
when called on to take decisions which may have serious
social or political consequences. Similarly, the scientist
and technician run the risk of losing contact with their
fellow citizens and hence of becoming an isolated group
in their community. The scientist and research worker
need a public which can understand them, just as the
public needs to be able to follow the work of the scientist.
But the task is far from easy.
People are no longer content to learn about the more
or less classic achievements of science in the past fifty
years; they are eager to understand and talk about the
new thinking of science today, such as the discarding of
the principle of parity or the new theories of Heisenberg
in certain nuclear reactions.

Three Lions, New York. Common, everyday objects like the tuning forks seen here arc sometimes used by research staffs
to test important scientific principles. Above, testing a new super-alloy for high lemDcrature
steam turbine blades. It demonstrates how the alloy (metal tuning fork at right) minimizes vibration
because it is built in magnetic structures, while ordinary steel tuning fork (left) vibrates freely.
Even more demanding in their desire for knowledge,
people would like to attempt an understanding of such
complex subjects without any recourse to mathematics,
and simply by applying their common sense, helped by
a few comparisons with already familiar phenomena.
Let us take a closer look at the difficulties faced both
by the popularizer and his readers. In the biological
sciences, for example, it is often impossible not to men¬
tion the names of species or refer to certain animal or
plant organs and tissues. Yet a little patience on the
part of the author and reader alike can overcome this
obstacle, especially as the writer can assume, quite reason¬
ably, that he has the reader's confidence and therefore
the latter will accept as scientifically established facts
certain phenomena and their effects, even though he
had no previous knowledge of them.
One example which comes to mind Is the explanation
of how bees transmit to each other information on the
whereabouts of food, which has been given by Professor
Karl von Frisch, the Austrian scientist (and 1959 winner
of the Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science.)
Professor von Frisch's studies showed that the eyes of
bees see polarized light in the sky, thus enabling them
to distinguish zones of different shades by which they
orient themselves. As the human eye, unlike the bee's,
ls not sensitive to the polarization of light, the reader
here has to use a certain degree of abstract thinking in
order to follow the explanation.
Complaints about the use of obscure, scientific Jargon,
common enough in the past century, have nowadays
become less frequent thanks to the efforts of science
writers and to a higher level of general scientific know
ledge among their readers. But the obstacles to clear and
simple explanation greatly increase once the science
writer moves away from observed facts and technical
achievements and begins dealing with fundamental laws
and principles. Yet this ls the realm in which the most
effective pioneer work in popularization could be made.
Modern sciences, or many of them, have long passed
the stage of merely accumulating knowledge; they have
succeeded in taking fundamental ideas that are linked
with one another by principles which can be stated In
a few lines and situating these ideas within a logical
framework of highly simplified structure. Without going
as far as Louis de Broglle's wave formula or Schrödlnger's
equation, it can be said that the principles of the conser¬
vation of impulse or energy, like the Carnot principle,
represent the syntheses of thousands of experiments and
calculations.
It Is from these heights of the scientific world that the
observer can expect to see all the valleys converge on
a common source; It is from these heights that he can
hope to reach the pinnacles from which he will obtain
a synthetic view of the whole complex system whose
exploration has taken so many years.
What is it that prevents the untrained public from
following the scientist in this ascent? I personally believe
that It Is the capacity for abstract thought that is lack¬
ing. Just now I mentioned those fundamental concepts
which are linked with one another by basic laws and
principles and the synthesis of which provides the vast
framework of modern science. Those concepts are essen-
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE
15

SCIENCE POPULARIZATION (Cont'd)
The hazards of oversimplification
tlally abstract. Certainly they are based on familiar
ideas, on those things that are self-evidentnumbers,
size, speed, position in space and time of similar or dissi¬
milar objects; but these familiar ideas must be the
groundwork for intense Intellectual effort leading to
abstract structures like those of mathematics. Only thus
is it possible to clearly understand a fundamental concept
such as that of the relativity of space and time.
Some highly skilled writers have believed it possible
to present to a reader who is intelligent, but has had no
fundamental scientific training, the chain of reasoning
and the logical construction that lead from the concrete
and familiar concept to the abstract one. In certain
cases this can be done without mathematical formula?
and by using everyday terms. Unfortunately, however,
such a feat produces scarcely any more real understand¬
ing than does the watching of a conjuror's tricks. The
reader thinks he understands; each step of the argument
seems to be within his grasp; but if afterwards he tries to
handle the abstract concept which he believes he has
acquired, if he tries to make use of it in other arguments,
he at once realizes that he has still not acquired a suffi¬
ciently deep understanding.
There may even be some danger in the simplicity and
extreme neatness of certain expositions, however brilliant
they may be. I remember at the university a particu¬
larly able professor of mathematics whose lectures were
so clear that they could be followed without the slightest
effort and who could lead his students through the mazes
of integral calculus in such a way that they seemed
like broad avenues beautifully laid out. But once his
lectures were over, as soon as we wanted to use these
concepts in order to make an actual calculation, we often
realized that we had to start all over again and that we
had travelled, as in a dream, through a wilderness for
which in fact we had no map.
So let us not delude ourselves. To understand these
abstract concepts and to reach the syntheses they make
possible, much thought is needed and much reflection.
The chain of reasoning must be followed over and over
again from the beginning and each time we must
recognize that in fact we are only advancing a little
further, only parting a little wider the veils that enwrap
the new idea we wish to grasp.
This is an individual task; no one else can do it for us.
The scientific writer can guide us, help us .supply us with
all the equipment needed to move forward, but he cannot
"think" for us. Newton said that he had discovered his
principle "by thinking about it." Similarly, we must
think and re-think if we are to make any worthwhile
progress along the path which the great scientific ex¬
plorers have blazed for us.
The difficulties of abstract thought are not the only
ones which the popularizer encounters in his work. There
is also, so to speak, the question of "shock." The brightest
rockets of modern physics or biology have so shocked the
common sense of many highly developed people (their
common sense, not their good sense) that these people
have been unwilling or unable to make the effort needed
to follow their flight. The principle of relativity, and
more particularly the relativity of time, still seem
inadmissible to many people who, although educated, are
insufficiently trained in the intellectual discipline of
science. The same is true of the uncertainty principle
and the principle of genetic information.
Generally, moreover, such people are under the impres¬
sion that there is no reason to make any undue effort
since these things are only the provisional speculations
of scientists, useful perhaps for their specialized work but
meaningless from the point of view of real life. Others,
having thought more deeply, see in them the overthrow
of certain "values" which mean so much to them that
their elimination is intolerable.
In regard to genetic information, for example, there
are some people who, for religious or other reasons,
cannot admit that all the characteristics of life are mate¬
rially embodied in a list of chemical molecules, however
complex. They remain persuaded that life cannot be
explained on the basis of physical-chemical phenomena
KALINGA PRIZE TO SPACE-AGE WRITER
16
THE selection of Mr. Arthur C. Clarke,
a British science and science fiction
writer as winner of this year's Kalin¬
ga Prize means that this annual intern¬
ational award for the popularization of
science has honoured for the first time
an interpreter of the space age.
Mr. Clarke is a former chairman of
the British Interplanetary Society and is
now President of the Ceylon Astronom¬
ical Association. Interplanetary flights,
spaceships and expeditions into the
cosmos are among the subjects of his
twenty-eight books, both fiction and non-
fiction, which have sold two million
copies in fifteen languages.
The Kalinga Prize of 1,000 pounds
sterling is awarded by an international
jury appointed by Unesco. It is a per¬
sonal donation of Mr. Bijoyanand Patnaik,
an Indian industrialist, who is Chief
Minister of the State of Orissa and a
director of the Kalinga Foundation, nam¬
ed after the empire ruled by the peace-
loving Asoka in India twenty-two
centuries ago.
The jury which awarded this year's
Kalinga Prize was composed of Profes¬
sor I.I. Artobolevski of the Academy of
Arthur C. Clarke
Sciences
Giuseppe
Genetics
Dr. M. S
of the U.S.S.R., Professor
Montalenti of the Institute of
of Rome University, and
Randhawa, adviser on natural
resources and scientific research to the
Planning Commission of India.
Previous winners of the prize since its
foundation in 1951 have been: Louis de
Broglie (France), Julian Huxley (United
Kingdom), Waldemar Kaempffert (United
States), Augusto Pi Suner (Venezuela),
George Gamow (United States), Bertrand
Russell (United Kingdom), Karl von
Frisch (Germany and Austria), Jean Ros¬
tand (France) and Ritchie Calder (U.K.).
The tenth Kalinga prizewinner,
Mr. Clarke has, in addition to his interest
in space questions, also delved into and
written about another great unknown
the ocean depths. He has done much
underwater exploration and photography
along the Great Barrier Reef of Australia
and the coast of Ceylon.
Aged 44, he now lives in Ceylon and
was nominated as a candidate for the
Kalinga Prize by the Ceylon Association
for the Advancement of Science. Among
the books he has published are "Inter¬
planetary Flight", "The Exploration of
Space", "Voice Across the Sea", "The
Challenge of the Spaceship", "The First
Five Fathoms", "The Challenge of the
Sea", "The Other Side of the Sky" and
"A Fall of Moondust". A special study,
"The Challenge of the Spaceship",
appeared in The Unesco Courier in
November 1957.

¿m *	«*
.« . ,y * *.
iljiÜiiii
.
^.
«
>\* ". * t' .*.'.'. y '
i Three Lions, New York Scientific research sometimes calls for simple apparatus ranging from balls and toys to bubble
blowers. Because soap bubbles tend to join and balance like atoms grouping themselves Into
orderly structures, they can be used, as here, to duplicate actual atomic crystal structures of which
all metals are composed. Research scientists can thus "see" and Investigate on a vastly larger scale
the patterns and defect structures formed by atoms In nature. (In the case of actual crystal struc¬
ture, spaces between atoms would be approximately six million times smaller than shown here).
and that a totally different type of entity, often termed
a "vital" force, must be invoked. They will not be con¬
vinced until a chemical synthesis of the first artificial
living organism has been achieved, even if it be no more
than a virus.
In such cases, the popularizer cannot hope for anything
more than to transmit a clear understanding of the prob¬
lem, an exact definition of what must be accepted if the
scientific adventure is to be followed further. We can,
of course, also make this adventure so attractive that the
lure of the quest becomes stronger than the traditional
attachments. It is here, incidentally, that the fantasies
of "science fiction" might have their most valuable effect.
If the difficulties are so great, just what can the scien¬
tific writer do? Let us make use of a comparison. Every¬
one knows that the actions of any specialized group,
when seen from a distance, remain Incomprehensible
even to the attentive observer. The crew of a sailing ship
or the workmen on a building site or mountain climbers
on a rockface all behave in a seemingly bewildering
manner: they stand about doing nothing, for no apparent
reason; they hurry to and fro, gesticulate, concentrate
themselves on the effort, again without any apparent
reason. Their behaviour can only be understood if they
are observed from close at hand and even then some
technical explanations will be needed.
It is the same when scientists and specialists are at
work: they toil away, they give up, they exult and broad
cast their triumph in their publications. But we under¬
stand nothing of It, It ls all too far off. The popularizer
offers u.s an admirable telescope with which we can peer
Into the very place where the work ls going on. He pro¬
vides us with a hearing aid by means oí which we can
hear the replies to the questions we put; he gives us
the explanations which become necessary as we proceed
with our exploration.
Nevertheless, he will not turn us into mountain climbers
or sailors. For that, we should have to live on the ship
or cling to the rocks, with every movement having a
definite and often vital inner meaning. The reader comes
to share the research worker's outlook and, having under¬
stood him, will be interested in his task and will be
ready to help him as far as possible. He may even become
enthusiastic about this science whose spiritual value he
can at last appreciate, whereas before he knew nothing
of it but its material Implications. If he ls still young
enough, he may be tempted actually to bridge the gulf
which the popularizer has enabled him to cross in his
mind, and become a research worker himself. What better
justification could one wish for the scientific writer?
Men of the highest distinction, sometimes even famous
scientists, have devoted themselves to this task of
popularizing science which is at once so difficult and so
enthralling. They have not hesitated to give much of
their time and thought to the exposition of scientific
knowledge in its most accessible form and without
diminishing its value.
17
