BUILDING A FUTURE
FOR YOUNG ARAB REFUGEES
by Richard Greenough
H owever it Is examined, In human, political or
simply numerical terms, the problem of
the 1,180,000 Arab refugees living In Jordan, Leba¬
non, Syria and the Gaza Strip seems as far away as
ever from solution. In fact, those closely associated with
the problem admit that It has, year by year, taken on a
more stubborn and a more chronic nature In terms of any
ultimate solution. The situation remains explosive,
charged with highly inflammable emotion.
But having said this, It is agreeable to be able to report
that a determined and constructive start has now been
successfully made by means of vocational training, towards
equipping some of the young men and women with skills
which will enable them to lead useful and productive lives.
An encouraging aspect of this work ls that it ls being
greeted with Interest and enthusiasm, especially among
the younger refugees, and that the Arab host governments
are also, in general, supporting the projects with facilities
for land, local services and funds from the more than
$5 million a year they are allocating for overall assistance
including UNRWA.
Since 1950 UNRWAthe United Nations Relief and
Works Agency has been providing food, shelter, health,
welfare and educational services for the Palestine refu¬
gees. Education which now reaches a total of more than
200,000 children in 398 of UNRWA's elementary, prepara¬
tory and secondary schools, situated mostly in the 57
camps where 40% of the refugees live, or in government
schools subsidized by UNRWA, and taught by some 4,000
teachers, is being carried out with Unesco providing tech¬
nical responsibility.
UNRWA
HOMEWARD BOUND from school, these Arab girls
are some of the 3,000 children being educated In
UNRWA-Unesco schools now operating within the
Aqabat Jaber Camp outside Jericho in the Jordan Valley.
E'xisting education services are being Improved
land expanded wherever possible by more and
better trained teachers, by more classrooms to avoid
double-shift schools, and by new streamlined teaching
methods. Refugee children are, in principle, guaranteed
nine years at elementary and preparatory schools with
opportunities for three more years at secondary school.
But over and above this, great new emphasis has now
been placed on long-range plans for vocational and
teacher training centres. These plans, to produce any
real impact and to achieve the expected snowballing
effect, are predicated on and must continue far beyond
the present UNRWA mandate due to end In June 1963.
UNRWA also regards this vocational training as more than
just training for an occupation but as an alternative form
of secondary education much more suited to the great
majority of young refugees than the normal academic
secondary course.
Specifically and thanks largely to $4.5 million subscribed
during World Refugee Year (1959-1960), a three-year, $8
million programme ls well under way which will:
(a) Expand vocational and teacher training among the
Arab refugees to a point where UNRWA can turn out
2,000, possibly 2,500, graduates a year compared with 300
in 1960.
(b) Increase the number of scholarships awarded
annually to students In Middle East universities from 90
to 180.
(c) Improve the agency's basic elementary and
secondary education programmes partly as a means of
supporting the two previous steps and of properly relating
this to the educational trends of the host countries.
(d) Continue a modest loan-grant programme of
helping qualified refugees put their acquired skills to
productive uses In enterprises of their own.
This $8 million ls part of a S16 million Increase over the
regular annual UNRWA income of some $34 million
voluntarily subscribed by 41 countries. 05
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ARAB REFUGEES (Cont'd)
MANY SKILLS & TRADES are taught to young
Arab refugees in the string of vocational training
centres set up in four Middle East countries by
UNRWA in co-operation with Unesco. Above,
a trainee reaches for an electric arc-welder in the
Kalandia Centre where more than 20 trades
are taught. Left, typing practice for some of
the students attending the commercial course.
for 22 trades & professions
26
However, all this should be considered against the grey
background of the fact that the refugee population
Increases by about 30,000 a year 30,000 more children
become adult, their places being taken by 30,000 to 35,000
new babies each year.
The whole Arab refugee problem has thus, with time,
shifted to the younger adults as more children grow to
maturity each year. Today of the 1,180,000 refugees,
approximately half are children under 18, half adults. Of
the nearly 600,000 adults depending on UNRWA, three out
of five have reached adulthood as refugees. The problem
is also compounded by the fact that maturing refugees
have hitherto been given so little chance adequately to
develop their latent productive talents that this deficiency
Is, in itself, a major contributing cause to the continuous
Increase in the number dependent on UNRWA. The
tragedy of this situation is not accurately reflected in
this rate of increase, but must be evaluated in terms of
Idle hours, vanished hopes, wasted talents, thwarted lives.
But UNRWA feels the picture is not hopeless. The
talents of these maturing young men and women can be
salvaged and put to constructive use.
In the words of Dr. John H. Davis, of the U.S.,
Commissioner General of UNRWA: "The three-year pro¬
gramme of UNRWA is not intended to be a solution of the
Palestine refugee problem. Rather it is based on the
humanitarian premise that young refugees should be, and
must be, given an opportunity to put to useful purpose
the basic talents with which they have been richly
endowed... It is important to bear in mind that specializ¬
ed training, In and of Itself, in no way prejudices the
ultimate solution of the refugee problem, in that young
persons reaching maturity will need specialized skills
regardless of where they may ultimately live." In other
words, try to ease a situation where the bottleneck of
refugees anxious to go out and make their way in the
world is forever growing tighter while the bottle of refu¬
gees grows bigger.
So UNRWA, with co-operation from Unesco in the form
of 24 international education experts drawn from 12
countries to help and train the Arab instructors at the
centres, has now established a string of vocational and
teacher training centres through the four Middle East
countries. UNRWA has its own team also of 28' interna¬
tional education experts at these centres.
Nine centres are now working. A training capacity of
nearly 4,000 young men and women 633 of them girls
is aimed at by next academic year, with an annual
graduation from then on of 2,000 to 2,500 students. Of
these some 1,700 will be for special vocations, the rest will
become teachers. All trainees are selected from among
those refugees entitled to draw rations on the form of
food supplies of a basic subsistence rate of 1,500 calories
a day in summer, 1,600 in winter. Of the 1,180,000
registered refugees, about 870,000 are entitled to these
rations, and of the balance who are not so entitled
because they earn a self-supporting wage, all but a very
few are nevertheless entitled to medical, welfare and
other UNRWA services.
In this part of the world where the Bible is
the ordinary man's Baedeker, the sites of
these nine centres are almost as rich in historical asso¬
ciation as some of the refugee camps, which can be found
in Jerusalem itself, Bethlehem, Hebron, Nablus, Jericho,
Damascus, Aleppo, Baalbek, Tyre, Sidon and Gaza.
The nine centres are situated: one in Lebanon, at Siblin
near Sidon; two in Syria, at Homs towards the north and
on the outskirts of Damascus; two in the Gaza Strip, at
Gaza itself and at Beit Hanoun; four in Jordan, one in

UNRWA Photos
NURSING STUDENT studies microscope slides at a refugee training centre. A prc-nurslng
course has also been introduced for 1 6-year-old girls who, If they do not choose to take up
regular nursing, may instead specialize in child care, midwifery or public health services.
Wadi Seer on the high ground above the capital, Amman,
one at Kalandia and two at Ramallah, both places a little
way out of Jerusalem on the old Roman road to Nazareth.
At Ramallah are the men's teacher training college and
also, opened September 1962, a combined teacher training
and vocational centre for girls, the latter a pioneer of
Its kind in the Middle East. It will ultimately have a
capacity of 633 and is housed in fine, hewn stone buildings
In 20 acres of hillside given by the Ramallah municipality
for a nominal rent of I Dinar ($2,80) a year, complete
with 1,050-old olive trees.
Twenty-two trade and professional courses, mostly two
years, some one, are offered the men. They include
carpentry, building, surveying, radio/TV, auto, electrical
and general engineering, sheet metal work, welding,
telecommunications, accountancy and commercial courses.
The favourite courses, nearly always oversubscribed by
three requests for every vacancy, are radio/TV and auto
mechanics.
The selection of courses is based on the best informa¬
tion presently available to the agency with respect to
employment prospects in the area. They are planned on
a flexible basis so they may be modified as more adequate
information becomes available. A word on this matter
of job placement later.
Six types of courses are offered to the women. Typing,
shorthand, secretarial work, known as "office arts" to
avoid any suggestion of direct competition with the men's
commercial courses; home and Institutional management;
infant leader courses for day nurseries and the like;
various types of dress design and dressmaking, known
rather unglamorously as clothing construction; pre¬
mising; and hafrdressing, manicure and pedicure.
The last presents special problems In the Arab world
according to Miss Marie Geldens, of Holland, chief Unesco
expert in vocational training for girls. Ilalrdresslng
training must be aimed at first chiefly for home atten¬
dance as the western Idea of women going to hairdrcsslng
salons has only been adopted In very few places In the
Arab world. "But the habit ls slowly growing and more
salons will open up," said Miss Geldens.
Nursing as a career for women ls still rather looked
down upon In the Arab world and women who have
regularly tended men patients In hospitals find their stock
quoted low in the marriage market. As a result this prc-
nurslng course has been Introduced to Interest girls
while they arc still young, 16 or so, as the top age limit
for entry Into the centre ls 19, In the hope that If they
don't choose to take up regular nursing, they may specia¬
lize In children's nursing, midwifery, public health or
become doctors' secretaries.
As with the men's courses, there has been no lack of
applicants for the girls' centres at Ramallah. For the
300 vacancies this current year In both teacher and voca¬
tional training, there were over 600 applications.
One heartening factor In the UNRWA-Unesco
education and training programmes is the
growing number of Arab girls In school at all levels, and,
more Important, those who remain In school now Instead
of dropping out as so often In the past for work at home,
in the fields or an early marriage. The attraction of
vocational training that this UNRWA-Unesco centre at
Ramallah has pioneered In the Middle East ls gaining
ground especially now that the entry of women into
teaching has become an accepted fact In the Arab world.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

ARAB REFUGEES (Cont'd)
For a more prosperous Middle East
As to the finances of this three-year programme and for
the future of the vocational and teacher training pro¬
grammes, most of the new centres and the expansion of
existing ones were financed through the $4.5 million
gathered during World Refugee Year, over 80% of It sub¬
scribed by three countries, the USA, Canada and the
United Kingdom, plus extra donations from the govern¬
ments of Kuwait and Morocco. Cost per trainee is
$500 per 11 months academic year.
To train the 2,000 students will cost $2 million during
1962 and 1963. Encouraged by the results of World
Refugee Year, UNRWA's chief, Dr. Davis decided to appeal
to voluntary organizations, private persons and in some
cases to governments, to "adopt" these refugees by
buying scholarships for them to attend the centres at the
rate of $500 per head per year.
The result has been encouraging. Funds have come
from such divergent sources as the United Steelworkers
of America and the Finnish Girl Guides ; from a commu¬
nity of North American Indians living in Canada and a
group of voluntary organizations in- New Zealand; from
the Arabian American Oil Company (ARAMCO) and U.N.
staff associations; from Swiss cheesemakers and the
Oxford Committee for Famine Relief.
Obtaining a job after finishing the courses is a crux of
the whole training programme. Placing teachers presents
few problems. Besides going Into the Agency's refugee
schools where there is always a need for more and better
equipped teachers, there is now a steady demand for
trained teachers throughout the Arab world and recently,
the total output of nearly 500 teachers trained over a
period In UNRWA-Unesco colleges, was absorbed not only
in the refugee schools but In Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Qatar
and Libya.
With regards to the graduates from the voca¬
tional centres, where hitherto only a maxi¬
mum of 300 a year have so far had to find, and have found
jobs, UNRWA believes that the Increased output can be
absorbed Into a Middle East which is now undergoing
rapid technological development. The real test of this
will come, of course, when the first 2,000 or so come on
the labour market next year.
From surveys made by UNRWA placement services,
there seems reason to be optimistic. In the various host
countries, those in charge of national development pro¬
jects as well as private industry have apparently expressed
readiness to take on trained refugees In addition to their
own native citizens.
In Syria, for example, Mahmoud Hamad, director of the
Damascus centre which will have a capacity of 392
trainees, said that Syria's own new oil industry would
need a growing number of trained people. Electrical
foundations, telephone and water companies were busy
extending services to rural areas and also needed skilled
people. One company, he said, was ready to take on
80 plumbers for building projects as soon as they could
be provided.
In Jordan, Wadi G. DIdes, principal of Wadi Seer (capa¬
city 404 trainees), said that the Jordanian government
was ready to take all his graduates in the telecommuni¬
cations field and that civil aviation companies expanding
activities through the Middle East, were also asking for
more telecommunications experts as well as skilled radio
men and electricians.
28 At the Gaza centre (capacity 369 trainees), the director,
Abdel Kaher Nagl, said that last year all his 126 graduates
were taken on by the United Arab Republic, and he hoped
for the same result, in all branches of trades taught, this
year. In Lebanon, in the Gaza Strip and the UAR with
which Gaza is associated, the situation is a little more
complicated. Refugees, from Gaza are allowed to work
In the UAR provided they have definite jobs offered; they
cannot enter the country looking for work. However,
recently the UAR has started opening up large numbers
of places for the graduates from the training centre, for
further industrial training. In Lebanon, though refugees
do not have the rights of Lebanese citizenship, work is
available.
It is likely that a good proportion of the graduates will
have to cross international boundaries to obtain work, as
has been the case in the past with the smaller number
of graduates turned out by centres. The obvious spots
are other Arab countries with a developing economy, or
with oil wells.
R¡ecently, Mr. Ahmad Tuqan, of Jordan, a
«.seasoned Unesco expert in general education,
toured a number of the Arab countries, particularly
those in the Persian Gulf, and returned with enthusiastic
reports that there was still a thirsty labour market for
nearly all trades, and one which looked like continuing
for a while. He cited specially, the Sheikhdom of Abou
Dhabi, one of the Trucial States, until recently a small
community of some 15,000 people, but where oil has been
lately discovered in such abundance that output may
eventually rival that of Kuwait, and annual income
should reach something like $150 million in a year or so.
Moreover, the Sheikh Shakhbout plans to use much of
his new income in social and economic development for
his people. There will be room for many teachers and
builders, home economic experts and hairdressers, as well
as for pipe-line welders, accountants and auto mechanics.
By making the learning of English compulsory at the
vocational centres, trainees are also being better equipped
for work both inside and outside the Arab world.
It would be idle, and wrong, to assume that by launch¬
ing this ambitious vocational and teacher training pro¬
gramme, which can in any case only cater for a small
percentage of refugees at the present time, though there
is always hope and provision for expansion, UNRWA
seeks to find a solution to the problem of the Palestine
refugees. That is not UNRWA's job anyway. The refugees,
many of them, still cry out after 14 years, to be allowed
to return to their homes, a step which, though many
today feel to be no longer very practical, is nevertheless
acknowledged in U.N. resolutions within the fiamework
of a general settlement. Alternatively, they demand
compensation.
The U.N. Conciliation Commission for Pales¬
tine is still actively at work, and early last
summer combined renewed energy with muted hopes for
a possible compromise plan, though political tension has
perhaps run too high for anything much to be achieved.
All that can be said in the meantime, however, is that
UNRWA and Unesco are seeking every means to restore
to the refugees some economic independence, while at the
same time educating their children and training theñ-
youth so that, whatever the future may bring, the new
generation will not grow up in conditions of stagnation,
and will have a chance to play its part in the develop¬
ment of the Middle East.
