WINGED PLAGUE Like huge snowflakes falling grotesquely onto the parched summer landscape of Morocco, a cloud of
locusts swoops down on the sparse vegetation. In the arid lands movements of this nomad scourge of
the insect world often correspond to the appearance of vegetation after seasonal or sporadic rains.

0 THE THOUSAND FACES
OF THE 'DESERT'
Photo André Sonine © Reporters Associés, Paris
Unesco's Major Project to promote scientific
research on the world's vast arid lands is to be
brought to an end this year after six years of
operation. This period has seen the amazing
growth of national and international activities

for the development of arid lands in which the
training of new arid land scientists and basic
research have received a new impetus. The end
of Unesco's Major Project will not mean the end
of this work. On the contrary, it will now be
carried forward as part of Unesco's regular pro¬
gramme and on an even wider scale than before by
direct action made possible through the Technical
Assistance programme and the United Nations
Special Fund. In a recent Unesco booklet, Pro¬
fessor Gilbert F. White, head of the Department
of Geography of the University of Chicago, has
reviewed the situation of Science and the Future
of Arid Lands, which we strongly recommend to
our readers. (Limited supply available on
request). From this authoritative study the Special
Report on the following pages has been adapted.
Arid and semi-arid regions cover more than a
third of the land surface of the earth, while
cultivated ground represents barely a tenth. For each
acre of cultivated land, there are three or- four acres
which are practically unused -by man because they are
desert or covered with sparse vegetation permitting only
a precarious subsistence economy at best. Yet the world's
population, which now exceeds 2,700 millions is increasing
more and more rapidly, and at the present rate will
double itself in fifty years.
These regions cover an immense diversity of landscapes:
majestic expanses of rolling steppe land in central Asia
and North Africa; dry lake bottoms in central Australia ;
rugged mountain valleys in Baluchistan; nearly flat
deltas at the mouths of the Nile and the Colorado.
Archaeological evidence suggests that the earliest cities
were in the dry valley of Mesopotamia. Possibly the
earliest cultivators and herdsmen were on the dry uplands
or river fringes of south-west Asia. Whatever the precise
early chronology, the arid zone has been occupied by man
since civilization emerged on the earth and it now shows
both rich fruit from his evolving use of its limited
resources and deep scars from his protracted misuse.
In these sectors of the earth's crust men often scan the
skies for a sign of rain, for scanty rainfall is the common
theme and the common problem. Rain is measured in the
depth that falls in an hour or day or year, and often rs
expressed as a mean annual depth in millimetres.
Any land surface in the temperate latitudes with a
mean annual precipitation of less than 250 millimetres is
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Photos Unesco - J. Dominique Lajoux
THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd)
Overnight magic in the wilderness
likely to suffer from shortage of moisture for crop
growth, but gross annual amounts are misleading if taken
alone, and they must be compared with the amounts of
moisture that would be used through evaporation or
transpiration by plants if a true measure of the adequacy
of water supply for plant growth is to be obtained. While
a place such as. Tartous, in Syria, may have a surplus of
moisture in a few winter months, it may have a shortage
throughout the remainder of the year.
The term "desert" is used very loosely by both scientists
and popular writers. The western interior of the United
States of America was dubbed "desert" by the pioneers
but would be considered humid by a Libyan herdsman on
the edge of the Sahara.
In the lands where summer daytime temperatures
commonly are high, vegetation, soil and ground water
also are sparse. Except for generally narrow strings of
tamarix, cottonwoods or similar trees along water courses
there are no dense stands of trees, and over large
expanses the herbaceous and shrubby plants are so thin
as to support only a few goats or a camel on 100 hectares
annually. In a few places there are major accumulations
of fresh ground water but generally these are meagre, in
many instances floating upon waters that are so saline as
to be unpalatable for animals and toxic for plants.
But if the water, soil and vegetation are marked by
sparsity they are also marked by variability both in time
and in place. It is not uncommon for a station in the
Nubian Desert or Negev to go 11 months without a drop
of rain and then to have a cloudburst of twenty inches in
a few hours.
Vegetation knows no orderly time-table here, but
responds in striking fashion to the vagaries of rain. This
is epitomized by the bright, delicate carpet of desert
flowers that may spring overnight from a seared desert
soil following one of the infrequent rains. Much of the
movement of nomads and of the nomad scourge of the
insect world the locust is in response to vegetation
which flourishes for a time in the wake of seasonal or
sporadic rains.
Just as arid lands vary with the years and seasons, they
vary tremendously from place to place. The unbroken
vista of sand dunes with »uniform ridges, soil, vegetation
and water conditions the traditional erg of the Saha¬
ra is in fact relatively rare.
Avast expanse of gently sloping plains in the
western Egyptian arid zone gives at first
glance a deceptive impression of uniformity. On closer
examination it is found to have a complex set of soils and
plants. The spottiness becomes greater to the east when
areas with greater differences in rock formation and relief
are investigated, as with the wadi systems that drain the
Sinai Peninsula and embrace a wide variety of land forms
and plant communities.
Tenacious human beings have established pockets of
settlement in these lands, leaving vast areas unoccupied.
From the standpoint of human occupation, scarcity,
variability and spottiness again are prominent charac¬
teristics. Arid lands encompass several of the' great
uninhabited wastes of the worldthe Sahara ergs, the
Atacama desert of the Chile coast, the Salt Desert of
Iran, and the Takla Makan of Central Asia.

SUNKEN OASIS. A few years ago an oasis cast Its green shade near Fort Flatters in the Sahara.
Today it has been swallowed up by the creeping sands and only the tops of three palm trees (left)
mark Its grave. Nearby is a lunar-like landscape (above) created by strange formations of vegetal
origin which formerly clung to the roots of trees, now dead and today petrified by time and weather.
These typically are crossed by caravan tracks and air
routes which connect settlements within and on their
borders. There and on the semi-arid borders are four
major classes of settlement. Perhaps most characteristic
are the pastoral nomadic groups which range across and
in the arid areas of the Old World in search of grass and
water but whose fortunes always are linked by trade or
tribute with sedentary areas.
Intensive farming is the rule in the Nile, Tigris-
Euphrates, Indus, Amu-Darya and Colorado valleys, as
well as in isolated areas like the Ouargla Oasis in Algeria
or the Imperial Valley of California and Fayum Depres¬
sion of Egypt, and it is in these areas that the greater
number of the people of the arid lands is crowded.
In some places linked with these agricultural areas and
in other places quite independent of them are fast
mushrooming cities like Cairo which have long been
capitals and in many instances owe their existence to
religious, mining, government, or trade functions which
are largely independent of the agricultural hinterland.
Thus Mecca and Jerusalem are holy cities, Karachi
and Teheran have taken on importance as centres of new
political administration, Kuwait and Abadan are centres
for oil exploitation. Quetta and San Diego are military
bases, and Phoenix and Yuma serve a relatively recent
invasion of urban dwellers who seek to enjoy the
amenities of sunshine and dry warmth.
In addition to the nomads, oasis farmers and city
dwellers, all of the arid lands have twilight margins of
semi-arid lands that are occupied in varying degrees by
sedentary farmers who try to wrest a living out of the
dry soil in the face of rains sometimes niggardly and
sometimes copious, and whose fortunes are at times as
variable as the rains. These marginal lands occasionally
have been the theatre of large-scale government occupa¬
tion, as in the case of the "virgin lands" programme in
the arid southern fringes of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
In the Americas and Australia the arid lands have been
largely free of pastoral nomadic occupancy although
their irrigated settlement has been one of the early
human chapters, and recently their use has turned on
new forms of urban and mining exploitation of climate
and location. Swimming pools ripple in the outskirts of
Los Angeles on land that once was worthless for forage.
It is highly problematical as to how most of
the arid landscape appeared when the earliest
agricultural settlements were established. Certainly the
plant cover has been changed radically since that time:
Syrian mountain slopes have been largely denuded of
trees, and grasslands have changed dramatically in plant
composition.
The records of abandoned fields and civilizations,
coupled with these instances of landscape change, have
fostered a popular belief that deserts around the world
are advancing. Sometimes these advances are attributed
to human destruction of resources, and sometimes to
climatic change.
The chronology is still confused and indistinct in many 7
periods, but from the patchy data a few conclusions
begin to emerge:
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd)
30 centuries of
man-made destruction
1) With the polar recession of the last of the great
fluctuating ice sheets aridity was widespread in the desert
lands of south west Asia and Africa. There were marked
changes in temperature and precipitation during the long
glacial period, so that lakes filled in areas of both Asia
and America which are now dry, but by the end of the
period, perhaps 15,000 years ago, a general climatic situa¬
tion similar to the present had set in.
2) The prevailing aridity was relieved in Africa and
western Asia during about 5000-3000 B.C. by a time of
greater heat and moisture. It was in this Neolithic
period that the boundaries of the Sahara apparently
contracted and that it had animals, plants and soils now
found far from its margins in savannah country.
3) There have been harrowing, prolonged droughts as
in the terrible drought of A.D. 1276-99 in the south¬
western North American lands and these have been
followed by more humid times.
4) During the last 50 years there has been a slight
tendency toward higher temperatures and lower precipi¬
tation throughout most of the arid zone. This is of the
order of 5 to 10 per cent reductions, a trend which is
small by comparison with annual swings in precipitation.
5) The more dramatic examples of resource destruction
during the past 3,000 years must be traced to man rather
than climate.
We cannot predict with any confidence that the
arid lands will become more or less arid in the
decades immediately ahead. They have been in man's
short history on the earth both drier and wetter. While
aridity as a climatic phenomena is not spreading on a
broad front, human abuse of arid lands still is going lar¬
gely unchecked. The need to halt this deterioration and
at the same time to make better use of the remaining
resources as a means of improving the life of its bur¬
geoning population presents the central problem in the
development of the arid lands.
Behind the problem of social and economic development
of the arid lands lies the more basic problem of
understanding the processes by which resources are being
destroyed and by which they may be used more effectively.
While it is often maintained that the pastoral nomads
make an ideal adjustment to the sparse grasslands of
the Middle East, moving with their flocks to the places of
most abundant forage, their record for treatment of the
grass resource is far from encouraging.
The combination of inflexible land-tenure systems, a
heavy goat population on sub-humid margins, and a
growing human population has promoted grazing prac¬
tices that have not only effected a radical change in the
total plant cover but have selectively eliminated many
productive species and have substantially reduced the
carrying capacity of the ranges.
The upland pastures in the steppe areas of Syria are
reported by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Investigators to be subject to continuing replacement of
forage plants by »non-palatable species. Over great
expanses the useful species have disappeared or nearly so.
Often labelled as Public Enemy Number One or as the
"black locust", the goat continues to roam and scalp the
more humid Middle Eastern grazing lands.
The striking feature of the arid zone cities is their raw,
rapid growth. They are expanding at a high rate,
pushing out into surrounding dry lands, attracting popu¬
lation from agricultural areas, and in turn placing fresh
demands upon those areas for food supply and raw
materials. No cities in the United States of America
have sprawled more quickly over their dry borders than
Los Angeles and Phoenix. Some of this recent increase
reflects the mounting exploitation of petroleum reserves.
Countries like Iraq and Saudi Arabia which have

Daily water minimum in
Arabian desert: 15 litres
undertaken alternative development programmes with oil
revenues may offset some effects of exhaustion.
What seems abundantly clear in connexion with
development efforts is that the needs commonly outstrip
the possibilities of human action and that two of the
principal barriers to effective action are lack of scientific
knowledge and failure to translate available knowledge
into positive action.
The slow process of scientific inquiry and the careful
building of educational institutions must be fostered.
These are the two major channels along which Unesco
has tried to move in improving the condition of people
in the arid lands:
A Berber tribesman and a California politician have in
common the question of whether or not there will be
water enough to go around. Shortage of water is the
unifying problem of the arid lands.
The one great source of water on land is the natural
precipitation. Determining the total supply that preci¬
pitation makes available at one place is complicated both
by the irregularity and spottiness of the records and by
the differing amounts of natural demand. Because the
arid lands are sparsely settled, the number of rain gauges
is smaller than in more humid regions and certain large
expanses such as the Salt Desert of Iran are wholly lack¬
ing in gauges.
In areas like the Negev where a few centimetres may
be highly important in planning new water control works
it is necessary to guess at means and annual variations
from the mean, using records only a few decades in
length at most, and to try to fill in the great gaps in
data by extrapolating from other records and from the
corroborating evidence of geochromology and archaelogy.
Nor is it yet clear how »much water a given field of
plants requires in order to attain optimum growth. There
are no ready ways of measuring them directly. At least
six different methods are in use for estimating required
water consumption, and these differ from each other by
as much as 30 per cent according to assumptions which
it is necessary to make about water and soil processes
that themselves are in doubt.
The design of new storage dams and canals in Lebanon
or in Peru depends upon these estimates of optimum
needs for water. Without them it is difficult to arrive
at appraisals of water-use efficiency.
It is not enough to have water of a given quantity; the
water must be of suitable quality. Water may carry
injurious amounts of either minerals in solution or solids
in suspension. One cost of permanent irrigation is
constant vigilance against salting.
S;rTiLL another hazard in water quality is the
silt load which, carried either in suspension or
as bed load, may clog up reservoirs and ditches. In many
ancient valleys, such as the Tigris-Euphrates, the decline
of early agriculture at certain periods is to be traced in
considerable measure to the failure of society to deal
carefully with the salt and silt menaces.
There is less »doubt about animal and human needs for
water than there is as to plant needs although man
exercises wide discretion in the surpluses with which he
supplies himself. The absolute minimum needed to
maintain life in a normal adult in the most intense heat
of the Arabian Desert is about 15 litres per day, Sanaran
workmen need a minimum of 7.5 litres and often more,
depending upon temperature and type of work. In tem¬
perate climates, daily need is sometimes taken as 3.7 litres.
Animal consumption of water varies with age, heat and
feeding conditions. Many mammals, such as the desert
fox, draw water entirely from their food intake. "
In a strict sense, water can be brought wherever man
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THIRSTY LANDS {Cont'd)
Tomatoes that drink
dew in the night
wishes if he is willing to take the trouble and pay the
cost of carrying out elaborate engineering works or of
effecting other changes in the natural cycle of water.
Increasingly these works are designed to serve multiple
purposes in an entire drainage basin, as in the Rio
Grande Basin in Mexico and the United States of Amer¬
ica, or in the Oom er Rbia In Morocco. Canals, aque¬
ducts, pumps, diversion dams, storage dams are common
devices for changing the place and time of water, but
their application to arid land conditions is severely
limited by factors of design ingenuity, of cost, and of
knowledge.
But there are other means than major engineering for
affecting the time and place of water in dry lands.
Through the spreading of flood run-off on permeable
Intake areas the supply of water flowing into underground
storage may be increased, as in the spreading grounds of
southern California. Plant control may be used in certain
favourable circumstances to increase the flow of water, to
reduce canal wastage, or to reduce the flow of water.
One of the fascinating technical possibilities is that
of reducing losses occasioned by evaporation from water
surfaces. In drainage basins like the Colorado the total
amount of water lost from reservoir surfaces in a year
may exceed the amount put to actual consumptive use in
the same basin. If there were a generally efficient means
of preventing such losses the available supply might be
greatly augmented. Promising experiments in evaporation
reduction are under way with mono-molecular films such
as cetyl alcohol. Practical application on a wide scale
awaits further refinement.
The schematic flow of water in the natural hydrologie
cycle is now seen to be subject to modification at many
points. Some of these changes, such as storage dams
and weather modification, increase the amount of water
effectively available to man.
The impact of man and the intricacies of the
plant-soil complex which he has modified are
nowhere more evident than in places where patches of
arid lands have been protected from goat and plough and
axe. In 1955 seven enclosures protecting a total of 29 hec¬
tares were established in Mauretania with support by
Unesco. Each enclosure gave a different combination of
soil, plant and microclimatic factors. Within one year
striking changes began to take place in the protected
areas. The total amount of vegetation increased.
It is not easy to predict the results of man's various
uses of vegetation and soil because there are so many
points at which knowledge of the basic life processes is
lacking. This is especially true of the processes by which
. plants use water and by which soil nutrients and solutions
are formed.
The selection and breeding of plants for the rigorous
drought situations of the arid lands can only be as
productive as that understanding. Thus, if it is recog¬
nized that a tomato plant can absorb dew from its leaves
at night, the way may be open to finding other plants
with similar capacities or to breeding up those characte¬
ristics in species which would not otherwise prosper in
areas with heavy dew fall.
Likewise, the exact means by which plant nutrients are
released from their mineral complex in the soil and made
available to plant roots through the medium of soil solu¬
tion or carried upwards by capillary action or downwards
by gravity is not well understood. These fundamental
processes of soil formation and plant nutrition are
important to the management of arid soils in several
ways.
If it were known as well how »minerals enter into the soil
water solution and how plants accommodate themselves
10 to different minerals, the prevention, cure, and adjustment
to salinity conditions would be greatly advanced over the
means now available to irrigation farmers.
Ajé 11 ii/ *l J
© STRATEGY OF
The desert is popularly viewed as an
inhospitable environment which repels
animal and man ; actually it supports
large populations in relatively healthy
state. Nowhere do extremes set up
insurmontable barriers to human
beings, whether roving or sedentary.
And as our knowledge of the physiology
of life in arid and semi-arid conditions
becomes greater the possibility of
making life more comfortable and
more productive is also multiplying.

MIMOSA TREE seedlings being planted In the dunes
of the Gaza strip under a United Nations Relief &
Works Agency (UNRWA) desert reclamation project.
1; |w
jt If |#^i
â. n
SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION
I n Egypt the desert which for centuries has
been shunned is now seen as a place of
recreation, and in southern California the arid interior
valleys once roamed only by mining prospectors are being
subdivided for holiday use.
Two of the characteristic urban features in arid lands
are the rough new mining and oil towns which rise out of
bare desert wastes and the ghost town which marks the
site of abandoned mineral operations. The refinery
towers of Abadan, the pipeline pumping stations of Syria,
the uranium mines of the Transvaal, the copper mining
pits of Utah and Chuguicamata, and the well-drilling
rigs of the Algerian Sahara are samples of vigorous new
mineral developments.
What part of the extracted wealth will find its way into
stabilized grasslands or flourishing irrigation projects or
productive towns or in devices to harness solar energy?
It is estimated that at the current state of exploration
approximately 55 percent of all the proven reserves of
petroleum and a substantial part of the potential reserves
are in the arid countries bordering the eastern Mediterra¬
nean and the Persian Gulf. At present rates of produc¬
tion those fields should last many more decades.
The known copper reserves of the world are widely
scattered, but are heavily clustered in a few arid areas,
chiefly Chile, Northern Rhodesia and the western United
States. A few other minerals have high local importance.
Manganese in the Union of South Africa and the Ukraine,
chromite in Southern Rhodesia, phosphate in Morocco
and Tunisia, vanadium in Peru and south-west Africa,
11
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PROBING THE SECRETS OF PUNT LIFE
m
i
%
Av
asa
VA« au»
C«v/
'
Manufacturing processes of plantsthe greatest factories in the worldare "taken
apart" and analyzed in this special agricultural laboratory in the United States. Scien¬
tists have now found that all growing plants contain a chemical which is activated by
red rays found both in daylight and artificial light. Part of the red end of the spectrum
promotes growth while another part encourages flowering. A fuller understanding of
these processes might enable the farmer of the future to benefit from a "light control"
of his crops, staggering the harvest season and making his schedule easier. Above, photo¬
grapher records difference in growth of two plants of same age which received same
amounts of food. Big plant received longer doses of light. Centre, hose lines carry
special nutrient solution to cocklebur plants and (right) bean plant. Everything known
to affect plant growth is strictly controlled and analyzed. Light, temperature, humi¬
dity and nutrients are changed at will. Basic research into the processes by which plants
use water and by which soil nutrients and solutions are formed is an essential part of
search for knowledge with which to make far better use of the world's arid lands.
'
THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd)
Minerals as economic stimulants
zinc in Mexico, and lead in Australia, are examples. In
each case, a large share of the regional income is derived
from exploiting these deposits.
One of the direct effects of new mineral exploitation is
to open up new roads and airlines to previously inacces¬
sible areas. In time these developments will place still
heavier pressures on the remaining local resources of
grass and soil. There is, however, the possibility of so
using the income from the mineral resources as to pro¬
mote more effective use of resources which will be avail¬
able when the petroleum is gone.
During the mid-1950's, seventy per cent of the petro¬
leum revenues in Iraq was set aside for construction by
the development board of new manufacturing plants, fer¬
tilizer plants, transport facilities, and water-control
structures. Similarly, a substantial part of the petroleum
revenues in Iran has been used since the early 1950's to
support resources development, of which the land and
water programme in Quhistan is a major example.
The Quhistan regional development programme in¬
cludes construction of a hydroelectric and irrigation pro¬
ject on the Dez River, a new sugar-cane and sugar-pro-
12 duction scheme, a polyvinyl chloride plastics plant as the
beginning of a petrochemical industry, and a fertilizer
test and demonstration effort.
In a basic sense, the effectiveness of current use of
minerals to support permanent occupance of arid lands
may rest on the wisdom with which research results are
applied in the management of soil and plants and water.
Just as the natural resources of the arid lands are
spotty and variable, so also are the resources of skilled
scientists and experienced teachers to deal with the
underlying problems of research and of education.
Among the newer national units, such as Libya, there
are some with only a handful of trained scientists while
in others, such as the UAR (Egypt), there are long-estab¬
lished universities. Few have the highly organized cen¬
tral research facilities that are found in Australia, or the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or the widespread
networks of agricultural experiment stations and agri¬
cultural extension workers that have spread across the
arid sectors of the United States of America.
In order to gain the quickest practicable flow of research
findings into areas where they are needed it is important
to speed up the conduct of basic and applied research
and to speed its results. No single country may be con¬
sidered to have solved the troublesome problems of water,
soil, vegetation, and sun, and the record indicates that
each must be prepared to draw heavily upon contribu¬
tions from outside its borders if it is to do so in a
reasonable period.

Some of the major centres for research on arid land
problems lie wholly outside of the arid zone. Basic work
on the organic content of arid soils is going forward in
laboratories in Zurich and Paris. Demineralization is the
subject of lively experiments in Japan and Florida.
Water balance studies are centred at a station in the
United States of America. The great Soviet Union soils
institute has its headquarters in Moscow, and the domi¬
nant agricultural research station in the United King¬
dom is outside of London.
At the same time there are vital centres of research in
the midst of arid terrain. Egypt's work on the Nile is a
monument of hydrologie research.
An example of the complex international collaboration
involved in a broad research programme is found in the
current attacks upon problems of salinity. The frontal
attack on the possibilities of converting salt water into
fresh is going forward on several fronts with Unesco
serving as a »clearing house for information among the
far-flung operations.
The problem of salinity recognizes common interests of
Soviet soil chemists, New Zealand animal breeders, Iraqi
archaeologists, and Iranian hydrologists in the hydrolysis
processes of soil formation. This is the view that led the
Iranian Government to sponsor jointly with Unesco at
Teheran in 1958 the first world symposium bringing toge¬
ther these diverse scientific approaches.
There is no precedent for an international operation
which seeks to speed up the research and the information
and education linked with it for a great expanse of terri¬
tory like the arid zone. Certain scientific disciplines have
achieved a fair degree of co-operation across national
boundaries through journals and occasional congresses.
Thus, the botanists bring together workers in plant
ecology at intervals of five years, and the geologists
gather every five years in a different country. The pro¬
ceedings of the International Association of Scientific
Hydrology regularly carry the latest research findings in
that field to its members around the world.
Confronted with the task of speeding up the action in
all these directions an international organization must
choose among many methods of helping. Attacking such
a problem for the first time, Unesco in its arid zone pro¬
gramme gradually charted a strategy that followed three
major lines.
Its most ambitious effort was to accelerate the whole
complex international flow of people and ideas that is
associated with the advancement of research. Secondly,
it sought to improve the training and education from
which scientists and technical workers may be drawn in
future. Finally, in a much more modest way it sought to
select critical and basic research problems deserving the
encouragement of definition and token support.
One issue of strategy which was raised at the inter¬
national level at the very beginning of the Unesco pro- 13
gramme and which lingers to plague every national co¬
operative effort is whether or not a specific research
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THIRSTY LANDS (Cont'd)
Research that will shape the future
14
institution should be named or set up as a centre of arid
zone research.
Unesco decided against a single centre and instead set
up an advisory committee representative of the coun¬
tries involved. This, however, only shifted the issue to
the national level where it continues to provoke debate
and alternative plans.
In addition to the long-established research centres in
other regions, there is now growing up a network of
Institutes within the arid zone. It would be ideal to have
a complete inventory of climate, geology, land forms,
water, soil, vegetation, energy sources and human popu¬
lation for each sector of the arid zone.
A practicable strategy of scientific co-operation must
recognize that the basic surveys, like the research work,
will make a spotted and diverse patchwork which will
rarely cover any one area adequately. The technician
and the scientist must be prepared to improvise and
interpolate, and to draw upon the best that comes from
workers elsewhere.
Within the domain of science are numerous channels
along which research workers and their findings may
move in advancing the limits of knowledge. The dis¬
tinctively international barriers to scientific advances are
the special concern of Unesco, and it tries to reduce them
by strengthening the national scientific agencies and by
helping speed up and extend international action. Its
stock in trade is ideas and people who can use them.
Thus, government committees have been established in
Iran and Pakistan to promote integrated research in
those countries and in each case the stimulus came from
the call to participate in a Unesco effort on a larger scale.
Astmple and 'direct way of speeding up the flow
of new ideas is to bring together represent¬
ative scientists from the chief countries involved to
exchange findings and views. In each case, papers
reviewing the current state of research are prepared in
advance, and then men from as many as two or three
dozen nations are given an opportunity to criticize that
work and report new contributions. Both the review
reports and the symposium papers are then published for
distribution to the many workers who were unable to
attend.
The impact of a scientific symposium of this sort is
widespread. A Tunisian hydrologist learns of new clima¬
tológica! methods which he can apply in designing water
control works at home, and he in turn teaches others the
concrete results of using archaeological studies of ancient
wells and terraces in the planning of new structures.
More common is the interchange between workers
which enables one of them to leap across what otherwise
would have been years of plodding through already disco¬
vered territory. A scientist returning to his laboratory
from one of the international symposia may carry only
a warm sense of fellowship with his workers in other
countries or he may be the means of radically revising
the research programme of his agency.
Universities of good quality cannot be created over¬
night where nomadic herdsmen or caravans make their
camps. However, for nations that are seeking to leap in
a generation over economic development that has taken
300 years in many other societies, a few years time in the
maturing of scientific workers may seem crucial.
It has already been noted that much of the resource
deterioration in the arid zone is in the face of sound
scientific knowledge of possible ways of preventing much
of it; from a technical standpoint many irrigated lands
need not be salted and the pasture lands need not be
eroded.
At least 90 per cent. of the Libyans are illiterate. Of
the more than 2,300,000 people who inhabit Somaliland,
Somalia and other dry lands of the "Horn" of Africa, at
least 1,700,000 are estimated to be pastoral nomads.
To reach these proud, roving people with new ideas or
even to facilitate their grazing operations by forecasts as
to available grass and water in the remote lands which
they prowl, is a formidable task calling for devices not
generally in use. To speak to them either in pictures or
words in a medium which is suitable requires sensitive
perception of their culture and an array of printed and
audiovisual materials that is not now available.
As one way of helping curb the unknowing abuse of
natural resources in the eastern Mediterranean area, a
special effort has been made to prepare simple educa¬
tional materials in the local languages. Kits of books,
pamphlets, posters, pictures and filmstrips have been
developed to give essential ideas about resources and their
more orderly use to children in the 12-14 age-group and
to adults in fundamental education centres.
T:hese kits were first tried for children in the
Arabic-speaking countries of Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon, Morocco, and of the United Arab Republic on
an experimental basis. After some experience, they
were reviewed and work was begun on a final set of
materials which might be used widely in areas with
similar conditions of dryness, plant cover, and grazing
and farming systems.
It is in the realm of FAO technical assistance teams
and co-operative surveys that the outlines of better pas¬
ture management practices begin to take shape, or that
regional attacks on the vexing question of salinity in
irrigated soils are planned.
Man has the tools to produce more from the resources
at hand but lacks the social skills to use those tools.
We may regard the arid lands, and particularly their
sub-humid borders, as a key test of man's ingenuity in
applying his technical tools to keep production ahead of
population growth.
The role played by basic research in setting the limits
for social development in arid lands is nowhere more
apparent than in the struggle to narrow the gap between
scientific knowledge and practical action in resource use.
If there were miraculously to be an abundance of
teachers to work with the Somali grazers and if there
were adequate funds to pay for whatever pamphlets,
radio sets, slide projectors or posters they might wish,
there still would remain the question of what should be
taught.
F;1 UNDAMENTAL investigation by the anthropo¬
logist and geographer thus must precede
sound decisions as to effective ways of using the rich
store of developed technology to advance the basic
cultural aims of these people. No simple transfer of
"know how" will do.
It is remarkable that while there are many descriptions
of nomadic groups relatively little is known of the migra¬
tion routes they take and of the conditions affecting their
shifts and their relations to sedentary peoples. The
whole process by which nomads choose grazing animals
and schedules is obscure. Yet every sound effort to work
out an improvement in methods must take such informa¬
tion into account if it is to succeed.
Clouds of Ignorance cover numerous scientific areas
which, once exposed, could influence man's capacity to
live in and use the arid lands.
The important need is to get on with the primarily basic
research wherever there are competent men to direct it.
No sector of the arid zone has received more concentrated
applications of technology and education than Israel with

USIS
INVADING SANDS REPULSED. Standing on a sea of sand, a Colorado, U.S.A., farmer points
to a sea of flowers and grasses, a terrain which he transformed from barren rangeland and unpro¬
ductive sandhills, into a profitable ranch area. For this land reclamation, natural vegetation was
allowed to grow. Once established, these plants held the soil and furnished shelter for pasture grasses.
its heavy inflow of capital and trained people. Here,
there is a tendency to stress applied science, but there
is also lively concern for basic research.
"What is the rough balance sheet of human gains and
losses in each of the major types of environmental com¬
plex in the arid zone?
On the whole, the grazing lands appear to be deterio¬
rating. Notwithstanding large-scale provision of new
water facilities, the net volume of grassland resources
seems to be on the decline. Where nomadic grazers are
in command there is thus far no highly effective means
of ordering their operations.
Grassland surveys are setting the ground for needed
plans of improvement and management methods are
being perfected.
As the ability to select and breed drought and heat-
resistant strains of plants is increased, and as under¬
standing of the physiology of drought resistance and
endurance in animals is widened, powerful aids in enlarg¬
ing the producing capacity of the grasslands may well
be released. Meanwhile, social research on nomadic life
holds the key to unlocking much of the biological work
already accomplished but bound by custom and organiza¬
tion into compartments outside the daily stream of
resource management.
Among the lands already irrigated it has been shown,
however, that at least three major factors affect the
prospects for continued use:
1) The widest ead problem of salting whose threat to
the permanency of many fertile lands will be removed
only as farming practices improve and as the under¬
standing of soil-water relations is sharpened.
2) The low efficiency of current water use. This also
may be curbed in part by enlightened management and
in part by research which in this case might lead to
closer estimates of crop needs and of means of reducing
water losses through seepage and reservoirs.
3) The increasing competition for water as between
irrigation and industrial, municipal and recreational uses.
Taking these factors into account and balancing them
against the current investments in new irrigation works,
it appears that for the arid zone as a whole there is a
net gain in agricultural productivity and in the stability
of village life as a result of massive irrigation develop¬
ment. The new dams and canals are strengthening the
productive plant.
The most rapid growth in economic productivity in the
arid lands is taking place in the areas of oil and metal
exploitation, and there the typical sights are new piers,
refineries, and smelters.
Essentially, the task of helping make the most of the
sparse and variable arid lands is one of discovery and
dissemination: discovery of the fundamental facts about
social behaviour, water, soils and plants on which refined
technological advances may be grounded; and dissemina¬
tion of the new and practicable knowledge to those who
should use it. Thus, scientific research and education
march shoulder to shoulder, each reinforcing the other.
It is this effort to sharpen and speed up the scientific
and educational processes that has special urgency for
the arid zone while its waters are not yet fully appro¬
priated, while its soils and plants still have some recupe¬
rative capacity, and while its minerals still provide the
stimulation of investment capital.
15
