Their limbs and bodies wasted by starvation, these men
were found prostrate in the streets of Calcutta. Here
they are being cared for by a charitable organization
which has already saved the lives of thousands of people.

FAMINE
THE
GREATEST
SCOURGE
OF HISTORY
T
by Georges Zottola
he world's earliest record of hunger is a stone.
On a stele discovered in a tomb near the First
Cataract of the Nile, a Pharoah of Egypt inscribed in
granite his cry of despair about the "Lean Years" of
famine ravaging his kingdom. Like a warning to
posterity, the stele of famine reads:
"From my throne I grieve over this calamity. During
my reign the Nile has not been in flood for seven years.
Corn is scarce and food is lacking. Men have become
thieves and pillage their neighbours. Those who would
run cannot even walk. Children cry and the young falter
and stagger like old people. Their legs drag or give way
under them. Their spirits are broken. The council
chamber of the nobles is deserted. The food bins are
broken open and empty. It is the end of everything."
Ancient art has bequeathed to us images of hunting and
agriculture, music and dance, but it has rarely given a
face to hunger. No effort was needed to evoke its
features. Down through the ages at the height of terrible 15
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FAMINE (Cont'd)
A haunting picture of death and desolation
epidemics, murderous wars and major disasters it has
always been a close companion to man.
Hunger also haunts the pages of the Bible. Like a
slow-moving, distant wraith it glides implacably across
the pages of Genesis, Exodus and the Book of Kings. The
prophet Joel bewailed its appearance in the wake of
hordes of locusts in these words:
"Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the
husband of her youth... Alas for the day... The seed is
rotten under their clods, the garners are laid desolate
and the barns are broken down... How do the beasts
groan!... Oh Lord, to thee will I cry."
The "daughter of the night," as the Greek poet, Hesiod,
called it, figures in all the great events of Antiquity. In
the year 440 B.C. the Plebians of Rome, crazed by hunger,
threw themselves in multitudes into the Tiber. Ancient
Rome had its Lactaria Columna. At the foot of this
monument, women, recalling the legend ' of the female
wolf which succoured Romulus and Remus, abandoned the
newly-born children they could no longer feed.
The spectral shape of hunger dominates the entire
Middle Ages. It drove Attila and his hordes towards the
south. It went its furtive way throughout the Hundred
Years War. Sometimes, as in 879, 1016 and 1162 A.D. it
held the whole of Europe in its grip. People were driven
to eating earth mixed with a little flour and baked as
a loaf. Animals were bled and men, like vampires,
sucked their blood.
In 1190 during the Crusades, beans were sold one by
one. The story is told of some crusaders at the siege ot
St. Jean d'Acre who paid a denier (a French coin,
originally of silver) for 13 beans. On their return to
camp they discovered that one of the beans had a weevil
in it and rushed back to the food merchant to change it
for a good one.
Thirteen times in the 16th century and eleven times in
the following century, famine gripped France. Writing
to Louis XIV, the great French philosopher, François de
Fenelon, declared: "From one end to the other, France
resembles a huge hospital, desolate and without food."
Hunger was one of the causes of the French Revolution.
In 1788, its baleful countenance was seen in the heart of
Paris itself, a grim omen of the bloodshed to follow.
Recording the ebb and flow and analyzing the ravages
of hunger in France during the second half of the 18th
century, Hippolyte Taine, the 19th-century essayist and
philosopher, notes: "The Bishop of Chartres found that
people were eating grass like sheep, and dying like flies."
Towards the end of the same century, a strange
comparison was drawn between famine and plague by a
pastor of Zurich, J.H. Waser. He concluded that plague
was infinitely preferable to famine.
"The loss of life through plague," he declared, "can be
made good in a matter of ten years or so, but the devasta¬
tions of famine have far more serious consequences...
Those who survive it do not fully recover until years later.
Those who come safely through an epidemic, however, are
INVOCATIONS
TO THE GODS
Since the Neolithic Age. when man turned from
being a nomadic hunter to become a farmer,
wheat, rice and corn have become the basic
foods of the majority of the world's peoples.
Thus, from time immemorial the cycle of winning
these foods from the soil has had religious and
ritualistic associations, reflecting man's hope for
good harvests and his fear of famine. One belief
of ancient Egypt visualized an afterlife in a place
where harvests were always plentiful. One of the
16
© Musis Guimet, Paris
RICE : The Japanese god of rice and of happiness.
Bulloi
WHEAT : Fragment of Egyptian tomb painting.

carefree and in good fettle.. Those who have succumbed
have left them a new place to occupy, as well as inheritan¬
ces, and thus all those who have a mind to get married
can now do so."
The historian, Cornelius Walford, agreed when he
wrote: "The losses in human life caused by hunger are
far greater than all the wars and epidemics put together."
The first deadly blow against hunger was struck by
Western Europe at the start of the 19th century the
century of hope. The discovery and development of
machinery uprooted agriculture from its age-long
lethargy. On the oceans, the majestic but archaic sailing
vessels were displaced by aggressive and bustling
steamships which were to supply the Old Continent with
more foodstuffs than it had ever before possessed.
Floored, but not yet beaten, hunger struck once more,
this time in Ireland in 1846 where it killed one million
people and drove another million to emigrate. Then it
retreated to Eastern Europe and the Far East where, as
if seeking its revenge, it produced its greatest ravages of
all times.
One hundred million Chinese died of hunger in the 19th
century. "No social factor anywhere in the world," noted
Josué de Castro, "has ever made its impact on human
conduct with a more despotic power than the collective
hunger of the lands of the Far East. When a Chinese met
a friend, he no longer said "Good-day to you." His first
words of greeting were: "Have you eaten?"
The 19th century was also the era of India's most
terrible famines. In 1876 alone, hunger wiped out five
million people and in the last years of the century twenty
million Indians fell victim to famine.
Nineteenth-century Russia traversed 40 years of famine.
In 1891, the newspaper, Russkie Viedomosti, reported:
"From morning till evening, hungry people wander from
ancient Japanese gods of happiness was also the
god of cereals, pictured astride sacks of rice.
In pre-Columbian America, the Zapotee Indians
made funerary urns in the form of gods associated
with agriculture and in particular the maize god.
house to house begging for something to eat. But they
return home empty-handed for no one gives anything
away at all."
"Traders went the rounds of villages," reported Hin,
"and taking advantage of the famished people, bought
up anything they could lay their hands on for next to
nothing. Even the bonnets and shawls of old women were
pulled out of the family chests and sold. Women sold
their hair. A good tress was worth two roubles."
The moujiks survived this hecatomb through a form of
"hibernation."
"The peasants practise a kind of artificial winter sleep
which they call Ijoschka. There is no mistaking its
resemblance to the ways of hibernating animals. This
collective sleep can go on for as much as four or five
months and arrangements are made to ensure its dura¬
tion, not just in the case of a few people, but for entire
villages. People simply stay in bed, move as little as
possible, and only do what is absolutely essential. They
only get up to refuel the fire warming the house."
H unger, the issue of natural disasters, did not
disappear with the arrival of the 20th century.
As an offspring of war, it struck in another guise with
even greater fury. Between 1940-1945, from France to
Greece and from Holland to Poland and Russia, it crush¬
ed Europe beneath its heel.
Only the resources of the black market in food saved
millions of French people from conditions like those found
in the "death camps." In Belgium, the marks of hunger
were written in faces and bodies swollen by the oedema of
malnutrition. In the Netherlands, during the terrible"
winter of 1944-1945, so many people died that there was
finally no wood left to make coffins and the bodies had
to be stacked in long rows in the churches. The system
of exterminating Jewish people by starvation during the
last war, as de Castro has emphasized, "caused dozens of
times more deaths than the gas chambers and execution
squads."
The writer, Boris Shub, has drawn up a striking table of
"famine statistics": "In 1941, nearly 50,000 Jews one-
tenth of the population died in the Warsaw Ghetto. By
1942 the death rate of Jews in Vienna was ten times that
of before the War."
But history's most recent great holocaust was not
confined to Europe. In 1942-1943 famine gripped Calcutta
with such intensity that people died by the thousands
and the number of corpses strewn in the streets was so
great that their disposal became a critical problem.
In 1945, the physiological processes of acute malnutri¬
tion were largely unknown. The "daughter of the night"
had always been a subject as taboo as, say, sexual prob¬
lems. The living-corpses of Bergen-Belsen were free, but
still went on dying "because," in the words of a leading
British specialist, the late Sir Jack Drummond, "we had
no idea how to revive these dying victims of hunger."
Gorged with food, and given injection after injection,
the moribund victims simply died twice as quickly. The
most effective antidote against malnutrition, it was
quickly found, is skim milk given in small quantities.
One of the first scientists to study the question of food
in times of famine was Parmentier.
"I know that those who live amid plenty," he wrote
in 1781, "cannot imagine that their fellow citizens are
deprived of the most basic necessities, nor could they
believe that most of the plants which I shall name are
often eaten uncooked."
The "Father of the Potato," as Parmentier has been
called, then listed thirty-four foodstuffs for times of
famine, all of them the roots of wild plants: Aristolochia
rotunda, Astragalus scandens, Cuoumis sylvestris, Arum
dracunculis, etc.
For lack of anything better, people have eaten the roots
named by Parmentier and also clover, ferns, acorns, nettle
leaves, and the sweepings of grinding mills. Clover, in
17
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
© Musée de l'Homme, Paris
MAIZE : A Zapotee funerary urn from Mexico.

FAMINE (Cont'd)
Driven to eating
straw and wood
particular, has saved many millions of starving people.
A Polish botanist, Doctor A. Maurizio, has published a
learned work on famine foods of the past. He tells us
that roots and wild plants were not the only "hunger-
breakers" used. People have eaten tree-bark or, more
precisely, a bread made with the bark of pine, elm, birch
and beech.
But eating "bark bread" can be dangerous. A Russian
traveller, J. Beckmann, describing a famine that occurred
in 1769, reported that children became weaker more
quickly than adults on this diet. Yet even adults, after
eating the bread for several days, developed such badly
swollen feet that they could no longer walk. Bark bread
is by no means the most extreme remedy for hunger.
Famine-stricken people have used especially in northern
Europe flour wood and shavings.
Doctor Maurizio explains how it was made. "First wood
was dried in the sun or in an oven. Repeated heating
makes the wood easier to grind and more digestible.
Cooked with yeast added, it produces bread which, it is
said, tastes better than that made with clover." The
trees used for making such wood bread were the maple,
the poplar, the lime, the birch and the elm.
Chopped up and ground straw was also resorted to in
the past. During a famine which occurred in Sweden in
1813 people actually ate the straw from their mattresses.
Dr. Maurizio tells us that "straw flour was mixed with
rye flour and bonemeal." In western Gotland, even dried
cow-dung was reportedly used.
Grim facts like these not only belong to eras long past;
they are also close to our own times. Famine still cleaves
its deadly way amid the great political and social
upheavals of our day, as in India and Pakistan between
1946 and 1948, when the partition of the two countries
caused the biggest migration in history, and nearly 12
million refugees flowed between the two countries. It
struck again during the recent events in the Congo.
Catastrophes of nature, like the great drought from 1951
to 1953 in Brazil's "Polygon of Drought," also continue to
claim innumerable victims.
A History of Hunger would be the greatest book on world
history ever written.
Based on a chapter from "La Faim, La Soif et Les
Hommes" (Hunger, Thirst & Men) by Georges Zottola,
published by Hachette, Paris, 1960.
Ou Maij/rr-os Le par mottuf, eft itf
Tbutrr, a Große- ruifttte mj/, timt f
© Bulloz.
THIN AS RAKES
& FAT AS HOGS
In the 1 6th cent. Pieter Breughel
the Elder pictured with mordant
skill an age-old human injustice
in these engravings of the lean and
hungry and the fat and overfed.

..' : .
HUMILIATIO
"The one thing to which a man can never become
inured is humiliation. Hunger becomes unbearable
when it is linked in men's minds with humiliation. If,
in recent years, hunger has become a dangerously
explosive problem, it is because men who look on it
as a form of humiliation have become ever more
numerous. Thus, the basic question we must ask
ourselves is not why, in the mid-twentieth century,
hunger is now the central problem of our planet, but,
more exactly, why at this time hundreds of millions
of people have come to think of their hunger as an
intolerable humiliation.
TIBOR MENDE
Speaking at the " Rencontres Internationales de Genève ", 1960.
19
