Cinémathèque Française, Paris
ACCENT ON THE EXOTIC. For many years, films on
Africa showed little more than the exotic side of the so-called
Dark Continent. It is only recently that film producers have
begun to look at the more human side of Africa. Above, a
scene from Trader Horn (193 1). Below, Donald Swanson's
Magic Garden (1950), a minor musical masterpiece telling
of the amazing adventures of a Negro youth in Johannesburg.
10

Today a new African cinema is coming into being, which
is adding something new and significant to the cultural
and artistic life of this continent. The importance of
this development was underlined at an international
round-table discussion held last year in Venice on " Afri¬
ca and Contemporary Civilization ". At this gathering
Unesco presented several studies on the cinema in
Africa. The article below is an edited and abridged
version of a study by jean Rouch, in which the
French film producer traces the development of the
cinema in Africa and looks at some of its new trends.
This subject will also be dealt with in future issues.
T;he cinema made its debut in Africa in the
very first years after its invention. A vaude¬
ville magician managed to steal one of the first "theatre-
graph" projectors from the Alhambra Palace theatre in
London in 1896 and used it to introduce motion pictures
into South Africa. It is interesting to note that South
Africa still employs the turn-of-the-century word "Bio¬
scope" to describe a cinema theatre.
In West Africa the first motion picture projections go
back to 1905 when mobile cinemas began showing ani¬
mated cartoons in Dakar and in surrounding villages.
It was also during this period that explorers first began
to use motion picture cameras in the course of their
travels. The French Film Library (Cinémathèque Fran¬
çaise) in Paris possesses several »catalogues by Georges
Meliès which make mention of the first films made in
Africa.
Since this early pioneering period the cinema has
witnessed quite an extensive development in Africa.
Tropical Africa, however, has remained one of the most
under-developed regions as far as film showings are con¬
cerned, and the world's most retarded continent in the
field of film production.
While Asia and South America have »been making films
for years (in fact Japan, India and Hong Kong are now
the world's three leading feature film producers, ahead
of the U.S.A. which has dropped to fourth place), tropical
Africa has as yet to turn out its first full-length feature
picture. As the French film historian Georges Sadoul
recently wrote: "Sixty-five years after the invention of
the cinema, not one truly African feature-length film has
been produced to my knowledge. By that I mean a film
acted, photographed, written, conceived and edited by
Africans and filmed in an African language."
Now, at a time when a true African cinema Is
about to be born, I think it is worthwhile to
take stock of what has been done, what is now being done
in Africa and to examine the new trends of African
cinema.
The first films shot in Africa were frankly "exotic."
They showed the strangeness of the continent, viewed as
a land of "savages" and "cannibals." The African was
portrayed as a wild creature whose behaviour was in¬
tended to provoke laughter when it did not border on the
pathological. With the end of the first World War came
the stereotype of the childish, good-natured native.
The first noteworthy film about tropical Africa was
probably Croisière Noire (Negro Cruise), made by the
Frenchman Léon Poirier during the first motor-car trip
across Africa from north to south in 1924-25.
The basic theme of the film was the epic automobile
adventure, but parallel with that it showed the most
representative aspects of the people encountered en route.
Though the team was pressed by time the film men
proved their ability both in choosing and seeing their
subjects. The scenes they shot are now dated but never¬
theless remain priceless documents on Africa and the
history of its cultures.
Cahiers du Cinéma, Pans

THE AWAKENING
AFRICAN CINEMA
by Jean Rouch
There can be no doubt about the sincerity and good
intentions of the authors of this film. And yet two facts
stand out sharply today. The unit simply did not under¬
stand the world they were filming and which they
»glimpsed only scantily. Second, even when they had
more time on their hands during long halts, their
approach was that of the "let-us-look-at-the savages"
type with scenes of platter-lipped women, details of cer¬
tain »circumcision rites, or aspects in the life of pygmies.
Although photographed with a maximum of objectivity
the scenes remained cold, if not ironical. They had none
of the human warmth which we find in the earlier or
contemporary films made by Robert Flaherty such as
Nanook of the North or Moana.
The same can be said of most of the exotic films of the
time when Western cameras were discovering the rest of
the world with Marco Polo-type lenses, or just about. The
situation worsened in later years when we find the camera
portraying Africa as a continent of barbarism and cruelty,
although it must foe admitted that Africa was not the
only region to undergo such treatment. Asia, South
America, Greenland were brought to the screen with
paltry sequences of savage dances, guitar strummers and
primitive hunters.
But this period also gave us Trader Horn which created
a sensation by showing an African devoured alive by a
crocodile (it was never learned whether the scene was
faked or an accident) and especially Sanders of the River
starring Paul Robeson. Sanders of the River was one of
the first good talking pictures to be made on Africa and
was quite a success in tropical Africa.
The late 1920s also saw the appearance of the first true
documentary films about Africa. André Gide had gone
to the Congo in 1926 and had taken with him Marc Alle-
gret who returned to France with Voyage au Congo
(1928). In 1938 the African specialist Marcel Griaule pro¬
duced two anthropological films in the he-art of the con¬
tinent, using sound track with 35 millimetres. Au Pays
Dogon (In the Land of the Dogons) showed the daily life
»and religion of the Dogons. More important was Sous
les masques noirs (Under the Negro Masks) a film relating
the funeral rites and customs of a Bandiagara cliff village
in what is today the Republic of Sudan.
Two years before, Jean d'Esme had filmed La Grande
Caravane in eastern Nigeria which told the story of a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Cahiers du Cinéma
A recent feature fil m on tropical Africa is Jean Rouch's " La Pyramide Humaine " (The Human Pyramid) whose
action is set in a secondary school at Abidjan, capital of the Ivory Coast. Below, a scene being filmed.
11

LIFE AMONG THE PEUHLS. For half
a year the Swiss film-maker Henry
Brandt lived the life of the Bororo Peuhls,
a noble nomad people of the Niger.
Wandering with them and their herds of
cattle across the savannahs, he came
to understand their ways and to love
them. From his sojourn has come a
film of extraordinary beauty and human
warmth, "Nomades du Soleil" (Nomads
of the Sun) and a book of the same title
from which these photographs are taken.
AFRICAN CINEMA (Cont'd)
1950 the great turning point
caravan journey to obtain salt. The same year G. H.
Blanchon produced a short film in Guinea, Coulibaly à
l'Aventure. Though completely ignored, it deals with one
of the most important »problems of West Africa the
migration of young people from the savannahs to the
cities »on the coast. This could have been one of the most
valuable documentaries to come out of Africa if the film
had not been ruined by an exasperating commentary.
It is only after the second World War that we find a
valid African cinema developing both in documentaries
and in feature films (1).
The last war indirectly helped the development of Afri¬
can cinema, for during this period army field services had
to use portable film equipment, thus permitting 16-milli¬
metre film, previously reserved for amateurs, to prove its
worth.
The 16-millimetre movement was born Immediately
after the war and took hold particularly in France.
French youth, emerging from the Occupation, from the
armed forces or the Resistance, was seized with an Irresis¬
tible wanderlust. The Musée de l'Homme, the anthro¬
pological museum of Paris, became a magnet for young
Frenchmen eager to discover the world for themselves
and thirsting for adventure.
Thanks to these young men probably the first real
archives of recorded African music were assembled on
tape and film. It was this more than anything else which
* made it possible to add authentic musical sound tracks to
African films without resorting to outlandish and wholly
inappropriate exotic music.
Certain folack-and-white 35-millimetre films made at
this time, such as Danses Congolaises, Au Pays des
Pygmées, and Pirogues sur l'Ogooué, have remained the
first top-quality images and sound recordings made In
tropical Africa. These films are documentaries but they
constitute exceptional records of the traditional dances of
the Congo, the daily life of the Babinga pygmies, and
canoe transportation on the Ogowé River in Gabon.
The year 1950 marks a turning point in the growth of
African cinema. The films produced in the preceeding
years had shown that the era of the cheap exotic film
of prewar days was ended, and showed that there was a
great need to learn more about Africa if the cinema were
really to be used as a medium for telling spectators of
other cultures about it. From 1950 until today African
cinema has revealed five main tendencies.
1. EXOTIC AFRICA: apart from the Tarzan films, in
which Africa is only a mere pretext for the locale, a
number of producers continue to work the vein of the
"cannibal" and the "dance of the witch doctors." Here,
as in prewar days, Africa is only a stage setting and the
Africans themselves miserable extras.
(1) Note should be taken of a religious film, S"urs Noires
(Negro Nuns), shown in Paris in 1935 and in which the actors
spoke Zulu. In the 1930s German film-makers made a number
of films on Africa as part of the world-wide documentary series
of EFA and Tobis films. From these perhaps came some of the
sequences for Melodies of the World, by Walter Ruttman in
Germany.

PEUHL LOVE SONG
Every maiden casts longing eyes at my herdsman
with his Dangadela ox and Ruadduru cattle.
He has gone off to the salt hole with his herd.
The first bird in the sky to bring me tidings of his
return shall have my joyful thanks.
Dear parents forgive me for being so madly in
love.
If I should be separated from him for long,
1 would be like a woman in mourning; I would let
down my hair;
For the first time the Peuhls will see a woman
baptising her infant with her own hands, so great
her happiness to have borne his child,
I shall call my baby girl Inna Ibba.
On our first outing we shall place her on the ox,
and how proudly I shall lead it by the halter.
Only Inna Ibba shall sit upon the ox. At the salt
hole, when we meet Bogue, herself enamoured of
my beloved, her face will drop.
Though her father may offer him many cattle, she
will not have my beloved.
He cannot be bought. He needs a true Peuhl
woman able to charge a bundle with speed upon
the ox.
Every evening we shall whisper together like two
newlyweds, until the morning star rises on the
horizon.
Photos from the book "Nomades du Soleil" by Henry Brandt,
© La Guilde du Livre and Éditions Clairefontaine, Lausanne.
2. ETHNOGRAPHIC AFRICA: here we find film¬
makers and anthropologists attempting clumsily at
times to portray the most authentic aspects of African
culture. The Influence of the ethnographic film has gone
beyond the domain of scientific research, and has already
greatly modified the approach of a large number of
commercial films made In Africa.
In the field of the pure anthropological film the work
of the Belgian Luc de Heusch deserves special mention.
An anthropologist turned film-maker, de Heusch has
attempted to use -the motion picture as a supplementary
tool in his scientific research. Though unpretentious,. his
films (such as Fêtes chez les Hamba, 1955) are conceived
and executed with great care, and still remain as existing
and authentic records of the cultures of the Congo prior
to the disorders of the Independence period.
By contrast, Henry Brandt of Switzerland Is a film¬
maker who turned to anthropology to make a film in
Africa. In the 1950s Jean Gabus, director of the Ethno¬
graphic Museum at Neuchatel, Switzerland, led an anthro¬
pological mission to the Niger to study,a nomad savannah
people, the Bororo Peuhl herdsmen.
He later sent Brandt to the area where he spent half a
year alone with the herdsmen. Brandt, using 16-millI-
metre, returned with a colour film of extraordinary
beauty and a sound track with musical recordings of
remarkable quality and authenticity. Jean Gabus had
told him that his purpose was not to amass "museum
documents" but to foster understanding and respect of
other men ("faire comprendre et respecter d'autres
hommes." )
His film, entitled Les Nomades du Soleil (Nomads in
the Sun) and completed in 1956, is now considered a
classic, although it has never been shown commercially.
(Commercial distribution is now being arranged and the
film will soon be shown in European cinemas Editor.)
At first these experiments were not very well received
in scientific circles. When an ethnographic film
committee was set up at the Musée de l'Homme to teach
anthropology students cinema techniques certain ethno¬
graphers raised the cry that more attention was being
paid to "picture chasing" than to scientific research.
Despite such protests an important school of ethnogra¬
pher-film makers specializing in Africa has now grown
up and as a result the making of ethnographic films is
being taken very seriously by the professional film world
itself.
In 1951, the professional film maker Jacques Dupont
turned out a really magnificent documentary, La Grande
Case (The Long House) which he shot in Western Came¬
roon, and Pierre-Dominique Gaisseau, another profes¬
sional, went off to Guinea to make a group of films,
including Forêt Sacrée (Sacred Forest), Naloutai and Pays
Bassari (Bassarl Country).
3. CHANGING AFRICA: films which attempt to show
traditional Africa in contact with the modern world and
the problems this raises (anthropologists call this "accult¬
uration." )
Here, the cinema faces the same problems as does ^3
African sociology, principally that of ignorance ignor¬
ance of the traditional cultures which are now undergoing
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ALSO DIE',
say Alain Resnais and Chris
Marker In a new French
documentary. Their highly
debatabletheme: masks and
statues are vanishing from
modern Africa and their
purpose is being lost. Our
museum pieces are thus be¬
coming meaningless relics.
Cinémathèque française
rapid change. This is no small handicap and it Is evident
in many films (mostly of the pro-national documentary
type) where we find the old dying cultures disdained and
ridiculed and little effort being made to understand
them.
The first film on acculturation in Africa was the French
documentary, Coulibaly à l'Aventure, made in 1936, and
already referred to. Fourteen years were to pass before
this subject was to be brought to the screen again. In
1950, a young student at the Institute for Advanced Cine¬
matographic Studies (IDHEC) in Paris, named René Vau-
tier, produced a clandestine film in the Ivory Coast on
the struggles of a new political party then under attack
by the colonial administration. Shot in 16-millimetre
black-and-white with a makeshift sound track, the film,
called Afrique 60, was banned in Africa and France and
has been shown only on film library circuits.
Another banned film was Les Statues Meurent Aussi
(Statues Also Die) made by Alain Resnais and Chris
Marker. It was made up of sequences filmed in European
museums dealing with Africa and supplemented by footage
from film archives on which they did an extraordinary
job of editing.
The theme was that the statues of Negro art in our
museums are denatured because their true meaning is
lost to us, and that the new African art influenced by the
West is completely decadent. (An edited version of this
violent film is scheduled to be released shortly-Editor.)
This was the period when African students at IDHEC
began to make their first films in Europe (they were then
unable to operate In their own countries.) A group consist¬
ing of Paulin Vieyra, Jacques Melokano, Mamadou Sarra
and Jarlstan (the cameraman) produced what is probably
the first film ever made by Africans. Called Afrique sur
Seine (Africa on the Seine) it portrayed the life of African
Negroes in Paris. Unfortunately the editing and sound
track were never finished.
Since 1950 films dealing with the theme of changing
Africa have been produced in practically every country
of tropical Africa. But in most of them (such as Paysan
14 Noir Black Peasant, L'Homme du Niger Man of Niger
or even Sanders of the River) Africa's traditions are
viewed as archaic and unworthy of surviving alongside
Western culture which is almost invariably taken as syno¬
nymous of progress.
But three films, I feel, merit special praise. One of
them Men of Africa, was shot in East Africa, and describes
the rivalry between educated Africans and the more
primitive forest pygmies; Carlos Vllaredobo's C'était le
Premier Chant (The First Song) In which a young French
official tries to better the lot of a bush village community
reduced to proverty by drought and lack of initiative ; and
The Boy of Kumasenu filmed by Sean Graham and the
Ghana Film Unit in 1952. It is the story of a boy fisher¬
man who abandons his lagoon village for the big city only
to come face to face with crime and corruption and
narrowly escapes becoming a delinquent himself.
Two films made by Claude Vermorel In Gabon and
Guinea belong in a class apart. In Les Conquérants soli¬
taires (Solitary Conquerors) and La plus belle des Vies
(Best Way of Life,) Vermorel takes the opposite view on
cultural change showing a European so taken by African
cultures after getting to know them that he adopts their
ways.
The political struggles for independence also inspired a
number of films but very few, I feel, can be considered
worthwhile.
4. THE TRUE AFRICAN CINEMA IN EMBRYO. The
films mentioned thus far were all attempts by foreigners
to bring their own impressions and interpretations of
Africa to the screen. But soon certain film producers
began to feel that this was not enough, that a further
step had to be taken to banish the exotic completely and
to bring cinema audiences into direct contact with the
people of Africa be they traditional or modern. This was
to mark the first stage of the true cinema of Africa yet
to come. And here again the modest ethnographic film
was to play an influential role.
The first film of this kind came to us from South Africa,
where as early as 1948 a South African pastor, the
Reverend Michael Scott, produced a 16-millimetre film,
Civilization on Trial, which showed the reaction of the
Negro himself to racial segregation. A minor masterpiece
was later achieved by Donald Swanson, of Great Britain,
with his Magic Garden which recounts the unbelievable
adventures of a Johannesburg thief. In similar vein is

First films made by African Negroes
Sean Graham's Highlife (renamed Jaguar) which he
filmed in Ghana.
A much graver message that of the very victims of
racialism was soon to come from South Africa when
Lionel Ragosin, of the United States, filmed Come Back
Africa in 1959. It is perhaps justifiable to ask whether
this film is not Ragosin's own cry of despair against Apar¬
theid rather than that of South Africa's Negroes. But
whatever the director's role may have been the fact is
that in his film it is the voice of Africa which speaks and
he is no longer master of what he has unleashed.
For several years I have attempted to work in the same
spirit. When I filmed Les Fils de l'Eau (Sons of the
Water,) a traditional ethnographic picture, I did my best
to avoid the trap of exoticism. Flaherty had shown me
one way of setting up a documentary. As a director he
arranged and built up a series of scenes from real life,
divorcing them from their alien background thus render¬
ing them accessible to audience the world over. But no
one can hope to equal Flaherty's success in making the
Eskimo Nanook, a real friend of people who had never
even seen an Eskimo.
I therefore decided to try another way by letting
Africans speak for themselves and putting on film their
spontaneous comments on their life, their work and their
opinions. In 1954-55 I tried this method with Jaguar,
letting three young Nigerian emigrants tell the story of a
more-or-less Imaginary journey to Ghana. (This film is
still unedited.)
In 1957, I carried out the same experiment in the
Ivory Coast with Moi, un Noir (I am a Negro.) I showed
a poor Abidjan stevedore, a silent film I had made on his
daily life and asked him to improvise a commentary on it.
The result was amazing. The stevedore, Robinson, was so
stimulated at seeing himself on the screen that he
Improvised an extraordinary monologue in which he not
only reconstructed the conversations filmed but comment¬
ed on them and even criticized himself and his friends.
5. AFRICAN CINEMA BY AND FOR AFRICANS.
I think we have now gone as far as we can working along
these lines. No matter what we attempt neither Ragosin
nor Graham nor myself will ever be Africans, and our
films will always be films on Africa made .by foreigners.
I am not implying that there is anything really wrong
with this, and it will certainly not stop us from continuing
to make African films.
But it is time for a Changing of the Guard. In fact it
has already started with the technical training of African
film-producers. Paulin Vieyra, the first African to study
at the Institute for Advanced Cinematographic Studies,
has been teaching in Dakar for the past several years. He
has made a film, slightly clumsy though it may be, called
Un homme, un idéal, une vie (A man, his ideal and life)
about the frustrations of a fisherman from the coast of
Senegal who defied tradition by installing a motor in his
canoe.
The film does not pass judgment on African traditions,
it simply states them, depicts them. And when in one
scene the trees of the forest speak and take part in the
council of the village elders, there is not even a hint of
mockery.
Lack of funds have prevented the film from being
completed, but Vieyra has other plans; he is no longer
alone. To mention only French-speaking Africa, it is to
him and his colleagues, Blaise Senghor, Tlmité Lassari,
Thomas Coulibaly, Jean-Paul N'Gasza and others that we
must look for the films we all so eagerly await.
JEAN ROUCH is Secretary-General of the Committee for
Ethnographic Films at the Musée de l'Homme, Paris and Direc¬
tor of the French Institute for Tropical Africa, Niger.
Tony Saulnier
WRITTEN IN THE SAND. Decorative design is allied to beauty of gesture in this move¬
ment captured by Pierre Gaisseau in " Forêt Sacrée" a film about the Toma people of Guinea.
15
