NEW WORLD STRATEGY
FOR SURPLUS STOCKS
NEWS ITEM: A 100 million dollar
World Food Programme using sur¬
plus food to promote economic and
social development, and conducted
jointly by FAO and the U.N. Is
expected to go into operation by
mid-1962 following final endors¬
ement of the plan by the U.N.
Economic and Social Council in
April of this year.
../
54
THE global picture of millions of
people going hungry in many
countries while the well-fed inhabitants of
others put great surplus stocks into stor¬
age has been described as "the paradox
of a world starving to death knee-deep
in food." The paradox is more apparent
than real, however, for if all surplus stocks
of food were shared out they could no¬
where near meet the needs of all the
food-deficient countries.
The primary answer to the world's food
problem is the development of food pro¬
duction where it is needed. With a few
exceptions the underfed countries have
the basic conditions necessary for produc¬
ing more food. They have fertile land,
manpower, and water to bring up the
crops. Scientific knowledge and advice
are available and are being made increas¬
ingly available. But these are not enough.
More complicated resources must be un¬
locked: dams and irrigation channels must
be built; fertilizer factories and seed farms
must be set up and vaccines produced
to protect livestock against disease.
Schools and colleges must be built and
staffed to produce a new generation of
skilled and scientific agriculturists; roads
and railroads must be developed.
These are the material resources needed.
If the under-privileged countries are to
accumulate these resources by themselves
from the little bit of their production that
they can spare over and above their day-
to-day needs they will be a long time
accumulating them.
The fact is that there Is very little sur¬
plus income to spare for long-term invest¬
ment in most of these countries. Their
choice is between reducing even further
the standards of living of their people in
order to devote a larger part of national
production to long-term development, or
inaction which will perpetuate the present
conditions unless help comes from out¬
side.
Since the war substantial aid has been
coming from the more prosperous nations.
Under a plan begun In 1954, for example,
the U.S.A. has given away or sold on
special terms 10,000 million dollars worth
of food and farm products to 40 countries.
Since 1960 this programme has been en¬
larged in the U.S. "Food for Peace" plan.
Canada and Australia have also been in
the forefront of surplus food distribution
to. countries within the British Common¬
wealth under the Colombo plan. But until
now almost all past surplus disposal pro¬
grammes have been carried out by bilateral
arrangements and not as a world-wide
plan.
In October 1960, the U.N. General
USIS OVERFLOWING grain storage elevator In the U.S. A., which has large
surpluses of agricultural produce. A large-scale distribution of surplus
food through U.N. channels should now help under-privileged countries
Assembly unanimously adopted a resolu¬
tion, proposed by the U.S., asking for a
study of the possibilities of distributing
surplus food through the United Nations
system as a contribution to social and
economic development. As a result, In
June 1961, FAO presented a report to the
U.N. Economic and Social Council for a
plan to "end the days of surplus food
disposal and usher in an era of surplus
food utilization for the social and economic
development of the world at large."
Entitled "Development through Food"
(see bibliography p. 64), the study examined
the potential uses of aid in the form of
food in under-privileged countries; it show¬
ed how surplus food supplies could be
used as capital to help give work to
unemployed men on development projects
such as roads, dams, school buildings and
industrial schemes, the workers being
paid partly in food, or the recipient country
selling the food to its people (thereby
helping to combat inflationary prices) and
using the resulting domestic currency
received to pay wages and other national
development costs. The report also showed
how surplus food could be used to. establish
national food reserves, allow governments
to undertake land reforms without causing
crippling food shortages, and be used in
developing livestock industries by taking
pressure off eroded and over-worked graz¬
ing lands.
Food surpluses could also provide school
lunches and supplement the rations of
workers on special heavy industrial develop¬
ment projects. Finally, food surpluses could
be used for more effective international
emergency relief in cases of disaster.
On the basis of this study, the FAO
governing conference last November
approved the plan for a World Food Pro¬
gramme to be carried out jointly by U.N.
and FAO with headquarters based at FAO
in Rome, and working under the supervision
of a 20-nation Intergovernmental Committee.
This group met in February and drew up
details for the establishment and operation
of a 5100 million three-year World Food
Programme with voluntary contributions
made in food, cash and services.
It was this plan that the Economic and
Social Council approved in April thus giving
the green liaht to the World Food Pro¬
gramme. A special "pledging" conference
is expected to be held later in 1962. But
already the United States has pledged
$40 million worth of food, and Canada
and Denmark have offered 55 million
and $2 million respectively in food and
cash.
The World Food Programme opens a
new international chapter In the problem
of distributing food surpluses to those
regions where there are food shortages
and where they can do the most "economic
and social good."
