TOMORROW'S WEATHER
Will artificial satellites give us the right answers ?
by Daniel JSehrman
Artificial satellites able to measure the sun's
heat beyond the earth's atmospheric inter¬
ference, and electronic computers working in conjunction
with a "mathematical model" of the earth, are among the
means by which science hopes to solve one of the world's
most stubborn mysteries: the climate.
This was brought out by a recent symposium on changes
of climate particularly as they affect arid lands which
drew 100 scientists from thirty-five countries to Rome on
the Invitation of Unesco and the World Meteorological
Organization.
But the mystery is a long way from a solution. While
scientists can tell us the exact position of Mars 500 years
from now, they are still unable to produce absolutely
reliable forecasts about next week's weather. As for the
climate next year or in the next decade, a problem of vital
interest to agriculture, these are impossible to predict.
The symposium certainly refuted a good many explana¬
tions which have been advanced for recent changes in the
weather. Generally speaking, world temperature averages
grew steadily higher from the 1850's to the 1940's, and this
warm spell has opened Arctic ports, enabled Iceland to
16
*
«w.- m

CYCLONES SEEN FROM SPACE. The remarkable photos on these two pages show two cyclones as they
look from a height of 400 miles. They were taken by the U.S. weather satellite "Tiros". Above, cyclone
cloud formation in the Pacific, 800 miles off southern California. Opposite, another cyclone moving some
300 miles north of New Zealand. Both extend over hundreds of miles of the earth's atmosphere. The
"eyes" and spiral cloud bands of tropical cyclones, such as hurricanes and typhoons, have been studied by
means of radar and aircraft photographs, but a picture of a complete typhoon structure as seen from high
levels had never before been taken until "Tiros" snapped the one north of New Zealand. Such photographs
help to explain both fair and foul weather situations, how storms mature and finally dissipate themselves.
grow barley, melted permanent ice in the Scottish High¬
lands and lured a steady run of codfish to the coasts of
Greenland. These warm years, with their economic
implications, have led to a number of theories, notably
one that man is changing the weather by burning fossil
fuels and releasing millions of tons of carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere.
Unfortunately for the theoreticians, this rising tempe¬
rature curve levelled off around 1940 and has now dipped.
Temperature averages have dropped (only half a degree
Fahrenheit, to be sure) in the Arctic and just about every¬
where except for the United States, Western Europe and
the Pacific Coast of Asia.
People who blame colder weather on air pollution or
atomic explosions get no support from climatologlsts.
Changes of climate in the past have been far greater than
any we are witnessing today and they were brought about
without the relatively limited influence of man.
One fact clearly brought out by the Rome symposium
is that, generally speaking, the study of cllmaie is still a
process of hunting for the missing pieces of a puzzle, it
has not yet reached the stage where the puzzle can show
any definite pattern.
A number of scientific disciplines are engaged in collect¬
ing these pieces. Meteorology, oceanography, geography,
hydrology, geology, glaciology, plant ecology, paleobotany 17
and archeology were among the specialized branches
represented in Rome.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TOMORROWS WEATHER (Cont'd)
Is the heat from the sun growing weaker?
The first requirement for a preview of the future is a
clear view of the past. Weather récords have only been
kept systematically for about 150 years a split-second
compared to the geological time over which the great
changes of the earth's climate have occurred. This
explains why many climatologists are studying ancient
chronicles and classical literature for more clues to the
weather of the historical past. A British delegate to the
symposium told how he is now reading through ships'
logs compiled at the end of the 17th century.
Beyond the limits of written records, the archeologist
has a contribution to make. Here, methods of dating
finds by measuring their radio-active carbon content have
proved valuable; this system of dating is also used to
determine the age of fossil tree-ring samples (the tree
rings themselves can indicate wet or dry years).
Fossil pollen is also an important clue to weather. The
symposium in Rome heard a French paleobotanist report
that, on the basis of pollen finds, he estimates the Sahara
desert to have advanced northward 1,500 miles in 4,000
years. The Sahara, now in the driest stage of its arid
history, once supported a Mediterranean type vegetation
and a grazing economy.
This trip through the past takes the climatologist into
geological time. Here, he encounters the Ice Ages which
are the biggest single factor in our weather. As one
leading meteorologist pointed out, we are still living in an
Ice Age. Ice on the earth's surface is not a "normal"
condition. We still have the mountain glaciers and the
polar ice masses which appeared during the Ice Ages.
Only the continental glaciers have disappeared.
Scientists are the first to admit how far they still are
from solving the mystery of climatic changes. Dr. R. C.
Sutcliffe, director of research in the British Meteorological
Office, put it this way: "There is still no basic theory as
to why the climate changes. We are in the same stage
as pre-Newtonian astronomy: we observe phenomena but
we have not worked out laws to explain them."
Electronic computers have a part to play in determining
these laws, if they exist (there are mathematicians who
will tell you that the earth's climate in the recent past
is like a big roulette wheel running on the law of proba¬
bilities!). In the United States, however, computers are
already being used with a mathematical model of the
earth though this "earth" is a uniform land mass without
oceans.
Artificial satellites will be able to settle a controversy
over the influence on the climate of changes in solar radia¬
tion. Whirling high above the atmosphere, the satellites
will decide if the intensity of the sun's heat is actually
changing or if variations recorded on earth are the result
of other factors.
T;hough they seek some of the basic causes of
weather in places as far away as outer space,
climatologists also place great stress on minor fluctua¬
tions which may not seem important statistically but
which can make an enormous economic difference to
agriculture in semi-arid regions.
Dr. Robert O. Whyte, head of FAO's plant production
and protection division, pointed out that farmers in the
2,500 mile African dry belt from Dakar to Khartum
assume a risk of crop failure once every ten years. If
this rate should rise to two or three failures in a decade,
then the face of the region will change.
18

At the final meeting in Rome, Mr. C.C. Wallen, Deputy
Director of the Swedish Meteorological and Hydraulic Ins¬
titute, outlined some of the problems that are to be
tackled by future international research.
"It is true that the clue to the cause of changes in the
earth's climate might be found in studi-es of the heat
balance by itself," he said, "but it must be admitted that
it would be even more interesting to know also how a
certain change in »the heat balance would influence the
general circulation and ultimately the climatic elements.
No doubt the new possibilities with electronic computers
in the statistical treatment of changes in the general
circulation on one side and data obtained from satellites
will play a dominant role in the future development of
studies of causes of climatic changes as related to the
general circulation.
"On several occasions during this symposium, the
significance of climatic changes for vegetation, fauna and
man's activity has been referred to. Most meteorological
scientists dealing with the problem have, of course, no
particular reason to consider this aspect. However, in the
last fifteen years geographers interested in the relation
between man and nature, as weil as international
organizations working for the benefit of mankind, have
shown a growing interest in this side of the problem. As
mentioned, the implications for vegetation, fauna,
agriculture, fishery and sea trade of the "recent climatic
fluctuations" have been enormous."
"In connexion with its arid lands programme,"
Unesco has become Increasingly interested in climatic
fluctuations in arid and semi-arid parts of the world.
Many of those areas, where we are now trying to extend
settlement and agriculture, are considered by many to
have been set out and used for dry-farming or irrigated
in ancient times.' A highly interesting aim of future
development within the field of climatic fluctuations will,
therefore, be an attempt to establish the changes of the
margin of the arid and semi-arid lands which have
occurred in historical and prehistorical times.
"The interrelation between true changes of climate
caused by extra-terrestrial influences or large-scale
fluctuations in the general circulation of the atmosphere,
on the one side, and, on the other, the influence of man
on natural vegetation and soil erosion conditions, which
may seem as caused by a true change in climate, is a basic
problem that we have to face in dealing with all practical
consequences of climate fluctuations in both ancient and
recent times.
"In order to investigate this interrelation, it is first of all
essential to know the present climatic situation and the
way in which natural vegetation, agriculture and climate
are related to each other. The joint Unesco-FAO-WMO
project to study »the agroclimatlc conditions of semi-arid
parts of the Near and Middle East will give a firm basis
to the understanding of the agroclimatlc conditions in
that part of the world.
"I
I feel that this project should be followed up
1 in at least one pilot area within the region
by a contemporary study of the climatic development
and man's influence upon climate by reforestation and
irrigation. This is a long-term project which has to go
on for a considerable time, but It will be the only possi¬
bility of obtaining an idea of the order of magnitude of
the changes caused by man in relation to those caused by
true fluctuations in climate."
In these semi-arid lands man wields an important
influence over microclimates and much further study Is
needed on the effects of deforestation, grazing, and irriga¬
tion. Once conclusions can be reached from such data,
then the meteorologist will be able to Indicate the actual
odds Involved in large-scale land development pro¬
grammes on the fringes of the arid zone. Steps are already
being taken in this direction to designate land for agri¬
culture, grazing or lying fallow on the basis of climato¬
lógica! findings.
19
