GERHART HAUPTMANN
DRAMATIST OF
THE OPPRESSED
by Karl Ruhrberg
GERHART Hauptmann, the German poet and
playwright, was born a hundred years ago. on
November 15, 1802, at Salzbrunn, in Silesia. He died on
June 6, 1946, at ten minutes past three in the afternoon,
in his house at Agnetcndorf (Rlesengcblrgc). The conci¬
liatory attitude shown by the occupying troops to the most
representative dramatist of the defeated country, Imme¬
diately after the war when suspicion, bitterness and
hatred were the order of the day bore consoling witness
to the Indestructible power of the spirit and to the
strength of the love that breathes through every page
and line of Hauptmann's work.
Hauptmann's writings found a response throughout the
world, partly because he vigorously championed the rights
of oppressed peoples. Travelling in Italy at the age of
twenty, he had been profoundly shocked to discover the
wretched condition of the poorer classes, particularly In
Naples. He never forgot his experience, and It was
reflected In his plays, where he gave expression to his
sympathy for the poor and for underdogs In general.
Alfred Kerr, the dramatic critic, who devoted a lifetime
to commenting on Hauptmann's development and ex¬
plaining his Intentions, declared that the basic sentiment
In his writings was longinglonging for a better world,
where all men would be brothers, all class and racial
prejudices forgotten.
That ls the Impression left by his descriptions of misery,
destitution and fear. This was what made him a great
writer. All acsthetlcal considerations and discussions as
to the strictly literary merits of his enormous output
(even the first section of which, omitting fragments,
variants and preliminary drafts fills 17 volumes) are over¬
shadowed by it.
I
) AFP. Paris Gerhart Hauptmann in the grounds of his home at
Agnetendorf, in the Riesengebirge mountains of Silesia.
n March, 1945, Hauptmann, then 82 years, of
. age, returned from Dresden to his house at
Agnetendorf. His Journey coincided with the Allied air¬
raids that reduced the former capital of Saxony to a heap
of rubble, two months before the end of the Second World
War. The advocate of compassion and love among men,
the poet who stood for a secularized Christianity, focused
on the things of this world, was profoundly afflicted by all
the suffering he had been forced to witness. "Anyone
who had lost the power to weep would recover it amid the
ruins of Dresden," he declared, only a few weeks before
Germany's final defeat.
He was deeply distressed by the horrors he had seen, but
his grief was passive and resigned. He made no attempt
to stir up resistance to the powers of darkness that had
brought disaster on the world. "I am nearly 83 years
old" he said, "and I come before God with a prayer
which has no power In It, alas, but It comes from the
heartthe prayer that God may show greater love to men
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

GERHART HAUPTMANN (Cont'd)
Last German 'Prince of Poets'
than hitherto, that he may transform them and enlighten
them for their own salvation."
This submissive attitude was not due merely to
Hauptmann's great age, it was part of his nature. He
was a Socialist, but not a militant one, he believed that
nothing could change the course of destiny. He was no
utoplan reformer, he had no taste for moralizing or
polemics. His plays depicted the grim world of the poor,
the outcast, the oppressed and rejected; but they also
showed that there could be beauty even in ugliness, nobi¬
lity even in cramped and petty circumstances and that
even the most despised members of the community had a
destiny to fulfil. He made no demands, however; his
attitude was one of hope and despite his pessimism of
confidence.
He did not aspire to be a stormer of barricades, and
this helps to explain his reserved attitude while Hitler
was in power, for which he was much criticized. In
spirit he was strongly opposed to National Socialism and
to the brutality of the dictators who showed him reluctant
respect because he was a great national figure; and in
1937 he wrote a requiem entitled "Finsternisse" (Tene-
brae), based on Tolstoy's "Power of Darkness", for his
Jewish friend Max Pinkus. But he made no open resis¬
tance; he preached love and brotherhood, but not rebel¬
lion. So his International reputation as a committed
champion of the proletariat is partly due to a misconcep¬
tion.
This is already made clear in his first play, "Vor
Sonnenaufgang" (Before Sunrise), which was produced in
Berlin in 1889 and caused a scandal by its unvarnished
portrayal of a family of alcoholics. The original title of
this play was "Der Säemann" (The Sower), and as the
word indicates, the Sower was the forerunner of a new
world. His name in the play was Loth, and in some res¬
pects he shows a marked resemblance to Hauptmann
himself. Loth, an enlightened prophet of Socialism,
irrupts into the drab world of profiteers, petty tyrants
and their victims, in a mining district in Upper Silesia,
and falls In love with Helene, a girl who has kept her
simplicity, freshness and purity, in an environment of
corruption, drunkenness and immorality.
Ihe talk between Helene and Loth is one of the
most beautiful love scenes in German dramatic
literature. But Loth is afraid Helene may have inherited
undesirable qualities from her father, who has become
a victim of drink, so he leaves her, and she commits
suicide. This denouement reveals the fundamental weak¬
ness of the central figure and of the play as whole. But
it also illustrates the untenable philosophical attitude
of nineteenth-century Europe and its blind faith in
science in this case taking the form of a conviction
that the theory of heredity is infallible.
Hauptmann was a passive observer, not an accuser,
much less a rebel. In this he differs from the militant
socialist writers, such as Maxim Gorki and Bertolt Brecht.
It is understandable that the first collected edition of his
works should have appeared not In Germany, but In
Russia, where it was published in 1902-1905. This also
shows that Hauptmann's writing's were in fundamental
accord with the spiritual situation of his own day, not
in Germany alone, but throughout the world.
Gerhart Hauptmann became a legend during his own
lifetime (he won the Nobel Prize in 1912), largely owing
to his forceful personality and his physical resemblance
to Germany's greatest poet, Goethe. He revelled in the
role of the last German Prince of Poets, which rather
paradoxically devolved upon him as the champion of the
poor In drama; his personality had a powerful streak of
the actor in it, to which Thomas Mann paid a somewhat
24 equivocal literary tribute by portraying him, with a
mixture of respect and irony, as Mr. Peeperkorn in his
novel "Der Zauberberg" (The Magic Mountain).
Together with Brecht, of whose "epic drama" his "nar¬
rative" plays, with their informal style, were to some
extent the forerunners, Hauptmann was the most pro¬
lific and important German playwright of the century.
His success during his own lifetime far exceeded that of
any other dramatist, even Schiller. For several decades
he dominated the German stage, and even theatres in
other countries still keep his work in their repertory.
His epic writings have attracted comparatively little
attention, though they include some ambitious efforts
such as "Bahnwärter Thiedel" (Thiel the Signalman),
"Der Ketzer von Soana" (The Criminal of Soana), "Der
Narr In Christo Emanuel Quint" (Christ's Fool, Emma¬
nuel Quint), "Till Eulensplegel", "Der grosse Traum"
(The Great Dream) and above all "Griechischer Frühling"
(Grecian Spring). There can be no doubt that Gerhart
Hauptmann reached the loftiest standard of his gene¬
ration; he touched its most responsive chord, and this
alone would fully justify his fame.
S ince the war, little has been heard of him,
either in Germany or abroad. Only a few of
his plays are still acted, and those not very often, and
there is practically no discussion of his work in literary
circles. There are several reasons for this. Hauptmann's
plays are not "literature" in the strict sense of the term.
As a boy he wanted to be a sculptor, and this ambition
left its mark on his writing. He simply changed from one
medium to another, using words instead of stone and
bronze. He wrote in a local idiom (Silesian and Berlin).
The characters in his plays are shown "in the round".
Their facial expressions, movements and gestures, even
their silences, are as important as the words they utter.
They stem from the visual imagination of a man who used
his eyes, who thought in pictures. Hauptmann was not
a philosophical writer, and he was the very reverse of
a rationalist. He wrote in a semi-hypnotic state, sunk
in meditation. To borrow a term from modern psycho¬
analysis, "something" wrote inside him, and much of his
output was enigmatic, sybilllne.
So in his enormous output the sublime is juxtaposed
with the commonplace, enduring values with topical
ephemera, realism with romanticism. Not all his writ¬
ings were carried to the ultimate perfection of form, and
their literary quality ls very unequal. Incompleteness,
unfinished sentences, have their own significance, as in
the conversation of Thomas Mann's Mr. Peeperkorn,
whose words take on meaning from his personality and
whose regal gestures raise his stammering utterances to
the unattainable level of impenetrable cosmic mysteries.
Gerhart Hauptmann's plays only come to life
when they are acted, it rests with the audience
to put the finishing touch to them. The written lines
are not enough. This is one reason why the literary
commentators have hitherto shunned the gigantic figure
of this last of Silesian mystics.
There ls another reason for their avoidance of him,
however, the fact that his work has an unusually wide
stylistic range. It includes all the movements that arose
during his long life, and there were a great many of
them. The plays range from naturalism, with its
attempt to show the world and its inhabitants as they
really are, to neo-romanticism, which won its greatest but
briefest theatrical triumph in "Die Versunkene Glocke"
(The Sunken Bell) ; from social dramas such as "Die
Weber" (The Weavers), which deals with the abortive
uprising of the Silesian weavers in the 1840's doomed
to end in resigned surrender to the four Atrides plays,
with their sombre retelling of an ancient tale of doom,
which make up a belated testament, influenced by the
inhumanity of his own day.

Flammarion, Paris
GERHART HAUPTMANN. HE WAS BORN ON NOVEMBER 15, 1862 AND DIED ON JUNE 6, 1948.
Interspersed with these are pieces like "Der Biberpelz"
(The Beaver Coat), a delightful comedy about a theft in
Berlin; the moving legend of "Hanneles Himmelfahrt"
(Hannele Ascends to Heaven), in which an unreal dream¬
world breaJîs into a poverty-stricken environment; the
tragedy of "Florian Geyer", the chivalrous peasant
leader, which "penetrated to the very heart of German
discord"; the tragedy of the artist, "Michael Kramer":
"Die Ratten" (The Rats), a poignant tragicomedy whose
characters are broken-down artists, proletarians and anti¬
social elements, and which is perhaps Hauptmann's best
play; "Rose Bernd", a tragedy of infanticide, based on the
period of German genius; an original version of the
Hamlet story called "Hamlet In Wittenberg", which vied
with Shakespeare and caused much controversy; and
many other works.
Hauptmann's most poetical play is a fairy-tale, "Und
Pippa Tanzt" (And Pippa Dances), set amid a community
of glass-blowers and in which the eternal powers Eros,
the spirit, and youthfind poetic embodiment In the cha¬
racters of the girl Pippa, the malevolent glassblower
Huhn, Wann, the gentle sage who ls an earthly Incar¬
nation of God, and the travelling journeyman, Michel
Hellrlegal.
Thus, In nearly all Hauptmann's plays, the plot centres
on love. It may be humiliated, scorned and wounded,
but It cannot be destroyed. Hauptmann knows that
people do not love one another enough. "Nobody has had
enough love", moans Rose Bernd, driven to crime and
disaster by other people's cowardice and selfishness; and
August Kell, once her betrothed, speaking "solemnly,
from the depth" utters the closing words of the tragedy:
"Poor girl what she must have suffered!"
A specialist and writer on theatrical questions, Karl 25
Rührberg is a director of the "Deutsche Oper am Rhein"
theatre, at Düsseldorf-Duisberg .
