AN S.O.S.
FROM CABLEMAN
TO FISHERMAN
by C. S. Laivlon
DEEP-SEA TRAWLERS with their sea
bed fishing gear have been responsible for
many cuts in international telephonic commu¬
nications through their trawls fouling ocean
cables. It is not uncommon for a cable repair
ship to find a fleet of as many as 40 large
trawlers at work in the area of ocean-bed
cables. Damage occurs in practically every
month of the year and in depths of well
over 200 fathoms (1,200 feet) of water.
Chauffard © Rapho, Paris
E ven In the earliest days of ocean cables, com¬
mercial fishing constituted a hazard, but radi¬
cal developments have come about in both Industries to
so aggravate the situation that now it is causing grave
concern to the communications companies.
Years ago fishing was carried out with hand lines by
small local groups with limited financial resources and
little, if any, government assistance. However, the popu¬
lar realization of the importance of developing this poten¬
tially vast source of food has brought with it great
emphasis by the governments of the world upon basic
research to Improve fishing methods, and the granting of
financial aid to the fishing industry.
The introduction of bottom trawling in the early 1900's
at once increased the hazard, particularly as (instead of
using two ships to keep the net spread between them)
most trawlermen tow the net from a single vessel,
dragging a pair of Otter boards along the bottom attached
to, but in advance of the outer edges of the mouth of
the net.
The safest bottom for a communications cable ls flat
and even, Irregularities cause suspensions across small
concavities. Because cable is inherently stiff and some¬
times has a tendency after having been uncoiled from a
ship's tank to retain a bit of helical springiness, these
suspensions cannot be avoided entirely by laying cable
without residual tension. As a matter of fact, if the
bottom is sufficiently flat and even, better results some¬
times may be achieved by laying it bartlght.
Naturally, if a cable is not resting on bottom at all
points and a trawl board, its lower edge scraping along
the bottom, is towed across It where the cable is sus¬
pended, the probability of fouling is great. Poor main-
tainance of the Iron shoes which sheath the lower edge of
the boards and the bolts which hold them in place, as
well as the shape of the boards themselves and their
attachments, often are contributory factors, but the chief
causes of fouling reside in the cableman's inability to
make cable conform closely to the contour of the sea
bottom and the fisherman's conviction that the boards
cannot be towed off bottom and still function properly.
The fishermen's stock argument runs: "The fish were
here before the cables", but even this "ain't necessarily
so". Fish have a way of migrating from one area to an¬
other with minor changes in water temperature brought
about by shifting currents which carry their food (plank¬
ton) and by the gradual melting of the polar ice caps.
As an instance of the latter, Cape Cod, Massachusetts,
the waters around which were teeming with codfish when
the Cape was named, supports little commercial cod-
flshlng today whereas this fish Ls plentiful in the waters
around southern Greenland, the inhabitants of which
scarcely knew what a codfish looked like sixty years ago.
The advent of refrigeration at sea and the ability to
ship frozen fish inland have revolutionized the fishing
Industry. The number, size and power of trawlers and
the depths in which they operate, all have increased. It
is not uncommon for a cable repair ship to find a fleet
of twenty to forty large trawlers of several nationalities
milling around In a small area on the continental shelf,
21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ITU. Geneva
OCEAN-BED TRAWL (above) is a broad net whose
mouth is held apart by a pair of Otter boards which
drag along the bottom of the sea. Some of the modern
trawlers and their gear are so powerful that they can
break the strongest communication cables, in some
cases without even being aware of it. Repairs by cable
ships (right) are costly and time-consuming and cause
major traffic diversions In International communications.
S.O.S. FROM CABLEMAN (Cont'd;
Can two freedoms of the seas' be reconciled?
well over a hundred miles from land, wherever bottom
fish are abundant. The season is limited only by the
presence of heavy field ice. Cable damage occurs in
practically every month of the year and in depths to
well over 200 fathoms of water.
There was a time when a cable could be designed for a
reasonable degree of protection by sheathing it with
heavy wire armor. That day has passed. Some of the
modern trawlers and their gear are so powerful that they
can break the strongest communication cables, in some
cases possibly without even being aware of them. These
cables have tensile strengths on the order of twenty tons
or more but under certain conditions it takes less than
the full tensile strength of a cable to break it.
B ecause two of the basic concepts of the free¬
dom of the seas, the freedom to lay cables and
the freedom to fish, are in serious conflict, the problems
at issue must be resolved on an international basis if
substantial Improvement is to follow.
Efforts have been, and are continuing to be made to
re-design the Otter board. The present bottom trawl is
not an efficient tool in that most of the fish in its path
are able to escape and almost one-third of a trawler's
propulsive effort is absorbed by the friction of the boards
scraping along the ocean bottom. Nevertheless, where
fish are plentiful it Is serving its purpose.
In the past those fishes which inhabit depths Inter¬
mediate between the surface and the sea bottom have
been most difficult to catch (except by hand-lines).
Recently, however, the sciences of "mid-water trawling"
has been the object of considerable research by govern¬
ment agencies and a few private inventors. One product
of this research is the buoyant Otter board which can
be controlled so as to operate off bottom.
Theoretically it should be possible to utilize such boards
with bottom trawls, since the boards are positioned some
distance ahead of the net and a slight upward pull of
22 the boards so positioned should not be enough to lift the
heavy weighted foot-rope of the net off bottom. Their
elevation by as little as a fathom or two would cause them
to ride harmlessly over cables while from the fishermen's
standpoint there would be either a substantial saving in
propulsive effort or a substantial increase in speed of
towing (which improves the chances of catching fish).
Where the bottom is consistently penetrable to a depth
of from 7 to 24 ins. and currents are not too strong for a
surface vessel to manoeuvre, cables have been successfully
buried over distances of about 20 miles in the ocean
bottom across a fishing area ranging in depths between
100 and 450 fathoms of water, but this technique is too
limited in application in the present state of the art to
be of much general assistance.
Research is going forward, however, in the extension to
deeper water of methods utilizing a bottom vehicle,
television-controlled and powered from a surface vessel.
The under-water television camera, with Its ability
actually to photograph cables lying in situ and trawl nets
in action gives scientists a new and powerful tool for
probing these mysteries, but how long It will take to bring
about the desired new techniques of cable laying and
fishing is anyone's guess. They certainly are not
imminent.
Efforts have been made to move cables out of heavily-
fished areas. Ten years ago Western Union moved
several of its transatlantic cables northward off the east
coast of Newfoudland on the advice of government
biologists that the cod would never be found there in
sufficient density to support commercial fishing. It was
known that redfish were there but at that time redfish
were not considered too suitable for the market and when
caught most of them either were thrown back or used
for fertilizer.
Fi rom about 1956, however, as cod became less
plentiful east of Newfoundland and other
nationalities sent their trawling fleets across the ocean to
fish, the lowly redfish, under the more attractive name of
ocean perch, became "socially acceptable" and can now
be purchased in frozen form almost anywhere in the
United States. The result has been that the cable diver-

Rapho. Paris
sions which were costly and time-consuming to make,
afforded only a few years of Immunity from damage.
One of the chief complaints of the trawlermen ls that
unless they have 'the positions of the cables they cannot
very well avoid crossing them, but until quite recently
these positions have had to be kept confidential for
security reasons. However, the wide-spread damage since
the last World War has convinced most governments that
the fishermen already have a fair acquaintance with
cable routes so that not much is to be gained through
continued secrecy.
Now that most of the countries concerned have agreed
to eliminate the security restriction it has been possible
to publish charts for distribution to trawlermen covering
fishing areas where there are cables, showing the route of
each cable but without individual identification as to
owner or terminal points; cables not now In use are
clearly marked, however. '
Every available means is being employed to bring this
matter to the attention of trawler owners, government
officials, and the fishermen themselves and to see that
they are kept fully Informed.
Ihe International Convention accord of March
14, 1884, for the Protection of Submarine
Cables, is evidence that broken cables have been an inter¬
national problem of long standing. The twenty-seven
signatories agreed that anyone who hooked a cable must
sacrifice his gear rather than cut the cable. Cable owners
were required to pay for the lost gear.
Appropriate legislation enacted by the member nations
still is in force but has done little to alleviate the problem.
Before the advent of the botton trawl, ships' anchors
had been the chief cause of cable damage, confining it to
fairly shallow water. But when a fisherman has to
sacrifice a trawl net, complete with Otter boards, he may
well find himself called upon to sacrifice a catch of fish
in the net and, unless he has a spare set of gear on board,
valuable fishing time while he proceeds to port to replace
it. When he returns the fish may not be there, of course.
The- consequential damages (as opposed to the sacrifice
of the fishing gear Itself) are difficult to assess with any
reasonable degree of accuracy and the cable operators
take the view that they cannot be held responsible for
them. Were they to accept responsibility, the way would
be open for fishermen to Ignore the presence of cables
entirely, whereas It ls mast essential from the cable
operators' point of view that tluTe remain some deterrent
to the practice of trawling over cable lines.

When a fisherman's trawl gets caught on something,
not knowing what he Ls foul of, the natural tendency of
the fisherman Ls to try to free his gear. In doing so, If
it happens that he has hooked a cable, he ls in grave
danger of damaging it electrically, even If he does not
break it entirely. Thus, whether he elects to cut away
his gear and claim damages merely on suspicion of having
hooked a cable, or whether he brings the cable to the
surface and cuts his gear away with the full knowledge
that It ls indeed a cable (thereby still further Increasing
the probability that he has caused damage), the fact
remains that it ls a hazardous practice to tow a bottom
trawl over cable lines.
As an example of what can happen. Western
Union lost four transatlantic cables In twenty-
six hours on February 24 and 25, 1959, three days after
the interruption of TAT 1, the telephone cable laid in 1950
between Canada and Scotland. Six days later (on
March 3) Western Union lost still another. The damage
to the telephone cable Included a tensile break and a cut
less than a mile apart. "Damage to the five Western
Union cables included ten tensile breaks and two Hush
cuts.
These cables are armored with No. 1 HWO galvanized
steel wires which were in good condition. The depth of
water ranged from 170 to 215 fathoms. The telephone
cable was out of use for eight days. Western Union lost
six days on each of two cables, seven on another, eight
on another, and fifty-six on the last one due to an ice
field (on the edge of which the trawler evidently had
been working) moving over the cable, making It
Inaccessible for repair.
The repairs required a total of 43 days of ships' time
and necessitated the remplacement of 19 miles of cable.
The total cost to the cable operators for repairs on UiLs
occasion was about $120 000. Tills, of course, did not
Include the cost of traffic diversions and hire of alternate
facilities where available.
In the first ten months of 19C0 Western Union cables
were Individually Interrupted or made faulty by trawlers
on forty-four occasions, and the telephone cables were
broken on several occasions aLso.
When cable interruptions come singly, suitable fall-back
arrangements can be made to overcome the loss but when
several cables are broken within a matter of a few hours,
such as has happened off Newfoundland repeatedly, there
Ls bound to be disruption of service and long delays in Its
restoration.
Despite the International scope of the problem and the
best efforts of those engaged in telecommunications,
neither of the two recent international conferences on
the Law of the Sea have been able to cope with it, having
been too deeply absorbed in the controversy over the
width of the Territorial Sea. On the other hand, It must
be clear to any serious student of the matter that the
provisions of the 1884 Convention arc ineffectual in
dealing with the situation which confronts us today.
In the early days of radio it was the hope of the fishing
fraternity that this invention would spell the end of
cables and the annoyance which went with them. No
doubt they are pinning their present hope on the develop¬
ment of communication satellites, but from the amount
of money now being Invested In new cable projects and
the extent of these projects it seems like a forlorn hope
lor the Indulgence of this generation of fishermen.
C. S. Lawton is General Manager of the International staff of
the Western Union Telegraph Company, New York.
23
