THE OCEAN
UNDER
A MICROSCOPE
by L. Howell-Rivero
T
I o
he sea is populated by myriads of microscopic
rganisms known as plankton. The vast major¬
ity of these marine biota are so small that if we were
to take a glass of sea water and look at it with the naked
eye, we should only see after close examination a series
of dots which might make the water appear muddy.
Viewing a sample under a strong magnifying glass, how¬
ever, we should see that these dots consist of living bodies.
Their composition is very varied; some of them are
unicellular plants (phytoplankton) , others are animals
(Zooplankton); they also include microscopic animals and
other marine animals in their larval state.
14
STRANGELY-SHAPED DIATOMS are a form of
phytoplankton from the ocean which have a shell of
pure silica crystals. How these tiny organisms extract
the silica from sea-water solutions is still a mystery.
ONE-EYED CYCLOPS is a minute animal of the
copepod family found in parts of the Baltic Sea. Cope-
pods are an important food for the sea's edible fish.
These organisms are clearly of very great importance,
since phytoplankton is at the origin of what is known
as the food chain; it derives its own nourishment from
the nutrient salts in the sea-water, uses sunlight as a
source of energy and in turn acts as food for Zooplankton
and other marine animals further up the scale. Thus,
the productivity of a given zone can be deduced from
the quantity of nutrient salts and plankton it contains.
There are many features of this microscopic world
which claim our attention and cause us to marvel at the
wisdom of Nature. Among the phytoplankton, for
instance, there is that group of microscopic algae, known
as diatoms, which have a shell of pure silica crystals with
varied and fantastic shapes. How do these tiny organisms
extract the silica from the different sea-water solutions
to make their shells?
In other microbiota, such as the foraminifera type of
Zooplankton the shell is calcareous like that of sea-shells;
here the question ls how can the soluble carbonate of
lime be made to create such insoluble shells ?
These are some of the mysteries to which Man must
find the answer if he is to take up Nature's challenge.

In spite oí their mysterious origin, these minute orga¬
nisms provide clues to the history of our planet since,
as their shells settled in the depths of the sea throughout
the ages, they became part of the radiolarlan, foraml-
niferous and other types of ooze layers.
If we recall the theories concerning the marine origin
of petroleum deposits, we shall see why the study of
foraminiféra in the different geological strata of our
planet is one of the basic means of determining the
possible location of "black gold".
Let us turn, however, to the great planktonic mass
formed by other marine animals In their larval state;
a vast and fascinating world lies before us when we
consider the changes and metamorphoses that some of
them undergo before they become the creatures we are
accustomed to see, such as oysters, sea-urchins, lobsters
and all kinds of fish.
Certain species of common oyster which, when full-
grown, are sedentary and are found attached to the roots
of coastal plants such as the mangrove, move about freely
when in their larval state until they find a suitable
place to cling and develop Into the commercial form which
can later be eaten by Man. During this short larval
period, they live of phytoplankton and move by means
of a crown of fronds, reminiscent of helicopter blades.
The larval state typical of certain sea molluscs which
scientists call "veliger larva" reveal a number of varied
and interesting structures. One of the most fascinating
subjects of zoological research ls that of the development
of these structures.
We have all seen sea-urchins and star-fish on beaches
or have felt their sharp spikes In our feet. They again,
Photos © L. J. Uporte, Paris
In their larval state, bear no resemblance to the fully-
grown species. In the case of star-fish, for instance, a
small bl-symmetrical organism is transformed on meta¬
morphosis into a creature with radial symmetry.
Even when its animal organisms can move of their own
free-will this does not prevent plankton from being
carried away by the great ocean currents, which thus
distribute the different marine species over wide areas.
A typical example ls provided by the marine lobster
in the Caribbean. The adult species ls found on the
coral sea-board of the whole area washed by the same
set of currents, which also ensure its distribution by
carrying the larva; away.
Here again, we encounter a great difference between
adult and larval forms. The larva; of lobsters look
like transparent spiders with long legs and no feelers.
At birth, each is about the size of a full-stop on this page.
As they grow, the features associated with the adult
lobster gradually begin to appear and the larval charac¬
teristics are lost. When they are hardly more than an
inch long, they select the coastal stretch where they will
turn into the lobsters that will subsequently be eaten.
There are many varieties of fish which undergo con¬
siderable transformations from the time they are born
until they become full-grown. We shall consider the two
most outstanding examples.
The first is the eel. This fish, which lives in European
and American rivers, migrates to the distant Sargasso 15
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE SEA has many tiny animals that glow in the dark and,
when very abundant, make the waters luminescent. Here
is Noctiluca scintillons, photographed by electronic flash.
ZOOPLANKTON of the forminifera type. From depo¬
sits of their calcareous shells in sediment geologists can
reconstruct the history of the waters in which they lived.
UNDER A MICROSCOPE (Cont'd)
The plaice with the roaming eye
16
Sea to spawn; its larvae then begin their return journey
to their respective continents during metamorphosis.
At first these transparent, planktonic organisms are very
minute, and when they reach the river mouths they are
scarcely two inches long; at this point they are sometimes
caught and sold as canned "fry". Scientific research has
established the relationship between the larvae and the
adult of this species, but there are many other species
which have yet to be investigated.
The other example worthy of note is that of the plaice
or sole. Everyone must have noticed that their eyes are
on the same side of their bodies. But they were not born
like that. As tiny creatures In their larval state, they
are bi-symmetrical and have the shape of a normal fish,
with one eye on each side of the head.
By one of Nature's quirks, one of their eyes moves
over to the other side, with the result that the head bones
become twisted; it is in this way that the peculiar features
of the fully-grown fish are produced. However, does one
eye in particular move from one side to the other? Here
again, Nature challenges us to discover the design behind
her apparent capriciousness. In some species, it is the
left eye which moves, in others it is the right eye, and
in yet others, this movement is unpredictable.
We can therefore see the enormous problem facing the
scientists who wish to learn about marine life; in order
to catch these mlcrobiota, they have to make use of such
special methods and techniques as plankton nets; after
the plankton has been caught, it has to be studied not
only for itself, but also for its possible long-term
practical value.
The reader may ask: What can plankton be used for?
Is there any special justification for the efforts made to
catch and study it? What benefits does it bring to Man?
Science is attempting to give a satisfactory answer to
these questions.
The relationship between nutrients and phytoplankton
is a guide to the economic potentialities of an area and
hence to areas where fish of commercial value may be
able to exist in abundance. In addition, there are species
of Zooplankton which reveal the presence of fish of
commercial value. Lastly, plankton itself provides food
for many different kinds of fish. This makes us wonder
whether Man himself could not use plankton for food.
Although it is reasonable to expect the time and effort
devoted to marine research to be justified by practical
applications, the research in itself is valuable in so far
as it reveals that Man is making an effort to learn more
about the natural phenomena surrounding him, their
causes and effects, and about the organisms living in a
given medium. Perhaps one of the most interesting and
least known of such fields ls that of microscopic sea-life.
Former professor of Ichthyology at the University of
Havana, Luis Howell-Rivero is now the Oceanography
specialist at the Unesco Latin American Science Cooper¬
ation Office, Montevideo, Uruguay.
