American director Joseph Mankiewicz. (20th Cent. Fox) Chariot race scene from the film "Ben Hur". (MGM)


THE HIDDEN FACE
il
THE CINEMA
20
With this issue, The Unesco Courier begins the exclusive
publication of a series of articles on some of the lesser-
known aspects of the cinema industry, based on a world
survey undertaken by Paul Léglise. M. Léglise takes us on
a voyage into the hidden problems of production, distri¬
bution and financing of feature and documentary films of
all kinds, including the impact of TV on the film industry.

From the WHO "film "To Your Health". (WHO photo) Japanese actresses at Tokyo Film Festival (< Almasy)
LONG queues winding down the streets outside
the box office ; a mystifying or suggestive
title at the entrance to draw in the crowds ; a famous
star's name or photograph haloed in a blaze of lights ;
a torrent of publicity pouring forth the star's dally
adventures reaU embellished or Imaginary. Rain or
shine, the queue waits patiently to pass Inside for two
or three hours on an evening or a weekend. This, for
the great majority of the general public, ls the stereo¬
typed façade of the cinema.
Yet behind the façade sits the cinema manager adding
up his takings. He sees his customers fleeing the bustle
of the city on their days off. He knows the T.V. pro¬
grammes will keep other old "faithfuls" at home tonight.
He is delighted of course with his Sunday week-end
crowds, but the week ls aLso made up of working days,
and his empty seats cannot be seen by the passerby in
the street outside. Besides, all cinemas arc not located
on the Champs-Elysées, in Piccadilly, near the Via
Véneto or on Broadway.
Not so long ago, various pundits rase to voice alarm
at the effects of the cinema and lost no time brandishing
interdictions and the cutting scissors. Then along came
the public finance experts who set about estimating what
cinema taxes could be levied on the thousands eager for
entertainment.
Fortunately the detractors of the cinema have come
to a better understanding of the positive contributions
the cinema can make, and now realize that a new
approach Ls needed in order to promote the production
of films specially suited for young people. This trend ls
also reflected In the new attitude of government finance
officials who now recognize the economic and cultural
Importance of the cinema for their countries, and are
gradually lowering the barriers raised by their prede¬
cessors against the free circulation of films. Today we
find the State giving its financial help to promote the
development of national film Industries.
The man who Ls the qualified Intermediary between
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

CINEMA (Cont'd)
The new undocile
the cinema and the public Is the manager of the cinema
theatre. Although he is only one part of the cinema world
everyone in the huge industry watches the rise and fall
of his box-office takings. For regardless of the form of
social or economic system the cinema operates under,
money remains the arbiter of film subject matter. A film
must please those who finance it and who decide what
they think is the public's taste. But it must also please
the audience itself, the real cinema audience, that is.
Once the most docile of creatures, the cinema public is
changing and Is showing increasing discrimination in the
type of films it is willing to accept. With the help of a
new type of film critic who is both lively and hard-hitting,
with the emergence of film clubs which foster a deeper
understanding of the cinema as an art, the passive
audience is being transformed into devotees of the film
"cinéphiles". People now go to the cinema to see the
work of a particular director, and actually follow the
trends of different "schools" of film makers. The cine¬
ma in fact ls becoming a more difficult profession to work
in and thereby Infinitely more exciting and rewarding.
Furthermore, the cinema ls no longer confined to the
public theatre. We now find It in the school, in the factory,
in fairgrounds, exhibitions, hospitals, museums, and many
other hitherto unsuspected places. We find it in the
Isolated village of the African bush, and In meetings of
specialists and great scientists. It is a working and
research Instrument for education, science and culture
where it has proved its value in every corner of the globe.
In the conception, production and distribution of a film
a whole series of complicated operations are involved.
Artistic values, cultural factors, economic considerations,
technical principies and industrial requirements all
overlap and clash. This makes the behind-the-scenes
life of the cinema no less fascinating than the flurry of
its outer bustle, superficial, artificial and publicity-
inspired as it so often is. Besides, the one explains the
other.
Let us try to penetrate behind the halo of
mystery which often prevents the general
public from grasping the fundamental problems of the
great film Industry. The film enthusiast may perhaps
regret that there will be no examination here of the
films of a Hitchcock, René Clair, Antonioni, Chukhrai,
Satyajit Ray, Kurosawa, Norman McLaren or Jiri Trnka.
But we shall not have much occasion to mention their
works except to indicate their production costs or box-
office takings.
Some readers may be disappointed too to find no
description of the studios and the actors at work or an
explanation of how the camera can express an idea or
feeling.
Our purpose, however, is to demonstrate to those inte¬
rested in the cinema that it is equally important to know
the underlying factors that regulate the production and
distribution of films. Here too the role of the cinema
devotee could be as decisive as it has been up to now in
moulding public taste.
Let us not forget that the economic and organizational
problems confronting the cinema today bear within
them the seeds of the great renewal of tomorrow and that
this depends on how these problems are ultimately
solved.
A Brigitte Bardot film and an industrial film on the
manufacture of steel are exactly the same when we look
at them in terms of the general techniques of film pro¬
duction. Where they differ is in the number of persons
employed, the means and capital engaged, and the
methods of production used.
It takes more than a camera and a few reels of film
to make a film. There must first be the nucleus of a
scenario, a "synopsis"; or at least an idea. Sometimes
the producer buys a title. It may be the title of a popular
song or the title of a book. One French producer once
22 bought the title (and nothing more than the title) of
CONT'D ON PAGE 24
MGM
SYNTHESIS OF ART
AND INDUSTRY
Towering backdrops, an army of "extras",
powerful arc-lights, batteries of cameras and
sound recording equipment, engineers, elec¬
tricians, carpenters, painters all under the
command of a producer are the character¬
istics of a "superproduction" like the one
being shot here. In a production of such
mammoth proportions even a sequence
lasting only a matter of minutes in the finished
film may cost several hundred thousand dol¬
lars. Skill and talent sometimes earn success
for far more modest productions. One recent
example is the Japanese production, "The
Island" in which Kaneto Shinto tells the day-
to-day life story of two peasant farmers on
an island (right) who have to transport every
drop of water for their field from the far-off
mainland. The story is told without words. The
film cost only $33,000 to produce, but has
already earned more than $110,000 abroad.

Kindai Ei|a K/okai, Cocinor-Marccau Filmi
> N, i
«^
s^g*
0 t* .*
V^Sj*^* -¿-- ' «
OBSf
23

CINEMA (Cont'd)
A full day's work: 2 minutes of finished film
a famous detective novel series for 600,000 francs ($1,200).
The scenario comes later, depending on the director and
the cast.
The producer then roughs out his plan of production
costs while the scenario writer and director work out a
shooting script. This is a kind of analytical blueprint of
the whole operation. It enumerates all the camera shots
(close-ups, medium and long shots), the timing and
camera movements (tracking and panning) and details
of direction (set arrangements, actors moves, the posi¬
tion of people and objects on the sets, etc.) as well as
the commentary or dialogue.
At this point the literary aspect of the cinema ends
and the technical side of production begins, while the
financial side of production continues for it starts
from the moment that the idea for the film has been
accepted.
Several days in the studio under powerful arc lights,
or on exterior location depending on the whims of the
sun, require the hiring of teams of technicians which
vary in their multitude according to the size of the pro¬
duction (the director, cameraman, continuity girl^ sound
engineer, set designer, make-up man, etc... and their
assistants) to say nothing of the cast (stars, other actors
and extras, etc.)
There are too many people Involved in the production
of a film to list them all. Great Britain regularly employs
4,000 persons in the production of feature films alone,
and it ls estimated that 25,000 to 35,000 persons work in
film production in the U.S.A. The Japanese film industry
lists 120,000 employees, 18,000 for the production and
distribution of feature films, 82,000 for film exhibition.
But are these figures complete? Are extras and other
persons called upon included? Music in a film for ins¬
tance means a composer, an orchestra, a recording studio
staff. Do they always figure in these statistics?
Every sequence shot is printed on negative film, with
very often several prints of some takes. In France, a full
day's work produces an average of two minutes of the
final film. The film is then developed and printed on
positive film preferably in well-equipped laboratories as
near the studios as possible. After this comes the editing,
the mixing of image and sound, optical effects for
transitions between shots (known as wipes, fade-ins, fade-
outs, and dissolves, etc.) then titling, the making of dupli¬
cate negatives, and the running off of the final positive
prints... Annual footage processed in French laboratories
for instance amounts to 72 million metres.
So we see that to call film-making an industry is no
idle use of the word. Before even the smallest of films
can be envisaged all the financial and technical require¬
ments of a big industry come into play. That is why
24
*ÜSí
r~iU<!-r<ci
Quite apart from their basic aim which is to encourage the public to buy someone's
products, publicity films occupy a special place in the film world. They offer young
producers the opportunity to display creative originality. Some of them are minor
masterpieces of the film-maker's art. Through application to publicity films animated
cartoons have, in particular, found ways to perfect techniques and discover new ones.
Cinéma et Publicité, Paris

CINEMASCOPE
INVENTOR'S
NOTEBOOK
The film industry has reacted to the
prodigious growth of television by
a vigorous search for innovations.
One of the most far-reaching de¬
cisions, designed to retain public
patronage of the cinema, has been
the introduction of wide screen
projections. This opened the
way, in 1953, to the development
of a technique invented years
earlier by a Frenchman, Henri
Chrétien. The result was the
birth of Cinemascope. Reprodu¬
ced on the right is a page from
the notebook of Professor Chré¬
tien, inventor of the Cinemascope
lens and camera, with the follow¬
ing annotations.
I.Shot taken with a normal ca¬
mera.
II.Shot taken from the same
point with the same camera and
lens, but now fitted with a Hyper-
gonar: the shot is distorted hori¬
zontally and the breadth of the
field of vision is doubled.
III.Previous shot projected by
a normal projection apparatus
fitted with Hypergonar which has
restored all objects to their true
proportions.
,.t -u. t <f{ " y
'flu. 'Jlua it- kt*A A«*¿ 4**fi-^Ä *'*" ''" d
íucum' ifyíUf, »tsUê i**iL (U. S'Hy/.aj'h'*: *
d*M ¿W^«^, ö&s* zU diùitL *
20lh Century fox
another important person in film-makingthe ever-
present, formidable film producer keeps his eye on
production from the first moment to the last. It is he
who fixes the budget of the film and sees that It ls
adhered to. The budget is based on the film's profitability,
or returns, that is, on the estimated money it will bring
In. The budget commands the greatest respect, for even
in the world of the cinema a Maecenas is a rare bird.
In fact its real Maecenas is the public, twelve thousand
million patrons each year in more than 175,000 cinemas
around the world ; and this does not include what the
trade calls non-theatrical (that ls, non-commercial)
showings which would triple or quadruple the figures.
It is no easy matter therefore to forecast what the public
interest will be. What is more, each film has its own
public. There are not many films like Gone With the
Wind which had an audience of 70 million spectators. And
yet it is the overall returns of an average film which
condition the budget of a new film.
The financing of films is dealt with by each country
in its own way. Without going into details of the mecha¬
nics of financing, the problem in the Socialist economies
and in the major American companies is relatively simple.
In both cases the anticipated returns of a new film are
estimated and the financial risks spread over several
films. The budget is then fixed and the required funds
are drawn upon as needed.
In a Socialist economy film organizations operate like
a government ministry possessing a special budget for
the production of educational and Information films.
They order a film on a particular subject, grant the appro¬
priate budget, have the film made and control every phase
of its execution. Profitability is assessed not for each film
individually but on the basis of the total returns of all
national and foreign-made films shown in the country.
With the major American films financing is more
speculative. Backing ls usually assured by commercial
banks or large industrial concerns. In turn the leading
film companies themselves (which control production,
distribution and cinema circuits) Invest most of their
capital outside the film industry.
Thus in both systems the risks are greatly diminished
by being widely spread. Future film production in both
cases depends more on the graph of national cinema
attendance generally than on the success of their own
films.
When an independent company decides to launch Into
film production, the problems of financing arc a matter
of much graver complexity. The risks involved are infi¬
nitely more serious since any single set-back, like the
Illness or death of the leading players or of the director
In the middle of shooting, or the public's cool reception
to the film once It Is released, can spell complete disaster.
Some of these risks, such as accidents, illness, bad
weather, the loss of film by fire, are of course covered by
Insurance ; and insurance companies often allow pre¬
miums to be paid after the release date of the film. Des¬
pite this, an independent company has to be prepared for
heavy expenses and must find the needed credit.
In France, for example, the 1951 total Investment in
the different branches of the film industry amounted
to 3.5 thousand million Francs (over $7 million) for a
production total valued at about 5 thousand million
Francs (over .* 10 million). This investment represented
66 per cent of the value of France's total film production
for the year, and was a national record for all industries
(the steel industry came second with only 37%.)
Where does this backing come from? First, there are
the contributions by the producer, then from private
sources, and loans from banks. Some banks specialize in 25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CINEMA (Cont'd)
Low-cost films vs. de luxe superproductions
film-financing loans. In Italy, for Instance, an indepen¬
dent branch of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro finances
up to 60% of production costs, and in Brazil the Bank of
the State of Sao Paulo grants credit of up to three million
cruzeiros upon presentation of an early-stage "cutting-
print" of a film costing on an average 5 to 7 million
cruzeiros.
Other sources of financing backing are the large
developing and printing laboratories as well as techni¬
cians, artists and film distributors and exporters. Note
should be taken of the important role played by the
distributor In financing film production, either by ad¬
vancing credit against future box-office takings or by
covering the cost of general release prints and advance
publicity. The conditions laid down by the distributor
for the leasing and exhibition of a film will vary according
to the degree of his financial participation in production.
The State too finances the production of private films,
and this is now becoming an increasingly frequent
practice. Apart from the subsidies and loans accorded
for the making of cultural films (particularly documen¬
taries) there is a growing tendency on the part of the
State to use the proceeds of special taxes on cinema
tickets, and levies on the footage of films being shown in
cinemas, to give financial support to films it wishes to
promote, and thus mould public taste.
This is now being done in Denmark, Portugal, Egypt,
Argentina, France, Italy, Brazil, Greece and other coun¬
tries. The funds are used for the granting of subsidies,
loans and advances on box-office takings, or for the
awarding of big prizes for completed or projected films
which by virtue of their quality or the ideals they espouse
do honour to the nation's cinematographic output.
When people refer to the film-producing countries they
generally have in mind full-length or feature films,
Regrettable or not, let us follow this custom.
The number of 35 mm. feature films produced each
year throughout the world for public screening runs to
about 3,000. No exact figure can be given since tabu¬
lating methods vary widely from country to country. In
the United Kingdom for example, a feature film must be
over 3,000 feet In length, while in Italy it cannot be less
than 6,500 feet.
Consequently, the national figures given below should
be interpreted with caution, particularly since there is
often no way of telling if certain co-productions have
been counted twice in two different countries. The
figures used here will be those provided by the Interna¬
tional Federation of Film Producers (1959 figures).
siA leads the other continents with 1,580 films
i produced annually, or more than half the
total world cinema production. Japan (493 films), India
(310) and Hong Kong (240) are the world's three largest
producers. These are followed in Asia by South Korea
(109) and mainland China (80). Burma, Thailand and the
Philippines each produce about 50 films a year.
The United States occupies fourth place in the world
with 187 films, or half of the total annual production in
the Americas: Mexico (84), Brazil (40), Argentina (23).
Europe produces 950 films a year: Italy (167), France
(133), U.S.S.R. (about 130), Great Britain (123), Federal
Republic of Germany (106), Turkey (60), Czechoslovakia
(35), Eastern Germany (27).
Sixty films are produced in Africa, 50 in the United
Arab Republic alone. If most people are aware of the
world-wide distribution of American films, it is not
always realized that the cinema of Asia too is a thriving,
dynamic industry which reaches wide audiences.
Although the bulk of its production is geared to meet
the tastes, customs and culture of the people of Asia,
Japanese films have been enthusiastically received in
Europe, and Indian films are finding a growing public
in African countries.
How can we explain the amazing development of film
26 production in Japan? In their book, Le Cinéma Japo¬
nais, Shinobu and Marcel Giuglaris tell us that "The
film industry is designed to make money and is not pro
tected by the State. Five large film corporations each
possess their own studios and production equipment, their
own financing methods and distribution chains, their
own cinema theatres, stars and technicians. A sixth
large group specializes in films for export.
Each of the first five groups produced a film a week in
1955 at the modest cost of 18 to 25 million yen ($50,000 -
$70,000) and made a return of 50 to 70 million yen ($150-
200,000) within a month from national receipts alone.
Thus, according to Giuglaris, one month's production time
and only one month's exhibition brought the producer,
after deduction of all expenses and exploitation costs,
a net profit of over 100%.
The low production cost of Japanese films is explained
by the fact that the actors are not paid astronomical
salaries, that there are no trade union rules decreeing
a minimum number of technicians per film, and that long
sequences with fixed cameras are a standard technique,
thereby greatly reducing the number of shots.
I n addition to these films made for home con-
I sumption, there are those made for foreign
screening which, especially since the success of Rashomon
are allocated a higher budget, though Rashomon "itself
was made for only 15 million yen.
If we remember finally that there are 7,400 cinemas
in Japan 66% of which show nothing but Japanese films
with a seating capacity for over 3 milion people, and
that more than 1,000 million spectators attended the
cinema in 1959, then is not difficult to understand the
enthusiasm of this nation for moving pictures and the
development of the Japanese film industry to meet it.
The United States offers a well-known example of the
concentrated importance of a film industry under a free
economy. Eight major corporations dominate the film
business. They release 60 to 70 per cent of the total
volume of feature films produced, and through their their
own distribution and exhibition outlets account for up to
85 to 90 per cent of America's gross box-office receipts.
In addition, their Influence extends abroad where their
subsidiaries or affiliated companies often enjoy a predo¬
minant position with regard to distribution and film
booking. As the French economist, Professor Henri Mer-
cillon has written: "Hollywood has taken over the field
of entertainment for a whole sector of the world."
Alongside a host of "B-pictures" made at medium cost,
Hollywood turns out a substantial number of high-budget
films which follow certain aesthetic standards that
flatter the public's taste. Such films feature big-name
stars and are released with an advertising build-up
commensurate with their cost. The de-luxe superproduc¬
tions call for gigantic installations and organization, and
it would seem could only be filmed by or in Hollywood.
Yet now a drive is being made to outdo Hollywood and
the Cecil B. de Mille technique by Italy's Cinecitta studios
outside Rome which are churning out elaborate spectacles
based on a formula of mythology and ancient history.
With its superproductions, America at any rate has hit
the box-office jackpot on the world's markets.
Thus though their production techniques are funda¬
mentally different, both Japan and the United States
are the world's leading film countries. It is interesting
to note, however, that both industries are characterized
by a high degree of concentration of their economic
structures.
In other free economy countries, and for that matter
in Japan and the United States as well, one finds a wide
variety of film producing companies in existence. These
range from the individual craftsman who produces and
directs his own films to the giant industrial complexes
with their multifold technical, commercial and adminis¬
trative services.
To attempt, under these circumstances, to record the
number of film companies operating In the world, or
even by country, becomes a statistician's nightmare. The
diversity of companies in terms of capital, staff, volume
and type of production, access to national and foreign
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

Photo» i*) Alma*/, Parí»
BOUNTIFUL JOURNALISTS
A three-masted sailing vessel spe¬
cially built for a new version of
the American film, "Mutiny on the
Bounty" sets out across the waters
of the English Channel with 80 jour¬
nalists and photographers on board
(see photos). The launching of a
feature-length film is usually the
occasion for a vast publicity cam¬
paign. In the case of de-luxe super-
productions the need for a rapid
turnover of the huge amounts of
capital involved leads to campaigns
being started while the film is still
under production. The budget for
publicity can run to as much as
7% of the total production costs.

Photo United Artists - Cahiers du Cinéma
SUSPENDED
ANIMATION
The Soviet film, "An Unsent Letter",
which recounts the adventures of a
group of geologists in the Siberian
"taiga", is distinguished by the remark¬
able shots of cameraman Sergei
Uroussevsky, a technician who seeks
always to work in real-life surround¬
ings. On right he is seen suspended
with his camera above the ice-floes
of a swirling river. Left, operating on
an indoor film set, the camera poised
on the end of a massive "boom"
follows the actors up a stairway, in
John Huston's film "Moulin Rouge".
CINEMA (Cont'd)
Pioneer role of independent companies
28
markets, makes it well nigh impossible to lay down any
common yardstick.
Furthermore, certain countries have special regulations
governing the establishment of film companies. In Italy
a company cannot be set up for co-production operation
if its capital fund is under 30 million lire. In France a
professional licence is required which is denied persons
with a police record or firms of limited capital (less than
$10,000 for the production of feature films; and less
than $2,000 for short films). Records show that in 1961,
as many as 617 feature film companies were in existence
in France and 960 short film companies, but the output
figures show only 145 feature films and 326 short films
actually produced during the year. Thus it. is quite
obvious that the number of really active producing
companies is much smaller than the impressive official
list would imply.
The situation is no different in other countries. Even
in the United States, the example par excellence of film
concentration in the hands of a few corporations, the
figures show 181 producing companies. These may be
accounted for by the fact that certain firms having once
produced a film under more or less accidental circum¬
stances retain the title of film-producer as ornaments
on their commercial letter-heads.
In fairness, however, it should be added that many
companies specialize in educational, technical and in¬
dustrial films, or in 16 mm. production, two and three
minute advertizing films as well as films for T.V. This
output represents a marginal fringe of the main cinema
industry, and official production statistics do not normally
Include them in their figures. Nevertheless it is a dyn¬
amic, bustling branch of the film industry the importance
of which ls rarely suspected because of its complex
operations.
To get back to feature films produced for commercial
circuits, a further word should be said about the many
independent producers and their stimulating effect on
the industry. In fact, if the cinema is constantly being
enriched as a form of art and entertainment in various
countries (and indeed on the world market generally)
much of the credit is due to the push and competition
created by the independent film companies. In their
efforts to establish a reputation, the enterprising in¬
dependents have not hesitated to break with the trad¬
itional approach of the big film corporations and have
pioneered new forms of cinema expression.
In the Socialist economy countries nationalization of
the film industry is the rule, production being planned
and financed by a ministerial department. Apart from
the director, all production technicians are attached to
a given studio and receive regular salaries.
In Poland, the Barrandow studios alone employ 1,800
persons regularly, while In Czechoslovakia at least, all
actors are hired for a specific film. In Yugoslavia,
persons engaged on the creative side of film making were
formerly employed on a regular salary basis, but in 1951
film production was decentralized and a new basis of
worker-management adopted, leading to an Increase in
the number of film producing companies in the country.
As a result film directors and other creative personnel
have been recognized as members of the liberal profession
with the right to sign separate contracts with film
companies. But most technical and administrative per¬
sonnel remain on permanent contract to a given
company.
Up to now we have been dealing only with feature films,
but if we were to consider the footage processed in all
the world's film laboratories, separating feature film foot¬
age from all other types (excluding amateur and TV
footage) the figure would certainly be startling and
prompt us to want to revise our current methods of tabul¬
ating world film production.
The plain fact is that present world statistics do ill
justice to the short film. Admittedly, there is no
universally accepted definition of how short a short film
should be. Finland says less than 2,000 feet, the U.K 3,000,
France 4,250, Portugal 5,900 and Italy less than 6,500 feet.
But it would be a serious mistake to underestimate the
continued growth and expansion of the short film, its

PholO Soviet ierren
richness as a medium of expression, and the important
place it occupies in the world today. A very conservative
estimate of the total number of short films produced each
year gives us a figure running into several scores of
thousands!
The short film is not often made by the large feature
film companies; it is usually left to the small, artisan-
type producer since it involves a much smaller expend¬
iture. For example, the average short film made in France
in 1961 cost 51,000 New Francs ($10,000) as compared with
1,370,000 Francs ($275,000) for the average feature film.
But unless it is subsidized the chances of a short film
recovering its production costs are much slimmer than
for the more expensive feature film. Even those films
produced for commercial cinema showing are very rarely
aimed exclusively at this market, except for featurettes
of the "curtain raiser" type such as short comedies or
dramas, or light variety shorts and musical briefs, or
documentaries considered to be of broad general interest.
Just as often they are aimed at the non-commercial
market, assuming they were not originally produced
chiefly for non-commercial distribution. Of course, certain
types of short films, like the technical, scientific and
educational films, never aim at anything but a non¬
commercial screening, and some are even produced only
in 16 mm.
When a short entertainment film is commissioned by
public or private backers who are not primarily interested
in getting their money back there is no real problem; but
there is a serious problem when we turn to the short
experimental film, independently produced. Here financ¬
ial backing is much more difficult to come by since such
films do not find a ready market. The experimental film
is thus in danger of disappearing for lack of financial
support or exploitation possibilities.
Luckily, many governments are showing concern for
this problem and are taking steps to remedy the situation.
The production and distribution of such films are being
encouraged by the offer of subsidies, loans, special film
prizes and tax concessions; in certain countries the double
feature has been completely banned, and cinemas are
required to include short films in all programmes.
We should not forget that short films, be they docum¬
entaries, animated cartoons or featurettes, offer the film
world unusual scope for creative originality, and that It
Is from this branch of the industry that the great film
makers of tomorrow arc likely to come. Like the full-
length feature, the short film too now boasts its own
"schools" and outstanding directors whose masterpieces
are in no way inferior to the feature film classics.
The special problems confronting short film production
have been recognized not only in the free-economy count¬
ries but in the Socialist States where significant measures
have been adopted to encourage new films. Thus In
Czechoslovakia while 80 per cent of the short films
produced are State-ordered, the remaining 20 per cent
are made up of freely-produced films proposed by art
councils set up In Czech studios.
Of the many types of short films turned out annually
for non-commercial use. the educational film ls finding
an increasingly important market. Educational films arc
often produced directly by government bodies or else are
commissioned and financed by the State. The French
Centre audio-visuel de l'Ecole normale supérieure de
Saint-Cloud, near Paris, exclusively devoted to films for
schools, is an interesting example. It undertakes comp¬
arative studies of audio-visual techniques in classrooms,
advises film makers and directors as well as teachers,
organizes film seminars, and produces its own experi¬
mental films in its own studios. Most French educational
films, however, are privately produced though State
commissioned and supervised.
In certain countries all educational film production Is
in the hands of private enterprise and no State control
is exercised. This is true of the United States where
educational productions are made by the large film com¬
panies and by several independent organizations. The
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

CINEMA (Confd)
30
Boom
in co-productions
unusual thing about these producers is that frequently
they are actually specialized branches of book publishing
firms. Textbooks, In fact, include references to films
which are specially adapted to or can appropriately be
used in conjunction with one chapter or another of the
textbooks in question. In Japan an Educational Film
Producer's Association groups 80 of the country's most
active companies, about a dozen of which account for
roughly one third of all educational and industrial film
production (approximately 200 school and adult education
films were produced In Japan in 1958).
In the past few years, however, there have been signs
of the government's growing interest in promoting better
educational films. Production and distribution remain
free of government control but an audio-visual education
section has been set up in the Japanese Ministry of Educ¬
ation to encourage the use of films in schools, and a
selection committee created to help teachers and adult
education leaders to choose appropriate films. In addi¬
tion, an annual educational film festival in Tokyo is spur¬
ring the production of better educational films.
Closely associated in certain ways with the educational
film are the various industrial films which play an im¬
portant part in professional training and are used in
"refresher" courses for executives and specialists in in¬
dustry. To cite the case of Japan again, of the 768 techni¬
cal films produced In 1958, 200 were concerned with
education proper while the majority of the remaining
568 dealt with industry.
HREE other types of specialized films, all highly
distinctive, deserve mentioning here: the
newsreel, the advertising film and the television film.
The newsreel is unique in that it appears at regular,
relatively brief intervals, and deals with various subjects
directly connected with current events. With the advent
of television, however, it is being forced to consider a
change of pace. Unable to compete with daily TV pro¬
grammes in presenting the spot news of the week as it
formerly did the cinema newsreel is rapidly tending to
become a kind of illustrated magazine featuring specific
events of the day in analytical capsule form.
The status accorded the newsreel varies from country
to country. In some it is entirely a private, commercial
affair (Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Colombia, Fed. Rep.
of Germany, France, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Nether¬
lands, Peru, U.K., Uruguay, etc.) ; in others it is regarded
as a public service or is nationalized (India, Norway, Por¬
tugal, Spain, the Socialist economy countries, etc.)
We shall not say much about the advertising film, which
is extensively used in fairs and exhibitions as well as in
public cinemas during intervals, except to point out that
many film people have made their cinema debut in this
branch of the industry and that it has proved a rich
medium of expression for the animated cartoon, and an
exceptionally good vehicle for perfecting and renovating
the style and technique of the animated cartoon generally.
As for television films, though broadly speaking both
TV films and films for the cinema use identical recording
techniques their production methods are radically differ¬
ent. TV films are rarely conceived as single units but
are usually produced (at least for commercial television)
as package programmes comprising 13 films for showing
over a 13 week period.
TV films require special adaptation of the frames to
the small television screen and also present particular
editing problems. Furthermore, in a TV film the per¬
formers act out their roles from beginning to end, follow¬
ing the script as in a play, unlike cinema actors who are
filmed in unconnected "takes". Nonetheless there is no
denying that cinema and television films.have much in
common..
Although TV companies often produce their own films
yet at the same time private film corporations are also
National Film Board of Canada
SCIENCE ON THE SCREEN. The National Film Board of
Canada has won international renown for the quality and scope
of its short film productions. Above, a shot from a film on the
subject of cancer. This drawing shows a multicellular growth.
Ministry of Information, New Delhi
THE METRIC SYSTEM. India has recently adopted the
metric system. To help explain this innovation to the man
in the street, an animated cartoon showing its uses was
produced in 1960 by the Government Films Division.
H Vz
Film Export, Prague
BIG HEADS FOR SMALL SCREENS. The tendancy to
exaggerate the size of the head in relation to the boby is a
feature of American cartooning, especially since the arrival of
television. The small TV screen calls for means to accentuate
character and expression. The figures under the drawings
(above) show the approximate head to boby proportions used by
artists who draw three well-known animated cartoon characters.

CARTOONS
AND PUPPETS
FOR LAUGHS
OR LEARNING
The short film has known an
immense growth and expan¬
sion in all its forms during the
past 15 years. This has come
about not only to meet the
needs of television and publi¬
city, but also because of the
pressing demand for educa¬
tional films. The annual pro¬
duction of short films has been
conservatively estimated as
running into several scores of
thousands. As photos on these
pages demonstrate, animated
cartoons and puppets can be
used as effectively to teach
serious lessons of many kinds
as for light entertainment.
From "The Technique of rim Ann ll Pir«, I r.nrti.
DOLLS AND LEGENDS. The screen has brought fame to dolls used by
the Czech film-maker Jiri Trnka. Painter and illustrator of children's books,
Trnka was the producer of a Unesco film entitled "Fable for Friendship".
Above, a scene from one of Trnka's puppet films "The Song of the Prairie".
called in (in the free economy countries) to produce
others. This example of collaboration, at least as far as
specialized film production is concerned, is a hopeful sign
indeed, particularly since relations between the two
industries have not always been of the best.
In fact at the Tangiers Conference called by Unesco
in 1958 to further international co-operation between the
cinema and television industries one could not help not¬
ing the bitterness of the cinema people towards their
television "juniors". They complained that the fees paid
by TV stations for commissioned films were too low (relat¬
ively speaking that is) and that they could rarely cover
their production costs from TV broadcasting channels
alone.
In time solutions acceptable to both sides will certainly
be found. As it is, films produced by public or national¬
ized services are nowadays widely diffused through the
cinema and on TV. In the near future, co-productions
resulting from co-operation between these two media will
no doubt point the way to a new and profitable opening
for films.
In their search for greater profitability, feature film
producers are today being drawn increasingly to the solu¬
tion of international co-productions. The past already
offers good examples of this trend: Cavalcade which had
a marked effect on the distribution' of American films in
British cinemas and Henry VIII, which opened the door
to the American market for some major British films.
The formula offers obvious material benefits. Endowed
with dual nationality the co-production can skirt many
obstacles to film distribution in its "parent" countries.
Its financial advantage is that production costs are
shared.
Viewed in terms of international co-operation the
arrangement also has much to commend it. Professional
actors and film-makers of different nationalities apply
skill and effort to a common end. Technicians and
creative workers get to know each other better and this
in turn helps to stimulate better understanding between
the people of their countries.
The co-production method has nevertheless come in
for some sharp attacks from groups concerned with
preserving the integrity of national expression. Art, say
these critics, is an expression of national culture and
when two countries combine their artistic efforts in an
artifical alliance the result may be a hybrid product which
satisfies neither the ideas and feelings of the spectators
in the two natioas nor those of foreign audiences which
prefer films offering authentic cultural backgrounds that
differ from their own.
But criticism of this kind must not be pushed to absurd
lengths. For every strictly national topic that would be
unsuitable for co-production treatment, there arc many
others which deserve to be handled in thLs way.
How do co-production arrangements work in practice?
Many forms exist but the most common is based on an
equal reciprocity covering two films. Let us suppo.se that
the first of these films is a Franco-Italian production.
The French company will foot the major part of the
cost while the Italian partners will be required to find
not less then 30% of the total estimated outlay. French
technicians and actors will outnumber Italians. After
this film Is completed a counterpart Italo-Frcnch prod¬
uction will be made in which the proportions of the
financial, technical and artistic contributions will be
reversed.
Arrangements of this kind are usually covered by an
official inter-governmental co-production agreement such
as existed between France and Italy In the example just
given. The films produced benefit from privileges norm¬
ally reserved for nationally produced films In both
countries State financial aid, tax concessions, quota
privileges and other advantages designed to aid a national
film industry. A joint commission decides which films
qualify for these benefits before production begins and
also supervises the working of the agreement. In 1961,
83 feature films were co-produced by France and Italy
in this way.
In another and more simple type of co-production
usually outside the scope of official agreements foreign
capital is used to finance production, or alternatively,
foreign technicians and actors participate in a film pro¬
duced with local capital.
In such cases the film does not always benefit from a
dual nationality status. The resulting loss of privileges
may in some measure be compensated for by a more
profitable distribution of the film In the country which
provided the technicians and cast.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

CINEMA (Cont'd)
Films for schools of all nations
Nowadays there Is a much greater use of foreign cap¬
ital for film production because of increased restrictions
on the export of film-showing -receipts. Large amounts
of capital earned by foreign films are now "frozen" in
some countries. Unable to export their profits, foreign
producers have been using them to finance co-productions
locally. Countries where this happens benefit in two
ways: films made with "frozen" funds often provide
employment for local labour and technical staffs, and the
films themselves are likely to have a wider distribution
abroad through the participation of a foreign co-producer.
Co-productions of this type have nevertheless disturb¬
ed the technicians' trade unions. In the United States
the problem of what the American trade journal Variety
has called "runaway" film production has attracted
much attention. The question has been raised and
discussed by the Labour Commission of the House of
Representatives. U.S. trade unions affirm that 509 films
made between January 1949 and November 1961 were
financed from U.S. sources.
Turning to educational films we find that co-production
has been tried out experimentally on quite a large scale
although on very different lines from those already
described. The overall problem here ls obviously not the
same. Basically each country tries to produce a number
of educational films corresponding to the needs and
content of its school programmes. Through consulations
and exchange of information between the various na¬
tional educational film services, a wasteful duplication of
effort such as the possibility of several countries produc¬
ing a film on exactly the same subject is avoided. Inter¬
national co-operation in this connexion benefits all
concerned.
Joint agreements sometimes lead to the production of
a series of films (physical and general geography and the
history of science have been three examples) each film
being made by a different country. Eventually each
producer country supplies to the other partners in the
project the material needed for making prints of its film,
free of all dues and charges. Thus each country receives
several films for the cost of one production.
An example of an even more ambitious development in
educational films is offered by the film, "Climatic Regions
of Europe", produced by the International Educational
Film Council. Four countries agreed to make sequences
presenting Europe's different climatic conditions: the
German Federal Republic for continental climate, the
United Kingdom for oceanic climate, France for the
Mediterranean climate and Sweden for the Arctic. An
introduction in animated cartoon form was made by
Denmark and the entire operation co-ordinated by Swed¬
en. Contributions towards the cost of the project were
made by Unesco and by the members of the Inter-
(1) {"Film Production By International Co-operation". No. 34 in the
Vnksc.o series. "Report.* and Pa/iers on Mass Communication" ,
Pans l!)li2.)
national Educational Film Council in proportion to each
country's share in the council's budget.
An account of these experiments and of several others
a co-production with the United Nations and two co-pro¬
ductions with broadly cultural themes (The Open Window
and December, The Children's Month) has been given in
a Unesco booklet (1). This publication will be of immense
value to future educational film-makers since its authors
explain at length the mechanics of co-operation and with
admirable candour deal fully with the problems they met
and the mistakes they made.
Increased international co-operation of this kind will
do much to open the way and smooth the path for future
educational films. This became clear at the Unesco-
sponsored meeting in Kuala-Lumpur, Malaya, in Aug¬
ust 1961, which brought together the heads of national
audio-visual aid departments in countries of South and
East Asia. Guided by the results of the experiments
already described, these specialists agreed to carry out a
joint production programme of films on human geography
and natural science, as well as other projects.
Since it combines both art and industry, the cinema
needs technicians, specialists and creative workers in
many fields. The "on the job" training of the early days
has now been replaced by highly skilled and specialized
instruction in schools specifically created for this purpose.
Most of these training schools, affiliated under an Inter¬
national Liaison Centre for Cinema and Television Schools,
are in Europe Potsdam-Babelsberg, Madrid, Paris,
Athens, Budapest, Lodz, Rome, Prague, Moscow, Vienna,
Munster, Kiel, London and Amsterdam and in several
universities of the United States. Others are operating
In La Plata, Cairo and Taipeh.
Professional training given in these centres covers the
creative roles in film-making (directors, actors, art
directors), the administrative (associate producers) and
the technical (operators, sound engineers, laboratory
technicians etc.).
In addition there are audio-visual training centres where
teachers learn to prepare or to make use of the multi¬
fold items of equipment now employed in today's visual
and sound information media, equipment which has prov¬
ed of much value in the classroom.
Tomorrow's cinema is already taking shape in such
schools and centres.
(To be continued)
This survey was undertaken by Paul Léglise, at the request
of Unesco's Free Flow of Information Division of the Depart¬
ment of Mass Communication and carried out under the
auspices of French National Commission for Unesco. Mr. Léglise
is head of the cultural and short films service of the Centre
National de la Cinématographie Française in Paris. He is the
author of several works on the cinema including, "Methods of
Encouraging the Production and Distribution of Short Films
for Theatrical Use", published this year by Unesco.

