HIDDEN HUNGER
The term malnutrition can be defined as the result of a diet which does
not provide the right kind of food for good health, for the normal deve¬
lopment of children and adolescents, nor for normal activity at allages of
life, The chief form of malnutrition is under-nutrition which is a defi¬
ciency of the vital nutrients in the food one eats. Malnutrition resulting
from eating too much of these nutrients is also known to exist but it is
extremely rare and does not even remotely have the social significance
of hunger, that is, under-nutrition.
by Prof. Michel Cépède
National Agronomy Institute, Paris
Tío maintain that two persons out of three in
the world still suffer from hunger, as was once
done in the past and is still done by a number of people,
including myself, it is necessary to abandon the simple
notion that the level of food consumption is measured
merely by the number of calories present in the daily
food eaten by each person.
When at the end of the 18th century Lavoisier showed
the analogy that existed between living matter and
combustion, he pioneered the idea that food was the
body's combustion agent or fuel and introduced quanti¬
tative analysis into the study of what happens to the
food we eat. His successors were thus able to calculate
the number of calories required by the human body to
sustain ' life.
Man's minimum calorie needs are very strictly defined.
Specialists of the subject agree (with variations of some
100 calories) that 2,200 calories are the minimum require¬
ment for the average adult at rest, depending on height,
weight, etc. With this as a basis, even the most optimistic
authorities admit that 10 to 15 per cent of the world's
population (excluding mainland China) is undernourished.
The first survey of the world food situation undertaken
between the years 1934 and 1938, the results of which
were published by FAO in 1946, revealed that average
daily calorie consumption was less than 2,250 in countries
totalling more than half the world's population, between
2,250 and 2,750 calories for one-sixth of the earth's
inhabitants, and over 2,750 calories for only a little less
than one-third of the population of our planet.
The more optimistic figures of 10 to 15 per cent cited
above were arrived at long after the first world food
survey, but can be accounted for by the fact that first,
mainland China is no longer included in United
Nations statistics, and second, food needs calculated on
the amount eaten (intake) are often confused with the
food actually available (bought at the retail level). At
the indispensable minimum level of calorie needs, the
difference is in the order of 100 calories, a figure which
can hardly be disregarded.
In some cases economists have even based their
calculations on gross food production figures, thereby
ignoring food losses as well as those food products not
consumed but used for other purposes. Statements of the
kind made in The World's Food, published in 1954 by
M.K. Bennett who determined dietary needs in terms of
20 "calorific equivalents in cereals" must be judged in the
light of these remarks if we are to avoid the same hasty
conclusions that led the English economist Colin Clark
to deny the very existence of undernourishment and hence
hunger itself.
Moreover, calculations based on the average availability
of food actually conceal an extremely important aspect
of the problem, since even in countries where enough food
is available there are those who have more and
consequently others (usually more numerous) who do not
have enough. The late John D. Black of Harvard
University once estimated that even in the United States
25 per cent of the population was overfed, 42 per cent well
fed, and 33 per cent underfed.
With these observations in mind, I do not hesitate to
state that for the total population of the earth more
than one-third and no doubt nearly one-half of mankind
suffers from under-nutrition due to lack of calories, that
is, hunger in the strictest sense of the word.
Unfortunately, calorie deficiency is not the only form
of undernourishment. In cases where attempts were
made in the past to feed populations cheaply on a diet
limited to low-priced calories, chiefly in the form of cereals
and especially roots and tubers i.e. foods with a high
starch content (such as manioc, taro, plantains, yams and
potatoes) it was soon discovered that serious illnesses
inevitably resulted. Josué de Castro has coined the
appropriate phrase "specific hunger" for such ailments.
To operate the human machine, fuels (in other words
calories) are not enough. Many chemical nutrients used
up by the body have to be replaced, and these must come
from the food we eat. Such nutrients have to be supplied
the body in particular forms, for as the great French
nutritionist André Mayer put it some time before his
death, "man is an imperfect chemist."
Certain plants are able to convert minerals into food,
and there are animals which can derive essential vitamins
and certain proteins from other forms of food. Man's
chemistry, however, is even more imperfect than that of
many animals. Consequently our bodies require more
than just a certain number of calories to save us from
malnutrition or "specific hunger."
The first specific hungers man came to know about were
the protein deficiencies (or at least a number of them),
mineral deficiencies such as calcium and phosphorous,
and above all the vitamin deficiencies. Extreme cases of
such deficiencies have been studied in spectacular diseases
like scurvy, pellagra, beri-beri and rickets and have been
found to vanish almost miraculously when diets were
modified. And it is well-known how vitamin-conscious
people were in the first quarter of the present century.
Only in more recent years has it been discovered that

There is no unanimity even among experts as to the propor¬
tion of the world's people who suffer from hunger since there
is no internationally accepted yardstick for measuring
"hunger". A number of years ago FAO advanced the figure
of two-thirds of humanity but has since lowered this as
Dr. Sen's article on page 7 indicates. Professeur Cépède, of the
FAO Council and a world authority on nutrition, here explains
why, in his opinion, the first FAO figure still holds true.
Pierre Plttet, Geneva The history of China is a history of hunger. Over a period of 2,000 years it has experienced no
less than 1,829 greatfamines. Today most of Asia's people are still undernourished and their health
and working ability impaired by malnutritionthe "hidden hunger" caused by diet déficiences.
long before these diseases actually appear specific under¬
nutrition saps health and working capacity to such an
extent that the whole life of the individual suffering from
specific hunger is seriously impaired.
What is true for the average adult applies with even
greater force to those who must not only feed their bodies
but need extra nourishment to promote growth. Expectant
and nursing mothers, children and adolescents are
particularly vulnerable to the various forms of specific
hunger.
As early as 1936, Lord Boyd Orr in his book Food, Health
and Income, which still stands as the first authoritative
work on the economics of food, used the example of Great
Britain to show that only the expensive foods made it
possible to avoid the specific hungers and their conse¬
quences.
We may well ask therefore if specific hunger is merely
a qualitative problem, or to put it slightly differently, if
all one has to do to ensure that mankind is well fed is
to inform people what types of food should go into every
person's daily diet of say 2,500 calories. As Lord Boyd Orr
has pointed out, such a diet is more expensive and it is
precisely the poor sections of society and the impoverish¬
ed nations more than the others who are the real victims
of specific hunger.
Agronomists have added a new factor whereby the
specific hungers can be re-appraised globally just as
caloric under-nutrition was re-calculated. For if the food
products which are essential to a proper diet are sold at
a higher price than those which simply provide energy
(calories) then it is obvious that the former mean far
more in terms of "agricultural production" than the
latter.
One of the most serious of the specific hungers, affecting
chiefly the more vulnerable sections of the world's popula¬
tion, can be overcome only by certain protein products
such as milk, eggs, meat and fish. Most of these are not
obtained directly from agriculture since each acre of land
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

HIDDEN HUNGER (Cont'd)
THE SAME CHILD
AFTER 10 MONTHS
When Molok, a little Iranian girl
four months old, was brought
into a foundling home in Teheran,
she weighed less than seven
pounds (left). A pitiful sight,
with her skinny limbs and swollen
belly, she was in an advanced
stage of malnutrition. Ten months
later (right) thanks to proper food,
careful nursing and hygienic condi¬
tions she had fully recovered and
was nine pounds heavier. The
home where Molok was cared for
was started by a British woman
specialist sent to Iran by FAO to
advise on school feeding pro¬
grammes. Over a period of 18
months it took in 132 children and
managed to save the lives of 100.
But for every child as lucky as
Molok, there are also countless
thousands who do not survive.
Public Health Dept., Iran
The earth is not overpopulated-it can feed 1 0 times the present number
must first furnish the required vegetation which in turn
is consumed by the animals that provide us with the
protein food. The fact is, however, that the yield of such
a process is extremely low, so that one calorie of grass
or grain does not produce one calorie of milk or meat.
The first world survey proposed as a conservative co¬
efficient the consumption of seven initial (or vegetable)
calories for the production of one calorie of animal prod¬
uct. Since then we have used this ratio which offers a
satisfactory scale, far superior at any rate to the ones
which calculate food level in terms of final calories
consumed, or of calorific equivalents in cereals which
amounts to the same thing (1).
On this basis we can indicate that if the daily diet of
an undernourished person is made up for instance of
1,700 calories of plant foods and 100 calories of animal
products, this represents 1,700 + (100 x 7) 2,400 "initial
calories." Similarly, If a properly nourished person con¬
sumes 2,000 calories of plant foods and 1,200 of animal
products daily, this represents 2,000 + (1,200 X 7) = 10,400
"initial calories". In terms of agricultural production
the second diet is 4.5 times greater than the first although
in "calorific equivalents" it is only 1.75 times greater.
Thus while we have pointed out that it is incorrect
to assume that a diet composed of an adequate number
of calories is a guarantee of proper nourishment, we can
now state that a diet composed of an adequate number
of "vegetable or initial calories" does meet man's
"specific" needs as a general rule. But of course the
figure of 2,200 "intake" calories is no longer applicable as
the minimum requirement when speaking of initial cal¬
ories; the true figure ls more like 6,000 initial calories for
22
(1) M Cépède and M. Lengelle, "Economie alimentaire du
globe" (1953).
an average person, allowing for the special needs of chil¬
dren, adolescents and expectant and nursing mothers.
In fact as early as 1953 we estimated that the per capita
daily diet for Egypt and France ought to be 5,850 and
5,804 "initial" calories respectively.
The first world food survey showed that the average
level of food consumption in Egypt was 2,100 "final" cal¬
ories and 3,000 "initial" calories. The figures given for
France for both types of calorie calculations were 3,012
and 6,160. A diet of 5,800 vegetable calories would corres¬
pond to a diet of 2,200 calories of which 600 came from
animal protein products.
On the basis of these calculations we easily arrive once
again at the figure that the nutritionists of FAO and
particularly Lord Boyd Orr advanced In 1946 to the effect
that two persons out of three suffer from hunger, that is,
from malnutrition through caloric under-nutrition and/or
specific under-nutrition. This figure was reached by a
series of estimations based on an analysis of the first
world food survey and not as a result of a simple mathe¬
matical error as M. K. Bennett believed in 1954 and Colin
Clark and many others still maintain.
A diet made up almost exclusively of plant foods, despite
the statement that it satisfies human needs expressed in
terms of "calorific equivalents in cereals" not only is
"monotonous and uniform" but cannot possibly meet "the
physiological requirements of the human body." And
those persons whose diet consists only of such food "truly
suffer from hunger." Both Lord Boyd Orr and Josué
de Castro are nutritionists and food physiologists, and
their affirmations were based not merely on statistics but
on factors visible to anyone who observes how man lives.
No doubt tomorrow may see new "advances" made by
science so that some of the nutrients now found only in
animal products may one day be available, perhaps even
more cheaply, in cereal or synthetic foods. A number of

results have already been achieved with food preparations
for certain animals such as pigs whose nutritional phy¬
siology does not differ markedly from man's, and the
experiments being carried out look promising.
But the many catastrophic attempts to feed people
cheaply which have marked the development of the
science of nutrition since the time of Lavoisier should
incline us to caution. Yet despite these failures there is
room for hope.
It is one thing, however, to have faith in the progress
of science and technology and quite another to claim that
mankind already has enough to eat.
And it is quite another thing too to pretend that the
earth is now overpopulated or that it will become so when
our planet contains six to ten thousand million people.
The fact that our present world population of 3,000 mil¬
lion does not get enough to eat, that two persons out of
three live face to face with hunger, does not mean that
we are incapable of feeding twice this number properly
and adequately. Colin Clark has written : "If we con¬
sider a diet based on cereals we could have a total popu¬
lation of 90,000 million."
Let us assume that his calculations are correct (2) and
merely rectify the basic error taken from M. K. Bennett
by adding animal products to the requisite diet. This
reduces his figure of 90,000 million people to about
35,000 million who could be properly fed on the basis of
our present level of scientific knowledge. And this figure
is by no means a maximum, especially if we look ahead
to the future.
But this is precisely the scandalous situation of our
time and one which it is useless to seek to disguise: that
in a world capable of properly feeding 35,000 million
human beings and containing only 3,000 million, at least
2,000 million suffer from hunger.
Particularly since one of the consequences of mal¬
nutrition is malnutrition itself. For malnutrition ruins
man's health and Impairs his ability to work. Proper food
is not simply a goal of, but a factor in, economic develop¬
ment (3). As Albert Sarraut has rightly pointed out, in
too many countries the inhabitants "are undernourished
because they do not work and they do not work because
they are undernourished."
It is not possible here to refer to the many lengthy
studies which show the relationship which exists between
food, health and working productivity. Let me simply
recall one experiment carried out in Costa Rica during
the construction of the first Pan American Highway.
The men working on the highway had a very low output
when their diet consisted chiefly of sugar cane which
gave them the requisite calories intake. When this diet
was changed and they were properly fed, it was found
that their output improved to such an extent that it
equalled the standards of workmen in the temperate cli¬
mates of Western countries (4).
This experiment was so spectacular in its results that
the Costa Rlcan section of the Pan American Highway
has come to be known as "The Road That Food Built."
But the food needs of adults or even workmen are not
our most urgent problem today. The malnutrition of
expectant and nursing mothers, of children and adoles¬
cents, has far more serious consequences on a nation's
health and the capacity to feed its inhabitants and
achieve economic development.
Much has been said and written about the rise
in the expectancy of life in modern times, but
the individual who has already reached adulthood does
not have a much higher life expectancy whether he is
well fed or poorly fed. For although diet does condition
the adult's working productivity it is no longer the over¬
riding factor of adult health, provided of course that the
body has the strict caloric minimum required of living.
The situation is totally different, however, as regards
the body of a growing child or an expectant mother.
The eminent French pediatrician, Professor Robert Debré,
has pointed out that the sudden deficiency of animal pro¬
tein which strikes children in the undernourished coun¬
tries when they cease to be breast fed and are deprived of
their mother's milk, is without a doubt the most serious
of all the diseases which afflict mankind.
This disease of malnutrition, the acutest forms of which
have all been given the common name "kwashiorkor",
often attacks eight children out of ten and is responsible
for the higher death rate observed in these countries.
But above all it cripples the children who manage to
survive, and for the rest of their lives (which may be
quite long) they remain physically impaired and unable
to provide the necessary food either for themselves or
their family.
To feed the adults of today and especially the men and
women of tomorrow, means putting mankind in condition
to feed itself better, it means breaking the vicious cycle
referred to by A. Sarraut; it means launching a process
of development so that tomorrow, if we so will it, we
shall no longer have two persons out of three suffering
from hunger as we do today even if in the meantime the
population of the earth does double or even multiplies
ten times.
It is not by denying the tragic realities of today that
mankind will be deprived of its oldest enemy, hunger, but
by facing up to these realities squarely and honestly and
recognizing that they are the scandal of our time for
which ignorance is responsible and not the ungenerosity
of nature or the number of people on earth ignorance
and problems of economics... For if two people out of
three suffer from hunger, perhaps the economist should
tell us why.
(2) These are based on a harvest of just over 1-2 tons of
grain equivalents for each of the 17,300 million acres of the
world's recognized arable lands.
(3) M. Cépède "Food as a Production Factor": Indian Journal
of Agricultural Economics. 1959.
(4) Between 1943, when 70 per cent, and January 1946, when 23
88 per cent of the workmen were Costa Ricans, daily output
per man rose from 313 cubic yards to 1,440 cubic yards.
