At the Great Temple
of Abu Simbel
F ORGOTTEN for many centuries, engulfed by
desert sands and finally rediscovered in 1813,
Abu Simbel ls still a storehouse of secrets. What myste¬
rious purpose determined the activities of the engineers
who executed the orders of Rameses II? Why does it
embody such curious lighting effects which can hardly
result from mere chance? With what intent was the
interplay of rock and sunlight so expertly combined?
At a time when Unesco is leading a world campaign to
save these unique temples from being swallowed up for¬
ever by the swiftly-rising waters of the Nile (See The
Unesco Courier, Feb. 1960 and Oct. 1961) one special
aspect of the Great Temple deserves closer study: the
relationship between its structure and the rising sun.
The facade of the great temple faces east, but not due
east; it runs slightly north-east/ south-west. Throughout
the year it receives the first rays of the sun practically
full on as soon as the sun rises from the hills lying on
the opposite bank of the river.
The sun first lights up the frieze of baboons, over six
feet high (there were once 22 of them) topping the temple
facade. The Egyptians had observed that baboons are in
the habit of uttering loud cries just before sunrise. In
Egyptian mythology they became the helpers at the birth
of the god Re every sunrise after his dangerous journey
through the darkness of the underworld.
At dawn the Sun god leaves his nocturnal bark for the
ship of day and resumes his triumphal journey through
an eternally blue sky. The cohort of baboons dances
with joy to celebrate his victory over the lethargy of
night:
A few moments later, the rising sun is greeted by what
seems to be his own image: the god Re Horakhti (the
sun rising on the horizon) standing in an oblong niche
beneath the cohort of baboons above the high doorway
leading into the underground temple. His falcon head is
surmounted with the sun disc from which a cobra spits
fire. On his left hand and on his right, the pharaoh
offers up the supreme gift of an absolute sovereign: the
image of Maat, goddess of balance, of justice and of
truth.
But is the statue really that of Re Horakhti? Under
his right hand is a dog-headed sceptre (in Egyptian
"user") and, under his left hand, the traces of a small
statue of Maat, which is difficult to recognize today but
which appeared clearly in the drawings made at the
beginning of the 19th century when the temple was
rediscovered.
These elements, with the name of the god himself;
complete a rebus of the name Rameses chose for himself
when he acceded to the throne: User-Maat-Re. Thus,
here is an identification of the pharaoh with the god just
as, thousands of years later at Versailles, another "sun-
10 god", Louis XIV, identified himself with Apollo.
CONT'D ON PAGE 13
DANCING BABOONS
As the sun rises over the mountains
it lights up a frieze of baboons atop
the façade of the temple. Thus
begins the first act in the myste¬
rious relationship between the
sun and the temple that has long
intrigued egyptologists. In Egyptian
mythology the baboons salute the
sun god, dancing with joy to cele¬
brate his new victory over night.
THE SUN GOD
Moments later a new phase begins
in an ingenious reconciliation of
religious symbolism and architec¬
tural creation. Sunlight bathes the
statue of Re Horakhti, the sun god,
standing in a niche above the en¬
trance to the underground temple,
his falcon's head surmounted with
the sun disc decorated with a
cobra. The Pharoah, Rameses II,
identified himself with this god.
Photos Unesco-Almasy
INTO THE MOUNTAIN
Still rising, the sun shines full upon
the four giant statues of Rameses
that form the façade. The next
phase, as the rising sun penetrates,
at certain times of the year, within
the temple, eventually reaching the
sanctuary 200 feet from the thres¬
hold, evokes the enigma of Abu
Simbel. Why did the Pharoah's
priests and astronomers choose
this site in Upper Nubia to carve
out the great temple ? Was the
construction of the galleries and
chambers deep within the moun¬
tain "married" purposefully to the
yearly course of the sun in such a
way that its first rays reach the
gods in the sanctuary at fixed dates ?
And why are these dates significant ?
Unesco - van der Haagen
DEZ VOUS

RAMESES' MYSTERIOUS
ENCOUNTER AT DAWN
by Jan K. van der Haagen
T^
' t 	 «- _
WITH THE SUN IN THREE ACTS 11

Ideal horizon: equivalent to height of altar inside
the temple Seen from interior of the temple:
RISING SUN APPEARING
OVER THE HILLS
NEW LIGHT ON
AN ANCIENT RIDDLE
j. van der Haagen
Position of sun above horizon; _^^^^M
Up to 4 degrees inner sanctuary (B)is fully illuminated. ^^^^^^^
Above 54 degrees no rays of sun enter the temple. ^^^^r
\ M CROSS SECTION OF TEMPLE AXIS
/y. / m A. Entrance hall with colossi
/ y/ /ni m ^' lnncr sanctuary
/' /mi
1 7 /^KT~T^~^^
Inside entrance hall (A in drawing on right). Inner
sanctuary is in far background (B in drawing).
The sudden illumination of the statues of the
sun gods in the sanctuary deep in the heart of
the rock at Abu Simbel is a breathtaking spect¬
acle. Its religious meaning is clear: divine light
seeks out from within the bowels of the earth
"he who holds divinity within him". But what
is the deeper significance of the dates, in February
and October, when this phenomenon occurs ?
Perhaps the whole vast undertaking of construct¬
ing the temple was linked with the important
ceremony that took place on the Jubilee of
Rameses II in the 30th year of his long reign.
Other evidence suggests a link between the
temple and a brilliant star in the constellation
ofOrion which, about1260B.C, rosein the vicin¬
ity of the axis of the temple. Photos on these
pages show how astronomers, builders and engi¬
neers enticed the rising sun to illuminate the
colossi inside the entrance hall (left) and finally
reach the gods seated in the sanctuary (right).

National Geographie Institute, Paris
Below, left to right, seated behind the sanctuary altar:
the gods Ptah, associated with the underworld (never
lit by the sun), Amon, Rameses and Re Horakhti.
ENCOUNTER AT DAWN (Cont'd)
A faint glimmer
on the wall
A few moments later, still rising, the sun lights up the
colossal statue of King Rameses (more than C5 feet high)
who has now discarded his divine metamorphosis. While
It was customary to place the statue of a sovereign close
to the entrance of a temple built on his command, here,
at Abu Simbel, the entire facade actually consists of the
four statues of the king.
Between the moment when it lights up Re Horakhti
and the moment when it shines full upon the statues of
Rameses, the rising sun reaches the entrance of the tem¬
ple. Its first rays faintly illuminate the upper part of the
wall at the back of the famous chamber of statues. This
chamber or entrance hall corresponds to the "first court"
in classic Egyptian open-air temples. It is divided into
three aisles by a double row of four pillars against each of
which stands a statue of the pharaoh.
Although these pillars arc generally called "Oslrian",
they represent Rameses and not Osiris. It is true that
the pharaoh holds in his hands the crook and the scourge
which are the attributes of Osiris, sovereign of the
Empire of the Dead, but these objects had already long
become the insignia of royalty.
In conformity with the classic Egyptian plan, the corri¬
dors become narrower and narrower, and the successive
chambers smaller and smaller, the ground sloping upwards
as the roof slopes downwards.
Viewed from any spot on the globe, the sun ls seen to
rise at the same point only twice a year. Consequently,
in the underground temple of Abu Simbel the play of light
deep within the earth varies constantly. When the sum¬
mer solstice comes round and the sun rises to the north
of the axis of the temple, the seat and legs of the statue
of Rameses on the facade to the north of the entrance
prevent the first rays of the sun from penetrating the
temple, and a little later In the morning it ls the lintel of
the doorway that serves as a screen.
Not until September 10 do the sun's rays reach
the face of the first colossus on the left In the
big chamber. On the following days they reach further
In, and a photograph which I took on October 0, 1959,
shows that the last colossi on the southern side were the
first to receive the light.
The culminating point of the cycle lies between October
10 and 30, during which period the first rays of the sun
reach the last chamber, the holy of holies, situated in the
heart of the mountain 200 feet from the threshold. It is
at this time that the sun-gods seated against the back
wall are illuminated, either separately or in pairs, and
each totally or partially according to the date.
These gods are Amon, the sun-god of Thebes (the capi¬
tal at the time), Re Horakhti and, seated between them,
a god among gods. Rameses himself. The god Ptah, one
of those who preside over funeral ceremonies, is not en¬
titled to the divine light and, except for his left arm, he
remains in perpetual darkness.
Henri Bonneval, leader of the Geographical Institute
of Paris expeditions, who made the photogrammetrlc
recordings of all the temples in Egyptian Nubia, has estab¬
lished that the sun appears on the horizon exactly in
the axis of the temple on October 19 and on that day its
first rays largely illuminate Amon and Rameses.
As autumn draws to a close the sun's first rays reach
the colossi on the north side and finally those seated
nearest the entrance. After November 30, the sun is once
more banished from the sanctuary. But less than a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13
Unesco-Almasy

ENCOUNTER AT DAWN (Cont'd)
Search for a forgotten star
month after the winter solstice, on January 20, it shines
inside once again, and in January, February and March,
the phenomena just described take place in the opposite
order. Amon and Rameses are reached by the first rays
on February 21.
The sudden illumination of these statues deep under¬
ground is breathtaking. Its religious Implication seems
clear: divine light seeks out from the very bowels of the
earth the man who holds divinity within him. As the
temple seems deliberatly to have been constructed on an
axis not exactly at right angles to the facade which
had to run according to the cleavage plane of the rock
the question arises as to whether the dates of February
21 and October 19 have a particular significance.
The spring equinox (March 21 or 22) and that of
autumn (September 22 or 23) immediately jump to mind.
Searching for an explanation of the difference of one
month. I wondered whether the phenomenon called the
precession of the equinoxes might not be involved. In
the Platonic year, which lasts nearly 26,000 ordinary years,
the celestial poles describe wide circles, finally returning to
their point of departure. Thus the entrance of the Pyra¬
mid of Cheops was orientated according to the French
astronomer Camille Flammarion towards a star which
then played the part of the pole star. Similarly, might
not the axis of the great temple at Abu Simbel be orien¬
tated towards a point which today has no particular
significance, but which, when the temple was built, was
that of the rising sun at the time of the equinox?
Astronomy soon brought me the proof that the
precession of the equinoxes played no part
here; so I had to look for another explanation. Could the
dates of October 19 and February 21 have been of special
importance in Egypt in the time of Rameses II?
The French Egyptologist, Louis Christophe, who retraced
the history of the construction of the underground temple,
after detailed studies of the figures carved on the facade
and the bas-reliefs inside, concluded that the decoration
of the oldest parts must have been completed before the
26th year of Rameses II's reign, and that of the principal
chambers before the 34th. The temple would thus have
been built towards the time of the sovereign's Jubilee,
in the thirtieth year of his reign, the famous Heb-Sed.
The Heb-Sed was one of the important ceremonies in
Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs and probably the
survival of a prehistoric custom which consisted in putting
the head of the tribe to death with great pomp lest he
become senile and harmful to the community. On the
occasion of his Jubilee, the Pharaoh had to prove that he
was still in full possession of his faculties, after which he
was enthroned as his own successor.
According to Louis Christophe, the first sculptures at
Abu Simbel are, as It were, a tentative move to identify
Rameses with the sun-god. The identification grew
closer as his reign proceeded, to become complete in the
30th year. But what was the exact date of Rameses
first Jubilee? It seems to be unknown. Nevertheless, the
Jubilee was followed by others at much shorter intervals
and we know that the fifth and sixth Jubilees of Rameses,
who reigned for nearly 70 years, were celebrated during
the first days of the fifth month of the civil year. In 1260
B.C. that day corresponded to our own October 22.
From this fact, Louis Christophe concluded that the
building of the temple was begun with the Heb-Sed in
mind, and that it was on that solemn day that the
Pharaoh had been deified.
It will be noticed that there is a difference of two or
three days between the date of the royal Jubilee estab-
J4 lished by Louis Christophe and the date at which the
sun Tises in the axis of the temple. Perhaps it is possible
to reduce this difference to one or two days.
Here is how I think this may be done. It seems
probable that the astronomer in Thebes or Memphis
who was asked to determine the exact point where the
sun rises on October 22 at Abu Simbel did not know
details of the site Memphis, for example', is nearly 800
miles from Abu Simbel. The astronomer may in conse¬
quence have based his calculations on an "ideal" horizon
situated on the same level as the temple. In reality the
sun rises at Abu Simbel about five minutes after it crosses
the "ideal" horizon since on the right bank of the Nile,
about 3,600 yards from the temple, there runs a chain
of hills sufficiently high to delay the sun's appearance.
Moreover, since, in the month of October and at that
place, the orbit of the sun makes an angle of about 66
degrees with the horizon, the first segment of the sun's
disc appears at a slightly more southern point than that
where the sun clears the "ideal" horizon. The problem
ls further complicated by the fact that the crest of hills
is far from level and at one point dips steeply.
But does the "astronomical error" really provide a full
explanation? Even taking into account the phenomenon
which led to the introduction of the bissextile year, it is
evident that a discrepancy of at least 24 hours exists
between the day the sun rises in the axis of the temple
and the date of the Jubilee. Now, if Louis Christophe's
theory is correct and the temple offers proof of the deifi¬
cation of Rameses II on the day of the Heb-Sed, the date
on which the first rays fully illuminate the statue of the
king is much more important than that on which the
sun rises in the axis of the temple.
The rays of sunlight do so a little after October 19, and
a photograph taken on October 21, 1961, shows the sunlit
statue of the king. Taking into account the difference
of one day which we have just mentioned as a possible
"astronomical error", this brings us to the day of the
Jubilee. At the same time, the fact that the depression
in the crest of the hills is not in the axis of the temple,
but slightly to the south of it, takes on particular signi¬
ficance. On October 21 and 22, the sun seems to keep its
point of rising as long as possible in the neighbourhood
of the depression as if to give its first rays the longest
possible opportunity of lighting up the sun-god.
This explanation, of course, is based on the assumption
that the ancient Egyptians had great ability in the fields
of theory and practical skills. We know this was already
the case one thousand years before Rameses. Moreover,
once the main lines of the undertaking had been estab¬
lished by calculation, it was still possible for the builders
to make rectifications. The size of the statues, for
example, enabled them to regulate the play of light
precisely as it happens the statues are not all the same
size. For this reason it would perhaps be wiser to believe
that around the year 1260 B.C., the Heb-Sed fell, not on
October 22, but on the day we now call October 21.
T here remains another hypothesis the possi¬
bility of there being a link between the temple
and the fixed stars. Although the precession of the
equinoxes does not change down the centuries the
direction in which the sun rises, it is equally true that the
appearance of the night sky was very different 3,000 years
ago from what it is today. One may reasonably wonder
whether the axis of the temple was not related to the
appearance of a star which was important to the
Egyptians.
At my request, Henri Bonneval carried out research on
this question and his findings are astonishing: for a
number of years around 1260 B.C., an exceptionally
brilliant star in the constellation of Orion did in fact rise
in the immediate vicinity of the axis of the temple.
Orion was one of the rare constellations in ancient
Egypt that modern astronomers have been able to iden-

PRIESTLY VIGIL IN THE CHAPEL OF RE HORAKHTI. At the northern end of the temple terrace at Abu Simbel stands a
little building known as the Chapel of Re Horakhti. What was its original purpose and why was Its axis pointed nearly 30 degrees
south instead of at right angles to the terrace ? One of the hypotheses outlined by Jan van der Haagen following his Intensive his¬
torical and astronomical research throws new light on this question. The chapel appears to be orientated In such a way that a priest
posted in the centre of the chapel would, at the moment of the winter solstice, see the rising sun exactly In Its axis. Until now
there has been no direct evidence that the Egyptians determined the solstices. Photo, Documentation Centre on Ancient r£yl,t
tlfy with certainty. Everyone Is familiar with the three
brilliant stars of Orion's belt, known for centuries as the
Three Wise Men. The middle star, the one we are concer¬
ned with, bears the Arabic name of Alnltam.
Today, thanks to the famous "astronomical ceiling"
on the tomb of Senenmut in the necropolis of Thebes,
we know that Orion, or rather, the three stars in Orion's
belt, were of great significance to the Egyptians. Various
texts also make It clear that Orion (Sah for the Egyptians)
was identified with Osiris, the god of resurrection.
"Osiris has reappeared in Orion" says one of the texts
of the pyramids.
It seems that the Egyptian calendar was based on the
heliacal rising of Sah and Sothis (our Sirius). The
200-feet-long tunnel formed by the temple was obviously
an invaluable aid in determining the moment when the
rising star first appeared in the faint light of dawn. The
tunnel formed an ideal screen against the rays of the sun
when it rose immediately after the star.
There is yet another hitherto unsuspected relationship
between the great temple at Abu Simbel and the yearly
course of the sun. At the northern extremity of the
terrace which runs along the great temple, a terrace
bordered with statues which represent Rameses and
Horus the Falcon alternatively, there is a curious small
edifice without a roof. The eastern facade has something
of the form a pylon and the building is known as the
Chapel of Re Horakhti.
" A small staircase and door lead up to it. In the centre
of the building stands what is generally called an altar.
However, this altar is not intended for offerings. A stone
staircase leads up to it and the priest In office, surrounded
by four stone baboons, one in each corner, could watch a
particular point on the horizon from between the crennels.
The baboons and the small obelisks standing to the north
and to the south of what is conventionally called the
altar (now preserved in the Cairo museum) prove that it
"/as indeed a sanctuary consecrated to the sun.
But there ls something unusual about this building.
Its orientation Is very different from that of the terrace
and consequently from that of the great temple. The
little temple is orientated further to the south.
What ls the reason for this? I wondered whether the
axis might not have been orientated in such a way that
the priest looked straight at the point where the sun
appears In the winter solstice a point which makes an
angle of 116 degrees with the north. Vital Information
on this point came from the Geographical Institute of
Paris. The axis of the small temple makes an angle of
about 118 degrees with the north. The difference of two
degrees is negligable considering that the axis of the
small temple ls only a few metres long.
Finally, we may recall that the eastern wall of the
little chapel has the form of a pylon. According to the
theory advanced by Mrs. C. Desroches-Noblccourt (Chair
of Egyptian Antiquities. Ecole du Louvre, Parts) the pylon
embodies an ancient Egyptian myth about the creation
of the world and does so to celebrate the winter solstice
and the rebirth of the young sun-god who succeeds
Osiris.
What will remain of the play of light between the sun
and the temple when Abu Simbel has been raised over
200 ieet a height about equal to the towers of Notre
Dame Cathedral? The line of the horizon to the east
will be a little lower, and In consequence the baboons
will greet the sun five minutes earlier than they have
been doing for centuries. But, as three thousand two
hundred years ago, with a difference of barely one or two
days, the rays of the sun will light up Rameses and the
sun-gods at fixed times, leaving Ptah in eternal darkness.
Jan K. van der Haagen, former chief of the Museums and
Monuments Division in Unesco's Department of Cultural
Activities, is now director of Unesco's Nubian Monuments
Service. He is the author of works on loth century 15
landscape painting in the Netherlands and on icono¬
graphy.
