As the year 1 962 draws to a close, The Unesco Cou¬
rier submits the following article to the contemplation
and reflection of its readers. The article is the inaugu¬
ral address that Ritchie Calder delivered in November
1 961 after his appointment to the Chair of Internation¬
al Relations at the University of Edinburgh. Winner
of the Unesco Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of
Science, Ritchie Calder is well-known to our readers
for the many articles we have published in past issues.
EARTH
sixteen times a day,
a man-made satellite
can circumnavigate the earth
By his own ingenuity, Homo sapiens, the
Earthling, has shrunk his world to the dimensions
of a very small planet. In the arrogance of our
conceit, which puts Man and his brain at the very
centre of the universe, we have never been quite
convinced by the astronomers when they have tried
to tell us how insignificant the world is in the
immensities of Space. But now the Space
Engineers, and the Astronauts, beating the bounds
of our global parish, have reminded us how relatively
small it is.
In the spirit of new adventure, one may regard
the world as a departure-platform for fugitives to
the moon or a launching pad for escapades to other
planets or even beyond our solar system, into other
universes. But the EarthUngs who cannot so escape
must recognize that on its relatively limited surface,
3,000 million people today, 4,000 million in twenty
years' time, and 6,000 million or 7,000 miUon forty
years from now, wiU have to contrive to Uve and to
work together. Or by the neglect of wisdom or
the abuse of human ingenuity, to die together.
An eye, human or electronic, in an artificial
satellite in orbit, sees no poUtical frontiers; no
ideological curtains; and no differentiation of races.
It might see H-Bombs going off as the signals of
tensions. It might see the smoke of industrial
cities, distinguishing the highly-developed, from the
underdeveloped, countries; but, in general, it would
see a globe of which only three-tenths was land and
seven-tenths covered by oceans; mountain ranges
reduced to wrinkles; evidence of surviving forests;
tawny expanses of hot deserts which cover a fifth
of its surface and cold deserts which cover another
fifth. It might with difficulty distinguish the
pattern of cultivation, of arable or cropped lands,
which accounts for only one-tenth of the land-
surface. That is the nature of humanity's famUy
estate of which, at the moment, we are the
improvident stewards.
T:he world is not just
the relic of a cosmic incident
It provides the biosphere, the Uving-space, for
the evolutionary process which, we Uke to think,
had its consummation In Man.
But with a wisdom which we have not demons¬
trated convincingly so far, we must recognize that
that biosphere and that evolutionary process include
other species with which we can coexist or which
we can stupidly destroy. Stupidly because our
relations with these other species are a condition
of our own survival.
A lump of soil no bigger than a football contains
a micro-organic population greater than the human
population of the world. That micro-organic popu¬
lation includes the germs and fungi which evoca¬
tively suggest disease or danger but which, in other
forms, are indispensable to our existance. In the
same way, we think of insects as deserving insec¬
ticide and other creatures as deserving pesticide,
but in the process we can kill those which are
essential to our ultimate needs.
For example, in order to get margarine, we
cleared big areas in Tanganyika of brush and tsetse
flies which it harboured, but in the process we got
rid of the bees which were needed to pollinate
alternative crops.
Similarly, for our short-term, and short-sighted,
needs we have destroyed the vegetation cover. We
have cut down forests the Sunday edition of one
American newspaper consumes in a single year the
yield of a forest area half as big again as that of my
native county of Angus. We have damaged the
vegetation cover in other ways, preventing the
absorption of water by the natural sponge through
which it seeps into the underground springs. As a
result the scouring rains sluice the soil off the hills,
cause floods and eventual erosion.
In the Ufetime of the United States, over two
hundred and eighty million acres of arable, crop
and range land have been destroyed more than ten
times the productive acreage of the United King¬
dom.
In the 1930's there was
the apocalyptic warning
when the midday sun
of New York was blotted out
by the dust of the Dakotas over a thousand miles
away. But only five years ago, the airliner on which
I was flying to Winnipeg could not land because at
noon we had flown into night. When we finally
broke through it was to find the city and everything
in it covered with khaki mud, spread by the rain
which had enabled us to land.
The "night", the pall which had blotted out the
sun, was dust. At 8,000 ft. the dust had been that
of Texas 1,500 miles away. At various levels, the
samples were from Oklahoma, Nebraska and the
Dakotas. The heavy particles nearer the ground
were those of Manitoba itself. We had been caught
in the cUmax of a dust storm which had whipped
topsoil from the middle of a continent.
Only slowly and recently have we come to
recognize that wild animals are not something with
which mankind is at war but a part of the balance
of Ufe, which is delicately adjusted. Recently, I
was at the Arusha Conference, in East Africa,
caUed by the International Union for the Conser¬
vation of Nature, under the sponsorship of Unesco
and the Food and Agriculture Organization. It
was an emergency meeting because so many new
states are becoming independent and the natu¬
ralists of Europe and America were afraid that the
Africans might decimate the game animals by
slaughter and destroy their habitat by immature
husbandry and indiscriminate cattle-raising.
It was gratifying, and at the same time humbling,
to find that the Africans themselves were tradition-
aUy more aware of the role of wild Ufe in their

LINGS IN THE SPACE AGE
by Ritchie Calder
own ecology than the white man has hitherto
shown in his intervention in that continent. The
African recognized that in the precarious nature of
the savannah lands, big game and even the tsetse
fly were a decisive factor.
Nearly four million square miles of the African
continent are held in fief by the tsetse fly. Because
of the fatal diseases which its bite produces in man
and his domesticated animals but does not produce
in the wild animals, the tsetse has preserved great
tracts which might have been destroyed by shifting
cultivation and by over-grazing.
It was suggested at Arusha that a monument
ought to be raised to the tsetse fly as "The Saviour
of Africa" and it was Africans who insisted that
before modern methods to remove the tsetse were
employed, their people must be trained to husband
well this legacy of land.
More than that, Prime Minister Nyerere of Tan¬
ganyika, volunteered the Arusha Manifesto pledging
his government, with the endorsement of all Afri¬
cans present, to preserve the wild life and their
habitat "for their children's grandchildren."
This kind of wisdom, this recognition of a world
we share, not only with other people but with other
creatures, has not been conspicuous in those nations
which we call advanced, or scientific.
In the past, civilizations have developed in loca¬
lities or regions. They have flourished and decayed
but always another civilization could succeed them.
Today, ours is a global civilization. It Is not
bounded by the Tigris and the Euphrates; it is the
whole world. It is a closed community so interde¬
pendent that every mistake we make is exaggerated
on a world scale.
For the first time in history, man has the power
of veto over the evolution of his species. We share
the biosphere. Into that we have injected, in the
past sixteen years, man-made radioactivity. Ele¬
ments which did not exist in nature have been
indiscriminately scattered over the face of the earth,
to combine in all living things.
Today there is not a child
in the world that does not have
radiostrontium in its bones
At least to some degree. The amounts may be
insignificant and the possible effects may be emo¬
tionally exaggerated and medically in dispute.
Much is unproven, much is unknown. But that only
emphasizes that men, on defective evidence or in
positive ignorance, are recklessly tampering with
the biosphere on which the present and future of
their race depends.
We have had plenty of reminders of the dangers
of neglecting Claude Bernard's warning to his
fellow-scientists a century ago "True science
teaches us to doubt and in ignorance to refrain."
Radiostrontium was overlooked in the calculations
of the possible effects of H-bomb testing, because
the mechanism by which radioactive krypton decays
into strontium-90 had not been taken into account
and because the mechanism of stratospheric storage
I
and the reappearance of radioactive particles in the
atmosphere had not been realized.
Nature, with grim Irony, brinßs the radioactive
chickens home to roost. Nuclear tests may be made
In remote places the Marshall Islands, Christmas
Island, the Sahara, behind the Urals or In the
Arctic, but the radioactivity will reappear in the
countries which originated such tests as, well, of
course, as countries which were not party to them.
Whether exploded near the Equator or beyond the
Arctic Circle, the radioactive garbage of those
bombs will be swept into the Jet streams of the
Radioactive Forties, the latitudes which include the
United States, Britain, France and the Soviet Union.
This, with all the emotional and political over¬
tones which it produces in international relations,
is another reminder that wc all share one biosphere
and of the global risks of tampering with it.
t took Homo sapiens
at least 200,000 years to
multiply and reach the present
figure of 3,000 million
It will, on present trends, take less than forty
years to double that figure. There ls no way, short
of cataclysm, man-made or otherwise, by which the
figure can be less than 4.000 million by 1930. It may
be more but it cannot be less.
In the lifetime of the younger politicians of today
the Demographic Revolution, which takes no
account of political Ideology, will have completely
changed the pattern of world politics. Whereas at
the beginning of this century, there was one Euro¬
pean to every two Asians, by the end of this century
the ratio will have become 1 to 4and here the
term "European" includes the entire Soviet Union.
Latin America will, in the twentieth century, have
Increased its population tenfold and the remaining
continents will have increased fourfold.
As the experts of the United Nations said In The
Future Growth of World Population "Wc are swim¬
ming against the tide of evolution but having disco¬
vered how to increase the flood, we have not aLso.
through biological science, the means of arresting
it." In the next twenty years, we have Inescapably
therefore to contrive to provide board and lodging
for a least another 1,000,000,000 people.
In fact. It means that. In political wisdom as well
as decent humanity, we have to double the present
food supply because more than half the world's
population is undernourished and the pressures
upon the governments of new states are to provide
proper nourishment.
I have. In the past fourteen years, been among
the wandering Bedouins in the desert, the Dyaks of
Equatorial Borneo, the Eskimos in the Arctic, the
peoples of the hinterlands of Latin America and
Africa and Asia. In one way or another their lives
and their destinies have been consciously touched
by scientific and technological achievement.
Many of them have acquired their freedom
there are nearly twice as many nations In the U.N. 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

EARTHLING'S IN THE SPACE AGE (Cont'd)
as there were when it was founded. But when the
intoxicating effects of political Independence wear
off, there is the mornlng-after-the-nlght-before.
People are apt to wake up and discover that free¬
dom has been robbed of its meaning; that they are
Just as hungry, or more hungry; just as poor, or
more Impoverished; just as sick or more disease-
ridden, and just as frustrated in their seeking for a
better way 'of Ufe.
But there is a new factor in their frustration:
they know that the wit of man can produce more
food and that disease is not the will of the gods
but can be cured by means available to man and
that there are so many things which they knew
they wanted but now know they need.
Through the limitedfinancially that isacti¬
vities of the U.N. agencies, of the U.N. expanded
technical assistance fund and now of the special
fund and by the much more lavish examples of
bilateral aid, people have been shown what is scien¬
tifically and technically possible. But it is not
enough to show them.
To demonstrate what might be done to people
who have not the means to do it is just tantalizing.
It is just "window-shopping"walking along
Princes Street with nothing in your pocket and with
plateglass between you and the things you have
been taught to want.
The peoples of the- emerging
countries have not the means
to go shopping in the
supermarket of science
Prof. P.M.S. Blackett has termed it. They
cannot even afford the bargain basement.
We say, and are emphatically right in saying so,
that the object of this kind of assistance is to help
people to help themselves throwing them a rope
with which to haul themselves out of the morass
of poverty. But this is no Indian rope-trick the
rope has to be tethered to something, and a winch
would help to haul them out more quickly. As it is,
the rope is slipping.
After ten years of this new social philosophy by
which governments acknowledged that they were
responsible, not only for their own people, but for
other, less fortunate peoples as well, the gap between
the prosperity of the highly-advanced countries and
the poverty of the countries struggling for develop¬
ment has not closed it has widened. The rich
countries are richer and the poor countries are
poorer despite the thousands of millions which
have been spent on aid.
The explanation is not that this aid has been
squandered although some of it has, because it
was given for the wrong motives and applied in the
wrong ways or because the recipients themselves
have misused it.
But the true explanation was that of the late Dag
Hammarskjold. He pointed out what the phrase
"You've never had it so good" meant in reverse
in the underdeveloped countries.
"A fall of only 5 per cent in the average of their
export prices is approximately equivalent to the
entire inflow of capital which they receive not only
from International Bank Loans but from all other
public and private loans and government grants."
The prices of some staple primary products of
those countries to the advantage of the richer
countries which buy them have dropped, not 5 per
cent, but from 10 to 47 per cent! One cannot disso¬
ciate that from the political consequences.
Such circumstances have, in this closely inter¬
dependent world, global repercussions. This was
very succinctly put by Mr. Ernest Bevin when, as
Foreign Secretary, he was trying to convince an
audience of Lancashire housewives that foreign
affairs were kitchen politics. It was at the time of
a worse-than-usual fat shortage. He said:
"You complain because you can't get fish suppers
in Lancashire. Why can't you get fish suppers?
The Fleetwood trawlers are bringing in the fish and
there's plenty of potatoes. But the fish-fryers can't
fry. And why can't they fry? Because there's
trouble in Burma and because we haven't got things
straightened out in Slam. And because of all that
India can't get rice from these countries. And
because India has to grow more food for its own
people, we can't get groundnuts from India. And
because we can't get groundnuts from India, the
fish-fryers can't get the oil. And you can't get your
fish and chips."
Governments, when the markets skid, cannot
"lift themselves by their own bootstraps" or, if
they do it is by duress. In the meantime their
peoples ' will endure the Misery-Go-Round of
Poverty.
Sick people cannot work to procure, or earn, food.
So they are undernourished, and because they are
sick and undernourished they remain ignorant,
because the sick and hungry cannot learn how to
Improvise or improve their condition. And because
they are sick and hungry and ignorant, they remain
poor and endure squalor, and because they Uve like
animals they breed Uke animals.
With more mouths to feed, there is less food for
everyone. And so the roundabout of wretchedness
goes on. Democracy is a word which echoes mean-
inglessly in empty bellies.
Dr. Sen, the Director-General of F.A.O., has
launched "The Freedom from Hunger Campaign."
He might not have had to do so if his predecessor,
Lord Boyd Orr, had not been frustrated in his
efforts to set up a World Food Board, fourteen years
ago. It would have taken politics out of food and,
food out of politics; in the phrase of former Mayor
Fiorello La Guardia of New York, "It would have
taken human lives off the ticker-tapes." It would
have ensured that food would get into the bellies of
people who need it and that farmers would not
suffer from over-production.
Per capita until this year we have had, globally,
enough calories, even for the increasing world popu¬
lation. But that, too, is grossly misleading. What
is important is not per capita but per stomach and
more than half the world's population have not
enough to eat, and, short of death from starvation,
have never had food adequate for well-being.
By 1960 the total world stocks
of surplus grain had reached
the incredible figure
of 125,000,000 tons
Enough to provide the full calorie needs of
450,000,000 people for a complete year. Or an extra
200 calories a day to the Asian population for more
than three yearsas Dr. Norman Wright, Deputy
Director-General of F.A.O., points out in the
valuable British Association symposium published
as Hunger: Can It Be Averted?
No one should be so foolish as to think that the
distribution of those vast surpluses, even if it were
possible would solve the problem of hunger. Reliev¬
ing immediate stresses, yes. By distribution through
such agencies as Unicef, yes. By turning food into
currency, yes. Supplies of food can be made avail¬
able to governments to help present needs and the
proceeds can be used by a government to help its
own agriculture to increase its yields in future
years. That is .the only permanent solutionto
enable countries and regions to produce their food
requirements.
It can be done. We do not need to imagine food
artificially produced by photosynthesis. The scien¬
tific know-how already exists. The knowledge we

have got, applied with wisdom, can increase the
yields from existing acreages. By plant-breeding we
can extend the food-growing acreages into what
seemed inhospitable regions.
The Unesco Arid Zone Committee has done
remarkable work in showing how deserts might be
developed. I have no doubt, having been in the
Arctic seeing whether it might become part of our
habitable world, that production, if need be, can be
extended there.
As far as those oceans which cover seven-tenths
of our globe are concerned, we are at the cave-man
stage.
At sea we hunt our food
and do not husband it
Sea-farming and sea-ranching
are perfectly feasible
The great international survey of the Indian
Ocean, sponsored by Unesco, In which 25 survey
ships of 15 nations are taking part, will not only
tell us a great deal about that birthplace of the
monsoons but also about its biological possibilities
and its food prospects.
The World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund have done a great huma¬
nitarian work in conquering disease and relieving
suffering. It is not too much to claim that, with
their very considerable help, modern medicine, with
scientific drugs, such as penicillin, has saved more
lives in the last ten years, than have been lost in
all the wars in human history. Drugs are the in¬
struments of death-control and, as such, have part
responsibiUty for the rising tide of population.
But reverting to our Misery-Go-Round, I would
remind you that ill people cannot produce, or earn,
food. Well people can. In rice-growing regions, the
critical, and very manual, functions of transplant¬
ing and harvesting rice coincide with the malarial
seasons. Three out of five may be sick of the fever.
ReUeved of malaria, there will be five pairs of hands
and the yields will be increased. Malaria control
extends acreages by recovering land from the mos¬
quito and clearing malarial jungle for cultivation.
Yet even this work is in hazard. Malarial control,
through modern insecticides, has freed hundreds of
millions from the fever. But the mosquitoes are
developing insecticide resistance and are multiply¬
ing and what was endemic malaria may become
epidemic malaria. It is a race between Man and
the Mosquito.
It means malaria eradication, not just control.
If, by modern drugs which are available, the para¬
site of malaria can be removed from the blood of
humans before the resurgence of the mosquitoes,
there wiU be no disease for the mosquito to trans¬
mit. It is perfectly feasible. What is needed is the
will and the financial support of governments for
the World Health Organization's Campaign.
Recently, the United Nations held in Rome a
conference on "New Sources of Energy." Ironically,
atomic energy was never mentioned. The new
sources were the oldest of all sun, wind and geo-
thermal energy, the heat in the crust of the earth.
It was a "Do-it-yourself" conference telling the
developing countries how they might contrive,
improvise, and adapt methods of harnessing the sun
and the winds to their domestic and industrial
needs.
We found that geothermal energy has immense
possibilities. We have thought of it, up to now, as
the self-evident showings the geysers, the bubbling
mudpools and the gases escaping from rock fissures.
Such sites have been usefully developed for power
and the production of electrical energy In Iceland,
CaUfornla, New Zealand and Italy.
But it has been shown that drilling into the geo¬
thermal structures, of which these are just the
obvious manifestations, will give temperatures even
twenty times as high as the open leaks. It Is pos¬
sible to tap oil as required develop power units to
suit requirements, which, of course, ls Just what
developing countries need. They have to have
power-units with which their Infant industries can
grow upas our Industrial Revolution did. from
factory steam engines to the industrial conurbations
with huge generating stations.
Now here Is an Interesting fact: the First Indus¬
trial Revolution derived from access to fossil fuels
coal In the first Instance, and then oil and natural
gas. But, as the World Power Conference has con¬
sistently reminded us, there ls a geographical and
geological "joker" In this. Over nine-tenths of all
the accessible coal and eight-tenths of the proven
oil Is north of Latitude 20 N.
So the countries outside that zone, Including mast
of the countries we now call underdeveloped, could
have no role In the First Industrial Revolution
except the one they had as the providers of food
and raw materials for the workers and factories
of the fossil-fuel countries.
But if we look at the configurations of geother¬
mal energy, we can Identify It with the great vol¬
canic arcs. From Kamchatka, through Japan, the
Philippines, Indonesia, the South Pacific Islands, to
New Zealand. From Alaska, down the west coast of
Canada and U.S.A. to Mexico, Ecuador, Peru and
Chile, to Terra del Fuego. From Iceland, via the
great range of submarine volcanoes, through Tris¬
tan da Cunha, round the Cape of Good Hope.
Another down the Great Rift from Ethiopia, through
Uganda, Congo, Kenya, Tanganyika and Mozam¬
bique.
Then there is a geothermal region from Italy
through Greece and the Middle East to Afghanistan.
Note that nature has provided geothermal energy in
places where it failed to provide fossil fuels. With
U.N. help countries are to look for this source of
energy which, by default of atomic energy, may
speed their development.
For the first time in history,
Man, the Earlliling, has
the power of veto over
continuing evolution
He can exercise that veto by the nuclear destruc¬
tion of the race, or, by default In handling the pro¬
blems of starvation, prove that Malthus was right.
He can ambitiously reach out to the farther
planets, but his species as such must survive on the
surface of the earth, subsist from the nine Inches
of top-soil which feeds, clothes and shelters him or
from the seas from which he emerged hundreds of
millions of years ago.
All the majesty of his mind can be dethroned by
his stomach. Man can feast like Bclshazzar and
Ignore the writing on the wall. He can spend
£40,000 million a year on the defence of peace and
Ignore the real content of the peace he Is supposed
to be defending. He can say, "My group, at least,
shall survive"', and like the locust-men of Attila',
Genghis Khan and Tamerlane and Hitler, try to
wrest lebensraum at other people's expense.
He can split the atom and release the power of
matter and use this, his greatest discovery, to poi¬
son the goodness of his earth and destroy his
species. He can outboast the Ancients, who in the
arrogance of their material success built pyramids
as the gravestones of their civilizations, for Modern
Man can throw his pyramids into Space and they
may orbit eternally round a planet which died of
his neglect.
Or he may choose to use his science and his
wisdom to co-operate with all his kind in the 7
peaceful enrichment of his Earth and of the people
who live on it.
