UNESCO SURVEYS
A SPECIAL
ARJD-LAND PROBLEM
^pP!
Y. Bagrianski, U.S.S.R.
Milos Hrbas, Prague
From as far as the eye can see a silver ribbon of
water flows down a newly excavated drainage canal
in the Soviet Socialist Republic of Uzbekistan.

THE DEADLY
Tashkent is one of those names on the map
that ring with adventure. Long before clumsy
galleons set out for new worlds, it throbbed with life along
the main artery of trade between East and West. It was
one of the great caravan halting places of Central Asia
on the silk route from China to Europe. Here, travellers
halted on their journeys, exchanged their goods and their
ideas and, perhaps, learned that what they had in common
outweighed what set them apart.
Recently, I watched Tashkent live through another such
adventure. The setting was a modern, rambling city of
1,000,000, the capital of the Uzbekistan Socialist Republic
in the Soviet Union. The camel caravans had been
replaced by jet airliners and plodding donkeys had given
way to trams and trolleybuses, but that atmosphere of the
caravanserai as an international meeting-ground could
still be felt.
This time, the travelers were scientists and the treasures
they were exchanging were knowledge. From twenty-
five countries, 300 of them had come to Tashkent to take
stock of a little-known problem that is one of most dan¬
gerous enemies facing man in his struggle to wrest new
land from desert and semi-desert regions the world over.

"i* ' Il
A burst of water from a high-pressure hose being operated In the
Uzbekistan desert and a sand dune disintegrates and is washed away.


SALT OF THE EARTH
by
Daniel Ilehrman
They met In a symposium on the influence of irrigation
upon secondary-sallnization of soils, organized by the
Academies of Science of the Soviet Union and Uzbekistan
with the co-operation of Unesco.
In addition to this symposium, Tashkent also played
host to a group of twelve Unesco fellows studying problems
of irrigation and salinization under differing conditions.
Their course in the Soviet Union followed stays In the
United States and France.
Why this concern with salinization? To the non-
specialist, with whom I had a great deal in common until
the problem was patiently explained to me, saline waters
belong In the sea and the "fight against salinization" im¬
plies efforts to convert the oceans Into reservoirs of
unlimited supplies of water for drinking, industrial and
agricultural purposes.
The Tashkent symposium, however, was interested only
in saline soils and saline ground water. True, this water
is not very saltywhen used for Irrigation, it contains
only from 0.5 to 2 grammes of minerai salts per litre
(1,000 grammes) as compared to an average of 35 gram
mes per litre in the sea. But if it ls not handled carefully,
it can play havoc.
The extent of this havoc was quickly brought out at the
Tashkent meeting. It opened with a statement by Prof.
G. A. Mavllanov, the director of the Uzbekistan Institute
of Hydro-Geology, in which he estimated that 30 per cent
of the 12,000,000 hectares now irrigated in the Soviet Union
are sallnized to the point where they require reclamation
to some extent. Dr. Luna Leopold, chief hydraulic en¬
gineer for the United States Geological Survey, put it to
me in another way: In the U.S.A. to-day, every new acre
of land brought in by irrigation Ls offset by the loss of
another acre rendered partially barren by secondary-sali-
nization. This figure, he believes, holds true for arid zones
thoughout the world.
Now the meaning of the Tashkent symposium was
beginning to be driven home: in these arid lands where
every acre of new soil represents both a huge economic
investment and a marshalling of engineering and scientific
skills, modern man is literally sowing his fields with salt.
Yields drop, plants wilt, whitish slime oozes into
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

THE DYING GROUND
White patches covering ground
between date palms (left) are salt
deposits brought to the surface
by evaporation of moisture from
water-logged soil at Lahore, Pakis¬
tan. Salts poison the soil, stunting
nearby vegetation. Soil specialists
(right) doing research work in
Uzbekistan are almost hidden by
dust clouds swept up by the search¬
ing wind from the eroded ground.
West Pakistan Water and Power
Development Authority, Lahore.
SALT OF THE EARTH (Cont'd)
Lands by man
u
furrows to turn land into a waterlogged salty mass, grey
outcroppings of salt blotch the surface in pools even
walls and foundations of buildings are attacked by a man-
made curse of the earth.
The blight ignores political boundaries. As speaker
after speaker took the rostrum in Tashkent, I learned that
It strikes in the Central Valley of California, the cotton-
fields of Uzbekistan, the Valley of the Euphrates in Iraq,
the Polygon of Drought in northeastern Brazil, the Indus
Plain in Pakistan... Temperate zones cannot afford to relax
fully, either: the danger lurks whenever Irrigation is used
to supplement scanty rainfall.
A question flashed into my mind as I listened to this
toll: what about the ancients? How were they able to
Irrigate for centuries or even millenia without suffering
from salinization? This question came naturally after
Dr. Mustafa M. Elgabaly, director of the Land Reclamation
Institute of the University of Alexandria in the U.A.R.,
told how salinization has appeared in Egyptian soil
only within the past century after 5,000 years of irrigation.
Here, I had unwittingly found the crux of the problem.
Ancient civilizations learned from trial-and-error to
Irrigate with water of low salt content on soils with good
natural drainage. Even so, it is believed that saliniza¬
tion was one of the causes for the decline of the great
ancient civilization of Mesopotomia. In some cases in
history a set of fortunate circumstances enabled irrigation
to be carried out without excessive dangers of salinization.
For instance, around oases, where land was irrigated for
thousands of years, belts of salt-resistant date palms
provided biological drainage by drawing the salt from the
soil.
Modern man, however, cannot rely on such exceptional
conditions when he seeks to stretch the cultivable surface
of the -earth. He must run the risk of using water with
a high mineral salt content when no other new supplies
are available. He must cultivate land where nature has
not provided the soil with drainage.
That is where the trouble begins. The two main causes
of secondary-salinization (scientists use this term to dis¬
tinguish man-made salinization from the problem of
naturally saline soils) are too little water... and too much
water.
Modern irrigation systems tend to stretch their water
supplies over the largest possible area of land. In dry
years when water resources drop, there is not enough
left for leaching that is, for flushing salts out of the
upper layers of the soil where they accumulate when
evaporation removes water from the earth but not its
salts. The leaching process is extremely important: it is
also used in making naturally saline soils fit for cultiva¬
tion.
Too much water can be even worse. It may come from
over-irrigation when farmers prefer the prospect of high
short-term yields to the long-term warnings of scientists.
It also Is caused by seepage from unlined irrigation canals
(losses of water in transport can run as much as 50 per
cent in old systems).
he combination of the two raises the sub¬
surface water table at a rate often as high
as three feet a year. When this ground water table rises
to the point where roots can suck it up through capillary
action, plants commit slow suicide and rich land becomes
a soggy swamp.
Like the common mortal who is neither a soil scientist
nor a hydrogeologist, I had always thought that making
arid land productive was simply a matter of bringing
water in. But the Tashkent symposium was much more
interested in getting water out.
It would be an exaggeration to say that, after four
days of meetings and seventy-five scientific papers, the
problem of salinization was solved. We have been
spoiled by the miracles of modern science in which a
wonder drug can wipe out a pestilential disease over¬
night or a discovery in petrochemistry can revolutionize
the objects in our everyday lives. But soil, water and
agriculture do not lend themselves to such dramatic test-
tube treatment. The conditions under which scientists
must work here are as varied as the waters and the soils
of the earth itself.
The Tashkent meeting made one point clear: this is
not one of those problems where wastage of natural
resources is an inevitable consequence of progress. On
two different occasions, I heard an American and a Soviet
scientist state flatly that irrigation per. se is not the
culprit. When properly performed, it can reclaim waste
land. The fight against salinization is a delicate and
complex process: it might be compared to adding and
draining exactly the right amount of water, according to
its qualities, while tending a flowerpot except that the
flowerpot in question usually measures a few hundred
thousand acres.
This flowerpot analogy was underlined when Prof. Pierre
Chouard of the Sorbonne, director of the phytotron out¬
side Paris where plants are studied under artificial envir¬
onments, told of a fascinating small-scale experiment in
the Sahara. There, fruit and vegetables are grown in

In the shadow
of Tamerlane's tomb
r^frSïn,
"-m
large plastic containers filled with sand and equipped
with "plumbing" to assure drainage of highly-saline
water. While this method ls suitable only for desert
stations where its high cost is still lower than the price
of bringing in food by road or air, it came as a welcome
Interlude among reports of gigantic drainage projects.
Throughout the world, the scale of these projects ls
nearly as great as that of irrigation dams and canals. In
certain regions, porous tile drainpipes are laid by auto¬
matic machinery at depths from ten to fifteen feet below
the earth's surface and they carry excess water into
collector canals in a network comparable to that of a
city's sewage system. Elsewhere, tube wells may have
to be drilled to depths as great as 300 feet (100 metres)
to pump out this excess water and lower the subsurface
water table out of the range of plant roots.
But how much land can be drained by a given number
of tube wells or a given length of horizontal drains?
Which plants resist salinity best? At what point accord¬
ing to the mineral salt content of irrigation water should
preventative steps be taken? And how can crops be
irrigated so as to maintain high yields, conserve water
and prevent re-sallnlzatlon all at the same time?
hese were some of the questions asked and
often answered at Tashkent both in and out
of the symposium. As any scientist who has ever
attended such an international meeting can tell you
some of the most valuable work of a symposium is done
outside official working hours. Tashkent Itself was
fertile soil for such encounters.
Despite its industrial growth represented by textile
factories feeding on irrigated cotton fields almost at Its
gates, It has wisely clung to its character of an oasis city.
Every street and avenue is lined by shady trees whose
roots bathe in omnipresent irrigation canals, a minor
pedestrian hazard until you get used to them. With Its
squares, parks and fountains, present-day Tashkent is
still on a human scale propituous for walking and talking.
Over shashllk or pilaf In a restaurant, drainage could be
discussed. On the balcony of a hotel room in the cool
desert night, an equation could be thrashed out. We even
saw people of four nationalities working in the shadow
of Tamerlane's tomb during a trip to Samarkand.
Men and women who had been faces behind printed
namecards became real with the help of generous Uzbek
hospitality. The mixtures with the experiences of two
dozen countries as its ingredients, began to bubble.
A very wise gentlemen, Prof. Alexel Silln-Bekchurin,
told me: "I think that the outstanding feature of our
symposium is that it ls being held in the desert where
irrigation and its problems are a reality."
They were able to contribute three decades and more
of experience in Central Asia to the symposium. One
such veteran at Tashkent was Dr. Boris (Dlmetreyevitch)
Korjavln, director of irrigation and reclamation planning
for Central Asia. This canal builder ls a weathered oak
of a man with a gleaming, smooth-shaven head rooted to
a powerful neck, and a face seamed by a ready smile. He
could tell of changes: when he came to Tashkent in 1925,
occasional camel caravans still passed through the city.
"Irrigation was easier then, too", he said almost wist¬
fully. "We still had plenty of good land without any
salinization problems."
In those days, the problem was machinery. Canals were
dug by hand and Dr. Korjavin recalled how the Great Fer-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15

SALT OF THE EARTH (Cont'd)
The Indus river in a computing
ghana Canal of Uzbekistan was opened In 1939 in a
fantastic plck-and-shovel Olympic: 160,000 men dug 320
kilometres of canal In 45 days, moving 18,000,000 cubic
metres of earth. "Two years ago", he commented, "we
had to widen the canal to double its capacity. We didn't
move a single cubic metre of earth by hand."
Women have had a hand in this work as well.
Soviet women scientists can be startling at
least, I was startled when I learned that a quiet lady
in a cool print suit and a summer hat had spent fifteen
years of her life trekking through the deserts of Turkme¬
nistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. Prof. Helene Lobova
of the Soil Institute in Moscow crossed them first by
horse and then by car.
"I chose the career of soil scientist because I wanted to
visit the Orient", she admitted. "But I quickly found that
this science is bound up with the relation between man
and nature. The nature of the soil can explain many things
in the life of a people and scientists can often learn from
the people of the desert. Farmers in Central Asia have
always used sand from old walls to improve the texture
of takyrthe clay-like mosaic soil found in some of our
deserts. Today, we know that the only way to change the
texture of this soil is to add sand to it, but on a much
larger scale."
Conditions have changed for scientists in Central Asia.
When Dr. Vladimir (Mlkhallovltch) Borovsky came to
Khazakhstan in 1934, soil samples still had to be sent to
Moscow or Leningrad for analysis, but he is now vice-
director of the Soil Institute of Khazakhstan at Alma Ata
where 250 scientific collaborators are working with him.
His home was originally in Leningrad, "the best town in
the whole country and not just because it's my town" yet
his life to-day in Alma Ata is a full one composed of work,
music, walking for relaxation (20 miles on a Sunday) and
scientific writing.
He ls a warm, stocky man with blue eyes, grey hair, a
gentle manner and that purely Russian gift for smiling
broadly while smoking a cigarette (that is, while clenching
the cardboard tube of a papyroska between his teeth). Over
a glass of tangerine soda at a little oasis of a stand out¬
side the symposium, he told me that he believed in world
co-operation by scientists to fight what he called "a war
on salinization." In this respect, he has high hop'es
for an International manual on irrigation and drainage
sponsored by Unesco and the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Organization. "People all over the world are working on
this problem," he said. "This manual will enable us to
learn their ideas and contribute our own."
,uch an exchange took place at the scientific
'caravanserai of the symposium, particularly
with the help of mathematics as an international tongue
to topple hurdles of language and nationality. In this
respect, extreme interest was stirred by Prof. Harold A.
Thomas Jr. of Harvard University when he described the
use of a digital computer to study the feasibility of using
tubewells to drain the waterlogged Indus Plain in West
Pakistan.
Prof. Thomas is a slight, bespectacled man of fifty with
a boyish aspect that belies his age. He was almost
dwarfed by the rostrum as he reported on a United States
project to aid Pakistan in combatting widespread sali¬
nization afflicting this region.
In this project, a mathematical model of the Indus
Plain was constructed at Harvard University, incorpor-
16 ating such data as river flow, rainfall, drainage, ground
water flow as well as economic factors on the basis of
available information. As a result, a fifty-year cycle of
the Indus could be run through a digital computer in two
minutes, and scientists were able to choose the best of
100,000 possible solutions to the problem. The mathem¬
atical model showed that tubewells could be used to drain
the plain and that the area drained by each could be
nearly tripled, resulting in a huge cut in reclamation costs.
"At home, we like to say that the Punjab's five-fanged
river is now flowing dry at Cambridge in the Harvard
computer", Prof. Thomas told me. "We expect very
shortly that a river will flow in a Tashkent computer."
Dr. Vassil Kabulov, vice-director of the Uzbekistan
Institute of Mathematics, reported that Soviet mathemat¬
icians are now using computers to forecast ground water
regimes, to estimate seepage from reservoirs and canals
and solve other irrigation problems. He was one of fifty
scientists who met with Prof. Thomas in an informal
shirt-sleeved working party on computers organized on
the spur of the moment. There, Prof. Thomas turned
over his data and received more he now intends to use
the research on cotton irrigation carried out by Dr. S.N.
Ryzhov of Tashkent State University as an additional
element in his computer studies.
¡ rvE-AND-TAKE ran through this entire sympo¬
sium like a bright thread, representing what
Prof. N.A. Kenessarin, vice-director of the Institute of
Hydrogeology of the Uzbekistan Academy of Science,
called the "eagerness" of all nations to advance research
for the benefit of arid lands.
On and off the symposium floor, the channels of
communication were open. Dr. Leopold was able to help
Dr. S. P. Raychaudhuri, of the Indian Planning Commis¬
sion in New Delhi, on a common problem: what to do
when, silted river channels rise to the point where they
hinder drainage. In turn, at Tashkent the Indian scientist
was asked for details of his own studies on the movement
of chemical nutrients from rocks through clay to plants.
The need for such channels was strikingly brought out
when Prof. Abdul Rassool Kamaliddin, director of the
Arid Zone Research Institute at the University of Bagh¬
dad, met Dr. V. R. Volobuev of the Azerbaijan Institute
of Soil Science and Agricultural Chemistry. They learned
that, working separately in Iraq and the Soviet Union,
they had arrived at almost the same equation to govern
the flushing out of mineral salts from the soil.
This free interchange was stressed at the close of the
symposium by Dr. Victor A. Kovda, former head of the
Salinity Laboratory of the Soil Institute in Moscow and
now director of Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences.
It brought out, he said, that highly-salinized waters (up
to 6-8 gr/1) can be safely used for irrigation purposes
under conditions of active drainage.
It also brought out that the problem of forecasting and
controlling de-sallnization can be solved only by an
integration of all methods, he declared, and the electronic
computer is an invaluable tool for such an integration.
But it is not a panacea.
"The use of computers", Dr. Kovda warned, "depends
upon their programming and this programming requires
extremely detailed knowledge of natural processes. In
other words, the use of computers to solve irrigation
problems means even deeper research into nature".
Then Dr. Kovda summarized the spirit of the Tashkent
symposium as well as its scientific lessons when he
concluded :
"We are all working with ground water, a hidden ocean
beneath the surface of the earth. Our meeting has shown
that this ocean links the scientists who are trying to
extract its. secrets."
