THE TREASURY OF ASIAN STORY
ASIA is the home of the short story.
Hundreds, and in some cases thou¬
sands, of years before Maupassant
and Chekhov, tales that were short stories
in the modern sense of the term were not
only being told in the market places but
were being put into writing in ancient Egypt,
in other countries which today speak
Arabic, in Israel, in China, and in Japan.
The riches of the classical short story of
the Far East are still, for the most part,
unknown in the West...
Although in certain great Asian cultures,
and in particular India and Persia, story¬
telling was first developed in other genres:
in the epic poem, the fable and the drama,
if we consider Asia as a whole, we may
well say that since ancient times the short
story form has never died...
Dozens of stories in the Bible, the Apo¬
crypha and the Arabian Nights, when
translated into living English, are revealed
as gems of the story-teller's art...
In China in particular there has been a
continuous two-thousand-year development
from the anecdotes, fables, 'myths, and
legends of earliest antiquity to the accom¬
plished stories of the twentieth century.
That the art of the Asian story-teller
is still a fruitful and powerful one is amply
evident from contemporary writing. In
many Asian lands the short story is now
the form of literary expression, yielding
only to poetry in others. There has
obviously been much influence on contem¬
porary writers by the European and Amer¬
ican masters of the genre, but the
influence of local tradition is equally strong.
A Treasury of Modern Asian Stories
(edited by D.L. Milton and W. Clifford,
Mentorbooks, New American Library, New
York), from the foreword of which the above
is. extracted gives convincing evidence of
the story-telling riches of the Asian conti¬
nent in its thirty tales selected from the
literatures of twelve countries and sixteen
different languages. As the editors of the
Treasury point out, they had thousands of
pages of stories, an enormous wealth of
material, to choose from. "It is high time",
they say, "that the world got to know of
the riches of Asian short-story writing, high
time indeed that not one but a number of
anthologies were published, at least one for
each country and one for each literature."
This, in a work published simultaneously
in England, the United States and Japan,
Unesco has now done for the Japanese
short story. Modem Japanese Stories *
published as part of the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works, is the fruit of
several years of co-operative activities by
the Literary Advisory Board of the Japanese
National Commission for Unesco, the
editor, Dr. Ivan Morris, Professor of Japa¬
nese history and literature at Columbia
University, New York, and his team of fine
translators.
Before the work of translating was begun,
the Japanese National Commission for
Unesco consulted a Board consisting of
the greatest men of letters of contemporary
Japan, and they, together with the editor,
finally narrowed down the choice to one
representative story of twenty-five import¬
ant writers. The result is a thorough
introduction to Japanese fiction in this
century, and, in a sense, a picture of the
contemporary Japanese mind.


MODERN JAPANESE FICTION
A break with tradition
by Ivan Morris-
T
JL i
28
he present literary scene in Japan is one of
immense activity. Publishers and literary
magazines abound, and the number of novels and stories
published every year is overwhelming. With books
extremely cheap an average novel costs the equivalent
of 6s. ($1.00) and of Is. 6d. (25 cents) in a paper¬
backed edition and the reading public large and alert,
sales are vastly in excess of those before the war; the
material rewards for literary success are considerable.
Some of the most substantial incomes in Japan are at
present earned by popular writers.
This situation is not without its dangers dangers
almost as great as those that beset the economically hard-
pressed writers before the war. There is a considerable
risk that "pure literature" (as it is rather primly termed
in Japan) will still further lose audiences to commercial
literature and to the so-called "middle novels," which
occupy a place somewhere between the artistic and the
popular.
In order to earn money many of the best writers
produce serial novels for newspapers and magazines of
large circulation. Sometimes an author will be working
on two or more serial novels at the same time, as well as
turning out articles on assorted subjects from birth
control to Japanese-American relations, giving lecture
tours and dashing off occasional stories to satisfy the
requests of the numerous literary and semi-literary
magazines.
One popular novelist recently became so confused by
the number of different things he was writing
simultaneously that he inadvertently changed the nam-i
of the main character in the middle of one of his serial
novels an error that was not caught up in proof and
which caused considerable bewilderment to his readers.
For the successful Japanese writer it never rains, it
pours. To remain successful he cannot afford to be long
out of the public eye, and the artistic energy necessary to
produce serious work is often dissipated by commercial
demands. Such conditions are, of course, not limited to
Japan, but the lack of solid tradition in modern Japanese
literature adds to the danger. Fortunately the risk of
total commercialization is recognized and deliberately
resisted by a number of the better authors.
The shi-shosetsu tradition of semi-autobiographical
"fiction" has survived into the post-war period, but it
is no longer as widely followed as some decades ago.
Most contemporary writers seem to be aware of the need
for a wider approach than is usually manifested in the
"I-novel" and the "I-story." Nevertheless, the confes¬
sional, diary type of writing, in which everything is seen
through the eyes of one lone, sensitive individual,
continues to be far more popular in Japan than in the
West.
After 1945 the torrent of translations from foreign
languages, which naturally subsided during the war,
reached new heights. Novels, plays, short stories and
poems from almost every country in the world were
translated and published for a public whose appetite had
been whetted by the years of official zenophobia and
isolation. The choice of books for translation was often
indiscriminate, sometimes incomprehensible. Nevertheless
in the influx a large mass of worthwhile literature from
the outside world has been made available.
To what extent, then, is current Japanese literature
influenced by that of the West? In the first place, it
should be emphasized that on the whole the influence is
not nearly as direct as is often assumed by Western
readers. Japan has now had some seventy years in which
to absorb the literary traditions of the West. European
and American literature have come to be taken for

ELLING
Among the twenty-five authors repres¬
ented are some who are already fairly well-
known outside of Japan, for example
Tanizaki, Kawabata, and Mishima, each of
whom have had novels translated by
Unesco, and Akutagawa and Kikuchi, both
of whom have had famous films, such as
Rashomon and The Gates of Hell, based
on their work. The reader will also find
stories of exceptional power and originality
by men equally deserving of world-wide
recognition, as Mori, Shiga, Muro, Niwa,
Sakaguchi, Inoué and Dazai.
The book also contains a long critical
"Introduction to Japanese Literature" (from
which the article below has been taken),
brief biographies of each of the twenty-
five authors, and a selective bibliography of
modern Japanese literature translated into
English. The whole forms a most attractive
and helpful guide to modern Japanese
writing.
* Published by Eyre and Spottiswoode,
London ; Charles Tuttle, Tokyo, and Rut¬
land, Vermont, U.S.A. (Price 30/-, $6.50.)
BOOKSHOP BUSTLE in Tokyo reflects the
Immense activity of the present literary scene
in Japan where publishers and literary maga¬
zines abound, books are cheap and the reading
public large and alert. Swarming book-buyers
here are crowding into a used book fair on
the Kanda, Tokyo's famous bookshop section.
The Japan Times Weekly, Tokyo
granted, and works from the outside no longer carry the
aura of the exotic and the startling that they had in the
early days of importation. Even more important, Ja¬
panese writers now have their own great literary figures
Natsume Soseki, Mori Ogai, among others (1). They can
now look back with a sense of belonging to an indigenous,
if recent, tradition.
Although in many ways the Pacific War and its
aftermath constituted a break with the past as great or
even greater than that provided by the Meiji Restoration
(1867-1910) there was no rupture with native literary
tradition such as occurred in the 19th century. Whereas
the new Meiji writers tended to look entirely to the West
for their models, the writers of the present day receive
their influence both from the West and from their own
writers of the past sixty years.
Even in the early days of importation, literary influence
in Japan rarely produced slavish imitation of certain
specific European or American models. It was usually a
much more indirect and complex process. As the young
post-war writer. Mr. Mishima Yukio, has pointed out,
Japanese novelists have usually assimilated only those
elements of foreign literature that are in some way close
to the recipient. This is more than ever true today when
the Japanese writer has such an immense selection of
world literature at his disposal.
Although the most conspicuous influences have certainly
come from Europe, it would be a mistake to discount
the effect of Chinese and Japanese classical literature on
certain modern writers. This classical influence is re¬
flected in the imagery, the descriptions, the general mood
and sometimes the structural techniques of many
(1) All names are given in the normal Japanese order, with
the family name preceding the personal one.
outstanding post-Meiji writers and their successors. One
of the most Interesting aspects of writers like Nagai Kafu,
Tanizaki Junichiro and Kawabata Yasunari is precisely
the way in which they succeeded in moulding classical
traditions with modern Western thoughts and technique.
However, the fact remains that the modern Japanese
novel and story are essentially Western forms; in so far
as literary influence has played a part, most Japanese
prose writers are indebted to modern Western literature
far »more than to their own country's classical tradition.
It is writers like Hugo, Poe, Whitman, Baudelaire, Dos¬
toievsky, Tolstoy, Hardy, Zola, Huysmans, Maupassant,
Wilde and D. H. Lawrence that have exercised influence
rather than Murasaki Shikibu, Saikaku, Bakin, and the
other famous prose writers of earlier centuries.
The. remark made in 1910 by Natsume Soseki, one of
the most important of the post-Meiji novelists, could well
be uttered by the vast majority of modern Japanese prose
writers: "What governs my mind at this. moment, what
will influence all my future work, is not, alas, the tradition
of my ancestors, but, rather, thoughts brought over from
across the sea, and by an alien race."
But few post-war writers in making this statement
would be inclined to include Soseki's expression of regret.
Japan is, of course, not the only country in which
imported literature has exerted an influence, but the
historical conditions of the Meiji Period made this
influence of primary importance. As Mr. Mishima (who
among the younger writers is particularly conscious of his
own country's classical heritage) has said, "In most other
countries there exists a strong literary tradition into
which writers can assimilate whatever is imported. In
Japan our literature does not rest on any such tradition. 29
Although our talented writers have managed to utilize
their abilities individually, there are very few of them who
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A CENTURY OF CHANGE IN WRIT¬
ING. After 1868 Japan's efforts to become
"modern" led to a sharp break with a past
epitomized by the traditionally garbed figures
depicted above in this painting by the 19th-
century artist Kyoden. The main effect of
Western influence was to encourage Japanese
writers to describe more realistically the
brave new world they saw growing about
them. Realism gave way to naturalism and,
after the First World War, to a school of
writing whose chief concern was the social
condition of city workers, seamen and farm
workers (right). Students (opposite) in a Tokyo
bookshop reflect today's book boom, with
sales vastly exceeding pre-war figures and large
material rewards crowning literary success.
Maupassant : a bombshell in Japanese letters
have managed to ground their works on secure tradition."
In Japan, as in most other countries, the story or tale
has an extremely long and varied history. Among the
earliest collections that have come down to us (leaving
aside ancient mythological collections where the literary
motive is secondary) are those from the Heian Period
(794-1185 A.D.) in which brief prose passages serve to
provide the background for thirty-one syllable classical
poems or to link a series of such poems by means of
rudimentary plots.
The Tales of Isé from the ninth century is the best-
known example; The Tales of Yamato (tenth century)
belongs to the same tradition; The Tales of Tsutsumi
Chunagon (which Includes the charming and original
fragment "The Lady Who Loved Insects") is a collection
of ten stories with well-defined plots and considerable
realism.
In the eleventh century Tales of Past and Present,
consisting of over 1,000 stories taken from Indian, Chinese
and Japanese history and folklore, represents a considera¬
ble advance in construction over the lyrical tales of the
early Heian Period. Otogi-Zoshi is the generic term for
collections of popular stories, most simply fairy-tales,
that were in circulation during the Muromachi Period
(c. 1300-1600).
±n a more recent period the numerous collec¬
tions of stories by Ihara Saikaku (1642-93) deal
in a more or less realistic way with the lives of contem¬
porary men and women, mostly members of the
seventeenth century townsman class. Tales of the
Moonlight and the Rain (1776), a famous collection of
nine ghost stories by Ueda Akinari, belongs to a tradition
of supernatural tales that goes back to the eighth
century (2).
We should also take note of a common form that is to
be found in much of Saikaku's work and elsewhere. This
consists of a collection of stories having a common thread
or theme; a typical example is Saikaku's Reckonings That
Carry Men Through The World (Seken Munesanyo, 1693),
which is a volume of twenty independent stories all
30 (2) The English translation is to be published by the Cam¬
bridge University Press in the Unesco Collection of Represen¬
tative Works Japanese series.
dealing with the torments that different groups of
characters experience on the last day of the year when
all debts become due for payment.
Despite this ancient and diverse tradition, the modern
Japanese story form in this century owed remarkably
little to the various -pre-Meiji collections of which exam¬
ples have been given above. It is true that a number of
the Meiji Period writers (including Higuchi Ichiyo, Ozaki
Koyo, Koda Rohan and Tayama Katai) recognized in
Saikaku's stories the same vigorous realism that they had
found in modern French literature.
Saikaku's realism, however, served to confirm such writers
in their already established literary approach, rather than
to inspire them. When it actually came to writing stor¬
ies, the main influences derived, not from Saikaku or the
other pre-Meiji masters of realistic fiction, but from the
recent literature of Europe and America.
The history of the modern story in Japan can be
considered to date from the introduction of Maupassant's
work in the 1890's. One of the earliest writers to attempt
to produce in Japanese the type of story that was current
in Europe was Mori Ogai, who after his return from
Germany in 1888 did so much to familiarize Japanese
readers with Western literary forms.
Of the two masters of the late nineteenth century short
story in Europe, Maupassant exerted considerably greater
influence in Japan than Chekhov. The reason is not far
to seek: the introduction of Maupassant's short stories
coincided with the rise of Naturalism in Japanese litera¬
ture and, indeed, was one of the important influences in
this movement. It was Maupassant's direct, realistic and
often harsh approach to his material that affected Japa¬
nese writers, rather than his mastery of the short story
form itself.
Although Maupassant, like Chekhov, regarded the short
story as being a genre in itself and although he contribut¬
ed so greatly to giving it the characteristic form with
which we are now familiar, his early influence in Japan
did not on the whole lead writers to make the clear
differentiation between the novel and the short story
that is accepted in the West.
The line of »demarcation in Japan between the two
genres has always tended to be vague. This is reflected
in the terminology. Both forms are known as shosetsu,
the word for short story being differentiated only by the
prefix tampen (short piece). Shosetsu Is also used with

Photos Unesco - Marc Riboud
the prefix chuhen, (middle piece) to describe an inter¬
mediate length of work having about, 40,000 to 60,000
words; this roughly corresponds to what is sometimes
known as novelette, but the form is very much more
popular in Japan than in the West.
Thus there is a regular continuum from tampen-
shosetsu through chuhen-shosetsu to shosetsu. The only
real differentiation is in the matter of length, which
itself tends to be very indefinite. This is not simply a
matter of terminology, but extends to the conception or
rather, lack of conception of the short story as a distinct
literary form. Very frequently we find the same piece of
fiction being described alternatively as a novel and as a
short story.
One result of this vague differentiation is the absence
from so many Japanese stories of certain stylistic qua¬
lities that we have come to regard as essential to the
modern short story in the West. This is certainly not to
suggest that the story is a narrow form with certain
strictly defined rules or cannons. Far from it. A genre
that so greatly antedates the novel is bound to have enor¬
mous flexibility.
T;he history of the story in the West goes back
to the Tales of the Magicians (from the Egypt
of almost 4,000 years ago) and traces its complex descent
through Aesop, Boccaccio, Chaucer, the Bible and La
Fontaine, to name only a few of the great landmarks.
Any neat definition is both impossible and undesirable.
As the well-known short-story writer, Kay Boyle, has
said, "The only continuity it (the story) possesses is that
it was isolated individuals, sometimes writing centuries
apart, who spoke with freshness and vigour, In a short-
winded rather than a long-winded form, of people, and
ideas, and incidents, which seemed to the reader moving
and true."
Since the time of Gogol, however, the story has develop¬
ed in a certain manner that we may characterize as the
"style of the modern Western short story." Its outstand¬
ing feature is an economy of means. This has involved
a tendency to compression, to the dropping of inessen¬
tials. The tendency has continued until the present day
and has been given particular impetus by the short
stories of Ernest Hemingway, whom Mr. H.E. Bates
describes as the "man with an axe... (who) cut out a
whole forest of verbosity" (H. E. Bates: "The Modern
Short Story".)
Without economy there can be no short story in the
modern sense of the term. This, of course, does not pre
clude the existence of short stories of considerable length.
The tendency since the time of Tolstoy has certainly been
In the direction of brevity, but the modern story may vary
from a few hundred words to 15,000 or even 20,000. What
is essential Is the close construction, the casting of all
the material round a single central image and the overall
compression that have become the marks of the success¬
ful modern short story in the West.
By these general standards a considerable proportion
of tampen-shosetsu are not short stories at all; frequently
they appear to be sketches, essays or truncated novels.
A large number of Japanese story writers are primarily
novelists for whom stories tend to be what Miss Elizabeth
Bowen has called "side-issues from the crowded imagin¬
ation."
Since the novel and the modern short story are two
totally different genres it is most unlikely that a writer
will be equally at home in both, and this applies in Japan
quite as much as in the West. The plethora of literary
magazines in Japan has encouraged many writers to
produce stories when their style was better suited to the
novel. As a result, their work often lacks the stylistic
compression that is the essence of the modern short story.
This is not primarily a matter of word-length (though
it is worth noting that Japanese stories are as a rule far
longer than their modern Western counterparts,) but
of failure to apply the indirect, suggestive and dramatic
methods which are indispensable for economy of style.
In a country that has produced the most compressed
forms of poetry In world literature, it is remarkable that
stories should so frequently be marked by a turgid verbo¬
sity which cries out for the ministration of a red pencil.
Fortunately a number of good modern writers in Japan
have treated the short story as an equal and separate
genre of literature, not merely as an abbreviated novel or
as a sketch. Of the authors represented In Modern
Japanese Stories, the three who stand out in Japanese
letters as short-story writers are Shiga Naoya, Akutagawa
Ryunosuké and Nakajima Ton.
The fact that these three writers are all masters of
literary style is not irrelevent. Like the poem, the short
story is undoubtedly a type of writing in which style or
form is all-important. An indifferently written or poorly
constructed novel may impose by the ingenuity of its plot,
by the evocation of some unusual scene or atmosphere or
again by the vivid portrayal of a character; but a badly
written short story is almost bound to fail, regardless of
its content.
31
This article may notbe reproduced withoutpermission.
