UNESCO EXPANDS ITS
HE United Nations Dev¬
elopment Decade has set
out to mobilize the world's technologi¬
cal and economic resources in a vast,
peaceful offensive in support of dev¬
eloping countries in all parts of the
world. Following the United Nations
Conference on the Application of
Science and Technology for the Bene¬
fit of the Less-Developed Areas, held
in Geneva last February, Unesco is
now reshaping its activities and its
thinking in order to play its part in this
offensive.
The UNCSAT Conference in Geneva
clearly brought out the fact that the
"application of science and technolo¬
gy" is not keeping pace with the pre¬
sent growth of the world's new nations.
It is the urgency of this problem creat¬
ed by the ever-increasing immediate
and long-term needs of the developing
countries that has led Unesco to plan
a reinforcement of its activities in
science and technology for the bene¬
fit of these nations.
As presently proposed by Unesco's
Director-General, Mr. René Maheu, the
new Unesco programme (for 1965-66)
will give to science an importance simi¬
lar to that now accorded to education.
Unesco's budget for science, techno¬
logy and their applications will amount
to about $7.3 million for two years as
compared with $4.3 million for the cur¬
rent programme. About 60% of the
budget will be concentrated on acti¬
vities of direct importance to dev¬
eloping countries, helping them to set
up national scientific and technolo¬
gical institutions and universities, to
make studies of natural resources and
to train engineers, research workers and
university professors. '
To carry out this vastly expanded
work new units will be created within
Unesco to direct a multi-sided pro
gramme in science teaching at all levels,
in research and training in the en¬
gineering sciences and in studies and
training related to natural resources.
Unesco's reinforced Department of
Natural Sciences will then have broadly
two main responsibilities: the interna¬
tional promotion of science and the ap¬
plication of science to problems of eco¬
nomic development. In addition, a post
of Assistant Unesco Director-General
for Science and Technology will be set
up.
Moreover, Unesco will be able to
count on financial and organizational
help from the United Nations Technical
Assistance Programme and the United
Nations Special Fund which are expect¬
ed to provide, through Unesco, bet¬
ween 20 and 25 million dollars during
1965-66. This will make possible the
creation of new faculties and institu¬
tions, the recruitment of specialists and
the purchase of equipment.
The new programme was considered
in broad outline by Unesco's Executive
Board in May and will be given further
study by the Board in October. In its
final form the expanded plan will be
submitted for approval to the Unesco
General Conference in 1964.
Its adoption, however, will in no way
diminish Unesco's continually evolving
programme in the field of international
scientific co-operation. About 40%
of the expanded regular budget for
science will be devoted to the basic
and earth sciences.
The new programme proposes a
considerable expansion of international
activities in astronomy, atmospheric
sciences, geology, ecology and pedo¬
logy. A reinforced and expanded pro¬
gramme in the life sciences in bio¬
logy and brain research, for example
will be carried out. Research in outer
space sciences and oceanography will
be maintained and expanded. An im¬
portant new project in scientific hydro¬
logy The International Hydrological
Decade, which will be of long-term
value to all countries will be started.
In drawing up its plans for 1965-66,
Unesco has taken into consideration
many of the facts and the recommen¬
dations received from national, regional
and international scientific organizations
as well as from special advisory groups.
Many valuable suggestion were offered
by an advisory committee which met
in Paris in April to discuss specifically
Unesco's role and functions in the use
of science for economic development.
This committee brought together top-
level scientists and technologists from
seven countries under the chairman¬
ship of Prof. M. S. Thacker, of the
Indian Government's Planning Com¬
mission, who presided over the UNCSAT
Conference in Geneva (1).
Noting that Unesco is the only U.N.
Agency with a general mandate in the
field of science and that as such it
has an extremely important role to play,
this committee declared that increased
emphasis should be placed upon
science and technology not only in
view of economic development, but also
as a component of education and of
culture.
The committee urged Unesco to em¬
phasize technological and scientific edu¬
cation at all levels and in all branches,
from the secondary to the post-univer¬
sity level. It asked Unesco to continue
its aid to countries establishing national
research councils and other similar poli¬
cy-making bodies. Unesco should fur¬
ther encourage local scientists to share
in the work of international scientific and
technological associations and foster
increased interest by these associations
of problems facing developing areas.

SCIENCE PROGRAMME
United Nations
The Central African Institute of
Scientific Research at Liviro, Repub¬
lic of the Congo (Leopoldville)
boasts one of the best equipped
seismologicai and geophysical labor¬
atories in all Africa. Here a team
of Unesco specialists inspects the
observatory installations there dur¬
ing a recent tour which they made
of scientific research and training
facilities in ten African countries.
Today Unesco is making a large re¬
appraisal of its resources in science so
as to give maximum support to the
vast United Nations effort that is
implied by the Geneva Conference.
However, the urgency of the problems
evoked by that Conference were recog¬
nized by Unesco's General Conference
three years ago, when it approved a
ten-year programme for science,
stressing the special importance of all
forms of assistance, through science
and technology, for the accelerated
industrialization of developing coun¬
tries.
The Conference named three priori¬
ties in this ten-year (1960-70) pro¬
gramme.
Co-ordination of scientific activities
on both national and international
levels ;
Exploration of the earth, methods for
drawing up an inventory of natural
resources, and the study of scien¬
tific problems related to the exploi¬
tation of these resources.
Application of science and techno¬
logy for industrialization.
In Unesco's current (1963-64) pro¬
gramme for science, all forms of assis¬
tance to Member States for the creation
of national scientific institutions, univer¬
sities, industrial research laboratories
and polytechnic institutes, have been
greatly increased in comparison with
past years. About 250 specialists are
now working in research and training
institutes that are being established
with the aid of Unesco and the United
Nations. Between 30 and 35 new scien¬
tific institutions, faculties of engineering
and applied research centres are being
created with Unesco's help and the use
of U.N. special funds.
While looking to the future and plan¬
ning its action on a new scale and with
greater scope, Unesco can now draw
on a decade of working experience in
this field.
Institutions like the Indian Institute of
Technology in Bombay or the Middle
East Technical University at Ankara
show what can be achieved by large-
scale national effort (in this case by
India and Turkey) with a backing of
international technological aid supplied
by Unesco.
Unesco specialists have trained geo¬
logists who are working to solve the
water problems of Brazil's Polygon of
Drought, they have taught physics In
Indonesia, they have gone to earth¬
quake-prone areas to advise on sound
construction methods for building and
public works and they have set up a
world network of centres to make avail¬
able the documentation which is the
lifeblood of science.
In these and many other ways,
Unesco is working to accomplish aid
programmes in scientific research and
training and in the applications of scien¬
tific and technological knowledge. It Is
thus responding to requests for aid
from many newly-independent countries
who realize that real political and eco¬
nomic independence can only be achie¬
ved by the parallel creation of scien¬
tific institutions and universities carrying
out research and studies on vital prob¬
lems related to economic and cultural
welfare.
(11 Other member» of the committee were:
Prot. Harrison Brown, of the California Insti¬
tute of Technology, In the U.S.A. : Mr. Ray¬
mond Cheradame, director of studies at the
Ecole Polytechnique In Paris : Professor
V.C. Emlllanov. head of the U.S.S.R. Agency
for the Utilization of Atomic Ensrgy : Dr. Ro¬
lando Victor Garcia, dean of the Faculty of
Sciences, University of Buenos Aires: Prof.
James Grelg. of the University of London:
Dr. Eni Nloku. vice-chancellor of the Nigerian
Federal University at Lagos; and Lord Todd
of Cambridge University.
