A MUSEUM
OF
THE ALPHABET
by David Diringer
amrrfm rjuEïj rannomPflgBnaiiniltTi
T'*:r"i::t!ïii*ïïïr~",TîniTT!TiIlii^:;mmiin
. i.m'inrfSVrfiii iiiftriin*mKinmn]n:
. ¡iiiim|tii::ii'i;i:,iin:)i:^nBjTn-T:iii"
Kii'iiiaiiiuiM3iJ|rinit][[.::TTiTl!Trr1ur
I'i'jtarllJili'i li;;[l|[1:]|J|,i:[::LiniirL
. i : i 'Tfji . ]. j jj I ' 1 1 ! i ; 1 1 r i [ : ^: ; in i : j [ : [ i T : TT
.i : TlMIIIIII III! IIHI'irr.illB
nmSJt&füi	. 	'"-üjeij i -i
:umniijii:Milii¡ .l!!:iIi:i!ffj:|IJSjL-.
IoTsj]u:MmMi[f1iri[UmnlJ.ríij]!EÍiiH]
pHggfcTini ii'ii '¡i' .ii ni -fiunttsk
Man has used all kinds of methods
and devices for transmission of
thought, images, symbols or arbi¬
trary signs. One symbolic device
was the "wampum" of the North
American Iroquois Indians (left). It
was a sort of broad belt formed by
strings of shells or beads arrang¬
ed in patterns according to the
story to be recorded. The most
convenient and adaptable system of
writing used by man is the alpha¬
bet. Right, an example of one
early alphabetic script, Aramaic.
This Canaanlte-Aramaic Inscription
Is one of the few that have come
down to us from between the 9th
and 7th centuries B.C. Aramaic
had little importance when a chain
of Aramasan sates stretched from
Mesopotamia to western Syria in
the 8th century B.C. The decline
of these states, however, marked
the beginning of Aramaean cultural
and economic supremacy in Western
Asia. Aramaic then became the
"lingua franca" of the Near East.
For more than a thousand years
it was the vernacular of the jews,
and thus of Jesus Christ and the
Apostles. It was probably the origin¬
al language of the Christian Gospels.
Writing Is so much a part and parcel of our
lives today that It Is difficult to imagine a
world in which writing is unknown. Yet for by far the
greater part of his immense past man was without
writing. Nor is it easy to realize in these days of popular
education, that for a great part of the time since its
invention, writing has been the prerogative of a few.
This was still the case in the not-too-distant past when
mankind had already reached a fairly high level of cul¬
ture. In some famous civilizations writing was cultivated
almost exclusively by the priestly classes. So great was
the magical power it exercised over the unlearned, that
this precious possession was regarded as something
beyond man's unaided powers of creation.
Ancient peoples held writing in such awe that its inven¬
tion was frequently attributed to leading divinities. The
ancient Egyptians assigned it to Thoth or Isis; the Baby¬
lonians to Nebo, sun of Marduk, who was also the god
of man's destiny: the ancient Chinese to the dragon-faced
Ts'ang Chien; the ancient Greeks to Hermes and others
of the Olympians; the Romans to Mercury.
The Teuton god Odin or Wotan was credited with the
invention of the Runes; the Celtic god Ogmios with the
invention of the Oghams. The Aztecs attributed their
writing to Quetzalcoatl; the ancient Indians to Brahma.
Even amongst the Jews there was a tradition that con¬
sidered Moses the inventor of the Hebrew script.
The position in more recent times is generally known.
Even in the more advanced countries, up to almost yester¬
day people could not read or write. The assaults of the
"awakening masses" on the ramparts of "privilege" have
been a frequent theme in radical or democratic teaching.
In an elementary sense writing and here need one be
reminded that the power to write includes the power to
readin effect, access to education was a focal point of
privilege.
Briefly, as a key to knowledge and learning, writing was
also a key to social and, in effect, to political power.
Here we are not concerned, even if space allowed, to look
at the vast complex of social, economic and political prob
lems , to which, over some hundreds of years, this posi¬
tion has given rise. The events and movements involved
in the endeavour to solve them, are the stuff of modern
history; nor least important is the shattering French
Revolution with its reverberating cry "Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity."
Much nearer to our immediate concern Is the place of
writing in the general picture. For it is the development
of writing which forms the subject of the Alphabet
Museum in Cambridge, England. As will have been
gathered, the field Is vast. The endeavour has been to
cover all ages and all lands. In fact, the story is broadly
traced in the co-ordinated assembly of material covering
this wide field. The story, however, is more than the story
of writing. It is a story which, it is thought, gives some
insight into the history of man's social and spiritual deve¬
lopment; for writing, especially under the dominion of

Kfflg>^B^M
PholOS fíO*" "The Alphabet" b/ David Di rincer,
published by Hutchinson, London
the Alphabet, is probably the greatest instrument which
has helped Man in his upward struggle from a more or
less tribal state.
In this broad picture, the Alphabet has a special place.
It is often a matter of great surprise to learn that the
alphabetic system is distinguishable from writing in gene¬
ral. Indeed, for long the two were regarded as one and
the same. The truth is that the Alphabet was invented
long after the dawn of writing roughly about the eight¬
eenth century B.C.
In this article we can but draw attention to one or two
aspects of the Importance of the alphabetic system in the
general history of writing. Its great virtue due to Its
intrinsic phonetic principle is its value in simplifying
writing, reducing the number of symbols or letters to
small compass usually between 25 and 45 letters. So
by lightening in no small degree the task of teaching and
learning in itself an immeasurable gainIt opened more
and more widely the doors of education.
Today, popular education, with all that it means for
the working of a true democracy, Is a tribute to the alpha¬
betic system. Not least of the merits of the system is its
easy adaptability; so that it has, in fact, been adopted
for almost every important language of the world. Even
the Chinese have now officially adopted it.
Thus, we get some inkling of the part played by the
Alphabet over an enormous field. Great thinkers such as
Kant, Mirabeau, Carlyle, reflecting on human progress,
have referred to the invention of writing as the real
beginning of civilization. They were writing in an age
when the fruits of the alphabetic system were already
CONT'D ON NEXT PACE
In the history of writing there
have been various scripts called
Ideographic which are a develop¬
ed form of picture writing.
Some have disappeared but
among those that are still known
is the script used by the Na-khi,
a people who lived an indepen¬
dent existence within the fron¬
tiers of China until the 18th
century. No one knows when
and hew the script originated,
but it is believed to have been
created by tombas or medicine
men. Left, the first page of an
illustrated Na-khl manuscript.

THE ALPHABET (Cont'd)
^!ÖSEISä!&^^ &£tt£&^^
Photos from "The Alphabet" by David Diringer
Writings on the wall
'SQUARE' ALPHABET. Pali is the language in which
the sacred literature ot Buddhism is written. Originally
oral, it began to be put into written form in the 5th
century B.C. The script employed for writing these
books is not easily readable. The letters were painted
with a broad brush and were correspondingly thick.
Above, Pali script from the sacred book "Kammuwa"
widely apparent. In our own day, an American scholar,
H. Breasted, has been even more definite; in his opinion,
writing was of greater Importance in uplifting the human
race than any other intellectual achievement.
ODAY, writing and in this context we include
such secondary forms as printing has entered
into the whole fabric of our civilization. Almost without
our realizing it, it has become an indispensable part of
our whole system. Not only in education, but in scientific
and technological development, In the great and varied
field of government, in all the vast and complicated
mechanism for maintaining and promoting the well-being
of large populations, writing if only in the modest role
of recording plays an all-penetrating, if a strangely
unobtrusive part. Nor should we forget that, in this role,
it provides a basis on which knowledge is built up, giving
it permanence and passing it on, with an assurance of
accuracy, from one generation to the next.
Yet, astonishing though it may seem, the history of
writing is the true Cinderella with learned men and lay¬
man alike. It has escaped formal study in most univer¬
sities and secondary schools; great international founda¬
tions, which assist so worthily in so many directions, are
not concerned with it; no important museum has thought
it necessary to offer a comprehensive exhibition of the
story of writing. Yet, almost every scholarly discipline
touches upon writing at some point, often in matters of
considerable importance,
It forms the basis for two significant branches of
research: epigraphy (dealing with the decipherment and
interpretation of ancient inscriptions) and paliography
(dealing with the decipherment and interpretation of
texts written on soft materials, such as parchment, papy¬
rus, paper, linen, wax). The study of epigraphy has revo¬
lutionized knowledge of the ancient world and has led to
the rediscovery and reconstruction of entire civilizations;
the study of palaeography has been of the greatest prac¬
tical importance for ancient and medieval history, for the
study of philology, for textual criticism, and so on. More¬
over, Egyptology. Assyriology, anthropology and ethnology,
Sinology. Indology, and many other branches of learning
are based on particular sections of the history of writing.
Here we have something of the most far-reaching
importance and yet, somehow, the most elusive. Like sun¬
light and the air we breathe, it is so "common," so
"ordinary," and so well "understood" a thing that often
it is not understood at all. The Alphabet Museum and
Seminar aims to offer, or rather to help in offering, a
corrective.
The Museum was formally opened by Sir James Pitman,
M.A., M.P., on June 8, 1959; it assembles the results of
many years' research by the present writer. The structure
itself is a modest one, built in the rear of his private resi¬
dence in Cambridge. Yet, in my humble judgment, it
provides an archive more comprehensive than any so far
attempted in this field. Indeed, as a "documentary" on
the development of script, it is, I think, unique in the
world.
The large collection includes original inscriptions on
stone and clay, casts of inscriptions, original manuscripts,
photographs of many more, charts and maps, and lantern
slides. The items are drawn from the world over, from
North-East Siberia to Central Africa and Peru, from the
Pacific Islands through Indonesia, India and Central Asia,
through Europe to North America; and the age ranges
from prehistoric times to the present day.
I Ts main interest for the West-European
student will doubtless be the wealth of
material on the development of the Greek and Roman
and related alphabets; for the East-European student,
the abundant material on the development of the Cyrillic
alphabets and their adaptation to dozens of other alpha¬
bets including Finnish, Turkish and Iranian.
For the Far-Eastern student, there is material on the
development of the Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Mongolian
and other scripts. The Indian and Indonesian student
will find much on the development of the numerous
branches of the Indian and Further-Indian scripts.
The Islamic student will find explanations of the origin
and development of the numerous Arabic scripts, the
Jewish and Old Testament student, on the development
of the Early Hebrew and Square Hebrew scripts, and t¿ie
Central African student, on the interesting memory-aid
devices and the adaptation of the Latin alphabet to lan¬
guages far removed in character.
CONT'D ON PAGE 8


SIBERIAN GIRL'S LOVE LAMENT aShoswrnan;e"
diagram (left) is a Siberian girl's love lament written in ideographic script (symbols rep¬
resenting ideas) of the Yukaghirs of north-eastern Siberia. "I am alone my home," the
text reads, "You have left and gone far away (to Russia). You love a Russian girl ; you
have married her, but yours is an unhappy marriage notwithstanding your children.
I shall remain sad and will always love you, though there is another man who loves me."
The umbrella-shaped symbols (numbered 1-6) indicate persons. Pointed lines on the top
of 1 and 2, indicate "pig-tails," i.e. women ; '2, wears a skirt wider on the top than No. 1 :
she is a Russian. No. 1 is in a house, shown by lines A-B; the other girl lives far away
(i.e. in Russia), as indicated by the "house" C-D, of which only the roof can be seen.
The man Indicated by No. 3 is the husband of No. 2 (they live under the same roof),
but they are not happily married (as indicated by the cross lines Z-2), though they
have children (5 and 6). Our heroine (No. 1) loves passionately (lines W-Y) the
man No. 3, this love being broken (line V cutting lines W and Y) by the wife of her
beloved ; our girl will continue to love him (line U), although she herself is loved (line S)
by another Yukaghir man. No. 4. Her great sadness is indicated by the cross-lines TT-TT.
SAYINGS OF THE EWE. Right, symbolic
proverbs of the Ewes of West Africa. From
left to right: (1) Two adversaries with bows
and arrows "two enemies cannot hold the
field. (2) Man between the world (repre¬
sented as a nut) and a tree, meaning "the
world is a baobab" world cannot be
bent round, encompassed, changed, trans¬
formed." (3) The Ewe symbol for "I": Man
indicating himself or holding hand on breast.
.... ¿
STRANGE SCRIPTS AND
OLDEST WESTERN ABC. This tablet found
at Marsiliana d'Albenga, Tuscany Italy, is
inscribed with the 26 letters of the early
Etruscan alphabet. It belongs probably to the
end of the 8th or beginning of the 7th century
B.C. and is the oldest Western ABC extant.
THE ALPHABET (Cont'd;
tree with 350 branches
It Is of no small help to see these numerous scripts in
their appropriate places In the general picture of the
development of writing. There is in fact here assembled,
and scientifically arranged, what has been displayed, with
perhaps greater plcturesqueness, in large university halls
and public galleries.
On entering the Museum, a visitor first sees a striking
wall-chart, painted in colourthe "Alphabet Tree." It is
a many-branched tree, dealing with some 350 alphabets
and showing their relationships in the light of up-to-date
research. Some scripts far removed geographically, are
seen In surprisingly close relationship. Green leaves repre¬
sent the many scripts in use today; brown leaves, the
alphabets in effect dead.
Where particular scriptsbecause of their use for
ritual or religious purposes onlyare removed from the
normal competition for survival (although assured of
"life" at least as long as those who revere them endure),
they are represented by leaves partly green and partly
8 brown; in this way are shown the Samaritan and Coptic
scripts. Likewise represented are the Welsh, Irish, Manx
and other scripts only partly used.
An interesting point sometimes, causing great surprise,
is clearly evident from the Chart: all alphabets, however
widely separated geographically, even alphabets long
abandoned, are probably descended from a common
ancestor, the North-Semitic.
In this setting there is an endeavour to show how
writing sprang out of the deep soil of human enterprise
and mutual understanding; and how from the needs of
social intercourse and mystical spiritual expression, the
demands of superstition and magic, and of the higher
religions, not to speak of those of trade and the economic
pressures, there resulted a growth of primitive means of
communication in various parts of the world.
Where the soil was favourable to the seeds of higher
attainment, there developed more advanced systems of
writingthese are symbolized by smaller trees on either
side of the main tree; they are the non-alphabetic
systems (scientifically known as "analytic," but generally
though wrongly called "Ideographic") of the ancient
Egyptians, the Mesopotamlan peoples, the Hittites, the
ancient Cretans, the Chinese, the Mayas, the Aztecs, and
so on.

NORTH SEMITIC GREEK ETRUSCAN LATIN MODERN CAPS
*
OLDEST LATIN TEXT. Professor David Diringer.
author of our article, holds in his arms the oldest
preserved Latin text: cast of the cippus (or
small column) from the Roman Forum, dating
from the late 7th or the early 6th century B.C.
ANCIENT ALPHABETS
II IHM:ll :ll
l^A A
i r*>ru
raim»it'V>jiti|
|[«ifJlrtlt|
UrZJi^imi=ii=iHi:n ii-ii-ii:ii:itii;M:j
IMML©l®!®l^l®i
viz \V
MIVUI1I
Äira^ixir/iiMr
^
1111117
IL^LIblEIUIJIJLIEII HJl:«;ll;ll:l
w|\a;1vV|WI/
IHKiljiMKIkTIiyjkTIkTILilltlLII
ÍEIfinÜHHHMMHMMl
HOW OUR CAPITALS EVOLVED. The
chart on the right explains how monumen¬
tal characters developed from their North
Semitic forms in the late Second Millennium
B.C. down through Greek, Etruscan and Latin
forms to give us modern capital letters.
ifcjiíáíDirüin
llluatrationi courte«, of Dr. D. Dlringar
The syllabic scripts also claim attention, particularly
those of the Japanese and the ancient Cypriotes. In the
region of the tree-roots are indicated the probable or
possible factors which gave rise to the particular scripts,
or otherwise influenced their development; here, too, are
references to the various theories on the origin of the
Alphabet.
Wall panels show the development of the main writing-
systems and of the individual alphabets. The panels are
supplemented by a great variety of material, including
specimens from manuscripts, photographs of inscriptions,
alphabet-tables, maps and so forth.
In this vast field, one is all too conscious that much
remains to be done and development in fact proceeds as
opportunity offers. This applies. In varying degrees to
almost all the 22 individual sections which, of course,
cover the whole history of writing. Parts of these sections
come within the sphere of "Writing and Art," and the
department dealing with this, as well as one or two other
departments, are being carefully studied with a view to
development
The realization of so large a project of development pre¬
sents formidable difficulties; but the effort seems worth¬
while. In no other field of culture Is the spiritual unity
of Man so clearly manifest. In the early endeavour
where speech could not serve to form a method of com
munication between individuals, in the effort through the
ages to perfect such a method, an effort in which so many
peoples have taken part, Irrespective of age or clime, race,
creed or form of speech, we see at work something more
than a great co-operative principle. There Is something
which forms a basis for mutual respect between peoples.
The Alphabet Museum, It is hoped, helps to make clear
this underlying unity.
The "Seminar," an adjunct of the Museum, is the
meeting-place for discussion of problems concerning the
history of writing, and is open to members of the Univer¬
sity and, Indeed, to scholars everywhere. Facilities for
study and research, including a specialist library, are
being made available.
Professor David Diringer, curator of "The Alphabet
Museum" in Cambridge, England, is a lecturer in the
Department of Oriental Studies at the University of
Cambridge. He is the author of The Alphabet a key to
the history of mankind. First published in 1943 by
Hutchinson's Scientific and Technical Publications, this
work is now being revised by the author in the light of
the most recent scientific discoveries and will shortly
appear in a new edition.
