THE HI 111 WORLD
OF VOLCANOES
by Haroun Tazieff
WE still commonly hear it said that volcanic
upheavals are far less violent today than they
were in earlier geological periods, that they are mere pin¬
pricks on the earth's skin, trivial by comparison with the
mighty terrestial convulsions during which great ranges
of twisted mountains like the Alps or Himalayas emerged
from the depths of the vast oceanic abysses.
There is no doubt that during some periods in the
earth's history volcanoes were more numerous and more
violent than in the present brief moment of our planet's
existence; but there have also been many other epochs in
which volcanic disturbances were even milder than they
are nowadays. It would, in fact, be a serious mistake to
accept the "official" figure of between 650 and 700 vol¬
canoes considered as currently active; this is a very
restricted figure which applies solely to volcanic craters
that have erupted during recorded history.
Two factors in the calculation completely falsify it. The
first ls the concept of recorded history itself: it amounts
to two or three thousand years in the tiny areas of the
old scientific civilizations of the Mediterranean and the
Far East, four or five centuries in Latin America and Indo¬
nesia, two for most of the Pacific, Kamchatka and the
Aleutians and only one for Central Africano more than
the twinkling of an eye when compared to the immense
duration of the geological ages!
The lives of volcanoes, however, are measured on a geo¬
logical time scale. How many of the so-called extinct vol¬
canoes throughout the world are merely dormant, sunk
in sleep during which physico-chemical processes take
place that will lead to new eruptions? There are perhaps
hundreds, even thousands of such cases; at least as many,
and probably more than those so far counted.
The second reason for this error in calculation is our
ignorance about what goes on over the major part of the
earth's surface in the depths of the oceans. Only now is
some light being shed on its mysteries.
he odds against a submarine eruption being
detected are several thousand to one. First of
all the ocean is deserted to a degree forgotten by people
who never travel over it and who only think of it in terms
of atlases and maps. To detect the relatively rare sub¬
marine eruptions that are visible on the surface a boat
or aircraft would have to be passing directly or almost
directly above the eruption at the very moment (often no
more than that), when it occurred. Finally, as most
undersea eruptions occur at depths of several thousand
yards any discharge of vapours is impossible because even
6,000 feet down, the hydrostatic pressure is greater than
the critical pressure of the water.
Thus, the eruption cannot be an explosive one, and the
molten lava spreads quietly over the marine depths in
the same way as a sill Is created between two strata within
the earth's crust, but in this case between land and sea.
The first gases which escape from the magma dissolve in
the water on account of the high hydrostatic pressure.
on This also prevents the gases from making a vesicular form
of lava which, reaching the surface as light pumice stones
would otherwise reveal what was happening In the depths.
But a study of ancient geological deposits provides clear
evidence that huge quantities of lava pour out in the
ocean deeps and on the sides of the géosynclinals in which
the mountains have their origin. Moreover, the great
submarine range which wanders for thousands of miles
in the middle of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, the
South Seas and the eastern Pacific, is most probably made
up entirely of lava which has accumulated to form a
thickness of thousands of metres enough to make even
the Himalayas feel small!
Current volcanic activity has thus built up gigantic
mountains, the most awe-inspiring being the Mauna Loa
in Hawaii rising to a height of 30,000 feet between its base
submerged 16,000 feet below sea-level and its crater at
an altitude of 14,000 feet.
olcanic activity has likewise poured out thou¬
sands of cubic miles of lava in the form of
basaltic or ignimbritic (1) "beds" spread over enormous
surfaces; It has emitted and is still emitting colossal
quantities of water vapour, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide
and other volatile components without which the com¬
position of sea water and of the atmosphere would be
utterly different.
It is not only the composition, moreover, but in all
likelihood the very existence of the oceans which is due
to volcanic activity since this extracts gases from the mag¬
ma a process undoubtedly responsible for the existence
of surface water and hence of life itself.
There is a third aspect which to peoples who inhabit the
unstable regions of our planet is of even greater impor¬
tance: the danger from volcanoes themselves.
Great volcanic catastrophes in which thousands of peo¬
ple are killed are relatively uncommon one, two or per¬
haps three in a century, as far as we know and also
allowing for the extreme shortness of recorded history;
but disasters involving hundreds of victims are quite
frequent.
In 1815, Tambora in the Indonesian island of Sumbawa
was decapitated by a series of tremendous explosions
which were heard 1,100 miles away; blocks of stone weigh¬
ing several pounds were hurled for distances of over
25 miles; the mountain's height was reduced by 3,000 feet;
300 miles away, the island of Madura was plunged into
complete darkness for three days, so thick and dense was
the colossal canopy of ash which covered this part of the
world ; some 92,000 human beings and millions of domestic
and wild animals died during this catastrophe.
Sixty-eight years later, In the same region, Krakatoa
caused the death of more than 36,000 people; three-quar¬
ters of the island of Rakata with an area of 12 square miles
(1) The problem of ignimbrites and ignimbrites them¬
selves were only recently discovered. The term was created
in 1932 by the New Zealand geologist Marshall from
"ignis," fire, and "imber," rain, to signify the way in
which highly silicic volcanic rocks are deposited over tre¬
mendous areas.

E, Aubert de la Rue BORN IN A CORNFIELD. The volcano Paracutin was born with dramatic suddenness in 1943
in a Mexican cornfield. Beginning as a tiny crack in the ground, it spewed forth cinders, ash,
lava and rock, growing 50 feet within 24 hours and reaching 1,000 feet within six months.
and an altitude of some 2,600 feet was shattered by explo¬
sions heard as far as Singapore and Australia, 2,500 miles
away; pumice and ash were hurled to a height of over
120,000 feet; then enormous subsidences occurred in the
subterranean hollow left by the eruption of cubic miles of
lava; this subsidence created a submarine caldera, a caul¬
dron-like cavity nearly four and a half miles wide, and
provoked tsunamis, incorrectly called tidal waves, which,
after devastating the coasts of the Sunda Straits, crossed
the Pacific and were felt as far away as Chile.
The 20th century was only two years old when the
Mt. Pelée disaster occurred, wiping out the town of
St. Pierre de la Martinique and its 28,000 inhabitants.
This eruption provided the scientific world with a new
phenomenon which the French mineralogist, Alfred
Lacroix, the first to study it, baptized "the fiery cloud."
This consists of a deadly combination of drops of molten
lava, ash, sand and rocks of all sizes suspended in gases
with a temperature of a thousand degrees. The explosion
which frees this cloud generally goes sideways rather than
upwards; it bursts through the weakest point In the side
of a dome of highly viscous lava which the pressure of the
gases forces slowly out.
Shooting out obliquely, the explosion then hurls its pul¬
verised lava, rock and fiery vapour In a specific direction.
The cloud rushes onwards, hurtles down slopes at speeds
which may range from 50 miles per hour to over 180, leaps
over natural obstacles such as ridges and sheer ravines
which may be In its path and spreads death and destruc¬
tion up to a distance of five or even ten miles (St. Pierre
was five miles from Mt. Pelée; Merapl on the island of
Java frequently causes deaths among the people living as
far as five miles away in the valleys round Its base).
In 1955-1956. a volcano which was thought to be extinct
suddenly erupted with such fury that it would certainly *'
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

VOLCANOES (Cont'd)
Cataclysmic
awakening
have caused scores and possibly hundreds of thousands of
deaths if it had been situated in a more densely populated
country. Fortunately there were neither deaths nor
destruction since this volcano, Mt. Bezimiannyi (The
Nameless Mountain), is in a desert area of the Kamchatka
Peninsula.
The awakening of Mt. Bezimiannyi came with a violence
proportionate to the length of its sleep. Figures provided
by the Soviet volcanist, G.S. Gorshkov, who observed the
eruption from the Klioutchi Observatory, give some Idea
of its cataclysmic power: energy unleashed: 2.2 x IO25
ergs; energy released by the most violent single explosion
of March 30, 1956: 4 x IO23 ergs (40 million kw.-hours) ;
volume of rock ejected by the explosion: 1 cubic kilometre
(enough to bury Paris under a layer 50 feet thick) ; weight
of debris ejected: 2,400 million tons; initial velocity of
ejectments: between 1,650 and 1,970 feet per second
(1,100 to 1,200 miles per hour) ; initial pressure: 3,000 atmo¬
spheres; altitude reached by the eruptive cloud: 150,000
feet.
By good fortune, the other great eruption of this cen¬
tury, the Katmai eruption of 1912, also occurred in a
deserted region in the massive Aleutian volcanic range
which extends onto the American continent via the Alaska
peninsula. Its consequences were formidable: Mt. Katmai
was completely decapitated and a caldera three miles in
diameter appeared in place of the summit. Through frac¬
tures running right down to the mountain's north base,
a fantastic quantity (12-15 cubic kilometres) of pumice
was ejected. Powdered by the pressure of its own gases,
it spread like a fiery cloud, filling a valley 12 miles long
and three miles wide, thereby creating the ignimbrite of
the famous Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes. Finally, an
entirely new volcano, emerged and was named Nova
Rupta.
AN ANGRY GIANT. One
of the greatest eruptions of
this century occurred in
1955 when Mt. Bezimian¬
nyi (The Nameless Moun¬
tain), an "extinct" volcano
in a deserted region of
the Kamchatka Peninsular
awoke in sudden fury
(above). The cataclysmic
power unleashed by this
giant was astounding. It
shot out 2,400 million tons
of debris (enough to bury
Paris under a layer 50
feet thick) at speeds of
from 1,100 to 1,200 m.
p.h. and carried the erup¬
tive cloud to a height of
1 50,000 feet. Below, Soviet
vulcanologists take a crater-
lip look at another volcano
in the Kamchatka region.
Novosti Press Agency

As in the case of all such major upheavals, the explo¬
sions were heard over great distances, sometimes as far
as 600 miles off; ash covered many hundreds of square
miles, plunging the village of Kodiak, 100 miles away, into
darkness at noon. Even more extraordinary was the fact
that tectonic earthquakes accompanied the eruption and
were recorded by seismographs throughout the Northern
Hemisphere. This was the first and only recorded eruption
which produced ignimbrites.
The study of volcanic phenomena is rarely easy. Every¬
thing seems to conspire against those who seek to pene¬
trate the mysteries. The terrain is always difficult and
sometimes completely inaccessible. There is danger which
ls sometimes obvious and formidable and sometimes all
the greater for being concealed. It is quite impossible to
probe the depths of the volcano to find out what is
happening inside. Finally, the complexity of the volcanic
activities, intermingling in time and space, demands the
simultaneous presence of specialists from all the scientific
fields concerned in the investigation.
The time has passed when a single man such as Pliny
the Naturalist, or investigators like Hamilton, Spallanzanl;
Perret or Lacroix, could individually harvest enough facts
from their observations of an eruption to advance the sum
of human knowledge. Nowadays when the recording of
volcanic phenomena in ever more accurate figures is
increasingly important, the work of studying active vol¬
canoes has become essentially a team operation.
And merely to assemble a fully-representative group of
specialists on or near a volcano in eruption Is already
itself a difficult undertaking, for except In Japan there
are very few experts In vulcanology, and they are scattered
throughout the world, each In hLs own institute or uni¬
versity.
To attempt to bring enough of them together, rapidly
enough and at short notice, in response to the whim of
a volcano situated in some remote spot ls an almost hope¬
less task. It is for this reason that only very few eruptions
have so far been observed with all the resources now
available for taking the measure of all the multiple
aspects of volcanic activity.
That the dangers are in no way imaginary ls proved by
the disappearance of twelve Japanese experts and twenty
sailors who set out to investigate the submarine volcano
of Myojln Syo during its eruption In 1952. After many
days of fruitless searching, all that was found of the océa¬
nographie ship (hundreds of miles to the southwest where
they had been carried by the currents) were scraps of
planking, some wooden objects and a buoy riddled with
pieces of pumice-stone of obviously very viscous lava.
So far, it is only in Japan that eruptions have been
studied by adequately-representative scientific teams. In
other countries, problems of a practical kind (warnings
against catastrophes, for example) are either relatively
unimportant (in Italy, U.S.S.R., U.S.A., New Zealand, and
certain Australian territories) or, where more acute
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

VOLCANOES (Cont'd)
Exploring a lake of molten lava
problems exist, the official attitude towards scientific
research is unfortunately one of indifference.
Scientists can already forecast volcanic eruptions and
will probably soon be able to predict their violence and
hence the danger they present. But this is only possible
in the case of volcanoes which, constantly observed and
meticulously studied, thus become thoroughly familiar
to the specialists responsible for forecasting disturbances
likely to endanger the surrounding population.
In the few places around the world where there are pro¬
perly equipped and efficiently staffed vulcanological obser¬
vatories, it is now almost Impossible for an eruption to
take people by surprise.
But apart from these places Asama-Yama,
' Aso-San and Sakurajlma in Japan. Kilauea
in Hawaii, Klioutchevskof in Kamchatka. Vesuvius and
shortly, no doubt, Etna In Italy nowhere else today are
volcanoes kept under even the minimum supervision
required to prevent catastrophes. Java, where the pre¬
war vulcanological service has remained intact, still lacks
highly specialized teams, and a country which is in such
danger from upheavals In one or another of Its dozens
of formidable mountains of fire needs more than the
services of a few competent geophysicists. Much the same
applies to the Philippines, the Lesser Sundas, the Antilles
and to all the volcanic countries of Latin America.
Apart from Japan, it is in those regions where volcanic
activity ls either limited or utterly non-existent that,
paradoxically enough, most of the world's volcanlsts are
found today. And, it is equally paradoxical that in
Western Europe, it ls Belgium, a non-volcanic country,
that has revived its vigorous pre-war research into active
volcanoes.
It should be explained that the Impetus for this de¬
velopment came from the former Belgian Congo where, in
an area hardly more than ten miles by twelve, to the
north of Lake Kivu, there are eight large volcanoes, some
of them particularly violent. Eruptions are relatively fre¬
quent (ten In the course of half a century). However, by
far the most interesting feature of this region is the deep
Nlragongo crater, which posseses the only lake of perma¬
nently molten lava existing anywhere in the world.
Lakes of molten basalt quite often develop during the
eruption of a group of volcanoes but access to the area is
often subject to the same dangers that are found in active
craters. A permanent lake, however, provides an Ideal
subject for those probing the mysteries of volcanic acti¬
vity: there ls practically no danger and the basic matter
of the volcanic action molten lava and the gases It
emits Is abundant if not readily accessible.
By managing to descend the 650 foot wall of the large
caved-in crater of Nlragongo which had discouraged ear¬
lier attempts at exploration, I had the good fortune to
discover the existence of this lake, the only one of its
kind in the world today. This was In 1948, after which
ten years went by before it was possible to overcome the
opposition of the Chairman of the Belgian Congo National
Parks to any form of vulcanological research on Nlra¬
gongo.
It was only In 1958 that the first reconnaissance and
systematic expedition could be organized. The following
«J year a larger and more comprehensive expedition was sent,
in which Belgians, French and one Japanese scientist took
part.
The approach to the Nlragongo lava lake is much more
difficult than was the case with Kilauea in Hawaii whose
"fount of fire of Halemaumau" was rightly renowned
throughout the world during the century preceding its
disappearance in 1924. Unlike the case of Hawaii where
it was possible to drive up by car to the very edge of the
lake, the approach to Niragongo involves climbing a
mountain almost 12,000 feet high, first following elephant
tracks through the virgin forest and then clambering over
the hard dark lava which crowns this powerful cone,
abruptly truncated by the 3,600-foot wide crater.
Then comes the descent of the crater. Nearly 650 feet
of steep and dangerously unstable wall divides the crest
from the vast ring-shaped terrace which stretches out
horizontally from the foot of the wall.
This terrace surrounds the central well which is some
1,500 feet across. To reach this point, a vertical wall
nearly 600 feet high must be passed*. The treacherously
insecure rock which forms this wall would make it an
excessively hazardous obstacle even for experienced moun¬
tain-climbers.
Accordingly, we had a light cave-explorer's winch built,
and, suspended at the end of a thin steel cable attached
to this winch, each of us descended in turn like a spider
at the end of a strand of web, until we reached a second
ring-shaped terrace only a few dozen yards across.
A tent was pitched there and for a month this was our
advanced camp. Beyond this, a steep ledge measuring a
good twenty yards was surmounted by means of duralumin
ladders and we then made our way through a chaos of
huge fallen boulders until we reached the opening of the
narrow platform which, more than 1300 feet below the
crest of the crater, encircles the vast lake Itself.
Over the last ten years or so, the lake has shrunk
appreciably, from some 320,000 square feet to roughly
140,000. Even so, it remains one of nature's most extra¬
ordinary spectacles. The great stretch of molten rock ls
sometimes calm, covered with a strange skin as plastic and
shining as satin, then sometimes breaks out in currents,
purple whirlpools and incandescent "fountains" scatter¬
ing viscous magma over the steep banks on which we
would stand in a wonder born of delight and awe which
was felt even by the most matter-of-fact members of the
team.
H ere, cherry-coloured stalactites hung from the
I vaulted ceilings of fantastic fiery grottoes in
which torrents of lava, suddenly quickening their pace,
would be swallowed up; a rhythmical swell, like a recur¬
ring fever would sometimes seize the heavy liquid mass;
there were sluggish orange-coloured surges In the more
peaceful parts, and strange galleons of black rock on a
sea of dark fire; there was a roaring, a rumbling, and
sulphurous smells. All this helped to create around us a
closed universe which was miraculous and almost
terrifying.
In six weeks, this awe-inspiring, ever-changing splen¬
dour never once wearied or bored us. Nor, fortunately, did
It distract us from our Immense programme of work. Day
and night for weeks on end, each specialist carried out his
observations, made his measurements, analyses and
recordings. The results of the seismology, the spectrogra¬
ph^ of the volcanic flames, the terrestrial magnetism, the
gravimetry, the chemical composition of the gases, the
mineralogy of the lava, the analyses of the sublimates,
and the photogrammetry would probably not mean much

British Travel and Holidays Association HEXAGONAL COLUMNS running in a promontory from the coast of Antrim in Northern
Ireland are a remarkable collection of basalt rocks, some being 20 ft. in length, known as Tho
Giant's Causeway. Distribution of basalt rocks, formed by the solidification of lava, is world-wide.
to anyone except a volcanist, but the figure for the heat
radiated by this infernal bath930,000 K.W.speaks for
itself.
It is far easier to reach the Italian volcanoes of Etna
and Stromboli because they are situated in a country
with a highly developed technology. But the final
approach to the burning lava and the vents in order to
collect samples of gases unmixed with pure air is, surpris¬
ingly enough, a much more hazardous operation than is
the case at the spectacular Nlragongo lake.
But the regular explosive activity of Etna and Stromboli
offers experts in the seismology of volcanoes a promising
field for exploration. The original team has expanded
since 1958 and is now made up of Italians, Frenchmen and
Belgians. Soon English scientists will be joining it and
later on, specialists from Finland, Hungary and elsewhere.
The primary aim of this physically fatiguing and often
baffling research, Is to understand the hows and whys
of volcanic activity. For these powerful terrestrial pheno¬
mena are far more vast and much more important than
the superficial movement of lava, however spectacular
and even deadly this may be.
As Alfred Rittmann, one of the outstanding volcanists
of our century, so aptly put it, "volcanic activity is a
process at work both within and below the earth's crust,
a process in which the liberation of gases from the crude
magma plays a rôle of primary importance In the history
of our planet's development" (1).
Rittmann drew up a vast synthesis in which he showed
how the earth has evolved from the original solar matter,
how the granitic continents were formed, how the pri¬
mitive atmosphere and ancestral oceans were created
all through the liberation of gases, the differentiations, the
movements involved in or caused by the magma. He
showed how the upsetting of balances, balances of tempe¬
rature, balances of weight, physical or chemical balances,
have throughout the four thousand million years and
more of the earth's existence caused, as they still do,
massive shifts within that magma, currents which mix it
in an attempt to restore the upset balance and thereby
exercise their colossal power on the crust of the earth.
It is in this way that the deep oceanic deeps are formed,
folds in the thin crust of basalt which forms the ocean
beds; sometimes these deeps develop Into géosynclinals
in which sediment brought by the rivers from the neigh¬
bouring continent accumulate to a depth of thousands
upon thousands of yards. And It ls from these géosyncli¬
nals, after a complex process of evolution lasting millions
of years, that the great mountain rangesAlps, Andes and
Himalayas emerge.
The whole of this vast orogenlc process ls due to the
movements of the magma, the same movements which,
when they break through the earth's crust at the points
of extreme pressure, allow the magma to rise and to burst
forth at the surface, thereby causing volcanic activities
in the narrow sense of the term.
It Is In this way that we must consider volcanic activity
if we genuinely seek to understand Its significance: as a
cosmic phenomenon which shapes the face and the
depths of the earth and in which eruptions arc no more
than a superficial aspect.
This fascinating side to volcanic research may strike
some people as somewhat irrelevant and even excessively
speculative; yet it ls an essential Ingredient for progress
in the two utilitarian aspects of vulcanology: the fore¬
casting of dangerous eruptions and the harnessing of the
formidable power of volcanoes.
As already pointed out, we may be able to foresee the
imminence of an eruption empirically but we cannot yet
predict either its violence or its duration, and without
these factors we cannot decide on the urgency and the
extent of the precautions to be taken. We shall, however,
attain a sufficient degree of accuracy when the true
mechanism of the phenomena is known, at least to a
greater degree than is achieved by the rough hypotheses
now employed.
Similarly, it ls through fundamental knowledge that we
will be able to develop and certainly In a very spectacular
fashion the exploitation of géothermie energy. Today
this new source of power has only begun to be tapped,
although already It has given magnificent returns, at Lar-
darello in Texas and at Wairakei in New Zealand.
Tomorrow, California and Kamchatka will benefit from
the millions of kilowatts recovered from those so abun¬
dantly provided by volcanoes. And this Inexhaustible
source of cheap power will assuredly be one of the most
productive throughout the world of the future.
(1) A. Rittmann: "Les Volcans et leur activité," revised
and expanded edition, Masson, Paris, 1963.
Haroun Tazieff, Belgian geologist and vulcanologist, is
the author of many books on geophysics. He has produced 9c;
several prize-winning scientific and documentary films on ¿i>
volcanic eruptions.
