ONE LANGUAGE
FOR THE WORLD?
by Mario Pei
u niversality was implicit in the ancient world
of the Romans and in the mediaeval world
that followed it. The language of Rome, which had
served the universal Roman Empire and the universal
Christian Church, continued to be the common language
of western scholarship until the dawn of the Renaissance.
But modern progress, the invention of printing, and the
spreading of literacy to upper and middle classes that had
been largely illiterate in the past, coupled with the
beginnings of the modern national states, brought the
spoken vernaculars of the masses to the fore. The fif¬
teenth century witnessed the final triumph of the national
languages over the Latin that had dominated the
thousand-year period since the fall of Roman Empire
natural, national languages be used, singly or in combi¬
nation, in straight or modified form, for international
purposes.
But the proposal advanced in 1629 by the French philo¬
sopher Descartes was of a radically different nature.
Answering a letter written him by a Father Merscnne,
who had enclosed in his missive an anonymous Latin
prospectus concerning the desirability of an International
language, the great philosopher presented his own views
on the subject.
Beginning with an attack on the difficulties of national
grammars, which prevent people from seizing the meaning
of a passage by referring to the dictionary alone, Des¬
cartes goes on to advocate the creation of a tongue whose
LEBTOREONFO PEETOFOSENSEN
PIFTOFOSENSEN =
Honour thy father and thy mother
of the West, and Europe assumed its modern linguistic
aspect, With an array of national tongues, both literary
and official.
It is therefore not to be wondered at that many minds
began to turn to the problem of a single language that
would serve for the new and numerous cultural exchanges
that were being established. Latin no longer sufficed.
In the thirteenth century, the traveling scholar would
care to communicate only with his peers, and they all
knew Latin. In the seventeenth, his desire was for oral
communication with all sorts people: merchants and
sailors and soldiers and nobles and perhaps even peasants,
and they knew no Latin. The vernaculars were not
merely too numerous ; they were too much broken up into
local dialects.
Yet Comenius, a seventeenth-century educator with an
international background, came out with the startling
proposal that the leading languages of eastern and
western Europe be used in international fashion, with
Russian serving the east and French and English the
west.
These proposals have been repeated, in one fashion or
another, from that day to the present. The Monde Bilin¬
gue movement, the zonal languages of Stalin, the advo¬
cacy of English in normal, Basic, or revised-spelling form,
are only three of the many suggestions that existing,
grammar will be so simple that it can be learned without
effort by anyone, by reason of Its absolute regularity and
logic.
Along with this, he proposes a word-coining system
whereby there will be, among the ideas of the human
mind, the same order that prevails among numbers in
mathematics, so that Just as there is In mathematics a
logical progression from the known to the unknown, the
same process may be possible with words. If thLs Is done,
he concludes, peasants will be able to determine truth in
better fashion than do philosophers at present.
What Descartes advocates, though he gives no example
of it, is a constructed language of the a priori or philoso¬
phical type, whose grammar will depart from known
grammars to the extent that it will be regular and
without exceptions, and whose word-stock will not be
haphazard, but logically connected. Such a language,
based on the analogy of mathematical operations, is per¬
fectly possible, but does not coincide with the structure
of any known tongue.
Descartes supplied no sample of his ideal international
language, but such samples were immediately forthcoming
from several of his contemporaries, Dalgarno, "Urquhart,
Wilklns, Leibniz. Cave Beck, in 1657, offered an ingenious
system based on combinations of letters and numbers to
CONT'D ON PAGE 28
23

(Cont'd from page 23)
ONE LANGUAGE
FOR THE WORLD?
be used in writing, while the numbers would be replaced
by sounds In actual speech.
"Honour thy father and thy mother" would appear in
Beck's written system as "leb2314 p2477 pf2477," which
would be read lebtoreonfo peetofosensen piftofosensen
(each numeral stands for a spoken syllable) It is perhaps
obvious why this system did not take hold. The strain
imposed on the memory is tremendous.
Since the days of Descartes, Leibniz and Beck, it Is
estimated that at least six hundred different proposals
have been advanced for the solution of the world's lin¬
guistic troubles. Their chronological sequence has inte¬
resting features. Once we are past the seventeenth cen¬
tury, popular interest seems to flag. Between 1800 and
1850, only four important projects appear, but one of
them is Sudre's famous Solresol, based on the notes of
the scale. This attracted enormous attention, was later
sponsored by such people as Victor Hugo, Lamartine,
Humboldt and Napoleon III, and had at one point a
considerable body of speakers, with die-hard followers as
late as 1900.
Statistically, combinations of the syllables do, re, ml
fa, sol, la, si yield seven words of one syllable, 49 of two,
336 of three, 2,268 of four, 9,072 of five. Shifts of accent
from one syllable to another then yield the possibility of
changing the function of a word from noun to verb or
adjective or adverb. The language could be sung or
played or hummed instead of spoken; it could be written
as music; knocks, or even colors, could be substituted foj
the syllables for distant communication. A phrase like
"I don't love" is dore do milasi.
That the constructed language of the a priori type,
having no connexion with existing languages, has not
fully died out is proved by two interesting twentieth-
century samples, both of American origin. One is Foster's
Ro of 1912, in which the first part of the Lord's Prayer
runs: Abze radap av el in suda, ace rokab eco sugem; ace
to leave the vocabulary alone and change the gramma¬
tical structure. In 1903, Peano presented a system called
Latino Sine Flexione (Flexionless Latin), in which the
endings of Latin are dropped or merged: Studio theorico
proba que es necessario nulla regula de grammatica, nullo
suffixo de derivatione (A theoretical study proves that no
grammatical rule, no derivational suffix, is necessary).
Language blends run all the way from barely disguised
modifications of Latin and Romance to systems that pro¬
pose to give what amounts to proportional representation
to all of the world's great language families. The original
idea, that arose in the middle of the eighteenth century
and replaced the earlier striving for "logic" in language,
was that of "the greatest ease for the greatest number."
But since, at the time when this principle was enunciated,
"the greatest number" referred only to speakers of
western-type languages, many of these blends, even today,
resolve themselves into combinations of Latin, Greek,
Romance, occasionally Germanic, still more seldom Slavic,
with little or no attention paid to the vast numbers of
speakers of other types of tongues.
The first a posteriori language to meet with favour was
Schleyer's Volapuk of 1885, a tongue which blends Latin-
Romance, English and German elements. "I don't want
the book, but a book" is in Volapuk No vilob eli buki, sod
uni buki.'
By 1890, the vogue of Volapuk had come to a standstill,
and Zamenhof's Esperanto assumed international im¬
portance. Here, too, we have a predominance of Classical,
Romance and Germanic elements, with other languages,
including the Slavic, largely left out of the running (this
is surprising, since Zamenhof was a Pole)*.
The popularity of Esperanto continues to the present
day, and it is estimated that eight million people through¬
out the world speak it in one fashion or another. But
the popularity of Esperanto seems to have had the effect
of encouraging rather than discouraging further attempts.
NO VILOB ELI BUKI,
SOD UNI BUKI =
/ don't want the book, but a book
26
rajda ec hep: ace va .eco uz in suda asi in buba. The
other Is Russell's Suma of 1957, in which the beginning of
the First Book of Genesis runs: talo moti sima baki boto
e beto e beto te peka e ena gide e ena doba.
Far more numerous and varied are the languages of
the a posteriori type, based on one or more existing natu¬
ral languages. Here a distinction must be made between
modifications of single existing tongues and language
blends of various kinds.
Typical of the modified natural language is Basic
English, which is ordinary English restricted as to voca¬
bulary, so that "participate" has to be rendered as "take
part", and "selfish" paraphrased into "without thought
of others." The claim (not altogether substantiated) is
that with 850 English words at our disposal we can cover
the entire vast range of human language needs.
Basic English does not interfere with normal English
sounds or grammar; but other modified languages prefer
In the course of the present century, well over 400 cons¬
tructed languages have been offered to the world.
Most of them are of the same basic type as Esperanto,
with a grammar that is more or less arbitrary and a
vocabulary drawn from the western languages. This is
true even of languages constructed by some of the world's
great linguists (de Saussure and Jespersen, to cite only
two names).
On the other hand, some very ingenious schemes have
been advanced to give some measure of representation to
other major language groups. Cheshikhin's Nepo of 1910,
for instance, adds Slavic to the Latin-Romance-Germanic
combination (Vatero nia, kotoryja estas in la njeboo,
heiliga estu nomo via is the beginning of the Lord's Prayer
* For an article on Zamenhof, the Father of Esperanto,
see The Unesco Courier, December, 1959.

in Nepo). Hogben's Interglossa of 1943 presents a Graeco-
Latin vocabulary, but with a Chinese word-order (.Na
Parenta in Urani; Na dicte voló; tu Nomino gene revero).
Steiner's Pasilingua oí 1885 makes provision for syno¬
nyms from Latin-Romance and Germanic: "good" may
be either bono or guto; "God" Is Deo or Gotto; "often" is
saepe or oftis. Fred Mill's Anti-Volapük of 1893 goes even
further, combining international connecting words, taken
largely from Latin-Romance, with nouns and verbs of the
speaker's own language, with the proviso, presumably,
that each speaker will learn enough of the other speaker's
nouns and verbs to be at least able to understand them.
Thus, the sentence "I think he is in the street" would
come out in the following English, French, Italian, Spanish
and Russian versions:
a western European blend to the exclusion of other lan¬
guage groups, which In the modern world are acquiring
an ever-growing Importance.
The corresponding disadvantage, to which many lin¬
guists object, Is that the constructed language, not having
grown from the soil, is not the bearer of cultural values.
For a language that is meant to be, at the outset, a
vehicle of material communication rather than an instru¬
ment of cultural Imperialism, this is not a disadvantage,
but the opposite.
History teaches us that cultures grow around languages
which were originally rough, crude, material tools of
communication. If a world culture grows In similar
manner around a world language, that will be all to the
good. At any rate, Esperanto, with Its numerous original
WO-TI ÑAMA MATA-HARI;
WO MIRU PER NI-TI FENESTRA ==
/ am called the sun; I look into your window
"Io think ke le es in le street."
"Io croire ke le es in le rue."
"Io credere ke le es in le strada."
"lo creer ke le es in le calle."
"Io dumat' ke le es in le ulitsa."
Most comprehensive among proposals designed to give
representation to all major language groups is the recent
one of Leidenfrost that a Universal Grammar and Voca¬
bulary be constructed by a commission of language specia¬
lists on the basis of a blend of ten representative lan¬
guages: Iraqi Arabic, Mandarin Chinese, English, Hin¬
dustani, Hungarian, Indonesian, the Kpelle of Liberia,
Russian, Spanish and Swahili. This still leaves out two
major language groups, the Japanese-Korean and the
Dravidian of southern India, both of which have well over
100 million speakers.
The dangers of these too extensive blends are pointed
out by Dr. Gode of Interlingua, a language constructed by
a team of language experts on the customary basis of a
combination of Western tongues. In Interlingua as it is,
he offers the following passage: "Le sol dice: 'Io me
appella sol. Io es multo brillante. Io me leva al est, e
quando io me leva, il es die. Io reguarda per tu fenestra
con mi oculo brillante como le auro, e io te dice quando
il es tempore a lever te'."
Now he shifts to an intercontinental version that
includes Chinese, Japanese, Indonesian and other Orien¬
tal tongues: "Mata-hari yu: 'Wo-ti noma mata-hari. Wo
taihen brillante. Wo leva wo a est, dan toki wo leva wo,
ada hari. Wo miru per ni-ti fenestra sama wo-ti mata
brillante como kin, dan wo yu ni toli ada tempo a levar
ni'." His points are that no westerner will even begin to
understand the second version without very special study,
and (perhaps even more important), that the Indonesian
speaker, who supplied mata-hari, will not understand the
Chinese wo-ti, ni and yu, or the Japanese taihen.
One final word may be added, in connexion with the
desirability (or lack thereof) of a constructed tongue vis-
à-vis a national language adopted for international use.
One of the great advantages postulated by the proponents
of constructed languages is their internationality or neu¬
trality, the fact that no nation need object to them on
the ground that they are vehicles and standard-bearers
of alien cultures.
This is quite true of the a priori languages, which are
based on no known tongue. It is far from true of the
majority of a posteriori languages, which definitely reflect
works, both in prose and in verse, shows us that a con¬
structed language, once It is In use, is perfectly capable of
creating its own cultural values.
Two considerations of a highly practical nature offer
themselves. National languages, big or small, seldom have
a system of perfect phonetic notation. This Is particularly
true of languages of century-old civilizations, such as
French and English, where the time-lag between the nor¬
mal evolution of speech and the bringing up to- date of
the spelling has worked to deepen the separation between
speech and writing.
Constructed languages, on the other hand, are normally
completely phonetized, with absolute sound-ior-symbol
correspondence (Esperanto Is a good example). This
means that any national language selected for Interna¬
tional use would have to go through a process of spelling
reform, at least for international purposes, before it could
be properly put into operation, while a constructed lan¬
guage could go Into operation at once, without further
study or change.
Even more important Is the fact that national langua¬
ges normally show deep dialectal divisions, with frequent
uncertainly as to a standard form. This is particularly
true of English and Spanish, somewhat less true of
French and Russian, where a "correct" standard exists,
whether or not it is followed by all the speakers. But the
constructed language Is normally fully standardized, and
the only problem is to keep it that way once it goes into
operation.
These two characteristics of constructed languages, pho-
netizatlon and standardization, are perhaps of greater
importance than a "neutrality" which seldom appears,
and which can in no case be made altogether perfect.
They are, in the opinion of this writer, of sufficient Impor¬
tance to warrant serious consideration of a constructed
language for international use along with the numerous
national tongues, old and new, that are offered for
candidacy.
Mario peí, an American linguist, is Professor of Romance
Philology at Columbia University, New York. He is the
author of "The Story of English", recently published by
Fawcett World Library in the United States. Readers will
find a more ample development of the ideas contained in
the above article in Mario Pei's book, "One Language for 27
the World", published by Devin-Adair Co., 23 East 26
Street, New York 10, N.Y. U.S.A.
