URBAN EXPLOSION
IN DEVELOPING NATIONS
by Paul Mercier
I
50
n the majority of developing countries, the
I town (especially the large town) is an entirely
new phenomenon which forced itself ruthlessly upon
essentially peasant communities. These were village
communities In which economic and social relations
developed between horizons that were often extremely
narrow. In these villages blood relationships were
broadly the basis of much of the social life, attachment
to the soil was of religious or quasl-rellgious significance
and respect for tradition slowed down the effects of
forces of social and cultural change.
The city thus offered an environment radically opposed
to the traditional way of life. It is significant that in
various regions of Africa south of the Sahara, for instance,
visits to the city and a temporary stay have replaced to
some extent the reputedly hazardous rites of initia¬
tion to which young men formerly had to submit before
being admitted to a fully adult status in society. Contact
with the city came to be considered as an experience par
excellence of a foreign, difficult and hostile world, though
one that none the less held many attractions.
For nearly all the developing countries entry into the
modern world has meant the creation of towns: adminis¬
trative centres in colonial territories, commercial centres
everywhere and an at first limited number of industrial
centres.
Economists were the first to emphasize the importance
of these links with the economically-developed nations,
links established by these countries for their own needs
as centres of political and economic domination in
directly colonized countries or simply for economic control
in others.
The limited integration of these towns with the regions
they were intended to exploit rather than to serve was
also noted. Even today this Integration is only proceed¬
ing at a slow place. A similar lack of harmony is also
found on the social and cultural level, though it is also
true that migration to the city has done much to spread
Its influence widely within a short time.
At first the new towns were rather primitive, and they
have still not outgrown this stage in many cases. Build¬
ing over the urban as whole Was sparse and somewhat
haphazard. Residential sections looked more like over¬
grown villages or "encampments." (Today many towns
are still unable to provide sufficient housing for their
inhabitants.) The creation of municipal administrative
services was in its formative stages as also was the labour
market.
However, within the last few decades, and especially
since the Second World War. many of these towns have
diversified their activities and have reached a stage of
partial consolidation. This process of diversification is
extending today, especially in former colonial territories.
The development of trade, industry and administration
Ibadan, capital of
the Western region
of Nigeria, is the
largest purely Afri¬
can town south of
the Sahara, with a
population of nearly
three-quarters of a
million. Negro Af¬
rica's first TV station
and Nigeria's first
university are in this
bustling, rapidly
growing city where
gleaming apartment
and office buildings
rise amid a sea of
tin-roofed houses.
Yet many of Iba-
dan's people still
work as farmers.
© Paul Almasy. Paris
and of political and educational activities is increasingly
combined in many towns.
The influence of the town as a centre for spreading
standards, prototypes and new ways is now penetrating
the rural areas more systematically. The development
of transport and news and Information media of all kinds
helps appreciably to reduce the gap between town and
country. Some plans for modernization and equipment
show clearly the intention of making the towns and their
resources the effective servants of the rural areas.
Nevertheless, the stabilization of urban populations
essential for the creation of sound economic and social
conditions still creates difficult problems.
Most new towns have heterogeneous populations, hete¬
rogeneous from regional, ethnic, linguistic and religious
points of view. Thus they facilitate contacts and the
mixing of different elements which is especially Important
to countries striving to achieve unity. However, they are
also the scene, for varying periods, of social tensions
which sometimes turn Into bitter conflicts between indi-

viduals, regional or ethnic groups or even between
different castes.
This situation arises all the more frequently because
of the lack of arrangements to assimilate these people
in urban areas. The individual or group has therefore been
driven to congregate with others of similar origin so as to
enjoy familiar social relationships. These could to some
extent be continued in town and help to lessen the
shock of starting an entirely new kind of life. At the
same time, the formation of associations of this kind,
all aiming basically at mutual aid, partly compensated for
the loss of the traditional kinship groupings which had
been the very basis for existence in the past, but which
could only subsist with difficulty in urban surroundings.
One of the main reasons for the intense migration to
towns is rural over-population. However, this is not the
only cause, and countries with a very low density of
population offer equally spectacular examples of migra¬
tion. The factors which come into play here Include
various kinds of social imbalance found in rural areas,
economic regression due to special historical circumstances
and direct and Indirect constraints imposed in colonized
countries to make sure of an abundant labour force, and
even a manpower surplus which helped to support a low
wages policy.
Although migration concerns a large part (often the
majority) of the adult male population, most migrants
do not settle permanently in towns or have no Intention
of doing so. Industrial labour studies show that in the
majority of developing countries the numbers of men
actually employed are small, but that the labour force ls
continually being renewed.
Industrial workers and town populations are basically of
a shifting kind. Recruitment of workers for industry and
urban Jobs has a "partial" character. The village re¬
mains their real "home" and even those who settle more 51
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

URBAN EXPLOSION (Cont'd)
Replacing the shanty towns
or less permanently in towns return to the village
periodically to visit their relatives, to help with the
harvest, to take part In ceremonies and so on. They do
not evade the social and religious obligations imposed by
the village. Studies in India and Africa revealed many
facts of this kind. While there is thus no complete rup¬
ture between the town and rural populations the tem¬
porary town dwellers or those who remain largely alien
to their new environment are nevertheless inadequately
equipped to meet the social and economic demands of
the town
Migration to the town means a search for work an
often hopeless search, as many migrants discover. Most
studies reveal a large proportion of unemployed and even
more often, of non-employed persons. If the migrant
does not immediately find employment, he stays in town
knowing that he will always be able to subsist with the
help of "relatives" he will find there.
The man who finds a job is a privileged person; relatives
often come to live at his expense and he usually complies
with the ancient, still surviving rules of family solidarity.
This phenomenon of "family parasitism," found almost
everywhere, is an obstacle to the raising of the standard
of living of the worker and to any show of initiative by
him. Yet , at the same time it offers a spontaneous
compensation for the effects of urban under-employment.
Some economists have referred to the transfer of under¬
employment from country to town. We shall return later
to the question of the lag that can be observed between
the rate of growth or urban populations and the rate of
increase in the number of jobs. Not all town dwellers
without regular employment are entirely inactive, but the
work they do is of an unproductive kind everywhere
there is an abundance of servants, petty traders, middle¬
men and people who live by doing odd jobs. The enormous
increase in the section of the population which does not
earn regular salaries reveals the extent of under-employ¬
ment in towns.
In urban areas which are still poor in resources and
where productive activity lags well behind the increase in
population, the housing shortage is always acute. Every¬
where there are shapeless shanty towns. Even the man
with a job often has no more than "a corner to sleep in,"
and overcrowding is a general rule.
tvEN where vigorous efforts are made to meet
this situation there is only a very gradual
Improvement. Intensive speculation in land, housing and
rents has been reported in many towns. Anything (even
the "corner to sleep in") is let at an exhorbitant price.
Rent eats up far too large a proportion of the budgets
of the lowest income groups. This explains why seasonal
migrants especially, but sometimes other categories of
workers too, are ready to accept overcrowding and poor
sanitary conditions or even to share accomodation with
others on an "in rotation" basis. This situation, the
result of rapid urban expansion, again reveals the limited
degree of integration of the townsmen in their new
environment.
Having developed too quickly the town communities
lack administrative structures and show signs of serious
disequilibrium. Reports have referred to "formless masses
of people." This is an exaggeration, although the fact
remains that the individual does lack the social structures
which he needs to support and guide him. The groups
to which he belongs are unable to give him all the help
he needs in the difficult choices confronting him and in
his efforts towards adjustment.
52 Efforts are often made to establish traditional types of
groups but these can never be more than fragmentary and
relatively ineffective. The basis of a new social structure
is still far from firmly established. The small family
unit tends to replace the large family group, but this
transition creates many problems because people are
unprepared for the new kind of relationships which it
involves between men and women, children and parents.
The fragility of this social structure ls only partially offset
by the relations that are maintained with the large family
groups In the villages from which the migrants came.
We must also remember that many towns had and
sometimes still do have very unbalanced demographic
structures because of the surplus of men, particularly
young men. This is explained by the nature of the mi¬
grations and has often lead to a widespread growth of
prostitution, along with other social disorders. A Society
in which traditional standards no longer apply or are
misapplied, in which new rules have not yet taken shape
or are not yet properly understood, is a favourable breed¬
ing ground for many kinds of disease. In some cases
there has been an alarming increase in crime and delin¬
quency.
It has been said that the incorporation of rural peoples
into the industrial work force demands a real effort of
"conversion" on their part. This is also true of every
kind of non-traditional work offered by the town. The
migrant who gets a job finds himself facing an entirely
new situation which includes a salary system, payment in
cash and the breaking down of work into individual tasks.
The new conception of economic and social relations in
work is instilled only with great difficulty.
Along with the instability of the labour force one finds
a lack of skill and low productivity due to a number of
Paul Almasy, Paris

physical, psychological and social factors. While the new
townsman learns his job fairly easily, either by following
a properly organized training course or "on the job"
(which is usually the case), he has more difficulty in
adapting himself to its context. His new work lacks the
social and religious meaning of traditional occupations;
it is specialized and he finds it hard to grasp the process
as a whole. This, therefore, mitigates against the intro¬
duction of incentives to production.
The worker, moreover, is not properly at home in an
undertaking which is made up of heterogeneous working
groups, sometimes managed by foreigners, and in which
he often stays only a comparatively short time. The
vocational training which many countries endeavour to
develop must not only be vocational but must also com¬
prise an element of "cultural adaptation." The efficacy
of such measures depends largely upon the control of
migration and by this fact is closely bound up with the
whole process of development.
Towns are favourable breeding grounds for new forms
of social stratification. Soon it is possible to distinguish
several more or less contrasting types of townsmen. Even
where a class structure has not fully developed in
present or former colonial territories, for example the
main social groups emerge by reason of their length of
residence in town, level of education, professional qualifica¬
tions, political activities, by their style of living (housing,
food and recreational activities becoming status symbols)
or by the ties maintained with traditional social forms
and values.
This stratification, combined with the creation of new
notions of prestige, produces a social breakdown very
different from that prevailing in the old communities.
The nucleus of townspeople who are firmly established,
who have permanent employment and the highest incomes
and who have adopted to a large extent the non-
STRAW IN THE WIND. Dilapidated shacks and straw huts contrast
sharply with nearby neatness of new homes built at Katutu in the
Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville). Housing is an urgent problem
in Africa's burgeoning towns. Most have shapeless shanty towns and
"encampments", the homes of hordes of migrants from rural areas.
traditional ways of life, fills the top ranks of this social
structure. These are the people who play a decisive role
in political life, not only In town, but in the country as
a whole. The town, then, ls the chief formative centre
of these modern elites and this ls an important clement
of its prestige and of its attraction for the rural popula¬
tions.
The control of migration to towns (the prerequisite of
equilibrium and general development) implies both an
expansion of the industrial economy and a rapid improve¬
ment in the situation of the rural areas. Irrespective of
whether or not they suffer from overpopulation.
he difficulties Inherent in agrarian reform
have already been mentioned. It is signifi¬
cant that those who draw up development plans often
include only modest provisions for increasing agricultural
production, as, for instance, in the case of India's first
two national plans. Many targets, desirable but too
costly, have In fact eventually to be abandoned. Except
in very limited spheres, educational measures can only be
expected to produce long term results. Even some tech¬
nological enterprises which seemed not ovcrambitious
ended in failure because social changes which are part
and parcel of such development were not taken suffi¬
ciently Into account; this has happened in many regions
of Africa south of the Sahara.
One good example of the difficulties Inherent In
the development of the rural economy Ls the mechaniza¬
tion, at least to a certain extent, of agriculture one of
the methods envisaged In many countries, as a way to
increase agricultural production and In particular the
production of foodstuffs In short supply.
Mechanization, of course, calls for considerable Invest¬
ment. But foreign or international aid ls mostly directed
to other sections of the economy, state subsidies are
usually small and the ability of the local farmers to
save money or to invest ls very limited or even non¬
existent.
In the case of regions where highly profitable crops for
export have been Introduced, for example, when the
revenue earned from agriculture exceeds the amount
required for immediate needs, the surplus is used primarily
to buy luxury consumer goods or goes on traditional items
of expenditure. This is true of many African regions
and the money amassed there ls (economically speaking)
more or less frozen.
Even If mechanization was financially feasible, It would
still raise many other problems. It often demands
structural changes in the community; people must be
trained to look after the new equipment, and peasant
habits must be changed. In addition, mechanization in
tropical countries may cause still greater deterioration to
already fragile soils.
Theoretically, the simplest solution ls to Increase the
area of cultivated land and to put to use virgin lands.
It has been said that in the case of Africa south of the
Sahara this kind of expansion would be possible and would
demand only slight technological changes.
In many regions of Africa, areas which had hitherto
been uninhabited or only sparsely populated were turned
to cultivation during the colonial period, though not with
the aim of increasing the average agricultural production
per inhabitant. This was done because the already
cultivated lands were becoming exhausted and because
new land was needed for bumper export crops which
quickly impoverish the soil. Such use of virgin territories
without the use of improved land care techniques and
proper precautions resulted all too often in a squandering
of frail soil.
But the case of Africa is by no means the most serious.
In some parts of the world either it ls Impossible to
Increase the land under cultivation or such possibilities co
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

URBAN EXPLOSION (Cont'd)
Finding new jobs for migrants
54
are very limited. Egypt's territories outside the Nile
Valley cannot be used for agriculture and this is also true
of most of the Amazon Basin in Brazil. Even in regions
where there are virgin lands their exploitation in the
near future will only be possible where cultivation would
not entail prior (and too costly) development of com¬
munications, irrigation and so on.
It will not be enough simply to throw these lands open
for exploitation. The farmers who settle there will need
to be led and educated technically, economically and
socially and migration will have to be carefully con¬
trolled, otherwise the immediate benefits gained may well
prove illusory.
While it is often difficult to increase the area of land
under cultivation, it is possible everywhere to improve
methods of exploitation within limits which vary accord¬
ing to each individual case. The dangers of overambi-
tlous plans have already been stressed. It is the small-
scale agricultural projects, costing comparatively little,
which have proved effective in many cases and which have
quickly produced an Increased yield by better use of land
in terms of its particular qualities, by Improved farming
methods and by changes in the system of crop rotation.
Larger scale measures which bring long term benefits
are irrigation, soil preservation and the rehabilitation of
worked-out land. These must be part of an overall plan.
The Importance of "a broad programme of small under¬
takings" has been stressed particularly in relation to
irrigation. These individual efforts can be accomplished
without recourse to large-scale investment and in the
familiar setting of a village or group of villages.
This, of course, does not exclude enterprises on a
grander scale such as dam building when funds and labour
are available. But such projects often involve major
changes in social and agrarian structures and also in the
way people are housed. And this in turn calls for a
concerted programme affecting the entire rural com¬
munity.
Soil conservation measures may include the use of
"green manure" (although this modern technique often
meets with opposition from traditionalist farmers) or of
chemical fertilizers, though these are expensive and their
use in tropical countries needs further study. In the
immediate future it looks as though in many cases action
will have to be restricted to teaching farmers how to care
for their soil.
As regards long term measures, the restoration of
exhausted lands for later use can often be achieved at
low cost and with existing labour resources, by planting
protective rows of trees and building low walls along
slopes and so on. But efforts of this kind must be part
of a future plan for the complete modernization of agri¬
culture and an intensive educational programme.
Reference has already been made to the existence of
a surplus population in areas now in the throes of ur¬
banization and industrial development. This recent in¬
dustrial growth has been unable to absorb the enormous
mass of migrants who have come to the towns in recent

decades. The increase in the number of jobs is never
more than a feeble percentage as compared to the rise
in the urban population: about 3% in India, 5% in
Africa and 6% in Latin America.
As the proportion of men of working age among the
new town dwellers is very high, under-employment In the
towns has actually increased. This problem is reflected
in national development plans whose target figures for
creating new fields of employment are enormous. The
second Five Year Plan in India, for example, aimed at
creating 15 million new jobs.
But targets of this importance are hard to attain even
when priority is given to the development of industries
which need large labour forces. Industrialization moves
at a slower pace than should be the case, not only because
of the general shortage of investment capital, but for
other reasons as well. The absorption of individuals and
family groups into an industrialized economy does not
necessarily give them a higher standard of living.
Actually it is often difficult to make statistical com¬
parisons between the living standards of the wage-
earning population and those of the rural peoples engaged
in a subsistence economy.
A worker with a regular job is regarded as a privileged
individual and his commitments increase accordingly.
Below a certain level of industrialization the income of
the vast majority of wage earners provides only for a
precarious existence and does very little to reduce the
poverty of the rural populations. The level at which the
situation would be reversed is seldom reached.
Industrial development may be carried out in various
ways depending on the particular conditions found in
each country and upon the choices made by each govern¬
ment for economic and political reasons.
In countries where population pressure is not an imme¬
diately urgent problem the only kind of industrialization
that can be envisaged (except In a limited number of
fields) is a long-term one, priority being given instead to
the technological and social transformation of the rural
economy. In the majority of cases, however, both poli¬
cies will have to be pursued simultaneously.
Industrial development aiming at the production of
consumer goods ls effective only In so far as the rural
areas are capable of absorbing a substantial part of these
goods. This in turn assumes that a number of conditions
will be met. Agricultural production must rise above the
ordinary level of subsistence in an ever-increasing number
of regiqns. An adequate network of roads must be
constructed. Distribution channels between producer and
of Industrially-produced goods on rural crafts must be
borne in mind.
Finally, efforts must be made to bring about changes
in the needs and demands of consumers (often very differ¬
ent from those of people in highly Industrialized coun¬
tries). This ls a fundamental need, economically,
socially and culturally. Consumer demand ls only partially
linked with the circulation of money and ls only partially
aimed at the satisfaction of individual needs.
But any educational effort In this direction will be
meaningless" unless It becomes part of a global attempt to
Introduce changes in the traditional ways of life of these
peoples. Thus we see once again how necessary it is to
consider both Industrial development and rural develop¬
ment as an inseparable whole and also to avoid approach¬
ing either the one or the other from a too strictly econo¬
mic point of view.
Paul Mercier, a leading French specialist in African questions, is
director of economic and social studies at the Ecole Pratique des 55
Hautes Etudes, University of Paris. He is also a Unesco consultant
in social studies.
