ELEANOR ROOSEVELT, who died last
year, once wrote that in all her years at
the United Nations she considered that
the most important task had been her
work on the Human Rights Commission.
Chairman of the Commission from its
inception in 1946 until 1951, she was
present in Paris on December 10, 1948
when the Universal Declaration, elabo¬
rated by the Commission under her chair¬
manship, was unanimously adopted by
the United Nations General Assembly.
USIS

ELEANOR
ROOSEVELT
A lifetime
of dedication
to Human Rights
by U Thant
s
*
¡Et;
F \
m
L > i
^fl ^lC*' ^1lÉIÉÉ^H-^^^^ *L^a\
f AM IHj^*
Secretary-General
of the United Nations
rs. Eleanor Roosevelt was a dominant figure
lin the early days of the United Nations, for
she came nearer than anyone else ever has to being an
actual embodiment of the commonly held ideals and aims
of the people of the world. Her personality, courage,
generosity and dedication placed her In a class by herself
and gave her a unique position of universal confidence
and respect.
It is perhaps misleading to try to single out her specific
work in the United Nations from the mainstream of her
amazing range of activity, for the whole of it was based
on broad and affectionate humanitarlanism. But this
humanitarianism and her deep concern for the underpri¬
vileged found an historic focus in the United Nations
especially in the work of the Human Rights Commission,
and in the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. She could not only communicate with
the oppressed and the exploited the world over, she could
identify with them. When she spoke of rights and
liberties, she evoked no mere theory, but a practice and
a way of life.
Mrs. Roosevelt's patient and untiring work as Chairman
of the Commission on Human Rights and its Drafting
Committee was a major factor in giving shape and
substance to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It was she who, as chairman of Its first session in
April 1946, proposed that the bill of rights should be
drafted in the form of a declaration or manifesto to be
followed by conventions that would be legally binding
on states.
It was her persistance and tact which guided the
immensely complicated work of drafting the Declaration
In 1947 and 1948, and her energy and enthusiasm which
sustained others In this great labour.
Though the impact of this historic document may well
take generations to achieve Its full force, its Importance
in the development of human Institutions and in the place
of the individual in history is already great and is
increasing.
Mrs. Roosevelt was one of those rare individuals whose
courage, vision and good-will and Indeed outright good¬
ness can light up a whole period of history and give
comfort and hope to humanity even in times of the
greatest anxiety and despair.
In a world in which human rights are still delayed and
denied, it is well for us to recall that Eleanor Roosevelt
nourished the dream and the hope that the Declaration
of Human Rights might one day become the Magna Carta
of all mankind.
This text is taken from an address by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, delivered at an Interna
tional Tribute to
October 21, 1963.
Eleanor Roosevelt, in New York, on
15
