A FACE-LIFT FOR THE SCI
Among the new mass media techniques
(such as films, recordings, TV, radio) which
are revolutionizing modern teaching, specia¬
lized photography is also proving itself a
precious auxiliary in many subjects, parti¬
cularly science. The photos on these and
the following pages were made to illustrate
a new secondary school course on the
fundamental laws of physics, recently dev¬
eloped by the Physical Science Study Group,
a group of American physicists and teachers
under the auspices of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. The course is taught
in some 1,000 U.S. high schools and has
been adapted for use in schools of develop¬
ing countries. It also uses slow motion
films and gives not only future scientists
but all students an appreciation of the me¬
thods, beauty and development of science.
This time exposure shows the student that motion is
described differently on the frame of reference of the
observer. Lights were fixed to the axis and the rim of a
moving wheel. To the camera or to an observer standing
alongside the point of light on the rim describes a
complicated curve called a cycloid. Similarly, in respect
to the axis of the wheel, the same point describes a circle.
Photos Berenice Abbott - USIS
32
This photograph of a
bouncing ball ¡s a por¬
trait of various natural'
laws of physics the
action of force on a
body, the principles of
momentum, impulse,
kinetic and potential
energy, the conservation
of energy. These prin¬
ciples govern the mo¬
tion of bodies as large
as the sun and as small
as an atomic particle.

ENCE CURRICULUM by Jerome B. Wiesner
S ociETY today is in an evolutionary state, in
which each advance of our knowledge of the
natural world has a series of consequences, frequently
unforeseen and probably unforeseeable In detail.
For example, one consequence of the automobile not
written in the original specifications is the congested city.
Improved health measures may mean a greatly reduced
mortality rate, but without accompanying improvements
in agricultural methods or the Industrial base, they may
result in greater impoverishment. Widespread use of
nuclear energy for industrial purposes may provide an
answer to some problems of development, but as we can
already see, it may also pose the serious problem of con¬
tamination of our environment.
Each of these advances therefore poses new problems
and new challenges, forcing man through science and
technology to make hard choices as to how he will use his
technical advances. The wiser and better informed these
decisions, the more chance we have of moving towards
better social conditions and of avoiding the fate of the
dinosaur.
I do not want to minimize the problems of transfer and
adaptation of technology from one culture to another.
Indeed, the variety of cultures offers opportunity for
experimentation in the application of science and techno¬
logy to development. With the increasing number of inde¬
pendent countries we can have a variety of experiments
with new approaches to old and new problems.
The problem of transfer may indeed work both ways. I
have not attempted to differentiate between the more and
less developed countries for, in fact, all countries are
faced with the same need for wise application of science
and technology to solution of their problems.
Many of the presently less developed countries have an
opportunity to leap-frog the problems and patterns en¬
countered in the economically advanced countries. This
age is newer than many of us realize; we should not
commit the error of copying old ways that are being
replaced by new ones. Many new countries have the
opportunity to experiment and produce something
better; in the older countries we should like to be in the
position of being able to copy their Innovations. For
example, the communications satellite will soon be avail¬
able and in many situations will be superior to present
techniques for Internal communications.
It Is obvious that an adequate level of education is an
absolute prerequisite to enable any society to incorporate
new ideas and attitudes into its development process.
But a more subtle and exciting observation ls that educa¬
tion Itself can benefit from the application of research.
Here the needs are monumental in all countries and
the field ripe for the kind of systematic research and
development on the educational process itself that has
only recently begun.
I have become convinced that if we pool our best efforts
dramatic Improvements In teaching and learning are
possible. I can speak on this subject with some feeling.
We in the United States have come to realize that our
educational system has not kept pace In the way we feel
necessary with the world created by scientific and techno¬
logical advance. Accordingly a number of the scientists
and technologists in our universities, who heretofore have
limited their efforts to traditional fields of research, arc
now applying the methods of organized research and
development to education, not only In the universities,
but also at primary and secondary levels.
As a result of their initiative over the past few years
it has been demonstrated, repeatedly and on a grand
scale, that educational quality in our schools can be
vastly improved. I am firmly convinced that the same
methods can be applied, taking account of given varia¬
tions, to greatly Improve and speed the development of
new educational systems.
OI ne aspect of the effort to improve educational
quality ls the development of new aids for
teaching. The blackboard and the textbook have done
good service for half a millennium, but that does not mean
that the presentation of Information cannot profit from
a little re-design. In these experimental programmes, we
are beginning to make new use of media that until
recently have been the province principally of the enter¬
tainment industry film, tape, records, radio and tele¬
vision. And we are also experimenting with teaching
devices of an entirely novel character new methods of
instruction and new types of apparatus, not to replace,
but to enrich the work of the teacher, the indispensable
human factor in education.
Our scientists and technologists also are working on
curriculum structure and content. They are seeking to
insure that fundamentals are taught; that the informa-
CONT'D ON PAGE 36
33

FACE-LIFT (Cont'd)
Bending light. Six beams of light plus a plastic box filled
with water demonstrate the behaviour of light passing
through a prism. The beams, coming from a source at the
bottom, are bent or refracted as they pass from air to
water and then from water to air. The fourth beam from
the left is partly refracted and partly reflected toward the
right. Beams five and six are wholly reflected from the face
of the prism and then they are refracted as they leave.
A precise view of physics
34
Like light, water waves pro¬
duce shadows. Above straight
waves are incident on a round
obstacle placed in a ripple
tank. The shadow above the
dark disc is readily seen. The
shorter the wave length with
respect to the size of the
object the sharper is the sha¬
dow. Experiment (left) shows
that reflected water waves,
like light, leave the reflecting
surface at the same angle at
which they approach it. The
angle of incidence equals the
angle of reflection. Here
the straight waves are reflec¬
ted from a diagonal barrier.

Photos Gerenico Abbott - USIS
Iron filings spread on a piece of paper
assume this pattern when an electric
current is passed through the loop of
wire. This pattern indicates the
direction and magnitude of the magnetic 35
field. Note that lines are heavier near
the wire, indicating a stronger field.

FACE-LIFT (Cont'd)
A lesson from the entertainment industry
tlon presented ls up to date, accurate and in perspective;
and that the method of teaching and the content impart
the excitement and challenge of the subject to the student
he ls a potential scientist or mathematician
or technologist, or one who will pursue other occupa¬
tions.
Although our experience has so far concentrated on
science and mathematics and foreign languages, we are
beginning to extend this approachto the teaching of
social studies, history, writing, literature, and also the
practical arts, In order to develop the skills necessary for
work in the new industries and in the new agricultural
enterprises.
The preparation of first-rate curriculum materials in
a subject is a complex operation in research and develop¬
ment. It requires the use of teams of workers from a wide
variety of backgrounds. The teams comprise not only the
outstanding masters of the field, but also outstanding
teachers at the appropriate levels, specialists who have
conducted significant research on the learning process,
and technicians such as artists, photographers, laboratory
and shop workers, who can help in devising new methods
of presentation.
Like research and development in other fields, the
creation of new educational techniques also requires a
large and genuine testing component. New curriculum
materials are not made generally available until they are
demonstrated to work In the classroom, in an experimental
process that can involve many schools over several
years.
What are the implications for the less developed
lands for this growing experience in improving
educational quality? The spirit of innovation, the team
approach, the development of new media and techniques,
and classroom experimentation would appear applicable
to new and old countries alike with the added advantage
for some countries that they are starting relatively fresh
in facing their educational problems.
This new approach to education could make possible a
massive attack on the problem of illiteracy, from which
so many of our countries suffer. To attain basic literacy,
as well as scientific literacy, true co-operation is in order.
There is no rule saying that the citizens of one country
experts in subject matter and experts in new teaching
devices cannot work with the citizens of another country
in developing new materials. People with distinct kinds
of special experience may also be necessary on the teams.
There may be problems of special frames of reference,
for example, exploiting local flora and fauna in a biology
course orto cite a more subtle problemteaching expe¬
rimental science in a culture that traditionally depreciates
manual labour.
In some cases, especially in mathematics, some of the
curriculum materials already developed might be useful
directly in other lands. In 'fact, some efforts for such
transfer are already under way, as are some efforts to
use teams made up of people from many countries to
develop new curriculum materials.
There is one aspect to improving educational quality
which dwarfs all others: the preparation of teachers to
teach the new courses both the retraining of teachers
now teaching traditional courses, and the education of
new teachers. A large number of teachers is needed and
so is a large number of teachers of teachers. But if we
are willing to experiment a little in finding more efficient
ways to prepare people for both tasks, it may not ne¬
cessarily take generations to build up a large supply of
skilled professionals.
I any of our colleges and universities have set
up special institutes to retrain teachers, both
in short summer programmes and academic year pro¬
grammes. In some schools we have tried establishing a
kind of interneship in education, an arrangement under
which the new teacher works for a period of time under
the supervision of a master teacher. We are also making
use of local broadcasting facilities, using both taped and
live programmes, to help teachers on a week-by-week
basis in using new instructional materials.
To conclude, I believe that educational development
must go hand in hand with scientific and technical de¬
velopments. Isolated technical projects, however worthy
by themselves, do not add up to development unless they
fit into an integrated national effort. There is a role in
the development process for all branches of science and
technology, for all the academic disciplines. We need a
better sense of priorities a closer identification of those
problems most in need of technological attention.
In this way the United Nations Specialized Agencies
will gain better guidelines for orienting their own pro¬
grammes of technical assistance in support of the deve¬
lopment process.
Jerome B. Wiesner is Director of the U.S. Office of Science
and Technology. A communications engineer on the staff
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, he is a
member of the U.S. Presidential Science Advisory
Committee.
A multi-flash photograph shows the path of a wrench when thrown horizontally. Although it
seems to be wildly tumbling, the cross on the handle, marking the centre of mass, belies this.
A ruler laid along the line of crosses shows that the centre of mass follows a straight line. The
spaces between the crosses are equal, showing that the wrench travels with constant velocity. Berenice Abbott - USIS
