ARE THE CONTIN

ENTS DRIFTING ?
by J. Tuzo Wilson
CRUST. The crust of the earth,
sometimes called the sial, varies
considerably in thickness. At the
ocean bottom it can be as little as
5 kms. whereas on the continents
its depth can vary between 30 and
70 kms. Projects to drill through the
crust to obtain samples of the
mantle below are now under way.
MOHO. (Mohorovicic disconti¬
nuity) the boundary zone between
the earth's crust and its mantle.
MANTLE. Also known as the sima,
it stretches from the earth's crust
to the outer core. Believed to be
solid but slightly plastic (and white
hot) and formed of different and
denser rocks than the crust. Man¬
tle's density increases with depth.
OUTER CORE. Thought to be a
mass of white hot liquid iron. Its
liquid form is suggested by the fact
that transverse earthquake waves
are unable to travel through it.
INNER CORE. It has been suggested
that within liquid outer core there
may be a solid central inner core.
Was the Pacific Ocean formed by
the separation of the Moon
from the Earth? Was there a flood or

is there a lost land of Atlantis beneath
the sea? Have continents moved about
and was the Atlantic Ocean formed
by their separation ? Can the earth
be shaken by any cataclysms greater
than we know?
These are sensible questions which many people have
asked, and which they will continue to ask until they
get a unanimous and clear answer. Unfortunately that ls
not yet possible. "We do not know all about the earth.
Its deep Interior cannot be penetrated and can only be
explored by Indirect means. Good records are not old.
From our fragmentary knowledge dlilercnt men Und
different aspects to emphasize and so reach durèrent
conclusions (1).
Since the time of the ancient Greek observations In
Egypt, scientists have surveyed the shape of the earth
and have agreed that It ls nearly round, but other scien¬
tists who have considered Its history have not been able
to make such precise observations and they arc not agreed
upon an interpretation. Like artists, looking at the same
things, they see different pictures. One, like Vermeer,
sees a still and photographic image of the earth. Another,
like a Van Gogh, sees a swirling, active planet. Yet
another, like a Picasso, thinks that the continents have
been displaced; that Greenland was once the head of
Europe; that Africa and South America arc twins which
have been torn apart to form the South Atlantic Ocean.
The different ideas held about the earth can best be
emphasized by a historical treatment to show how fresh
evidence has changed men's views.
From the early maps of travellers and navigators, from
observations upon soils and rocks by farmers and builders
and from studies of terrain by soldiers the sciences of
astronomy, geology, and geography have gradually
emerged.
Today the shape of the globe and the topography of
many countries and the age and variety of rocks all over
the continents and islands are known. There remain
gaps to fill, but by far the largest concern the floors of
the oceans and the whole interior of the earth. Indeed
virtually nothing was known about these major parts of
the earth until this century, when complicated physical
instruments began to be developed, which could examine
hidden places by indirect means, as an X-ray camera
explores the vital organs of a human being. This indirect
study of the earth is the new science of geophysics.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
(1) See article by Prof. Beloussov, page 12.

DRIFTING CONTINENTS (Cont'd)
The earth-a soft-boiled egg
One of the earliest things discovered about the earth's
interior was that it must be very hot. This was a simple
deduction by miners who found that the rocks got
approximately one degree hotter for every 50 metres they
dug down into the earth. Thus below a depth of a few
tens of kilometres, the whole interior is believed to be
white hot and only the pressure of its own weight keeps
much of the earth from melting. Miners also saw that
the strata in mountains had been crumpled and when
Kelvin and Helmholtz pointed out that the earth must
be radiating its heat and cooling, it seemed obvious to
all that the earth must be contracting. This was held
to be the force which crumpled strata and uplifted
mountains.
This view is the great classical contraction theory of
the earth. It is like a photograph. No motion of conti¬
nents has blurred the picture. The image of the earth's
history ls fixed and sharp. This view is still held by
many, but a great uncertainty was introduced by the
discovery of radioactivity in 1896 by the French scientist
Becquerel. Radioactive elements produce heat. No one
can measure the small but significant quantities of ura¬
nium and thorium in the earth, hence no one can tell
whether the earth is cooling or heating and whether the
earth is contracting. This now seems doubtful.
It took some time after the discovery of radioactivity
for all the implications to be assessed, but gradually some
men Including A. Holmes of Great Britain and D'.T.
Griggs of the United States came to believe that the earth
was producing more heat than it could lose by radiation.
They suggested that not only was the earth not contract¬
ing, but that the white-hot mantle probably had convec¬
tion-currents in it like those which rise and sink in a
saucepan heated on a stove.
F.A. Vening Meinesz of Holland added fresh evidence
from studies of gravity to support the idea that mountains
might be formed by the movement of such currents. This
picture of currents in the earth is like a painting by his
compatriot Van Gogh, for according to it the earth should
give the appearance of fluidity and flow.
This theory of convection currents has been particularly
favoured by physicists many of whom find it theoretically
satisfying, but since physicists do not In general know
much geology their articles have generally dealt with
idealized cases and until very recently this theory has not
been fitted to the earth's existing pattern of mountains
and rocks.
Nother theory advanced Independently as an
»alternative to the contraction hypothesis was
that of continental drift. To understand this it is essen¬
tial to record another great advance made in 1909 by the
Yugoslav seismologist A. Mohorovicic. He showed that
some earthquake waves are reflected within the earth
from the base of a thin outer crust. Other scientists soon
found a second reflecting horizon and divided the earth
into an interior core surrounded by two outer layers.
We thus know that a section through the earth has a
similar arrangement to the interior of an egg that has
been boiled for about three minutes. The egg has a thin
and brittle shell to which the crust of the earth corres¬
ponds. The white of the boiled egg, which is also solid,
and somewhat plastic, may be compared to the mantle of
the earth. The mantle is also solid (and white hot) . Just
as the white of the egg is formed of different material
than the shell, so is the mantle of the earth formed of
different and denser rocks than the crust.
At the centre of the earth is a liquid core, probably of
white-hot iron, which can be compared with the liquid
yolk of the boiled egg.
To a Danish woman scientist, the distinguished seismo¬
logist, Dr. E. Lehmann, belongs the credit for a further
refinement, the suggestion that within the liquid core, in
the very middle of the earth there may be a small solid
centre.
Since Mohorovicic's discovery, hundreds of determina¬
tions especially made by the United States over the
oceans and by the U.S.S.R. on land have shown that under
the oceans the crust of the earth is about 5 kilometres
thick and is either made of basalt lava or the altered
and hydrated top of the mantle. Under the continents, on
the other hand, the crust is from 30 kilometres thick under
the plains to as much as 70 kilometres under mountains,
and it is made of granitic rocks overlain by sedimentary
strata.
Scientists are so sure of this that the Mohole project
has been started in an attempt to drill holes through the
crust where it is thinnest so as to obtain samples of the
material of the mantle below. This work must be done
at sea, where the crust is thin (see page 18). The name
Mohole is of course a tribute to Mohorovicic who first
CONT'D ON PAGE 8
WANDERING AUSTRALIA. Recent studies of
magnetism in rocks have opened up new fields for
discussion of the idea that continents may have moved
great distances during the earth's history. Professor
S.K. Runcorn, a specialist In palaeomagnetlsm, has
seen evidence of continental drift in the changes
found in the direction of the magnetism of the earth's
rocks. An example of this is seen In the various posi¬
tions of Australia relative to the pole, plotted by Prof.
Runcorn. According to this diagram, beginning in
the Pre-Cambrian period (over 600 million years ago),
the continent set off from position (1) on a journey
through geological time. It sometimes approached
and sometimes receded from the pole at various times
before finally reaching its present-day position (13).
From " Continental Drift " edited by S.K. Runcorn © 1962 by Academic Press. Inc.

Diagrams © by Geographical Projects Ltd.
and Methuen Ltd.. London
1 7 S> )
vj£0S
ALFRED WEGENER
From " Continental Drift "
edited by S.K. Runcorn.
© 1962 by Academic Press Inc.
When in 1912 the German meteorologist
Alfred Wegener formulated his theory
of continental drift the notion was
pooh-poohed by most scientists. Today,
however, a growing number are less
sure the principle was wrong. Wegener,
like many persons before him (including
Bacon) was struck by the fact that the
hump of South America fitted the
coastline of Africa, and pointed to an
amazing number of affinities of fossils, rocks and structures on
opposite sides of the Atlantic as evidence of his theory. He believed
that all the continents were once joined together in one super-
continent which later fragmented until they formed our present
land masses. Maps, above, first appeared in Wegener's "The Origin
of Continents and Oceans". (Present coastlines are shown and
lighter shading indicates former shallow seas.) In 1937 one of
Wegener's followers, the South African geologist A. L. Du Toit
suggested that there had been two primordial continents, a northern
Laurasia (Europe, Asia and North America) and a southern Gond-
wanaland (South America, Africa, Antarctica, plus India and Aus¬
tralia) separated by a seaway (Tethys). He made the detailed
jigsaw-puzzle analysis of the ancient rock structures of the African
and South American shorelines, shown in the map on right.
WEGENER'S SUPERCONTINENT
«5 Geographical Projects Ltd .
Oliver and Boyd Ltd.. London
r
Cretaceous-Eocene
I Gondwana
I Pre-Silurian
I Old Granite
-' Silurian-Carboniferous
Post-Triassic uplifts
Cape foldings
Limit of Mesosaurus
Post-Nama foldings

DRIFTING CONTINENTS (Cont'd)
Memories of a great flood
demonstrated that the earth had a crust to drill through.'
Unlike the shell of an egg, which is uniform, the crust
of the earth has two great divisions, continents which are
thick and light and ocean floors which are thinner and
denser. Both rest upon the mantle of still heavier rocks
and can be even considered to float upon it.
The concept that continents form dry land because they
are lighter and float higher than the ocean floors is a
strange one, but . it ls easier to comprehend when one
realizes that only the crust of the earth is chilled and
brittle, while the whole interior is a white hot ball, capa¬
ble of slow, plastic creep.
Indeed in Scandinavia and in Canada there is very
convincing evidence that the crust really does float and
that its level has risen and fallen in response to varying
loads upon it. The loads which provided these tests were
Ice-sheets, about two miles thick which covered most of
Scandinavia and Canada, as Greenland and Antarctica
are covered today. The old moraines, disturbed soil,
transported boulders and scratched bedrock show where
these ice sheets lay until they melted rather quickly due
to a sudden warming of the climate about 10,000 years
ago.
This removal of the loads which had been depressing the
g land allowed it to rise or float very slowly upwards and
many beaches, formed at sea level, but now raised as
much as several hundreds of metres above It record the
steady elevation of the land where It had formerly been
depressed. The maximum rate of rise of the land is about
one centimetre a year in northern Finland.
Incidentally the melting of such enormous volumes of
ice affected sea level all over the world. The addition of
so much melt-water raised sea level by about 50 metres
in places which had not been glaciated and must have
flooded many coastal settlements. It seems probable that
memories and traditions of this great flood have been
handed down to us. This Inundation is a possible source
of the story of Atlantis, which the movement of continents
could not possibly provide, because human history and
existence are so young compared with major geological
events.
When the capacity of the earth to flow and move up
and down in a vertical direction had been demonstrated,
one can understand the great significance of the sugges¬
tion made in 1912 by the German meteorologist, Alfred
Wegener, that if the land could slowly move up and down
that it might also be able to move sideways at a similar
rate of a centimetre or a few centimetres a year.
He suggested that, if this happened, the parallelism of
the two sides of the Atlantic Ocean could be explained.
For, at that rate, Europe and North America could have
moved apart in a few hundred million years. The earth
is so old that there is time, even at such a slow rate for
oceans to have been opened and closed, perhaps not just
once, but several times.

T^ggey«gr«g5SCTffg^ *K¡*m~*m¿i»*>nxs*.ji\*esm
The world's mightiest mountain range is a continuous sub¬
marine ridge with a rift along its top running (map left) down
the North and South Atlantic Oceans, then across the Indian
Ocean and, south of Australia, across the Pacific to the west
coast of Mexico. It is hundreds of kilometres wide and several
kilometres high and its rocks are unusually hot and volcanic.
A branch of the Indian Ocean ridge has invaded Africa along
the Great Rift Valley which cleaves the high plateaux of East
Africa. Some scientists have concluded that the mid-ocean
ridges mark the places where present continents split opart
and see the Rift Valley in East Africa as an early stage in tho
development of a new ocean and the beginning of the frog-
mentation of Africa. Profiles below show the close similarity
of the rifted ridge in Africa and three ocean ridges including (4)
the Atlantic Ridge. Locations of profiles are shown on left.
From " Continental Drift" edited by S K. Runcorn © Academic Pioss Inc.
CONGO LAKE .TANGANYIKA
ZANZIBAR
SOMALIA ADEN GREENLAND SPITSBERGEN
FLEMISH CAP
Vertical exaggeration 40 : 1
ENGLAND
Some scientists immediately opposed his Ideas and many
do so still. Others supported it from the beginning, in
particular geologists in India, Africa and Australia, who
had already noticed many striking similarities between the
fossils and strata of their continents. But they could only
study the land surface and for many years the propo¬
nents of drift could neither explain what caused conti¬
nents to move, nor could they see the ocean floor where
the evidence of rifting and the passage of continents
should lie. This was a great weakness.
This idea of moving continents about did not appeal to
most believers in a fixed and contracting earth. They
were like admirers of Vermeer who have been shown their
first Picasso. They did not like it and they said that
continental drift Was non-representational, which is a
much more derogatory epithet when applied in science
than it is in art.
Yet another hypothesis is that the continents have
been growing. It was first advanced by geologists who
noticed that mountain ranges are often peripheral to
continents. They suggested that successive ranges had
been added without any motion of the continents. The
work of Italian, Japanese and German scientists upon
volcanoes and more recently investigations in Hawaii have
shown that lava probably rises from depths of the order
of 100 kilometres and that It may accumulate as additions
to the crust.
Hess at Princeton and Dietz and Menard in California
have discussed how these additions might be converted to
continental foundations. Modern geochemistry, which
was founded by such Russian scientists as Vernadsky,
Fersman and Vinogadov and by Goldschmldt of Norway,
has been used to support the idea of growth as have
isotopic studies in Great Britain, Switzerland, Canada and
in Massachusetts. These include the discovery that the
shields of old rocks In the heart of continents are zoned
with a tendency for the older rocks to He towards the
centres.
In recapitulation we can thus see that the early concept
of a rigid earth, with permanent continents and ocean
basins, in which mountains were built as a consequence
of cooling and contraction, while still considered valid by
some has increasingly been replaced by three new
hypotheses, each of which is incomplete by Itself.
These new theories are the physical theory of convec¬
tion currents, which still requires to be related to geo¬
logical observations ; the geological theory of continental
drift which needs a physical explanation of why conti¬
nents are considered to move and what force can exist
to move them ; and the geochemical Idea of growth of
continents, which does nothing to explain whether
continents are fixed or moving.
The rest of this article will be devoted to a summary of
some of the discoveries of the last few years. These
provide a suggestion that it may be possible to integrate
all three of the more recent theories into a more satis¬
factory replacement for the now generally out-moded
contractive theory of the earth's behaviour.
One of the great new discoveries has been largely due g
to the French scientists Chevallier and Thellier, although
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

DRIFTING CONTINENTS (Cont'd)
STAGNA
I ! -.
From '" Scientific American ", April 1963
20,000 leagues of mountains under the sea
it has been followed up in Britain and Australia. This
is that when rocks are formed, whether by sedimentation
or by the cooling of lavas, they are likely to have locked
into them a record of the prevailing direction of mag¬
netization.
This depends upon the latitude in which they lay. In
older rocks this ls found in general to be different from
their present latitude. The progressive nature of the
change observed in rocks of several ages collected from
the same region suggests that several continents have
been systematically moving. In particular Africa, India,
Australia and South America seem to have been moving
northward. Here is evidence favouring continental drift.
Modern exploration of the sea-floors has provided two
other important pieces of evidence to help to solve the
riddle. On the floor of the Pacific Ocean several great
fractures represented by cliffs up to 3 kilometres high and
as much as 3,000 kilometres long have been discovered,
Comparisons of the two sides of these scarps have
suggested horizontal displacements along them of as much
as 1,400 kilometres. Such motions are the largest known
and begin to approach those required for continental
drift.
In 1956 M. Ewing and B. C. Heezen of Columbia Uni¬
versity, New York, made a most remarkable discovery.
They suggested that a number of great ridges known to
exist on the floors of the oceans were continuous and
formed a single mountain chain right down the middle
of the North and South Atlantic Oceans, thence south of
Africa across the Indian Ocean and south of Australia
across the Pacific Ocean to the west coast of Mexico.
u
10
| pon this great mid-ocean ridge lie many active
or recently active volcanic islands, including
Iceland, the Azores, Ascension, Tristan de Cunha, Kergue-
len, and Easter Island. This submarine ridge is the
greatest mountain system in the world, for it extends for
the best part of 20,000 leagues under the sea; it is every¬
where hundreds of kilometres wide; and it is several kilo¬
metres high.
The properties of this ridge are even more remarkable.
Its rocks are unusually hot and volcanic. In the Atlantic
and Indian Oceans it lies very precisely in the middle of
the Oceans, half way between adjacent continents. It
seems to be in the process of being torn apart, in contrast
to the better-known young mountains on land which have
been compressed.
There are thus two great mountain systems on earth,
complementary to one another. The mid-ocean system
has just been described. The continental system which
was first recognized by E. Suess, an Austrian, consists of
two belts, one around the borders of the Pacific Ocean and
the other across Eurasia. The first consists of the Andes,
and Cordilleran mountains and the island areas of the
Aleutians and East Asia through Kamtchatka, Japan,
the Philippines, Indonesia, New Guinea and small islands
to New Zealand. The other belt consists of the Alpine
and Himalayan mountains extending from Spain all the
way across the Mediterranean and Southern Asia to join
the first belt in Indonesia.
When we consider the concept of convection
currents in the light of these discoveries, it
seems possible to believe that the upward currents might
be rising beneath the mid-ocean ridges and sinking
beneath the better known belts of continental mountains
and island areas.
According to this view the heat, the volcanoes and the
tension which marks the mid-ocean system derive from
hot currents that rise to feed volcanoes and separate to
tear the brittle crust apart while the characteristics of
the continental mountains are a result of the flowing
together of the same currents to produce compression.
Their descent sucks down the great deep trenches of the
ocean all of which lie close to chains of Islands, off
Kamchatka, Japan, the Philippines, the West Indies and
elsewhere. The crust and upper mantle , are cold and
brittle and earthquakes occur when it is broken due to
flow beneath.
An important contribution to this theory is Hess's
suggestion that whereas the continents are true rafts of
lighter material, the oceanic crust is only altered mantle
top which on being dragged down reverts to unaltered
mantle again.
This concept provides a geographical and a geological
setting that was lacking in earlier discussions of convec¬
tion. There is even some evidence that the direction of
flow is recorded in ridges or stream lines on the ocean
floors.
Unfortunately, although we may believe that we can
map the direction of flow, we cannot yet measure it
directly. It is thought to be only about three centimetres

One of the more challenging and controversial ideas recently
advanced is that continents have moved to their present positions
under the impulsion of convection currents welling up from deep
in the earth's mantle. The same process has also been said to
have created the world's mighty mid-ocean submarine ridge and
has formed mountain ranges and earthquake belts. Drawing, left,
illustrates this theory. On right currents move up in area of mid-
ocean ridge, feeding presently-active volcanoes (Tristan da
Cunha, Iceland, Azores, etc.). Inactive volcanic cones which
have been moved sideways by flow of convection currents form
lateral ridges. Continent, on left, has been pushed along to point
where convection current sinks towards earth's centre. Since
continents are lighter than the mantle material of the ocean floor,
they are not sucked down into the deep oceanic trench created
by the current, but pile up to form mountains. Earthquake zone is
created (crosses) when cold and brittle crust and upper mantle is
broken because of flow movements of convection current beneath.
Such are the complications of silicate chcmLstry that
each melting leads to the separation and eruption of rocks
more siliceous and also less dense than their parents.
Basalt ls lighter and more siliceous than the mantle ; the
new volcanoes such as those of the Andes, Italy, Japan,
Indonesia and of the continental margins arc In general
yet more siliceous than basalt.
These rocks are eroded again, some to be carried back
to the ocean trenches where they can again be dragged
down and remelted, others are laid down as stratified
sediments, others again are recrystalllzed Into continental
basements. As the complex process continued soils
developed and the home of man was prepared for him.
The age of the earth is perhaps four or five thousand
million years. The record of the first third of that history
has been lost, but the rocks preserve the rest and now that
we can Indirectly explore the earth's interior and Its ocean
floors we are approaching the time when we will have a
satisfactory and agreed theory with which to unravel that
history. In the meantime it ls only fair to say that the
scientists are still arguing one with another as they
struggle to solve these problems.
a year and this small change cannot be measured across
the width of an ocean.
If we accept this concept it also can provide the
mechanism which was missing in early statements about
continental drift: one must suppose that the currents have
carried the continents like rafts away from the mid-ocean
ridges equally on either side until they have become
stranded at the edge of down currents.
The Americas and East Asia, are pushing against the
downflow around the rim of the Pacific Ocean, while
India, Arabia and Africa are thrust against Eurasia over
another downward flow. The current has been carrying
these continents and also Australia northwards, which
agrees with the observations on remanent magnetism.
The periodicity of mountain-building can also be
understood. This periodicity is shown by the fact that in
Europe the Alpine chains have replaced the formerly
active mountain chains of Scandinavia, of the Urals and
of Scotland while in North America the Rockies have
taken the place of the once great and active Appalachian
Mountains.
If drift has been going on It has not occurred just once
but by changing patterns of convection currents within
the white-hot, solid but slightly plastic mantle, like
currents boiling in a pan, but on a infinitely greater and
slower scale.
Each different pattern has produced a different moun¬
tain chain, first one added on one side of a continent, then
one on another. Elsewhere, when a new rising current
has started, continents have by the same process been
torn apart, as Is happening, or so it appears, in the Red
Sea, and in the rift valleys of Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda,
Burundi, Congo and Tanganyika today.
We have spoken of the growth of continents.
That they do grow is a view more widely held
than that they move. From what do they grow? The first
rock produced by partial melting in the earth is basalt
which flows so abundantly to the surface in Iceland, in
Hawaii and has done so in the past in the Deccan of India
and in the Parana basin and Patagonia of South America.
The basalt, erupted on the sea floor, is eventually carried
by convection currents Into the ocean deeps where it is
inexorably dragged down by the same currents to be
melted and to rise again.
H ere the progress being made In those attempts
I has been reviewed. There ls not yet general
agreement, but an agreed solution seems to be In sight.
Perhaps there is enough agreement to offer answers to the
Initial questions which we raised. Most workers agree
that although the Earth and the Moon may have been
formed together, that so many changes have occurred on
earth and that the properties of the moon differ so much
from those of the earth's surface, it is most improbable
that the Pacific Ocean basin has anything to do with the
moon.
If Atlantis was lost beneath the sea it probably ls a
memory of a great flood which occurred due to the melting
of North America and Scandinavia Ice-sheets 10,000 years
ago. In any case it has nothing to do with the major
events of geological history which occurred long before
mankind had appeared on earth.
It Is quite possible, and becoming more probable all
the time as new evidence pours In, that continents have
moved apart and that the Atlantic Ocean is a result of
the separation of Europe from North America, and of
Africa for South America. Not all scientists agree to this
yet, and once one accepts that the continents can move
there are an Infinite number of ways in which they might
have done so.
The rapid rate of exploration of the ocean floors and of
geophysical discovery should soon lead to a firm decision.
This Is badly needed, for until it Ls settled whether conti¬
nents have moved, and if so by what paths, no complete
answers are possible to the major problems of geology,
of geophysics, of past climates and of evolution itself.
We are sure that In all the vast record of the rocks, there
ls no evidence of immense earth-shaking convulsions. The
earthquakes, typhoons and volcanic outbursts that man
has experienced are terrible enough, but their effects are
local. We believe that the earth has developed in gradual
majesty by the slow operation of the same processes that
we see in action about us today. The earth ls stable and
our home ls a safe one.
dr. John tuzo Wilson is professor of geophysics and di¬
rector of the Institute of Earth Sciences at the University jj
of Toronto. From 1957 to 1960, Dr. Wilson was president
of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics.
