WORLD
by Ritchie Calder
Last February the United Nations brought together at
Geneva probably the world's greatest assembly of scientists
to discuss the application of science and technology for
the benefit of the less developed areas. This double issue
is based in major part on material from these discussions.
In the special article below Ritchie Calder, winner of
Unesco's Kalinga Science Prize (1961) highlights the
work of the UNCSAT conference and its implications for
the new nations tomorrow. He is now completing a
full-length analysis of the meetings, shortly to appear
under the title "World of Opportunity" as Volume I of an
8-vo/ume condensation of the UNCSAT conference to be
published later this year by the United Nations.
HERE are plenty of new flags fluttering at the
mast-heads. When the United Nations was
created in 1945, there were fifty-one members. Now there are one hundred
and eleven and of those forty-six are countries which have won their indepen¬
dence in the meatime.
But flags are not enough. Political freedom is an exhilarating experience,
but there is the morning after the celebrations when peoples are likely to wake
up and find that freedom has been robbed of much of its meaning; they are
just as hungry, just as sick, just as impoverished. They have the pride of
nationhood but are deprived, by squalor and hardship, of human dignity.
They have an equal vote in the assembly of the nations but they suffer the
inequality of unshared abundance.
This is the contradiction of the modern world. At one and the same time,
there has been the "revolution of rising expectations," of which political
freedom is only part-fulfilment, and the scientific and technical revolution which
has increased the prosperity of the advanced countries and has widened the
gap between them and the less-developed countries.
From the peasant in the paddy-field to the astronaut
As Professor M. S. Thacker, in his presidential address to the United Nations
Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit of
the Less Developed Areas, reminded the world: "One tenth of the peoples of
the world enjoy 60% of the world's income, while 57% of them have
less than 10% of that wealth at their disposal. If present trends are to
continue, the gulf between the poor and the rich countries will widen still
further and this at a time when great continents have awoken to freedom
and their populations are clamouring for certain minimum standards of life...
Prosperity, like peace, is indivisible."
The gap is as wide as the vertical 200 miles which separate the peasant,
wading in the wet paddy-field transplanting rice stem by stem, from the
astronaut, circling the planet Earth which 3,000,000,000 human beings have
to share; between the muscle-efforts of the poor and the supreme achievements
of modern science; and between those who lack science and technology and
those who have them.

OF OPPORTUNITY
The closing of this gap was the "categorical imperative" of the injunction
of U Thant, United Nations Secretary General, to the 1,655 participants at the
qcience and technology conference at Geneva. Ironically, the roll-call of that
conference displayed the gap; the numbers of delegates from the advanced
countries were four to one of those from less-developed countries, representing
two-thirds of the world's population; their governments just could not afford
to send more than one or two delegates; fourteen could not send any.
A meeting of minds without precedent
Unesco. - Pierre A. Pittet
The Bosscha Astronomical Observatory,
close to Bandung in Indonesia, has been
equipped, partly through a Unesco con¬
tribution, with twin telescopes, one
intended for visual and the other for
photographic work. Because they are
situated seven degrees south of the
equator, the observatory's telescopes
are well-placed for studying certain
constellations such as the Milky Way.
Apart from its size and the 10,000,000 words which "went into the record,"
this conference was exceptional. It was not one more of those 1,500 scientific
conferences which are held every year and at which scientific specialists discuss
the details of their specializations. It was a public "stock-taking" not only
of the goods which science has to offer in what Professor P. M. S. Ulacketl
called "the supermarket of science," but of the cupboards, meagre in the
essentials of human existence, of the less-developed countries. It was u
venture in a new dimension of discussion not just the laying out of facts but
a consensus of human aspirations.
No one had to be reminded of what science is capable of doing the release
of atomic energy and the circling satellites (57 when the conference opened)
were proof of what Thinking Man can do when he sets his mind to it. There
were no bitter recriminations; political considerations, while not entirely
absent, were muted. There was a certain amount of finger-wagging, of
professorial cautioning about not attempting too much but also salutary
reminders about the dangers of doing too little.
There was, to begin with (because it was a conference without precedent), a
tendency to over-formalize the discussions but that quickly broke down under
protest and perhaps more mental business was transacted outside the sessions
than in them, in the lobbies, and in the bars of the Palais des Nations. Anil in
a real sense the delegates fullfilled their function of being, in Professor
Thacker's phrase, '"the ambassadors of the needy and the spokesmen of the
tongue-tied."
As Academian E. K. Fedorov said, the range of items was '"encyclopa:dic."
Governments had been asked to submit papers as well as to send delegations
and, in advance of the conference, over 4,000 papers were sent in, from which,
with political as well as scientific tact, the scientific secretariat had to reject
2,000; the number of papers eventually presented to the conference was 1,849.
If all the transactions, totalling 10,000,000 words, were to be published, they
would fill 80 volumes. Instead, one of the post-conference tasks was to distill
from all this material eight "'working" volumes (1), eacli self-sufficient as a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
(1) 8-volume series, "Science and Technology for Development" : I. A World of
Opportunity; II. Natural Resources; III. Agriculture; IV. Industry; V. People 5
and Living; VI. Education; VII. Science and Planning; VIII. Plenary papers
and Index.

This "forest" of multi-coloured cork balls is a research laboratory scale model (100 million to 1)
of an atom compound showing its crystal structure. To obtain the information they needed to
build this model, research chemists first studied the direction and intensity of X-ray beams diffracted
by a crystal. From research like this much has been learned about the internal structure of matter.
WORLD OF OPPORTUNITY (Cont'd)
subject, so that men of affairs could comprehend and, more important, act
upon the useful suggestions.
There were 96 sessions in sixteen days three plenary sessions in which out¬
standing and understanding personalities could survey the problems and set
up the signposts for The World Development Decade, as the U.N. General
Assembly designated the 1960s; 12 general sessions, covering cognate subjects;
and 81 specialized sessions.
A host of unexpected answers from the computer
At the instigation of the President, three other special sessions were arranged
so that the representatives of the less-developed countries could canvass their
general problems. Even that was not enough; the chairmen of the various
sessions organized twenty-three extra meetings so that they could go into more
detail. And just to show how desperately in earnest the participants were
an extra-curricular service that no one had planned sprang into existence.
Experienced conference-goers became the "hosts" for the hesitant and made
it their job to introduce them to those who had the answers for which they were
looking.
The result was a friendly "clubbin0" little groups getting together in alcoves

or private rooms. And it was not a one-way traffic; the "teachers" became
the " taught," because they learned from the representatives of less-developed
countries a great deal that is not in the text-books. In winding-up, Professor
Thacker compared the conference to a computer into which a great amount of
information had been fed and a lot of unexpected answers had come out.
It was, in truth, a conference without precedent but, then, the circumstances
were unprecedented. Historically one might think of The Age of Reason at
the end of the Eighteenth Century when there was a similar ferment of
freedom, with the coming into existence of the United States, with the French
Revolution, with Voltaire, Rousseau and Tom Payne and with the "encyclo¬
paedists" trying to encompass and disseminate the knowledge of their times.
And all of it coinciding with the invention of the steam-engine which gave a
new power to the Industrial Revolution. If, as in the case of the Geneva
Conference of 1963, there had been a coming together of those two forces, of
aspirations and of material change, how different would history have read
today.
There was, in the Geneva Conference, this sense that it was changing human
destiny. It could not be otherwise. Science and technology lias become the
social dynamic of our times. While reminding the leaders of the emergent
nations that they were inadequately informed of the scientific advances which
would give the maximum content to political freedom, U Tliant, in his message,
had this challenge to offer:
"Science today is on trial because of the vastly increased power it has given
to the forces of war and destruction to the point that, for the first time,
humanity may be threatened with instant and total annihilation hut equally
because, in its boldest and most far-reaching experiments science seems to have
lost contact with society. Its processes have at times become so involved in
mathematical abstraction and its preoccupations centred on areas so remote
from daily life, that to the common man the scientists may appear today to live
in a secluded world of their own. In some way, science must lie made to
remain aware of its human origin and human destination."
No more foundling on the doorstep of society
The scientists accepted that challenge. By their very presence in such
numbers, they had accepted the fact they had social obligations and must no
longer be prepared to leave their discoveries like foundlings on the doorstep
of society with no responsibility for their upbringing. Rut speaker after
speaker made this explicit in such phrases as:
"No one can deny that the scientist has become a man of power and influence
in the twentieth century. Whether he likes it or not, he has obtained a high
place in decision-making." (Thacker, India.)
"Science is a supra-national activity, for its truths recognize no political
boundaries." (Bernardo Houssay, Argentine.)
"For far too long has the scientist lived in an ivory tower of his own creation.

For far too long he lived the captive life of the djinn of Aladdin's Lamp.
He must change his own attitudes before he can ever see the goal of world
development fully realized." (Abdus Salam, Pakistan.)
"We, scientists who have each of us embarked on vessels over which we have
no control, have at least the right and the duty of saying publicly that in aiding
the under-developed countries, the industrialized countries should not only give
away their superfluity or their surpluses but should be ready to deprive them¬
selves and give until it hurts." (Henri Laugier, France.)
"Today, when science is exerting enormous influences on life, scientists
appreciate their responsibility for the way their knowledge is being applied."
(Fedorov, U.S.S.R.)
This, however, was not just a conference of soul-searching but of life-giving.
In the twelve sections of the Conference, problems were examined on the most
prosaic as well as the most profound levels. In purely material terms, -¡
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD OF OPPORTUNITY (Cont'd;
countries are underdeveloped because full use has not been made of their
natural resources. More often than not, they do not know what natural
resources they possess and a great deal of practical consideration (and advice)
was given about how those resources should, by modern techniques, be found,
charted and made use of.
One of the most critical discussions in this section was on river basin develop¬
ment. Agriculture, rightly in a hungry world, had more papers than any
other subject. Industry in all its aspects was examined, with the recognition,
continually emphasized that, however preoccupied with increasing its farm
yields, no country can enjoy complete independence unless it has a developed
industry.
Charting and using a nation's natural resources
Transport and communications are indispensable to "getting a country on
the move." Health, nutrition, housings rural and urban development, were
examined and exemplified, with the recurring warnings to avoid the mistakes
of the older industrialized countries and reminders that development is not an
end in itself but a social purpose.
Planning, it transpired, is no longer a suspect word with ideological inflec¬
tions. This was one of the most important of all the sections, not only in
terms of economic planning but especially of the planning of science and its
direction to the needs of countries. Permeating and to some extent domin¬
ating all sections was the need for education and the sharing of knowledge and
skills and how this is to be done, in terms of international collaboration and
new techniques, as the most urgent follow-up of the conference. In this,
Unesco's role, as in the promotion of science for development, was obvious and
accepted.
Perhaps the most significant, indeed revolutionary change in thinking was
the recognition of the need for "investment in human resources." This is basic
to all U.N. thinking and has been embodied in all the work of all the
specialized agencies. But here was the recognition that the true "in¬
frastructure" is not that of conventional economics the building of ports,
railways, roads, etc. as a precondition of industrial development, "the gravit¬
ational flow of capital." Instead, it is not only "human resources," but "human
resourcefulness" which matters. A healthy, better fed, better educated popu¬
lation can hasten everything else. In addition to being the "social beneficia¬
ries," human beings become the economics factors in their own prosperity.
J
The rising expectations that cannot wait
"Hasten" is the operative word. People are now impatient to give material
meaning to their freedom. Delay, as the Geneva Conference insisted, means
a worsening of the disparity between the rich and poor "a slum at the bottom
of the rich man's garden," as the President put it.
We are trying to telescope time. Britain, first off the mark in the Industrial
Revolution, has the benefits of 200 years of industrialization; Western Europe,
of 150 years; the U.S.A., of 100 years; Japan, of 80 years; Russia, since the
Soviet Revolution, of 40. If the less-developed countries have to wait 40, those
"rising expectations" will be deferred until the twenty-first century. Science
and technology, shared and with means to make their possibilities real, can
8 compress the calendar. The World Development Decade, with the Geneva
Conference to give it its head-force, is under way.
The University of
Ibadan in Nigeria is
one of the most mod¬
ern in Africa. Some
2,000 students at¬
tend its faculties:
Science, Agronomy
and Veterinary Sci¬
ence, Economic and
Social Sciences, Let¬
ters and Medicine.
© Paul Almasy. Pans

