FAO » C. ßavagnoli
FARMERS GO TO SCHOOL. Nigeria plans to boost Its food production through an ambitious
farm-settlement scheme coupled with the creation of farm Institutes where young men (above)
are taught modern farming practices: soil conservation and fertility, crop and animal husbandry.
To meet population increases world food production must be tripled by the turn of the century.


GASTRONOMY FOR THE BOLD
by Ritchie Calder
I N a Congo market, street vendors were selling
' fat, black, hairy, wriggling caterpillars, four
Inches long. These were not live" bait for anglers but food
for human consumption. One shuddered and thought of
the dreadful privations which could reduce people to such
straits. But this .was not the Hunger" Belt of the Congo
and those caterpillars were not starvation rations but, for
Africans, delicacies like shrimps, escargots, or frogs' legs.
In a Bornean longhouse, among the treetops of the jun¬
gle, I had three helpings of a succulent, communal dish.
Some of the ingredients were obvious the saffron rice,
the bits of chicken, the herbs and the peppers, but there
were tasty bits which were unfamiliar. After enjoying the
meal I asked the headman what those were. When he
told me I sneaked down the ladder and was sick in the
undergrowth. The *'tasty bits" were slugs like those
which I had been pulling off my back in the jungle. If
I had not asked, my stomach would not have revolted but
Imagination baulked at self-cannibalism!
In West Africa, ambitious attempts to set up poultry
farms have been expensive failures, because of the local
micro-organisms. In any event, the feast day delicacy
of the local Africans Is not the Christmas or Thanksgiving
turkey but the giant snail. This represents about half-a-
pound of nutriment and Is as appetising as the Callfornlan
mollusc, abalone, an expensive dish on the American
menus.
In the Arabian deserts, the wandering bedouins eat fried
locusts. The locust has been the plague of settled cultiva¬
tions since Biblical times. The insect Is Just a winged
stomach and consumes its own weight of growing crops
In a day. Since a swarm of locusts can weigh thousands
of tons this consumption is devastating.
But desert wanderers do not concern themselves about
what happens to crops hundreds of miles away. To them,
a locust is human food. So much so, that when locust 21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

GASTRONOMY FOR THE BOLD (Cont'd)
Seaweed as good as candy floss
control officers went into the Empty Quarter of Arabia to
stop the locusts before they took off to wreak destruction
In the Soviet Union, Iran, Pakistan and the Middle East,
they had to take sacks of Maria Theresa dollars. They
had to have those coins of 200 years ago fresh-minted as
the only currency the desert tribes would recognize. They
had to bribe them to allow the killing of the locusts.
In Scotland, when I was young, we youngsters used to
sneak Into the back streets to buy and to eat hunks of
seaweed, which to us was as desirable as the candy floss
of a more affluent generation. We had to do it furtively
because It was vulgar, but years later I paid a dollar in a
luxury restaurant for a dish which was only a fancy ver¬
sion of that self-same seaweed.
hose are examples of what is really meant by
saying "One man's meat Is another man's
poison." In rare cases the expression may be true; there
are food allergies by which otherwise innocent edibles like
strawberries, or eggs, or chocolates can have serious and
even fatal effects on some individuals. Mostly, however,
our likes and dislikes are dictated by habits or by Imagi¬
nation (or the lack of it) or by taboos and our reactions
are not biochemical but psychological like my slug-
sickness in Borneo.
They are none the less real because of that. Even in a
famine, religious vegetarians will die rather than eat meat,
as also will rice-eaters rather than eat wheat. A world-
eminent free-thinklng professor, a long way removed from
the sacred sanitary laws of the Leviticus, can never force
himself to eat ham or pork; his stomach refuses to break
the rules of his upbringing.
One of the most appetising and worthwhile fish Is
mackerel but the fishermen of my part of the world who
catch mackerels and sell them will never eat them
because (quite untruly) they are supposed to feed on the
corpses of seamen. In Thailand, pretty well off for food,
mothers harm themselves, their unborn infants and their
suckling children by barring a whole range of fruits and
vegetables because they are fetish symbols but no part
of their Buddhist religion.
Another food-discriminator is snobbery. No one will eat
something called "dog-fish" (Squalus acanthias) but call
It "rock-salmon" on the menu and everyone is happy.
None of us would really enjoy the notion of eating
reptiles but the great feature of the Lord Mayor of
London's banquet is real turtle soup and a turtle is, of
course, a reptile. Similarly, we recoil from an egg which
is "off" but when we have a Chinese meal we will eat
addled turtle eggs and "bird's-nest soup," which is bird-
spittle mucilage (and perfectly good protein) secreted
from the salivary glands of swifts. Kangaroo-tails are
served in the British House of Lords. Crocodile-tails are
delicacies to Africans, just as the palms of the polar bear
paws are to the Eskimos. Sharks fins are shipped to the
Chinese but the food-thrifty Japanese eat shark-meat and
get rich vitamins from the sharks' liver.
When oysters in the days of Charles Dickens, were the
food of the poor of London, the rich did not eat them.
Now the rich eat them and the poor cannot afford them.
In expensive Western stores, one can buy bottled ants and
silkworm conserves made of the cocoons, once the silk
has been unwrapped.
One can buy jars of manna, from the Biblical wilderness.
It may not be the manna of the Exodus but It is the
saccharin excretion of an aphis which drinks the dew on
the tamarisks of the Sinai and the Negev. The excretion
dries like sugary snowflakes and drifts over the desert.
Where and when food is abundant, taste can afford to
be selective. In the land of Feast and Famine, among the
Eskimos, if the caribou-kill is high, they will feast off the
tongues and throw the meat to dogs. Come the famine,
and they will ration the offal and split the bone for the
marrow. In Wyoming, they boast "We cut out the steak
and throw away the steer." In Britain, unwanted milk
Is poured into disused coalmines.
Photos WHO - Spooner
22

FAO - Eric Schwab WHAT'S ON THE MENU? Food habits and the nutritive value of the vast variety of foods on the world's
menu are nowadays carefully studied in research institutes. Below, foodstuffs from all over the world, col¬
lected for testing in a British research institute. Changing diet habits are reflected (above) In fish pond
development schemes to provide more proteins for people of Indonesia. Working towards a more rational
use of world food resources, a joint Food and Agriculture-World Health Organization commission Is now
compiling a Codex Alimentäres, a collection of international food standards to help harmonize the existing ones.
But there is another kind of waste: Where people like
things (giant snails for Instance) which seem a bit
eccentric why should we try to Impose conventional foods
upon them? These may be the new foods. With all his
science, modern man has not been very enterprising.
Practically every food animal we know was domesticated
in prehistoric times. Of course, we have Improved the
breeds and the yields until a farm-animal has become an
agrofactory but we have not much extended the range.
Why not domesticate the sea-cow, the manatee or its
kin, the dugong? The manatee Is a substantial creature In
terms of sea-cow sirloins, because It can grow as much as
25 feet in length. It Is oceanic but It favours estuaries
and might be coaxed or adapted to the freshwater environ¬
ment of the great rivers. It has one especial virtue. It
Is the one creature, It seems, which Is prepared to feed
off the water hyacinth. If this seems to put It In the cate¬
gory of the famous Ferdinand, the Bull, which preferred
flowers to fighting, It should be explained that the wild
hyacinth, with its delicate blue blossom bobbing on the
waters, Is no choice bouquet. This Is one of the world's
scourges.
In the South American rivers where the water hyacinth
belongs, It is quite well-behaved, but when it has been
introduced by design (how nice to have it In our pool!)
or by accident (in ship's bilges) into Africa or Asia it has
become a plague. It chokes the great rivers, blocking the
channels, and smothering dams. It cannot be got rid of
by weedkillers because they would imperil the fish or the
useful plant life. It has to be cut and dredged out by
physical effort. But the manatee loves It and could pro¬
cess the pest Into excellent meat and oil.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

GASTRONOMY FOR THE BOLD (Cont'd)
One hippopotamus steak feeds a family
Then there is the hippopotamus. We call it "the river
horse" but it is a pachydermatous, non-ruminating,
artlodactyl ungulate in other words, underneath the two-
inch thick rind of its fourteen-feet bulk, there are three
tons of excellent pig-meat. A rasher of hippo would
provide a meal for a family.
If you can't lick 'em, join 'em! If you cannot domes¬
ticate wild animals, conserve them. That is a good thing
in itself because the world Is in danger of losing its noble
animals by stupid destruction. But conservation has other
commendations. Protected animals multiply beyond the
resources of their natural habitat, and in the interests of
their kind, they have to be culled selectively killed, just
as the sensible cutting of trees improves a forest. In
Africa, this would preserve the species for posterity and
protein for the people.
24 Conservation as against domestication has other values.
The increase of flocks and herds on savannah ranges (as
in East Africa) can destroy the herbiage and start erosion
into desert. Cattle and sheep are grazers; they eat only
from the ground but they crop everything close. Nature
has budgeted more intelligently. There are the rooting
animals, like the warthog, which get their food below the
surface and the many types of deer and antelopes which
graze but are non-competitive in the types of plants they
eat. There are the browsing animals which dine off
shrubs and bushes and there are the giraffes and elephants
which can help themselves from the trees. It is self-
service on four floors! No biotechnical efficiency-expert
could improve on that.
Where we have been least effective in our harvesting
of food Is in terms of the sea. Seven-tenths of our planet
is covered by oceans. Davy Jones' Locker is a vast food-
hamper. The nutrient material produced annually by the
sea amounts to one hundred billion tons of which only
thirty million tons, the world over, are recovered as edible
fish. This contrasts with the billion tons of vegetable
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

TORTILLAS & BLACK BEANS. The
beans and tortillas (maize pancakes) being
eaten by this young farmworker in El
Salvador are basic items of diet in many
Latin American countries. But human needs
in food are not merely quantitative and
millions are still undernourished in terms
of protein products...milk, eggs, meat and fish.

GASTRONOMY FOR THE BOLD (Cont'd from page 25)
Food from unsuspected sources
produce, and one hundred million tons of animal protein,
farmed from the land surface.
Since the early Chinese, and through the mediaeval
monasteries with their carp ponds, we have had inland
fish farms (still not enough) but as far as the sea is
concerned we are still at the Cave Man stage of hunting
our sea-food. We have not domesticated the sea creatures
nor husbanded nor harvested the sea-pastures.
The Idea of sea-ranching"The Riders of the Purple
Kelp"Is not in the least absurd. We could herd the sea-
creatures. (We might even train the intelligent dolphins
to be the collie-dogs of the oceans.) Sir Allster Hardy,
the distinguished marine biologist, once conjured up, in
a scientific assembly, the vision of frogmen "riding the
fences" of the sea-ranches, driving submarine tractors,
harrowing the starfish (which are the marine pests, eating
four times as much food as the edible fish) and ploughing
up the bottom of the sea.
B;[tjt one does not need to be that fanciful. The
'herding could be done by electrical devices.
The harrowing could be done by mechanical drags which
would comb out the starfish and recover them as poultry-
food.
The ocean floor could be ploughed by remote-controlled
tractors. Why plough? Because the bottom of the sea is a
great compost heap. It contains stagnant nutrients in
abundance so much so that the idea of artificial fertilizers
for the sea, which has engaged a lot of thought, is
redundantAll that is needed is to stir the nutrients so
that they circulate in the layers where grow the submarine
vegetation and the plankton which are the diet of the
edible fish.
This would encourage sea-pastures for other purposes
as well. The Japanese, Industriously searching for
means of feeding their multiplying population, have
already discovered uses for some 10,000 different kinds of
seaweed. Some of it is used as fertilizers for land crops,
producing food at one remove, but many of them have
been processed for direct human consumption. They can
be attractively packaged (like breakfast cereals) and if one
does not mind "corn-flakes" coloured green with a flavour
of iodine, or black "potato crisps" with the salt built-in,
substitutes from seaweed are palatable and nutritious.
We could have sea-farming in fiords and enclosed sea-
basins. The trouble is that one cannot clip the wings of
fish as one clips the wings of poultry to prevent them from
migrating but it should be possible to fence some of those
Inlets. Just as a single wire with a harmless charge of
electricity will discourage land animals from straying, an
electric current beamed across the exit would discourage
the fish from leaving. They would remain to multiply and
grow.
There are also floating pastures of minute plant-
plankton and swarms of animal-plankton. So far we have
found no effective way of harvesting this suspended
vegetation and animal material. We might, however, study
the whale which swims along gobbling plankton, squeezing
out water and converting the material into 70 tons of
meat, bone and blubber. Perhaps we could devise a
mechanical, atom-propelled "whale" as our combine
harvester of the sea!
N ow we come back to likes and dislikes: Who
would choose to eat plankton? But we can
give all such things, whether the wasted sustenance of
the sea or the waste proteins of the land, a gastronomical
anonymity. When we eat meringues and some kinds of
ice-cream, we never recognise them as algenates, extract-
32 ed from seaweed. Fish-fingers beautifully packaged out
of the deep-freeze may be fish from which one would
recoil if one saw it on a fishmongers' slab.
Deep-seated objections, like religious taboos, are more
difficult to overcome. The Indians who prefer a vege¬
tarian diet would be better off with meat-protein but there
is no need to offend their religious convictions nor to
convert them to meat. At the Food Research Institute at
Mysore, they have produced a multi-purpose food. Ten
teaspoonfuls has the nutritive value of one quarter of a
pound of meat, a baked potato, a dish of lentils and a
glass of milk, all added together.
It is made from indigenous products peanut flour,
Bengal gram, calcium and vitamins. It is cheap and it
can be added to the chapatis, the curries, or any of the
habitual diets. Similarly they have produced "tapioca-
macaronL" This uses cassava, a root easily grown but
Cinedis
ANTS FOR DINNER. What makes a succulent dish
for one person is merely repulsive to another, depend¬
ing on what part of the world we live in. Mostly
our likes and dislikes are dictated by habits, by imagi¬
nation or by taboos. Few Europeans would today
relish the dish of fried ants and caterpillars shown here.
of poor nutritive value but It can be combined with
25% wheat semolina, and 15% groundnut flour, with
fortification of calcium and vitamin. It can (as a pasta)
be made into any shape, including that of rice-grains; it
is much more nutritious than rice and it can be cooked in
seven minutes an important point because village cook¬
ing means burning cow-dung.
Recently Dr. Melvin Calvin was awarded the Nobel Prize
for having, with the help of radioactive tracers, worked
out the complete cycle by which the growing-plant takes
the energy from the sun, the elements from the air and
the minerals from the soil and converts them into the
sugars and starches of our basic foodstuffs. He has given
us the flow-sheet of a chemical process which we could
reproduce in chemical engineering.
Work is also going on, notably in the U.S.S.R. on the
further stages by which the plants produce the proteins
necessary for the repair and growth of the human tissues.
Foreseeably, we could start with the elements themselves,
cut out the intermediates, of the soil, the plants and the
animals which eat them in order to feed us, and make
our food as a druggist compounds a prescription.
It really is not necessary. We have the know-how of
growing more, and using better, the crops and animals so
that hungry people could be fed. We have the science.
What we need is the imagination and the intention.
