i
With the signature
of the First Geneva
Convention, "For the
Welfare of Soldiers
Wounded in Action"
by representatives of
12 countries (left)
on August 22, 1864,
the Red Cross was
born and given a solid
foundation in inter¬
national law. Today
ninety-one states
are parties to the
Geneva Convention
which has been re¬
vised and expanded.
Boissonnas-Geneva

THE RED CROSS
CENTENARY OF A UNIVERSAL BANNER
by Hubert d'Havrincourt

" For three days I have been looking after the wounded
from the battle at Solferino and I have tended over a
thousand of these unfortunate men. We have had
40,000 in all, both Allies and Austrians. There are not
enough doctors, and in their place I have had to make
the best use I could of a few local women and the
prisoners who are fit enough to help ..."
Henry Dunant (1828-1910)
here were tears in the eyes of the young man
who was feverishly writing these lines at the
corner of a blood-stained table. Henry Dunant, Just turn¬
ed 31, was the eldest son of a well-to-do Genevese family.
He was an enterprising young man and a great traveller
always on the look-out for profitable transactions. But
he had not come to the battlefield to open cases of lint.
His purpose was to put before the Emperor Napoleon III
a plan for building mills at Mons Djémila in Algeria.
But the Emperor, caracoling on horseback in the
distance in the midst of his brightly-uniformed staff, had
other things to think of at that moment. It was the
evening of the day of battle, June 24, 1859, and from all
sides came the groans of the dying and the agonized
screams of the wounded stricken with gangrene. Forget¬
ting what had brought him there, the stylishly dressed
-traveller hurried about the field of slaughter trying to
ease the human agony that had upset his plans.
There was only one dressing-station in a church at
Castiglione, the Chiesa Maggiore. Here, Dunant organiz¬
ed volunteers for first-aid. He got the village women to
bring linen, water, and lint. He himself helped to wash
wounds, distributed lemons and tobacco to the wounded
and gave them water to drink. Thanks to his efforts,
Austrian doctors among the prisoners of war were
"freed" to treat the wounded. Helped by the Piedmontese
peasant women he tended and comforted over a
thousand wounded and if he still found time In the small
hours to pen some lines. It was because sleep had deserted
him and he felt somehow Impelled to tell the Influential
people living peacefully at Geneva about the horror of the
battlefield he himself had Just left, exhausted with fatigue
and emotion.
The terrifying memory of the Chiesa Maggiore haunt¬
ed him and it was only by writing what were to be the
first lines of a memoir that he could find some peace
of mind again. Entitled "A Memory of Solferino", this
booklet of 128 pages was at first intended only for his
family and his numerous friends. It was a private edition
limited to 1,600 copies; its subject, "the battle and its
horrors, the suffering of the wounded left to die, their
cries, their tears, their agony which remain fresh and
piercing in the author's memory". In conclusion Dunant
proposed the setting up in every country of "relief
societies" to give aid to the wounded In time of war.
The book was published In 18C2. Dunant sent it to the
leading citizens of Geneva to governments, to men of
letters, to princes. Europe was shaken by Its revelations.
The Goncourt brothers hailed it as "liner, a thousand
times finer, than Homer", and declared, "one puts down
this book cursing war". Dickens published extracts from
Dunant's book In his "All the Year Round" review.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
WHO
21

THE RED CROSS (Cont'd)
Henry Dunant, a practical idealist
The king of Saxony asked Dunant to visit him and told
him: "A nation that does not take part in this human¬
itarian work will be censured by European public opin¬
ion." Queen Isabella II of Spain organized a "Permanent
Committee for Help to the Wounded". The king of
Prussia and Sweden, the Tsar, and the Emperor of France
all gave Dunant their support.
Having made a triumphant tour of all the Courts of
Europe, Dunant felt that the moment was ripe for inter¬
national action. With the collaboration of four Swiss
friendsGeneral Gulllaume-Henri Dufour, Gustave Moy-
nler, a barrister, and two doctors, Théodore Maunoir and
Louis Appla he set about persuading the different coun¬
tries to set up national societies for help to the wounded
in time of war.
The five friends held their first meeting at Geneva on
February 17, 1863, under the chairmanship of General
Dufour, a veteran of the Napoleonic wars, a well-known
figure whose presence was an International guarantee
for the movement. They decided to set themselves up as
a "Permanent International Committee for Help to the
Wounded of the Armed Forces." Eight months later, the
Committee succeeded in bringing about an "International
Conference" to remedy the inadequacy of medical services
with armies in the field. Unofficial delegates from 16
countries met at Geneva to approve the suggestions of
the "Committee of Five."
The neutrality of the wounded and of medical personnel
was discussed, and it was decided that thenceforward
they should be protected by a distinctive sign a red cross
on a white field a reproduction of the Swiss flag with
the colours reversed. This symbol was eventually to win
recognition from all governments, except Arab countries
which chose the Red Crescent, and Iran which took the
Red Lion and Sun as its emblem.
But this was not enough, as the Prusso-Danlsh war
1864 was soon to prove. The delegates of the Committee
to the warring countries found themselves reduced to the
role of observers. They could do little more than collect
facts, though valuable use was made of this information
in pressing home the aims of the Committee. The
convening of an international conference of delegates
who would sign specific engagements in the names of
their respective governments was now considered. The
Swiss Confederation invited 25 states to take part in a
diplomatic conference at Geneva, starting on August 8,
1864.
here was, however, a great deal of suspicion to
be allayed, vanity to be soothed, and opposition
to be overcome. Bavaria and the Vatican did not send
representatives. At the outset, the Russians were reluctant.
Austria was convinced that her medical services were
faultless. More than once, negotiations ground to a halt.
Finally, after seven laborious meetings, the first Geneva
Convention the basic charter of the Red Cross, called
the "Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition
of the Wounded in Armies in the Field" was signed by
12 countries on August 22, 1864, and was left open for the
accession of powers which did not sign.
As war swept over Eur¬
ope in 1939 millions
fled (left), families were
scattered and countless
men, women and chil¬
dren were deported and
interned. More often than
not the Red Cross was
the last resource for tra¬
cing lost relatives (right)
or getting news of miss¬
ing persons. Into the
Geneva headquarters of
the Red Cross came innu¬
merable demands for help
in tracing missing rela¬
tives, combatant and non-
combatant. Hope lived in
the vast card indexes
(below) of the Red Cross
Agency manned by
over 3,000 people.
Today the Red Cross
still manages to trace
many missing persons.
Red Cross Photos
WÊÊ*
WHO

Red Cross-Anpfoto, Amsterdam Today when a catastrophe strikes anywhere in the world where local resources are too small to
relieve suffering, the Red Cross goes into action. In 19 53 dykes In the Netherlands gave way and
the floods this caused (above) affected 80,000 people. Red Cross help was given to thousands of
destitute people. That year, 129 million Swiss francs (Nearly $'30 million or over Jl10 million)
worth of aid went to the world's victims of natural calamities, which Included floods In Yugoslavia,
Japan and India, and earthquakes in Greece and Turkey. In the past 10 years 97 appeals have been met.
However, the event passed practically unnoticed. As
for Dunant, who had for the last five years been travell¬
ing from one end of Europe to the other, he had some¬
what neglected his private affairs. His business in Algeria
had been doing very badly and eventually he went bank¬
rupt. Ruined and faced with scandal, he chose exile.
Unlucky in finance, he was later to admit that "as a man
of letters, he knew nothing about business".
At the same time, Gustave Moynier succeeded General
Dufour as President of the International Committee.
Dunant now severed all links with Geneva. Shortly after¬
wards, the Prusso-Austrian War of 1868 broke out. Serious
difficulties arose. Critics said the volunteer service was
badly organized and that delegates were ill-informed
about the situation and the real needs. Help came much
too late, or very often, too lavishly where It was not
required. There were not enough nurses on the first
hospital trains. The wounded were not always cared for
in proper time.
Meanwhile, Dunant had settled in Paris. When the
Franco-Prussian War broke out, he did his best, with
mixed success, to remind the French ministers of the
existence of the Geneva Convention which France had
signed. He also suggested that certain towns in the Paris
area should be neutralized and designated as "cities for
the wounded".
B.y now however, his ideas were being adopted.
'For the first time in history, 25 national socie¬
ties offered their help to the belligerents. Here and there
on the front, field dressing stations and military hospitals
protected by the sign of the Red Cross, were saving thous¬
ands of wounded from death. Despite great difficulties,
34 field dressing-stations had been organized at the front
by the French Society for Relief of the Wounded. This
was still far too little, of course. At Worth, at Gravelotte,
at Sedan, barns filled with wounded, resounded to the
groans of the dying, just as they had at Solferino. In
Germany, where the funds collected had reached the sum
of 70 million marks, there were still only two doctors and
ten nurses to a thousand wounded!
Nevertheless, the International Committee sent off
7,000 parcels, organized a mail service between the
wounded in enemy hands and their families, and forward¬
ed up to 1,000 letters a day. Governments made hand
some contributions to the national societies and gifts
flowed In. Lists of the French wounded In Germany and
of the German wounded In France were drawn up and
published for the benefit of their families. Numerous
convoys of wounded were repatriated through Switzerland.
Dunant was to save some other victims from death the
following year at the time of the Commune of Paris,
before he sank Into a life of abject poverty which took
him across Europe. Sometimes he slept on a bench In
some railway waiting room or else took advantage of the
temporary hospitality offered by his few remaining
friends in London, Paris, or Stuttgart.
|uring this period, he attempted to found a
"Universal Alliance for Order and Civiliza¬
tion", lectured In London on the conditions of prisoners
of war, outlined a plan for an "International High Court
of Arbitration", and preoccupied himself with the cam¬
paign against slavery. Then, one day, unobtrusively, he
drifted Into a poorhouse at Helden In the Swiss canton
of Appenzell where he was to live mlsanthroplcally on
three francs a day the gift of a friend. lie was not then
70 years old but he looked 80.
Nevertheless, he started once again to launch pacifist
appeals and humanitarian programmes, and at the same
time worked unceasingly on his memoirs which are
nothing but the long complaint of a tortured man. There
he remained, forgotten by his country and the world at
large, until the day he was discovered by a Journalist,
who had believed him long dead and burled. Dunant
was sitting In his armchair with his long white beard and
his gentle, sad eyes, but his former eloquence was un-
dlmmed.
Long-denied recognition came at last. In 1897, he was
awarded the Prize of the International Congress of Medi¬
cine, and in 1901 the first Nobel Peace Prize which he
shared with Frédéric Passy. On October 30, 1910. the
"Man in White", as the soldiers at Solferino had called
him, died peacefully. He went almost furtively to his
grave, for by his own request, there was no funeral pro¬
cession. It was the village carpenter who alone trundled
the coffin to the graveyard on a simple handcart.
When Henry Dunant died, famous at long last, the Red 23
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE RED CROSS (Cont'd)
Ready to help disaster victims everywhere
Cross and Its International Committee were already active
throughout the world. The International Committee is
an independent collégial authority of which all the
members (a maximum of 25) are Swiss citizens elected
every three years. Aided by State contributions, collec¬
tions, and gifts from private individuals, the Red Cross
was able to lend Its services everywhere, including the
Boer War and the war between Russia and Japan. On the
eve of the first World War, It was ready and equipped to
resolutely put into practice its basic principles of human¬
ity, Impartiality, neutrality, and independence.
From 1914 to 1918, the Central Prisoner of War Agency
received information from the belligerents about prisoners
and filed 5,000,000 index cards. As many as 18,000 replies
were sent each day. Four hundred and fifty thousand
sick and wounded were exchanged. Two million parcels
were distributed. Between the years 1919 and 1922,
500,000 prisoners of war were repatriated. Each national
society worked to the limit of its resources; by 1918, the
British Red Cross, for instance, was spending £20,000
($56,000) a year.
When civil war broke out In Spain, only skilled diplo¬
macy won the Red Cross the right to act In an Internal
conflict. It had already worked in other conflicts: the
Gran Chaco war and wars in Ethiopia and in China.
HThen came the second World War. For
five years, the International Committee
gave help to prisoners of war and to
civilians who had been interned or
deported. Red Cross representatives,
some of whom met their deaths while
performing their duties, even succeeded
in making their way into concentration
camps. Four thousand people worked at the Central Pri¬
soner of War Agency which dealt with 40,000 documents
each day, and received in all some 53 million letters.
Through the International Red Cross Committee, 10
million civilian messages were exchanged between belli¬
gerent countries; 36 million parcels to a value of 3,000
million Swiss francs were sent to prisoners of war in
Germany alone. Forty Red Cross ships travelled all over
the world carrying sick and wounded, as well as food
supplies.
Shortly after the end of the second World War,
"Geneva Law" was codified, and the four Conventions of
August 12, 1949, are now its legal basis. They concern:
the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and
sick in armed forces in the field;
the amelioration of the condition of the wounded, sick
and shipwrecked members of armed forces at sea;
the treatment of prisoners of war;
the protection of civilian persons in time of war.
The Red Cross has carried out its work
through all subsequent conflicts, wher¬
ever blood has been shed: In Greece,
Palestine, Suez, Cyprus, Indo-Chlna, the
Lebanon, Cuba, Rhodesia, Algeria, the
Congo, Laos, Nepal, Yemen. Every¬
where, It raises its voice against suffer¬
ing and brings effective relief.
In 1919, just after the end of the first World War, Henry
P. Davidson, President of the American Red Cross, pro¬
posed that a federation be formed of all the national
societies so that the impetus of their work during the
war should be carried on Into peacetime. On May 5, of
that year, there was born the League of Red Cross, Red
24 Crescent, and Red Lion and Sun Societies.
Since that time, the League has given help all over
the world wherever there is suffering, and whenever a
disaster is too great to be met by a country's own
resources.
Thus, practical form has been given an idea put
forward by Henry Dunant, who appealed for the organi¬
zation of international help when floods ravaged the south
of France in 1875. Today, the League groups 88 societies
totalling some 155 million members. Its aim is to en¬
courage the formation of national Red Cross Societies in
countries where there are none, to contribute to the well-
being of humanity, and to co-ordinate help in times of
national disaster.
The work of the League is co-ordinated by the Advisory
Committee on International Disaster Relief which has its
offices in Geneva. There are international centres, and
a telecommunications service ensures constant liaison
with the technicians of each national society. An Inter¬
national Relief Handbook (a complete guide to disaster
relief) defines in detail the work of specialists when wide-
scale action has to be taken to help refugees, or the
victims of epidemics, floods, earthquakes, and other
natural disasters, and covers, in fact, all kinds of inter¬
national relief.
Between 1947 and 1957, the total value of the relief
co-ordinated by the League amounted to 400 million
Swiss francs. These international activities are a new
proof of the co-operative spirit which guides the Red
Cross.
Not a year goes by without appeals for help being made
to the member societies. In 1953, the sea burst through
the dykes in Holland and thousands of people were left
destitute, losing their houses and the land they had cul¬
tivated. When the water receded ,salt had made the soil
unfit for agriculture. The Dutch Red Cross received help
amounting to 14,639,000 Swiss francs ($3.4 million or £1.2
million) from 39 national societies.
The year 1960 brought a series of
disasters: there were floods In Greece,
an earthquake in Peru, and famine in
Brazil; the earthquake at Agadir in
Morocco left 18,000 people homeless. Red
Cross societies sent staff, and gifts of
over 10 million Swiss francs ($2.3 million
or £820,000) to meet these catastrophes.
During the last 10 years, the League has responded to
97 international appeals from 47 countries all over the
world in order to help victims of all kinds of disasters.
The aim is not to duplicate what others are doing already,
but to give emergency aid whenever the need arises.
The wide field of the societies' activities, which range
from nursing instruction to training first-aid workers
to tend the victims of as terrible a disaster as an atomic
war, has given them the status of public services, indis¬
pensable both on national and international levels.
Though born on the battlefield, the Red Cross is above
all a great force in time of peace which must be cons¬
tantly ready to relieve human suffering and to safeguard
human values. It is not an institution but a movement
able to adapt itself to all circumstances.
Today the International Red Cross must adapt Itself
to the changing conditions of our contemporary world
and with the development of atomic weapons has felt
that it cannot blind itself to the consequences of a possible
nuclear conflict. Recently the head of the Japanese Red
Cross posed the problem openly and squarely and
suggested that doctors should be given special training
in radioactivity and also stressed the need for a co¬
ordinated study by all Red Cross societies of radioactivity,
its dangers, and methods of treatment.
As Ernest Renan wrote when he sent Henry Dunant a
letter of congratulation on the Red Cross: "You have
created the greatest undertaking of our century. Europe
may have greater need of it than We think."

THOUSANDS SAVED
IN MOROCCAN TRAGEDY
In 1959, thousands of persons of all ages were crippled in
Morocco when cooking oil adulterated with mineral oil was sold
on the market. The victims were left partially or completely
paralyzed. Together the Moroccan Ministry of Health, the
League of Red Cross Societies and the World Health Orga¬
nization launched an international rehabilitation programme.
Doctors, physiotherapists, nurses and other health staff sent
by Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies supervised and
carried out the rehabilitation treatment shown In thoso photos.
When the international phase of this campaign, which saved
thousands from incapacitation, was completed, tho work was
taken over by Moroccan medical staff trained by tho specialists.
Photos © Oik Dfryrr
25
