THE PROMISE OF
by Homi Jehangir Bbabha
n adequate supply of energy is the primary
»requisite for all modern industrialization and
for supporting a high standard of living. For the under¬
developed countries of the world, It is therefore of prime
Importance to ensure that adequate amounts of energy
and power are harnessed at all stages of their develop¬
ment. A sound policy with regard to energy development
can be formulated properly only by taking a long view of
the broad energy requirements for quite some time into
the future.
In planning for the supply of electricity, it is important
to remember that the capital investment in plants and
industries required to consume a unit of electricity is on
the average roughly seven times the capital investment
in plant required to produce a unit of electricity. Thus,
in any industrial complex the investment in power pro¬
ducing industries is generally only about 10 to 15% of
the total investment.
A conclusion to be drawn from this important fact is
that when making large investments in power production
it must be assured that several times this amount, say
five to seven times, is available for investment in new
industries to utilise this power. Otherwise, some of the
investment made in producing new power will lie unuti¬
lized. A second and equally important conclusion to be
drawn is that while the investment in power has to be
roughly one-seventh of the total industrial investment,
one should always ensure that the investment in power-
producing industries is somewhat more rather than less
than the optimum figure of about one-seventh. Under-
supply of power has a much more adverse effect than
an over-supply.
14
When discussing the economics of utilizing alter¬
native energy resources, the present levels of
energy consumption the growth in demands for energy and
the availability of the different energy resources have to
be taken into account. For an examination of these fac¬
tors, it is convenient to divide the world into nine groups
of countries as follows: North America, comprising essen¬
tially the United States and Canada; Oceania, consisting
of Australia and the Pacific Ocean islands; U.S.S.R.; West¬
ern and Eastern Europe; Africa excluding Egypt; Latin
America including Mexico and countries south of it;
South Asia and the Far East, including all countries of
Asia excluding the Middle East and China; The Middle
East, including Iran, Turkey, Egypt and other Arab
countries, and China.
A tabulation of the per capita consumption of com¬
mercial energy, electricity production and installed elec¬
trical capacity for these regions shows that the per
capita energy consumption for North America is about
7.8 tons of coal equivalent per annum, and that for Europe,
Oceania, and the U.S.S.R. is about 3 tons. These areas
comprise the industrially advanced countries of the
world today.
On the other hand, Latin America, Africa, South Asia
and the Far East, the Middle East and China, which
comprises areas that may be termed as "underdeveloped",
have a per capita consumption of less than 0.7 tons coal
equivalent. The disparity in these figures points to the
CONT'D ON PAGE 16
..^ - V~ '

NUCLEAR ENERGY
India Is basing plans for its future industrial development on tho uso of nucloar
energy. It began surveys of its nuclear fuel resources uranium and thor¬
ium as far back as 1 949 and, as part of its programme of nuclear research,
began to operate its first reactor, the "Apsara", or water nymph, at Trombay,
near Bombay in 1 957. It now has three research reactors at Trombay, Includ¬
ing the Canada-India Reactor whoso huge steel protective domo is shown
here, and in addition it is planning to build two nuclear power stations.
Canadian National film Board
15

NUCLEAR ENERGY (Cont'd)
Coal and oil exhausted in 75 years
enormous Increases in energy production that will be
required as the underdeveloped regions industrialize
themselves. Moreover, the underdeveloped regions con¬
tain the bulk of the world's populationsome 2,139 mil¬
lion out of a total of roughly 3,000 million.
According to a recent survey by the World Power Con¬
ference, it is estimated that the total reserves of fossil
fuel In the world that could be economically recovered
are about 3 i million million tons. On the other hand,
the total consumption of commercial sources of energy
in the world in 1960 was about 4,200 million tons of coal
equivalent. The world consumption of energy increased
at a rate of about 5% per annum in the 1955-1960 period,
and the rate has increased above this figure in 1959 and
1960. On this basis the estimated reserves of economi¬
cally recoverable fossil fuel would be exhausted in about
75 years.
So far as water power is concerned, it is estimated that
if all the sites in the world that have been surveyed are
utilized, it should be possible to generate about 5 million
million Kw hours of electricity per annum. This forms
a small portion of even the present total world energy
consumption and would be less than 3% of the likely
consumption 30 years hence. It therefore appears that
within the foreseeable future, the world will have to go
in for a massive utilization of nuclear energy or other
non-conventional resources.
A tabulation of the total reserves of conventional re¬
sources, both measured and inferred, for different re¬
gions of the world, reveals the striking fact that the
underdeveloped areas of the world are also those with
the least per capita resources of conventional energy.
The reserves are under 400 tons of coal equivalent per
capita for the underdeveloped areas, 1,400 tons for Eu¬
rope, over 8,000 tons for North America and over 25,000
tons for the U.S.S.R.
We may assume that the underdeveloped areas will
aim at achieving as rapidly as possible a stage of dev¬
elopment corresponding to that prevailing in Europe today,
which would mean a per capita annual energy consump¬
tion of about 3 tons of coal equivalent. With a consump¬
tion of 3 tons per capita for these regions annually the
entire reserves would be exhausted in less than 40 years
in Latin America, less than 65 years in the Middle East,
less than 30 years in the South Asia and Far East region
and less than 133 years in Africa. This does not, of
course, take into account the steadily rising population.
It is clear therefore that in the underdeveloped areas,
POWER FROM THE
SUN. Energy captured
from sunshine may one
day be used to run entire
factories. For the moment
there is an immediate need
for small solar power units
that can be used to pump
water from wells and un¬
derground streams in the
world's arid areas. Re¬
search on such batteries
of mirrors is going for¬
ward in many countries.
This photo shows recent
installation at the Uni-
16 versity of Dakar, Senegal.
© Paul Almasy. Paris

the conventional reserves will not be sufficient to support
a developed economy for any significant length of time
and that recourse will have to be made either to nuclear
energy or to imports of fuel on a massive scale in the
near future.
The area which is worst endowed with conventional
resources is the South Asia and Far East region which
with a present population of 925 million will therefore
require the use of nuclear energy at the earliest date of
all.
The cost of commercial energy depends on two factors;
first, the intrinsic cost of the energy in the fuel used,
and secondly the cost of the plant necessary for extract¬
ing this energy from the fuel and converting it into a
commercially useful form, such aá electricity.
If the cost of coal is $4 a ton, the cost of energy in it
comes to 20 US cents per million British Thermal Units.
Transport may more than double the cost of energy. For
furnace oil at $16 per ton, the cost of energy contained
in it is 40 US cents per million BTU. The cost of nuclear
fuel is higher, for we have to include the cost of bringing
the ore to the surface of extracting the uranium content
in it and then fabricating this uranium into fuel ele¬
ments of the desired type. This may result in fuel
elements costing anything from $30,000 to $60,000 per ton.
On the other hand, the amount of energy that can
be extracted from each ton, even with today's technology,
is so enormous that the cost of energy from uranium may
vary between 8 and 20 cents per million BTU. In other
words, the intrinsic cost of energy from nuclear fuel is
almost invariably lower than the cost of energy from
conventional fuel, and may in many cases be less than
half the cost of energy from coal even at the pit heads.
This general situation could have an important bearing
on fuel policy. If fuel has to be imported in any case,
then it is much cheaper in terms of the energy obtained
to Import nuclear fuel rather than conventional fuel.
The known reserves of conventional fuels In most of the
underdeveloped areas are relatively so small that the full
industrialization of these areas will have to depend either
on a large scale import of fuel or on using nuclear energy.
In view of the markedly low cost of energy In nuclear
fuel the necessity to import fuel in very big amounts
will itself tip the balance In favour of going In for nuclear
energy. Thus, we come to the conclusion that the full
industrialization of the underdeveloped areas will in the
long run take place only on the basis of atomic energy,
whether the fuel is Imported or obtained indlgeneously.
If the generation of electricity from nuclear energy is
not already much cheaper than from conventional fuels
it is entirely because the technology is still In its Infancy
and the cost of plant required to utilize nuclear fuel Is
greater than the cost of plant required to use conventional
fuel. However, the cost of nuclear power stations has
been coming down rapidly, so much so that In many
areas of the world electricity from atomic energy has
already become competitive with electricity from conven¬
tional fuels. A major portion of India, which is remote
from the coal fields, falls within this category, and cer¬
tain high fuel cost regions of the United States are prob¬
ably also In the same class.
I n conclusion It Is necessary to make a few
general observations. Should a study oí the
economics of the situation In a particular underdeveloped
area show that it would be expedient to go In for nuclear
production, this could be done Initially on the basis of
imported equipment. It is neither necessary nor desirable
for every such country to go In Immediately for the design
and manufacture of nuclear equipment, as the necessary
technical effort may well take away scarce personnel from
more urgent problems.
On the other hand, every new Industrial project,
whether in the nuclear field or otherwise, should b"e made
the starting point for the training of personnel, not only
for operating such plants but for wider purposes. Each
industry should be used to make its contribution directly
and indirectly towards the development of technical
personnel in a wider context than merely required for its
operation.
It is not necessary for every country, especially a small
one, to produce everything, but it must be able to produce
some things containing a high technological content
which can be sold in return for other things which may
be needed. A balance cannot be maintained only by
trading raw materials for industrial equipment. In the
last analysis, the most important asset of the highly
industrialized countries is their educated and trained
manpower in all fields, in particular their large number
of scientists, technologists and skilled labour. It Is this
resource which the underdeveloped countries must build
for themselves as quickly as possible, if they are to cease
lagging behind, and to pull their own weight In the
forward march of humanity.
Homi Jehangir Bhabha is one of India's most distinguished men
of science. Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission
since 1961, he is also a member of the U.N. Scientific Advisory
Committee and was president of the first International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in 1955. He gained
distinction through his original research in theoretical nuclear
physics and in particular on the quantum theory and on cosmic
radiation.
17
