£) Paul Almasy. Paris
SCHOOLS FOR ALL. Education must be free and compulsory, at least in the elementary
and fundamental stages, to make the right to education a reality for all. Above, an elementary
school class in Tunisia where a 10-year nation-wide programme to establish free and compul¬
sory education has been in operation since 1958. School enrollment has already increased by
nearly 65%. Unesco has sent educational specialists to Tunisia to help with this programme.

UNESCO
AND HUMAN RIGHTS
FOR ALL
Unesco helped to prepare the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and has since assumed two responsibilities: to spread knowledge
and understanding of the principles on which the Declaration is
based and to work for the attainment and universal respect of rights
relating to education, science and culture. The rights on which
Unesco has concentrated special efforts are those defined in Articles
26, 2, 27 and 19. (The complete text of the United Nations
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is reproduced on page 16).
Everyone has the right to education . . .
(Article 26)
LL Unesco's work for education from the
i extension of free and compulsory primary
education to educational planning and development, from
education for international understanding to the im¬
provement of general secondary and technical vocational
education and from adult and youth education to the
international exchange of educational information and
documentation aims to help member states achieve the
standards proclaimed in Article 26 of the Universal
Declaration.
As part of its efforts to extend free and compulsory
primary education Unesco launched in 1957 a 10-year
major project for the extension of primary education in
Latin America. This is designed to help co-operating
states of the region to provide education for all children
of primary school age as speedily as possible.
Since then, other large-scale programmes for the
development of education at the primary and other levels
have been undertaken in Africa, Asia and the Arab states.
For example, with resources provided from the United
Nations Special Fund, Unesco has recently started several
broad development programmes in these regions for
technical and vocational education and the training of
secondary school teachers.
The educational goals of the Universal Declaration
will only be attained if the advancement of education in
schools is accompanied by action to provide out-of-school
education for both young people and adults. Unesco has
therefore set up regional training centres for education in
community development in the Arab states and Latin
America; it has aided national projects of youth and
adult education; it has organized international con¬
ferences and expert meetings, and has carried out a wide
variety of educational activities In collaboration with non¬
governmental organizations.
A further step of major importance was taken in 1962
when the General Conference of Unesco authorized the
Organization to help prepare a massive world literacy
campaign. The first phase of the campaign, which would
be completed within the limits of the United Nations
Development Decade, aims to bring literacy to some
300 million of the 500 million illiterate young people and
adults In Unesco member states in Asia, Africa and Latin
America.
Unesco has joined in the struggle against discrimina¬
tion in education. A Convention and Recommendation
against Discrimination in Education was adopted by the
General Conferences in 1960, "not only to proscribe any
form of discrimination... but also to promote equality of
opportunity and treatment for all in education." The
Convention came into force in 1962.
In combating discrimination in education, Unesco has
singled out for special attention the problem of providing
full access to education for girls and women. It co¬
operates closely with non-governmental organizations
working to extend education opportunities for women.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

UNESCO AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Contd)
Without distinction of race, colour, sex,
language...
(Article 2)
u nesco's action to combat discrimination ranges
over many different aspects of the problem,
from Its effects in impairing the right to education
to the harm caused by racial discrimination.
In recent years Unesco has been diagnosing the causes
of racial prejudice among young people and finding out
how to prevent such prejudice from developing. Its
Inquiry on this subject among young secondary students
In France, the German Federal Republic and the United
Kingdom can be considered as the first comparative
study of its kind.
During the past 12 years, Unesco has published or has
sponsored the publication of some thirty works on race
questions. To these publications it will shortly be adding
a study by S. Zavala (Mexico) on "The Defence of Human
Rights in Latin America" (16th to 20th centuries) in
the series Race and Society, and also a collective work,
"Industrialization and Race Relations," prepared under
the direction of the Institute of Race Relations (London)
in the series, The Race Question in Modern Science.
The nine booklets previously published in this series
have been re-Issued in one major volume which presents
the points of view of sociologists, anthropologists, biolo¬
gists and ethnologists on the origins and development of
race prejudice, and demonstrates that there is no scien¬
tific justification for racial discrimination.
Unesco plans to carry out and to publish the results
of two further studies. "The Development of Race Rela¬
tions in Africa," a collective work, will include contribu¬
tions by African and non-African specialists. The results
of the second study will be published as a booklet, "The
Economy and Race Relations." (See also The Unesco
CourierOct. 1960on "Racism").
Unesco has also made studies of the ways of life of
certain marginal social groups. One of these "Nomads
and Nomadism in the Sahara," prepared by C. Bataillon,
of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes in Paris, has
made an important contribution to knowledge of noma¬
dism, of the conditions in which it develops and of its
social and cultural consequences. Another example is
the study by J. Ben Davis, of the University of Jerusalem,
on the agricultural communities established in Israel by
the immigrants who arrived there in great numbers after
the second world war.
Thirteen years ago, Unesco published a declaration
in which some of the world's leading specialists in the
fields of biology, genetics, psychology, sociology and
anthropology set down the conclusions of scientific think¬
ing on the question of race. Judging that the time is
now opportune for a fresh evaluation of scientific thought
on this question, Unesco is to convene another internation¬
al meeting of specialists to reconsider the previous
declaration.
Everyone has the right to the protection
of the moral and material interests
resulting from any scientific, literary or
artistic production of which he is
the author.
(Article 27)
Unesco is making a broad
study of new possibilities for
attaining the right to share In cultu¬
ral life. By showing some of the
factors which already give the popu¬
lation as a whole access to cultural
life, Unesco will try to establish a
better and more precise definition of
measures that can assure a broader
and more effective application of this
right.
This study is being made in already
technically advanced countries and in

<0 Rapho-Bornhard Moosbiucgoi
others at present embarking on
programmes of technical development.
Basically it seeks to assess the
potential results that can be attained
through a rapid expansion of mass
communication media (radio, the
press, T.V., the cinema, libraries and
museums), always keeping in mind
the need to maintain the cultural
values of works that will become
increasingly accessible through these
means.
In the field of copyright, where
multilateral Conventions already in
existence have failed to obtain gene¬
ral accession, Unesco has drafted a
Universal Copyright Convention
which lays down that in all states
adhering to it, works and authors of
foreign origin shall enjoy the same
protection as is given to works and
authors of national origin. This
Convention, which came into opera¬
tion on September 16, 1955, estab¬
lished an Intergovernmental Copy¬
right Committee which continues to
watch over the operation and appli
cation of the Convention and over
questions of copyright in general.
Unesco Is currently convening an
African regional study meeting on
copyright at which the newly-inde¬
pendent nations on this continent
will examine together problems of
authors' rights.
Unesco has also recently sponsored
an International Convention for the
Protection of Performers, Producers
of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organizations.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

UNESCO AND HUMAN RIGHTS (Cont'd)
BOUNDLESS
PROSPECTS
OF SPACE
COMMUNICATION
Last year, the General Conference of
Unesco declared its conviction that
space communication offers "boundless
prospects" for advancing Unesco's aims.
The retransmission of radio and TV pro¬
grammes carried out experimentally with
the U.S. satellite, Telstar, (left) has
already revealed the feasability of inter¬
continental communications by this
means. For economic reasons, space
satellites are likely to be first used regu¬
larly in the field of information and later,
depending upon the extent of interna¬
tional co-operation, for educational and
cultural exchanges on a global scale.
Right, a transistor radio brings the
latest news to villagers in Mauritania.
USIS
The right to receive and
impart information and
ideas through any media
and regardless of fron
tiers...
(Article 19)
10
Fifteen years ago, the United Nations Con¬
ference on Freedom of Information declared
that freedom of information "is the touchstone of all the
freedoms to which the United Nations is dedicated."
The United Nations and Unesco have recognized this fact
by their constant efforts to help the people of developing
countries to obtain adequate means of information.
Four years ago, the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights asked Unesco to make a special study of
information facilities press, radio broadcasting, films
and TV in developing countries and to suggest how they
might be improved.
Covering Asia, Latin America and Africa, Unesco's
survey took, as a basic standard that any group of people
should be considered to enjoy the "vital minimum" of
information facilities if, for every 100 persons, it had the
following: ten copies of daily newspapers; five radio
receivers, two cinema seats and two TV receivers.
The inquiry revealed that for some 2,000 million people
in over 100 countries available information media falls
short of this "minimum standard"; in other words, two-

te
UNCSCO - Pioiro hllot
thirds of the world's population is deprived of this basic
right to information.
Unesco then prepared a programme to help the devel¬
oping countries to reach the minimum standard by 1975.
The programme was endorsed in December 1962 by the
U.N. General Assembly which asked nations to consider
it as an element in the United Nations Development
Decade. The General Assembly also asked Unesco to
keep its survey up to date and to continue to further the
development programme by using such means as new
communication techniques to speed up progress in edu¬
cation.
u nesco is carrying out this task In a variety
of ways. News agency development has been
spurred by the setting up under Unesco's auspices of
regional associations of news agencies in Asia and Africa.
Unesco is helping to promote the training of journalists
by granting fellowships and holding regional seminars.
It sends experts to help countries build up their radio,
film and TV services and to train staff in the use of these
media for education. It is now studying how space
communication through man-made satellites may be
used to promote the free flow of information and aid tbe
development of education.
As defined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, freedom of information comprises freedom to
seek, receive and Impart Information and ideas "through
any media." The agreement which Unesco prepared
abolishing customs duties on books, publications and
other educational, scientific or cultural materials has now
been adhered to by 44 countries.
To appropriate International conferences Unesco has
submitted proposals designed to promote free flow of
Information through a reduction of postal and telegra¬
phic charges and of transportation costs for persons
engaged In educational, scientific and cultural work.
Unesco has also introduced a coupon scheme as a
means of reducing currency barriers to the free move¬
ment of educational, scientific and cultural materials and
to the exchange of students, teachers and research
workers. Unesco is helping to Improve and extend tech¬
niques in information media. The reports and studies
which it publishes are alerting public opinion to the ..
obstacles which Impede the free flow of information
between countries.
