THE FIRST
ASTRONOMERS
OF CHINA
& BABYLON
"opular opinion has mistakenly ascribed
to the Mesopotamians and, still more,
to the Egyptians, a profound understanding of astronom¬
ical phenomena. It is indeed a fact that various buildings
in Egypt and elsewhere were oriented on heavenly bodies;
and to people for whom those bodies have no particular
significance this seems to be a mysterious fact implying
scientific knowledge of a very abstruse sort. It really
implies nothing of the kind; it is simply the result of
careful observation of what could not safely be dis¬
regarded.
Mere observation of the heavenly bodies, if carefully
maintained, will suffice to show that their relative posi¬
tions change and repeat themselves in a definite space
of time, and such movements can be related to the agri¬
cultural seasons or may themselves determine the times
for religious celebrations. The sun, the moon and the
planets were gods who, as such, directly influenced man's
fate.
Civil life depended upon the regular succession of days
and months and years, all of which are fixed by the
course of the sun and the moon, and similarly the gods
moving about In the upper spheres bring peace or war
upon earth, destruction or prosperity; their movements,
therefore must be watched and, if possible, interpreted
In the light of experience or analogy.
onsequently from a very early time such
'phenomena were observed and recorded, but
that Is not the same as saying that astronomy begins
early; men's interest in the celestial bodies was calendral
on the one side and astrological on the other. Professor
Neugebauer has defined that matter succinctly and
authoritatively: "Astronomy does not originate with the
recognition of irregular configurations of stars or the
invention of celestial or astral deities. Scientific
astronomy does not begin until an attempt is made to
predict, however crudely, astronomical phenomena such as
the phases of the moon." That attempt came later . . .
Only in the course of the first miUennium B.C. did
Babylonian astronomers succeed in predicting the lengths
of the lunar months and it was only from Babylon that
the Egyptians subsequently acquired such knowledge.
The advance from observation to prediction was reaUy
made impossible for the Egyptian by the elementary char¬
acter of his mathematical system which could not cope
with the elaborate calculations demanded by astronomy.
It would appear that, having once obtained, by very simple
observations, the agricultural and ritual data necessary
to an ordered Ufe, he had no urge to pursue the matter
16 further.
Thus we find in the Egyptian texts no reference at all
Chuzeville, Louvre Museum. Pans
This stele, dating back to about 2300 B.C., depicts
the triumph of Naram-Sin, a king of Akkad. In his
treatment of this scene of historical action, the artist
has achieved a remarkable balance between the dra¬
matic and the decorative. It is the only Mesopotamian
monument of its kind to have survived to our day.
to lunar ecUpses (1); such must presumably have appeared
to the Egyptian as isolated events due to some super¬
natural cause and therefore incalculable and having
nothing to do with the regular course of things.
From China we have, in one Anyang bone inscription,
a very early record of an ecUpse which took place "on
the fifteenth day of the twelfth moon of the twenty-ninth
(1) Professor J. Leclant (France), however, suggests reference
to a passage of the inscription on the Bubastis Gate at Karnak
concerning the year 15 of Takelot II, i.e. c. 820 B.C. IRA.
Caminos, The Chronicle of Prince Osorkon (Rome, 1958),
pp. 58 sq.1: "The sky swallowed not the moon"the interpre¬
tation of which has led to a very considerable flow of ink.

year of King Wu-Tlng," i.e. on November 23. 1311 B.C. (2)
which shows an interest, and possibly a knowledge, ante¬
dating anything of the sort in Egypt. The Inscription
by itself is insufficient to prove that the Interest went
beyond the recording of a striking phenomenon, and the
fact that the record figures in an oracle-text may well
raise doubts as to its scientific value.
But In the Chou records we are told that In the thirty-
eighth year of the reign of the Shang "emperor" Ti-hsin
(1137 B.C.) the Chou ruler Chou-wen-wang ordered a
sacrifice to be offered because "the eclipse happened not
on the right day": it occurred on the sixteenth day of the
month, according to the calendar, instead of on the
fifteenth.
This, If the construction put upon it be correct, surely
implies that as early as the twelfth century B.C. Chinese
astronomers were able to calculate the lunar ecUpses in
advance, and that with such confidence that an error
of twenty-four hours was enough to alarm the authori¬
ties. The Anyang inscription may possibly Imply know¬
ledge two centuries earlier...
he Babylonians, possessing a mathematical
basis for astronomical calculations much
superior to that of the Egyptians, made far greater
progress in the astronomical field and started at quite an
early date to amass a corpus of information which would
ultimately supply the material for science. The earliest
computations were concerned with (a) the duration of
day and night in the different seasons (b) the rising and
setting of the moon, and (c) the appearance and
disappearance of Venus.
From the time of the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2100 B.C.)
onwards the omen tcxLs, which combine astrological fore¬
casts with astronomical observations, prove the careful
attention paid to astral phenomena. (3) Thus the sixty-
third tablet of the great astrological series "Enuma, Anu,
EnlH" which was put into shape between 1400 and 900
B.C. contains a list of the heliacal risings and settings
of Venus during twenty-one years of the reign of Am-
mizaduga; the observations must have been made at the
time, I. c. In the late seventeenth or early sixteenth
century B.C. But what we have here Is simply observa¬
tion which was carefully conducted over a considerable
period; it docs not involve any scientific theory...
The evidence that wc possess Justifies us In saying that
by 1200 B.C. in Babylonia the foundations of real astro¬
nomical research, as defined by Professor Ncugcbauer,
had been well and truly laid. Further it appears likely,
though it cannot be definitely affirmed, that already the
first tentatives steps had been taken in the direction of
scientific thinking over the data which careful observation
had amassed, and that certain rather crude and elemen¬
tary results had been achieved which in the course of the
following mllennlum would be developed into the astro¬
nomical science inherited by the Greeks.
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY
Part II. Chap. VII
(The Sciences)
(2) It should be noted that the date is not accepted by all
scholars.
(3) The character of the "omen texts" can be illustrated here
by two examples; one, dated to the time of the First Dynasty of
Babylon, reads, "If the sky was dark on the first day the year
will be bad. If the sky was clear when the new moon appeared
the year will be happy." A more elaborate text, taken from the
Ammizaduga tablets, reads, "If on Sabatu 15th Venus disap¬
peared in the west, remaining three days from the sky, and on
Sabatu lßth appeared in the cast, catastrophes of kings: Adad
will bring rains, Ea subterranean waters; king will send
greetings to king."
COMMONWEALTH
MEDICINE
... More perhaps than any other art
was medicine in the ancient world
internationalized. A famous Egyptian
doctor might travel far afield to treat an
important patient. Thus Parimachu the
Egyptian was summoned to Asia Minor
to the sick-bed of the king of Tarkhuntash.
Ramses II, according to a late story,
sent his court physician to Hattusas to
cure Bentzesh, the sister-in-law of the
Hittite king Hattusilis it is interesting to
note that, when the doctor failed to drive
out the demon that possessed her,
Pharoah was constrained to send the
holy image of the god Khonsu, by
whose aid the cure was duly effected.
The same Hattusilis, negotiating for a
treaty with Kadashman-Enil II of Babylon,
was at pains to explain away the
embarrassing fact that a Babylonian phy¬
sician who was visiting the Hittite coun
try had been forcibly detained there.
Personal visits of the sort were really
not uncommon, but what more than
anything proves the universality of
medicine is the fact that medical books
circulated freely from one country to
another; Hittite copies of Babylonian
medical tablets have been unearthed at
Bogazhöy, and it is evident that the phar¬
macopoeia and the prescriptions based
upon it .were in some measure the
common property of doctors throughout
the Middle East.
It is this internationalization of medi¬
cine, and the great reputation won by
Mesopotamian physicians, that account
for the adoption by European peoples
(through Greek and later through Arabic)
of numerous Mesopotamian plant-names,
while, on the other hand, the tablets
definitely explain certain plant-names as
being foreign and the herbs consequently
imported, as, for instance, ricinus from
Elam and cardamom from Anatolia.
But while the evidence shows that in
the art of healing there was throughout
the Middle East a certain amount of free
trade in medical service and in medical
knowledge, it must still be remembered
that by common consent the actual drug
was held to be less potent than the magic
rites with which it was administered.
The successful physician was he who
knew both sides of his profession, and it
was because of this duality that there was
a limit to the international character of
medicine. The gods of the different
countries were not the same, and a
charm that worked satisfactorily in Baby¬
lon might fall upon deaf ears in Memphis...
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY
Port //, Chap. VII
(The Sciences)
17
