At Assiut the ancient
capital ot Upper
A NEW UNIVERSITY
IS BORN
Assiut University,
the first to be built
in Upper Egypt and
inaugurated in
1957, will be the
most modern in the
United Arab Re¬
public when finally
completed. Shown
here is a model of
the teaching hos¬
pital complex that
will have 1,200
beds and complete
facilities for the
students and staff.
by S.A. Huzayyin
University of AsmuI
I n 1957 the United Arab Republic established
a new university at Assiut in Upper Egypt.
One of the main problems of a modern university is
how to maintain balance between three functions:
educating the youth and preparing them to assume
their role as leading citizens of their country,
providing the country with a centre of higher thought
and culture, and
making the country's contribution to the develop¬
ment of human knowledge and science through the
pursuit of research.
In highly developed countries the last function may
tend to outgrow the other two, while in developing
countries stress may often have to be laid upon the first.
In some cases too, the second function may also either
be overlooked or overstressed in a way that diminishes
the possibility of national contribution to peaceful human
development through the work of the university.
Prior to 1952, the United Arab Republic had three
modern universities together with Al-Azhar, the tradi¬
tional theological university of the Muslim World. These,
however, were not enough to meet the needs of the
developing country. They were also all concentrated in
the north in the two single large cities of the country,
Cairo and Alexandria.
This meant that in the provinces of the south the young
people were deprived of an equal opportunity to attend
university. Only the well-to-do could afford the long
journey and the costly life of the far cities. Some
800 kilometres extending along the narrow strip of the
Nile valley south of Cairo had no higher educational
services. Not a single institute of higher education was
established south of the capital. Over six millions of the
population had to send their children to Cairo or further
north if they were to get any form of higher education.
Once in Cairo or Alexandria for university education
lasting from four to seven years, students from the
southern provinces tended to look for Jobs in the north
Instead of going back to their home areas. This meant
a regular depletion of human resources. Indeed the
southern part of the country, which was once the seat
of power in ancient Egypt, became badly neglected in
many respects.
The Idea of establishing a university in Assiut, the
capital city of the region of Upper Egypt, goes back to
1949. But the effective step to bring the project into
existence was taken in 1955. After two years of planning
and preparation, two faculties for science and engineering
were Inaugurated in 1957. In Upper Egypt, the High
Dam of Aswan was to be built and schemes for industrial
as well as agricultural development had to follow. We
had to think of the need for technicians to carry out the
vast programmes which were to change the face of this
ancient land. This meant the need for faculties of
science, engineering, agriculture, medicine, veterinary
medicine, business administration, etc.
But the potentialities of the country for the establish¬
ment of such a modern university had to be carefully
surveyed. A new modern university would need, above
all, qualified staff in large numbers for teaching and
research work. It was realized that the university would
have to be built up In stages, and that priorities in setting
up one faculty after another would have to be governed
by needs and availability of staff. It was also decided
to start with the first year enrolment of students in each
faculty and to let it grow year by year.
In 1958 a third faculty, agriculture, was added. In
1960 the faculty of medicine was Inaugurated and in
1961 new departments of pharmacy were added. In the
same year a new faculty of veterinary medicine was
established. This year the faculty of commerce and
business administration will be added. In following years
new faculties for dentistry and for arts (humanities),
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
41

A UNIVERSITY IS BORN (Cont'd)
Campus for 16,000 students
will complete the picture of the university. It ls a plan
which has been carefully prepared and which will take
some 10 to 12 years to Implement in full.
At Assiut there were no buildings available as a per¬
manent campus for the new university. A good secondary
school building was taken as temporary headquarters.
New land was purchased for the campus within easy
reach of different parts of the city, totalling some 370
acres, to comprise the whole campus with its scientific
departments, its recreation and sports grounds and a
university city to .house students and staff. It comprises
also the site for university hospitals as well as an
experimental farm.
Of course for an agricultural country as densely popu¬
lated as ours, it was a pity that the university should
take such space from the arable land. But it was plan¬
ned that once the faculty of agriculture was established, it
should undertake a project of reclamation covering at
least four times as much of desert land in the vicinity.
The reclaimed land would then be handed over to
landless peasants in the area according to agrarian
reform laws. This will not only afford good training
opportunities for our students; it will also show the
local community that the university did not deprive
them of good arable land. It will also help integrate
more Intimately the work of the university with the
efforts being made In the area to raise the standard of
living of the people.
A plan was then drawn up for the
building of a campus. A careful study
was made of present and future
requirements with possibility for expan¬
sion. It was found that the university
would need some 30 buildings for its scientific departments,
apart from the public buildings for library, hospitals,
recreation, etc. The programme was spread over some 10
years for the principal buildings, with an additional two or
three years for the completion of auxiliary Buildings.
A professor of architecture was appointed as head of
the architecture department of the faculty of engineering
and put in charge of the planning of the site and prepara¬
tion of the draft designs for building. Some of the
buildings, such as the hostels for students and the blocks
of flats for the staff, were also designed by members of the
staff.
It is estimated that the total cost of the campus will be
in the neighbourhood of eight million Egyptian pounds.
The programme started late in 1958 with the building of
large workships for engineering (and where most of our
furniture and some of our scientific apparatus is now being
manufactured) and part of our recreation grounds. It
is hoped that . by 1968-1969 the whole campus will be
completed. It will accommodate some 12,000 students
(attending 8 or 9 faculties), and eventually 16,000 students.
The question of style of buildings was also carefully
considered. The idea of a classical style was discarded.
We are building a university in the second half of the
20th century, and feel that it should reflect Its time and
age.
So we adopted a modern style, adapted it to the local
conditions of a warm climate (such as double external
walls, double roof, good orientation to provide insulation,
etc.). The buildings are of a concrete frame, with red¬
brick outside walls and large glass windows, especially on
the shady side.
The purchase of up-to-date scientific equipment ls
necessary for the proper functioning of any university.
As our university at Assiut is composed principally of
"science" (rather than humanistic) faculties,' more
apparatus is needed for this work. That was why we
had to start in our building programme with the work¬
shops, which have so far been able to provide 'us with
some of the simpler apparatus for teaching, as well as
some of the apparatus especially designed for research.
Equipping a scientific department with apparatus needs
very careful planning to avoid waste and make one's
funds go as far as possible. It also Implies other
difficulties connected with obtaining hard currency.
Another problem we faced was that we had to get our
equipment from different countries, East and West. This
entailed special training of technicians and, in some
instances, the sending of technicians abroad, or receiving
the help of foreign technicians for short terms at Assiut.
One other problem which we had to tackle was the repair
of instruments. But the workshops of the university
were of invaluable help in this respect.
It is difficult to estimate the total cost of 'apparatus
for a new university, for this depends on the number of
scientific departments to be equipped and the total of
student enrolment. We have so far invested over
1,500,000 Egyptian pounds. But we are still less than half
equipped in some of our newer faculties.
As for books, we began collecting some during the two
years of planning before we went to Assiut in 1957. We
started with a nucleus of more than 50,000 volumes for our
library. But we found real difficulty in getting back-
numbers of scientific periodicals. The university is
setting up its own press to publish a "Bulletin of Science
and Technology," as well as text books prepared by the
staff and sold to students at cost price.
Staffing of the scientific departments was probably the
most difficult of all our problems. Fortunately, when the
idea of the university was first conceived in 1949, some 50
graduates from the other universities were sent abroad for
Ph. D. work in the various disciplines. They represented
the nucleus of our first faculties. The staff of the
university was then regularly added to year by year from
returning members of missions or by other recruitment
for leading posts. Gradually we also received a small
number of visiting professors from other countries, mostly
through cultural exchange agreements.
In 1955 a vigorous programme for research at universi¬
ties in Europe and America was started. By the summer
of 1962 we already had some 130 men and women doing
research abroad, together with another 40 to follow. Some
of these have already finished their preparation abroad
and are returning to assume teaching posts. Nearly 1,500
At its foundation, the University of Assiut gave priority
to science and 'engineering faculties. Already 500
science and engineering students have graduated to
join those now carrying out development programmes
in Upper Egypt. Below, buildings of science faculty.
42 Cuts show the ancient symbol of the union of two lands. The reed
of Upper Egypt and the papyrus of the Delta are entwined around
a hieroglyph meaning "to unite".

Photos : University of Assiut Bird's-eye view of future campus of the University of Assiut to be completed in 1969-70. Covering
about 250 acres, it will have 30 buildings for science and allied subjects alono and a total student
body of 16,000. Dormitories are at lower right below stadium. Humanities faculty is just above tip
of minaret. Faculties of science and agriculture line the northern edge alongside irrigation canal and
those of engineering and medicine the southern side. At left is the university teaching hospital.
members are now abroad and will occupy teaching or other
posts upon their return. Thus the acute problem of
staffing the University of Assiut is being gradually solved.
Ours was to be essentially a provincial university. It
was decided that our places should be allocated primarily
to students taking their secondary school certificate from
schools in the five southern provinces of the country.
This meant that the new university would alleviate
pressure on the universities in Cairo and Alexandria.
Entry into all universities in the United Arab Republic
Is based upon open competition between students finishing
their secondary education. In addition to the numbers
accepted from the country, 10% of the total is allocated
to students from different Arab and other countries. At
present girls make up 8 to 10% of our enrolment, but the
percentage is steadily rising.
The establishing of our university in Upper Egypt has
provided a new opportunity for girls in this part of the
country to obtain a university education. At present
nearly 80% of our students are from the five southern
provinces of the country. The University of Assiut started
with 500 undergraduate students and some 10 research
students. The total number (including research students)
was nearly 6,000 during the academic year 1962-1963.
As in most other countries, our youth justly feel that
we are becoming an engineering society. So most of our
boys (and many of our girls) prefer to join the engineering
faculty. Next in preference are the faculties of medicine
(and pharmacy) and science.
As already mentioned, Assiut is a small provincial city
of some 120,000 inhabitants. Before the university was
established, the town had limited accomodation for
visitors from outside. It was never really a tourist city.
It was also not in the tradition of its families to accept
strangers as paying guests. So there were difficulties for
the university to establish itself in the city. Living
conditions were not easy for staff or for students.
Eight blocks of new apartment buildings were rented
by the university and converted into hostels for students.
The building plan Included the construction of the
university city already mentioned, to house, when complet¬
ed, some 3,000 students..
An appeal for funds was made and the sum of 65,000
Egyptian pounds was collected from private donations.
This was sufficient to build the first block of buildings
for students. Ten more blocks will follow. Also three
blocks of flats have already been built for 24 families of
the staff. Other blocks will follow. A new housing
scheme was also started by the local authorities two years
ago. So the face of our little town is quickly being
changed. It is estimated that within 10 years or so, the
university will have added (directly or indirectly) to this
provincial city about 20% of Its population. This will give
a new pattern to the social life in Assiut.
Life in the campus ls gradually taking shape. Ours
will be one of the rather rare examples of a complete
campus, comprising both academic buildings and living
accomodation for a section of the staff and student
population. At the same time, recreational amenities are
gradually being added. The recreation grounds were
actually amongst the earliest facilities to be provided. A
stadium ls already being used by students and other youth
of the city. It is in our plan to have all our facilities
open to the public. This includes the stadium, the club,
the halls, the theatre, as well as the public library.
The university has Its own department
of public relations to organize contact
with the local community. Extramural
activities and extension services include
Assiut and the whole region north and
south of it. The faculty of agriculture gives advice and
guidance to peasants and farm groups. The hospital Ls
designed to serve the whole region and to be a centre for
health services and research. Even the workshops of the
faculty of engineering are in the service of any citizen
who wishes to avail himself to their services at cost price.
The university of Assiut ls gradually building up its status
as a provincial institution In the service of the commun¬
ity and the whole neigbourhood.
Yet even this new university is not limited in its ser¬
vices to the area in which it is located. It is in our
tradition in this land to consider ourselves as an Integral
part of the Arab people as a whole. In addition to the
percentage of seats reserved for students from Arab and
other neighbouring countries, these students are accorded
every care to facilitate their stay with us. Already
students from more than 10 countries, coming from as
far as Malaya, are studying in this small university. The
numbers of students and the countries from which they
come are gradually Increasing. This ls a welcome feature
of our university education.
Our university is thus playing an ever-increasing part
in our national life and development, as an Institution
for men and women citizens of a growing nation.
S.A. Huzayyin is Rector of the University of Assiut, United
Arab Republic.
43
