Y LIFE IN ART
Last pages
of Stanislavsky's
spiritual testament
I am no longer young and my life in art is approaching Its last
act. The time has come to sum up the results and to draw
up a plan of my last endeavour in art. As a stage director and actor I
have worked, on the one hand. In the field of production, and, on the other,
In the actor's sphere of Inward creatlveness.
Having tried In the theatre all the means and methods of creative work;
having paid homage to the enthusiasm for all types of productions along
all the lines of creatlveness costume drama, symbolic, Ideological and
others having learned the production forms of various artistic movements
realistic, naturalistic, futuristic, schematized, exaggeratedly simple
(with statuary, drapes, screens, tulle and all sorts of lighting effects)
I have come to the conclusion that all these things are unable to oiler
the background which the actor needs to display his creatlveness to the
full. And while my studies of scenery and stage design convinced me In
the past of its limitations, I can now say that its possibilities arc indeed
exhausted.
The sole ruler on the stage is the talented actor. But I have never
succeeded In finding for him the scenic background which would not
interfere with, but help his complex artistic work. What is needed Is
a simple background, a simplicity created by a wealth of imagination, not
a lack of It. Unfortunately I have not yet learned how to keep the
simplicity engendered by a rich imagination from being even more
conspicuous than very luxurious theatricality. It attracts more attention
than ordinary scenery, to which our eye Is accustomed. We can only
hope that a great painter will one day solve this, the most difficult of all
scenic problems, by creating a simple yet artistic background for the actor.
The situation in the sphere of inner creatlveness is entirely different.
Here everything Is dependent on talent and intuition, and In the
overwhelming majority of cases pure dilettantism reigns supreme. The
laws of acting have not been established, and many think that they would
be unnecessary and even harmful.
A passionate search for truth
urn m
H B IV
í:.S»w_
There Is a very old belief that the actor needs only talent and Inspiration.
There is another opinion, very widespread In our profession, that the
thing most needed Is technique, though, of course, talent Is also acceptable.
Is it not because such people are afraid of genuine emotion and of living
their part on the stage that they are unable to do so?
Nine-tenths of an actor's work lies in feeling the role spiritually, In living
it. When this is done, the role Is almost ready. It Is senseless to leave
these nine-tenths to mere chance. Let exceptional talents feel and create
their roles at once. Laws are not written for them; It is they who write
them. But astonishingly enough I have never heard them say that
technique is unnecessary and that talent Is the only requirement, or that
technique comes first and talent second. On the contrary, the greater the
actor, the more he is interested In the technique of his art.
This need to acquire experience and skill is particularly apparent in
theatrical art. The tradition of painting is preserved in museums and art
galleries; the tradition of literary art In books; the wealth of musical forms
In scores. But the tradition of stage art lives only in the talent and
ability of the actor. This is the sphere of living tradition. This is a torch
which can be passed only from hand to hand; and not on the stage, but
through instruction, through the revelation of mysteries, on the one hand,
and exercises and stubborn and inspired effort to grasp these mysteries, on
the other.
The main difference between the art of the actor and all other arts Is
that other artists may create whenever they are inspired. The actor,
however, must be the master of his own Inspiration and must know how
to call it forth at the time announced on the theatre's posters. This is
the chief secret of our art. Without this the most perfect technique, the
greatest gifts, are powerless. And this secret, unfortunately, Is most
jealously guarded.
With but few exceptions, the great masters of the stage not only do not
try to disclose this secret to their younger comrades, but keep it behind
an impenetrable curtain. The absence of any tradition in this sense
doomed our art to dilettantism.
Among the thoughts and ideas that have reached us are those of
Shakespeare, Molière, the Rlccobonls (father and son), Lesslng, the great
Schröder, Goethe, Talma, Coquelln, Irving, Salvlnl and other law-makers
in our art. But all these valuable thoughts and counsels have not been
systematized and classified. That is why we still lack the sound principles
which could guide instructors in our art. All that has been written about
CONT'D ON PAGE 17
15

"I am a character actor" said Stahislavsky. His capacity for character¬
ization was, indeed, phenomenal. It was due to his clear and precise
understanding of the character he was playing and because beneath
his mask of make-up he was able, without reserve, to express the feel¬
ings of the person he was portraying handsome or ugly, good or
wicked, ridiculous or exalted. These photographs of Stanislavsky
in six contrasting roles illustrate the wide range of his repertoire.
Below, he appears as Argan in Moliere's 'The Imaginary Invalid".
ACTOR WITH
A HUNDRED FACES
Official Soviet photos
16
"A Month in
the Country"
by Turgenev.
"The Living
Corpse" by
Tolstoy.
"Uncle Vanya"
by Chekov.
"Wit Works
Woe" by Gri-
boyedov.
"Lili," an oper¬
etta by Hervé.

)
STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd)
the theatre Is either pure philosophy sometimes very Interesting, aptly
describing the desirable goals In art or criticism which applies to the
value or uselessness of what has been achieved.
These works are valuable and necessary, but not for practical uses, for
they say nothing of how final results are to be achieved, or what we should
do with the beginner or with the over-experienced and spoiled actor.
What kind of "solfeggio" exercises does he need? What scale and arpeggio
does an actor require to develop his creative mood and to live his part?
The exercises he needs should be numbered, as problems are numbered
In an arithmetic book and systematically practised in school and at home.
But books and treatises on the theatre say nothing of this. There Is, in
fact, no method handbook. There are only attempts to create one. but
it is either too early to speak of them, or they are not worth speaking about.
It is obvious that there can be no system for producing inspiration,
just as there cannot be a system for playing the violin like a genius or
singing like Challapin. Both have been endowed with the most important
thing a gift from the gods. But there is something, small yet Important,
equally indispensable both to Challapin and the ordinary chorister, since
they both have lungs, a respiratory system, nerves and physical organism
however better developed in one case than In the other which must
produce sound according to laws of nature. The same applies to the
sphere of psychic, creative life, since all actors, without exception, absorb
food for creation according to these laws of nature, retain what they
receive In their intellectual, emotional or muscular memory, digest these
materials in their artistic Imagination, give birth to the Image and life
of the human spirit, and incarnate It according to known, natural laws
that are Incumbent upon all.
Like a prospector in the wilderness
The creative laws that can yield to our consciousness are few. They do
not play a purely honorary role; they have well-defined professional uses.
These laws should be studied by every actor, for it is only with their aid
that he can set In motion his superconsclous whose essence, It seems, will
forever remain a mystery to us. The more talented the actor, the greater
and more enigmatic the mystery and the more he needs the technical
methods accessible to consciousness; It is by these that he penetrates the
Innermost recesses of the superconsclous to call forth Inspiration.
We must try to understand the perspectives, the goal the younger
generation is seeking to attain. It Is very interesting to live and watch
what is going on in the minds and hearts of youth.
But in this new situation I would like to avoid playing two roles. I am
afraid of becoming a young old man who flatters the young, tries to look
their age and share their tastes and convictions, or fawn upon them. Nor
do I want to play the role of the too experienced old man, who has seen
everything, who Is impatient, Irascible, opposed to everything that Is new,
forgetful of the experiments and mistakes of his own youth.
In the last years of my life I would like to continue being what I am
in reality, what I must be according to the laws that have ruled my life
and my work in art. What am I? What do I represent in the new theatre
of today? Can I, as in the past, fully understand all that goes on around
me, all that enthuses youth?
Organically I feel I can no longer understand much In the aspirations
of present-day youth. One must have courage to admit this. You know
from what I have told you how we were educated. Compare our life with
the life of the present generation of youth brought up amidst the dangers
and trials of the Revolution.
We know from our own experience the meaning of a permanent art and
the path outlined for it by nature, and from our own experience we also
know the meaning of fashions in art and their transitory nature. We had a
chance to see how useful It is for a young man temporarily to turn from the
highway leading to a well-defined future on to a side road and to roam
freely along it. It would be dangerous, however, to leave completely the
highway art has followed from time immemorial.
How can I share with the younger generation the results of my
experience and warn them against mistakes that are bred by inexperience?
When I look back on the road of my life in art, I feel like comparing myself
to a gold prospector who first has to roam the wilderness to find a vein of
gold, then wash tons and tons of sand and rock to get a few grains of the
precious metal. And like a prospector, it is not my labours, my quest and
privations, my joys and disappointments that I can bequeath, but only
the few grains of gold that I found . . .
The above text is extracted from the final chapter of Stanislavsky's "My Life in
Art", written in 1925 and translated into English by G. Ivanov-Mumjiev (.Foreign
Languages Publishing House, Moscow). Stanislavsky wrote an earlier and shorter
version while in the U.S.A. in 1924 and that edition, published by Little, Brown
and Co., is the one known to most English-speaking readers. The Moscow trans¬
lation was published over a quarter of a century later. Another important work
by Stanislavsky, "An Actor Prepares", has been published in the U.S.A. by Theatre
Arts Inc. The publication of the "Works of Stanislavsky" in eight volumes is now 17
¿n progress in the U.S.SJI. under the supervision of the Soviet Academy of
Science Press.

STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd)
Official Soviet photos
" All the work of the Russian actors at the Moscow Art Theatre is admirable," wrote Gordon
Craig, the English actor, stage designer and producer, in 1 908. Whether they are dealing with
an episode of modern life or a fairy story, they display a sure, discriminating and masterly skill."
Above, members of the Moscow Art Theatre listening to Chekov reading from his work, " The
Seagull" in 1898. This was the new theatre's first important success and to this day it carries
a seagull painted on its curtain in memory of its debt to Chekov. Stanislavsky and his actress
wife, Lilina, are seated on either side of Chekov. Standing, far left, is Vladimir Nemirovich
Danchenko, playwright and joint founder, with Stanislavsky, of the Moscow Art Theatre. Far
right, seated, is Vsevolod- Meyerhold, theatrical producer and one of Stanislavsky's disciples.
Right, a page from Stanislavsky's Notebooks, with a sketch and working notes for "The Seagull. "
ACTOR-
PRODUCER
AT
WORK
A<U 'lA zto
I }Tl4lA4 lO^^L+lJ) 1AJ.IA x. t.
U.OU4 xfi.Mj^t'L-tA^
Mm it 3,ij w,tu yifvo
dé
\ lui.j. < <y>..x'j-<¿
HjUL.jí.iyO í^tAl.
¡ " *i e*""t *'
OfCjZ-r.t.jPpC.^.Ç/
Àce tJ-A~4Al*-*.M
. '< :> it /tiC-t.L , t /-itfv_ (S/,..
' ! LL.L'.Lû-i3AiAjûi	iA/.
</uA
\ :
	, J
18

I » ilifl
«K ¡3h
í^V^rs
Vh4 -
" Si - M *
^^^¿ * yj ^A^H
Stanislavsky did not believe
that acting, the kind worthy
of being called an art,
could be left to chance.
The perfection he sought
in acting and in theatrical
production was attained
at the price of repeated
effort, careful reflection and
a scrupulous attention to
details. "There are no
small parts," he once said,
"only small actors." Above,
a scene from Molière's
"Tartuffe," a production
undertaken by Stanislavsky
shortly before his death
on August 7, 1938, but
only presented the follow¬
ing year. Right, in "The
Lower Depths" by Maxim
Gorky (1912), Stanislavsky
(centre) plays the part of
a tramp. While preparing
this play, he and other
members of the cast visited
the place in Moscow where
tramps congregated, to see
exactly how they lived.
The doss-house scenes in
this play created a new
standard in realism for the
theatre of that time. Left,
a scene from "The Govern¬
ment Inspector" by Gogol.

LEAVES FROM STANISLAVSKY'S NOTE
Throughout his life, Stanislavsky jotted down in his note¬
books comments on everyday occurrences as well as his
professional observations and reflections. There are over
100 of these notebooks in the literary archives of Stanis¬
lavsky, now kept in the museum of the Moscow Art
Theatre. Many of the notes, a short selection of which is
published here, appear in more developed form in the
eight-volume collection of his works.
1899-1911
When you play an evil man look for his
good points.
Intuition Is not an ideal guide for every
actor. For instance, when I forget myself
I act badly: I talk too much, I make mean¬
ingless gestures, my voice squeaks, I grim¬
ace and make a hash of everything.
People go to the theatre to be enter¬
tained, but leave it either enriched with
knowledge or with their problems solved;
with questions put into their minds which
they will try to elucidate, or with their eyes
opened to something that happens every
day, but that only a genius has noticed
(In Gogol's The Inspector General, for
example).
So long as an actor is striving towards
an ideal he is an artist; but when that ideal
has been reached' he becomes an artisan.
In order to express silence there has to
be some sort of noise. In order to express
the idea of the emptiness of a street a few
extras have to walk along it. In order
to express gaiety you must show .dullness.
All these moods depend on their relations
to their opposites.
If the producer lacks the sensitivity and
imagination to add even an insignificant
detail that is not shown or that has been
omitted by the author, but which follows
the author's intentions, then he is unworthy
of his calling. Even when working on the
great Shakespeare the producer must invent
details to interpret the author's idea and
convey it more successfully or to help an
insufficiently gifted actor to communicate
the author's thought... for it is impossible
for the author to foresee every chance
element in the complex life of the stage.
I am reproached with underestimating the
importance of the actor and enhancing too
much the role of the author. That is not
so. On the contrary, I extol the importance
of the actor, making him a collaborator with
the author. That is a far more honourable
role than the one actors choose for
themselves when they try to use other
people's creations in order to display
themselves. It is far more honourable, for
example, to collaborate with Shakespeare
than to exploit him.
Critics and public of narrow views who
fail to understand the breadth of a work
of art are frightened by novelty of any
sort; they are afraid of being confused.
They surround art with a mass of rules
and conventions without which they them¬
selves cannot exist.
1912-1918
This morning, December 16, 1912, ex¬
hausted after the performance of "Uncle
Vanya" I felt so reluctant to give last night.
At first it was agony. But the audience
listened so- attentively that it forced me to
act and by the middle of Act One I found
myself under the influence of the excellent
atmosphere reigning in the hall, and played
with pleasure as if in a new and well-master¬
ed part. One has to admit that the audi¬
ence is the third creator of a performance!
Theoreticians butt their heads against
theory and see nothing on the other side
of that wall.
Academicism has no failings, only virtues,
and for that reason it is dead, dry and
lifeless.
An actor's playing is the fulfilment of a
number of creative ends corresponding
to' the author's intentions, and these ends
are only achieved by truly living the part.
Find tasks,
acting.
not by reasoning but by

BOOKS
Sentimentality is bearable up to the point
when it rouses your feeling for creative
work and warms your heart; but the moment
it begins to crowd out feeling, substituting,
sloppy lyricism for real transports of love,
it is bad.
When I am in the auditorium I understand
everything, just what I have to do and
how. I go on stage and at once I become
an idiot who doesn't understand the sim¬
plest thing about feelings and inter-relations.
.To understand, to remember and to feel
these are different domains.
Don't analyse intonation but the emotion
that gave birth to it.
Now it is clear that the crisis of the
theatre of representation and entertainment,
the theatre of spectacle, has already begun
and is inevitable. In terms of outward
effects, in a purely professional sense,
cinematography has defeated the theatre.
Decoration, in the sense of naturalness
(and stylization too), crowd lighting, pro¬
cessions, scenes of everyday life, thun¬
derstorms, wind these are incomparable
in cinematography. In a matter of a few
years there will be sound cinematography
too. Besides, in cinematography those
emotions which are felt by the actor at an
early stage, when the role is fresh, before
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE In 1918 Stanislavsky undertook to improve the dramatic sido
of the Moscow Bolshoi Theatre's operatic productions, rio
set up an Opera Studio which functioned at his homo for
the next seven years. Above, Stanislavsky (seated) with tho
Russian bass, Chaliapin (on left). The portrait is of Anna Pavlova.
During his tours in Europe and the
U.S.A., Stanislavsky was given a
warm welcome and hailed as the
great renovator of dramatic art.
Right, in New York in 1921, he
visits the Paramount Studios during
the filming of "Monsieur Beau-
caire" and meets a star of the
silent screen, Rudolph Valentino
(standing beside Stanislavsky).
The actresses seated on the right
are Bebe Daniels and Lois Wilson.
Far left, Stanislavsky meets Marion
Anderson, the singer, and, left,
dines with George Bernard Shaw.
Official Soviet photos
1
* i ^i
III Vm
¥ ' - Av-*Jni
f i^HH"
à À
UT.>.'
r V
r H¿i
f *
21

TNP-Agnès Varda
A WORLD-WIDE INFLUENCE. Stanislavsky lived to see his ideas adopted in theatres far
from those of his own country. "And his influence is far from spent," writes Jean Vilar, the
French theatrical producer. "The many thousands who flock to theatres each evening in
New York or Moscow, Rome or Paris, London or Berlin, are unaware that much they find to
admire, from the individual play of the actor to the composition and disposition of groups on
the stage, comes from the teaching of Stanislavsky." Above, Jean Vilar (foreground) in a
production of Balzac's "Le Faiseur" presented at the "Theatre National Populaire" in Paris.
Stanislavsky's notebooks <c°f<D
22
his feelings have grown stale and stereo¬
typed, can be repeated again and again.
The actors are constantly seeing themselves
and their work and this gives them a chance
of perfecting themselves...
Shakespeare is so boundless that each
of his works requires its special form of
production.
1. The Tempest stage it as a mystery-
play (god, people, monkey forebears). In
front a chorus (orchestra unnecessary,
chorus of voices without words, with closed
lips).
2. Julius Caesar, Corialanus should be
read as speeches in parliament.
3. The Merchant of Venice Find a fairy¬
tale form. Against a gold background and
a dirty wall.
4. King Lear Against black drapes
where Lear's sufferings are terrible, against
rich tapestry where he is in his glory,
against white where Cornelia is pure,
against red where the evil daughters express
their true selves.
Actors are superstitious because they
place themselves in direct dependence on
chance inspiration.
...Picture of a new theatre, with a mu¬
seum back stage, music, lectures, etc. In
the new theatre the orchestra ought not to
be in the house as now, but in the wings.
Words should become a means, not an
end.
You can imagine, see or hear in your
mind how you or some imaginary person
would act or speak at a given moment in
studying a certain role. These pictures
evoked within himself allow an actor to
copy the thing imagined. In other words,
this way leads to an imitation, a portrayal
of a role. But you can approach a role
in a different way, by putting yourself in
the place and situation of a character. You
can feel your fellow actor at your side, like
the very soul of the character he portrays;
you can then set out to influence, to a greater
or lesser degree, this living soul of the
character your partner is playing. Only
then do you begin to fulfil your task, when
you begin to act instinctively, according
to your experience of life. That is the
path to living one's role, to creative acting.
Actors are always concerned about "how"
they should play, not "what".
Producers make a grave mistake when
they impose their feelings and their own
conception of a role on the actor. That is
to use force. The function of a producer
is something else. He ought above all to
understand the inclinations of the actor,
the designer and all those -who take part
in the performance. He must take from
them all the spiritual creative material they
can offer and then consider what use can
be made of it and how this is to be done.
If he imposes his own feelings he will not
obtain a vital, living substance from his
actors, and out of dead material will come
a dead work.
If a critic has talent he can be a friend
to the actor and help him in his work and
also as an intermediary who explains to
the audience what is good in the actor.
A critic who lacks talent does great harm
even when he praises an actor.
Nothing repeats itself in life. There are
no two persons, thoughts or feelings alike.
The feelings an actor experiences on the
stage to-day are not repeatable to-morrow.
That is why emotion itself can never be
fixed; it has to come afresh.
