HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd)
Volume I of the Unesco-sponsored ' History of Mankind ", which appears this
month in its first English edition, is divided into two parts: Prehistory " by
Jacquetta Hawkes, and The Beginnings of Civilization " by Sir Leonard Wool-
ley, both archaeologists of world-wide reputation. In 920 richly illustrated pages
the first volume takes the reader on a fascinating journey into man's earliest
past through the Bronze Age to the development of civilizations in Sumer,
Egypt and Elam, in Phcenecia, Crete, Anatolia, in India and China. Prehistory
and the Beginnings of Civilization " describes what it was like to be a cave
dweller and Stone Age hunter, a weaver, metal worker and farmer, how tech¬
niques, arts and crafts grew, and how languages and writing systems developed.
It takes the reader back to the first gropings of the early ape-men in Africa and
Asia in their efforts to make tools, control fire and forma language, to the mystery
of the Indus Valley civilization at Mohenjo Daro and Harrapa, to the famous wal¬
led Great City of Shang " which set the foundations of Chinese civilization.
On the following pages, The Unesco Courier is privileged to offer its readers
a few selected passages from the vast colourful tapestry of Volume I of " History
of Mankind ", an international publishing venture of unparalleled importance.
Courtesy of Govt, of India,
Dept. of Archaelogy

THE AWAKENING
he expansion of consciousness is a main
theme of history. Nothing has greater signi¬
ficance than the development and exercise of the human
greatness. This must be the estimate of the humanist;
If it were added that it is through these gifts that God
has made us aware of divinity, then there are few people
in the world who would challenge it.
In man's animal past as one of the primates, the sharp¬
ening of sight at the expense of the more lowly sense
of smell that went with living in trees, contributed to
a heightening of mental faculties; only birds, carnivores
and primates are equipped with a specially sensitive
spot on the retina which provides for great acuteness of
eyesight. When to this sharpness of sight the stereo¬
scopic vision was added, while that habit of grasping
branches and seizing insects and fruit produced a flexible
hand, the way was open for further advance. An ape
or monkey fingering at the same time as it scrutinizes
some unfamiliar object offers a good symbol for the dawn
of both conscious apprehension and skill.
Much has sometimes been made of the great Impor¬
tance for human evolution of the hand with its opposable
thumb; it was important, certainly, but only as the ser¬
vant of a waxing brain. The hands of the higher mon¬
keys would be perfectly capable of the finest skills had
they a mind to set them to work; monkeys could be
watchmakers had they ever conceived the notion of time.
A further stimulus to mental growth was given our
(1) Professor A.C. Blanc (Italy) points out that many authors
have challenged the view that our ancestors left the trees and
only then began to adapt themselves to living in relatively open
country; instead, they consider that life in trees of apes is a
form of specialization which the human species never went
through.
(2) Professor G. F. Debetz (U.SJSJi.) suggests that the use of
the hand in the process of labour activity and of the practical
transformation of objects of nature for the purpose of satisfying
the material requirements of man, conditioned the formation
and development of his spiritual faculties: thinking, attention,
memory; it complicated and improved such psychic function as
sensation and perception. And our ancestors' requirements for
communication, ensuing from joint activities, conditioned inevi¬
tably the beginning and development of speech.
ancestors when they left the trees and a mainly vege¬
tarian diet and began to adapt themselves to living in
relatively open country and eating meat (1). It may be
that the actual chemical constituents of meat were of
benefit to their brains; undoubtedly its nutritive value,
so much greater than that of herbs and fruit, relieved
them of the necessity of perpetual eating.
More important, the need for a creature with a rela¬
tively flat muzzle and lacking sharp claws of canine teeth
to kill, skin and break up animal food must have led
first to the use and then to the manufacture of tools.
Once manufacture had begun, our forebears had stepped
to an altogether higher plane of concentrated visual
attention and manipulative skill. It may be that the
controlled use of the hand helped to develop another
essential human faculty, that of speech (2).
It has been found that movements of the hand pro-
(After Singer et al.)
For many years it was thought that the earliest human species
originated in Asia, but it is now generally agreed that Africa
was the birthplace of mankind. It is in Africa that Australo¬
pithecus (reconstructed above with chimpanzee) the most
man-like of the fossil apes has been found. Australopithecus
walked upright and shaped stone tools a million years ago.

OF THE MIND
by
Jacquetta Hawkes
voke a sympathetic movement of the mouth, and it may
be that a habit of communicating by gesture helped to
Induce the controlled emission of sounds.
Here again, however, there is need to be chary in any
recognition of cause and effect. Just as monkeys and
some other primates have hands capable of executing
skilful tasks were their brains equal to it, so, too, their
lips, palate and vocal chords are probably capable of
speech. It is brain power that is lacking.
It is easy to say that the need for acute vision, the
ability to manipulate, the necessity of cutting up meat,
the purposeful concentration required to make tools all
led to the multiplication of brain cells in hominid and
human skulls, while each multiplication of cells led In
turn to a further advance in functions.
To this we can add the further Idea favoured by many
biologists that "man is a fcctallzed ape," that is to say
that the direction of human evolution was towards
resembling the young and not the mature primate, and
that this postponing of physical maturity gave opportun¬
ity for a longer period of learning and experiment and
further increase in brain size.
AH this Interplay of cause and effect can be made to
seem very convincing after the event. Yet we should
remember that for thousands of years the Egyptians
seemed to have very good reason for thinking that the
rising of Sirius caused the Nile to Hood. It may be that
the ultimate cause of the waxing of the human brain,
of the expanding of consciousness within It remains as
remote from our knowledge as the mountain sources of
the Nile were to the Egyptians.
I
(After Le Gros Clark)
Peking man, a reconstruction of the creature whose remains
have been found in some numbers in the Choukoutien caves
near Peking. Cave deposits proved the ancient human
inhabitants were capable of chipping rough tools and of
maintaining fires for warmth and protection. Their skulls
had a brain capacity just within the modern human range.
F causes are best treated with caution, there
is no doubt that the strengthening of mental
power came with the vast expansion of the cerebral cortex
of New Brain in man. The two hollow hemispheres of the
human cerebrum are so large that they have become
deeply folded and convoluted to house them within the
plates of the skull.
The great size of the frontal and temporal lobes Is
particularly characteristic of man, and they include
among their millions of nerve cells many groups not
enslaved to exact functions but with the storing of
memories and their association. Memory, association,
leading to image-making powers, these are the capacities
necessary for full self-consciousness, for the awareness
of past and future, intelligent anticipation and the build¬
ing of traditions to bind the long life of the race . . .
The self-consciousness that Intensified with the ela¬
boration of the cerebral cortex, making man more and
more aware of his actions and of his separation from
nature, was to take two main and opposing directions.
One was towards controlling the environment. This led
Immediately to tool-making and then on to the whole 9
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd;
A mental legacy from pre-humans
accelerating course of our technical and scientific
advance. Here analysis, the breaking down of the whole
into manageable parts, has been the means, and the
ends are wholly practical and material.
The other direction is towards reuniting the part with
the whole, man with the universe from which his
consciousness seemed to divide him. This way led to
ritual, art, religious faith, mysticism and some aspects
of philosophy. Metaphor, simile, symbolical enactments
and other unifying forms have been the means, and the
ends, essentially, are not practical or material.
The very evident weakness of archaeology as a proper
basis for history Is its helpless dépendance on material
remains and the resulting tendency to over-emphasize
the first of these two great
ways of human endeavour.
Thus, for example, It is not
until the sudden appearance
of art and ritual burial
towards the end of the
Palaeolithic Age that we
have anything beyond the
faintest hint of man's inner,
unifying existence although
undoubtedly this must have
been increasing and re¬
fining even while in his
extraverted and practical
life man went from batter¬
ing pebbles to shaping a
hand-axe.
We can assume at the
intellectual level a growing
ability to categorize and to
draw conclusions from the past
future. At the imaginative level
Women in long skirts figure in
this ritual scene painted on a
cave wall at Cogul, Spain.
(After Burkitt)
to the benefit of the
there must have been
mounting power to picture things (and particularly objecte
of desire such as game animals) when they were not before
the eyes, comparable to the ability to visualize the com¬
pleted tool within the unshaped block of stone.
The beautiful shape of the hand-axe Itself can, indeed,
be used as a proof of the early emergence of an aesthetic
sense. It has even been suggested that the finest of
these tools, those which seem so much more exquisitely
worked than practical necessity demanded, may have
become cult objects like the ceremonial axes of the Cale¬
donian islanders or the very unwarllke silver maces often
brought out on state occasions in western Europe.
Whether or not these implements came to possess some
special Imaginative significance or mana, their satisfying
proportions show that already a quarter of a million
years ago the imaginative mind had its own sense or
Tightness in pure form which, whatever its source, still
holds good for us today.
Consideration of the source of these aesthetic judge¬
ments leads to the question of inherent mental patterns
of all kinds. It may well be that man's feeling that
certain proportions are right or beautiful has always been
derived from his participation in the natural world,
animate and inanimate, organic and mathematical, from
which he emerged.
But beyond that there is a widely held and also
strongly contested view that human beings are born with
certain innate mental forms which have come into being
through the experience of the evolving species. They are
inherited just as the similarly evolved bodily parts are
inherited, but as they are mental they tend to be
expressed in cultural forms, most obviously in religious
fO myths, which although they differ in outward form With
the tone of the culture concerned, often appear to have
an underlying unity that is world-wide and timeless.
These archetypes might correspond on a higher, more
complex plane to the undoubtedly innate sense of aesthe¬
tic Tightness and such universal tendencies as the
grotesque in art, animal forms, dragons and other recur¬
rent artistic manifestations.
Although many people cannot accept this idea of the
inheritance of mental forms, it is surely far more likely
than that we are born with a mental carte blanche.
At the level of instinct we accept the idea readily enough,
even though the instinctual bequest from the past may
be highly complicated.
Weaver birds, for example, after six generations of
having been reared among other birds and deprived of
their own proper nesting material, can still in the
seventh generation weave their ingenious nests when
given the opportunity. At some time in the remote past
this species gradually perfected a most unusual form of
dwelling construction, and the pattern for it has become
fixed in the brain and central nervous system so that it
can be repeated at any time by reference to this "ins¬
tinctive" pattern book.
Surely, then, it cannot be Impossible for man to inherit
patterns at a more imaginative level from the repetitive
experience of twenty thousand generations? Or, having
Inherited them, that he should find expression for them
in myths and other cultural forms?
At least the possibility is strong enough for it to be
unscientific to ignore it, particularly when considering
the diffusion of cultural traits. When two peoples at some
distance from one another possess some peculiar imple¬
ment, design, myth, In common it may well have been
transferred by trade, migration or a spreading Influence.
These contacts should always be looked for, but If they
cannot be detected, then there remains the alternative
that the trait represents two independent expressions
of a common mental pattern.
Whether or not human beings
inherit mental furniture of this
kind, there is no doubt that we
bring with us from the past very
much more than our bodily parts.
Forty thousand years after the
death of the last Neanderthaler,
Homo sapiens still carries with him
a most powerful inheritance of
passions and emotional tendencies
acquired through the ages. Even
inquisitiveness, the desire to explore,
is an emotion proved to exist already
in animals.
Some modern men have liked to
think of themselves as wholly
rational and their fellows as poten¬
tially so, yet others have concluded
that our species is never capable of
carrying out a rationally formed
intention.
The Sorcerer, part
man, part beast, part
divinity, painted and
engraved on a cave
wall in S.W. France.
(From a drawing in the
Musée de l'Homme, Paris)
The whole course of human
history in which so many great
peoples have hurled themselves to self-destruction,
seems in many ways to support this second point of view.
Some rationalists might be happier to have it otherwise,
but if we lost our emotional inheritance with its ener¬
getic power to galvanize the imagination, the whole
creative life of our kind would soon be withered, parched
as a mummy.
Part I, Chapter IV (Mind)
