A BIOLOGIST
LOOKS AT
WORLD CO-OPERATION
SCIENCE
by Norair^ Martirosovich Sissakian
V,
' "I llll "j|j '
~^
10
usis

THE FISHERMAN'S
FRIEND: The chemist,
the biologist, the geolo¬
gist and the physicist
are all keenly Interested
in the sea today and
international co-opera¬
tive research In these
fields ls growing. Efforts
to Increase our food
supply from the oceans
depend not only on the
fisherman but the marine
biologist. Here scien¬
tists on the deck of an
océanographie research
vessel are seen gathering
microscopic specimens
from the sea in the course
of a research cruise.
National Institute of Oceanosraphy, Great Britain
J TjST as life itself depends on biological exchange
for its normal development, so science needs
the exchange of ideas, methods and principles for its own
enrichment and to strengthen the control of man over
nature. Perhaps nowhere does the need for scientific co¬
operation on an international basis emerge with such
clarity as in the field of biology, or, putting it more
broadly, in the field of life sciences.
This co-operation is all the more Indispensable as,
within present-day natural sciences, the biological
sciences are progressively assuming an ever-larger place ;
the part they play in the promotion of welfare for all
mankind is becoming more and more influential. If we
consider the matter in its broadest perspective, mankind
is faced with a number of vitally Important problems,
which we cannot afford to ignore.
With steadily widening economic, scientific and cultural
contacts between peoples, I believe the foremost obliga¬
tion of scientists is the unification of creative efforts for
the successful elaboration of the following scientific
problems:
Assurance of unlimited resources of energy for the use
of mankind;
Enlargement of food resources to meet the needs of
all peoples of the globe in foods of full nutritive value ;
Elimination of all infectious diseases and the creation
of material and hygienic conditions for longevity, along
with conservation of vigour, capacity for work, and
physiological activity at a sufficiently high level;
Exploration of other worlds of the universe, the un¬
derstanding of their laws and the utilization of these
for the welfare of all mankind.
These problems of science, which concern all
humanity, Inspire the scientists of the whole worldthose
true scientists for whom the great power of science must
serve exclusively the Interests of peace, friendship and
happiness of all people. These Ideas and problems must
and should, I believe, serve as a basis for the organization
of international scientific co-operation.
In this respect, we have positive experience to work on.
The co-operation of scientists In the programme of the
International Geophysical Year, the creative work of
scientists from several countries In the Antarctic, the
beginning of large-scale research on marine life within
the framework of Unesco, the experience gained as a
result of mutual agreements on scientific co-operation
among many countries of the world all this represents
an important contribution to mutual understanding and
co-operation between peoples.
International scientific co-operation may be realized in
various ways and at various levels. In particular, the
organization of International symposiums and widely rep¬
resentative scientific meetings can do much In this res¬
pect. For example, the International Biochemical
Congress held In Moscow in August 1961 proved to be a
magnificent forum for the biochemists of the world.
If the problems of securing permanently available
energy resources for all of mankind must be solved by the
efforts of physicists and power specialists, the other prob¬
lems which I have listed will have to be dealt with by
representatives of an intricate complex of biological
sciences.
A number of important problems may be cited which, in ^
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd)
my view, may serve as a basis for international co-opera¬
tion:
The study of forms of life, of laws of reproduction and
the increase in biological productivity of the world's
oceans;
Elucidation of the nature of photosynthesis so as to be
able to reproduce this truly cosmic process otherwise
than in chlorophyllous plant life;
The multi-disciplinary study of the brain.
The study and the utilization of the world's oceans,
like meteorological and geophysical research, is the most
appropriate and the most necessary form of international
scientific co-operation.
The ocean Is the largest integral natural object on our
planet, in which all processes and phenomena are Inter¬
dependent and lnterdetermined. The study of the ocean
calls for co-ordinated research In several disciplines such
as physics, chemistry, biology and geology.
he scientific study of the ocean and of the
problems of its practical utilization must be
treated as a single coherent entity. There must be
no schism whatsoever between theoretical Investigation
and practical problems.
Studies of the physical processes in the watery mass of
the ocean and the interaction between it and the
atmosphere will bring solutions to many problems concern¬
ing navigation, climatic forecasting and the utilization
of the power resources of ocean waters. Chemical and
geological studies of the ocean will lead to the
utilization of its mineral resources; the geological
findings will also result in important progress in
navigation and port-building. Bio-oceanological re¬
search ls necessary for the full and rational utilization
of the vital resources of oceans and for the solution of
navigation problems. A fuller knowledge of the ocean will
help us to develop rational means of protecting the ocean
from pollution, from the deterioration of its biological
resources, and from dangers to the health of mankind.
The present rapid development of such studies is
explained by the fact that this branch of science and its
practical aspects lagged behind others in the past, as well
as by the application of many new methods of research
and the realization of the tremendous scope and signifi¬
cance, from both theoretical and practical viewpoints, of
the perspectives of scientific and economic mastery of the
global ocean.
In working out an International programme for bio¬
logical Investigation of the ocean, the international study
of the Indian Ocean which was started in 1959 and which
should continue for the next 3 to 5 years under the joint
supervision of SCOR (Scientific Committee for Oceanic
Research) and Unesco must be taken Into account because
of its great importance. Yet these investigations should
in no way impede the development of general interna¬
tional research in oceanography within the programme of
the Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission, one of
whose tasks ls to determine the character and intensity
of biological processes which take place in various parts
of the global ocean In other words, to elucidate all aspects
of the biological structure of the ocean.
CONT'D ON PAGE 14
© E. Aubert de la Rue
GIANT
MARINE PLANTS
& PYGMY
The tiniest of seaplants
are mostly invisible to
the naked eye. Their
hidden beauty, however,
is revealed by micro-
photography, through
whose penetrating eye
the cluster of common
algae (right) is seen to
resemble a delicate fan
richly studded with gems.
Fronds of giant seaweed
(left) line the banks of
a fjord on the Kerguelen
Islands in the Antarctic.
Seaweeds have long been
used as a source of
iodine and vegetable gela¬
tin and many kinds are
eaten directly because
they are a rich source of
vitamins and minerals.

13
USIS

direction of wind
-*
SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd;
Mysteries of photosynthesis
The basic task of marine research must be the study
of the character and tempo of biological productivity at
various latitudes and In various parts of the global ocean,
the qualitative and quantitative structure of its plant and
animal life and their biological peculiarities. The process
of production undergoes regular changes according to the
physical and chemical conditions experienced in the
various geographical zones; from pole to pole, from the
shores to the central parts of the ocean, and from its
surface to its depths, the quantitative changes may vary
a hundred-, a thousand-, and a hundred-thousand-fold.
The International programme of biological reseach must
Include the study of plant and animal organisms as
possible carriers and concentrators of radioactive waste
matter, and the phenomena of biocirculation as one way
by which such matter may be dispersed in the ocean.
he biological data thus obtained must form
the oceanological basis for the recognition and
evaluation of fish and other kinds of resources in regions
whose resources have so far been barely used or left
completely untouched. Nevertheless, the tremendous
amount of information collected by international océano¬
graphie programmes should not be kept separate from
practical considerations, such as those which affect the
fishing industry. In no case should incomplete utilization
be permitted of the data obtained In the investigation of
the ocean, for such data can be of use to various branches
of economy, including the fishing industry.
Today the photosynthesis of plants (in which the plants
perform the primary synthesis of organic substances and
store the energy from solar radiation) ls practically the
only primary source of food for all living organisms on
earth, including man.
There ls no doubt that in the future, too, the decisive
role in this area will be played by the natural photo¬
synthesis of plants, for only the cultivation of highly
j 4 productive plants over tremendous territories can guar¬
antee the abundance of food needed for the world's
population no matter what its size, and can satisfy the
needs and tastes of man in respect of the composition
and variety of such food supplies.
At present, the green plants of the globe create through
photosynthesis hundreds of times more organic substances
than are needed as food by the population of the Earth.
Even so, the problem of food resources Is one of the most
acute problems of contemporary mankind. This problem
has social and biological-technical aspects.
For example more than 90 per cent of photosynthetic
production occurs in the plants of seas and oceans and of
forests and prairies, yet the percentage of this production
used for food is extremely low (about 0.02). Cultivated
plants produce only 10 per cent of the total photosynthetic
production, but the proportion of utilization of this pro¬
duction for food is high: the cultivated food and fodder
plants yield not less than 80 percent of the food used by
human beings.
Nevertheless, this production does not fully satisfy the
food requirements of mankind. Furthermore, to the prob¬
lem of assuring food supplies of the requisite nutritive
value for present generations must be added that of
providing for the constant growth of the population. For,
after all, It is the potential products of photosynthesis and
the extent to which mankind can utilize these products
for food that will determine the population potential of
the globe and its standard of living.
For this reason, the photosynthesis of plants, the in¬
crease of photosynthetic production and the control of
plant photosynthesis as a source of food are among the
most important problems of mankind.
The adequate, rapid and most advantageous solution of
the problem of photosynthesis in the above context
depends to a large degree on the co-ordination of research
on an international scale. Let us consider the following
examples:
According to contemporary calculations which,
however, are neither precise nor final about 80 per cent
of the total photosynthetic production of plants of the
globe is carried out by the photosynthesizlng organisms
of seas and oceans (mainly unicellular seaweeds).
CONT'D ON PAGE 16

___ WËÊÊÊk
Painting by David Pratt repro¬
duced from the book "Oceans",
produced and © by Geographi¬
cal Productions Ltd., and pub¬
lished by Paul Hamlyn, London
(50/-); U. S. edition entitled
"Seas. Maps and Men", pub¬
lished by Doubleday (S9.95).
LIFE LINES IN THE SEA
Present knowledge of large parts of the oceans is still pitifully small.
Only within the past few decades have we begun to understand some
of the processes taking place in their depths. The most important of
these from man's viewpoint, since it affects the food harvests from the
sea, is the cycle of food chains shown here in coastal and oceanic waters.
(1) As marine animals die and decompose, their remains sink to the
deeps and are reduced into salts by bacteria. (Creatures shown at the
bottom are "garbage eaters" only found in the depths of the ocean.)
Upwelling of deep waters returns the salts to the surface where (2)
floating masses of microscopic green plants (phytoplankton) turn them
into food by photosynthesis through the light of the sun. This "grass"
of the sea is then eaten (3) by the smallest floating animals and these in
turn become food for "carnivorous" Zooplankton (4). The final food
chain (5) runs from tiny fishes through progressively larger creatures
to sea mammoths like the sperm whale. Here the cycle begins again.
15

SCIENTIFIC CO-OPERATION (Cont'd;
Exploring the workings of the brain
16
But this production ls used by man as food almost
exclusively through Industrial fish and other animals, by
way of complicated and often circuitous food chains.
As a result the coefficient of utilization of the photo¬
synthetic production of seas and oceans for food for man
is so small as to be almost negligible. This situation is
made worse by the total absence of attempts to regulate
the photosynthetic activity of phytoplankton of seas and
oceans, the lack of serious attempts to reconstruct and
Improve the food chains, and also above all by the pri¬
mitive methods used to bring In the harvest of fish and
animals, which are both insufficient and often predatory
In character.
Finally, it is important to determine the extent and
possibilities of regulating and utilizing the photosynthetic
production of oceanic vegetation. This potentially tre¬
mendous source of food and of other valuable material for
man must no longer remain neglected as It has done in
the past.
> As to plants on the earth's surface, especially culti¬
vated food and fodder plants which in the future, too,
will constitute the main supplies of food for men, the
basic factor determining their possible and final produc¬
tion is solar radiation energy, the principal force of the
process of photosynthesis. In fact, all agriculture
constitutes a system of processes the object of which is
the utilization of solar radiation energy to form organic
substances with the help of photosynthesis.
ur knowledge concerning the solar radiation
energy which can be used for photosynthesis
in various zones of the globe and on the globe as a whole
ls far from complete and certainly Insufficient.
To change this present unsatisfactory situation calls
for broad unified efforts in blo-actinometrics over as large
areas of the globe as possible.
In the final analysis wide-ranging and well co-ordinated
studies in photosynthesis and in the optimum use of solar
radiation energy for this purpose, will open up for man¬
kind unlimited possibilities for the solution, on any scale
desired, of the most important biological and technical
problems. Complete, rapid and radical solutions to these
problems will only come through unified efforts of scien¬
tists within a broad framework of international co-opera¬
tion.
The exceptional significance of cerebral activity in the
history of man, in his productive efforts, his cultural life,
his education and in so many other fields, is drawing more
and more scientists to study of the workings of the
human brain.
No matter how successfully we try to "relieve" the
human brain by such means as the automation of
industrial processes and the use of computing machines,
no matter how much we improve conditions of life, the
growth of science and technology makes more and greater
demands on the activity of the human brain.
In this respect, special recognition is now being given
to the new field of neuropharmacology or psychophar-
macology as It is called which has developed as a result
of successful studies concerning the functions of separate
brain centres, their interrelationship, their reaction to
drugs, as well as of specific metabolic processes in various
parts of the brain.
Drugs have been discovered which, by changing the
metabolism of specific regions of the brain, raise or lower
the tonus of the cortex, bring about changes in behaviour
and affect the activity of Internal organs. Medicine has
acquired potent means for the treatment of a number of
psychic diseases and epilepsy. And there is no doubt that
if they continue on this path scientists in the near future
will acquire even more effective means and methods for
the directional regulation of brain activity.
H| ere we refer not only to the treatment of brain
diseases and their prevention in hereditarily
tainted persons, but also to the re-establishment of the
complete and efficient working of the brain in persons
with neurotic tendencies and insomnia and the treatment
of narcomanias (alcoholism, caffeinism, etc.).
Furthermore the development of contemporary science
and technology stimulates the need to find ways of
increasing the working efficiency of the brain and of
boosting intellectual activity. In other words, we must
find ways of raising the speed of memorizing and the
extent of memory, of fighting against premature brain
fatigue and of maintaining a normal tonus of nervous
activity.
It is obvious that apart from other general measures
this will be achieved through action on the metabolism in
the central nervous system and the ability to regulate it.
Particularly difficult conditions, usually referred to as
extreme conditions, are occurring more and more
frequently during the working activity of man. Here, too,
methods affecting the nervous system, based on neuro-
physlological and neuroblochemical studies, should play
an important role along with general measures to safe¬
guard the normal activity of the brain.
All these problems are extremely complex; not only are
those sciences which must work directly for their solution
challenged but other forces must also be brought to bear
if we are to reach successful solutions rapidly. Scientists
of different countries who work in this field must co¬
ordinate efforts in the further study of the mechanisms
which regulate the activity of the brain and In the search
for new directional means which would have no side
effects on the basic nervous processes in the brain of man.
While scientists of the Soviet Union are ready to share
the results of their investigations, they are also eager to
learn what is happening in the institutions of other
countries. Thus every encouragement should be given to
the work of international scientific conferences, congresses
and symposia for each one is a step towards international
scientific co-operation and towards the development of
friendship and mutual respect among the representatives
of science from all countries of the world.
Norair Martirosovich Sissakian is Vice-President of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and Chief of its Biology
Branch. A leading Soviet biochemist, he has carried out
research on enzymes in the metabolism of organisms and
in the cell structure of plants. He is a member of the
Executive Board of Unesco.
