THE OUTLAWING OF
INDIA'S CASTE SYSTEM
by Humayun Kabir
NÍEVER before in history has there been such
recognition of the rights and duties of the
ordinary citizen as there is in this century.
In spite of the teaching of religions to the contrary, all
societies in the past have been hierarchic in which a
minority enjoyed privileges at the cost of the majority.
Race, colour and sex have In the past been the basis of
discrimination within and among communities. Different
conceptions of human rights could and sometimes did
subsist side by side and because of lack of communica¬
tions failed to coalesce or influence each other.
Today such a state of affairs is unimaginable. Whatever
happens in one corner of the globe has immediate reper¬
cussions on all other parts. There can therefore no longer
© Richard Lannoy
be divergent conceptions of human rights. Any charter of
human rights today must be a charter on a global scale.
Such a charter is the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
The great religions of the world have perceived the
identity of human rights and duties from the earliest
times. Though quite early in the history of India caste
became an essential feature of the Hindu community,
Hindu religious insight has always recognized the dignity
of the individual by Identifying the human soul with the
Absolute. Buddhism with its doctrine of flux and the
conception of Nirvana, Christianity With its enunciation
of the Fatherland of God and Islam with its emphasis
on the brotherhood of man have all proclaimed the same
doctrine with equal and sometimes even greater force.
12
Women pilgrims
from Maharashtran
in Western India ar¬
rive in Benares, the
sacred city of the
Hindus. These coun¬
try-women wear tra¬
ditional heavy silver
anklets and they have
tied up their saris like
trousers to give them
greater ease when
walking. In India
today, the Constitu¬
tion affirms complete
equality of rights for
all citizens what¬
ever their religion,
race, caste or sex.

Today, in schools the world
over, new generations learn
the lessons of human rights.
By instilling the recognition
and respect of these rights in
the classroom, the teacher
can do much towards dispel¬
ling deep-rooted social and
racial prejudices. In India,
"untouchability" on the basis
of caste has now been abo¬
lished and its practice in any
form is forbidden. Right, a
teacher in a village on the
Upper Ganges reads to his
class from a book written in
Hindi, a language used by
over 100 mjllion people in
India. The painted mark seen
on his forehead shows that he
belongs to the Hindu religion.
Raphe- <0 Louis-ri6d6tic
All religions have declared that injustice against one
man Is an offence against all men. The Indian religions
carried this doctrine still further and held that an offence
even against an animal or a plant is a sin. One may add
that apart from religious considerations, self-interest, if
not ethics, has from the earliest times taught man that he
should refrain from doing unto others what he would not
like being done unto himself. Without this recognition of
the rights of others, there would have been no civil society.
In spite of the fact that mutuality of rights and duties
is the basis of human relations, man has often sought to
claim rights for himself and deny his duties to others.
Till the modern age, consent of the ruled was assumed
rather than sought for. With the spread of the democratic
principle, this has changed and today all progressive
countries have written into their Constitutions certain
fundamental rights and safeguards to preserve the dignity
of the individual and secure social justice to all. The
preamble of the Indian Constitution affirms its determi¬
nation to secure for all citizens: "Justice social, economic
and political; Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith
and worship; And to promote among them all fraternity;
Assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of
the Nation."
This reaffirmation was the more necessary in India, as
our practice has often deviated tragically from the ideal.
I need refer only to the disabilities which arose out of the
institution of caste. In origin and intention, though not
In actual operation, caste was a device for enabling
different races and individuals to live together in har¬
mony. Individuals as well as families could in the earlier
phases pass from one caste to another. Caste in its earlier
phases also helped to mitigate the economic conflicts
which so sharply divided nineteenth-century Europe.
Whatever may once have been the justification of caste,
it had already become an Institution of oppression by the
time the Buddha appeared. His was one of the first nota¬
ble revolts against caste. Ever since, Indian religious
teachers and reformers have fought it. The South Indian
Nayannars denied It In the first mlllenlum after Christ.
Sankaracharyya, often regarded as the champion of
orthodox Hinduism against Buddhism and all other here¬
tical creeds, ls believed to have honoured an untouchable,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

OUTLAWING CASTE (Cont'd)
Prejudices die hard
14
a man of the lowest caste in the Hindu social hierarchy.
The impact of Islam In the middle ages gave an Impetus
to the movement against caste and fostered a religious
renaissance based on the dignity of man. Great reformers
like Ramanand and Kablr, Nanak and Chaitanya sought
to break down the barrier of caste and judge individuals
for their intrinsic worth.
The advent of Europe on the Indian scene also helped
to undermine the rigors of caste. Starting from Raja Ram-
mohan Roy, a succession of social, political and religious
leaders fought to diminish the rigors of caste, if not alto¬
gether to abolish it. Names like those of Vidyasagar and
Ranada, Shraddhanand and Vivekanand readily come to
one's mind.
ne of the most powerful poems of Tagore
Gitanjali attributes the misfortunes of India
to the evils of caste. Gandhi threw the whole weight of
his personality against untouchability and caste and
staked his Ufe to restore freedom and equality among
all members of the Indian community. It is therefore
not surprising that the Indian National Congress has
accepted the eradication of caste as one of its major
goals.
The declaration of the equality of rights and duties for
all citizens in the Indian Constitution ls therefore a direct
outcome of the teaching of Indian seers from the days
of the Buddha. In the modern period, voluntary agencies
in all parts of the country have worked to create a new
social consciousness based on the equality of man.
One may add that modern developments in technology
had in any case created a situation where caste and
untouchability had become obsolete. Modern modes of
transport compelled close contact among people of diffe¬
rent castes, communities, races and creeds. Industrializa¬
tion forced men and women to Uve together regardless of
caste. The growth of towns led to increasing anonymity
and offered the individual an opportunity of shedding
disabilities of caste.
OME ideological as well as technological consi¬
derations have combined to enshrine the con¬
cept of natural justice and respect for the individual in
the Indian Constitution. Of the many article dealing
with human rights, the following are of special interest:
"The state shall not discriminate against any citizen on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or
any of them."
"No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any
disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to
access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of
public entertainment ; or the use of wells, tanks, bathing
ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained wholly
or partly out of state funds or dedicated to the use of the
general public."
"There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens
in matters relating to employment or appointment to any
office under the State."
"No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be
ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect of any
employment or office under the State."
"'Untouchability' is abolished and its practice in any
form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability
arising out of 'Untouchability' shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law."
"No citizen shall be denied admission into any educa¬
tional institution maintained by the state or receiving
aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, language or any of them."
"The State shall promote with special care the educa¬
tional and economic Interests of the weaker sections of the
people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social
injustice and all forms of exploitation."
As a further step towards the eradication of the social
disability of the so-called lower castes, the Untouchability
(Offenses) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955) became law on June 1,
1955. This Act provides for the punishment for the prac¬
tice of "Untouchability," for the enforcement of any
disability arising therefrom and for matters connected
therewith. Offenses under the Act, on the grounds of
"Untouchability," are punishable with imprisonment.
I n a democracy, the outcome even of legisla¬
tion depends ultimately on the will of the
people and on the determination and effort of the back¬
ward sections themselves. Prejudices die hard and quick
results cannot be expected. The surest, though not the
quickest, way is therefore to make education broadbased
and extend to all neglected classes the benefits of gene¬
ral, technical and professional education. A programme
for the purpose was taken up even before the Consti¬
tution was adopted and it has been intensified since then.
With the development of educational facilities all round
and the growth of industries and cities, it can be con¬
fidently expected that "untouchability" will vanish before
long. The major burden for bringing about a change in
outlook depends on the teachers. They will have to deve¬
lop a feeling for Human Rights in the minds of the rising
generations through precept and, even more important,
practice. The U.N. Charter will prove a most valuable
tool for teachers in this work, for here we have a for¬
mulation of rights and duties which apply to all men in
all countries of the world. Although not enough has been
done In schools in India and particularly in teacher train¬
ing establishments for spreading the lessons of the Char¬
ter of Human Rights, it is my earnest hope that the
15th Anniversary celebrations of the signing of the Decla¬
ration will give a fillip to this programme.
In the words of our President, Sarvepalli Radhakrish-
nan, "The Commonwealth of humanity has no written
Constitution; it is based on community of ideals, freedom
and dignity of the individual, rule of law, economic
opportunity for all citizens and love of peace."
Humayun Kabir is Minister for Scientific Research and
Cultural Affairs of the Government of India. A distin¬
guished writer and educator, Professor Kabir is the au¬
thor of many works on philosophy, poems and shaft
stories. His article and the review of Unesco's work for
Human Rights (pages 6-11) are taken from a neio United
Nations publication, "Teaching Human Rights" (2nd
edition, 1963), a handbook for teachers in elementary and
secondary scliools. (Price: $0.35.)
