m. s -J
ROUSSEAU'S
MESSAGE
J^kJ FOR OUR
mSk wt WORLD TODAY
Vj \ by Lourival Gomes Machado
1) y Director of Unesco's Dept. of Cultural Activities
:
A bust of Jean-Jacques Rousseau
by the 18th-century French
sculptor, Jean-Antoine Houdon.
© A. Acquadro, La Neuveville
T:he commemoration of the 250th anniversary
of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's birth coincides
with the bicentenary of two of his major works, Emile
and The Social Contract. It also has a special character¬
istic rarely encountered in anniversary celebrations of
this kind actuality.
Mr. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco, had this
fact in mind when, addressing the world Round Table
organized at Royaumont near Paris by the French Natio¬
nal Commission for Unesco, he declared last year, "to
reread Rousseau is to go directly to the heart of today's
problems." By associating itself, both directly and in¬
directly with this celebration and with several similar
events, Unesco has affirmed clearly and unequivocally its
belief in the validity for our own time of the great themes
dealt with by Rousseau.
These themes are strikingly up-to-date and are cer¬
tainly destined to remain so until such time as man every¬
where has fulfilled his multiple possibilities. This can only
be accomplished by man through a better knowledge of
himself.
However, we today should not be intimidated by such
a wealth of ideas. For Rousseau's works have a perfect
unity, as surprising as this statement may seem regarding
an author whose "lack of method" was so often evoked
by his contemporaries and by succeeding generations.
Modern critics, though, have come to see the unity of
Rousseau's work only after long, patient study carried out
with sympathy and understanding, and unmindful of the
consequences which Rousseau's ideas at once carry with
them. These consequences are inescapable and compel us
to abandon the misty, innocuous realms of pure
speculation.
Fortunately, the reading of Rousseau can begin with any
one of his works without in any way interfering with an
understanding of his philosophy. The reader can start
with Emile or the first Discourse or a Letter to Christophe
de Beaumont, The Social Contract, The New Eloisa or the
Essay on the Origin of Languages. Each of these texts
introduces the reader to one of the main themes of Rous¬
seau's philosophical point of view. And all these works in
their sweep form part of one complete whole, for as
Rousseau said in defining the purpose of his meditations:
"It is man that interests me." That is why most readers
of Rousseau who want to find that aspect of his work
most significant to us today are inclined to choose first
his treatment of the theme of equality.
For perhaps no one has given to the idea of equality
between men a greater world impetus than did Rousseau
and the power to instil in every individual respect for all
men wherever they may live and whatever their status.
In Rousseau we find the first modern definition of man
in terms of his intrinsic worth, and henceforth the mere
fact of being a human being gave one the right to have
an education and knowledge of others, human rights and
the esteem of one's fellow men, regardless of origin, race
or creed.
It is this message which explains why Rousseau's ideas
swept across frontiers and why everywhere they kindled
the torch of new freedoms which though ever latent,
nevertheless remained ignored and unfulfilled.
T:his great theme of the equality between the
peoples of one nation is still in many ways
more a hope than an accomplished fact; and it has found
its contemporary response in the deep preoccupation of
our day to put an end to the inequalities between nations
and people, as Unesco for example, is trying to do.
How many persons and even whole communities are still
deprived today of certain fundamental human rights,
have no opportunity for schooling and are constantly
exposed to disease and hunger. All those whom history
has neglected in their chance for economic security and
development; all those who, more than others, have
remained outside the pale of man's greatest scientific and
intellectual conquests because of circumstances beyond
their control or hapless chance.
Rousseau's revolutionary ideas will continue to live for
so long as such inequalities have not been vanquished.
And for those who finally achieve this position of equality,
Rousseau's words will sound a note of caution to warn
them how fragile their victory can be.
Only the joint efforts of all nations can guarantee that
all men will be equal as they originally were as members
of the same species Homo Sapiens.
From here, the unity which binds the writings of Rous-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

MESSAGE FOR TODAY (Cont'd)
Jean-Jacques and
Unesco's ideals
seau leads us to a new theme on the problems of civiliza¬
tions. This subject is as modern today as the previous
one and its significance to man was also dealt with by
Rousseau with admirable depth.
Rousseau stressed the fundamental unity of all men
despite the different civilizations which society has
developed on our planet down the ages. Above individual
societies of men he saw a single, universal humanity that
is, simply humanity itself.
At a period in history when the foreigner from a far-off
land was considered at best as a "noble savage", Rousseau
rejected the idea that man could ever be foreign to his
fellow men and proclaimed that universal fraternity was
their one common denominator.
This idea of fraternity which Rousseau inspired was to
have deep repercussions, not only in the emotional
upheavals of the Romantic Period, but in the struggle for
democratic ideals which is still going on.
Perhaps the finest homage to Jean-Jacques Rousseau
in the past year's commemorations was paid by Claude
Lévi-Strauss when he saluted Rousseau as the first to
realize that "in order to rediscover one's own image as
reflected in others, one should first reject the image of
oneself".
For the only satisfactory foundation on which frater¬
nity can rest is the world-wide recognition of the principle
of equality. This is the ultimate purpose and goal of all
today's efforts for greater international understanding,
and to which Unesco has been unceasingly committed.
In celebrating the 250th anniversary of Rousseau's birth,
we are also marking the 200th anniversary of both The
Social Contract and Emile. It is difficult in this connexion
not to mention, even if only in passing, the important
place (indeed now the first place) accorded to education
by Unesco as part ot its great cultural objective. For the
principle of education as Rousseau conceived it has today
found acceptance everywhere in our modern world.
R;
22
ousseau insisted that heart and mind, the
irrational and rational, all played their part in
man's great urge to learn about himself and the world.
He considered this urge ever-present, eternally reborn and
revitalized, and strengthened by man's unending search
for the origin of things.
From the moment he won the essay prize offered by the
Dijon Academy, Rousseau was opposed to jurists and
philosophers, as Indeed he was to the wave of rationalist
thinking in the 18th century. He attacked the jurists and
philosophers for making no distinction between man's
fundamental nature and the accidental existence he is
forced to lead twisted and contorted by a thousand and
one forms of inequality.
Nor did Rousseau flinch from later attacking even the
Encyclopedists, including those who sincerely liked and
admired him. For he felt they were little more than the
stewards of an enlightened elite which regarded itself as
the sole guardian of the struggle against the injustice
maintained by the authorities in power.
And Rousseau realized that liberty and equality as well
as the enormous task of education could no more be left
in the hands of those who held power and denied justice
than in the hands of those who held the privileges of
rank or the monopoly of knowledge.
Today, once again, the peoples who have recently
acceded to independence have awakened to the need for
educating their young as the very condition for their
social stability and their social progress. Thus, far from
being outmoded, the tasks laid down by Rousseau still
loom large before us. The dream of the solitary dreamer
has become the fabric of our political and social structures
as it has that of our everyday action. For years to come
Rousseau's ideas will continue to inspire all those whose
task it is, as he himself said, "to help men to establish
their rights."
Writing of his exile in Motiers, Switzerland, Rousseau related
in his Confessions : "I continued to walk quietly through the
country wearing' my fur bonnet and long coat, surrounded by
the clamours of this scum of the earth and sometimes by their
stones." Engraving (right) shows Rousseau in the situation he
described. But history was to offer him a striking posthumous
victory over those who tried to stifle his words. From the time
of the French Revolution his influence was felt unceasingly and
his popularity became immense. Above, portraits of Rousseau
and Voltaire used here to illustrate an 18th-century calendar.
* ,
M HIM
1 I -.1 ."! 1 ;I-i I I I I
1 M 111

THE ROAD FROM
PERSECUTION
TO APOTHEOSIS
Below, Rousseau's portrait flanked by those of Voltaire and Benjamin
Franklin. Grouped under the title, "The Torch of the Universe", they
were used as a medallion decoration on a box made during the revolu¬
tionary epoch. Left, The Apotheosis of Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Sixteen
years after his death his remains are transferred in state to the Panthéon.
Photos Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
23
