I n the ancient French cathedral city of Reims
I lives a family which can look back over four
centuries of unbroken dedication to a great artistic
craft the design and execution of stained glass windows.
The history of the Simon family as makers of stained
glass began In the 16th century when Paul Simon settled
in Reims and opened a workshop in the shadow of the
soaring Gothic cathedral. Here he began to work in
stained glass an artistic craft that originated In anti¬
quity and gradually spread throughout Europe.
Paul Simon could hardly have foreseen that his humble
little workshop would survive him by many centuries and
that in time it would become one of the most highly es¬
teemed of all places where stained glass is made. In
founding it, he also created a dynasty of artist craftsmen
who handed on the tradition from father to son unin¬
terruptedly down the years.
A few years ago it looked as though the famous
workshop in Reims would pass into other hands. The
head of this oldest established firm of stained glass makers
in France, Jacques-Paul Simon, was thinking of retiring
and he hoped his son would succeed him. But Luc Simon,
a young painter, told his father that he had decided not
to follow the family tradition. Instead he wished to
devote himself exclusively to painting.
This was a hard blow for his father. It now seemed
almost certain that the dynasty would come to an end.
Then Jacques Paul's daughter, Brigitte, an art student
in Paris, stepped forward. "Ill try to carry on the work,"
she told her father.
Jacques-Paul Simon accepted immediately, and Brigitte
left the art school In Paris and came to the workshop
in Reims. She began her apprenticeship with enthusiasm
and from the energy and talent she displayed. It was soon
clear that she had the makings of a first-class artist In
stained glass, one worthy of the family name.
These expectations have since been confirmed and
today Brigitte is in complete charge of the workshop.
Nowadays her father only pays occasional visits to the
workshop to inspect with pride and satisfaction the work
Brigitte ls doing. Brigitte shares this work with her
husband, Charles Marq, a former student of philosophy
who, when he married, also decided on a change of career,
and who has since become a fine stained glass artist.
Examples of the skill and artistic talent of the members
of the Simon family who ran the workshop in the 16th,
17th and 18th centuries are recorded in the family archives
and preserved In the windows of many French churches.
However, perhaps the most striking achievements were
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
17

STAINED GLASS (Cont'd)
CARRYING ON THE
FAMILY TRADITION
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris
18
In the workshops where the
ancient art of stained glass
is still maintained today,
over 1,400 different colour
tones are used. Above left,
Jacques-Paul Simon, who used
600,000 fragments of shatter¬
ed glass as a basis for restor¬
ing the war-damaged windows
of Reims Cathedral, examines
some glass samples. Left, his
daughter, Brigitte, works on
a window that will be placed
in the French church of Vitry-
le-Francois. Above, Brigitte
preparing a project for a

new window. She has execut¬
ed windows based on designs
of such well-known artists as
Chagall, Joseph Sima, Braque
Bissière and Villon. Below,
the Simon family team in the
workshop founded by their
ancestor, Paul, in the 16th
century. Right, the great
south Rose Window in Reims
Cathedral. An entirely new
window, it was executed after
the First World War by
Jacques-Paul Simon, to replace
a 16th-century window des¬
troyed in a bombardment.

Paul Almasy, Paris
Marc Chagall, at work on
a series of windows for
Metz Cathedral, is watched
by Brigitte Simon and her
husband, Charles Marq.
This husband-and-wife team
executed all the windows
for the Synagogue in Jeru¬
salem which were also
designed by Marc Chagall.
STAINED GLASS (Cont'd)
Save the old & create the new
those of Pierre Simon in the 19th century and of Jacques-
Paul, the present head of the family, in the 20th.
About 1830, Pierre Simon, who was then responsible for
the upkeep of the stained glass in Reims Cathedral,
decided to make records of every panel in these windows.
He did so on paper applied directly to the panels which
he had previously coated with a light oil painteasily
removable afterwards in the appropriate tint. He thus
obtained a complete record of the leads, the outlines of
the figures and designs in the windows and even the half
tones. The method also enabled him to work unhindered
by opacities due to dirt or poor transparency.
All these records were carefully stored in the family
archives and later, Pierre's son, Paul, completed his
father's work by making a precise colour catalogue of
every individual piece of glass.
A few years later all these records were an invaluable
aid to the Simon family. In 1866 a great storm damaged
the cathedral, shattering the great Rose Window above
the central portal and leaving it full of gaping holes.
From the detailed Information collected by his father and
himself, Paul Simon was able to make a perfect restora¬
tion of the damaged window.
Half a century later, a similar work of restoration,
though on a much larger scale, was carried out by Jac¬
ques-Paul Simon, then at the start of his career. The
First World War was raging and Reims was close to the
front line. In April 1917 a violent bombardment shattered
all the windows in the cathedral. When the war ended,
the French Ministry of Fine Arts asked Jacques-Paul
Simon If he thought it was possible to restore the windows.
20 After a long examination of the records collected by
his father and grandfather the young man decided to
accept the task which he knew would be delicate and
arduous. He assembled a team of six craftsmen and set
to work.
About 600,000 fragments of stained glass were collected
from around the cathedral and within the building itself.
Each window was slowly and painstakingly rebuilt with
these fragments and areas of missing glass were replaced
with new pieces painted in exactly the original tints.
Altogether these artist-craftsmen reconstructed over
16,000 square feet of stained glass: eight windows in the
nave, eight more in the transepts and a further eleven
in the chancel. The results were greater than had ever
been hoped, but the work took 20 years to complete.
During the same operation the team completely restored
the rose window on the south side of the cathedral. This
was the only window at Reims which did not date from
the 13th century. The original 13th-century rose window
was destroyed in a fire and was replaced in the 16th
century by a craftsman named Nicholas Derodé. Jacques-
Paul Simon created a completely new rose window based
on the subject of the earlier work.
Remarkable new works have come from the Simon
workshop since Brigitte and her husband have taken over
its management. Brigitte herself has executed a modern-
style stained glass window for the baptismal font chapel
in the cathedral which offers new proof of her talents.
In the church of St. Remy at Reims, Jacques-Paul Simon
has executed a rose window in the north transept and
Charles Marq has been responsible for a flamboyant
window on the south facade of the same church.
Working from designs by the famous artist, Marc Cha¬
gall, this husband and wife team executed all the
windows for the Synagogue in Jerusalem. Today they are
engaged on a new series of Chagall-designed windows for
Metz Cathedral.
