A PORTUGUESE
SANCHO PANZA
IN THE FAR EAST
by Antonio Jose
Saraiva
Europe's pioneers of oceanic
navigation to the Far East
were the Portuguese. In 1497,
Vasco de Gama, sailed to India
and opened a maritime trade
route to the Orient. By 1519 a
Portuguese cartographer was
able to depict with commendable
realism (in this picturesquely
illustrated map) countries from
the Red Sea to South East Asia.
¿JBÜSfeS
h &¿f
> y^y~y ,
£." -»*t "i
I N the 15th and 16th centuries, the Portuguese
_ and Spaniards reached America, the Indies,
the Pacific Islands, the Malay Archipelago, China and
Japan, and in 1522 the world was first circumnavigated
by Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese. Next it was the
turn of the Dutch, the English and the French to voyage
and to establish settlements in many parts of the globe.
However, it cannot be claimed that Europeans imme¬
diately penetrated to the spiritual treasures of the civiliza¬
tions they were discovering. The conquerors and traders
were less interested in souls than in gold, silver and
spices and also in slaves who were themselves trade goods
like the rest. Even Christian missionaries saw only
human error or the wiles of the devil in beliefs that
differed from their own.
The crushing of the Aztecs and the Incas and the obli¬
vion in which their remarkable art was doomed to remain
for several centuries are outstanding examples of this
failure in understanding which led to the impoverishment
of the cultural tradition of mankind as a whole. Only
in our own day has the pre-Columbian art of America
regained its rightful place in the world's cultural heritage
and has made a rich contribution to the originality of
modern Mexican painting.
History, however, is not completely void of cases where
the world's diversity was accepted and voyagers showed
a sympathetic understanding of non-European civiliza¬
tions. One of the oldest examples is offered by a Portu¬
guese book of the 16th century, Peregrinacao, by Ferdi¬
nand Mendes Pinto, a Portuguese trader in the Far East,
who died in 1582.
Though almost forgotten today, Peregrinacao was at
one time known throughout Europe. First published in
14 1614, it was translated into a number of languages, in¬
cluding French, English, German and Dutch, during the
17th and 18th centuries.
The Portuguese navigator, Vasco de Gama arrived at
Calicut, the present seaport of Kozhikode, on the
Malabar coast of India, in 1498. In 1511, the Portuguese
annexed Malacca which gave them a firm control over
trade in the Far East for some time. In 1517, they sent
an Embassy to the Emperor of China, but at that time
the Ming Dynasty had turned its back on the sea and
closed its frontiers to foreigners; and so the ambassador
of the King of Portugal failed in his mission.
Nevertheless, a few venturesome Portuguese merchants
and adventurers managed to trade between China, the
Malay Archipelago and the Pacific Islands, by accepting
the risks which this involved. Private Individuals,
unconnected in any way with the Portuguese State, they
operated in a more or less clandestine way, building
small stores and depots on the Chinese coast which
eventually grew into self-governing mercantile commu¬
nities and trading stations. If the opportunity came
their way, they were not above acts of piracy. On
occasion their voyages took them to places hitherto
unknown to Europeans.
Thus, about 1542 a ship with Portuguese merchants
aboard, including Ferdinand Mendes Pinto, who by then
belonged to this strange world of adventurers, arrived at
the island of Tanegashima in Japan. Mendes Pinto has
left us an account of this first meeting between Euro¬
peans and Japanese.
He was charmed by the chivalrous spirit and noble
nature of the Islanders and impressed by attention paid
to questions of honour which was the cause of endless
feuds between the nobles. He also tells us how one of
his companions, Diego Zeimoto, introduced firearms to
Japan. The first time they saw Diego killing game with
his gun, the local people took him for a magician, but
they quickly learned to make guns themselves since
as Mendes Pinto tells us their craftsmen were extremely

JXDÍV I INTRIGA
f Y-M / -'T^yi iu:vil'-> i¡ff^ l v i:
2 %I"r^M^ ^''Z^^^fd
)J¡£ljJ¿S:'\, s F "	.niJg'iv XJLj^ ;
í&
AAR.EIM)LCVM
<s
PIALEÖVS
^¿- y a&frg§
SÉ
tSSáSsIe.
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
skilful. Pinto also remarks on the graciousness of the
women and the exquisite politeness of the courtiers.
This delightful picture of the Japanese is only part
of the book. Its author boasts of having covered the
whole Asian coast from the Persian Gulf to Siberia, with
detours through the Indonesian Islands and the Island
of Taiwan, and of having travelled in China by river and
canal between Pekin and Nanking, where he was as¬
tounded at the huge "towns" of boat-dwellers.
He claims to have worked as a convict on repairing the
Great Wall of China and to have been able to measure
its height and thickness with his own hands. He asserts
that he was enlisted into the Mongol army which
invaded China about 1544, that he was taken before the
famous king who burnt the suburbs of Pekin (probably
Dayan, King of the Ordos), and that he visited the Holy
City in Tibet.
These travels, some of them undoubtedly true, and the
others imaginary, serve him as a framework for a vi¬
vidly romanticized autobiography. It is packed with
incident, with land and sea fights, shipwrecks, wander¬
ings, dreadful crimes, glorious exploits and popular
risings, with anecdotes, with descriptions of customs,
rites, beliefs, ceremonies, towns, palaces and temples of
the most wonderful kinds. From its pages speak a mul¬
titude of characters into whose mouths the author puts
eloquent discourses studded with Eastern imagery. The
whole is a blend of narrative and description almost
Homeric in Its variety and power.
The main character, the author himself, is successively
agent of the Governor of Malacca, merchant, pirate,
slave, vagabond, beggar, soldier, and finally, simul¬
taneously ambassador of the Viceroy of Goa to a
Japanese baron and Jesuit missionary.
He never depicts himself as a hero but rather as a
poor booby muddling his way as best he can out of
innumerable misfortunes. Most of the time he is at
grips with hunger and fear. In a word, he is the com¬
plete "picaro," the "anti-hero" of the Spanish picares¬
que novels. If we prefer, we can look on him as a
Portuguese Sancho Panza of the East. He has no notion
whatever of knightly honour and he is the absolute
reverse of a "hidalgo" or "conquistador."
At most, he is a trader and that is why, even when he
is acting as an ambassador, he always appears to be of
a, lower order than his Eastern interlocutors, be they
Malay Sultans, Chinese mandarins, Japanese Samurai,
priests anywhere and everywhere, or even the impo¬
verished fishermen whose slave he was for- a while.
From all these people he receives lessons of every kind
to which he is obliged to hearken submissively.
The women too, for whom Mendes Pinto has the
utmost affection, have something to teach the plun¬
derers. A storm hurls them on the shores of the Island
of Léquia (Taiwan). They are borne off to prison on
suspicion of being sea-rovers disguised as merchants, but
the wretched state in which they arrive, naked and
covered with cuts and bruises, stirs the. women to pity.
When the travellers are on the point of being executed
the women flock to the main square of the city with a
moving petition to the King, signed by hundreds, begging
him to spare the prisoners. The King is moved and
releases the condemned men, but says that he will not
receive them "because it ill becomes a king to look on
men who, though knowing God, do not obey His laws
and are wont to steal their neighbour's goods."
To Mendes Pinto's Orientals, the Europeans are little
better than savages: they eat with their fingers, quarrel
loudly and sometimes come to blows for futile reasons.
To the East, they are objects of amazement or derision. 15
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PORTUGUESE SANCHO PANZA (Cont'd)
The first European to reach Japan
Above all, however, Peregrinacao gives us a whole¬
heartedly admiring picture of the civilizations of the
Far East. As for China, Mendes Pinto depicts it as an
absolute Utopia: justice is swift, humane and completely
fair to the accused; the structure of the State prevents
the corruption of its magistrates and the oppression of
its subjects; there is no unemployment or famine; manu¬
facturing and trade supply all the needs of man ;
there is a complete system of communications; manners
are perfect; and "Rome, Constantinople, Venice, Paris,
London, Seville, Lisbon or any other famed city of Europe"
do not begin to compare with the capital, Pekin. Men¬
des Pinto even goes so far as to wish that the laws of
China could be copied in Portugal.
This description of China is of course rather idealized and
the indications are that our author did not know China as
well as he knew Japan. What counts, however, is his
admiration and lack of prejudice, and his admiration is
not purely intellectual, but comes also from the heart.
At every turn we find him moved to wonder by the
works of art, the towns, the crowds, the colour and
music, the manner of speech the ceremonies, the beauty
of the women and the delightful ways of the children.
He even gives us descriptions of Chinese and Japanese
plays, translates forms of greeting and courtesy, and
provides transcriptions (though how faithful, it is hard
to say) of occasional words of the tongues of the East.
Naturally, the picture he paints is not without its blem¬
ishes. It Includes accounts of unbelievable atrocities.
Yet the fact remains that Mendes Pinto was, I am sure,
the first person to attempt a synoptic sketch of the
civilizations of the Far East and that he produced one
that is lively and artistic, and that seeks to penetrate
to the heart and essence of those civilizations and to
understand them from within.
Leaving aside some undeniable mistakes and errors of
fact, we have in Perigrinacao, which was written in
Lisbon in the second half of the 16th century, a book
which does not treat men with beliefs differing from the
author's own as mere objects, whose sole interest lies
in the profits and advantages that can be gained from
them. In other words, for Mendes Pinto the European
viewpoint is not the only valid one.
That is why, in any history of European feelings and
attitudes towards non-European civilizations, Mendes
Pinto has earned an honoured place.

Japanese and Europeans
met for the first time
when a ship with Portu¬
guese merchants aboard,
Including Ferdinand Men¬
des Pinto, reached the
Island of Tanegashima in
Japan, about 1 542. Soon
other trading vessels
followed them and the
arrival of one of these is
shown here in a Japanese
screen painting which
dates from about 1600.
Kobe City Museum, Japan
THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES
OF FERDINAND MÉNDEZ PINTO'
Extracts from the book with the above title, done into
English by Henry Cogan and printed in London in 1663.
FOR the better satisfaction of the reader, I dare boldly say, if my
testimony may be worthy of credit, that in one and twenty years
space (during which time, with a world of misfortune, labour and pain,
I traversed the greatest part of Asia, as may appear by this my discourse)
I had seen in some countries a wonderfull abundance of several sorts of
victuals, and provisions which we have not in our Europe ; yet, without
speaking what each of them might have in particular, I do not think there
is in all Europe so much as there is in China alone.
And the same may be said of all the rest, wherewith Heaven hath
favoured this climate, as well for the temperature of the air, as for that
which concerns the policy, and riches, the magnificence and greatness
of their estate. Now that which gives the greatest lustre unto it, is their
exact observation of justice ; for there is so well ruled a government in
this country, as it may justly be envied of all others in the world...
I think it not amiss to make a brief relation here of the city of Pequin,
which may truly be termed the capital of the monarchy of the world ; as
also of some particular I observed there, as well for its arches and policy,
as for that which concerns its extent, its government, the laws of the
countrey, and the admirable manner of providing for the good of the whole
state.
THIS city of Pequin (Peking) is scituated in the height of forty and one
degrees of northerly latitude ; the walls of it are in circuit (by the report
of the Chineses themselves, and as I have read in a little book, treating
of the greatness thereof, and intituled Aquisendan, which I brought since
along with me into Portugal) thirty large leagues, namely ten long, and five
broad... it is environed with two rows of strong walls, where there are a
number, of towers and bulwarks after our fashion.
Without this great inclosure, which (as I have said) is not comprehended
in the city, there is in a distance of three leagues broad, and seven long,
fourscore thousand tombs of the Mandarins, which are little chappels all
gilded within, and compassed about with balusters of iron and lattin, the
entries whereinto are through very rich and sumptuous arches...
It hath also five hundred very great palaces, which are called the houses
of the son of the sun, whither all those retire that have been hurt in the
wars for the service of the King, as also many other soldiers, who in
regard of age or sickness are no longer able to bear arms, and to the end
that during the rest of their days they be exempted from incommodity, each
of them receives monethly a certain pay to find himself withal, and to live
upon.
LIKEWISE there are along this river Batampina, whereon we went from
Nanquin to Pequin, which is distant one from the other one hundred
and fourscore leagues, such a number of engines for sugar, and presses
for wine and oyl, made of divers sorts of pulse and fruit, as one could hardly
see any other thing on either side of the water.
In many other places also there were an infinite company of houses and
magazines full of all kinds of provision, that one could imagine, where all
sorts of flesh are salted, dried, smoked, and piled up in great high heaps,
as gammons of bacon, pork, lard, geese, ducks, cranes, bustards, ostriches,
stags, cows, buffles, wild goats, rhinocerotes, horses, tygers, dogs, foxes,
and almost all other creatures that one can name, so that we said many
times amongst ourselves, that it was not possible for all the people of the
world to eat up all those provisions.
17

m- '.,-
j
in m
X
%, rJh
»C
V
aa/^**
From "Science and Civilisation in
China" by Joseph Needham, r Cam¬
bridge University Press, I9S9.
A CHINESE VIEW OÉ THE EARTH in the mid-17th century is offered by this
page from the Ko Chih Tshao, a rare treatise on astronomy and geography,
by Hsiung-Ming-Yu, which includes a diagram explaining the sphericity of our
planet. Some 16 centuries earlier, a great Chinese astronomer of the Han
Era, Chang Heng, described the heavens as "like a hen's egg and as round as a
crossbow bullet ; the earth is like the yoke of the egg, and lies alone in the
centre". Hsiung Ming-Yu also used the phrase "as round as a crossbow bullet"
to describe the earth, but graduated his sphere into 360 degrees instead of the
365 1 4 degrees used by the Han astronomers. The sphere shows ships ofChinese
rig, pagodas and, at the antipodes, a large European building like a cathedral.

NEW TRADERS
THE EAST
Left, merchant adven¬
turers dressed in Euro¬
pean costumes of late
16th century disembark
on the coast of Japan
from a Portuguese trad¬
ing vessel. This Japan¬
ese screen painting dates
from the same period.
Below, Portuguese mer¬
chants ride on an ele¬
phant and are carried by
bearers in this detail from
a Japanese screen paint¬
ing. The complete work
shows a ship lying in the
harbour of Goa, the Por¬
tuguese trading settle¬
ment etablished on the
west coast of India, before
setting sail for Japan.
Kobe City Museum, Japan
