BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER
IN NEW DELHI
by Georges Fradier
This article has been written by Georges Fradier as
a letter to a young man from the West, Joris van W.,
who is visiting India. Replying to the young man's
complaint that he was bored and disappointed by
a performance of the Indian epic, "Krishna Leela",
Georges Fradier explains that he has only himself to
blame. Lack of curiosity and indifference have pre¬
vented him from sharing in a unique cultural experience.
THE CELESTIAL FLUTIST. In all lands,
simple or idealized images of legendary heroes
and divinities who embody in themselves the
basic values of a culture are passed down
from generation to generation through poetry,
epics and folk tales. In India the legends
surrounding Krishna, a youthful and lovable
Incarnation of Vishnu, have won him a special
place in the affections of the people. Left,
a folk mural of Krishna the flute-player. Right,
an image of this celestial musician whose exploits
have inspired innumerable songs and dances.
ear Joris,
'To find oneself in Delhi, or New Delhi on a March
evening, as I'm sure you must have felt though you
didn't say so in your letter, is an experience prized by all
its inhabitants, rich and poor alike, and still more by the
Western tourists for whom it must be little short of a
miracle. Such evenings are indescribable; those who have
known them try to convey their impressions by words
like soft; warm; sweet and scented air; starry skies;
rustling palm trees...
But all these words are inadequate, for who can say
for instance that the tall palm fronds in the gardens of
wealthy New Delhi homes stir the emotions more than a
few leaves glimpsed in the humbler and still more peace¬
ful sidestreets beyond the Kashmir Gate. And who can
say why the soft air so often mentioned should be as
palpable at nightfall among all the backfiring motorcycle
taxis in Connaught Circle as in the velvet solitude of
the Lodi Gardens.
Winter is over and the pitiless summer is still a few
weeks off. The lawns and other open spaces are not yet
swarming with the crowds who escape from the old blocks
of flats without balconies or air-conditioning to find a
night's sleep. You can wander alone between the Red
Fort and the Great Mosque where the fields are still green
or in the Ramilla Gardens bathed in moonlight and
caressed by the soft night breezes.
You must surely have fallen under the spell almost too
powerful for people in our part of the world cast by

Photo« © Richard Lsnnoy
nature which at this time of the year becomes a sheer
delight with the same fresh yet uneffusive spontaneity
we find in the welcome extended by the Indian people,
whom you describe as the most hospitable in the world.
Unless you were ill in bed, all this must have given you
renewed pleasure in life and added reason for living.
Such are the delights or illusions bestowed by February
and March in northern India where musicians from time
immemorial have sung of them with matchless fervour.
And so these spring evenings or nights might even be
described as cultural values.
In India spring has been given a more exalted place
than, perhaps, in any other part of the world. In Europe
it makes you hum an air by Mozart or a "pop" tune or
it brings to mind a Botticelli figure. Here it has been
embodied in divine legends that for three thousand years
have been the never-failing inspiration of poets, sculptors,
painters and even philosophers.
Since you already had some knowledge of its literature
when you set out for the East, I feel I can speak to you
of the Ramayana, an epic which is comparable only with
the Iliad in the lasting influence it has exerted on the
thinking of a whole people. I want to talk about it to you
(because of your March evening in Delhi) as I imagine
you know your way about Hndu mythology and are not
content, when you visit temples with their crowds of
tourists, merely to admire the statues without any idea
of what they represent. Just picture a tourist in Ghent
who, on the grounds that he is an agnostic, sees no more
than lines and colours in the Retable of the Lamb.
When presented with an eíílgy of the Hindu Trinity,
you of course can put a name to the three faces of
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. You have grasped that
Vishnu symbolizes perpetual life the sheer will to live.
He is the power that holds the world together. But for
him everything would disintegrate, and when sleep over¬
takes him the universe shrinks to nothing. He is the
hope of all mortal things; and so the Hindus will tell you
that he Is the god of all religions. That is why, every
few hundred or thousand years, when the world seems
threatened with collapse, he comes down in bodily form
to give it new strength and life. You could never re¬
member all the many forms of his successive incarnations.
But the two most famous and most splendid of these
Rama and Krishna have to do with your night in March.
The landscape and seasons in India cannot have
changed much since these incarnations which are suppos¬
ed to have occured a few centuries apart, in relatively
recent times, at the beginning of the "age of conflict".
I wouldn't feel too remote from them though. Rama for
instance is the "Charmer" who must be familiar to you
from Indian literature and the sensitive people who have
welcomed you, for all classes of society feel a very deep
devotion to this god incarnated as a prince.
The story of Rama not only extols the finest feelings
especially loyalty and faithfulness to one's word but is
also an inexhaustible source of inspiration for essayists
and story-tellers, It is roughly comparable with the part
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER (Cont'd)
Krishna's flute calls from the forest
played by Don Quixote In Spain. Many a scholar in
India and beyond its borders regards it as the origin of
the tale of Prince Charming in Western legend, where
the hero overcomes countless natural and supernatural
obstacles before being reunited with his beloved.
In India she is Sita whom you must have seen in the
many prints and plaster images on sale in the bazaars.
In one she is depicted holding a lotus flower, covered In
jewels, sitting on Rama's left knee; Rama has a serene
smile on his face, set off by a resplendent necklace and
ear-rings, with his hand ever ready to his bow. Behind
him is his brother, the chaste and valiant Lakshman,
also armed. Reposing at their feet is Hanuman, the
monkey king, who triumphed over the evil spirits of
ancient Ceylon.
NI ow that I mention this semi-divine animal, so
devoted to Rama, you must wonder if Indian
children have the same feelings about monkeys as the
youthful visitors to the London, Hamburg or Antwerp
Zoos. Almost inevitably, monkeys should conjure up in
the minds of Indians the army of Hanuman, just as a
reader of the Little flowers of St. Francis is reminded by
birds of the great saint, or a lover of poetry cannot help
reciting Baudelaire when he sees cats. Are these com¬
parisons too far-fetched? But I only meant to bring
home to you the diversity of each people's bestiary. By
the process of mental association, animals, too, can
acquire the significance of cultural values.
The story goes that Rama having sworn to have one
wife only, promised to be reincarnated later so as to
satisfy the passions he had kindled in his followers. And
so he appeared as Krishna, the dark, comely god of love,
all-fulfilling. We find him for Instance in the miracu¬
lous forest of Brindaban not for from the Jumna, a
paradise which for all its appeal to the senses is the most
Innocent that ever sprang from man's imagination. One
March evening in Delhi the spirit of Krishna was present;
though you may never have read a line of the Bhagavata
Purana you were assuredly in Brindaban.
In your letter you say: "Last night I was invited to an
open-air performance called Krishna Leela; I thought it
was never going to end. To begin with I was bored to
death by the pompous speeches with their mixture of
patriotism, learning and philosophy, and then by the
music, which at first I found disquieting and then terribly
monotonous. The performance was a kind of ballet or
historical pageant with lovely costumes but incomprehen¬
sible bits of folk dancing.
There was too much pantomine and an unending succes¬
sion of gods and evil spirits, persons and tableaux with
no apparent connexion between them. It must all have
been based on folklore. But does it mean anything
today? Has it a message to bring? Who can say?
Anyhow it put me to sleep?"
y dear boy, I'm twenty years older than you
I so can't tell you as bluntly as I should that
you're an utter fool. If you were my age, I wouldn't
mince my words. Good luck and your kind hosts brought
fabulous cultural treasures within your grasp one March
evening.
India, which is almost as vast as Europe and has as
large and as varied a population, has other, many other
treasures besides. But this Is one of the most fascinating
aspects of a heritage which belongs not merely to the
past but keeps on growing; and it is one of the most sti¬
mulating aspects of that heritage. Your talk of endless
speeches and a performance based on folklore shows that
it was all completely lost on you.
When the Oberammergau peasants vowed in the 17th
century to play the Passion from time to time a tradition
they have adhered to down to the present daywas it
6 nothing mere than folklore? If despite the flood of
tourists you managed to attend this performance it would
never occur to you to think of it merely as a stage piece
on the same level as a production of Parsifal or the Flying
Dutchman. Instinctively you apply other standards; you
will immediately feel absorbed and for several hours you
will Identify yourself with the actors as a Christian and
even as a Bavarian.
The ballet you watched less solemn, with less ritual
and less spontaneity could not of course be equated with
the Passion or even the mediaeval Mystery Plays which
could be made into a first-rate spectacle in any modern
theatre. But at both the Mystery Plays and the Krishna
Leela, the public's reactions are much the same charged
with emotion and with no trace of surprise. You yourself
would have no difficulty in feeling at one with the spec¬
tators, and in understanding and experiencing the same
emotions, provided that you too were first familiar with
the story brought to life In the acting and dancing.
I suppose that the choreographer had to rest content
with a mere allusion, towards the end of the ballet, to
the part played by Krishna as an adult in the feudal,
cosmic war in which a host of princes of the same blood
destroy one another. Krishna spends his childhood in the
fields and woods among cowherds and milkmaids. The
little prince is entrusted at birth so as to escape the
massacre of the innocents to a family of kind, wealthy
farmers and waxes in strength and mischief rather than
wisdom.
There are endless stories about all the pranks played
by this spoilt child, but everyone is delighted with them,
being powerless to resist the charm of this divine boy
who, after getting into the most terrible mischief, turns a
disarming smile on his nurses and later on his friends.
He has any number of girls among his playmates, and
they are ready to put everything aside work, family, the
past and presentto follow him or just to go looking for
him in the forest. (Later on he was to acquire lawful
wives by scores and then by hundreds, ending with a
grand total of sixteen thousand eight hundred and eight) .
Like all who come into contact with Krishna
as a child or a young man, they have mo¬
mentary visions of his divinity, seeing him in a flash as
Vishnu. Usually the transfiguration passes as it came,
their worship or ecstasy fades in the light of not-quite-
common day; his adoptive parents return to their toil, a
warrior to battle, girls begin dancing and vanish into the
darkness, summoned by a flute. Please never tell me
again that you found that flute monotonous.
In your neglect of the peculiar qualities of the Krishna
story you closed your eyes to the exceptional talents of
the dancers performing before you. Some figures of the
dance had a "merry peasant" atmosphere, a colourful
liveliness you must have enjoyed; for capering in a circle,
hands on hips, to a simple measure, has an unfailing
charm, and the most universally familiar themes of our
century are those of folklore, with its pottery, textiles,
basket-work and ballets.
The round dances have their rightful place of course in
a fairy-tale that was born of the people and still belongs
to them. But in the "classical" dances, products of a
supremely refined art you seem to have perceived only
conventionality and symbolism. True, their technique is
conventional, like that of the Bolshoi Theatre and Covent
Garden.
The masters who teach them in schools such as the
Bharatiya Kala Kendra at Delhi are the direct heirs of
those who formerly brought renown to the courts of
princes or emperors. Incidentally, their learning is the
more precious for being ephemeral; the classical tradition
and the kathak style had nearly vanished from Repub¬
lican India, and are preserved only through the gener¬
osity of unusually devoted and wealthy patrons.
This is the most difficult of all styles of dance, but the
long years of remorseless discipline that are required in
order to master it confer an incredible freedom. Try to
spend a few hours, a few days if possible, among these
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

THE
> OF
DANCE
© Richard Lannoy
India's dances are an expression of every aspect of life and even symbolize life Itself:
Siva, who represents both creation and destruction, is also Lord of the Dance. He is
often depicted surrounded by an arch of flames (destruction) and holding a small drum
(the rhythm of creation). Above, an 8th century A.D. figure of Siva in the famous
rock-hewn underground temples of Ellora, in Hyderabad, southern India.

Chasing a demon (Kathakali)
Photos ID Richard Lannoy
STORIES TOLD
WITH THE HANDS
India's rich heritage of dances ranges from
religious and traditional temple dances (Bha¬
rata Natyam) and dance dramas (Kathakali)
down to simple folk dances. Its five major
schools of classical dance are the Bharata
Natyam, the Kathakali and the Mohili Attam
in southern India, and the Kathak and the
Manipuri in the north. In these dances the
gesture language of the fingers follows rules
that are as strict as they are subtle. These
gestures, through which the audience follows
the story narrated by the dance, offer to the
performer a means of expression as eloquent
as the spoken word. Right, opposite page,
a pose from a Bharata Natyam dance depict¬
ing Siva stamping on the demon of ignorance.
Some examples of the finger movements, or
"mudras", are seen in these photos With their
infinite variety of combinations they are used
to interpret dramatic works, poetry, prose and
songs. Audiences in India find the basic
meanings of this symbolic language easy to
understand and connoisseurs can follow
even the most delicate shades of meaning.


BLINDFOLDED TRAVELLER (Cont'd)
No longer a foreigner
singers and musicians, in their school. You will have an
opportunity, perhaps unrivalled elsewhere, of watching
performers of all ages in a display of virtuosity, with an
incomparable mastery of their art and control of their
limbs.
Take your seat in the unadorned hall, resonant with
the unchanging drone of the tambura, the basic single-
stringed Instrument. The dancer bows to you, stands
motionless for a moment, then clicks her Angers lightly
to the tabla player's tones which grow more and more
irresistible. She comes forward and bends as though to
kiss the feet of the guru, who is seated at your side. She
waits silently for an instant, about to begin her dance.
She begins... When, at a sign from the guru, she stops,
you do not know whether she has been dancing for half
an hour or an hour. She could have gone on all day,
with more and more intricate steps, seemingly improvised,
never weary, never frenzied, never mechanical but on the
contrary with increasing physical control and ever¬
growing rapture.
Her grace, skill and tireless vigour will no doubt
I teach you more about the Dance, with its ca¬
pacity for beauty and indeed for ecstasy than you could
ever learn from any ballet performance. In any case I
hope that this dancer with her technical mastery over
every least gesture and expression, from flashing eyes to
the musical tinkle of rings as her bare feet tread the
marble floor, will restore your feeling for the wonders of
the Krishna Leela, which evaded you the other evening.
And this will probably reveal to you before long the
Krishna of the poets. Your recollection of that dancer
so completely "traditional", though born about 1940 is
bound to be a help as you turn the pages of the Gita
Govinda, the "Song of the Herdsman", written by Jaya-
deva eight hundred years ago, and then the variations,
differing in their depth of mysticism and in their inge¬
nuity, composed between the fifteenth and eighteenth
centuries by a dozen lyric poets from Princess Mira Bai
to Bihari Lai and Kali Das. Translations are not hard
to come by.
You will find it even easier to appreciate certain sets of
engravings and reproductions, for the loves of Krishna are
the great Inspiration of Indian painting and the producer
of what you took to be a "folk" ballet used the old Pun¬
jabi painters as his guides. They used to illustrate ma¬
nuscripts of which Krishna was the hero; but even quite
lately he was the favourite theme of Jamini Roy in Bengal
and of George Keyt in Ceylon. So to familiarize yourself
with Krishna you need not delve into the past, for he
has not suffered the fate of Apollo and Orpheus who are
now relegated to schoolrooms on the classics.
The Krishna Leela is proof of this. Its Ingenuousness
left you cold. Its ardour a mingling of sensuality and
religion disappointed you. Its wealth of poetry bored
you. You are of course at liberty to attribute this frustra¬
tion to accident, long-winded speeches, or even the fact
that it was too dark to read the programme. Why not?
But when you are told of the worthy 18th century mathe-
matican who went to a Racine tragedy and asked, as he
left the theatre, "What does it prove?" it is not Racine
you find pitiable.
he sole purpose of that dancing, singing and
mime based on the Krishna legends was to
give you pleasure; neither the choreographers nor the
dancers were trying to convey abstract truths, to teach
you local history, or to thrust doctrines down your throat.
The divine legend they acted out is probably meant to
announce that life is worth living and that the world can
10 shake off its terrors; but that is the burden of all music
and dance of all art, most likely though they preach
only to the converted.
You do not invariably close your eyes and ears to beauty
and imagination. But this time you were unable to
escape from yourself and your habits, to forget your em¬
barrassment, which was that of a foreigner clinging des¬
perately to his foreign standards.
Finding yourself unmoved by the magnificent scenery
and costumes, you might perhaps have whiled away the
performance by pretending to be a historian of races and
religions; a dignified amusement, as a substitute for the
message you hoped to find. You would then have noted
for instance that Krishna (and Rama too) always has a
very dark skin, shown by some painters as midnight blue,
and that he is not a Brahman but an aristocrat, a warrior.
You would have pondered over the disputed question of
his Dravidian origin with the conflicts and exchanges it
implies In Vedic times, and the fact that even in more
recent centuries the Aryans have not entirely driven out
the ancient population whose races and languages still
predominate in southern India. It is to these multiple
influences that Indian culture owes its richness and com¬
plexity. Such considerations are by no means idle and,
I repeat, they would have passed the time for you. But
frankly, they are utterly remote from the Krishna Leela,
which offers nothing but delight.
It is true that to understand its joyous language you
need to know the sort of things I have been telling you
here, and a little more as well. Nothing would have been
easier. Quite apart from books, you had only to ask one
or another of your friends in Delhi; not necessarily the
most learned of them. A few hints, recollections or
anecdotes would have put you on the right track.
Indeed, the tone in which people talked to you of Krish¬
na's legends, if not of his worship, would itself have put
you in the right mood for the performance. Then you
would have been ready to understand not only the
sequence of scenes and episodes you now find puzzling,
but the deeper meaning of this tremendous story which
unfolds itself simultaneously on earth and on the super¬
natural plane and piles up a glorious heap of absurdities
as a firm foundation for the triumph of life and love.
h or you to come away in a cold and rather con¬
temptuous mood from a performance that
delights an entire nation is not, in your opinion, a very
serious matter. It is only a pity for you yourself. Go
to see the Krishna Leela again; or, if it is given while
you are there, to the Ram Lila; but try to give it your
full attention. Allow yourself to be moved. Enjoy the
story right through, try to judge the dancers and musi¬
cians by their own standards, in the light of what they
are trying to do and express.
I am not suggesting that this will automatically make
India, with its history, its civilization and its daily life, as
familiar to you, as intelligible, as crystal-clear as your
own native town. It isn't as easy as that. But I promise
you that you will feel a bit less of a stranger there. In
coming to understand such an important element in its
culture you will have moved into a new dimension of
intelligence and sensitivity, even if you have not pene¬
trated very deeply into modern India or the Hindu
doctrines.
Unless you become an Indian, however awkwardly, at
theatrical performances and concerts, for want of any
better opportunity, you will never cease to wonder, with
the foolishness common to all impatient travellers, "how
anyone can be Indian". If this temporary conversion
strikes you as impossible, I really cannot see why you
should stay any longer in India. You see what I mean,
I hope: become an Arab when you go to Lebanon. And
let us hope that the Indians will transform themselves
into Swedes, Italians and Greeks when they have the
chance.
This text is taken from Encounters and Celebrations, a study
on the mutual appreciation of cultural values in Orient and
Occident by Georges Fradier, shortly to be published by Unesco
in English, French and Spanish.

(Q Richard lannoy
RAMAYANA
SPECTACLE
These children have put on traditional costumes and masks with grotesque features
for their parts in a performance of the Ramayona. This great Indian epic, dating back
over 2,000 years, tells the story of Rama, a "Prince Charming" who overcame a
thousand and one obstacles to win his beloved Sita. Today, as in the past, the legendary
adventures of this hero captivate audiences in India and other Asian countries.
11
