CULT
CULTURE EXPRESSES ITSELF IN CUSTOMS. It is seen in gestures,
manners, the expressions which appear on the lips; in the hands, in the
looks of the countryman, artisan or student ; it passes from one lip to another,
one hand to another, one eye to another... until it covers with a mesh of
behaviour every human group. In Japan, people remove their shoes before
entering a temple (below), just as they do when going inside their own homes. Oliver G. Wackernagel, Basle
A
26

URE AND FREEDOM
by German Arciniegas
; ;
Fifteen years ago the Colombian author, Gorman
Arciniegas, wrote a remarkable study on tho right
to culture which was later published in English in
the volume "Freedom and Culture"(1).Tho follow¬
ing article is abridged from this text which is as
timely and meaningful today as when it was writton.
Like many other cities in America, Lima has Its
own archaeological museum. Learned Peru¬
vians, French and German archaeologists, poor peasants
from the mountains all show nowadays a keen interest
In recreating the history of civilizations which existed in
the Western Hemisphere before the arrival of Christopher
Columbus.
The centre of interest has shifted. Discoveries now
made in America have aroused the same public curiosity
as did, in their day, the Assyrian excavations and the
finding of Tutankhamen's tomb. Diggings undertaken In
sandy stretches of the Peruvian desert have revealed
mummies between five and ten centuries old, wrapped in
cloaks of the most exquisite texture and colouring. The
dry particles composing these arid dunes have preserved
the cloth, which looks as glossy as if It had only Just left
the unknown hands and primitive loom of Its native
weaver.
But neither mummies nor cloth can compare with the
museum's eighty thousand pieces of pottery. Until the
Europeans arrived, the Indians made clay figures of ani¬
mals, birds, flowers and men. They achieved technical
perfection. The thin layer of terracotta, covered with
enamel, has withstood the action of time. The work ls
the living expression of an age-old spirit.
Clay represented for those earlier peoples poetry, the
theatre, and books. It was the natural vehicle for the
expression of their genius. In clay the artist depicted
with one bold stroke the proud heads of warriors, or the
loving, submissive brow of the Indian woman. In his
representation of old people, the irony and malice of the
ceramist have the same corrosive effect as has the hand
of time, when it wrinkles and shrivels up the skin. It is
unlikely that sculptors of our own day will be able to put
greater meaning Into their work.
These old artists of Peru had some magic quality In
their fingertips. They combined poetry with realism
superbly. In a design showing two doves or the head of
a llama they could convey the rhythm of a subtle grace¬
fulness with a delicacy which has never been surpassed
in the decorative arts. When representing scenes of daily
life, they showed man engaged in all his crudest activities
with a frankness ingenuousness of expression which no
present-day artists have ever ventured to use.
Four centuries ago, this culture came to a standstill.
Then began the colonial epoch, Introduced by the Spanish
sovereigns in the name of Christianity. Little by little, the
fruits of a new culture began to take shape. They have
not yet reached maturity. For Instance, it is Impossible
to find in Peruvian ceramic art of today works as perfect
as the old ones, or which reflect so faithfully the life of
a people.
Nevertheless, those forgotten nations which entrusted
their Innermost poetic dreams to the care of so fragile a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27
(1) All reproduction rights reserved

FREEDOM AND
CULTURECCo/7f'c/> THE SE
Around the pow¬
erful and pres¬
tigious court of
the kings of Abo-
mey in Dahomey,
West Africa, there
has long existed
a rich tradition of
arts and crafts
which still flou¬
rishes today. The
exploits, emblems
and animal mas¬
cots of the royal
family are em¬
bodied in works
by Abomey's ar¬
tists and crafts¬
men. Left, grace¬
ful giraffes fash¬
ioned in copper.
K. and R. Corpel. taken
from the album Terre
Dahoméenne ". Infor¬
mation Dept.. Republic
of Dahomey (1961)
III
ill III.
I i I I I I I
i i l n i I i
i i i I I I
il it'
.» .' .». ». I. '
III III
, V I n ', V .
. ». .« ,' '. «. } .
V." .'¿'.V.'
I.I Jill II
frf&v;
© Georges Patrix
The ups-and-downs of a word
material as clay continue to live. The humble, unknown
potter can never have imagined that the frail vessel on
which he stamped a woman's fugitive smile would remain
floating above the current of the centuries and be turned
into a message from his then isolated and remote native
land a message of wonder to our modern world which he
must have been quite unable to envisage.
This provides an excellent lesson. It shows us that
there Is something about culture which is immortal.
Today we can get to know a lost world, simply by looking
at pieces of pottery in a Lima museum, just as we can
make contact with other worlds in the gilded halls of the
Cairo museum, or among the ancient stones of Yucatan,
China or Rome. Learned men labour to determine the
number of dead civilizations. But are they really dead?
Is it not rather we who are deaf to the voices of the
remote past?
The word "culture" is one of those that has
suffered the most ups-and-downs in all languages, in a
2g universal masquerade of misunderstanding. Those respon¬
sible thought that by taking the word away from its
obvious and natural meaning (stemming directly from the
root word "cultivate") and trying to turn it into a grand
lady dressed in her Sunday best, they were going to create
the most important character in the "drama of enlight¬
enment."
We are now coming to the moment when it is necessary
to consider whether such a disguise must, be considered
definitive, or whether the time has not arrived for a
radical change which should place culture in the simple
context of human rights not in that of a privilege
pertaining to an intellectual class. For culture is a for¬
ward movement whose object is to cultivate the mind, to
form the personality. "Culture is something which has
to grow. You cannot build a tree; all you can do is to
plant it, arid look after it; and wait for it to mature in
its own due time." These are the words of T.S. Eliot true
words and words that should be elevated into a symbol.
In the history of languages, the first thing to appear
as culture is the cultivation of plants, the labour of the
soil, agriculture. Let us recall the line of Pope's:
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil.
It would seem as though, before appertaining to the

VENTH ANCESTOR
Weavers in Africa have a legend to explain
the origin of their craft. In a handsome
volume published in connexion with the
exhibition, "The Hand of Man", held this
year (June 23 to December 31 ) at the Ethno¬
logical Museum of IMeuchâtel, Switzerland,
Jean Gabus, director of the museum, says
that in the case of the Dogon people of
Mali, the basic technique of weaving is
linked with a mythical origin, forming part
of an African conception of the creation
of the universe. In the words of Ogotem-
meli, a Dogon hunter: "The seventh ances¬
tor was the creator of weaving. Between
his upper teeth, used like the reed of a
loom, he distributed 80 strands of cotton.
He did the same with his lower teeth, thus
forming the warp of the loom. By opening
and closing his jaws he moved the warp
through heddles separating the threads.
As the threads crossed and recrossed, the
ancestor's tongue pushed the thread of
the weft, and the strip of cloth was for¬
med outside his mouth. And from the
breath which he thus exhaled came the
second word: the words were woven into
the threads and became one with the strip.
They were the cloth itself and the cloth
was the Word: a blending of word and
method; of physical movements and spi¬
ritual forces." Right, this weaver of the
Bouaké, in the Republic of the Ivory Coast,
cannot draw the designs he weaves. But
when asked to depict a man he improvised
on his loom the figure shown on the left.
^te~ *
¿Ü
,VV
>*
S
history of literary development, culture were by natu¬
ral right a word belonging to natural history.
If, in referring to a "tree," Eliot were not speaking sym¬
bolically, he would be leaving something unfinished. For,
so far as culture is concerned, there is something more
than just a tree, subject to decay. What gives culture its
particular quality is its power to transmit a heritage, a
treasure, from generation to generation what is called a
tradition.
When we dehumanize culture and cut it off from its
branch in order to stick it in a flower-vase, we hasten the
day of its death. Culture is rooted In the depths of human
existence. It begins on the very day man discovers the
means of raising himself above the level of the beast
when he controls fire, invents the arrow and begins to
speak.
Between these first discoveries and those of the wheel,
the metal wing, the waves which carry the voice and even
the light and shade of photographs across the oceans. He
centuries of research, generations which have sweated
blood, rejoiced and suffered under the chancy pendulum
of life. All is part and parcel of this development of
human culture.
But when we say "culture" in the singular, we are using
an abstraction; as such it is unsatisfying, giving the term
a generic, amorphous sound. We must look at the
species in its plural aspect, for the "cultures" In the
plural evoke wonderful facts: Egypt and Mexico, Greece
and Japan, France and China, the Amazon, Polynesia.
In naming them thus, the vital slgnificace of the term
becomes apparent. Representatives of every nation take
on colour, voice and shape as they move across their own
magic screen. I would almost suggest that "culture" ls
not a noun but a verb, indicating the action carried out
by the peoples as they move forward under the urge to
rise, take shape and mould their characters.
The right to culture is therefore an individual one. It ls
the human right of every people to reveal its soul, to
express itself freely. And It is a permanent right. It
took many centuries for the Egyptians to acquire an
architecture of their own and a hieroglyphic style of
writing and to evolve methods of preserving their dead,
portraying their great national leaders In stone, and
bringing the Nile valley under control in order to turn
it into the nation's granary.
The archaeology of the great cathedrals of Europe ls
the best witness to the slow development of cultures. We
see In these cathedrals how the ages overlap one another.
We begin with the Romanesque crypts with their dog¬
tooth arches, and end with the Gothic spires, which had
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

CULTURE AND FREEDOM (Cont'd)
The humblest artifact tells a story
to wait centuries before the stone sprouted forth in floral
decorations, strange and fabulous creatures, and all that
the Middle Ages produced from their miracles and magic,
their patience and their dreams.
Finally, we may say that the right to culture Is, as it
were, the ultimate right of all peoples. It must be upheld
until they are able to loosen their tongues and untie the
knot in which their hidden longings are held bound. It is the
most important factor in the development of their internal
freedom. It has made possible the creation of languages,
symphonies, mural paintings, ornamental capitals, figures
in marble and bronze, and books.
Culture expresses Itself In customs. It is seen in ges¬
tures, manners, the expressions which appear on the Ups,
in the hands, in the looks of the countryman, artisan, or
student; It passes from one lip to another, one hand to
another, one eye to another, right up to refined circles,
until it covers with a mesh of behaviour every human
group, which thus reaches Its own style of expression.
It would be interesting to follow, in painting for
example, the history of the different attitudes of the
hand; from the hand which grasps, clutches and closes
over convulsively, to the two hands that unite in prayer,
or are covered with rings, or seem about to bestow a caress.
We may recall the oriental hands of Fujlta; those of the
Dutch peasants painted by Van Gogh In his Supper of
Potatoes; those of El Greco's noblemen in the Burial of
the Count of Orgaz; those of the Gioconda, and those
of the women in Botticelli's Spring. Every expressive
gesture disseminates itself by sympathetic contagion.
Thus are the customs of each society formed.
t every new stage, with minute variations,
^ attitudes take on greater refinement, polish
and meaning and words more colour; while new concep¬
tions, issuing in felicitous gesture, can be attained even
among the lowest ranks of society. Whoever has lived
among countryfolk knows how, under their rough exterior,
there is a native civility some would say even courtesy.
This is expressed in such ways as, for instance, hastening
at a meal to pass the first and best helping to the woman
guest, wife or mother. May not this part of our culture
have had its origin among such as these, and subsequently
have passed into urban usage?
The same thing happens in the case of words. It is a
pity that in the rush of modern Ufe there is not time to
"prepare" Words, to await the moment when they
suddenly become so charged with meaning that they seem
to have some miraculous effect on the development of the
language.
Formerly, in all languages each of the smallest parts of
a house, a ship, or a coat-of-arms was given a name which
was a poetic Image. In our mechanical age, words to do
with the motor-car and the aeroplane sprout up In the
catalogues with the same speed at which steel sheets are
pressed into shape in the moulds. There still remains,
however, a wide margin in the matter of adjectives and
of names that spring up in popular intercourse. If the
greatest writers in all ages, those who have later become
the pride and ornament of literary cultures, made them¬
selves masters In one thing, it was in this: picking up,
as they went along, gems of popular speech.
From hands and words we may pass to countless
different aspects of life. There is no piece of crockery
we use daily, no household utensil, that does not contain a
history of novel shapes developed, transformations brought
about by taste which has been free to function creatively.
30 In their handwriting and in the peculiarities of their
capital letters the characters of the different peoples
show up plainly. In clothes, in hats, in cosmetics, in
polite social intercourse and in cooking in everything we
see the cultivating hand of man, leaving an impression of
his passage, proclaiming his active, personal presence.
Are there superior cultures; or are there only different
cultures? Upon the answer which we give to this double
question depends the whole problem of respect for
culture, for the individual spirit of different peoples, for
the freedom of expression which is of the essence of such
matters. If so much Uterature had not accumulated on
the subject of superior culture, It would be puerile to
present the question in its double form. It can only be
answered by referring back to the obvious and natural
meaning of the word "culture." For then we eUminate
the deformations imposed by nationalist imperialism, the
vanity of certain peoples, or the momentary triumph of
certain political tendencies, and arrive at the original and
permanent conception that culture consists in the cultiva¬
tion of Man; which acts as a refining influence on the
personality of every people, shaping its individual style
in the course of generations.
Every people is bound to have its own parti¬
cular mode of expressing itself, a variety of
images, rhythms and gestures, in which Eastern art can
be as rich as Western. The painting of the Japanese
Sesshu is of one style; that of Rembrandt is of another
style. The glory of the world consists in there being
both a Sesshu and a Rembrandt.
Culture has what we might call provincial depth. It
is essential to observe that culture is a measurement of
depth, not of surface. And It is in the provinces where
the spirit of a people is concentrated and where greater
emphasis is given to the personaUty. It is this provincial
consciousness that gives Europe its highest value. To be
able to talk of a Flemish, Provençal, Scottish or Basque
tonality to be found in language, painting, dancing or
dress ls to express vital facts about the culture of a
continent.
This intercourse between Nature and the arts and
customs which Goethe saw realized in Italian culture,
occurring as it does in every part, in every single province
of the world, produces the wealth of expression character¬
istic of mankind. Freedom of expression, freedom of
study and research, freedom to penetrate into the life of
the people and to present the fruits arising out of one's
meditations, these open to man the only road by which
his passage through this world can be made other than
sterile. _
The superiority implied by democracy over aristocratic,
oligarchic or absolutist systems lies in offering people of
every colour, social origin or race, opportunities of access
to Institutions working for the advancement of culture
through the medium of the sciences, the arts and letters.
These opportunities are nowadays a human right on which
all intellectual progress depends. It is the human enter¬
prise par excellence. Humanising culture simply means
returning to authentic culture.
he fundamental thing about culture is its
_ intimate association with historical develop¬
ment. There is no superior culture; there are only inci¬
pient, adolescent or mature cultures. It is all a question
of time.
Nowadays there are means that can be used to accelerate
the development of culture; but there is a Umit to such
acceleration: it has to conform to natural laws.
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

Vi.»
--*. í
7/y
: :
M
/
" Gisèle Freund
It was not until 1952 that archaeological research in Mexico revealed that pyramids built
by the ancient Mayas not only served as substructures for their temples, but also as tombs.
Among the objects found in the tomb of a monarch-priest beneath the Temple of Inscriptions
at Petanque was this warrior's head modelled with a headdress of plumes and flowers.
The artist has given the nose a form corresponding to the Maya concept of the ideal human
profileclosely resembling that of the Quetzal bird which the Mayas and Aztecs revered.

CULTURE AND FREEDOM (Cont'd)
Man has not spoken his final word
The same thing does not happen in the case of civiliza¬
tion, for which reason a distinction must be drawn between
the two words, although not necessarily in the Spenglerlan
sense. "Civilization" is an expression of the citizen, of
civil life, which springs up in the city. When there Is a
civil authority, a civil law, a civil code, life has become
civilized. It makes no difference that the people should
still remain uncultured. It might happen, as has been
affirmed, looking at the problem from a European stand¬
point, that civilization represented the final stage of a
culture. But this Is not essential.
But what ls happening today? Civilization can be
fabricated. There is no need to plant It like a tree.
Everyone is agreed that the progress of civilization has
been rapid, and not always favourable to culture. CiviUza-
tion Itself has been shown to have a marked propensity
to suicide. It can devour Itself for lack of culture.
It is obvious that in order for culture to prosper civiliza¬
tion is necessary; that is to say a system of civil life in
which the dignity of man is respected and the free
working of the means for study and self-expression
assured; where there is civil justice and work is not
carried on under barbarous laws, so that the intelligence
is able to retain its spontaneity and freshness which are
the mainspring of its activity. The problems of man and
of the spirit, which today confront one another in Asia,
Europe and America, are thus situated between the two
terms "culture" and "civilization."
In the present development of civilization a new factor
Intervenes: communications. All inventions are diffused
nowadays with a rapidity undreamt of before. Continents
are brought together and, in this sense, the
world appears to be uniting. It represents far more one
civilization than many civilizations, in contrast with the
position in the field of culture, where diversity is the rule.
The attainment of a civil existence enabling man to
cultivate his "spirit" that is what the common sense of
the ordinary human being demands at the present time.
solemn declaration of man's ancient faith
Un his liberties has now become a matter of
the greatest urgency. Our struggle and the great ques¬
tion of our time are comprised in those precedents whose
study Unesco has agreed upon. In the preamble to the
Constitution of this new international organization it
is already stated: "Peace must be founded upon the intel¬
lectual and moral solidarity of mankind."
From the depths of the collective soul rises a demand
for justice, for balance. For hope also is one of the
rights of man an alleviation of his toil and fatigue.
"The Universal Declaration of Human Rights," says the
[former] Director-General of Unesco, M. Torres Bodet,
"ls the most promising international document to which
governments have set their names since 1945 ... It is the
first international manifesto enumerating the rights of the
Individual and setting forth the conditions to be fulfilled
by those States that desire to respect the liberty and
dignity of the human person. It is the extension of
honour in man. It is an urgent call to governments to
remind them that man exists . . ."
Yes, indeed: man exists. His is the lasting value.
Dictators are here today and tomorrow are gone with the
wind. Man is the result of generations of struggle, ideals,
work accomplished, hopes which form the basis of his
rights to life, liberty and a place in the sun. Every step
forward in the conquest of civilization, every advance in
culture, have been marked by. nameless sacrifices, by
vigils in which ardour overcame all misfortunes.
32 Centuries of history have given man his strength. He
has been a slave in innumerable dark periods in his life
that are well known. But every time he has hoped for
the dawn. And the dawn always comes in the end. Man
does not so much live as outlive himself. He Is the work
we Inherit, the work we continue, and the work we leave
behind unfinished when our hands fall, to be carried on
by the nimble hands of our youthful descendants.
For man the hour for the complete realization of know¬
ledge, justice and liberty has not yet arrived. Open before
us lie ever new vistas to feed our dreams, new incitements
to struggle, new reasons for not allowing life to become
a profitless existence. Every bit of knowledge we possess is
still a subject for free discussion. The explanation of man
and the argument in favour of liberty are based on the
evident fact that man has not spoken his final word.
German Arciniegas is one of Latin America's leading historians
and thinkers. Through his many books in English translation, he
has introduced Latin American history and present-day social
conditions to the English-speaking world. Among his works in
English are: The State of Latin America, Caribbean: Sea of the
New World and Green Continent, an anthology of works by leading
Latin American writers which he edited. Freedom and Culture
was compiled by Unesco with an introduction by Julian Huxley and
published by Columbia University Press, New York and Wingate,
London (out of print.)
