One of the outstanding
achievements of the Su-
merians was the system
of law they evolved. On
the stele (left), Ur Nam-
mu, a ruler of the Ur
dynasty in about 2600
B.C., is depicted in ado¬
ration before Shamash,
the god of justice. Their
figures at the top of the
stele are incomplete, but
the same scene is re¬
peated (intact this time)
immediately below them.
Some five centuries later,
Hammurabi, the Babylo¬
nian king, gathered exist¬
ing laws and legal pro¬
cedures into his cele¬
brated Code and in the
design accompanying it
he too represents him¬
self in an attitude of
reverence before Sha¬
mash as the embodiment
of the idea of justice.
All the illustrations
accompanying our
"History of Mankind"
report (pages 4-19 and
front cover) are taken
from the first volume
of this global History.
University Museum, Philadelphia

ORY OF MANKIND
A global view of scientific
and cultural development
i he publication this month of the first volume
of the monumental six-tome History of
Mankind, subtitled Cultural and Scientific Development,
sponsored by Unesco, marks an important date for histor¬
ical science and for International understanding.
Many of the differences that still divide mankind go
back far into the distant past. Yet, as Professor Paulo
E. de Berredo Carneiro, of Brazil, points out In the preface
to the History, a study of the historical antecedents of
its peoples reveals links which draw them nearer to one
another.
"Beyond differences of race, climate, economic structure
and systems of ideas," writes Professor Carneiro, who is
President of the International Commission responsible
for the preparation of a history of the scientific and cul¬
tural development of mankind, "history shows the funda¬
mental identity of the various human groups, making it
possible to discern, in many cases, profound analogies
among the transformations they have undergone from
the Palaeolithic era down to the present time. If we
consider the human species as a whole, we perceive that
the course of its evolution has been accomplished from
one region and from one people to another by way of a
series of oscillations, greater or lesser in extent, longer
or shorter in duration. The different civilizations which
have arisen in the course of the ages correspond to dis¬
tinct phases and patterns of this general movement.
Almost every one them is to be found somewhere in the
world of today. Contemporary society appears as a
mosaic in which the most widely differing cultures adjoin
and confront each other."
Volume One of the History of Mankind, which appears
first in its English edition, deals with prehistory and the
beginnings of civilization. But neither this volume nor
the five others to follow trace the national history of any
country or people in particular. Instead, what they
present is a detailed study of economic and social events,
religious and emotional life, the forms of artistic expres¬
sion and the scientific thinking, and a comparison of these
with the forms taken by the same experiences in other
countries during the same period.
S ir Leonard Woolley, writing in Volume I on
the urbanization of society, for example, exa¬
mines this economic and social process as it occurred In
Egypt, Sumeria, the Indus Valley and China. But he
does not describe in the traditional way the thousand
and one ups and downs in the fortunes of these countries.
From the first volume to the last, and whether authors
are dealing with prehistory or the 20th century, the
chapter headings follow a similar pattern. First an
introduction gives a chronological picture of the histor¬
ical events forming the background to the development
of the great cultural and humanistic institutions. Then
the life of the people, the social structures, economic
activities (crafts, production and trade), the development
of spoken languages, of writing and teaching, religious
life, the development and applications ot science and the
forms of artistic expression are all examined In turn.
The study of the origins of language made by Jacquetta
Hawkes in the first part oí Volume I is followed by Sir
Leonard Woolley's survey on the formation of and dif¬
ferences between spoken languages in Sumeria, Egypt and
China. The subject is taken up again In Volume II, this
time by Professor Lulgl Paretl, who surveys the chief
languages of the period between 1200 B.C. and 400 A.D.,
amongst them Greek, Latin and Sanscrit.
Similarly, It will be possible for the reader to follow the
development of science and Its applications down the
road of history from Its origins in far off antiquity up to
the present 20th century. But once again this is not a
history of French science or Russian science or American
science, but of the development of science as a whole in
which contributions made throughout history by French¬
men, Russians and Americans as well as by scientists from
other countries are given full acknowledgement.
need for a global history of mankind was
Lmade clear at the conference of Ministers of
Education held In London while the world war was still rag¬
ing. The idea was again put forward in 194G, this time by
Dr. Julian Huxley, then Executive Secretary of the Prepa¬
ratory Commission for Unesco, In his report, "Unesco: Its
Purpose and its Philosophy." In 1949, Unesco's General
Conference examined the project and after many prepa¬
ratory meetings and studies, decided on the form the
work would take.
In 1951, and under the aasplces of Unesco, the Interna¬
tional Commission for a History of the Scientific and Cul¬
tural Development of Mankind was formed with its own
executive body and secretariat. The Commission's work
went on for more than ten years during which time
scholars the world over were asked to Join the team
working on the project.
Those closely associated with the work realized the im¬
mensity of the task. From the start it was clear that,
like all works of great originality, it too could expect to
come under rigorous scrutiny. And the final result mast
fully justify the expectations of a world public. Further¬
more, scholars who normally work in private and seclusion,
would here be very much in public view: not only would
the Unesco General Conference periodically discuss the
execution of the project, but historians and scholars
throughout the world have also have to be kept Informed
of the progress of the work.
Since 1953 the editorial plan of the History has been
presented in the pages of the Journal of World History, a g
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd;
An unparalleled
international venture
quarterly review initiated and published by the Interna¬
tional Commission. This review has also published some
chapters from the History as well as major articles cover¬
ing a wide range of subjects relating to scientific and
cultural development. Commissioned by the authors of
the different volumes from their colleagues in all parts
of the world to assist them In compiling this work, these
articles represent the thinking of scholars , from many
countries and with every kind of ideological background.
In all cases scholars were given the widest possible
bounds in which to develop their subjects: the bounds
of human experience. By limiting itself to cultural and
scientific development, the History seeks to attain the
universality which brought Unesco into being and which
guides it today. For, at every stage in the ascent of
humanity and in varying degrees of complexity and
intensity, culture and science have made their contribu¬
tions.
The prehistoric man described by Jacquetta Hawkes in
Volume I was more or less consciously applying certain
scientific principles each time he used a sling, shaped a
flint or discovered the advantages of irrigation and crop
rotation in agriculture. The complexity of the Sumerian
civilization, as seen in its involved structures, scales of
values and Internal relationships, made it a very different
one from that of Egypt. Yet the very existence of both
Sumer and Egypt was conditioned by similar factors: the
fate of both was linked to rivers.

FANTASTIC
BESTIARY
The civilization of Sumer
which flourished 4, 500 years
ago produced a rich art in
which the animal -world is
portrayed in striking poetic
fantasy. The shell plaque
(left) decorated an ornate
lyre unearthed from the
tomb of a ruler of Ur (about
2500 B.C.). It bears a grace¬
fully executed series of little
scenes engraved on a black
enamel base, depicting ani¬
mals with human attributes :
gazelles with bearded human
heads, a dancing bear, a lion
bearing a vase, a dog carrying
a dagger in its belt and
pushing a table, and a donkey
musician. Not only does the
bestiary show animals behav¬
ing like humans, as in the
fables of Aesop and La Fon¬
taine, but it also depicts men
metamorphized as animals,
like the scorpion man (enlar¬
ged at right) who is attend¬
ed by a roguish young goat.
To attain the goal set by the International Commission,
editors of the different volumes worked in clos-3 co-opera¬
tion. Every manuscript was drawn up according to a
plan prepared by Professor Ralph Turner and approved
by the Commission, and each was meticulously revised
after having been widely circulated among Unesco's
National Commissions in all the Member States. Com¬
ments, criticisms and additional facts supplied by spec¬
ialists were used to correct and complete the texts.
Thanks to Unesco's support, this method was used on
a world-wide scale. The long list of historians whose
comments were used in the revision of Volume I includes
Soviet specialists, American and British prehistorians,
French, Italian and German archaeologists and scholars
from Japan, Spain, Mexico and India. In editing this
first volume, Jacquetta Hawkes and Sir Leonard were able
to make use of more than eighty comments from scholars
of world-wide reputation.
Where comments have not been embodied in the texts,
for reasons of historical or even ideological interpretation,
they have nevertheless been included as notes prepared
by the editorial advisers.
In the chapter dealing with intellectual development
for example, the theory advanced by Jacquetta Hawkes
on the origins of languages is supplemented by comments
from an American specialist, Dr. W.C. Sturtevant, who
has different views on this subject. Similarly, from
detailed notes and comments, Sir Leonard Woolley was
able to record his discussion on the origins of Aryan
civilization with Indian scholars. He was also able to
exchange views with Marxist scholars regarding some
social institutions which, in dialectical materialism, are
given a prominence contested by other schools of thought.
The International Commission has used these notes,

without in any way disturbing the continuity of the nar¬
rative, to show readers the great wealth of historical
thought in the 20th century and the differences In inter¬
pretation which it has produced. On controversial ques¬
tions, whose interpretation is so often linked to a parti¬
cular philosophy of history, the Commission carefully
avoided adopting a definite position.
Contributors to the History were not asked to include
In their texts viewpoints with which they dlsgreed, but
in all cases where specialist opinions were available, these
other views were included in the volumes in the form of
notes or appendices. In Volume I, this type of contribu¬
tion was compiled and edited by a Swiss scholar, Professor
A.G. Bandi. of the University of Berne, and a French
scholar, Professor Jean Leclant, of the University of Stras¬
bourg.
Under the auspices of Unesco and the responsibility of
the International Commission, the work of compiling the
History was marked throughout by a spirit of interna-

tional co-operation. But it was no easy task. The dis¬
tribution of more than 200 copies of original manuscripts
and the study of commentaries that were often lengthy
involved a great deal of patient work. From the scholars
co-operating In this work it required above all their readi¬
ness to revise their opinions in the light of Information
submitted by their colleagues, when this was convincing,
even If it did not correspond to their own ideas.
This work has come Into being in the middle of the
20th century at a key moment in history when there is a
growing consciousness of a civilization embracing all
mankind.
In the words of René Maheu, Director-General of
Unesco, In the forward to Volume I; "For the first time
an attempt has been made to present, with respect to the
history of consciousness, the sum total of the knowledge
which the various contemporary societies and cultures
possess... It departs from the traditional approaches to
the study of history, which, as we know, attach decisive
importance to political, economic and even military
factors... This historical study is itself a cultural achieve¬
ment, calculated to Influence, by its spirit and methods,
the present trend of culture. And that, no doubt, Is its
ultimate end."
Guy Metraux has been Secretary-General of the Inter¬
national Commission for a History of the Scientific and
Cultural Development of Mankind since its inception.
Doctor of Philosophy of Yale University, he is co-editor 7
of the "Journal of World History", published by the Com¬
mission, and author of "Exchange of Persons: the Evolu¬
tion of Cross-Cultural Education" , published by the Social
Sciences Research Council, New York, 1952.
