WHEN FLIGHT
WAS SILENT
by David Gunston
I
28
n the modern world where long-distance, jet-
I driven air travel is an everyday occurrence, it
is hard to believe that there was once another age of air
travel before aeroplanes were taken seriously. It was a
romantic, adventurous, now vanished era of flight the
age of the balloon.
Men first truly flew in balloons, and aviation really
began when these great cumbersome-looking aerial craft
were used as a means of transport. In fact, the world's
first air pilots controlled only a large bag full of gas with
a small wicker basket hanging beneath.
When the Frenchmen, brothers Joseph and Etienne
Montgolfler, profiting from the much earlier scientific
discovery that hot air rose, launched their first workable
balloon from the market-place at Annonay, France, on
June 5, 1783, it was to them merely an experiment. Yet
all unknowingly they committed mankind to mastery of
the air.
They could persuade no one that their simple balloon,
36 ft. in diameter, and filled only with hot air, would leave
the ground, let alone carry 400 lb. in weight aloft. But
at the appointed time, "their paper dome, filled with the
smoke of burnt wood, amid the shouts of congregated
men," rose to nearly 6,000 feet, to land ten minutes later
over a mile away.
The intrepid Montgolfiers were swift to follow up this
success, for in the month of August they sent up another
unmanned balloon, made this time of silk to an improved
pattern and filled with "Inflammable air," or hydrogen,
then newly discovered. This ascended to some 3,000 feet,
but drifted for 15 miles from its launching-place in a Paris
park, to be set upon with pitchforks by terrified peasants
when it landed in a field!
Before that momentous year of 1783 was out, several
other successful balloons were sent up, and on Novem¬
ber 21 came the world's first real human flight. Pilâtre de
Rozier and the Marquis d'Arlandes risked their necks by
going up in a large hot air balloon made of special paper.
They rose from the Bois de Boulogne in Paris, stayed in
the air for 25 minutes and travelled 5h miles over the
city.
To keep their balloon up they carried a fiery brazier
slung beneath its open mouth, to produce a continual
supply of hot air. This meant the fire had to be kept going
at a fair rate, with terrible risk of the paper envelope
igniting. In fact, de Rozier took up with him a large
sponge and some water, and coolly dealt with a small out¬
break of fire on the balloon casing.
Their feat was capped in December 1783 by Professor
J.A.C. Charles, who made the first voyage in a hydrogen
balloon, flying 27 miles from the Tuileries in Paris in a
rubberized envelope of his own design.
In fact, Charles was the real father of the balloon. He
quickly saw that the hot-air-and-brazier method was too
dangerous, and that the answer lay in a bag filled with
a lighter-than-air gas. Hydrogen, although inflammable,
seemed to him the best, and was in fact used for balloons
CONTD ON PAGE 30
Paul Almasy, Paris

Ai
The world's first aeronauts, the Marquis d'Arlandes and Pilatre de Rozier, rose above Paris on November
21, 1783. Their balloon, shown here in a modern re-enactment of the event, stayed in the air for 25 minutes 29
and travelled five and a half miles, over Paris opening the road to the conquest of the air. Ballooning
continued as a popular sport until about 1910 when heavier than air machines began to be developed.

CHANNEL CROSSING. The first aerial cros¬
sing of the Channel on January 7, 1785, was
made by a Frenchman, Jean-Pierre Blanchard
and an American, Dr. John Jeffries, of Boston.
Unesco Photos
EQUESTRIAN ASCENT. Ballooning soon grew its own crop of eccentricsand showmen. Before
a Bastille Day holiday crowd on a Paris race course in 1850, a Frenchman named Poitevin made a bal loon
ascent (above right) mounted on his pony, Blanche. This kind of fairground stunt, whose cruelty
was rightly condemned, was started over half a century earlier by another Frenchman, Testu Brissy.
SCIENCE FICTION, 1863. An "Aerial Vessel
Designed for Exploration" was conceived and
drawn by an early balloonist, Etienne Gaspard
Robertson. Heavily loaded with equipment,
including a telescope, this early piece of
science fiction actually opened a window on
the future. Balloons have since been and are
still being used for astronomical observation.
WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT (Cont'd)
Fantasy & progress
30
until coal gas became readily available in 1821. He also
devised the strong rppe netting over the balloon that
safely supports the basket, or "car," the control valve at
the top, through which gas can be let out, and the cir¬
cular hoop below the rigging from which the car hangs.
On his second ascent he rose alone to nearly two miles,
and again landed safely.
Hearing of these epic flights, wise old Dr. Samuel John¬
son prophesied that the age of the "flying coach" was
near. In fact, ballooning became a reality before the
dawn of the nineteenth century.
In 1784, the first woman to fly, Madame. Thible, had
gone up as a passenger from Lyons, in France, and later
that year interest shifted to England, where a young Ita¬
lian diplomat, Vincent Lunardi, made the first English
flight. Over 20,000 highly sceptical and Impatient specta¬
tors watched his small red and blue hydrogen bag ascend
from the Artillery Ground in London.
The pilot took with him a cat, a dog and a pigeon.
The latter escaped soon after take-off, and the cat
suffered so much from the cold that Lunardi touched
down in Middlesex to release it. Taking off again, he
finally landed at Standon, in Hertfordshire, where a stone
monument commemorates his "traversing the regions of
the air" for 2i hours.
By 1784, in fact, basic ballooning principles had been
established. So long as the complete craft, filled with gas,
weighs less than the amount of air it displaces, it will
rise, leaving the ground after release of numerous sand¬
bag "anchors." When the volume of the surrounding air
equals the balloon's weight exactly, the gas-bag remains
suspended in space, "in equilibrium." Once gas is
released, however, air takes its place, making the weight
heavier than that of the surrounding air, and so the
balloon drops.
In practice, piloting a balloon was largely a matter of
extreme watchfulness in the use of the ballast carried on
board, usually sand in 20 lb. or 30 lb. bags. Even a handful
of sand dropped overboard would cause the envelope to
rise from equilibrium. The pilot kept a constant eye on
his simple altimeter, an ordinary aneroid barometer, and
so judged his height.
Among the hanging control ropes above the flyers'
heads, but kept in a separate sleeve and painted bright
red to prevent accidental use, was the rip-line. When
pulled, this tore out the long ripping-panel, about half
one of the vertical panels, or "gores" from which the
envelope was made. This instantly emptied the balloon
of gas, and was used only on landing.
As early as the second year of the balloon age, 1784,
these strange aerial craft were used for scientific experi¬
mentation and travel, as well as being a fascinating
novelty. Two hardy aeronauts, the Frenchman J. P. Blan¬
chard and Dr. John Jeffries, of Boston, U.S.A., made the
first scientific observations, from a free-flying balloon, and
in January, 1785, made the first pre-determlned journey
in one, across the English Channel, from England to
France.
They carried a compass with them, taking off when the
wind was blowing in the right direction, and finally landed
safely, but not before jettisoning their oars, food and sup¬
plies, and even some of their clothes to maintain height.
Pilâtre de Rozier and his friend Romain, trying to repeat

FLIGHT OF FANCY. This drawing wsa published
in Vienna in 1801 with the explanation, "The latest
invention : a balloon towed by eagles." According to the
artist's ingenious flight of fancy, these birds in harness
allowed themselves to be guided like a team of horses.
MID-AIR MARRIAGE. In 1865 an American bride.
showing that she was immune both to vertigo and the
limelight of publicity, agreed to be married in mid¬
air above New York. Already 80 years earlier the first
female balloon passenger had flown from Lyons, France.
this voyage in the reverse direction on June 15, 1785 in
a balloon that oddly combined both the hot-air and hydro¬
gen type, tragically became the world's first air casualties
when their gas ignited and they crashed near Boulogne.
Not long afterwards, on the express orders of Napoleon
himself, the balloon became an engine of war. In June
1794 the French army carried out military reconnaissance
from a tethered gas-bag at Maubeuge. Balloons of one
kind or another have been used for varying purposes in
every major war since.
Another use for balloons began in 1797 when the very
brave French aeronaut, Garnerln, successfully tested the
first real parachute from one. Parachuting from captive
balloons became a popular feature of nineteenth century
spectacles and outdoor entertainments, both men and
women dropping to delight the crowds. In the same year,
Testu Brissy went up mounted on a horse, ushering in a
long series of balloon ascents by all kinds of animals,
including stags and a bull.
All Europe went "balloonatic," as the saying was.
Hardy folk went up for the fun of It at fairs and the like,
where the gaily-coloured and patterned envelopes were
always sure to attract attention and money. Gradually,
however, men began to take this strange new form of
transport seriously, even though all balloon journeys were
at the mercy of the prevailing winds.
With cheap coal gas established as the lifting power,
scientists, inventors and explorers took to the air. Men
could fly at last, but passively, standing uncomfortably in
little wicker cars, at the mercy of the elements, yet In
control of the climbing and falling of their overhead craft.
What was it like to "enclose a cloud in a bag and sail
upon the bosom of the air?" All balloonists agree that
although it was exciting to risk danger and launch into
the unknown in such a new way, the greatest single
reaction was one of sheer elation. "Lingering in the deep
blue vault of space," though in fact seldom higher than
about 10,000 feet, regularly gave aeronauts "a sensation
of perfect quietude and restfulness, and a feeling of how
petty the earth and its concerns are," said one pioneer.
Ballooning was in fact like arriving at a mountain
summit without the fatigue of the climb. As the gas-bag
always travelled at the exact velocity of the prevailing
wind, there was no sensation of speed, rush or Indeed of
any movement at all. Early balloonists used to throw out
strips of paper to see whether they were rising or falling.
And the overall sense of tranquillity was further marked
by the complete and uncanny silence.
In these old days flight really was completely silent. To
travel in a balloon offered, as one man said, "a silence so
profound that no silence on earth can equal It." Apart
from the occasional slight friendly creak of basket or
rigging, the only sounds heard came up from the earth.
At low altitudes all were plainly audible: the concerted
roar of traffic over towns, the whistle and rumble of
trains, the noise of dogs, cockerels, cattle and children.
Above all, for the first time, men heard the full "Incessant
murmur of the commotion of the waters" when over the
sea. This was unlike the noise of the waves on the sea¬
shore, a strange, mighty rippling surge that In fact can
only be heard from a balloon.
Of course, there were hazards, though most aeronauts
declared their huge craft were easy to handle. There was
a decided chill when clouds or mist were entered, and
above 10,000 feet it could be distinctly uncomfortable. If
wet, ballast could freeze Into Immovable blocks. Owing to
the risk of fire from the coal gas, there was always a strict
"no smoking" rule, and tall hats were taboo. When the
rising envelope blew off surplus gas from its open neck
tube hanging directly above the flyers the effect could be
most unpleasant.
Sometimes when hot sunshine quickly dried out rain-
wetted rigging and caused a simultaneous slight loss of
gas, the car would drop suddenly, perhaps only a couple 31
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Unesco
TRIPS BY CINEORAMA. Visitors to the Paris Exhibition of 1 900 were offered the impressions of
a balloon flight without ever leaving the ground. This attraction was made possible by a multiple-
camera device, the "Cineorama", developed by a Frenchman, Raoul Grimoin Sanson. A platform
shaped like a balloon basket, over which hung a real balloon, was surrounded by a circular screen
over 300 feet in circumference. Beneath it was a room equipped with ten film projectors. Grouped
on the platform several hundred spectators could watch films, taken during real balloon flights over
Europe and Africa, projected on the circular screen. After only a few performances the Cineorama
was stopped by the authorities as a serious fire hazard. This spelt ruin for the inventor.
WHEN FLIGHT WAS SILENT (Cont'd)
No noise, no smell, no oil
32
of feet, but forcefully enough to terrify the crew through
the sensation of having broken loose. Lightning was
always a danger to be reckoned with, and it was tricky
trying to land on a chosen spot in a high wind.
From about 1852 onwards some aeronauts grew in¬
creasingly dissatisfied with their inability to steer their
craft or drive it forward. Attempts had long been made
to propel balloons with wooden oars, without success, but
yet another Frenchman, Henry Giffard, developed an
elliptical gas-bag powered by steam-driven propellers.
This was the true ancestor of the air-ship.
But other enthusiasts were content to float freely in
their "gallant and graceful aerial craft," and ballooning
did not begin to die out until about 1909-10, when the
aeroplane became feasible. In 1862 the eminence of the
static gas-bag was well demonstrated when the English
weather expert James Glaisher and the noted balloonist
Coxwell reached some 20,000 ft., a clear record for that
date. Both men went up to make meteorological obser¬
vations, and were seriously affected by the cold and lack
of oxygen. Incidentally, the balloon altitude record,
achieved in 1960 by Capt. J. W. Klittinger of the U.S. Air
Force, stands at 102,800 feet (19.13 miles).
Another aspect of the balloon's unattained powers was
illustrated as long ago as 1897, when the Swedish explorer,
Major S. A. Andrée, tried with two others to reach the
North Pole in a giant hydrogen balloon made of the finest
Chinese silk. With vaseline-soaked rigging to resist
moisture and a specially large car, this monster deserved
to succeed if ever a balloon did.
Unfortunately, Andrée failed to reckon with the Arctic
mist, and his balloon was forced down on the ice, heavy
with frozen mist on the envelope, 288 miles and 65Í hours
after leaving Danes Island. The three men trekked by
sledge over the drifting pack-ice for two and a half
months before perishing of cold on White Island, but by
an incredible chance their remains and last camp were
discovered in 1930. Although 33 years old, and damaged
by wet, some of Andrée's photographs of his crashed
balloon were later developed and printed.
In the early years of this century, ballooning became an
inexpensive sport followed by adventurous pioneers like
Charles Rolls (partner of Henry Royce), T.O.M. Sopwith
and J.T.C. Moore-Brabazón (now Lord Brabazón), Bri¬
tain's first pilot. They used to go up at weekends, and
take part in many events and races to see who could tra¬
vel the furthest before coming down. The 1914 record
of 1,890 miles still stands.
Since those days free-flying balloons have become
almost extinct, but balloons of other types, not least the
myriads* of small weather balloons regularly released all
over the globe, prove that the work of all those intrepid
pioneers was not wasted. Yet when the aeroplane took
over, something was lost, the strange attraction enjoyed
by those first flyers.
To quote Lord Brabazon, writing long afterwards:
"I still maintain that ballooning is the only gentle¬
man's way of going into the air no noise, no smell, no
wind, no oil just peace... and the delight of having to go
the way the wind willed, with the pleasant anticipation
of landing in some remote spot."
