UNESCO
IN RETROSPECT
AND PERSPECTIVE
by Jane Albert Hesse
Anew international and multilingual publishing
venture by Unesco has made its mark in
the field of art book production. Collabo¬
rating with publishers in eight countries Unesco has
launched a series of art books in pocket form.
The striking fact about this new collection, in which
four volumes have already appeared, is that it pre¬
sents colour reproductions of great works of art of
a high quality normally only found in expensive art
books, in a pocket-sized format at well within the
normal level of pocket book prices which are usually
around 5/- or less than $1.00. This has been made
possible by the scale of the enterprise and the
co-operative arrangements between Unesco and
publishers in Britain, the United States, France, the
German Federal Republic, Italy, Mexico, the Nether¬
lands and Spain.
EACH Unesco Art Pocket Book contains 28
plates of colour reproductions, additional illus¬
trations in black and white and an introductory
text by an international scholar in which the histor¬
ical background and an analysis of the works it
covers are presented in a simple, straightforward
way for the man in the street.
In "Egyptian Wall Paintings from Tombs and
Temples", Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt, Cura¬
tor of the Department of Egyptian Antiquities at the
Louvre in Paris, discusses the delicate frescoes
painted some 3,000 years ago in the tombs and
temples of the Nile Valley. "Persian Miniatures
from Ancient Manuscripts" is introduced by Basil
Gray and presents some of the great art treasures
of the world in the form of miniatures now preserved
in the Gulistan Palace of Teheran.
THE third book, "Spanish Frescoes of the Roma¬
nesque Period", introduced by Juan Ainaud,
opens the door to a brilliant and little-known
period of European art. Lastly, "Russian Icons from
the 12th to the 15th Century", with its colour plates
and an introduction by Victor Lazareff, presents a
vivid overall picture of the different schools of
Russian icon paintings.
More titles are to be added to the series which
has so far appeared in English, Spanish, French,
Italian, German and Dutch language editions. By
this multilingual approach and the fact that these
books will be on sale in every kind of bookshop
and bookstall, in railway stations and large stores,
Unesco's aim to bring fine quality colour reproduc¬
tions of world art masterpieces within reach of a
wide public will have been achieved.
The success of Unesco's earlier initiative in art
publishing its handsome World Art Series albums
promises to be repeated by its new Art Pocket
Books. (See page 35 for further details.)
I t may seem surprising that Unesco is still an
unknown organization to certain people. Is
it not an international organization which has been in
existence for 16 years, the co-operative enterprise of 113
countries which has been reported and commented on by
the world press ? Its headquarters are in the centre of
one of the world's great capitals In a strikingly-designed
building of concrete and glass a new sightseeing at¬
traction for the visitor to Paris, but primarily the labor¬
atory of a new 20th- century humanism.
Educators, scientists, artists and specialists of all kinds
follow Unesco's work either by participating directly or
through reading the books, periodicals and the studies
which it publishes. But other people, the vast majority,
in fact, only hear of Unesco through the necessarily brief
and fragmentary reports that appear in the press. Some,
in fact, think of Unesco either as an institute for study
and research or a body with humanitarian aims on the
lines of the International Red Cross.
Though comprehensive studies on Unesco have appeared
in some countries, in France. Unesco's adopted home, no
exhaustive work on how it came into being and what it
has since achieved had ever been published until recently.
This gap has now been filled.
A remarkable book published by the famous French pub¬
lishing house, Gallimard, * recounts the Unesco story
telling of its aims and problems, its failures and succes¬
ses. The book has set out to dissipate widespread igno¬
rance and misunderstanding regarding Unesco, yet even
the reader well-aquainted with Unesco will find revealing
facts and information in its pages. Bearing the simple
sitie, "Unesco", the book was written by a Frenchman,
Tean Thomas, who knows Unesco well. He served Unesco
from 1947 to 1960, first as head of its Cultural Activities
Department and later as Deputy Director-General. He
shows how the name "Unesco" United Nations Educa¬
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization embodies
both the historical reasons for the creation of this U. N.
Specialized Agency after the Second World War, and why,
face to face with the urgent needs of a swiftly-changing
world, it has had to choose between one road and another
at various periods of its life.
u
26
nesco was born in London in November 1945,
when representatives of 45 countries met to
found a new organization dedicated to education, science
and culture. The atmosphere of this period was
influenced by the many still-unhealed wounds and the
resolve of nations to "erase from men's minds the seeds
of fanaticism and hatred." There was thus a need, as
Miss Ellen Wilkinson, Britain's Minister of Education, said
at the time, for an association of states which would
make education one of Its main fields of action, but not
its sole objective.
Unesco's forerunner, the International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation, established in 1926 by the
League of Nations had been conceived on very different
linesas an "association of minds", to recall the words of
Paul Valéry. In the case of Unesco, the greatest emphasis
was on education and the Agency was founded, to quote
its own Constitution, "for the purpose of advancing,
through the educational and scientific and cultural

Henry Moore
relations of the peoples of the world, the objectives of
international peace and of the common welfare of
mankind."
The rapidly changing situation of the postwar world
and the emergence of so many former colonies and trust
territories as independent nations soon made it clear
which were priority tasks. Even before political develop¬
ments sparked these changes, the economically-developed
countries had stated clearly and unequivocally the degree
of responsibility they felt towards their less fortunate
neighbours.
H ow can Unesco carry out its work, asked Sir
I Julian Huxley, in his first report as Director-
General to the Unesco General Conference, In a world
where more than half the people are illiterate and lack
the skills and knowledge necessary to build for themselves
a healthy life and prosperous conditions of agriculture and
also to make the most effective use of scientific dis¬
coveries?
The need was clear: give top priority to providing educ¬
ation where there had been none, never forget the human¬
istic ideal of universality and always show a genuine
understanding and respect for cultural values whatever
their origin.
At Unesco's preparatory conference in London in 1946,
representatives of 44 states were present. The next year,
a total of 23 had ratified the Constitution and took their
seats as member states at the General Conference. The
numbers grew: 37 by the end of 1947, 55 in 1950, and
today, 113.
Equality in status for the member states of Unesco did
not, however, remove a flagrant Inequality of fact: the
number of newly-developing countries In Unesco grew
unceasingly and the dividing line between these and the
more favoured was clearly economic.
It was to meet this grave situation that the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance was conceived,
adopted in principle in 1948 and applied, in Unesco's case,
as from 1950. In applying this aid, Unesco always kept
in mind the aims affirmed in its Constitution. "Unesco
was the only international organization," writes Jean
Thomas, "to take to heart the truth that people have not
only material needs, but spiritual ones too, which are no
less important."
This faith in the primacy of education and the resolve
to see it universally acknowledged stand out clearly
throughout the book. They are its real animating force
and spirit. The author has not given to his account the
chronological form that might have weighed down his
narrative. Nevertheless the whole story of Unesco how
it faced up to increasingly complex tasks, how it main¬
tained course and purpose despite difficulties and crises
and how, finally, it came to maturity stands out clearly
in his account.
No one could say that Unesco's task has been simple.
It has encountered many difficult and dangerous situa¬
tions in its lifetime and one of its major problems has
been the question of its moral autonomy. "How can the
unanimity which for so long has been missing from the
United Nations be achieved in Unesco?" asks Jean Tho
mas. Yet while in no way underestimating the difficul¬
ties, he considers that Unesco Is proving Its worth, and
explains why. However, to Judge Its circctiveness. he
adds, "each one of Unesco's projects must be examined
separately and each time on the basis oí different cri¬
teria."
How then has Unesco coped with two major tasks: the
fight against illiteracy and the reclamation of the world's
arid lands?
It Is not Unesco's role to take over education for chil¬
dren or for adults In any country. This Is the responsibi¬
lity of governments. Through a system of co-operation
between governments, educators and appropriate orga¬
nizations, Unesco has offered advice on educational tech¬
niques that might be used, has suggested the lines for
development programmes and has passed on the results
of experiments that have been tried successfully elsewhere.
It has given direct aid to countries when they have a.sked
for It.
For the arid zone problems, "through co-operation
between specialists, Unesco has encouraged and co-or¬
dinated scientific activities related to these problems and
has helped member states within the action of the Tech¬
nical Assistance Programme."
Thus any evaluation of Unesco's effectiveness must take
into account Unesco's alms, the methods It uses and the
means It Is given to work with. None of this Is likely
to be Immediately obvious to the man In the street. It
is here that the Jean Thomas' book reveals lLself as an
Indispensable guide to those concerned with public Infor¬
mation. It analyzes clearly and precisely Unesco's rela¬
tions with its member states and with the United Nations
and explains how Unesco co-ordinates the delicate balance
between Its activities.
N o matter how slight his previous knowledge of
Unesco, the reader Is left with the Impression
of having shared in an unfolding adventure of high
endeavour. For, says the author. Unesco's Constitution
has given It a task high In the scale of moral values: "the
maintenance of peace and security among the nations".
But the roads of peace are rarely triumphal highways,
modest, rather, and always difficult of access.
Here, in its "public relations", Its relations with the
peoples of 113 countries Unesco Is accomplishing its mis¬
sion. Thousands of peace treaties have been swept
away by the winds of history. Unesco today strives to
build the defences of peace In the minds of men.
And this Is by no means the least Important of the
lessons olTered by this book which the author concludes
on a resolutely optimistic note, still further underlined by
the frankness with which he has described the temporary
setbacks and permanent problems facing Unesco. "When
one takes stock." he says, "of all the multitude of different
activities and intellectual disciplines Involved In Unesco's
work, the resulting array of strength Is so great as to
banish any fears as to the resources open to It. What It
must learn to do is to draw and marshal 'around It all
these forces of goodwill."
* Unesco by Jean Thomas, published by Gallimard. Paris. 1962.
Price 13.50 Fr. frs.
27
