HOMO SAPIENS-
THAT STRANGE PARAI III
by Daniel Bovet
Nobel Prize for Physiology and Médecine
X
56
What Is science? What are we scientists trying
to accomplish in the work we do in our
laboratories and research? When we try to answer this
question we come up against the two complementary
aspects of the problem. On the one hand, science seen
only as part of the development of rational thought and
knowledge; on the other the contribution of science to
economic and social advancement through the applica¬
tion of new techniques in industry, agriculture and
communication.
Even though the classical opposition between pure and
applied science is today out of date, the purposes and
consequences of science cannot be totally divorced from
these two aspects.
If the purpose of scientific knowledge is considered by
some to be the enunciation of universal laws, to others it
is nothing more than an instrument of practical action.
Whereas Henri Poincaré affirmed that "thought is no
more than a flash of light in the darkness of a long night
but it is this flash that is everything," Henri Bouasse, not
without humour, supported the pragmatic attitude when
he wrote "the scientist seeks a pattern into which the
facts may be moulded, and science has but one justifica¬
tion for Its extreme monotony: to serve an end."
When looked at in terms of economic development
(where its results are most apparent) the answer to our
question is relatively easy: the growth of new sources of
energy, the advances made in telecommunications and
methods of transport, automation in industry and fac¬
tories, the rise in the expectation of life and the almost
total disappearance of infectious diseases are but a few
of the hundreds of obvious examples of the progress
achieved by the second industrial revolution.
But this is not the most important consideration, and
if we are not to overlook what is perhaps the crux of
the problem we must recognize that the moral, social
and even political revolution brought about by the recent
development of science is as important as, if not more
important than, the technological changes themselves.
Today scientific research has become such an impor¬
tant element of modern society conducted and exploited
almost on a par with mineral or land resources, that a
real effort must now be made not to forget that this
capital asset is really no more than the ideas, the culture,
the creative genius I am tempted to add the flight of
fancy of a few men.
Thus if the stereotyped image of the scientist as a man
in an ivory tower lost in incomprehensible experiments,
little understood and the butt of many jokes, has not
entirely disappeared, it is slowly dying and giving way
to the modern notion of the "team of scientists" working
in richly endowed institutes, forming a growing army of
skilled investigators at the service of important industrial
and governmental bodies.
One of the major results of the new policy of planning
scientific research is the influence it will have, either
consciously or not, on the ultimate equilibrium between
the various branches of scientific research.
In the nineteenth century the most audacious theories
of science came from the field of biology and it was here
that the greatest battles raged between old and new ideas.
In our present century the most spectacular and most
revolutionary discoveries have been made in the physical
sciences micrpphysics and our knowledge of the uni¬
verse. The scope of present-day discussions on both
questions of theory and practice lead one to believe that
the balance will continue to weigh heavily in favour of
the physical sciences for some time to come.
But when we consider the enormous problems facing
the biologist and the crucial importance for all mankind
of the ultimate solution to these problems it would seem
preferable to have the scales of the balance tip once
again in favour of the life sciences.
I should like to recall at this point a hypothesis which
I formulated some years ago concerning the history of
the major trends in human thought. I called it "the
hypothesis of the constant or invariability of grey
matter". This hypothesis is based exclusively on the
experimental method. Thus, of 100 rats raised in my
laboratory only ten (or fifteen at the most) are capable
of being taught even a slightly complex operation. If I
train them to climb on to a perch at a given signal it
Is unlikely that they will learn to open a door. If I teach
them to push a lever in order to get a drop of sugared
water they often forget their other skills.
I have sometimes asked myself if this does not also
apply to our own human society.
We know that certain colleges and universities have
found themselves depleted of staff because of the serious
inroads made upon them by industrial laboratories. Can
we imagine what would härmen if an excessive demand
for physicists suddenly deprived us of good biologists and
doctors? Do we not have examples in history where cities
have suffered from a lack of good statesmen because
everyone wanted to be an artist, or where the over-
popularity of philosophy deprived a nation of leaders for
its defence. This is a subject the reader might carefully
ponder.
I t is no longer enough to proclaim that no
I sphere of knowledge can henceforth remain
unexplored; we must also recognize our degree of igno¬
rance regarding the many problems deeply affecting man
himself. These embrace a broad field of subjects parti¬
cularly the vast domain of the basic sciences, molecular
biology and biophysics, research into intermediary meta¬
bolism and the science of nutrition, neurophysiology, the
study of the information processes in the central nervous
system, psychology and animal sociology in relation to the
study of behaviour.
Man's noblest intellectual and cultural achievements
have sprung from the human brain, the organ which
controls our behaviour and thought and largely regulates
our physical and mental well being. , The study of the
brain should, therefore, it seems to me, occupy a promi¬
nent place In research programmes and be carried out
as a co-operative scientific enterprise both on an inter¬
national and inter-disciplinary scale.
As for the field of pharmacology, particularly familiar
to me, I feel that the time is now ripe for a concerted

WHO-Spooner FROM MICE TO MEN. The behaviour of animals, of mice and rats in particular, has been
widely studied by scientists. Biologists have gained valuable knowledgo for tho lifo sciences.
attack on the problems of therapeutics and mental and
social hygiene just as the research drives of recent years
have led to important breakthroughs that have van¬
quished disease and prolonged human life.
We must work for the prevention and treatment of the
degenerative diseases of the brain, mental deficiency and
the physical disorders of old age. Certainly after
conquering a horde of disease-bearing microbes, chemo¬
therapy is hardly less capable of attacking those more
subtle spectres, our hallucinations and obsessions.
Not long ago a biologist formuiated the hope that
science would produce à "formula to make' men good."
I for my part believe that since man can never halt on
the road of evolution he will be obliged in the future to
resolve his own dilemma by choosing between the "Soma"
of Huxley's Brave New World which will plunge him into
a state of stupid beatitude, and the pill which will make
him more intelligent by developing his learning capacity
and power of retention.
Since I have espoused the cause of biology I dare
say I gladly support the seeming paradox which main¬
tains that it is through the study of animal behaviour
that we should embark on the study of the human
sciences. And I am convinced that biological research
offers us the clearest road for understanding how the
development of his own knowledge can in fact modify
and enrich man's vision of his own destiny.
In human terms then what can we foresee as the result
of -this new "Operation Scientific Research"?
In contrast to Jean-Jacques Rousseau who denounced
the corruption of morals engendered by science, the
Encyclopaedists saw in scientific progress the one great
hope for mankind and the raison d'être of all our endea¬
vours. In the centuries that followed, Rousseau won
numerous new supporters as the world witnessed the
extraordinary development of science and technology.
And even today there are still those who point an accusing
finger at science. The narrow intellectual sphere in
which the scientist works is roundly denounced and cer¬
tain groups have even gone so far as to see in the machine
and automation a "world conspiracy against all inner
life," accusing the scientist of depriving man of hLs
"soul."
And yet the value of science in forming and developing
the Individual is evident to us every day as teachers. We
see it In the drive, the enthusiasm, the perserverance as
well as the will and spirit of abnegation of our students
and colleagues; we see it in action among our fellow
scientists in universities and research institutes; we sec it
in the determination of so many of them to be an active
part of the society they live in, convinced that their deep
faith in a supreme truth will help to achieve a much
broader ideal of human justice. As scientists wc arc filled
with the feeling that we have received a parcel of the
wonderful heritage bequeathed to us by our masters, and
which, transcending those now living, continues to enrich
us after four centuries of a long, prodigious tradition.
Why is our age, which is barely over the threshold of
Immense new sources of energy, gripped by a sensation
of helplessness bordering on despair? Wc are so dLsillu-
sloned by the experience of two world wars and their long
aftermaths; so obsessed once again by the feeling of
insecurity and so deeply troubled as members of society,
that It would seem our generation has lost the courage
and the will to believe and work for peace.
As men of science we must proclaim loudly not only
that science is not solely responsible for all the evils of
our day but that some of the greatest accomplishments
of the post-war period have been brought about by
science.
Confident as I am in a new humanism, I believe that
we can have no sober constructive vision of the future if
it is not based on a rational approach to reality, recourse
to science to solve the problems facing us, and the search
for an ideology and technology worthy of man.
Daniel Bovet, of Italy, won the Nobel Prize for Physiology
and Medicine in 1957. He is director and founder of the 57
Therapeutical Chemistry Laboratory at the Institute of
Health in Rome.
