MrÔlDDonÂu^
OF THE CINEMA ~V
L PT. 2 FILM DISTRIBUTION ^^^^H
In its December issue, The Unesco Courier began the publication of a
series of articles on the lesser-known aspects of the cinema industry
based on a world-wide survey by Paul Léglise. In his second article, the
author turns a spotlight on the vast and complex machine through which
films of all kinds are distributed to the world's 170,000 commercial cinemas
as well as to the multitude of specialized non-commercial cinemas.
film has been completed. Soon It will be
i presented to the public in cinemas around the
world. Its makers hope that it will turn out to be a
major box-office success, drawing record audiences to the
cinema. As the American producer, Walter Wanger, once
wrote in The New York Times: "The film must appeal
Just as much to an eight-year-old child as to a man of
eighty; it must entertain people of every race and every
country, Irrespective of their religions, and political or
social systems."
This is the salient principle of the universal audience
and what American film-makers mean when they speak
of "universal appeal." But the cinema-going public is not
a homogeneous group of people. Innumerable influences
exert pressure upon the cinema audience. Sex, age, in¬
come, social position, level of education, character, likes
and dislikes, working hours, seasons, periods of prosperity
and economic crisis all help 'to mould the audience, as
does publicity In all its forms. And, moving alongside
the entertainment film, the specialized production now
holds an increasingly important place In the cinema world.
By way of example let us simply take one of these
factors age. Surveys and polls conducted in different
countries all indicate that, from childhood on, film-going
Increases with age to reach its maximum among teen¬
agers (between 15 and 20). From then on attendance
declines. Thus the film public and the public in general
are not one and the same and because of this, film dis¬
tribution has to be geared to meet the special character-
. istics of the film-goers. Its first problem is publicity:
what is the most effective way to publicize a newly-
completed film?
The greatest impact on the man-in-the-street is made by
the "spectacular" aspect of publicity the use of huge
poster hoardings and eye-catching boxed items in the
press. Through other columns in newspapers and perio¬
dicals he also tastes some of the atmosphere and feverish
excitement of international film festivals the gala
openings, carnival-like processions and cocktail parties.
All this is dismissed by some people as trivial and frivo¬
lous. And yet this kind of artificial effervescence is vital
to the cinema. This was so in the past and is still the
case today. As to the future, there is a need for the
development of more mature tastes in the . spectator
28 and the means to satisfy them. Tomorrow's film-goer
will be more responsive to the qualities of what he or
she sees on the screen, and the cult of the film will be
FANS AND FLASHLIGHTS. Flashbulbs pop
while fans and the curious crowd around some of
the stars in the galaxy attending the Cannes
Film Festival in France. Behind the glitter and
excitement of such occasions the gala openings
carnival-like processions, receptions and cocktail
partiesis another world : the serious, down-
to-earth business world of the film industry.
replaced by a love of the cinema. Already film criticism
is making a positive contribution in this direction.
But the general public has, on the whole, little inkling of
the things that go on behind this glittering facade: the
negotiation of contracts, the planning of future produc¬
tions and the sale of current films on the world market.
The number of contracts signed during a fortnight-long
festival is a fair measure of the concentration of "stars"
and big names in the cinema at any of these "fairs" of
the film world.
While business may occupy pride of place at the great
film festivals, cultural values are not forgotten. Meetings,
discussions and round-tables are not exclusively concerned
with professional matters, but deal with such subjects as
artistic expression, intellectual trends, the art of editing
or décor. -. [
Festivals at Cannes, Venice, Berlin, Moscow, Tokyo. Mar
del Plata, St. Sebastian and Locarno are primarily devoted
to feature-length entertainment films. There is never
any question of other aspects of the cinema being given
the place of honour nor can they always even squeeze
their way in to a folding seat or a stool in the aisle. This
explains the mushroom growth of film festivals that we
have seen recently in many parts of the world.
Some (Oberhausen, Tours) are solely devoted to short
films or, more generally to cultural and documentary films
(Cork, Mannheim, Manila). But above all nowadays the
movement is towards subject specialization (mountains
and exploration at Trento; sports films at Cortina d'Am¬
pezzo; industrial films at Harrogate, Rouen and Antwerp;
cartoons at Annecy; music and dance films at Valencia;
touristic and folklore films at Brussels).
An important co-ordination problem concerning film
distribution is how to keep the organizers of film screen¬
ings properly informed about the material that is
currently In circulation. The difficulty Is not so great in

<0 furoprc.î, Pari.
the case of feature-length and even short entertainment
Alms shown in cinemas thanks to the excellent compre¬
hensive catalogues distributed each year by the national
trad.- organizations. But for cultural, educational, scien¬
tific, technical or Industrial films the situation is far more
complicated. How is one to find the way through a forest
of catalogues that overlap, but do not necessarily present
a complete picture, and amid card indexes of the most
varied types and sizes.
One way of getting around this problem was suggested
by a round-table gathering organized by Unesco in Venice
In July 1959. This meeting recommended that national
information centres should be set up to supply facts about
all films produced in their respective countries. A similar
suggestion came from the conference organized In London
in February 1961 by the Council of Europe, on the distribu¬
tion of cultural films.
Subsequently, at Unesco's request, the International
Cinema and Television Council appointed a specialist to
make a thorough study of the problem. In a remarkable
and comprehensive report, this specialist has outlined all
the facts on the basis of which a rational and effective
plan of action could be co-ordinated and applied.
As recommended by the Venice round-table and the
London conference, the national cataloguing centres would
assemble and list all films and television programmes for
eventual publication in a General Film Catalogue, similar
to existing national bibliographies. To meet the delicate
problem of bringing cataloguing standards into line,
Unesco has published, International Rules for the Cata¬
loguing of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Films and
Filmstrips.
In the early days of the cinema a film might be produc¬
ed in hundreds of copies which were sold by the yard and
shown by travelling showmen until completely worn out.
The film trade was first alerted to the need for a reform
in this sphere by a former French lawyar, Edmond
Benoit-Lcvy, in a key article that appeared In the review
Ciné-Gazette which he founded in 1905. Writing under
the pen-name of Francis Malr, he asked, "What is a film?
Is it ordinary merchandise which the purchaser can use
as he thinks fit? No, a film is a literary and artistic
property. In order to show it royalties must be paid.
Future discussions will be concerned with the fixing of
such royalties."
The first to adopt this formula was the French newsrcel
pioneer, Charles Pathe, who in 1907 set up five regional
companies in France and gave them a 20-year monopoly
to exploit his productions.
The results of this reform in distribution methods were
revealed quite clearly when the second International
congress met In Paris under the presidency of Georges
Melles in February 1909. This was attended by film
company representatives from the United States, Great
Britain, Denmark, Italy and France. Faced by a looming
crisis In the cinema business and wishing to fix uniform
prices for films as well as to prevent the over-long use of
prints, the congress decided to Introduce the first regula¬
tions governing the sale or release of films. Producers
agreed that In future they would supply films only to those
who had signed an agreement and who were prepared
to certify In writing that they would return the films,
carriage paid, to the producers within four months.
This was the beginning, however embryonic, of film
distribution as we know it nowadays. Today a product
of the film-maker's art Is protected as an original work
under the Berne and Geneva Conventions on Copyright,
and only its authors have the right to authorize its re¬
production and screening.
CONT'D ON NEXT PACE
29

CINEMA (Cont'd)
A trade in
'intangible property'
Who. are, in fact, the authors of a film? For many years
this controversial question provoked lively discussions at
international congresses. The 39th Congress of the World
Literary and Artistic Association, held In Budapest in 1930,
appeared to reconcile the conflicting views on the problem
when It defined the term "author" as covering the writer
of the original work, the composer of the original score and
the film's director, with the producer retaining exclusive
ownership of the cinematographic rights in the work for a
period of seven years.
For some years afterwards, however, producers, pressed
home the view that the producer was the chief, if not
the sole, author and that he alone had the right to
authorize the reproduction and showing of a film.
N
30
owADAYS the film is generally considered
as a collective work and while each film may
be judged as an individual case, the prevailing view Is
that the co-authors of a cinematographic work are the
creative collaborators (director, scenario writer, music
composer and producer).
These co-authors grant most of the rights which they
have inherited in the work to one of their number, the
producer, but retain a moral right which covers the inclu¬
sion of their names in the film credits and in advertising
and enables them to refuse to accept any changes that, in
their view, detract from the integrity of their work. For
the distribution of the work, the producer may in turn
grant the rights which are his by contract to other per¬
sons. Thus the distribution machinery Is set in motion.
It seems reasonable to suppose that not only the financ¬
ing arrangements of a film, but even more so its distribu¬
tion would call for a full knowledge and clear understand-
ing of its authors' rights, any contracts involved as well as
any disagreements and ensuing legal decisions. It is
surprising, therefore, that only a few countries such as
France, Italy and Federal Germany, require these basic
facts to be listed In a central registry.
Though film distribution may be looked upon in principle,
as a trade in what jurists call "intangible property"
(having no material existence in itself, but attaching as a
right or profit to some actual thing) it does involve many
aspects of a more material nature.
After signing a contract with the producer and as we
have already seen, this often takes place when the question
arises of financing a planned film the distributor, acting
for the producer, launches a publicity campaign aimed at
exhibitors. Screenings for members of the film trade are
arranged and distribution company, salesmen make the
rounds of cinema managers' offices to offer films that are
available.
Blind-booking doing business in films that are still In
the planning stage is practised less often nowadays. Yet
the risks involved in rentals of this kind are still accepted
by some first-run cinemas which thereby put up a percen¬
tage of the money needed to finance the production.
Large companies whose interests cover simultaneously
production, distribution and exhibiting are also obliged to
adopt this system in their cinema circuits so as to ensure
the distribution of their own films. And for similar rea¬
sons, so are the cinema organizations in countries with
socialist economies.
Another method frequent and deep-rooted is block-
booking which consists of not selling the exhibiting rights
to a given film but to a series. Exhibitors buy a locomotive
(a film sure of box-office success) and a string of trucks
(films whose profitability is far less certain) on the basis of
"all or nothing at all." This is the reason for the uneven
and incongruous series of programmes that some cinemas
other than those which specialize in a certain type or
CONT'D ON PAGE 32
DRA1ERLIM.
Magic
Made
¿ASV
Magic by Merlin is an
eye-opener (above) for
this 12-year-old "star"
of the film, "School Sau-
cery" an awardwinning
production by the Wal¬
ton County Secondary
School Film Unit in
England. Each year the
best school film unit pro¬
ductions compete in
a nationwide contest
sponsored by Great
Britain's National
Union of Teachers.
Litter bin is pressed
into service by a youth¬
ful cameraman (right)
"on location" at a sea¬
side resort. Film pro¬
duction gives youngsters
a deeper and more se¬
rious interest in the
cinema and develops
initiative. Below, a 15-
year-old artist at work
at. the animating desk
on a cartoon sequence.
All photos W.-Iton County Secondary School Film Unit

The right angle for the
close-up. Schoolboy
cameraman prepares
to "shoot"' the girl
"star" of the film
"Crosswise" (right).
Below, a camera team
photographs the end
titles for "School Sau-
cery"', a short film.
FILM FESTIVAL FOR THE JUNIOR SET
year for the first time
school-age and teen-age film
producers are to have their own inter¬
national festival. The Tenth Muse
Competition" organized by the Inter¬
national Centre of Films for Children
(241, rue Royale, Brussels) is to be
held at the Venice Lido and will
award prizes for the best films made
by young people. It will be world¬
wide in scope and open to two age
groups: those under 16 and those
between 16 and 18 years of age.
Films may be in colour or black and
white, 8-mm. or 16-mm., but they
must be silent and must not run
longer than 15 minutes. The Tenth
Muse Competition (adding a new
one to the nine muses in classical
mythology) reflects the place now
given to films in the classroom and
in education generally. Film produc¬
tion by the pupils themselves is now
a regular feature in the curriculum
of many British schools. Photos on
these pages show some of these
junior British film-makers at work.
r
I
I ' rT

CINEMA (Cont'd)
Boom in art and experimental films
32
class of film offer their customers; programmes that
always surprise cinema-goers who would like to see
something corresponding to their tastes rather than
simply "go to the cinema."
How many prints of a film will be needed by the distribu¬
tor? The answer can vary considerably. It all depends
on the success of the film, the cinemas involved and
whether the film Is to have a. mass release or a gradual
distribution. Copies reduced to a 16-mm. format instead
of the standard trade format of 35-mm. will be needed for.
use on rural circuits and in the non-commercial field.
In the case of foreign language films, sub-titles must be
added or, through the more complex operation of post-
synchronization, actors voices dubbed in the national or
local language.
Then the next phase in distribution begins. Films have
to be despatched and on their return the condition of
copies checked carefully. This alone calls for an ade¬
quately-developed technical department, according to the
size of the firm and the number of rental contracts.
Equally Indispensable Is an extensive book-keeping
department. The distributor, in fact, is the real cashier of
the cinema and as such he often becomes a kind of
production banker. He draws up the invoices, sees that
these are settled and pays over to the producers the sums
that are due to them. Supervision of receipts, especially
where a system of percentage rentals is involved, is often
a far from straightforward operation.
It Is here that corporative or State bodies can often be
of great help since taxation and financial authorities have
a direct interest in the control of cinema business. In
France, for instance, all tickets sold at cinema box-offices
are supplied by the National Cinematographic Centre.
After each programme is screened, the Centre receives a
declaration of receipts, showing the first and last numbers
of tickets sold during the performances.
In the socialist countries distribution and production are
associated in nationalized firms which come directly under
the ministries concerned with films: Film Polski (Govern¬
ment Film Monopoly in Poland), Ceskoslovensky Film
(Czechoslovak Films), Sovrofilm (Rumania) and so on.
I iSTRiBUTioN . problems like those already
described create new difficulties in developing
countries where the technical resources to cope with
them are not always available. Shortage of raw film and
a polyglot language situation complicate matters still
further.
These are the kind of problems that Inspired the Bang¬
kok Conference on the development of information media
in South East Asia (January 1960) to suggest the creation
of a regional co-operation bureau. Though this body
would not itself actually distribute films, it would assist co¬
ordination between national 'film departments and would
produce local-language versions of films.
Under what kind of legal conditions is film distribution
operated? Without going too deeply into the judicial
complications of contracts we find two main categories.
In the first of these the distributor obtains the exclu¬
sive right to handle a specific film within a specified area
and for a fixed period at an agreed price or, alternatively,
against a share of the receipts from rental. He may also
grant these rights to another distributor.
The second type of contract determines the general
conditions in which films are exhibited. It gives the
exhibitor the right to screen a copy of a film in a specific
cinema for an agreed number of sessions, on pre-arranged
dates and on payment of a lump sum or a fixed percentage
of receipts. He may not, however, pass on this right.
This type of contract usually includes clauses granting
benefits to certain cinemas: sole rights (only the benefi¬
ciary has the right to show the film within a specified
region and for a set period) ; priority (the right to screen
a film before other exhibitors) ; first or second showing
rights; protection periods (the length of time prior to or
following the screening of a film during which no compet¬
ing exhibitors within a named area may also exhibit it).
Programme patterns vary from one country to another.
By far the most common practice is to open with a
newsreel and one or more short films and then present
the main feature film. But this seems to be increasingly
replaced by the "double feature" two major films in the
same programme. This trend Is to be regretted for it
leads to the suppression of short films and a corresponding
growth of the so-called "B films."
There are of course, other kinds of cinema programmes.
In the "news theatre," for example, newsreels and short
films provide about an hour's entertainment, and some
other cinemas provide a complete programme of shorts.
Today art and experimental cinemas grouped within the
International Federation of Art and Experimental Cinemas
United Nations
A vast number of educational films are produced
nowadays, but their distribution is handicapped by
lack of standardization in cataloguing and indexing
systems. Unesco has now made a study of the various
systems with a view to co-ordinating and assembling
Information about educational films which would be
of special benefit to countries in which this kind of
film production is small or non-existent. Above,
an image of rural life in Ceylon being filmed by a
cameraman from a U.N. travelling motion picture
unit for a film entitled "A Field In Asia", showing
developments in U.N.-aided projects throughout Asia.
are experiencing a remarkable boom throughout the world
by distributing top-quality programmes of the kind that
are often hard to exploit commercially. The development
of special programmes for young people should also be
taken into account.
Generally speaking, cinemas receive newsreels on a
subscription basis. Payment is calculated on fixed sum or
a percentage, depending on how up-to-date the newsreel
is by the time it is shown. In South America, for example,
the rental cost is frequently a multiple of the price of the
best seats in the house (five times the cost of a ticket
for the most expensive seat in Brazil; ten times the price
in Paraguay). In some countries, including Argentina,
Bulgaria. Czechoslovakia, German Federal Republic, Hun¬
gary. India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Peni, Poland and Spain,
the showing of newsreels is compulsory.
(To be continued.)
