Malina

MALINA : ARTIST-SCIENTIST OF THE SPACE AGE
i
18
CEPHEUS. One of a series of
lumidyne paintings of the constella¬
tions of the Zodiac, 25 by 25 cms.
Other constellations in this same
group are shown on page 20.
n 1954 Frank J. Malina brought a new vision to art
when he introduced electric light and movement
into painting. We present here a few examples of his
mobile electro-paintings, though admittedly still photo¬
graphs in black and white cannot do justice to the works
which are based entirely on the continuous movement of
shapes and forms and the changes and inter-reactions
of various colours. It is no accident that all the examples
shown are interpretations of heavenly bodies in outer
space or artistic expressions of scientific phenomena.
For Malina is a rare combination of great scientist and
artist. A U.S. aeronautical engineer and geophysicist,
he designed and launched America's first successful
high-altitude rocket (the WAC Corporal) in 1945. He
directed Unesco's first humid and arid zone research
programmes from 1947 to 1953 when he resigned to devote
himself completely to art. After the launching of the first
astronaut he agreed to devote a portion of his time again
to scientific work, and is now director of the International
Academy of Astronautics and permanent representative
to Unesco of the International Astronautics Federation.
In his art Malina has sought to find new methods and
forms of expression and a new rhythm characteristic of
our modern age. By choosing his themes in the world
of science he has tried to focus attention on the interplay
between science and art in our time. To Malina, " move¬
ment is a fact, an aspect of modern life, and it would be
like tying our hands behind our backs not to use this
important element in the plastic arts. " Science, he says,
offers us a new vision of the universe generally unseen
by the naked eye, but it is up to the artist to translate this
vision into rhythmic, aesthetic terms.

NEBULA II is a striking example of Frank Malina's kinetic art of our space
age. This large painting measures 200 by 100 centimetres and was produced
early in 1961. The background is painted in deep cerulean blue ; the nebulae
are masses of vibrating, fluid light in yellow and white, animated bycountless
minuscule undulations. The whole effect is one of extraordinary beauty,
giving the observer an impression of looking into interstellar space.
Biü^*~'' "'PPllfflB
I'1 "
Hi---' ^K/~ '''^3
. ;
;
kuálÉll
E,.,!.'!
a^K^'1 >Kn
; |3
B? '^I BIBÉ^' BMíPÜg -r^^BB: 9
^IgSBIfn -I^K^ "'fjf gtf~T:- .: igft MBj B^R
1
Bfcr-- g|~_., J BF i^i
1Ü - "^ Ls 11
© Paul Almasy, Part*
PATHS IN SPACE. Detail of un¬
completed work of cover photo. Malina's
revolutionary paintings are usually
composed of four planes : first, a
source of artificial light (electric bulbs
and fluorescent tubes) placed behind
revolving discs or " rotors " painted
in patterns with opaque or transpa¬
rent oil paint ; a tiny motor operates
the rotors. In front of the rotor is
placed the " stator ", a fixed trans¬
parent plaque on which is painted
the basic composition. The completed
painting, combining movement, colour,
and design, appears on the final
plane, a translucid diffusing screen.
Thus, blue on the rotor passing a
yellow area on the stator is seen as
green on the diffusing screen. The
work of art is enclosed in a frame
and is then ready for hanging on a wall.
POLARIS (1957). Here the North
Star is shown at upper right along¬
side large orbit in motion within
which is depicted an orbital flight
of man around a planet. Squares
in centre slowly change their colours
with the Plough (Big Dipper) appear¬
ing in yellow every two minutes.
Marc Vaux, Parii.
1 PLUS 2 TRIANGLES. One of Malina's early kinetic paintings
produced in 1955 and based on a mathematical theme. Here artificial
electric light and blue, orange and green painted triangles are diffused
and seen in motion appearing and disappearing through a wire mesh.
19
