12
Vardanega

MOVEMENT & LIGHT
IN TODAY'S ART
by Frank Popper
KINETICS - The science of the motion of
bodies as produced by the forces acting
upon them. Motion involves the ideas of
space and time. We measure space by the
time which a body takes to move from
one part of space to another. Heraclitus
was the first to insist on the fact of
movement as constituting the most
characteristic aspect of the universe.
Dictionary of Philosophy
and Psychology
by James Mark Baldwin
an's Ideas about movement have varied
I considerably through the ages. In turn he has
feared it and has longed to halt its flight; he has wished
to take part in it, then to analyse It, and finally to make
use of it. Ever since prehistoric times the artist has tried
to give visual expression to movement, and seeking ways
to represent it, he has been torn between the urge to arrest
each changing scene that met his eye and the wish to
breathe new life into the vision he had Just set down.
Increasing powers of analysis brought greater knowledge;
fresh materials became available for the artist's use, and
movement began to find expression In new ways.
So we should not be surprised today to witness the emer¬
gence of Kinetic art, i.e. the use of mechanical, or "visual"
and "natural" movement, and to find others who are
reviving the sporadic studies of a few pioneers, such as
the American, Thomas WllfieJ, the Hungarian, Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy and the Russian composer, A.N. Scrlablne,
CONT'D ON PAGE IS
Galerie Denise René SCULPTURE, REVOLVING AND HYDRAULIC. Today's search for new artistic expression
is reflected in these sculptural works of transparent plastic, incorporating light and movement,
produced by artists from Latin America. Left, detail of a work by Gregorio Vardanega, "Synchronistic
Development of an Infinite Circle". This recent work is one of the descendants of the suspended
constructions created about 1920 by a pioneer of kinetic art, the Soviet artist, Alexander Rodchenko.
Above, two phases of " Hemisphere of Water", by Gyula Kosice, photographed in motion. In his
"hydraulic sculptures", Kosice obtains striking effects from the refractions of colours through
water. Vardanega (born in Italy) and Kosice (originally from the Carpathian Mountains) represent
the two main lines of artistic research which have done much to develop kinetic art In Argentina.
13

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd)
14
Robert Doisneau, Paris
MOBILE FRESCO BY A
CYBERNETIC TOWER.
At the Palais des Congrès in
Liège (Belgium), Nicolas
Schöffer offers the visitor
a grandiose spectacle called
" Forms and Light ". Behind
the vast, glass facade of
the building (above right)
is a huge (16,000 square
feet in area) semi-trans¬
parent plastic screen on to
which variable coloured
images are projected. The
rhythm and movements of
the' images forming this
mobile fresque can be varied
and controlled by commands
recorded on tape and are
synchronized with a sound¬
track playing electronic
music. To the right of the
palace rises the " Cybernetic
Tower ", (detail left) a metal
sculpture 170 feet high.
Schöffer's Tower is control¬
led by an electronic brain
sensitive to atmospheric
changes, and it is these
which regulate the move¬
ments of the sculpture's
64 mobile blades or vanes.
© Alexis, Brussels

Search for a new dimension
all of whom made a very direct use of light in art to give
an impression of actual movement.
Scriabine had rays of coloured light projected as an
accompaniment to his symphony, Prometheus, and
Wilfred designed an instrument he called the Clavilux;
by "playing" on its keyboard he cast moving shapes and
colours on a screen. In our own day the most important
work with light and real movement is being done in
painting by an American, Frank J. Malina, and in
sculpture by a Frenchman, Nicholas Schöffer.
Nuclear fission, cybernetics and the whole range of
scientific discoveries are making a deep impact on the
outlook of the average person; their effect on the artist
is no less marked. And it is against this background of
modern science and its relationship to the basic preoccu¬
pations of art, that it is interesting to examine the new
role played by light and movement.
What actually are the latest developments in this field
of art? What objections to their work do these artists
have to face? And how are these criticisms answered?
Apart from works which make use of artificial light and
movement, there are today three distinct trends in which
the element of time is a paramount factor.
The first uses mechanical movement for various pur¬
poses. The aim is to convey the idea of a machine in
operation, using light solely to illuminate and emphasize
the functioning of the mechanism.
This mechanical or mechanistic trend, which tries to
be both amusing and poetic, has a fairly recent history
of some Importance. Francis Plcabla, a French artist,
visualized what he called "irrational machines." Another
Frenchman, Marcel Duchamp, actually built some in
1913. He constructed his first "ready made" a bicycle
wheel mounted on a stool and followed it up with
various pieces of "high precision optical apparatus," as
he called them, such as the "rotary hemisphere." Man
Ray, the American photographer, was also constructing
"ready mades" at this periodamong them a mobile
arrangement of coat hangers; while two Russians, Vladi¬
mir Tatlln and Naum Gabo, Included mobile elements in
their constructions.
MONG other great pioneers of mechanical
Lmovement, we of course find Alexander Calder,
of the U.S.A. Calder, though, first used mechanical pro¬
pulsion in his Circus and in the toys he designed before
producing his "Mobiles" sculptures made up of suspend¬
ed metal plates and wires, which are delicately poetic yet
amusing at the same time. More recently, Jean Tlnguely,
of Switzerland, has been trying to advance beyond the
mechanics of science to a new kind of "metaphysics,"
Illustrated by the titles of his constructions Métaméca-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15

ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd;
Electronics enters the world of art
nique, Métamatic, Relief Métamécanique Sonore. A Bel¬
gian, Pol Bury, uses a concealed motor to give slow move¬
ment to his three-dimensional constructions made of wood
metal and other materials.
The second trend is based on the movement of the
spectator's eyes, either by the manner of looking at the
work (the eye is guided) or by changing position before
it and so causing the eye to move. A Hungarian-born
French artist, Victor de Vasarely, and a Venezuelan, J.R.
Soto, are reviving a long-standing tradition that leads us
back to the linear and perspective trompe l'kil works of
the Renaissance and Baroque periods.
Vasarely began his study of the subject before the war,
by experimenting with transparent plaques which slid In
grooves. He became the leader of a movement known as
Chiétisme Plastique. His designs are usually constructed
with simple elements diverging lines or geometrical
figures skilfully repeated, cut out and superimposed.
These may be black and white or polychrome; it is their
juxtaposition which gives them depth and creates a
three-dimensional effect. The spectator's change of posi¬
tion when looking at a picture gives the work yet another
dimension duration. These qualities relate Vasarely's
work to architecture, to which it may indeed belong.
By the play of specially wrought metallic shapes
suspended before a fluted background, Soto achieves a
poetic effect of great subtlety. Similar trompe l'iil effects
are achieved by Francisco Sobrino and the Frenchman,
Yavaral, with plexiglass and vinyl wire.
The third trend is exemplified by artists who, though
working In a similar vein to those just mentioned, use
natural elements such as air, water and fire to achieve
actual motion.
One group, employing here light and ingeniously
suspended materials, obtains movement in the same way
as Calder does with his "Mobiles" by using air as the
motive force. Thus, J. Le Parc, of Argentina has built
structures made of tiny metallized plastic plaques which
move with the air and shimmer with light. Another
Argentinian, G. Kosice, introduces the force of water into
his "hydraulic sculpture," while the Frenchman, B. Au-
bertin uses matches in his "fire pictures" to produce a
real "firework display." In addition to these three main
16
Ultra-modern devices
are used by Nicolas
Schöffer to impart
movement to his
sculptural composi¬
tions. Left, part of
the electro-mechani¬
cal equipment operat¬
ing the cybernetics
system which controls
the movements of
Schöffer's "Tower"
at Liège, Belgium.
The apparatus seen
here varies the orders
given to the control
system and thus en¬
sures a spectacle of
the greatest variety.
Q Doisneau-Rapho, Paris

trenas mention might be made of the work of the Greek
sculptor, V. Takis, and his use of the magnet and its
power of attraction.
Thus far, reflected or refracted light have played a
limited role. Before going on to consider artists who have
used it more deliberately, let us look at some of the
criticisms levelled at this new form of art.
The main objection is voiced by lovers of painting, art
historians and by painters themselves. They maintain
that the sudden introduction of movement into a picture
destroys the subtle balance which exists in every well-
harmonized composition. Movement can only be adequa¬
tely expressed, they say, by the general rhythm of a
picture, by the lines of force or the vibration of the
fields of colour; and only thus can the feeling for beauty,
the artist's sensitivity remain unimpaired.
Many persons have also found it extremely difficult to
accept as legitimate art some of the latest trends in
sculpture. According to Moholy-Nagy, the art of sculpture
has evolved from a block like the pyramids to modelled
sculpture (both solid and hollow) and so on down to
contemporary forms in which the sculpture is perforated,
suspended in the air, and finally endowed with movement
as in kinetic sculpture.
he most traditional works of art draw their
vitality from the various internal rhythms
connected either with subject or with form. Yet this
same rhythmic interplay is the guiding principle of pre¬
sent-day kinetic art. The artist tries to achieve a satis¬
factory combination of the rhythm of the moving object
(mechanical rhythm) with the rhythm of human per¬
ception (psychological rhythm) and the aesthetic rhythm
(our appreciation of the work of art).
Another more sweeping type of criticism denies any
connexion between scientific and artistic invention. Or,
in other words, scientific inventions such as cybernetics
and electronics cannot be used to create works of art
and, by the same token, artistic creation can have no
bearing on the widening of human knowledge.
Obviously, present-day research in science takes place
on a scale vastly different from that in art. Setting up
a scientific laboratory demands vast resources and great
discoveries are often the result of collaboration between
several scientists, even whole teams of scientists. All the
same, one can hardly imagine that a scientist, even a
highly specialized one, could wholly ignore the sense of
the aesthetic, since he must have it to picture the complex
physical phenomena of our universe as well as the aesthe¬
tic needs of mankind to which his work is dedicated.
s for the artist, it is equally clear if we agree
Lthat artistic creation is partly a conscious pro¬
cess that a scientific understanding of the means he
employs, of the world around him and of his own per¬
sonality can hardly fail to enrich the artist's art. But it
would be going much too far to say that scientific inven¬
tion and artistic invention are one and the same process.
Yet the artist and scientist have often been combined
in one person: Leonardo da Vinci was an illustrious
example of this, and so were all the great figures of the
Renaissance. Very few artists could lay claim to universal
knowledge nowadays, of course, but some who are working
on kinetic art are actually carrying out scientific experi¬
ments. Their theoretical knowledge is such that, with
the help of specialists, they are able to use the most
modern techniques in composing their works.
The art of the cinema has already outgrown these
difficulties. The cinema welcomed every invention that
CONTD ON PAGE 20
Light, movement, depth and
colour are all used by sculptor,
Nicolas Schoffer, an Innovator
in the field of " lumlno-
dynamlc " art forms. Shown
here are three phases of
his work, "Chronos". (1)
" Chronos " immobile. (2)
In movement. (3) At full
speed. Now it Is a complex
interplay of light and shadow.
Photoi Yvei Horvocllon, Pirii
METAMORPHOSIS
17

THE HEARTBEAT OF A
FROG. One day in 1956
Malina was reading a scien¬
tific article on the workings
of a frog's heart and was
struck by the graphic design
of its heartbeat. Shortly
thereafter he produced this
artist's interpretation of the
phenomenon incorporating
artificial light. The painting
illustrates a point often made
by Malina that our universe
contains many landscapes
and designs undreamed of
by many observers and
artists and which offer rich
subject matter for art today.
Boigontier-USIS
ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd)
Unseen rhythms of our universe
20
could be of use to it, "and based its aesthetic theory on a
precise relationship established between light and time.
Movement as the technical principle of films, the move¬
ment of the camera, and many other kinetic features are
of great importance here.
Pioneers of abstract film-making, such as the American
Hans Richter, and the Swede, Viking Eggeling, and their
successors, have often taken the movement of forms as
the central theme of their work. Motion picture cartoons
from the earliest down the present day, are all related to
our subject. So are drawings made directly on films like
those of Len Lye, of New Zealand, and Norman McLaren,
of Canada, and the work of a still younger generation.
Another contribution was the film, Le Ballet Mécanique,
the work of the French artist Fernand Léger, which
brings us back to painting.
Frank Malina, the American painter and scientist, has
introduced light and movement directly into his pictures
and in this respect three aspects of his highly original
work deserve special consideration.
Malina's compositions are ingeniously constructed.
After experimenting with an electronic system, he finally
devised an electro-mechanical technique for his "electro-
paintings." The basic composition is painted in various
colours on a fixed transparent plaque (the "stator" ) while
one or more elements ("rotors") which are also painted,
are moved by an electric motor. Light, from lamps
incorporated in the construction, Is cast on a semi-
transparent screen.
Here, an interesting attempt has been made to establish
a real correlation between Science and Art. A glance at
Malina's career may help to clarify this point. He was a
brilliant aircraft engineer, and before the war had made
a special study of rocket propulsion. He directed the
development of the first successful American high-
altitude rocket, and as such was one of the pioneers of
astronautical development. Later Malina extended his
field of research to geophysics.
It is not surprising that the forms of his electro-
paintings should be akin to those of coral, radiolaria,
diatoma and crystals photographed through the micro¬
scope. This kinship with the physical universe is even
more marked in the case of stars and galaxies.
I n purely artistic terms, the work of Malina
I evokes the art of stained glass. The artificial
light he sets behind the screens of his pictures is a sub¬
stitute for the changing sunlight to which Gothic stained
glass owes part of its miraculous quality.
The way in which he divides his space, the intensity of
his black-circled reds and blues, and the ever-changing
rays of light all transform a picture by Malina into a
kind of animated stained-glass window. Unlike stained
glass windows, however, Malina's pictures are enclosed in
frames and are hung on walls like traditional paintings.
Malina's third important contribution to kinetic art is
his co-ordination of rhythm whether physical, human or
aesthetic by the use of continuous movement of coloured
forms.
Movement in Malina's pictures may be compared to
atomic, biological or astronomical rhythm. Psychologi¬
cally speaking, these movements express the speed of time
as it is lived, not as it is shown on the clock face. They
bring us closer to life and to human movement than to the
prodigiously rapid movement of the universe which is
something our minds cannot grasp.
The investigation of human perception has not yet
been carried very far in the aesthetic sphere ; but even
so, the transposition of the rhythm of life into aesthetic
rhythm is a particularly interesting feature of Malina's

work. His essential purpose in trying to break away from
traditional methods of painting, is to create a new rhythm,
demanding the sustained attention of the spectator.
This experiment has a certain relationship to music.
Indeed, in Malina's latest works recorded music is linked
to a mechanical and electrical source, so that its varia¬
tions influence the intensity, while the movement of the
coloured forms keeps time with the music.
One needs to see some of his one hundred kinetic pic¬
tures, such as Changing Times in the Lyons Museum, or
Orbits III in the Musée d'Art Moderne in Paris, in order
to appreciate at its true value Malina's contribution to art.
He has achieved a synthesis of art and science by evolving
a new method for the direct transmission of coloured
light, accompanied by continuous movement in which
different rhythms combine to create a harmonious whole.
Nicholas Schöffer, the sculptor, works with the same
concern for light, movement, depth and also colour. His
sculptures are metallic structures in which curved and
angular elements are arranged horizontally and vertically.
His most recent works are placed behind large, semi-
transparent screens, on which synchronized variable
Images are thrownformed by the shadows and rellcctlon.s
of the revolving sculpture and the colours cast by a
mobile disc. The source of light, though placed outside
the sculpture, plays an important part. SchotTcr uses a
kind of organ to project and vary his chromatic composi¬
tions.
He is interested, too. In the relationship between sound
and Image, and In his largest work, The Cybernetic Tower,
a piece of sculpture 52 metres (170 feet) In height, the
sound track (street noises, recorded and mingled with
electronic music) plays Its part In Farines et Lumières, a
programme presented annually, from June to September,
at the Palais des Congres at Liege, Belgium.
SchölTer's Tower Is controlled by an electronic computer
sensitive to atmospheric changes, and it is these which
regulate the movements of the sculpture. This skilful
mingling of aspects of the environment with the most
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Marc Vaux
Malina has created a whole series of small lumidyne paintings of the various constellations In the heavens,
including those of the Zodiac. Painting at upper right represents Ursa Major (the Great Bear), the most
conspicuous of the northern constellations containing the stars which form the Plough. The other paintings
are variations in colour presentation of the constellation Cygnus (the Swan), with the bright star Dencb.
21

Photos Vasarely
ART, MOVEMENT & LIGHT (Cont'd)
VIRTUAL MOVEMENT
Unlike the other works
shown on these pages,
this composition by Vic¬
tor Vasarely, " Transpa¬
rency " (below) does not
actually move. The illu¬
sion of movement, or
" virtual movement ", is
produced solely by the
change of position of the
viewer in relation to the
work. Vasarely sees a
place for these art forms
in the architecture of to¬
morrow's cities. Left, an
earlier work by Vasarely
showing how a form is
obtained by deviations in
pattern of straight lines.
Interpreting life's quickened pace
22
subtle creations of the mind is typical of Schöffer's victory
over traditional limitations.
In his earlier compositions sculpture was Schöffer's chief
interest; but at Liège his Cybernetic Tower is now flanked
by a giant screen on which moving forms and colours are
projected from a series of "light mixers."
Other experiments in filtering, projecting and polarizing
light have been made by the Italian artists Bruno Munarl
and G. Vardanega, by the Argentinians, Martha Boto and
Le Parc and the Israeli artist, P. Hoenich who uses the
sun as a source of light and natural wind for movement.
Some of their revolving structures are lit from within or
reflected in mirrors.
The introduction and synchronization of rhythm and
movement in the theatre brings us closer to the "com¬
plete" work of art. In Russia, V.E. Meyerhold and J. An-
nenkoff introduced the first mobile scenery. The German,
Oscar Schlemmer and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy sought to
establish a correlation between visual, spatial and musical
movement in drama and in dance that art of movement
par excellence brought back to life by Serge Diaghilev at
the beginning of the century. S.M. Eisenstein in Russia,
Jean Cocteau in France and Walter Gropius in Germany
even used films as part of the stage setting. Kandlnsky
in Russia achieved the first "complete" theatrical produc¬
tion by staging Mussorgsky's "Pictures from an Exhibi¬
tion."
The latest experiments again reveal a conscious effort
to bring the audience Into the performance so far as
possible. J. Belson and H. Jacobs at San Francisco,
have tried to create a new kind of drama by using
electronic apparatus, while in France, Jacques Polieri has
Ideas about a theatre completely In motion.
Similar methods are adopted in the Son et Lumière
performances, the purpose of which Is usually to bring
some famous building to life and to recount its history.
But the real impulse of kinetic art is towards a complete
rhythmic synthesis by using elements derived from
kinetic art Itself.
It thus seems that new modes of artistic expression
appeal to man's hitherto neglected kinetic "sense," the
connexion being established chiefly by light. It is an art
which strives to intensify the relation between this sense
and the others through an association of rhythms. From
the social standpoint, it may help to improve the stan¬
dard of aesthetic appreciation by disseminating and
multiplying original images conceived by the artist.
Kinetic art will not take the place of the other arts.
The poetic, intimate quality of traditional painting, the
three-dimensional message of sculpture and the stable,
monumental quality of architecture will continue to be
subjects for the aesthetic contemplation of mankind. But
man's additional need for an artistic link with the dyna¬
mism of life has always been of capital importance. In
fact, it dominates man's earliest writings and pictures.
As the Twentieth Century progresses, the pace of life
accelerates; distances shrink; man's contacts with his
fellow men become closer and closer. His ambitions lead
him to explore other real worlds, and even his imaginary
worlds are now formed from increasingly familiar ele¬
ments. Will man falter and fail to keep up the pace, will
our artists be unable to master the new techniques? Let
us hope that the artist was right in believing, as many
scientists do, that human resources like those of the earth
have hardly begun to be exploited.
Frank Popper has made an exhaustive study of the
development of new art trends and is now completing a
doctoral thesis at 'the University of Paris, to be entitled
"The Image of Movement in the Plastic Arts since 1860."
He is also engaged on research at the Institut d'Esthétique
et des Sciences de l'Art, at the University of Paris.

Photos Groupe de Recherche d'Art Visuel, Paris
Two successive aspects of " Instability ", a work by the young Argentinian artist, Julio Le Parc,
whose research in kinetic art has produced many varied works. The play of shadows and light on
a painted plaque with a polished rim is governed by a mobile object before the source of light.
ARTIST ON FILM
By its very nature the
cinema offered an ideal
springboard for aesthe¬
tic research combining
the use of movement
and light. In this con¬
nexion the short films
of the Canadian artist,
Norman McLaren, are
now world famous. A
great experimentalist,
McLaren draws his films
directly on the celluloid.
Left, a cosmic move¬
ment from his stereo¬
scopic film, " Around is
Around ". He has also
found a way of adding
sound to his creations.
By designing with pen
and ink along the margin
of the film where the
soundtrack usually runs
he has now produced a
new kind of " music ".
National Film Board of Canada
23
