AFRICAN
METAMORPHOSIS
by E.A.K. Kalitsi
Like other newly-independent
nations of West Africa, Ghana is
living through a time of construc¬
tion and fundamental change. Its
people are building new paths in
technology and industrialization,
opening schools, hospitals and
technical institutes. But in creat¬
ing this new fabric of life, they do-
not forget their ancient past
with its culture, crafts and tradi¬
tional values. Left, stairway of a
Ghanian home; right, nurses go
on duty at the Sekondi hospital.
All photos with this article, taken
by Willis E. Bell, are from " The
Roadmakers ", by Efua Sutherland,
© Newman Neame Ltd., and Ghana
Information Services
44

kix years ago, Liberia was the only independent
"country in West Africa (1). The rest of the
area was divided between the British, French, Spanish and
Portuguese. Today, only Gambia (a British crown colony)
and Portuguese and Spanish Guinea with less than 2%
of the population are dependent countries. The rest of
the population, totalling more than 80 million inhabitants,
is divided among 15 Independent states (2) of which
Nigeria alone has 40 million people and Ghana six and a
half million people.
In spite of ample land, minerals and forest wealth.
West Africa remains a poor region. None of the countries
has an annual income per head of 200 dollars. Many in
fact have only about 100 dollars a head per year.
The main problem of development in West Africa there¬
fore is how to raise the levels of production so that the
people can come somewhere near the 800 dollars per head
which is earned in Western Europe, not to speak of the
2,000 dollars per head which is earned in the United
States. It will require a phenomenal rise in productivity
for the real incomes in West Africa to approach those of
the developed world.
While the West African leaders and their professional
advisers are puzzled about how to tackle this problem,
the higher consumption standards of the developed
countries are being communicated to West African
(1) West Africa is here understood as the area stretching 1,700
miles from Cape Verde near Dakar on the west coast to the
Cameroons mountains in the east and from the Gulf of Guinea
in the south to the northern boundaries lying in the Sahara
Desert which starts roughly some 600 to 700 miles from the
coast. It covers an area of about 2,400,000 square miles and
has a population of about 80 million.
(2) Cameroun, Dahomey, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast,
Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Togo and Upper Volta.
villagers, who in turn are no longer content to remain
without the amenities of good food, good housing, good
health and good education for their children. Most of
the goods and services which go to satisfy these higher
levels of living are still imported goods. The need arises
therefore to find the foreign exchange to pay for develop¬
ment as well as current Imports if standards of living
are not to fall.
West Africa is a producer of primary commo¬
dities. Industries are almost non-existent. In
each of the countries, the economies have been geared to
the needs of European powers with which they were
associated. Thus, each country ls heavily oriented to
the production of one or two commodities only at the
expense of a more balanced development in the economy.
Ghana ls heavily dependent on cocoa, Nigeria on cocoa,
oil-palm and ground-nuts, Liberia on rubber, and the
former French West African countries on cotton.
The heavy dependence on primary production for export
makes these countries victims of the whims of foreign
trade, producing In them large fluctuations of income.
The bitter experience of cocoa farmers in the 1930's
caused a stagnation In the cocoa production of Ghana
for some twenty years. One aspect of this pattern of
trade is that each European power held a monopoly of
the trade of each dependent territory. That is why even
today exports and imports of the French-speaking coun¬
tries of Africa are still almost exclusively with France
and those of Nigeria and Ghana with Britain.
These countries have therefore been unable to establish
among themselves an Internal West African market which
could widen their areas of exchange and gain for them
the economies of large Interdependent production.
French West Africa's trade with other West African
CONT'D ON PACE 47
45

SYMBOLS & WISDOM
"The wisdom and achievement of the past are our guide", say the
people of Ghana. Above, the family elder, to whom the household
looks for counsel and guidance. Below, from a blackboard on the
outside wall of a Ghana village school a young man pursues his
studies. Symbol of the age of new development for Ghana is the
country's first steel suspension bridge (right) which was. com¬
pleted in 1956, and which now spans the Volta River at Adomi.
K"\
.: 3 1 10'
a. a '» '-- * n Z',
Ho pu a Si la á-T»^
46
. ..-_;«S*

AFRICAN METAMORPHOSIS (Cont'd)
Challenge to science :
a revolutionary plough
countries ls 10% of her total trade, Ghana's ls 4% and
Nigeria's 1%.
This In itself should not have made any difference
were It in fact practicable for the surplus or under¬
employed population of West Africa to migrate to France
and Britain and capital to flow In large volume from
Europe to West Africa. If this were possible, the present
large disparity in Income would not have developed
between the European countries and their complementary
dependent economies in West Africa.
The United States has the same relation with Puerto
Rican trade. But within the last twenty years, Puerto
Rico's yearly imports have been exceeding their exports
by some 50%. The difference has no doubt been going
into the rapid capital formation going on In the country.
At the same time, Puerto Rico has transferred during this
twenty-year period some 30 to 60,000 of her surplus or
under-employed population per year to the United States.
I t is not surprising therefore that the same
pattern of trade should produce in a little,
resource-poor Island of 2-1/2 millions a per capita income
of 565 dollars while producing In the large relatively rich
region of West Africa with 80 million people under 100
dollars per head per year. As West Africa has not the
advantages of Puerto Rico therefore, the problem arises
how best to develop an internal West African market
large enough to stimulate all-round production while
retaining the present expert products upon which the
countries depend at the moment.
What of the resource situation in West Africa ? Unlike
Asia, fortunately, West Africa's population ls not alarm¬
ingly large. But, with the rapid improvements going on
in the health of the people, It can be expected that the
population will rise, thus creating greater pressure upon
the land. At the present over 70% of the people are
farmers, mainly peasant subsistence farmers with pro¬
ductivity only about a fifth that of United States farmers.
This low productivity of West African agriculture can be
explained by the very low level of capital Input into
agriculture, poor techniques and deficiencies in the land.
he failure of the British attempt to mechanize
agriculture In East Africa illustrates In a dra¬
matic way some of the problems of Increasing agricultural
productivity in West Africa. It has been found, for
example that the rock fragments of West African soli are
such that a caterpillar tractor only consolidates the sur¬
face into a hard macadam layer. Thus ls ruled out the
majority of mechanical cultivators at present used in
temperate countries. Disc ploughs have also been found
unsuitable and frequent ploughing only ploughs out all
the goodness from the land.
Until agricultural scientists devise suitable equipment
and techniques for the soil, therefore, It appears there
will be no alternative to the small hoe and shifting culti¬
vation. In spite of those disadvantages, agriculture
remains the most important source from which surplus
can be generated for other development. Effort is
therefore needed to raise this surplus.
In addition to agriculture, there ls some evidence of
substantial mineral resources in West Africa. Gold and
diamonds are at present exploited In Ghana, bauxite In
Guinea and Ghana, tin, coal and petroleum in Nigeria,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
47

AFRICAN METAMORPHOSIS (Cont'd)
Nation-builders in transition
iron in Liberia and Sierra Leone, phosphates In Togoland,
manganese In Ghana, and saline salts in Mauritania.
Further geological work ls required to determine the
extent of these deposits.
Although West Africa has ample land and a not
ungenerous supply of mineral resources, the countries are
still very poorly supplied with capital, whether as fixtures
like houses, roads, railways, or as equipment like ma¬
chines, transport vehicles and agricultural tools. In fact,
capital accumulation has been going on at the rate of
about 5% a year, but at that rate capital formation can
barely keep pace with the rate of population growth, let
alone cover any increase in the standard of living.
I t is considered by some people that the rate
I of capital formation should be upped to 10%
or 15% if development is to accelerate. But with Income
so low, it is not the easiest thing to save such a large
percentage for capital formation. Like other poor coun¬
tries of the world therefore, West Africa is caught in the
proverbial vicious circle of poverty. But how can this
circle of low investment and low productivity be broken?
The answer produced by the West African governments
was to create the social overhead capital so that directly
productive activities can be established or expanded.
During Ghana's first five-year development plan, for
example, a first class trunk-road system was established
running from north to south and from east to west and
also linking the major urban areas of the country.
Several hundred miles of secondary roads, untarred but
quite adequate, radiated to most of the small villages and
hamlets in the country.
A new harbour and its 40,000 service township was
planned and substantially completed. A university was
built, the school system expanded and health centres built
throughout the country. Telephone and electric lights
more than doubled. This development was carried out
during a period when the country was a net exporter of
capital. This was due mainly to the good price of cocoa
which financed some 90% of the 130 million pound pro¬
gramme.
In the Second Development Plan, the emphasis shifted
from the infra-structure to concentration on agricultural
improvement, development of industry and expansion of
the secondary school system to provide necessary tech¬
nicians for the new activities. As the country has been
dependent upon cocoa production so far, a start was made
to diversify agriculture by introducing or encouraging
crops such as coffee, bananas, and rubber. At the same
time, attention was given to improvement of cocoa. A
public corporation was given funds and the authority to
develop industries in the country. Tax concessions were
provided to investors, factory buildings provided on rental
basis for those who needed them, and financial and other
assistance offered. Trade agreements were signed with
countries like the United States.
The foregoing gives an example of some of the attempts
being made to create the conditions for industrialization
48
Pottery (right) the pro¬
duct of an ancient, indi¬
vidual craft, and newly
skilled hands in indus¬
try (far right)- sum up
West Africa's evolution.
Now its dominant need
is higher production
in industry and in the
rural economy. Today
many people in West
African countries earn
no more than $100 per
year. Over 70% are
farmers. In spite of
ample lands, mineral
riches and forest wealth
West Africa will remain
a poor region until it
exploits these resources
and has acquired its
own skilled personnel.

in West Africa. As a practical matter, local capital can
be gathered only slowly, mainly out of present agriculture
and it will take a little while for the local entrepreneurs
to acquire the necessary industrial know-how. Foreign
capital can help tide over this period of transition in the
economy. But the flow has been slow. Most of the
foreign investment is locked up in quick-yielding enter¬
prises like import and export trade. What is wanted
really is the means to exploit local resources and train
adequate personnel. The governments are therefore out
of necessity forced to undertake some of the directly
productive activities considered necessary for the growth
of the economies.
here is no doubt that increased capital for¬
mation is urgently necessary for West African
countries. But we do not want to lay too much stress
on that factor alone. The existing capital could be put
to a better use and even increased if the illiteracy rate
were not so high. It is significant that the new state of
Israel, located on a desert, should within a very short
time have developed faster than the oil-rich Middle East
countries. Not a small part of the explanation ls that
Israel had a high degree of literacy which enabled the
country to train her work force and organize them
quickly, free from the crippling inhibitions of tradition-
oriented social structure and illiterate communities.
In any case, in West Africa, with some 85% of the
people illiterate, any scheme of major development ls
bound to press hard upon the already limited supply of
educated people who are required as legislators, business¬
men, engineers and technicians. Fortunately, there have
been enough of these people to assume the responsibilities
of self-government without a breakdown occuring as has
happened elsewhere. However, what constitutes an
immediate bottleneck for many of these countries'
developments ls secondary school graduates for training
in the technical and skilled operative level In agriculture
and industry. The problem can be tackled as has been
done in Ghana by the allocation of more resources to
secondary education than before. But it will take time
for the teachers, especially in the scientific fields, to
emerge.
Of even greater importance is the problem of political
stability and the establishment of law and order. Now
that most of the countries have become independent, they
are faced with the problems of transition. The new
institutions have not yet established their full authority.
The energies of the leaders are therefore concentrated on
political problems of natlon-bulldlng, leaving them little
opportunity to give full attention to problems of economic
and technical development.
The bureaucracies trained in the old colonial school
to regard their main function as maintenance of law
and order are converting even more slowly to their
new function of speeding up the economic develop¬
ment of their countries. However, it is noteworthy
that the leaders as well as the people of West Africa arc
all anxious to transform their countries into modern
nations. I believe that this enthusiasm for development
which can be seen In the brisk and lively cities of the
western coast, is perhaps the most important factor which
will help clear away some of the problems of developments
in West Africa.
E.A.K. Kalitsi is senior assistant secretary of the Deve¬
lopment Commission, Volta River Authority, Government
of Ghana.
49
