ORIENTAL ECHOES
OF THE
SOCIAL CONTRACT
There have been three thinkers
in the Far East whose ideas reveal
singular analogies with those of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Chronologic¬
ally they were Houang Tsong-Hi
of China, who lived in the XVIIth
century ; Shoeki Ando, a Japanese
country doctor who was a contem¬
porary of Rousseau ; and another
Japanese, Chomin Nakae, a writer
in the latter part of the XlXth
century who translated the Social
Contract, who was the first to ac¬
quaint the Far East with Rousseau's
by Takeo Kuwabara
5 Werner Bischof-Magnum

theories and who was known as
the «Rousseau of the Orient".
Houang Tsong-Hi's period is a
century earlier than that of Rous¬
seau ; but, two hundred years after
his death, Houang's democratic ideal
was to inspire the Chinese people
during the 1911 revolution, and he
was known to the revolutionaries
as the "Chinese Rousseau".
Shoeki did not even know the
name of Jean-Jacques Rousseau but,
for many reasons, he well deserved to
be called the "Japanese Rousseau".
A portrait of Houang Tsong-
hi (1610-1695) known as
"The Chinese Rousseau".
Iwanami Publishing Co
H| ouANG Tsong-Hi was born in 1610 in a repu¬
table family of central China during the Ming
dynasty. His father, a learned and scholarly man, was
involved in plots against the Court eunuchs and was even¬
tually sent to prison where he died. Houang too took up
the political struggle, often at the risk of his life, and only
devoted himself finally to philosophy when he saw that
the collapse of the Ming regime was complete.
In 1663 he published a work entitled Ming y tai fan
lou. Though only fifty pages in length, it was nonethe¬
less a work of prime importance which set out the basic
principles of his political theory. The title literally means
"Political Advice to an Ideal Future Head of State" and
the main chapters of the 13 which make up the preface
are entitled "What is the Prince?" "What is the Subject?"
"What is the Law?" "The Prime Minister's Establish¬
ment" and "Academy."
In the chapter entitled "What is the Prince?" Houang
explains that man has always looked after his own
interests and that though this may be a natural state of
affairs, it also means that no one has the public interest
at heart or tries to eradicate things which harm the com¬
munity as a whole. As a result, it is hard to maintain the
"T'ien hia" (a Chinese term meaning human society as
compared with "Kuo" which means the State or the
Kingdom).
Men thereupon step forward who are prepared to
sacrifice their own interests on behalf of the T'len hia
men such as Yao and Chun, kings from a legendary past
whom the Chinese regard as paragons of princes or
saints. But the kings of later times considered that the
T'ien hia belonged to them and lived in luxury and
idleness to the detriment of the people: they became
thieves preying on the T'ien hia.
Accordingly, the people regarded the reigning princes
as enemies. "The people constitute the most precious
thing in the world," said Mencius, "then comes the State
and the least precious is the Prince." The Chinese philo¬
sopher recognized the .right to revolt, asserting that it
was proper to overthrow a government which harmed the
interests of the people.
The learned men who criticise Mencius, said Houang,
are corrupt; and he adds that when an official has a
position in the government it is in order to, serve the
T'ien hia (human society), and not the reigning Prince.
The law existed in the Golden Age under upright princes
because laws were established for the benefit of T'ien hia
whereas later on they were promulgated in the interest
of the kings so that power, which the kings looked on as
their own property, was transmitted from father to son.
They therefore do not deserve to be called Law.
As regards the academy, Houang's thought is entirely
original. The academy was an institution which at one
time grouped the thinkers and scholars. Its principal and
its professors were not solely concerned with teaching;
they also undertook to raise, in the loftiest sense of that
term, the political ideal of students. The revered kings
of antiquity invariably accepted the views of the academy.
It was not for them to decide on their own account what
was sound policy; they had to refer the question to the
academy.
Houang called for the revival of this system. The
"assembly of Intellectuals" should meet once each month
with the head of the academy in the place of honour and
the Prince listening among the students. The principal's
task would be to appraise the Prince's policy without fear
or favour.
Certain Japanese scholars emphasise the fact that
Houang did not reject the monarchy (in which he differs
from Rousseau whose ideals were republican and egalita¬
rian) and remained a devotee of primitive Confucianism
headed by Mencius. However this may be, the revolution¬
ary movement of the T'sing period called on Houang's
theories and when Rousseau's ideas began to be known in
China, via Japan, Houang became known as the Chinese
Rousseau. It was because of this kinship between their
ideals that Rousseau's ideas, through those of Houang,
came to play an important role in the modernization of
China.
S. HOEKi Ando, on the other hand, exercised no
' Influence whatsoever in his own country. Very
little is known of his life, not even the exact date of his
birth and death. It is known that the was a doctor in
Northeastern Japan and that he travelled widely through¬
out the country. His masterpiece is the Shizen Shi-
neido (The True State of Nature) which was published
in Kyoto in 1753 in an abridged form.
In the XVIIIth century, Japanese society which had
remained in a state of stability since 1639, when the coun¬
try had been virtually prohibited to foreigners, began to
suffer from a disequilibrium which was to lead to revolu¬
tion a century later. Capitalism did not yet exist but the
merchant middle class was growing stronger. The big
landowners grew increasingly wealthy and the peasants
increasingly poor. As from 1750, peasant revolts became
more and more frequent. Such was the period in which
Shoeki wrote.
His ideal was the "Chokko no Shinzin" ("The pure man
who cultivates the land with his own hands".) To work
the land with his own hands represents man's true con¬
dition. As a result, all men should be free and equal.
It is because the true state of nature has been lost and
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

ORIENTAL ECHOES (Cont'd)
Revelations of the son of a Samurai
26
replaced by an artificial state that classes have come into
being with the rich exploiting the poor.
This brings us close to Rousseau. But Rousseau was a
great artist whereas Shoeki was little concerned with
beauty of expression. He Is sometimes held to be an
atheist because he rejected Buddhist and Confucian doc¬
trine, but although he criticized corruption among the
Shinto priests of his time, he remained in favour of
ancient Shintoism.
Shoeki hoped to transform society by gradually return¬
ing the Samurai to the land, since they produced nothing,
and by turning the great lords into small land-holders or
local magistrates. But he had no other clear plan for the
future. He did not even envisage the concept of a "social
contract" and, while his criticisms were harsh, he did
nothing to overthrow the established order since he
loathed violence. His philosophy was based on nature
and he believed in a necessary co-operation between all
the component parts of society. Good and evil were not
absolute opposites; nature required their co-existence.
A century after Shoeki's death, the feudal system of the
Tokugawas was abolished, but Shoeki's theories played no
more part in this revolution than those of Rousseau, for
the very good reason that nothing was known of Rousseau
in 1868 while Shoeki had been utterly forgotten. Japan's
major need at that time was modernization, without which
the country would have been entirely dependent on the
Western countries which had already achieved their
Industrial revolution. And it was to bring about modern¬
ization that the people overthrew the feudal government.
Ten years later, a great anti-government movement
demanded liberty and equality, the "Jiyu-Minken-Undo"
based on Rousseau's theories and with Chomin Nakae as
its ideologist.
okusuke Nakae, the son of a Samurai of
Shikoku Island, is better known by his pseu¬
donym of Chomin which means "people numbering a
thousand million." This name which he chose for himself
is indicative of the way his thoughts ran. Chomin learnt
Dutch and French and spent two years in France. On
his return, he founded a school where he lectured on
French civilization (language, philosophy and politics).
In 1882, he completed his translation of The Social Con¬
tract but as early as 1877 manuscript excerpts were cir¬
culating in liberal circles. It is certain that this trans¬
lation stimulated the spirit of resistance and the rebellion
against the despotic government. In 1883, the translation
of the Discourse on the Sciences and the Arts followed
that of The Social Contract.
Chomin subsequently contributed to various newspapers
and periodicals and disseminated Rousseau's democratic
ideas so thoroughly that the government expelled him
from the capital. When the first National Assembly was
convened in 1890, he stood as a candidate and was elected
but resigned in order to protest against bribery which
occurred when the government paid certain deputies, even
including liberal deputies, to ensure that the budget was
voted.
Opposed by the government, the "Jiyu-Minken-Undo"
the Democratic Liberal Movement had failed, but there
can be no doubt that it contributed to the formation of
the constitutional government. The 1889 Constitution did
not recognise the supremacy of the people but it would
have been even more dictatorial in essence had the demo¬
cratic movement never existed.
The ideologist Chomin felt responsible for the fate of
the people. He did not become a statesman but remained
a thinker whose influence was considerable in China as
well as Japan. His main work, the San Suijn Keirin
mondo (Political Discussion among Three Drinkers) pre¬
sents the pro-Western "Yogaku-Shinshi" who urges the
immediate creation of a democratic republic; the nation¬
alistic "Goketsu-Kun" who holds imperialist views
regarding the continent of Asia and, finally, the moderate
"Nakai-sensei" who seeks to reconcile the demands of his
companions by proposing gradual modernization.
This discussion among the three drinkers clearly sums
up the political problems of the period. Chomin himself
used the arguments of the "Yogaku-Shinshi" but with the
reasoned qualifications of the "Nankai-sensel." He classi¬
fied democratic systems in two categories: the first, those
which the people had obtained through force and the
second, those consented by the Prince. The latter he con¬
sidered the more estimable.
Like Rousseau in The Social Contract (Book 11, Chap¬
ter 6), he believed that it was possible and necessary to
establish a republic in Japan while retaining the monarch
in his position.
Chomin, however, believed more in evolution than in
progress and, in this sense, he divides with Rousseau. In
his view, both nature and mankind evolve and men should
assist that evolution. Again, his ideas were based on
materialism and atheism reached via Buddhistic natura¬
lism. Confucianism had strongly Influenced him, too, and,
while he may have rejected the Chinese philosopher's doc¬
trine on the political level, he was nonetheless deeply
affected by his thinking.
Thus we discover three Asians whose ideas were linked
with those of Rousseau. This strange homogeneity gives
us much on which to ponder. Is it because the separa-
teness of urban existence and its associated wealth raises
a social problem in all societies based on peasant life and
agriculture and because luxury engenders inequality? In
that case, no matter what the country, liberal and sen¬
sitive thinkers preoccupied with this contradiction follow
a revolutionary line of thought which precedes industrial
revolution. Since science and techniques have not yet
succeeded In radically transforming human society, such
thinkers evoke an ideal society which is supposed to have
existed in the past. If they cannot unveil the structures
of the future, they infuse their analysis of reality with
certain idealistic elements which are to contribute to the
building of new social structures and thus play their part
in the society of the future.
takeo kuwabara is director of the Institute of Cultural Sciences
and professor of French literature at the University of Kyoto,
Japan. The article above is adapted from an address given by
Professor Kuwabara to the World Round Table on "Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and Modern Man" , held in Royaumont, near Paris, from
June 28 to July 3, 1962.
