UNESCO
IN THE CONGO
by Garry Fullerton
N o one In Leopoldville or anywhere else in the
I Congo knew whether the secondary schools
would open In the fall of 1960. And if they did open, no
one knew how many teachers would be on hand to greet
the returning students.
Education, like all other public services, was a victim
of the political and military instability of the new
republic's first few months of independence. Thousands
of European technical and professional personnel
teachers, doctors, lawyers, civil servants, journalists,
engineers, business people had left the country and few
Congolese specialists had beeen trained to replace them.
Answering the appeal of the Congolese Government,
the United Nations and the specialized agencies tried to
All the breach. A vast co-ordinated programme of civilian
assistance, covering nearly every field of activity, was
launched in July and August, 1960, and grew rapidly until
it became one of the most extensive international efforts
of its kind ever undertaken.
In Unesco's part of the programme, secondary schools
were by far the most urgent problem. First of all, there
were virtually no Congolese teachers and it was not
known how many Belgian teachers would return after
their summer holidays in Europe. Secondly, although
secondary school graduates were desperately needed in
every sector of government and industry, enrolments
were extremely low and only 152 Congolese graduated in
1960.
The picture was equally grim in primary education, but
there the problem was one of quality rather than quantity.
By the official statistics, nearly 1,500,000 children were in
primary schools throughout the Congo in 1960. They
constituted 71.5 per cent of the age group 5 to 14, one of
the highest enrolment ratios in Africa. But only 3,500 of
the 16,000 schools provided teaching beyond the second
grade, and nearly 70 per cent of the pupils left school
before completing four years, the minimum necessary to
maintain literacy. Only nine percent finished the full six
years.
Similar situations prevailed in the fields of science and
of mass communication with which Unesco was also
Unations
concerned. Many European journalists had left, and the
Congolese who had received journalistic training fre¬
quently rose to positions of prominence in the new
government. Thus newspapers and radio were left with
staffs who lacked both professional training and a good
cultural background.
To solve the secondary school problem, Unesco helped
the Congolese authorities recruit teachers from other
countries and establish a National Institute of Education
to train Congolese teachers.
Although initial recruitment was slow, Unesco managed
to send 66 teachers to the Congo during the winter of
1960-1961. Together with a number of Belgian teachers
who volunteered to remain at their posts under a bilateral
technical assistance programme, these teachers made it
possible to re-open or keep open a number of schools
which otherwise would have had to close their doors or
reduce the number of classes.
By the 1962-1963 school year, some 556 teachers had
been recruited with Unesco's help for Congo schools, about
one third of the entire teaching force. These teachers are
actually employed by the Congolese government, but
Unesco pays one third of their basic salaries in foreign
currency, as well as a bonus of $1,200 a year.
Among the 25 nationalities represented by this corps of
teachers, Haitians are the most numerous, followed by
Belgians, French and Lebanese in that order. But there
are also teachers from Spain, Italy, United Arab Republic,
Syria, Greece, Afghanistan, Poland, Canada, Honduras,
Vietnam, United States, Norway, Switzerland, Netherlands,
China, Luxemburg, Mexico, Rwanda, United Kingdom,
Colombia and Sweden. Several school faculties have as
many as a dozen different nationalities, and one the
athénée at Goma has 15.
Despite difficult living conditions (especially food and
housing) and teaching conditions, most of these teachers
have done a job of which they can be proud. A few have
been outstanding.
CONT'D ON PAGE 6
READING BY STREET
LIGHT. Thirst for educa¬
tion impels young men and
women to buy books when
they have little money for
food and to spend long
hours at night studying
under the streetlamps of
Leopoldville (right) when
their homes are too noisy
or too crowded or have no
light. In 4 years secondary
school enrolment has more
than doubled in the Congo.
Left, one of hundreds of
secondary school teachers
recruited with Unesco's help
is seen in a history class.

Unesco - Unations - Basil Zarov

Unations photos
NEWSPAPERS have a larger circulation in the Congo
than in any other French-speaking African country
according to a Unesco report. Its six dailies now total
34,000 compared with 24,000 before independence,
and there are about a dozen weeklies besides. During the
past year Congolese newspapermen have been attending
courses combining journalism and general education
run by Unesco specialists. Below, Unesco expert Antoine
DesRoches explains some aspects of front-page layout.
LOVANIUM UNIVERSITY, above, traces its origins to
1925 when the University of Louvain, Belgium, established
a medical foundation and agricultural centre near Leopoldville.
Given university status in 1956, Lovanium now includes
faculties of law, medicine, philosophy and arts, theology,
science, political and social sciences, and polytechnical
studies. Its research facilities include Africa's first nuclear
reactor. In 1961-62, 1,100 students were enrolled in Congo
institutions of higher education, eight of which now exist.
CONGO (Cont'd)
Decolonizing of the
"Unesco's aid has been extremely precious to us in the
difficult years following independence," Michel Colin, the
Congo's minister of education, told me last May. Other
Congolese authorities acknowledge too that without the
foreign teachers there would be no secondary education In
the Congo.
The ministry of education has estimated that the need
for foreign teachers will continue to grow until 1967,
reaching a peak of 7,000, before leveling off as Congolese
are trained to take their places. Whether this many can
be supplied either through international or bilateral tech¬
nical assistance remains an open question. Perhaps
Congolese secondary schools will remain short-staffed for
some years to come.
Meanwhile, however, the National Institute for Educa¬
tion will begin in 1964 to graduate about 100 teachers a
year. The institute, better known by its French initials,
IPN (Institut Pédagogique National), opened its doors in
1961 and is a prime example of international co-operation.
Headed by a Congolese director, its staff includes Unesco
experts from 12 nations. It receives financial assistance
from the Congolese government and the United Nations,
as well as from the United States AID programme and the
British Council.
IPN's student body includes young people from all
£_L&

mind
MOBILE UNESCO TEAMS are now touring the Congo giving refresher courses
in education to many of the country's 42,000 primary school teachers. Each team is
made up of three Unesco educators as well as a UNICEF nutrition-hygiene specialist.
Above, a group of young Congolese teachers get a "live" demonstration in child caro.
provinces of the Congo, selected without regard to ethnic
origin or religious belief. In addition and this Is
something of a novelty in a country where women have
traditionally received very little education and teaching
has been mostly a male monopoly it is open to women as
well as men.
The institute's programme of studies lays heavy stress
on African linguistics, African and Congolese history,
cultural anthropology and sociology. By emphasizing the
Congo's own heritage, it hopes to become what Joseph
Ngalula, former minister of education, called "an instru¬
ment of mental decolonization."
Antonio Chiappano, the Unesco expert responsible for
the school's curriculum, feels very strongly that it must
combine the best experience of all nations and yet be
adapted specifically to the needs of the Congo.
"We know that the experience of one country is not
directly transferable to another country," he said, "but
we don't know yet what can be saved and what must be
discarded. We are in a process of constant revision and
self-correction. The institute is above all experimental.
What we learn here will be applied when additional
teacher training Institutions are set up."
This same pragmatic philosophy also guided the work
of the reform commission established by the Congolese
government with the help of Unesco to overhaul and
streamline the entire structure of secondary education in
the Congo. The reform involves both modernization of
the system to take advantage of the latest educational
research (similar to efforts being made in most other
nations) and emphasis on Africa, particularly in such
subjects as history and geography.
The commission, appointed In February, 1961, was
headed by Henri Taklzala, secretary-general of the Congo¬
lese ministry of education. It included representatives of
the administration, the Catholic Office of Education, the
Protestant Office of Education, the University of Lovanium,
primary education and technical education, as well as
Unesco advisers.
The group proposed that- secondary education be
divided into two cycles: a first "orientation" cycle of two
years, during which all students would take the same
courses; and a second cycle of four years with specialized
sections for science, the humanities, commerce and
administration, agriculture, teaching and technology
(mechanics, electricity, construction and industrial
chemistry).
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CONGO (Cont'd)
On the long road to school
The principal difference between the new system and
the old Is that the new one is "promotional," seeking to
advance as many students as possible without sacrificing
quality, rather than limiting itself, through rigid selection,
to the education of a tiny elite. Whereas the old system
produced a large number of academic failures, ill-adapted
for any sort of occupation, the new one is so designed that
students can Interrupt their schooling at any one of
several points and begin useful careers with the informa¬
tion already acquired.
The orientation cycle has already been put into effect
in most Congo schools, and the first year of the four-year
cycle is beginning this year. Formidable obstacles stand
between the plan on paper and Its application in reality,
however, including the shortage of teachers, the shortage
of textbooks and the shortage of funds. An ideal system
of education, and this plan comes close to that, cannot
be bought cheaply and it may be many years before the
transition from old to new is complete.
iNALLY, although the reform has received over-
m whelming approval from most Congolese edu¬
cators, a small but vocal minority has remained opposed
to it. In part this opposition stems from the natural
conservatism of educational traditionalists; in part it
reflects a suspicion, quite unfounded incidentally, that
the reform is an attempt to "water down" the old curri¬
culum for Congolese consumption.
These psychological obstacles are gradually being over¬
come, however, and if the tough problems of teachers,
books and money can be solved, the reform can become a
reality. Should this happen, this might well constitute
Unesco's most significant contribution to the Congo.
With Unesco's help, the Congolese government is
tackling all aspects of education simultaneously and at
all levels. One Unesco expert traveled 24,000 miles in a
five-month period early this year as a school architect,
designing and supervising the construction of classroom
and laboratory buildings and student and faculty resi¬
dences, both for secondary schools and higher education.
Another acts as purchasing agent for all books and school
supplies used throughout the system and supervises the
sale of Unesco Coupons for this purpose. To date more
than $7,000,000 worth of these Coupons have been used
in the Congo. Still other experts are helping the central
and provincial governments reorganize and strengthen
the administrative and financial services of their
ministries of education.
Some of the most exciting work, however, has been that
of Unesco's four mobile teams which travel across the
Congo giving four-week refresher courses to primary school
teachers. These teachers, In contrast to the secondary
school teachers, are almost exclusively Congolese, but the
level of their professional qualifications and general
education is often extremely low.
I met one of these mobile teams, two Frenchmen, a
Frenchwoman and a Haitian, in the steamy river port of
Kindu one day last April. A few days earlier they had
set out from Bukavu, 700 kilometres away, to cross the
parallel ranges of mountains which separate the East
African lakes from the Congo River basin. It took them
three days to make the journey. Their heavily-loaded
Jeep station-wagon had averaged 20 km an hour over
roads that were little more than jungle paths, across
slippery pontoon bridges rocked by churning flood waters,
through swamps where mud choked the axles and water
reached the floorboards.
CONT'D ON PAGE 10
FOCAL POINT for science in the
Congo is the Institute of Scientific
Research in Central Africa. Its
principal installation (below) at
Lwiro on Lake Kivu includes the
best equipment in Africa for
seismological and geomagnetic
measurements as well as extensive
botany and zoology laboratories.
The Institute also serves as a
meeting place for regional and
international scientific congresses.
One such meeting, a seminar on
seismology and geophysics spon¬
sored by Unesco in April 1963,
supplemented its work with visits
to the nearby Niragongo volcano
and the Goma lava fields (right).
Mmm
Photos: Unesco- Unations - Basil Zarov

RESEARCH STATION at Uvira
on the shores of Lake Tanganyika
concentrates on hydrobiological
studies. Scientists aboard its
research vessel, the President Paul
Ermens (right) have identified and
classified more than 400 species of
fish in its waters, a fact of major
importance for the diet of Congo¬
lese and Tanganyikans. Other
scientific facilities in the Congo
include a network of more than
100 meteorological observation
stations, linked with the central
bureau at Binza, near Leopoldville
where student forecasters (below),
learn the use of meteorological
equipment. The World Meteorolo¬
gical Organization is organizing this
training of Congolese weathermen.
A. Gille
Unations

Unesco - Unations - Basil Zarov
LAND OF VAST NA
With 15 million inhabitants scat¬
tered over an area the size of
Western Europe, the Congo (Leo¬
poldville) is one of the largest
and potentially one of the richest
of all African countries. It pos¬
sesses vast untapped sources of
hydro-electric power and some
of the world's greatest mineral
deposits. The mines of Katanga
(right) supply seven per cent of
the world's copper and two-
thirds of its cobalt. The develop¬
ment of a future tourist industry
is possible in the lake district of
CONGO (Cont'd)
One quarter the size of Europe
10
While such journeys are not everyday events for the
mobile teams, they Illustrate the kind of difficulty these
modern day pioneers can expect to meet. They also face
formidable odds in their efforts to improve primary
education in the Congo. As indicated previously, the
quality of both the Instructors and the teaching in many
primary schools is quite low.
Thus, theoretically, French is now the official language
of instruction for all schools in the Congo. In practice,
however, much of primary teaching is still done in the
four major African languages which the Congo uses Lin-
gala, Kikongo, Tshiluba and Swahili.
Then, too, there is the matter of school equipment.
Although some schools in the larger cities are well-
equipped, the average school in the "bush" consists of
four poles and a thatched roof. Very often there are
no tables, chairs, desks or benches, no blackboards, chalk,
notebooks or pencils, few textbooks and no visual aids of
any kind.
In the face of this situation, Unesco's four mobile teams
(plus a fifth which supplies them with audio-visual
materials) can only scratch the surface of what needs to
be done. However, the project which began in October,
1962 on an experimental basis has already proved its
worth.
In Kindu, for example, I talked with Benoit Kayombo,
a primary school inspector, who told me how he had put
into practice a number of ideas he had picked up in an
earlier refresher course in Bukavu. All his teachers now
instruct their pupils in hygiene (one of the points the
team stresses), and he has begun shifting his better
teachers to . the first and second years of school, where
they can do the most good, instead of reserving them for
the upper grades.
As of April, 1963, some 1,702 Congolese teachers had
taken part in courses given by the mobile teams at 14
different places, and at least that many more had to be
turned away and persuaded to wait for later sessions.
Present plans call for the creation eventually of more
teams and more courses, but for longer periods of time and
with fewer participants. It is also hoped that Congolese
experts may soon be associated with the teams and
eventually form teams of their own to continue the
activity.
In addition to improving primary education and expand¬
ing secondary education, Unesco has helped the Congo
create two new Institutes for technical training at the
post-secondary level. These are the Institute of Building
and Public Works in the Leopoldville suburb of Ozone,
and an Institute of Mines all the way across the Congo
in Bukavu.
Both institutes, staffed entirely by Unesco experts, give
intensive practical and theoretical training to a limited
number of students who will become engineering tech¬
nicians, field supervisors or works supervisors in the

TURAL RESOURCES
the Congo's eastern border, around
Lake Kivu (left) for example.
Among this region's attractions
are a relatively cool, pleasant, cli¬
mate, volcano-surrounded lakes
and the immense (1,926,600 acres)
Albert National Park (below).
No part of the tropical world has
been the subject of such long,
careful and exhaustive study,
carried out by specialists of fifteen
different nationalities, according
to Unesco's recently published
"Review of the Natural Resources
of the African Continent".
A. Gille Unations
mining and construction industries. Some of them may
also continue their studies at the university level to obtain
degrees as architects or engineers. Many, at least for the
next few years, will be drafted for administrative positions
in the central and provincial governments.
From the relatively modest beginnings in the autumn
of 1960, Unesco's work in the Congo has grown until it
now embraces virtually every problem in the field of
education. Much of these activities would have very
little lasting result, however, if there were not at the same
time efforts to train Congolese experts to assume the
tasks now being performed by foreign specialists in the
central and provincial ministries of education. This has
been done in two ways: first, by In-service training In the
Congo Itself, and secondly by sending Congolese personnel
abroad for special study. Two groups of senior educa¬
tional officials, for Instance, have been sent to Geneva
for nine months of intensive training in a programme
sponsored jointly by Unesco and by the International
Bureau of Education. Their studies at the University of
Geneva and in special seminars were supplemented by
study visits to Swiss, French, Italian and Austrian school
systems.
Unesco's aid to the Congo in the field of education has
been accompanied by assistance In mass communications
and science, as well. During 1963, four experts in radio
and the written press have helped the Congolese govern¬
ment reorganize its ministry of information, drafted sta¬
tutes to govern the operation of the Congo radio and a
national news agency, provided in-service training for
reporters, editors and newscasters, and improved the scope
and effectiveness of educational radio programmes.
In science, the major effort has been the safeguarding
of the Congo's principal scientific research institutions.
One of these in particular, the Institute for Scientific
Research In Central Africa (IRSAC), boasts some of the
finest laboratory equipment In Africa for study of the
earth sciences. Another, the Institute of National Parks
in the Congo (IPNC), Is extremely Important for the
conservation of African wildlife. Unesco has been
Instrumental In securing interim financing for these
institutions from the Congolese and Belgian governments
and from private foundations. At the same time, a
Unesco expert has helped draft a charter for the co¬
ordination of all scientific research in the new nation, and
another to provide for the transition of the institutes from
being Belgian organizations to becoming Congolese ones.
In the autumn of 1963, Unesco's activities in the Congo
probably reached their peak. Nearly 800 foreign teachers,
recruited with Unesco's help, were teaching in Congolese
schools this year. More than 80 experts In education,
science and mass communication are helping the central
and provincial governments of the republic move toward
a better future.
Within the next year or so, It is expected that there
will be a gradual lessening of this type of emergency aid
and a "normalization" of relations between the Congo and
the various specialized agencies of the United Nations
family.
Readers may be interested in a forthcoming booklet, "Unesco
in the Congo", by Garry Fullerton, which tells the story of 11
Unesco's share in the vast United Nations programme of
assistance to the Republic of the Congo.
