World scientists join
in a great venture THE UPP
GEYSER POWER. Jets of steam and superheated water which shoot out of the ground in countries like Iceland,
New Zealand, Japan, the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. are the tell-tale signs of a vast subterranean thermal power of which
comparatively little use has so far been made. Proven resources in the U.S.S.R. alone of this new "mineral" could
replace a calculated 100 million tons of coal annually. In Kamchatka the first Soviet power station working on thermal
waters is now being built and near Omsk water for household purposes is already being tapped from one of the world's
largest reservoirs of hot water extending over an area of three million square kilometres in West Siberia. Below,
steam from geysers drifts across the empty landscape 14,000 feet up in the Atacama Desert area of the Chilean Andes.
'
12 &-&$&mm
Mike Andrews ö Holmes-Camera Press

ER MANTLE PROJECT
by Vladimir V. Beloussov
I n many respects we know more about distant
space than we do about what ls going on
under our feet. The deepest shaft so far sunk anywhere
in the world ls little more than seven kilometres In length
a mere pln-prlck compared to the earth's radius which
ls about 6,370 kilometres.
Even the vast research programme of the recent Inter¬
national Geophysical Year (1), during which thousands
of scientists from all countries Joined forces in studies
designed to reveal the secrets of our planet, was mainly
concerned with the study of physical phenomena taking
place above the solid crust of the earth in the oceans,
in the lower layers of the atmosphere, In the upper atmo¬
sphere and In clrcum-terrestial space.
The International Geophysical Year marked an epoch
in the history of the study of our planet. A completely
new picture of the life of the oceans was obtained:
currents were found at great depths, thus exploding the
old theory that waters lying immediately above the ocean
bed are stagnant; new mountains, mountain ranges and
depressions at the bottom of the ocean were mapped;
huge deposits of minerals were found scattered on the
sea bed in petrified form.
The study of glaciers enabled scientists to estimate the
volume of ice in the world and to show that the quantity
ls diminishing. Antarctica was "rediscovered," for more
was learned about it during the I.G.Y. than in all the
time that has elapsed since men first reached this ley
continent.
The I.G.Y. produced other results. It gave rise to new
forms of co-operation between scientists and provided an
inspiring example of the way In which International
collaboration can be developed in this domain. But its
results came almost entirely from observations made on
land, in the waters and In the air. The I.G.Y. paid little
attention to the interior of the planet.
It is true that some information about great depths,
even to the very centre of the earth, has been obtained
by geophysical means. But this is indirect information.
The data obtained tell us something of the physical
properties of the material of which the earth is made,
but reveal nothing of its chemical composition or of its
crystal and mineraloglcal structure.
The most widely used geophysical method ls selsmo-
graphy. Elastic seismic waves from earthquakes or man-
made explosions are studied during their passage through
the inner layers of the earth, and from their behaviour
scientists are able to determine some of the physical pro¬
perties of the matter they penetrate. Our conception of
the internal structure of the earth has been built up
mainly from the valuable information so acquired.
If to this we add our Ideas about the distribution of
pressure and temperature Inside the earth, we build up
quite a good picture of the material contained In the
inner parts of our globe. At best, however, these are
only assumptions and several different yet equally plau¬
sible deductions may be made from the same data. Even
today, scientists are not in agreement about the com¬
position of those layers of the earth's crust that cannot
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13
(1) See The Unesco Courier, Sept. 1957 and Jan. 1962.

UPPER MANTLE PROJECT (Cont'd)
The unknown beneath us
be reached by drilling to say nothing of the deeper parts
of the planet.
There ls still considerable controversy regarding the
processes going on Inside the earth, processes that cause
the slow or rapid movements of the crust and the rise of
molten magma towards the surface; this magma either
remains below the surface as a solid body or breaks out
through the mouths of volcanic craters.
It may be asked whether It really ls Important for us
to know what the earth ls made of at great depths and
what processes are going on Inside it? There can only
be one answer to this question Yes! The theoretical pro¬
blems concerning the composition and structure of our
planet and the processes taking place inside it are of the
greatest importance. We live on earth, and no matter
how far away future cosmonauts may venture, they will
eventually return to this planet which will continue to be
man's real home. It would be strange if we had no urge
to know what our own house is made of or were satisfied
to make only chance guesses at what is hidden in its
distant storehouses and even in those quite close to us.
The problem also has a practical significance that
becomes all the greater as time goes on.
Modern technology, all modern civilization, in fact,
depends on mineral resources, because technology and
civilization itself are based on the use of metals dug out
of the earth in the form of ores. The raw materials for
our power supplies coal, oil, gas and atomic raw mate¬
rials are also extracted from the earth. Lastly, building
materials, too, come from the earth.
14
s technology develops man requires more and
^more mineral wealth, but the minerals are be¬
coming harder to find. Man began to use stone to fashion
his first instruments axes, hammers, scrapers, knives by
picking up what was lying on the surface and adapting it
to his needs by chipping, shaping and grinding.
The first ores for smelting were obtained from places on
or near the surface. As time went by surface supplies
became exhausted and man had to delve deeper and
deeper into the earth to find the minerals he needed. Thus
mines have reached depths of over three kilometres and
wells have been sunk to a depth of over seven kilometres.
As the most accessible resources run out, the prospecting
of mineral deposits at greater depths becomes increasingly
difficult. When geologists prospected for deposits lying at
depths of a few dozen or a few hundred metres, they often
found clues to their presence on the surface.
A spring containing iron pyrites, for example, might
indicate a deposit of ore some distance down. But when
deposits lie at a depth of several kilometres It is no use
counting on such tell-tale signs. These "blind" deposits
are completely hidden inside the earth and give no indica¬
tions of their existence on the surface. What is the geo¬
logist to do under these circumstances?
It is here that the theory of scientific forecasting comes
into the picture. It should be possible to forecast which
minerals we may expect to find in the depths of the earth
and where they lie. The theory must be based on a
correct conception of the conditions under which various
minerals are formed. Many minerals, metal ores, for
example, result from processes taking place in molten
magma. They are crystallized either directly out of the
magma, or out of the hot aqueous solutions or vapours
that rise from the magma as it solidifies inside the earth.
Movements of the earth's crust have a tremendous effect
on the formation and accumulation of minerals. Such
movements lead to the appearance of crevices in the crust,
vapours and solutions rise up through these cracks and
deposit metal ores on their walls in the form of minerals.
HOW TO BEND
ROCKS: Originally
deposited in hori¬
zontal layers, these
rocks in the Cauca¬
sus Mountains have
been squeezed into
their present weird
shapes by the colos¬
sal forces of the
earth's tectonic
movements (the
rising and sinking of
its crust). In labora¬
tory experiments
designed to show
how these rock folds
came into being,
scientists have repro¬
duced processes that
took nature millions
of years to complete.
Official Soviet photo
*
The movement of the crust also leads to the bending of
its layers and the formation of domes and undulating
folds. Dome-shaped folds, or bulges, offer favourable
places for the accumulation of such light minerals as oil
and combustible gas.
From this it follows that to evolve a theory capable of
giving an accurate forecast of which minerals we may
hope to find and where they are to be sought, we must
understand the causes of the formation and movements
of the molten magma, the causes of the movements of
the earth's crust and also the natural laws governing
these movements.
The movements of the crust are called tectonic move¬
ments: they take the form of the slow rising and sinking
of the earth's surface, the crushing of the strata into
folds, the formation of crevasses, and, lastly, earthquakes.
Incidentally, an explanation of the causes of tectonic
movements and the laws governing them, is also necessary
for the elaboration of methods forecasting the probable
times and sites of future earthquakes.
The causes of magmatic phenomena and tectonic move¬
ments are buried deep down inside the earth; a thorough
study of those depths must therefore be made for practical
as well as theoretical reasons. We now know that the
main causes of the formation and rise of magma and of
all tectonic movements are to be found below the crust, In
the layer of the earth known as the mantle; the mantle
stretches all the way from the crust to the earth's core,
which lies at a depth of 2,900 kilometres from the surface.
It is only the upper part of the mantle, to a depth of
about a thousand kilometres, that is active.
This outer mantle is today believed to be the place where

magma originates and from where it rises to the surface;
here, too, the movement of matter and changes in its
volume begin and these processes are reflected on the sur¬
face as movements and deformations of the crust.
The need for further investigation led to the elabora¬
tion, in 1960, of an international research project; the
plan has been given the name of the "Upper Mantle and
its Effect on the Development of the Earth's Crust," or,
more briefly, the Upper Mantle Project. The scheme has
attracted the attention of scientists all over the world and
many countries have announced their readiness to parti¬
cipate.
The general purpose of the project is to extend as far
as possible our knowledge of the composition of the crust
and upper mantle and of the processes taking place in
them. The "heart" of the project is the combination of
the methods employed by all branches of science that
study the earth geophysics, geology, geochemistry and
geodesy.
At one time, geology was the only science that studied
the interior of the earth, its structure and development.
Owing to the limitations of its methods, geology was
unable to "see" more than a few kilometres into the
earth, and then only on dry land. In the present century
two new branches of science, geophysics and geochemistry,
have emerged; they study the deep regions of the globe
that geological methods are unable to reach.
As we have seen, the data provided by these sciences
are indirect, whereas geology provides direct information
about the upper layers of the earth's crust. Unfortunately,
geologists, geochemists and geophysicists have been, and
still are, working independently of each other, but if they
are to solve the problem of the nature and causes of
magmatic and tectonic phenomena they must combine
their efforts in joint studies.
Geology cannot carry out the task alone because Infor¬
mation on the outer mantle, where the causes of mag¬
matic and tectonic phenomena are to be found, can be
obtained only from geophysical and geochemlcal data.
Geophysics and geochemistry are also unable to carry out
the work alone because account must be taken of the way
magmatic and tectonic processes are reflected on the sur¬
face and also of their history throughout geological time.
Geodesic measurements are also important for the study
of contemporary movements of the earth's crust.
The general problem set for the Upper Mantle Project
must be solved by comparing the surface structure and
development of the earth's crust with the structure of the
lower layers of the crust and the upper mantle. The sur¬
face of the earth's crust is divided Into numerous areas
differing in structure or in history. These are usually
called tectonic areas, and the concrete task of the project
is a comparative study of their structure in depth.
Examples of these areas on the continents are the folds
of various ages, stable platforms, crystalline shields, and
so on, and In the ocean, abyssal valleys, very deep, narrow
trenches, submarine mountain ranges, etc. The continents
and the oceans are themselves the biggest tectonic divi¬
sions.
Geology, mainly the branch known as geotectonlcs, has *5
shown us that individual tectonic areas reflect different
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

UPPER MANTLE PROJECT (Cont'd)
The deep roots of the earth's crust
stages in the development of the earth's crust. At some
time in the past the entire crust was extremely mobile.
Folds were formed, mountains took shape, and magmatic
processes were very active.
Later, in a period separated from us by some 1,500 mil¬
lion years, stable areas, or platforms, began to make their
appearance while the crust surrounding them continued
in a state of turbulence. The platforms gradually in¬
creased in area and the moving strips between them grew
narrower.
Then, In the last period of geological time, about twenty
million years ago, the platforms came to cover the con¬
tinents almost completely and a new form of activity
began: mountains appeared on the platforms as secon¬
dary formations. Thus the highest mountains now in
existence, such as the Tien Shan, the Pamirs, the moun¬
tains of Tibet and still others, came into being. From
this we see that the stage of secondary mountain forma¬
tion followed the platform stage and the latter came after
the stage of the great mobility of the earth's crust.
IIt is important to bear in mind that the earth's
crust is not developing evenly; some areas go
through their development rapidly, others lag behind.
For this reason tectonic areas belonging to different stages
of development exist side by side and we are able to
observe them simultaneously.
This is an advantage to us; it enables us to get a picture
of the deep-lying structures under each tectonic area and
to determine the way in which its structure changes with
time. We have only to compare the structure in depth of
those areas belonging to early stages with those that
belong to later stages to be able to get some idea of the
nature of the processes taking place at great depths.
So far we actually know very little about the structure
of the earth's crust and of the upper mantle, but the
little we know allows us to make some interesting
assumptions.
It has long been known from seismographic data that
the earth's crust has a different structure under the
continents and under the oceans. It is thicker under the
continents (averaging 35 kilometres and increasing under
the mountain ranges to as much as 70 kilometres). Under
the oceans, the crust is no more than five or six kilometres
thick.
The crust under the continents consists of several strata,
of which the most important are the upper, or "granite"
and the lower, or "basalt" strata. The upper stratum,
according to geological data, has a thickness ranging from
ten to twenty kilometres and ls actually composed of
granite or similar rocks.
Nothing whatever is known of the composition of the
so-called "basalt" stratum. It has been given that name
because elastic seismic waves penetrate it at the same
speed as they penetrate basalt, a volcanic rock rich in
magnesium and iron.
Under the oceans, there is no granite stratum at all and
the crust there consists only of a basalt stratum (not
counting, of course, the seabed deposits). In this case it
ls extremely likely that the stratum actually consists of
basalt, because the numerous volcanoes on the ocean bed
and on oceanic islands erupt only basalt lava. The oceanic
crust, too, is thicker under the mountains and thinner
under the plains.
The earth's crust is bounded below by what ls known as
the Mohorovicic Discontinuity, named after the Serbian
scientist who discovered it. In passing this divide the
1fi velocity of seismic waves undergoes a sharp change.
Above the divide the velocity is lower; after passing the
divide it is noticeably higher. The earth's mantle begins
at the divide, and the first thousand kilometres of it
constitute the upper mantle. We do not know what the
upper mantle is made of, but there is no doubt that it is
solid matter and that it is heavier than the materials
which make up the earth's core. It contains a larger com¬
ponent of magnesium and iron than the "basalt" stratum.
Until quite recently it was believed that although the
crust changes In structure and thickness from one tec¬
tonic area to another, the mantle is everywhere identical.
It has now been established that this is not so. The first
discovery was the difference in the structure of the upper
mantle under the continents and oceans.
In both cases the mantle contains a stratum that is
somewhat softer than the strata above and below it ; in
this stratum the velocity of seismic waves is slightly lower
than in the other strata. This soft stratum is called the
asthenosphere. It seems to be of great importance, since
molten magma is born there and it is the site of those
movements of matter and changes In its volume that
affect the surface in the form of tectonic movements.
It was then discovered that this asthenosphere ls thicker
under the oceans than it Is under the continents (300 kilo¬
metres as compared to 150 kilometres). Furthermore it is
now known that the mantle also differs in structure under
tectonic areas of smaller size than continents and oceans
under folds and platforms of different ages, under big
plateaux and depressions, under strings of islands and
submarine mountain ranges, etc. This shows that the
surface structure of the earth's crust has Its "roots" at
the very greatest depth, at least some hundreds of kilo¬
metres, and that the development of the crust is intim¬
ately connected with that of the outer mantle.
This knowledge has compelled us to reject all the tec¬
tonic hypotheses that assume independent development of
the crust and the outer mantle and the absence of any
connexion between them. One of these, the hypothesis of
shifting continents, was proposed by the German geo¬
physicist, Alfred Wegener, at a time when very little
information of the earth's interior was available.
We cannot today admit the possibility of parts
of the continental crust moving across the
surface of the mantle. We see that the causes of move¬
ments of the crust, of the rising and sinking of parts of
it, are to be found in the outer mantle ; if the crust moved
independently of the mantle, the rising and sinking areas
would move across the surface of the continents. Such
areas, however, remain fixed in one place for a very long
time.
The area known as the Baltic Shield, for instance, has
been slowly rising for something 'Hike 600 million years.
If we accept the hypothesis of the horizontal shifting of
continents, we must also assume that the crust under
them moves together with the mantle. In other words, we
must assume that It Is not a thin crust some thirty or
forty kilometres thick that moves, but a tremendous mass
with a thickness of a thousand kilometres, which is
obviously impossible.
Another important discovery that has been made is
that the earth's crust can In the course of time not only
become thicker, but also thinner. It is now known that
the rising areas of the crust are thicker and the sinking
areas thinner. Geological history, however, tells us that
many of the areas that are at present sinking, formerly
rose. This must mean that the crust under them was
formerly thicker.
This discovery is Important because it has led scientists
to the unanimous conclusion that the crust is made of
lighter materials than the mantle, and that the lighter
materials were gradually exuded out of the mantle in a

molten state and floated towards the surface. This melting
is due to the heat generated by the disintegration of radio¬
active elements.
Today there is every reason to attach great importance
to the melting process in the development of the earth.
It may even be basic, it may be the primary cause of all
magmatic and tectonic phenomena. It might seem that
the process could develop only in one direction and that
the crust must, as time goes on, become ever thicker.
Actually the matter is more complicated than this ;
parallel to the direct process, which makes the crust
thicker, there is the reverse process, the destruction or
reduction of the crust that is probably due to the melting
of its lower strata caused by increases in temperature in
the mantle.
If the first point of view is correct we shall have to
regard the basalt crust of the oceans as the older, and
as having been formed when the flow of molten matter
from the mantle was still going on. In this case the con¬
tinental crust must be younger, since Its formation
required the flow of greater quantities of light molten
matter from the mantle.
If this Is true, more and more new continents should be
rising out of the oceans and their area should be cons¬
tantly increasing. If the reverse process is taking place
and the crust is becoming thinner, some continents should
collapse and become ocean beds. A number of facts point
to this conversion of continents into oceans as a dominant
tendency in the last geological period.
Research foreseen as part of the Upper Mantle Project
should provide answers to these and many similar ques¬
tions concerning the magmatic and tectonic life of the
earth's crust.
One interesting problem is that of the folding of rocks.
OUR RESTLESS EARTH. In an average year there are
about 20 major earthquakes and hundreds of thousands
of minor tremors, most of them passing unnoticed.
Fissure shown here was caused in a few seconds by an
earthquake which struck Mongolia on December 4, 1957.
Official Soviet photo
For a long time It was believed that folding ls due to the
contraction of the earth's surface and the reduction of
the volume of the earth. Opinions on this question have
now changed. The cooling and contraction of the earth
are impossible, primarily because radioactive elements
Inside the earth are constantly producing so much heat
that it Is more likely that the earth is gradually becoming
warmer and not cooler.
It ls probable that the primary cause of the folds ls the
vertical movement of Individual masses, separated from
each other by cracks that penetrate the entire crust and
enter the mantle. These masses move up and down like
piano keys. The folds are formed by layers of the rising
masses slowly slipping on to lower surroundings under
their own weight.
In general, there Is every reason to believe that vertical
movement, the rising and sinking of different areas, has
the greatest significance In the life of the earth's crust.
These movements are going on constantly. In the past
they produced countless changes In the configuration of
land and sea, they made mountains and caused de¬
pressions to form. Today these movements can be
observed by geodesic methods; the usual rate of movement
is a few millimetres a year, rarely as much as one or two
centimetres.'
he comparative study of the various tectonic
areas in accordance with the Upper Mantle
Project must be carried on Jointly by geophysical, geoche-
mical and geological methods, all of which must serve to
complement each other. Since not all types of tectonic
areas are to be found in any one country, not even in
countries as big as the U.S.S.R. or the U.S.A., it ls im¬
portant that the work should cover, as far as possible, the
entire surface of the earth.
Great hopes are being placed in ultra-deep drilling.
Two projects exist. The American project ls to drill
through the thin crust under the ocean floor, enter the
upper mantle with the drill head and establish the com¬
position and properties of the mantle. This project has
been launched by a test drilling in the Pacific Ocean off
the shore of Southern California.
The Soviet project Is to drill through the continental
crust for the purpose of studying the structure of the gra¬
nite layer and, as far as possible, also the "basalt" layer
of the earth's crust. It ls not improbable that on some
offshore island, where the crust ls thinner at the Junction
of ocean and continent, the drills may reach the upper
mantle. It is estimated that the first Soviet wells to be
sunk will be from twelve to fifteen kilometres deep.
Thus these two projects, the American and the Soviet,
will complement each other ; they are an excellent
demonstration of the advantage to be gained from Inter¬
national scientific co-operation.
Geologists, geophyslclsts and geochemlsts expect a great
deal from the Upper Mantle Project. A few years of spe¬
cialized study will bring our knowledge of the Interior of
the earth up to a completely new level. We shall learn
what matter lies in the depths and how It behaves, and
then the period of vague guesses and weakly-grounded
hypotheses and fantasies (of which the sciences studying
the earth have had far too many) will give place to a
new period of precise knowledge.
At the same time the practical possibility of using the
wealth hidden in the bowels of the earth, both mineral
and energy resources, will be greatly enhanced. It is well
within the bounds of possibility that each deep well bored
into the earth will itself serve as a source of underground
heat energy since it must pass through temperature belts
of 300° to 400» C.
Prof. Vladimir Beloussov is president of the International
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics. A corresponding member of \~¡
the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, he is also president of the Soviet
Geophysical Committee.
