TRACKING THE HURRI
Meteorologists now track hurricanes through a network of storm-warning radar stations, each able to scan several
hundred square miles of sky. On radar screen (below) is the horizontal plan of a storm. Light-coloured streaks in¬
dicate areas of heavy rain. Weather satellites also transmit vast amounts of meteorological data back to earth.
USIS
24

CANE
by E.R. Yarham
he hurricane Carla which struck the United
States in the early autumn of 1961, cost the
Insurance market about 100 million dollars. The sum
was made up of claims from nearly 250,000 Texan and
Loulslanan policy-holders. The claims related to damage
to property and contents of buildings caused by the wind,
and did not include marine, crop or livestock lasses cov¬
ered by Insurance. While these Carla losses were
substantial, they were not so great as those caused In
1960 by Donna, which, at 150 million dollars, proved the
costliest New World hurricane on record.
Such mighty tropical winds are not limited to the
Caribbean, but are found in similar latitudes around the
world. The chínese tal-fun (the "big wind,"), the Phi¬
lippine baquios, the Australian "willy-willy," and the Bay
of Bengal typhoon are all hurricanes under another
name. The name, however, comes from the New World,
where from the earliest days they were known to Euro¬
peans, to mariners, who learned to dread their terrors.
Columbus got this first knowledge of the "big wind" from
the Carlb Indians who called it Hunraken, after their
god of stormy weather. The Portugese explorers of the
same period imported a variation of the name, Huracán.
In the original scale of wind force devised for .sailing
ships by Admiral Beaufort in 1808, the word "hurricane"
was used for a wind "such that no canvas could
withstand." Later a hurricane was defined as a wind
whose mean speed exceeded 65 knots. Sir Graham Sutton,
the Director-General of the British Meteorological Office,
has given this description of the phenomenon: "In
modern meteorology the name Is reserved for a cyclonic
disturbance of relatively small area, characterized by in¬
tense low pressure around which winds blow at very high
speed. The more descriptive, but cumbersome phrase
revolving storm' is often used In British official
publications. The hurricane ranks with the tornado as a
major destructive force and is more to be feared because,
unlike, the tornado, it is relatively long-lived and capable
of causing widespread ruin should it move Inland."

|n an average the life of a hurricane covers
nine days of destruction, and in Jamaica there
is a jingle which warns the inhabitants when to expect
the big winds.
June too soon,
July stand by,
August look out you must,
September remember,
October, all over.
However, as Hobart E. Stocking, of the U.S. Atomic
Energy Commission, has commented: Just as June Is not
always too soon, neither do hurricanes always avoid
Jamaica in October. Spaniards of Colonial times were
aware of seasonal variations in hurricane paths. The
church decreed that Ad repellendat tempestates be
Included in all masses recited in Puerto Rico during
August and September but not in October, whereas the
same appeal was ordered In Cuban devotions during
September and October.
One of the most notorious of Caribbean hurricanes was
that of September 7, 1900. Whereas the diameter of a
hurricane is usually around 100 miles, this one eventually
gained a diameter of destruction 300 to 600 miles In
extent. The tempest reached its full maturity south of
the Mississippi delta. Shaped like a cosmic gramophone
record, hundreds of miles across but only thousands of
feet thick, the maelstrom of screaming winds whirled at
120 m.p.h.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

TRACKING THE HURRICANE (Cont'd;
Satellites sound the alert
Vicious air heaved the ocean into gigantic windrows
that moved with the speed of wind and then the city of
Galveston, Texas, was struck. First torrential rain
accompanied by shrieking winds flooded the streets to a
depth of four feet; then, striking with a force of 571b.
to each square foot, hurricane winds grasped waves
already mountainous and flung them against the, cowering
city. Like enormous battering rams the waves levelled
street after street. Three thousand six hundred houses
were, totally destroyed, not a structure in the city escaped
serious damage, and 6,000 people perished.
Even the greatest vessels are sometimes unable to stand
up against the ferocity of a full hurricane. One. of the
most historic escapes was that of the British warship
"Calliope" from the disastrous hurricane at Apia, Samoa,
in March, 1889. Three American and three German
warships were driven ashore with great loss of life- The
"Calliope" succeeded in steaming out through the narrow
entrance between the coral reefs in the teeth of the
furious wind and a raging, confused sea, in which at times
she was literally buried. It took her a full hour to cover
a distance of half a mile. The accomplishment was a
marvellous feat of seamanship.
More recently, during a western Pacific typhoon, the
U.S. Third Fleet cruiser, "Pittsburgh," only a year old,
had her bow ripped clean off by precipitous waves. Only
a short time before three destroyers had gone down with
the loss of 763 lives. The worst visitation in Hong Kong's
history was in September, 1906, when in addition to
heavy loss of life, in two hours there were sunk or
seriously damaged in or near the harbour 67 European
vessels, 652 Chinese junks, 54 lighters, 70 steam launches,
and innumerable, sampans.
Like all tropical hurricanes, typhoons bring winds of
tremendous strength, and during the Swatow typhoon of
August 1922, a sudden change, of wind direction as the
centre passed caused a huge wave to sweep over the town,
occasioning an estimated loss of 50,000 lives.
he willy-willy is a tropical cyclone experienced
_ over north-west Australia, mainly in late
summer. It originates in the hot Timor Sea, and first
moves south-westwards, often causing severe losses to
the pearl fishing industry. Then it recurves to the south¬
east, crosses the coast, where it causes more damage and
brings heavy rain, and moves inland to the Great
Australian Bight.
A typical willy-willy carved a path 50 to 70 miles in
width, wrecking townships and farms, and disrupting
communications. Roads were blocked for miles by fallen
trees, wheat silos, orchards, haystacks and fences were
wrecked, and stock killed by falling trees. So fierce was
the wind that a flock of seagulls was blown inland 75
miles from the coast.
South Africa is also of victim of similar visitations. To
mention one example a terrific hurricane, tearing
through darkness as black as night, struck parts of the
Orange Free State, one afternoon. The roofs of farm
houses were wrenched off and stock hurled to the ground
or blown along helplessly for long distances, and windmills
(used for pumping water) were bent and broken. The
hurricane, was followed by a destructive hailstorm lasting
a quarter-of-an-hour, destroying wheat crops and all
growing fruit. In the towns there was absolute darkness
for 30 minutes, and many children became hysterical and
terrified. The roof of an isolation hospital was jerked
off and hurled 700 yards, where it crashed to the ground
a shapeless mass. An enormous eucalyptus tree, 93ft. high
and five feet in diameter, was uprooted as if it had been
a reed and flung 100 yards away.
s has been pointed out. earlier, since the
Learliest days of its discovery by Europeans, the
Caribbean has been notorious among sailors for its
hazards during autumn. One of the worst tragedies,
occurred in 1780. A terrible storm resulted in the sinking
of an entire French fleet of 40 ships, with all their crews,
off the island of Martinique. An English fleet anchored
off St. Lucia met with the same fate. It was estimated
that 9,000 people perished in the former island and 6,000
in the latter. At Port Royal, Jamaica, fourteen hundred
houses were flattened out as if they had been made of
paper, and most of the inhabitants were killed.
One of the chief reasons for such heavy death-rolls
in the past has been that the hurricane struck its vic¬
tims before they were aware of its approach, and so they
were unable to make any preparations to shield themselves
from its fury.
To-day, happily, meteorologists are able to forewarn
territories lying in the path of an oncoming storm of its
imminence, and it is possible to predict with some
accuracy the path a hurricane is taking. This is made
possible thanks to arrangements made undex the auspices
of the World Meteorological Organization whereby weather
observations made simultaneously at thousands of stations
all over the world are exchanged by an international tele¬
communications system. These observations provide the
raw material for the synoptic charts which enable the
meteorologist to detect tropical storms in their early
stages of development, to forecast their movement and
to issue warnings to the populations of threatened regions.
Although such warnings cannot prevent gigantic damage,
they do help to keep down the loss of life.
This has been proved many time, as for example when
one powerful hurricane swept the Gulf Coast. As it was
a dozen people perished and several towns in Texas wexe
absolutely isolated. Had it not been for the precautions
usis
26
BULLDOZER
vs.

HURRICANE
If warning of a hurri¬
cane's approach Is given
sufficiently early, mea¬
sures can be taken to
protect property and
lives. Here, a bulldozer
raises a wall of sand to
protect structures on a
beach from seas which
will soon be lashed by
hurricane force winds.

- - :ji
USIS
The American continent is particularly "hurricane prone". One of Its defence outposts Is this floating
station, Nomad I, anchored in the Gulf of Mexico, which is equipped to automatically transmit
hourly information on the changing conditions of air and sea when wlndspeeds exceed 33 knots.
taken when the alert was put out that the storm was
heading for land the, death roll would have been much
higher. It had proved possible to evacuate all the inha¬
bitants of the lowlands. The titanic power of the wind
was evident in the fact that everywhere the power lines
were snapped and towns thrown into darkness; trees
were torn up like saplings; houses fell like cards; and
families had to sleep in the open country for fear of
collapsing buildings.
As America suffers more than any other single country
from hurricanes, and as scientific research Is highly
organized there, one is not surprised to find the warning
system more advanced there than anywhere else. Since
the end of the last war the United States Weather Bu¬
reau has greatly intensified its watch on approaching
hurricanes. The difficulty is that although they can be
detected and tracked along their courses, nothing so far,
at any rate has been devised which can check their rav¬
ages. For instance, the Bureau was able to watch the
most destructive hurricane yet, Donna (it was named at
the outset), from a network of radar stations strung out
from Daytona Beach to Florida Keys, yet both scientist
and the man-in-the-street had to stand helplessly by as
it laid waste the countryside. The one advantage was
that as the outcome of earlier warnings people were able
too take shelter quickly.
Last year the radar screen was much extended
In both directions, and it now forms an
unbroken chain stretching from Portland In Maine, in
the north, to Brownsville, Texas, almost on the Mexican
border. In addition another recording device has now
been stationed In the Gulf of Mexico 300 miles south of
New Orleans. This is anchored to the ocean bed and is
known as Nomad I. Unmanned, it is equipped to
transmit a five-minute weather bulletin every six hours,
and if there are winds of more than 33 knots this Is
automatically switched to hourly transmission. In 19C0
a more primitive form of this apparatus was used, but Is
was able to pick up signs of hurricane Ethel and send
warnings to the mainland 48 hours before the storm
arrived.
Perhaps the most valuable, ally of the meteorologists Is
the satellite, the latest scientific development. This was
impressively shown in September 1961 during the career
of the hurricane, Esther, which fortunately missed the
mainland. Esther was spotted on September 10 by Tiros
III, America's third television-equipped weather satellite.
Reconnaissance planes were rushed to check on the In¬
formation from the satellite, and confirmed that a great
hurricane with winds of 130 m.p.h. was surging across the
Atlantic, but that the only land areas likely to be affected
were those, very close to the East Coast.
Tiros III, launched from Cape Canaveral In July 1961
is especially equipped to photograph the development and
movement of hurricanes and other tropical storms. Its
two wide-angled T.V. cameras are designed to locate them
when they are still no more than movements in tropical
cloud patterns. And It has certainly lived up to Its
reputation as a hurricane spotter.
During its first month of orbit it sent back more than
6,000 pictures. These included photographs of many
storms both In the Atlantic and the Pacific. These
photographs, combined with the findings of hurricane
hunter and research aircraft, have provided meteorologists
with vast amounts of fresh data on the behaviour of
severe storms. They hope the next move will be to attack
the hurricanes far out into the ocean, and get them to
dissipate their strength before they reach land. In the
1961 season experiments were made with this object,
consisting of "seeding" the storms with a chemical, silver
Iodide. The hope is that the action of the chemical,
converting super-cooled moisture to ice, will disturb the
storms' energy cycles.
27
