THE MENTAL STRAINS
OF ANTARCTIC
SOLITUDE
Australian Official Photograph by George Lowe
26

Life at an Antarctic station is life In a test
tube; the environment is one in which men
and their behaviour can be subjected to searching
scrutiny. Observations which are made on small teams
in this remote region will provide valuable material for
the social scientist concerned with man In his more
complex urban society and are not the least important
Antarctic investigations (1).
Men who winter at an Antarctic station are cut off from
all except radio contact with the civilized world for many
months. Their sense of utter isolation is increased by a
number of deprivations the lack of female compan¬
ionship, of comforts and luxuries, of variety in food,
liquor and amenities, and of daily contact with a wide
range of different human beings.
The main stresses at such a station are psychological
stresses those between individuals, those between groups
and those between the leader and his party. The mental
stresses are aggravated by physiological factors resulting
from the disturbance of diurnal rhythms in the body
during periods of continuous daylight or darkness; in
addition there is the depressing effect of high winds, dull
cloudy weather and intense cold.
In a large city a man with peculiar characteristics,
strange prejudices, or embarrassing weaknesses, can often
escape from stress situations merely by avoiding them.
At a remote station a man's avenues of escape are consi¬
derably restricted, and his chances of hiding his
weaknesses are almost nil. Even the desire to hide them
disappears.
Deeply ingrained social or intellectual differences in
(1) We remind readers that our January 19C2 issue was entirely
devoted to "Antarctica, International Land of Science."
men present some of the worst problems In such an
environment. They tend to occur mainly amongst men
of low intelligence and Inferior educational qualifications.
A man with a strong sense of inferiority may tend to be
aggressive and difficult In his relations with other men
and therefore become unpopular. There Is thus a
descending spiral of deterioration in his morale, often
accompanied by a developing persecution complex. Exam¬
ples of superiority complexes, on the other hand, are not
Infrequent. Intellectual arrogance is common among
young freshly graduated scientists, but the Influences at
a station tend to correct this fault rather than to
accentuate It as the year goes by.
Most men at an Antarctic station instinctively realize
the need for holding their emotions on a tight rein. For
instance, quarrels serious enough to end in a brawl back
home rarely terminate In physical violence in Antarctica.
Men seem to be innately aware of the Irrevocable nature
of an actual blow in an environment where for months
to come one must dally meet one's antagonist face fo face.
C. S. Mullin and H. J. M. Connery, writing in 1959 of
United States Antarctic bases, noted that headaches were
the most common psychosomatic complaint and that they
occurred more frequently amongst the scientists and
officers than amongst the navy enlisted men. They
reported that the headaches were apparently related to
the sharply felt need for careful control of aggression and
they ascribed the difference between the two groups to
the more complete repression of their hostilities by the
former group.
At Australian stations the commonest psychosomatic
symptoms have been those associated with the digestive
tract, such as dyspepsia" and various abdominal pains.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

ANTARCTIC SOLITUDE (Cont'd)
The torment of the long polar night
Headaches rate far lower on the list and are not more
common amongst the intellectuals. When headaches have
been notable amongst Australian intellectuals they have
been associated with over-worked, over-conscientious
men struggling day after day with heavy routines of
observation and instrument maintenance in the face of
numerous difficulties, rather than with the repression of
aggressive tendencies.
Other ills are insomnia, with its consequent ailments,
and rheumatic "aches and pains." Both these have been
noted at French and Argentine bases. Argentine investi¬
gators also report that at their stations changes in diet
and water produce mild gastro-intestinal troubles in more
than 40 % of men shortly after reaching Antarctica. It
is possible that some of their trouble is psychosomatic.
Ac
f
graph of the morale at a station shows a
»fairly regular pattern each year.. It starts off
at a low level during the relief period, when the men who
have just arrived, unsure of themselves in their new
environment, feel ill at ease in the presence of the pre¬
vious, experienced party and look forward to the departure
of the ship so that they can be completely alone with their
new possessions and responsibilities. When the ship sails
their morale surges up to its highest point and for several
months the general activity and enthusiasm is maintained
at this level.
Then the long winter night, with its limitation of
outdoor activity and its absence of sunshine, causes a
general deterioration in morale, varying in degree with
different parties. The graph rises again when the sun
returns and men can busy themselves preparing for
spring and summer field trips. Another high point is
finally reached in the last two months, when the prospect
of relief looms attractively close and the contemplation of
unfinished work spurs men who wish to complete their
tasks to renewed efforts.
During the return voyage, the men's behaviour is in
marked contrast with that exhibited during their outward
trip. They tend to be lethargic, lacking in exhuberance,
cynical, more individually isolated, drained of intense
feeling and interested in little except their early delivery
to a home port.
The mid-winter low in morale is generally accompanied
by Insomnia in a large proportion of men. In a big party
this is not serious; as most suffer from it, it becomes
accepted as normal.
However, in a small party, the situation can be more
serious. As we all know, the worst thing to do about
insomnia is to worry about it, and a man who is the only
"insomniac" amongst four or five sound sleepers is hard
to reassure.
The interesting feature of insomnia is that it tends to
occur more during the mid-winter period of 24-hour
darkness than during summer's continuous daylight. No
doubt the high peak of outdoor activity which coincides
with summer is the differentiating factor here.
O(ne of the most difficult subjects for study at
an Antarctic station is that of sex. We know
very little of the sexual disturbances and abnormalities
caused by the deprivation of woman's company suffered
by men at these bases. We do known that no single
deprivation counts as greatly as that of women. However,
this matter is much broader than the narrow question
of the lack of natural sexual Intercourse. I venture to
say that, for a number of reasons, sexual deprivation in
28 the narrow sense Is not nearly as important as many
people might expect; while the lack of female compan¬
ionship in the wider sense is felt very greatly.
In our experience men seem to accept the absence of
any sex life realistically ; their attitude can be summed
up by the sentence: "There is nothing you can do about
it, so the less you think of it the better." Ameliorating
factors are, first, the absence of the constant sexual
stimulants which abound in a civilized environment
(pretty girls, advertisements, sexy magazines and films,
and so on), and, secondly, the sublimation of sexual
energy into hard work which undoubtedly occurs.
Food becomes an item of the greatest importance in
Antarctica. This is not only because the climate and the
hard work encourage healthy appetites; in addition food
acts as a psychological compensation for other depri¬
vations.
The incidence of severe mental Illness at Antarctic
stations Is very low, owing to the care with which men
açe selected. Neuroses of varying degrees of severity,
however, are fairly common. Frequently they occur
amongst ,men who are brought face to face in this
exacting environment with their own ineptitude In some
field or other and who suffer from an acute feeling of
insufficiency in the face of problems from which there Is
no escape other than a neurotic one. Aggressive, blustering
behaviour is often adopted by such men to hide their
feelings of inadequacy.
Homesickness, fear of the dangers of the environment,
family problems at home, violent personal antipathies
between men these can all produce neurotic symptoms.
The anxiety state of the authoritarian type of leader
who fails to obtain the support of his party is another
example of neurotic behaviour. This is a complex matter
in which offended ego, a sense of failure, a tendency to
drive himself to the limits of his physical strength, and
the reaction upon him of the resentment of the
antagonised members of his party all play a part.
J. H. Rohrer has stated that all six people evacuated by
U. S. authorities from International Geophysical Year
bases in Antarctica for psychiatric reasons developed
symptoms of mental disturbance In from one to four
weeks after arriving. Experience of Australian stations
has been similar, the worst cases of mental disturbance
occurring within from two to eight weeks of the departure
of the relief ship which landed the men. Apparently the
impact of the environment is immediate and severe.
Serious breakdowns in Antarctica occur mostly in young
men less than 25 years of age.
he greatest obstacle to the building of a happy,
contented, well-adjusted party is the diffe¬
rence in cultural levels of various men. What topics
of conversation can be common to all? How does a leader
prevent the development of an intellectual clique at meals,
when the more erudite men gather at one end to discuss
philosophical profundities, and the less informed mem¬
bers, tiring of the continual highbrow conversation, sit
and jeer and try to break it up?
It is here that the cinema proves its worth as an
amenity; not so much because it provides an escape from
the environment, but because it creates talking points for
conversation. A cinema is also a source of group
enjoymentmen congregate together to partake of what
the evening has to offer.
A very marked feature of the psychology of Antarctic
stations is the hunger for recognition and praise exhibited
by many of the men. This is most apparent amongst
those with strong inferiority complexes to whom I have
already referred. This desire is a perfectly normal one,
which is accentuated when the man down south counts
up the hardships, the deprivations and the dangers he
has to face in carrying out his work.
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

H. Cvjn» - AMAKL
Life in an icy wasteland with buffeting blizzards
and all the rigors of the Antarctic winter ¡s a
severe trial for the polar teams even when
they are housed in a "village" like the one shown
above at the Australian base of Mawson. Right,
a great moment in the life of a polar station:
a relief team takes over (in this photo, at the
French Dumont-d'Urville station in Adelie
Land). One group will soon begin the long
voyage home; the newcomers are at the
start of a grand adventure. Meantime, they
exchange news and experiences. Below, unex¬
pected polar scene. Moscow music hall artists
on tour near the North Pole entertain scientists
manning the Soviet base, "North Pole I",
adrift on an ice-floe. In Arctic and Antarctic,
every effort is made to maintain the morale of
the men during their long period of isolation.
V. Egorov - Tass
VILLAGE ON ICE
O J-icqucs Mav-on French PoUr f^p^'Jitions

ANTARCTIC
SOLITUDE
(Cont'd)
NATURE'S ICE-BOX.
The conservation of food
stocks presents no problem
when a natural refrigerator
can be built from blocks of
ice. Food becomes an item
of the greatest importance
in Antarctica. This is not
only because the climate and
hard work encourage appe¬
tites; food also becomes
a psychological compensa¬
tion for other deprivations.
Jacques Masson-French Polar Expeditions
The ideal expedition man
When the task is completed he quite naturally expects
a pat on the back. It is possible, also, that in Antarctica
he suffers from the lack of such everyday recognition and
praise which back at home arises normally in the home
environment the commendation and the loving adulation
of mother, wife and children.
A good leader can go far towards gaining the loyalty
and goodwill of such men by the judicious use of praise,
by making sure that other members of the party are
notified of the special achievements of Individuals, and by
guaranteeing that published reports will give adequate
recognition of the personal achievements of the separate
men.
Obviously, the selection of the personnel for an Antarc¬
tic station is a task of the greatest importance. The man
I have learned to avoid most in choosing an Antarctic
team is the group-disruptive egoist. Overweening egoism
is always dangerous, but a certain amount of ambition
and pride is essential to produce the driving force which
urges a man on when the going is toughest. If one can
find a man with ambition, who is proud of his accom¬
plishments and is eager to excel, but who is humble in
spirit and self-critical in outlook, then one has a very
powerful combination indeed.
The first and most Important requirement in an expedi¬
tion man Is that he shall love his job. A man is judged
in Antarctica by his companions largely on the basis of
his efficiency in his work. The man who won't pull his
weight, and slacks or Is incompetent in his specialized
3Q job, is highly resented. A good man, on the other hand,
experiences a double sense of accomplishment the reali¬
zation of having done his job well, and the gratification
of knowing that his competence has been appreciated
by his fellows.
The second essential is unselfishness, which embraces
thoughtfulness for others. Closely behind unselfishness
I would place tolerance tolerance of other men's views,
other men's idiosyncrasies, other men's failings.
Optimism, I think is also important. Pessimists I avoid
like the plague, also cynics. A sense of adventure and an
avid curiosity are desirable, but we have had good men
who possessed neither.
Character, guts and "stickability" are basically essential,
for a year is a long time and the difficulties which
confront a man are many.
Nevertheless, a year in Antarctica can be a most reward¬
ing experience. Apart from the more obvious rewards
such as broadened experience, real adventure and magni¬
ficent scenery, one may experience the true companion¬
ship of men working together, in humour and kindliness
courage and unselfishness, towards a common goal.
Phillip Garth Law has been director of the Antartic
Division of Australia's Department of External Affairs since
1949. He led the Australian National Antarctic Research
Expeditions which established the first permanent Australian
station at Mawson, MacRobertson Land, in 1954. His article
is based on an address he delivered to the British Medical Asso¬
ciation in Melbourne, later published in the "Medical Journal" of
Australia (Feb. 20, 1960).
