The struggle
against illiteracy
THE MOS
© Dan Sorin

T EXALTING VENTURE
OF OUR GENERATION
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
T
here are more than 700 million men and
women in the world over 15 years of age
who cannot read or write. This figure, which
emerged from a study that Unesco carried out
in 1962 at the request of the United Nations
General Assembly, represents two-fifths of the
adult population of the globe.
In certain countries of Africa, Asia and Latin
America, the number of illiterates stands as high
as seventy, eighty or even ninety per cent
of the total population and in many countries
the female population is almost entirely illiterate.
Despite the spectacular expansion of education
for children, a by no means insignificant number
of youngsters attending primary school leave
before they have had an adequate schooling
and sooner or later end up as illiterates.
As a result, the number of illiterates is rising by
20 to 25 million persons each year according
to certain estimates.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Gh. Serban

The new strategy: a five-year selective
These figures speak for themselves and need little comment. They mean that
in our era of unprecedented advances in science and technology, millions of men and
women are condemned to live on the fringe of modern civilization. They mean that
a large portion of the intellectual potential of mankind is being lost forever. Such
a state of affairs is not only a disgrace and a scandal on the grounds of human con¬
science and justice but in terms of economics is the height of absurdity and a sheer
waste of manpower. Little wonder then that the map of the world's illiteracy is prac¬
tically identical with that of underdevelopment. Economists and specialists in ques¬
tions of planning have clearly shown the importance of human resources in imple¬
menting development programmes and have equally demonstrated that adult literacy
is an essential factor governing returns from other forms of investment. It is not
surprising, therefore, as I had occasion to point out recently in Geneva at the 1964
summer session of the U.N. Economic and Social Council, that the underdeveloped
countries consider illiteracy a top priority in their plans for development.
Countries where illiteracy is widespread have been making determined indeed
sometimes heroic efforts to combat this affliction, and in many instances the
results have been remarkable. But we must also face the fact that a number of
national literacy campaigns have had discouraging results even though they were
launched with much enthusiasm and were financed with more than adequate funds,
simply because in the initial planning stages certain conditions indispensable for
success were underestimated. It has now become clear too that isolated national
efforts varying considerably in size and nature cannot be the answer to a problem
which is worldwide in scope and that international action is needed.
II T was within this framework that the General Conference of Unesco at its
twelfth session held at the end of 1962, decided to submit a report to the
U.N. General Assembly on the eradication of illiteracy in the world, which included
a plan for international action to encourage and bolster national efforts. This report,
which I had the honour of presenting personally to the General Assembly in October
1963, was the subject of a long discussion that led to the unanimous adoption of a
resolution approving the principle of a World Literacy Campaign.
The resolution called on countries with a high proportion of adult illiterates to
intensify their efforts to reduce illiteracy, and asked countries which had solved the
problem to assist those that had not.
It Invited the Secretary-General of the United Nations "in collaboration with
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Managing Director of the Special Fund, the Executive Chairman
of the Technical Assistance Board and the President of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and its affiliates, to explore ways and means of
supporting national efforts for the eradication of illiteracy through a world campaign
and any other measures, if appropriate, of international co-operation and assistance,
both non-financial and financial, and to submit a report thereon, together with appro¬
priate proposals, to the General Assembly at its 19th session,"
Since this important decision was adopted by the General Assembly a number
of significant events have occurred within the framework of the U.N. and Unesco
which reveal the interest the idea of a mass literacy campaign has aroused around
the world.
Thus, two U.N. regional bodiesthe Economic Commissions for Africa and for
Asia and the Far East met respectively at Addis Ababa in February and Teheran in
March 1964 and adopted resolutions recommending that the governments of those
regions include adult literacy programmes in their national education plans as a part
of overall development. Similarly, the regional conferences of the Asian and Arab
National Commissions for Unesco, the former held in Bangkok in February and the
latter in Algiers in March, used almost identical terms to stress the Importance of
literacy in those countries. At Algiers the idea was advanced for a regional sys¬
tem to co-ordinate activities in this field.
Africain trainee in the sheet
metal workshop of a vocational
training centre. One aim of
Unesco's proposed experi¬
mental programme for mass
literacy is to open the door
of vocational and technical
training to illiterate workers.

programme
In March of this year, a regional technical conference on literacy, organized by
Unesco at Abidjan, drafted a series of recommendations which the conference of
African Ministers of Education, meeting in the same city a few days later, endorsed
unanimously. In particular, the Ministers agreed that since literacy was the starting-
point for any vocational training, even at the minimum level, and for the improvement
of workers'qualifications through continuing adult education, it was directly instru¬
mental in raising productivity. They therefore felt that literacy projects should pre¬
ferably be directed at the organized sections of production where the desire for
literacy is strongest.
© Paul Almasy
LAST April, an expert committee on literacy which had been specially conven¬
ed by Unesco in Paris urged that a "selective strategy" be adopted in the
literacy campaign and that it be started in those sectors of the national economy
which were already organized, such as factories and other public or private enter¬
prises, co-operatives, trade unions, village councils and community development
services. This committee also advocated a strategy of intensive projects, at the
beginning of the campaign, to be carried out on an experimental-demonstration
basis in a limited number of pilot countries.
Finally, a conference of non-governmental organizations having consultative
status with Unesco, which met in Paris in June, likewise emphasized the impor¬

tance of action to reduce illiteracy and promised the support of the many organi¬
zations and associations it groups together, including a number of highly influential
ones.
It was in the light of this consensus of opinion reached by all the responsible
authorities and competent experts in their conclusions and recommendations, that
I submitted to the 67th session of the Unesco Executive Board last May the broad
outlines of an experimental programme for mass literacy as a preparatory step in the
launching at a later stage of a world campaign, the principle of which, as I have
previously indicated, has been adopted by the General Assembly of the U.N.
This programme would apply the idea of "selective strategy" in two ways.
Firstly it would operate in a limited number of countries eight at the most chosen
on the basis of a number of factors such as the illiteracy rate of the given coun¬
try, the priority given to literacy programmes in its overall education plan, the
support its people could be expected to give such a programme, etc. Secondly, it
would be limited to those sectors of the national economy which were already
organized.
T!'HESE intensive projects at the national level in a few countries would be
supplemented by regional co-operation services for research, the training
of leaders and mutual assistance designed to strengthen existing institutions.
The idea is that the experimental programme will extend over a period of five
years, from 1966 to 1970, and as each project reaches the end of its operational
stage the results will be analyzed and evaluated immediately.
The experimental programme has been approved unanimously by the Executive
Board of Unesco and goes before the Unesco General Conference when it con¬
venes in Paris this month. It has won the wholehearted support of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and was submitted to the Economic and Social Coun¬
cil which recently met In Geneva. The Council unanimously adopted a resolution
recognizing the importance of literacy programmes in national education plans and
approved the broad lines of the experimental programme, recommending that the
General Assembly should give it favourable consideration and entrust its execu¬
tion to Unesco.
This, then, is the progress which the idea of a mass literacy campaign has made
thus far within the family of the United Nations. Of course, we should realize that 7
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE

Simultaneous attack on two fronts
other groups too have grappled with this problem, such as the World Congress
for the Combating of Illiteracy, to name only one, which met in Rome in September
1962.
In a little over two years, enormous strides have been made in focusing attention

on the problem of illiteracy and in the study of its possible solutions, but certainly
the most striking development of this period has been the recognition of the neces¬
sity for universal literacy, the necessity that every adult person on our planet know
how to read and write. This idea has struck a deep, responsive chord in world
public opinion, as Unesco has found in the understanding and support it has receiv¬
ed from men and women everywhere often expressed in the most deeply moving
terms irrespective of their religious or cultural backgrounds, their economic or
social status, or their country's political system.
Personally, I consider the struggle against illiteracy to be the most imperative
and the most inspiring task of our present generation. I believe that having recognized
the universal right to education it is our duty to make that right a living fact, at the
very least on this elementary level. If illiteracy is really to be wiped out, the battle
must be fought on two fronts simultaneously. First and foremost, we must see to
it that primary and compulsory education becomes a reality everywhere, for without
this, as I have already said, new multitudes of illiterates will continue to loom up
and cloud the world horizon. At the same time we must redouble our efforts to reduce
the present large number of adult illiterates. It is essential that the two types of
action should go hand in hand since obviously generalized primary education is
impossible in a society of illiterate adults, and adult literacy is pointless if no steps
are taken to ensure the adequate education of children.
BUT to bring literacy to adults on a mass scale will have no chance of success
without the understanding and active support of the general public, since it
calls for nothing less than a general mobilization of all mankind. This is so not only
because of the funds it would require but, more important, because the very unity
of mankind is at stake. At a time when science is opening the gateway to the
stars, it is unthinkable that two-fifths of mankind should still be prisoners of ances¬
tral darkness. Or are we to have two types of human beings one for the stars,
the other for the caves? There could be no hope of peace if we tolerated an
iniquity as flagrant as this unequal division of the benefits or progress.
It is most important that both governments and people be fully informed of
these things. They must know and understand the reasons which have prompted
the proposed programmes as well as its ultimate goals.
The countries with widespread illiteracy will of course have to provide the bulk
of the resources needed for carrying out the literacy programmes. It is expected
that national efforts will represent at least three-quarters of the total resources to
be mobilized. It will be the task of both the parliaments and the governments in
those countries to give the necessary priority to literacy and to continuing adult
education in relation to the nations' overall development needs.
As for the countries where illiteracy is no longer a problem it is hoped that
they will lend technical or financial aid as part of their bilaterial, regional or inter¬
national assistance to countries which need it for their adult literacy programmes.
Unesco invites all nations and all peoples to join in this great venture for the
unshackling of men's minds and the liberation of a .pew technological, civic and
moral potential everywhere.
The stake is a colossal one. Ultimately, it involves no less than opening up
the path of enlightenment and the portals of history to two-fifths of mankind now
stagnating in ignorance and resignation.
© Louis Normand
Bureau d'Études
Henri Chomette
8
An address to the Interparliamentary Union, meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, on August 26, 1964.
