
With rivers and lakes perma¬
nently used as sewers, water
pollution is a growing cancer
of industrial society. Once
limpid streams are now foul-
smelling and filled with scum
and filth. Water pollution se¬
riously threatens publichealth.
has annihilated whole popula¬
tion of fish and other water
creatures and has ruined
countless holiday resorts for
swimming and aquatic sports.
In Finland thousands of lakes
are totally polluted. Lake Ge¬
neva is "off limits" to bathers
in many places etc. Drinking
water though "purified" che¬
mically is often disagreeable
in flavour as this Paris "water
taster's" grimace testifies.
Photos < Paul Almasy. Paris

CAN WE STOP THE CANCER
OF RIVER POLLUTION?
by René Colas
NE of the unwelcome features of modern civilization is the mass of
waste and refuse it seems to produce. Refuse from all kinds of
human activity industry, agriculture, recreational pursuits even has actually
become a kind of yardstick with which to measure the degree of civilization reached
by any community or country.
The problem of refuse disposal, of course, is one that has faced man throughout
history. But in the past the solutions adopted were usually much simpler than those
demanded by modern sanitary rules and regulations. In medieval times, for
instance, refuse was often simply dumped into the street where it helped to touch
off many a devastating epidemic.
Confined within their defensive ramparts, the cities of the middle ages had often
no alternative but to live literally on top of a garbage heap. The surprisingly high
level of some Paris streets above their surroundings is simply due to the amount
of rubbish and refuse left there in days that are perhaps not so distant as one
would imagine.
The problem was not the same in the countryside where by a natural transfor¬
mation process refuse was eventually returned to the soil as it still is and became
a valuable fertilizing agent. Today too this process is the very basis of good soil
preservation in some countries.
But the unpleasant image of piles of refuse being left to rot in the streets of
medieval towns tends to obscure the fact that even in ancient times some cities had a
sewage system whose design and construction had much in common with our
modem installations. And even in those times some refuse found its way into the
rivers, though only in quantities which the self-purifying qualities of these water¬
ways were able to handle, thus rapidly restoring the natural biological balance.
In early 13th century Paris, during the reign of Philip-Augustus, the waters of
CONT'D ON PAGE 25
23

Sorvice de la Navigation
do la Seine - Chevallier
Detergents have become one of the chief agents of water pollution. At locks and weirs where water is troubled, the
detergents are whipped up into masses of foaming suds like those above, near the locks on the River Seine at Mericourt,
between Rouen and Paris. Below, waters of the Rhine polluted with oil wastes. Even one thirtieth of an ounce of
oil products can make 200 gallons of water sufficiently poisonous to kill aquatic life and also unfit for domestic uses.
A NEW CULPRIT : DETERGENT SOAPS
^a^
24
Studies have shown that the worst
agents of pollution are the world's
big cities with their huge output of
sewage water. The greatest offenders
are of course those capital cities
which have been built on the banks
of rivers.
In recent years the use of detergents
in the home and in factories has in¬
creased tremendously, and the results
can be seen in rivers and lakes in
which the presence of detergent pro¬
ducts is revealed by masses of foam.
This is formed when even a minute
quantity of detergent is present in the
water.
The products which make dishwash¬
ing and the laundry so easy are
poisonous for aquatic animal and
plant life. Water plants turn brown
and lose their leaves when water is
invaded by even a microscopic
amount of detergent. Slightly higher
concentrations kill off the tiny water
animais which form the foodstocks for
many fishes, and even tiny fish them¬
selves.
Detergent manufacturers are trying
to reduce the amount of foam produced
which inconveniences industry just as
much as the housewife with her wash¬
ing machine.
But sanitary engineers are worried
by the appearance on the market of
detergents which produce little or no
foam. Though the evidence of pollution
will be reduced, the toxic effect of the
detergents will in no way be lowered.
The water in lakes and rivers is
only renewed very gradually by the
cycle of nature and this is an im¬
portant reason for stepping up the
battle against pollution.
The waters of Lake Constance, on
the frontiers of Germany, Switzerland
and Austria, are renewed every four
and a half years. But as water does
not flow into the Rhine from every
part of the lake the complete renewal
of the waters may take even longer.
Water pollution costs the United
States over one thousand million
dollars every year. An effective
campaign against water pollution
might cost as much as 600 million
dollars, but this would still leave an
overall saving of 400 million dollars.

RIVER POLLUTION (Cont'd)
Waters that die a slow death
the Seine were crystal clear and from the bridges a passer-by could see the fish
swimming between the stones and the green plants carpeting the river bed.
In London, at the turn of the 17th century it is reported that between sessions of
Parliament, one of the pastimes of the honorable members was to fish for salmon In tho
Thames.
Gradually, the waste disposal networks expanded, and at the same time as towns organized
the collection of domestic garbage they also arranged for the systematic discharge of
waste and cess waters into rivers.
The spread of the "sewage system", combined with the progressive use of sanitary equip¬
ment lavatories, bathrooms, washing machines, etc. has consequently sent all waste
waters into the rivers where, thanks to the introduction of refuse-grinding devices In tho
home, they may soon be joined by much of our domestic garbage.
Any increase in urban population causes a corresponding rise In Industrial production.
And, as industry develops and production processes grow more complex, water consumption
increases at an even faster rate than population growth itself.
While, in the developing countries, the total annual consumption of water per head is
between 200 and 260 cubic yards, nations with Industrialized economies are already using
between 650 and 800 cubic yards of water for all purposes and today the annual per
capita consumption in the United States is nearly 2,000 cubic yards a figure which is
expected to rise to over 2,600 cubic yards within the next 40 years.
Much, if not all, of this water is discharged with all kinds of polluting elements In it: viruses,
microbes, organic matter, floating particles.
Once the mass of pollution discharged into a river exceeds a certain amount the river Is
no longer able to destroy it. All animal and vegetable life disappears. The river Is trans¬
formed into an open sewer: it dies.
WHO- Jean Mohr
HIS has been the case just outside Paris where, in certain years, the Seino
has flowed downstream as a mixture of half water, half sewage.
So, when we add up all the possible sources of pollution industrial waste In the form
of chemical products, toxic elements, particles that give water an unpleasant taste, oil
discharged by shipping and the increasing quantity of detergents it is easy to understand
how river water becomes unsafe, not only for drinking but even for Industrial use. This
situation has coincided with an increase in demands for good quality water, and when towns,
finding underground water sources insufficient to meet these demands, have been compelled
to turn to rivers for their drinking water.
The case of Paris is typical of many large cities. During the 19th century, spring water was
brought into the capital via aqueducts which, for the time, were models of hydrological
design and engineering. Until the early part of the 20th century, Paris managed with the
water that came through these ducts from 60 and even 120 miles away. But the day came
when Paris was obliged to introduce into its supply network water from the Seine, which
up to then had been used only by industry. Full precautions were taken by slow filtering
and then sterilizing. This was originally intended to be merely a reserve supply for the
summer, a time when water sources diminished while consumption increased. But the needs
of the capital quickly grew ; buildings were modernized, new urban areas were being
developed and the suburban population was increasing all the time.
Since there was no room to extend the filters or build new ones, the only way to treat the
increased supply was by introducing stronger purification techniques: chlorination and ozoni¬
zaron. The quantity of water from the Seine and the Marne supplied to Parisian homes thus
gradually increased, while that of spring water remained virtually the same.
A few years ago the low-water period of the Seine coincided with a marked drop in the
spring supply. This created a critical situation and almost caused a breakdown in the Paris
water supply. In the suburbs water was distributed by water tankers and in some places
was sold in large bottles and even by the litre.
On one occasion Parisians complained bitterly about the Seine water they were drinking
because of traces of chlorophenol which were produced by the combined effect of chlorine
used for purification and phenol discharged into the river by a factory. This problem was
overcome by using chlorine dioxide and by stopping the factory from discharging any more
phenol into the Seine.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

RIVER POLLUTION (Cont'd)
Six million tons of filth
On another occasion an abundance of microscopic water plants in a tributary of the Marne
again affected the taste of the water and also seriously hindered the fuctionihg of the filters.
Though in every case purification measures were taken, the people of Paris lost confi¬
dence in their water supply and the sales of mineral water and bottled table waters soared.
At the recent Congress on Hygiene held at the Pasteur Institute in Paris the quality of the
city's drinking water was again strongly criticized and plans were put forward for the
construction of a new supply network to provide drinking water of exceptionally high quality.
This would meet a daily need of five or six litres per person euid would provide for other
purposes water free from harmful bacteria but possibly unpleasant to drink.
Quite understandably, these proposals were considered Utopian by the specialists at the
Congress, who finally voted for a system that would provide a single quality of water
the best. Such examples illustrate the water supply difficulties which all towns are up against
today.
.OMETIMES situations become so critical that towns have to consider regene¬
rating part of their used water so that it can be reintroduced into the supply
network after being treated or purified naturally.
This recycling is already practised in some industries whose water supply is inadequate
and in some cases such water is recycled nearly 100%. In industry as in public utilities,
however, this technique is limited by the increase in the amount of dissolved salts. Care
must be taken to ensure that the limits laid down in nearly every country regarding the salt
content of drinking water are not overstepped, and that strict standards of water cleanliness
are maintained.
It is here that new methods currently being studied and applied for removing salt from
sea water and brackish water so as to help supply arid regions can be used. The use of integral
regeneration processes contemplated for space travel is also being studied.
We know that some underground water sources have still to be prospected and a better
distribution of water resources, with dams and intercommunicating channels between river
basins, would satisfy growing needs for some time to come.
Few people realize, for instance, that water flowing in all French rivers totals over
220,000 million cubic yards a year, of which only between 26,000 and 32,000 million cubic
yards are actually used by man? From the Loire basin alone about 13,000 million cubic
yards flow unused to the sea each year.
But obviously the battle against pollution is still a vital and urgent task. Some countries
have already realized this and have introduced regulations and taken firm action to combat the
disastrous effects of pollution.
j i i.V fJ
Comet, Zurich
HERE are, for instance, institutions in the Federal Republic of Germany which
control the water administration in the Ruhr : "Emscher Genossenschaft,"
"Ruhrverband", etc. The work of the English "River Boards" has quite recently been taken
over by the newly-formed "Water Authorities." In Belgium, the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. rivers
have been surveyed and classed according to their state of pollution and in France a bill has
been presented to Parliament, which provides not only for the classification of surface waters
according to their degree of pollution but also for the setting up of public boards, which, in the
worst zones, will help solve the overall problems of water supply and assist in combating
pollution.
In the meantime the French Water Commission (founded in 1959) which actually drew up
the Parliamentary bill, has established administrative machinery which will help all regions in
France to carry out the enormous task of meeting the demands of a rapidly growing population
and industry.
More than 20 million French town dwellers and many people in rural areas discard their
waste directly into rivers without any purification process. The annual flow of French rivers
carries with it 7,000 million cubic yards of filthy water containing polluted matter which would
fill 10,000 trains carrying 600 tons each.
To this must be added the drainage from farm lands which have been treated with chemical
26 fertilizers and insecticides, the hydrocarbons from boats and oil tankers which add to river
pollution, the detergents, the rise in river temperatures caused by the discharge of cooling
water from factories, and the growth of minute aquatic plants due to an increase of "nutritive
DEADLY
About five million
children die each year
from intestinal diseases
caused by water, re¬
ports the World Health
Organization. In some
developing countries as
many as 90 % of the
population either have
an inadequate piped
water service or are
being supplied with
water that is unsafe.
Many people still have
to rely" on drinking
water taken from wells.

/
f s
/
S / /
.--«?
VA -
lé AîÇ*"-1^*-
At a time when ever greater use is being made of rivers and lakes for sailing, bathing, water ski-ing (above) and other aquatic
sports, our waterways are also becoming increasingly polluted with the waste products of densely populated and industrialized
areas. It. is neither pleasant nor beneficial to go sailing or swimming in polluted water or to walk on river banks that are
clogged with dirt and silt. And there are growing complaints from anglers in many places that their sport is being ruined.
WATER
rivers and other sour¬
ces open to contamina¬
tion with disease-trans¬
mitting organisms. For
some people water is
so dear that they can¬
not buy the minimum
amount needed for ade¬
quate living. In the
world's less developed
areas water-borne
diseases such as chol¬
era, typhoid and dys¬
enteries are the lead¬
ing causes of death
and many sicknesses.
salts" of phosphorus and nitrogen found in the water. The final picture of pollution is
one which, at some periods and in some areas, has well nigh reached saturation point.
Similar situations are found in other countries, even where regulations have been introduced
and public works carried out. Despite such measures these countries are losing the battle
against pollution because the costs are more than they can afford.
To "clean up" river water in France and comply with current regulations would cost
between £576 million and £1,152 million. And to maintain a satisfactory quality of water the
annuel cost of water purification and protection would probably be between £14 million and
£28 million that is, between 0.15% and 0.3% of the French national revenue.
In most countries the price paid for water by the consumer is much lower than its real
value. The revenue from water charges often fails to cover the cost of supply, let alone to
finance research into new resources or to promote purification of used water.
The time has now come to apply moderate increases to water supply rates and taxes and
thereby maintain the quality of what is, after all, a precious element of wealth and prosperity.
Perhaps too the moment has come to affirm that water is an asset belonging to all men
which no individual has any longer the right to use as he pleases, and that it must be protected
as the most vital of our natural bounties.
René Colas is director of the French Institute of Industrial Sanitation and Hygiene Techno
logy, and is chairman of the French Water Information Centre.
"Eaux et Industries" (Water and Industry).
He is editor of the review
27
