PEACEFUL USES
FOR
MILITARY ENERGY
by Ritchie Calder
Professor of International Relations,
University of Edinburgh
HE nations of the world are spending over
£43,000 million ($120,000 million) on armaments
per year.
As the United Nations survey on "The Economic and
Social Consequences of Disarmament" pointed out this is
equivalent to about 8% to 9% of the world's annual output
of all goods and services and according to some estimates
is equal to the entire national incomes of all the devel¬
oping countries put together.
More significant however, is the fact that about 85% of
the world's military expenditure is accounted for by seven
countries: Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany,
France, mainland China, the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom,
and the United States. On the other hand, the remaining
15% represents a disproportionate burden on the econo¬
mies of poorer countries.
The U.K. Defence Budget has now, with the recent sup¬
plementary expenditure, passed the £ 2,000 million ($ 5,600
million) mark. That represents over 7% of the gross
national product. In terms of direct employment in Britain
the armed forces, the supply departments, industrial
contracts and research this represents about 1,118,000
persons or 4,5% of the total working population. That is
the number of people whose livelihoods would be affected
by disarmament, "affected", because it can be shown
that it does not mean unemployment but, rather, a labour
force made available for constructive, not destructive
purposes.
Nevertheless the threat to their livelihoods, not unreas¬
onably, colours the attitude of workers towards disarma¬
ment. If you put it crudely "Do you want armaments and
employment, or disarmament and unemployment?" even
the least militaristic would at least hesitate. This is the
more true in these days when contract-work on defence
expenditure is not always obvious as visible weapons.
The worker who builds a Polaris submarine or bores
the barrel of a gun may be aware of the arms he is making,
but the man who is making parts for a computer may never
think of it as the instrument which will launch a nuclear
ballistic missile. He is not a conscious trigger-man, but
he is probably aware that his firm has defence contracts,
the cancelling of which might lose him his job. You cannot
reproach these people as "war-mongers" because in the
complexity, and the sinister ingenuity, of modern weapons
few of us can remain entirely innocent.
If I write an article on some new development in nuclear
physics, 1 may put an idea into somebody's head as
to how it might be adapted to missiles. The scientists
involved in that highly admirable enterprise, the International
Geophysical Year, in which a hundred nations took part
for purely scientific reasons, did not foresee that artificial
satellites, which to them were merely observation instru¬
ments, might be exploited as nuclear space-mines.
The making of armaments which are obsolete as soon
as, or even before, they are in production is, in the econo¬
mics of wastage, the equivalent of digging a hole and
filling it up with this difference, that the hole we dig is
either our own grave or a refuse dump in which we bury
the elaborate artifacts which consume our scarce natural
resources and squander our human resourcefulness.
"The Economic Effects of Disarmament" produced by the
Economist Intelligence Unit, sponsored by the United
World Trust, (1) is a survey of the effects of disarmament
in terms of one country, Britain, and it confirms the findings
of the United Nations experts that there need be no econo¬
mic or labour-force convulsions if the disengagement from
arms is planned with an awareness of the industrial and
man-power adjustments which have to be made.
I N general disarmament, the re-deployment of
I men and industrial plants is no more complex,
indeed less so, than the running down of the fighting
services and the munition industries at the end of the
Second World War.
In June, 1945, after the collapse of Germany, there were
5,100,000 persons in the British armed forces and approxi¬
mately 3,900,000 persons producing equipment and supplies,
giving a total of nine million persons directly engaged in
military effort. In October 1945, a target was set for the
demobilization of one and a half million men and women
from the forces by December 31 plus a simultaneous
reduction of 1,400,000 in munitions and related industries.
In the event, despite transport difficulties, the reduction
of the armed forces was successfully carried out and so,
for all practical purposes, was the reduction in the indus¬
trial field. The run-down was almost complete by the end
of 1946. Both in terms of output and re-employment the
disarmament programme was carried out with the minimum
of friction and dislocation.
Behind this remarkable piece of redeployment was the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29
(1) Published in January 1963 by the Economist Intelligence Unit.
London, and University of Toronto Press, Toronto.

PEACEFUL USES (Cont'd)
The case of one countryBritain
meeting of the International Labour Office at Philadelphia
in April/May 1944. The liberation of Europe and the end
of Hitler's war was still a year off. The I.L.O., when the
League of Nations collapsed, had moved to Montreal. It
was still at that time an organ of the League of Nations
and this war-time Conference re-dedicated the I.L.O. to
the constructive purposes of peace. Delegates, on the
regular pattern of government, employer and worker, came
from the allied nations then fighting the war.
The Office had prepared careful studies on demobiliza¬
tion and the re-employment and the re-deployment of
industry. Delegates, beset by the urgencies of war and,
most of them, anxiously concerned about the sufferings of
their people under enemy occupation were asked to give
thought to the transfer from war to peace.
The mood might have been "Let's win the war firstl" but
it was not. All of them could remember the disarray of
the labour force after the First World War and the hardships
of the years which followed.
The I.L.O.'s staff-studies dealt with the demobilization of
the armed forces and the machinery necessary for direction
and re-training; with the needs of young people, evacuated
from their homes, even exiled from their countries, their
schooling interrupted and, often, drafted into factories;
with the women "doing their bit" in industry but likely to
be displaced by ex-service men; with the disabled, civilian
as well as military, and their rehabilitation; with the
technological changes, already taking place in industry,
to which the returning workers would have to be adapted,
and with the complications which would follow the switch
of plants from war to peace.
HE recommendations approved by the Phila¬
delphia Conference, provided the basis for
subsequent, and salutary, actions by governments, em¬
ployers and trade unions. The measures agreed eased
the processes of re-adjustment and contributed to the
remarkably swift recovery of war-ravaged countries.
One of the factors in Britain of the easy transition was
the back-log of demand built up during the war years due
to both the devastation and the lack of supplies. In fact
Britain even now has not fully caught up with that back-log.
Her machine tool industry for example has still not reco¬
vered from the effects of the war which prevented re-
equipping. Forty-five per cent of the hospitals taken over
by the National Health Service in 1948 were in poor condi¬
tion, and no new hospital was started until 1954, and
between 1954 and 1958 the proportion of the national
income alloted to hospital building was still only half of
what was spent before the war.
In the United States, the transition was equally easy
because there was an enormous unsatisfied demand for
consumer goods, and for everything the American economy
could produce from food and fuel to automobiles and refrig¬
erators as well as every kind of machine tool and machi¬
nery. So the wartime U.S. boom continued, and reached
new heights during the Korean War. Then in the words of
a U.S. journal "Peace Broke Out" and there was a definite
recession because by then the American home markets
were saturated in terms of affluent requirements.
The American economist, James P. Warburg, has said
in his book. "Disarmament: The Challenge of the 1960's"
that no unsatisfied demand for consumer goods like that
of the post-war transition period now exists. Instead, he
adds, the extension of automation has meant five and a
half million workers displaced by the machines so that the
reconversion of the nine per cent of the gross national
product which is represented by U.S. military expenditure
is going to produce difficulties unless, and he terms it
a self-evident "unless", the United States goes out for
public works and social services to provide for the under¬
privileged ten per cent of its population. More than that,
as J.P. Warburg adds, it must go out into the wider world
where the unsatisfied demand exists but the purchasing
power is lacking. "The provision of that purchasing
power" he writes, "and the gearing of the American eco¬
nomy to the world's needs can be readjusted to meet it."
BUT the U.S. has a problem apart from the
conversion of industry. The military installa¬
tions themselves account for a government military and
civilian payroll of $11,000,000,000 a year. This is equal
to one-and-a-half times the combined payrolls of the iron
steel industry and all the other basic metal industries. It
is more than double the payroll of the automobile industry.
By comparison, the position in Britain is relatively sim¬
ple. Britain has a smaller military force and the number
of workers engaged on defence work is 750,000 in 138
companies. Of the defence contracts, 27.6% are in the
London and South-Eastern region and 7.7% in Scotland.
Northern region accounts for 5%, East and West Ridings
5%, North Midland 4.5%, Eastern 6.8%; Southern 7.7%
South Western 6.3%; Wales 3.2%, Midlands 15%, North
Western 10% and Northern Ireland 2.3%.
The British industries directly affected are the aircraft
industry, the electronics industry, shipbuilding and marine
engineering, the motor industry, the electrical industry and
of course, ordnance and small arms. The aircraft industry
is the most exposed; 45% of its 300,000 workers are
directly employed on defence contracts and it gets
£ 100,000,000 ($ 280,000,000) from the Services for research.
Some 40,000 men in the electronics industry (about 20%
of the total labour forces) are "on defence work. The motor
industry is barely affected a mere 2% of its 420,000
workers. Shipbuilding and marine engineering with a
labour force of 244,000 has about 81,000 workers on Service
contracts. Mechanical engineering with 1,265,000 has only
3% involved and the electrical industry with 500,000 workers
has only 4%. Ordnance and small arms would have a
redundancy of about 23,000 assuming that general disarm¬
ament abolished everything including rifles.
But these figures are deceptive to the extent that in
practically every instance with a major exception of the
CONT'D ON PAGE 32
Technicians wear protective helmets and
gowns when handling certain equipment
in a nuclear research laboratory. Atomic
energy for peaceful uses is now being deve¬
loped on such a large scale that in the event
of disarmament it could quite easily also use
the services of nuclear scientists and engine¬
ers at present engaged on military projects.
© APN

i
s
,v 1
1 JkV
1 KV sJiV
BEI ÉJ
*** W
¡M
1 K -jiA ^^^k V m Ig wj
tafe ^» -7 kàww 1 J
f- 1
r * V
^^ IWä
N
jj0ty%*i -

PEACEFUL USES (Cont'd)
What we need is the courage
aircraft industry, largely involved in military type aircraft
and in missiles the work is interchangeable, civil and
military. A worker in the electronic industry is not like an
armourer. He has not spent all his life perfecting his skills
for one particular weapon; his products are components
capable of unlimited diversity. What the electronics indus¬
try needs is not massive reconversion but a continuation
of orders for civil electronics machines to bring British
industries up-to-date.
And the same would apply throughout the "demobilized"
sectors of industry. Instead of making weapons which if
they are ever used are catastrophic and, if they are never
used, are sheer waste, industries would be making things
which would multiply the components of prosperity.
The word to emphasize is "components" because we
have become hidebound in our thinking about the finished
article. The liner Queen Elizabeth is not just a ship; it is
a city wrapped up in a hull but the components of that
city do not have to be encased in steel and slid down a
slipway. In a country badly needing homes and hospital
wards and classrooms, there is no reason why shipyards
dependent on armed forces contracts should not turn over to
the pre-fabrication of "living units" for assembly ashore.
Then the reduction of naval construction would not be a
threat to workers' livelihoods.
ND when the contracts are committed and
Lwhen it would cause great hardship to cancel
them, then we should think of more imaginative uses for
military or naval or air force surpluses. For instance,
Britain is committed by contract to a fleet of Polaris
nuclear-powered submarines each costing £70,000,000
($200,000,000). A lot of money already appropriated and
a lot of work already started. But they could be converted
Into a fleet of submarine tankers, or freighters, which could
go under the polar ice and open up the frozen north of
Canada.
This is not a fanciful idea. Consider Hudson Bay. Look
at that great bight on the map bulging into the heart of
Canada the shortest sea-route to the grain lands of the
middle provinces and to the still undeveloped wealth of
Atom Age minerals in Keewatin, the sub-arctic region of
Eastern Canada, and to the iron deposits of Labrador.
But Hudson Bay is inaccessible to ocean-going ships for
nine months of the year. It would not be very difficult to
maintain an ice-free port (like a seal's breathing-hole
through the ice) where submarine freighters, or submarine
tugs could surface any time. The Canadian authorities
seriously considered having such a port but abandoned it
because of the cost of providing a nuclear submarine fleet.
But if Britain had such a fleet going abegging, it could do
for the north of Canada what the transcontinental railways
did for the Middle West in the 19th Century. Go North,
young manl
In the wider world we need components unlimited.
Unesco has stated that in the struggle to help the illiterates
of the world, we need a minimum of 400 million radio-
receivers, cheap, foolproof, battery transistor-sets are
needed. The hundreds of millions already invested in
electronics for guided missiles could pay-off by provid-
32 ing the components. We need hundreds of millions
of tractors, which if they were made simple and durable
enough (and not the sophisticated mobile power-units
which advanced farming uses) could transform the agri¬
culture of the underdeveloped world. We need hundreds
of millions of small motors the sort of things that operate
the flaps of bombers which, as components, could be
used in a thousand different ways, from winnowing machi¬
nes to village industries. We need hovercraft, pipelines,
telecommunications, machine-tools, teaching machines and
packaged nuclear power reactors.
If nuclear materials were not locked up in military stock
piles and if brains and skills were released from the com¬
pounds of military establishments, we might keep some of
those promises of footloose energy which were made at
the first Atoms for Peace Conference.
As important as the money and resources which could
be released are the imagination and skills which have
been diverted to military purposes and could be redirected
to all those opportunities which were arrayed in February
1963 at the U.N. Conference on Science and Technology
for the Benefit of the Less Developed Areas held in Geneva.
What we need is the courage to accept general disar¬
mament.
"Fear knocked at the door. Hope answered. There
was nothing there."
MUSEUM
OF THE
FUTURE
Guide:
"The monster
appeared in the
middle of the
twentieth cent¬
ury and threat¬
ened the whole
world. It be¬
came extinct
with the great
disarmament."
