World ex on arms
1 20,000 MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR
H t\ LL the problems of transition connected with disarmament could be met by appro-
^^Lpriate national and international measures. There should be no doubt that the diversion
to peaceful purposes of the resources now in military use could be accomplished to the benefit of all
countries and lead to the improvement of world economic and social conditions. The achievement-
of general and complete disarmament would be an unqualified blessing for mankind."
This view, expressed unanimously by an international panel of economists, is the final conclusion of
a major study entitled "Economic and Social Consequences of Disarmament" published by the United
Nations. "It is particularly encouraging to discover", writes U Thant, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in its preface, "that it has proved possible for a group of experts drawn from countries with
different economic systems and at different stages of economic development to reach unanimous
agreement on a subject that until recently has been so beset by ideological differences."
The study reviews the resources devoted to military purposes; it shows the peaceful uses to which
these resources might be put when released; it examines the conversion problems that might arise,
and the impact of disarmament on international economic relations and on aid for economic develop-
4 ment; and it calls attention to some social consequences of disarmament.
This historic U.N. report deserves to be better known. Some of its major findings are summarized in
this issue (see opposite, and pages 14 to 17 and 22 to 26).

HE present level of military expenditure not only
represents a grave political danger but also
imposes a heavy economic and social burden on most
countries. It absorbs a large volume of human and ma¬
terial resources of all kinds which could be used to increase
economic and social welfare throughout the world both
in the highly industrialized countries, which at the present
time incur the bulk of the world's military expenditures,
and in the less developed areas.
On the basis of available data, the world appears to
be expending roughly $120,000 million annually on mili¬
tary expenditure (1). This is equivalent to about 8 to 9 per
cent of the world's annual output of goods and services
or to at least two-thirds of the entire national income
of all the developing countries, and is close to the value
of the world's annual exports of all commodities.
Nearly 20 million persons now serve in the world's
armed forces. When other persons occupied directly or
indirectly in servicing the needs of these armies are. added,
the total may well amount to over 50 million. The total
volume of manpower and of other resources devoted to
military use at the present times is thus very large indeed.
In many countries the estimates of military expenditure
range between 1 and 5 per cent of gross domestic product,
while in others, particularly in some of the larger countries,
(1) A 1962 estimate. Today's armaments' bill is believed to have
risen to between $130,000 million and $140,000 million.
the corresponding ratio ranges between 5 and 10 per cent.
The great bulk of the world's military expenditure Is highly
concentrated in a handful of countries and industrial sectors.
About 85 per cent of the world's military outlays is accoun¬
ted for by seven countries Canada, Federal Republic of
Germany, France, mainland China, U.S.S.R., United King¬
dom and United States.
Among the major military powers military production is
highly concentrated in a few industrial sectors, notably
munitions, electrical machinery, instruments and related
products, and transportation equipment, including airplanes
and missiles. In most other industries military outlays
account for a relatively small proportion of total demand.
Industries dependent on military expenditure also have a
high degree of concentration in certain regions and cities.
Total military expenditure in all the developing countries
amounts to about one-tenth of that of the industrial private
enterprise economies. This means that although many
developing countries devote significant proportions of their
resources to military purposes, the great bulk of the
resources released by disarmament would be concentrated
in a very few countries.
The situation is rather different in those countries that
rely upon imports for their supplies of military goods or
in which the major part of military expenditure is for the
pay and subsistence of the armed forces, rather than
for their equipment. In such cases, the resources devoted
to military purposes consist essentially of manpower and
foreign exchange. This is especially true of the developing
countries.
