CALENDAR OF
MONUMENTAL
OPERATIONS
1960:
Temple of Debod, north chapel of Taffeh,
kiosk of Kertassi : dismantled by the Anti¬
quities Service of the United Arab Republic.
1962
Temples of Dendur, of Dakka and of Mahar-
raqah : dismantled by U.A.R. Antiquities
Service.
1962-63:
Temple of Kalabsha: dismantled, transferred
and re-erected by the government of the
Federal Republic of Germany at its own
expense.
MAHARRAQAH
1963:
Kiosk of Kertassi: re-erected by the U.A.R.
Antiquities Service. Temple of Aksha : sculp¬
tured blocks removed and transported to the
new museum at Khartoum in Sudan thanks
to the financial contribution from France.
Tomb of Djehuty-Hotep at Debeira East:
painted scenes in the first chamber were cut
out and taken to the new museum at Khar¬
toum, by the Sudanese Antiquities Service.
Temple of Buhen: dismantled and transported
to the new museum at Khartoum through
financial contributions by the U.K. and the
U.S.A.
WADI ES SEBUA
ELLESY
KASR IBRIM
1964:
10
Temple of Derr: dismantled and cut out of
the rock by the U.A.R. Antiquities Service.
Temple of Wadi-es-Sebua : cut out and
dismantled thanks to a U.S. financial contri¬
bution, supplemented by one from the U.A.R.
Temple of Beit el Wali : cut out of the rock
(U.S. contribution).
Tomb of Pennut at Aniba : removed from the
rock (U.S. contribution).
Temple of Amada: front portion dismantled
by the U.A.R. Antiquities Service; remaining
portion now being transported in its entirety
by rails for re-erection on a higher location
(French contribution).
Temple of Gerf-Hussein: certain elements
and sculptures cut out of the rock by the
U.A.R. Antiquities Service.
Temple of Jebel Shams : stele to be cut out
this year by the U.A.R. Antiquities Service.
Abu Simbel: protective works being raised
prior to removal of temples.
Temple of Kumma at Semna East: dismantled
and transported to Khartoum museum (Nether¬
lands contribution).
Temple of Semna West: dismantled and
taken to Khartoum museum (Belgian contri¬
bution).
m
ABU SIMBEL (
A
^£BU ODA
foUSTUL *
FARAS \* JEBEL SH*MS
*< ^ \ y
<r£ P1 l̂é^.IJE'EfEIRA EAST
IS
AKSHA 1\
*
y
BU>rtN
y
3O Wadi Haifa
y
y i. 2nd cataract
s MIRGISSA àKi.
ASKUT
SEMNA WEST
GEMAI
SEMNA EAST (KUMMA)
3rd cataract (Dal) NUBIA
Grey shading shows the outline of the man-made lake
(about 300 miles long) that will be formed when the
waters of the Aswan High Dam reach maximum level. ,
Names underlined are temples and monuments already
dismantled and removed from the threatened area.

HOW ABU SIMBEL
WILL BE SAVED by
Karl Heinz Martini
These giant metal
piles driven into
the ground before
the Great Temple
of Abu Simbel
form the core of a
cofferdam of rocks
and earth that will
shut off the temple
from the rising
waters of the Nile
while rescue ope¬
rations proceed.
© Jean Sonnier
THE salvage of the Abu Simbel temples is now
fully under way.
Yet a year and a half ago, the prospects for their pre¬
servation had become very uncertain. The famous lifting
project conceived by the Italian firm Italconsult (see
The Unesco Courier, October 1961) had to be abandoned
because of the high cost of the operation. The United
Arab Republic and Unesco searched for a less expensive
method. Different proposals were made, among them
an extremely interesting scheme devised by the French
engineer, Professor Albert Caquot, for floating the two
temples up on giant pontoons.
The Government of the U.A.R. finally decided in favour
of a salvage project to cut the temples into blocks conceived
by the Swedish engineering firm Vattenbyggnadsbyran of
Stockholm. The execution of this operation has been
entrusted to the International Joint Venture under the
leadership of Hochtief AG, the company which had already
effected the dismantling, transfer and re-erection of the
temple of Kalabsha under the sponsorship of the Federal
Republic of Germany.
The Joint Venture includes the following firms : Hochtief
AG, Essen (Federal Republic of Germany), Atlas Company,
Cairo (U.A.R.), Grands Travaux de Marseille, Paris (France),
Impregilo, Milan (Italy), Skanska, Stockholm (Sweden),
and Sentab, Stockholm (Sweden).
Agreements for the execution of the project and for
international participation therein were concluded between
the donor states and Unesco and between Unesco and
the U.A.R.; the government of the U.A.R. signed the
contract with the Joint Venture on November 16, 1963,
and the work began immediately. The project Is to cost
between $32,000,000 and $36,000,000.
Since it had proved impossible to envisage transporting
each temple as a single whole, the principle now applied
involved dismantling and cutting the monuments into blocks
of no more than 30 tons in weight, transporting these
blocks to a position in the neighbourhood of the original
site but higher up, and reassembling them on that location.
This very difficult operation is being carried out in
three stages : first, the hills containing the temples must
be excavated so as to expose the buildings' themselves.
Secondly, each monument must be cut out ; the blocks
must be transported with every possible precaution to
prevent damage and temporarily stored until all have been
removed. Thirdly, the temples are to be re-erected at the
new site with the same orientation as before, and their
surroundings must be reconstituted so as to give them,
as far as possible, the appearance they had originally.
The ground level of the Great Temple of Abu Simbel is
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
11

ABU SIMBEL
(Cont'd)
IE
SALVAGE
OPERATION
an artist's
view
An artist's conception
of the salvage opera¬
tions now under way
at Abu Simbel. Façades
of the temples will be
protected and reinforced
by giant sloping sand-
fills made of compacted
dune sand (here shown
as transparent, covering
only half of façade).
Plans then call for the
careful excavation of
the mountain rock above
and behind the temples
to enable dismantling of
roofs and walls of the
temple rooms. Exca¬
vations will be carried
out without use of ex¬
plosives to avoid harm¬
ful vibrations. Giant
tube will provide ac¬
cess to interior. Cof¬
ferdam is shown in
foreground with road¬
ways up to new site.
Drawing by
Gunter Radtke-Hochtief
122 metres above sea level (a metre is just under a
yard) and that of Queen Nefertari's Small Temple is only
120 metres. This means that the water level of the new
High Dam reservoir which began to fill up this year would
flood the temples before they could be removed if no
exceptional measures were taken to protect them tem¬
porarily.
In order to shut the temples off from the rising water
a special cofferdam has been designed and top priority
given to its construction. The cofferdam is about 360
metres long starting from a point south of the Great
Temple and rejoining the cliff to the north of the Small
Temple. When completed, it will be about 25 metres high
above river bed and the crest will be 135 metres above
sea level. It is formed of a line of steel sheet piling,
24 metres in height, penetrating into the river bed down
to the bedrock, with above that, a concrete lintel, one
metre high, and on the top another line of steel sheeting,
12 13 metres in height. On either side of this barrier rockfill
material is being accumulated.
The building of the cofferdam took on a particularly
dramatic character in the autumn of 1964 because the
season of the flood water level of the Nile proved to
be exceptionnally long. It was necessary to complete the
cofferdam above the level originally scheduled, and the
crews of the Joint Venture found themselves working
both day and night in order to reach the needed height
in time. Meanwhile, several pumping stations have been
installed to serve as a de-watering system for the area
between the temples and the cofferdam as the water
level of the Nile rises. The water is to be directly dis¬
charged into a drainage pipeline.
All work on the cofferdam will have been completed
before summer 1965. The reservoir level will rise above
the cofferdam in January 1967, but the monuments will
have been removed long before then.
The hill above each of the temples (rising 30 metres
above the top of the Great Temple and 40 metres above
that of the Small Temple) is to be excavated to within
80 centimetres (2 1/2 feet) of their ceilings and around
the sides of both monuments. This means removing
150,000 cubic metres of rock (approximately 300,000 tons).

The excavation will be carried out by means of rippers,
pneumatic hammers, compressed-air drills, and rock
chisels. A chute at either side of each temple will bring
down the excavated material, which is being used to help
fill the cofferdam, No explosives can be used in this
operation; they might damage ceilings, walls and
statuary, which already show cracks and fissures in
certain places.
At the same time, scaffolding is being put up in all
the rooms of both temples in order to support the
ceilings and the sides when they are separated from
the surrounding rock. Forty per cent of the scaffolding,
of which a total of 150 tons will be necessary, was already
installed in September 1964. A huge tube is to be installed
to give passage to the entrance of each temple while
sand is filled above the façades to protect them.
Some of the sandstone at Abu Simbel is extremely
fragile, and it will be strengthened by the injection of
chemical agents. A specialized firm is now testing the
different synthetic resin products to be used for this
purpose. Not only must some of the blocks be streng¬
thened as a whole the sandstone sometimes shows so
little cohesion that the blocks would break apart when
cut or lifted but the edges of inscribed surfaces must
be specially treated along the cuts to safeguard against
corners breaking off during cutting. The stone hooks
for the lifting of the blocks will be sunk into the blocks
with a synthetic resin compound.
In parts of the hill outside the immediate temple area,
tests are being performed to ascertain the exact results
of each different type of cutting equipment : wire saws,
disc saws, chain saws and several types of hand saws.
Only after all the tests are completed will the actual
cutting and lifting of the blocks themselves be undertaken.
At this stage cutting will be executed under the constant
surveillance of archaeologists. Every precaution is being
taken to prevent aesthetic damage being done to the monu¬
ments.
For each temple, two guy rope derricks capable of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

14
ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
lifting 20 to 30 tons will remove the blocks as they
are cut out on platform lorries of a special type which
will transport them to the storage area behind the old
site and near the new position to be occupied by the
temples.
The blocks to be removed in both temples total
15,000 tons (11,500 tons for the Great Temple and 3,500
tons for the Small Temple). In view of the need to
preserve some of the surroundings of the monuments,
several thousand more elements of smaller dimensions
will also be taken away. The blocks will be stored with
individual protective coverings and numbering to
determine their exact positions in the edifices, until the
transfer is completed. Special handling will of course
be required for the bas-reliefs and statues.
The temples will be re-erected in a position about 64
metres higher and 180 metres farther inland from the
river as compared with the present site. The re-erection
operations will be similar to the dismantling, only in
reverse order. At first, the blocks will be assembled
upon an internal scaffolding, individual blocks being
anchored to or suspended from a reinforced concrete
supporting structure on the top of which concrete domes
will be constructed to carry the overlying rock. The
façades of the temples will put up at the same time as
the reinforced concrete domes.
Afterwards, the surrounding area will be landscaped
and treated so as to recreate the original appearance.
The orientation of the temples will be the same as before.
The whole operation is scheduled to be completed in
six years from start to finish.
The organization of the work yards at Abu Simbel
is almost as arduous a matter as the salvage operation
itself. In the first place the project is being carried
out in a very remote area. Abu Simbel is 280 km (175
miles) from Aswan and 1,500 km (nearly 1,000 miles)
from Alexandria. Equipment which must be imported
from foreign countries takes a considerable amount of
time to reach the site. For instance, from Hamburg to
Abu Simbel a minimum of eight weeks must be expected.
Moreover, the Nile is now closed by the Aswan High Dam
and equipment transported by river must at this point be
taken overland.
However, the work of the Joint Venture is now
facilitated by special means of transport. There are
thirteen boats operating for the Joint Venture of which
six units have been hired from the U.A.R. Government.
Furthermore, two small airplanes, each with three
passenger seats, are transporting urgently required
material staff. The government has also allowed the Joint
Venture to set up a wireless communication system on
normal frequency between Abu Simbel and Aswan.
At present, some forty foreign and ten Egyptian
technicians and 750 local labourers are working at the
site. At the peak point in the operation it is expected
that there will be at least 50 foreign and 40 Egyptian
technicians and about 800 labourers.
Climatic conditions are naturally very severe, for
everyone, but are particularly difficult for staff of European
origin. However, special housing is now being provided
for labourers and staff. A nearby river port and an airfield
ensure communications.
European staff are generally sent out to Abu Simbel
for two-year periods. As soon as the villages are
completely ready, wives and children of staff will join
them. The problem of schooling will be a somewhat
difficult one, the children being from several different
countries ; and indeed Abu Simbel has become a veritable
Babel of languages where Arabic, German, Swedish,
Italian, French, English and Spanish are to be heard.
The men who are working on the Abu Simbel project,
most of whom knew nothing about the temples, their
history or their cultural value before coming here, are
all vitally interested in making this difficult project
succeed, and they have become fascinated with the
history and art of the cultural treasures that they are
helping to preserve. When on the new site of the Great
Temple, the first rays of the sun penetrate into the inner
sanctuary exactly as before, modern technology will have
achieved a result rivalling that of the ancient Egyptians
themselves of which not only those who have directly
worked to make such a gigantic achievement possible
but the world as a whole can be justly proud,
K. H. MARTINI is a member of HochtiefA. G. of Essen (Fed. Rep. of
Germany), the firm directing the demanding operations atAbu Simbel.

National Institute of Geography. Paris This is the first time that the bas-reliefs in the hall of Osirian Pillars at Abu Simbel have been photographed
together as a single scene in its full sweep. The ¡mages occupy the southern wall of the hall of the Great
Temple of Rameses II and recount his many exploits. The photo was made from a series of individual pictu¬
res by the French National Institute of Geography, using special photographic and topometric techniques.
Drawing by Vattenbyggnadsbyran
Stockholm
Cross section of the Great Temple of Abu Simbel showing where the moun¬
tain of rock will be cut away. Diagonal lines indicate that facade and interior
ceilings will be 80 centimetres (2 y2 ft.) thick. Outlined in black is concrete
reinforced backing which will be introduced after the temple is reconstruc¬
ted at its new site. Reinforced concrete domes will be built above each temple.
Some of the sandstone of Abu
Simbel is extremely friable. On the
hillside near the temple tests are
made (left) with different kinds of
cutting equipment including special
hand saws. Right, a bas-relief is
cut from the façade of the Great
Temple. Where the stone is
exceptionally fragile it will be
reinforced with injections of syn¬
thetic resin. This is especially
important when the stone bears
ancient inscriptions that may be
damaged during cutting operation.
Vattenbyggnadsbyran. Stockholm Hochtief
