tSHEVCHENKO (Cont'd)
by Roger Caillois
This article is copyright © and may not be reproduced
I
14
| n 1847 Taras Gregorevlch Shevchenko was thir¬
ty-three years old. Some time had elapsed
since he had passed from serfdom to freedom and from
obscurity to fame. His future was now assured; but his
nature was such that he could not accept the prospect of
his own personal success while an endless horizon of
misery and slavery faced the people of Kirillovka and
Mornltz (the villages where he was born and raised) and
beyond them, the inhabitants of countless other, villages
and towns throughout the Ukraine and perhaps even
beyond the frontiers of Ukraine itself.
He could not abide the thought that those he loved
should continue to suffer the degradation he himself had
known during his childhood. He Joined a secret revolu¬
tionary group and animated Its members with the im¬
passioned poems of sedition which poured from his pen.
Seized and arrested, he soon found himself Impounded
into the army as a private and shipped off in exile to the
far-off military fortresses beyond the Urals in central Asia.
Before turning this page, let me pause, here for a
moment to try to visualize the effect of such an event on
the mature and celebrated figure that Shevchenko had
become. He had achieved what had once seemed to him
an Impossible dream by graduating from the Academy of
Fine Arts; he was an habitué of the notable salons of
St. Petersburg, a poet and a painter. Suddenly there he
was thrust Into the ruthless, brutal world of the army and
the mire and filth of military barracks.
"A child shaped like a cube." This was the strange
phrase Shevchenko once applied to himself. At the
present moment in his life he seems not only to have the
hard form of a cube but, carved as it were in an adaman-
. tine, unpliable substance, its rock-like solidity as well. He
appears as stubborn now as he was in his early childhood
when he would trek across the Ukrainian countryside till
he dropped with fatigue or sleep in order to reach the
pillars of iron, behind the mountain, which propped up
the sky. Not only had he tumbled back Into servitude and
isolation after only a brief interlude of happiness and
Independence but by order of Czar Nicolas I he was
forbidden either to write or paint one of the most Ignoble
forms of tyranny and oppression against artistic and
literary creation.
For Shevchenko the order to abandon brush and pen was
well-nigh unbearable but at least he was never forced to
paint or write in glorification of a regime which persecut¬
ed him. In any event he soon began to write again in
secret.
The following year, 1848, the Russian general, A.I. Buta-
kov set about equipping a large scientific expedition to
%
explore the flora and fauna of the Aral Seaa vast though
not very deep expanse of salt water set in the midst of the
desert. Because of his skill at drawing Shevchenko was
asked to join the expedition. Soon one thousand five
hundred horse-drawn wagons called telegas were crossing
the Kara Kum wastelands. They carried everything
needed including a dismantled schooner.
I can well Imagine what that month-long journey must
have been like; men struggling against such heavy sand¬
storms that young faces rapidly developed the furrows of
old age. On the dunes which stretched ahead like ocean
waves, on the brain-like, coral-like sinuosities, nothing
grew but sedge and wormwood, dwarf . saxifrage and
desert acacia, an armour-plated vegetation, tough, thorny
and hostile.
Yet when the waters of the melting snow receded there
was a brief multicoloured explosion of swift budding tulips
and sudden poppies. It is not hard to picture the
unexpected delight which these short-lived flowers,
blossoming in the barren landscape, brought to the
painter, to the poet exiled far from the green banks of
the gentle Dnieper where for so long the land had belong¬
ed to man that it undulated with the burial mounds rising
over his bones.
Sketches and water-colours followed one another in

Sunset on the edge of the Aral Sea. This water-colour was painted by Shevchenko on September 25, 1848, in the
camp of the scientific expedition which he accompanied to the Aral Sea. Shevchenko recorded the desolate scenery of
this vast region in innumerable drawings and wrote many of his finest poems here. Left, a Cossack horseman : A water-
colour which was painted in 1848 or 1849, as Shevchenko crossed Central Asia, making towards the Aral Sea.
rapid succession. They were both works of art and
scientific documents, and included contour outlines of hills
and surveys of terrain. For these too are a way man
gains mastery over new lands, identifies and describes new
species of plants and animals and helps to complete the
record and Inventory of the planet we live on and the
riches it contains.
I have by no means seen all the drawings made by
BY THE ARAL SEA
Beneath an unwashed sky
The sullen waves sleep on
And though no wind stirs
Far off, above the shore
Rushes bob and sway
As if in a tipsy dance
How much longer must I wither
By this sombre, dismal sea?
Though the faded grass is silent
On the steppe it bows and bends
Like a feeling, living soul
But the withering grass won't talk
It will never tell the truth
And there's no one here, except the grass
To be questioned on our fate.
TARAS SHEVCHENKO
Shevchenko In exile. I do not even know if they have all
been preserved or If many of them have been lost. No
matter. I like to think that we owe to him the first
picture of the rare salmon found only in the Aral Sea,
or that of the elegant cardlum, a heart-shaped shell-nsh
which, by who knows what mysterious way, left the
Mediterranean to proliferate In this land-locked lake.
During the winter on the island of Kos-Aral, Shevchenko
wrote poem after poem. Many of his most powerful and
original verses were written there. Then, at Orenburg
and Novopetrov, even though he was once more subject to
the harshest conditions, came his best prose works,
especially his Diary.
No sign of despair ever appears in its pages. I believe
that when on August 2 1859, he left Novopetrov, he was
happy not only because he was returning home, but also
because be had turned adversity and solitude into a rich
human experience.
Even when conditions were most trying he refused to
be discouraged. Instead he simply turned out more and
more work. With his drawings of cliffs and hills and a
thousand sketches of various kinds he contributed in his
way, at the distant end of the earth to which tyranny had
exiled him and because an enlightened general gave him
a chance, to the advancement of a science which must
certainly have seemed strange and foreign to him, namely,
geography. One cannot always choose the alphabet of
one's message.
A philosopher has observed that man would not today
be what he is had not his caveman ancestor determined
to bequeath to his descendants a better world than the
one he had Inherited. Every generation is in the same
situation and Is subject to the same unspoken law. In
Shevchenko, we honour not only the painter and the poet
but also one of the resolute pioneers who have truly
understood this prime and permanent duty of man.
15
