ENCOUNTER
ON A SUMMER NIGHT
Extract from Shevchenko's novel "The Painter ft
In 1856 while exiled to the for¬
tress of Novopetrovsk on the
Caspian Sea, Shevchenko
wrote a novel entitled "The
Painter". It was a largely au¬
tobiographical work and des¬
cribed how a young serf with
ambitions to become an artist
finally won his freedom, as
did Shevchenko, helped by
the painter, Karl Brüllov and
the poet Vassili Zhukovsky.
The following extract from
"The Painter" is taken from
"Taras Shevchenko-Selec-
tions", translated by John
Weir, and published by "The
Ukrainian Canadian", 1961.
IN St. Petersburg I nearly always pass the summer nights out on the street
or somewhere on the islands, or more often yet, on the riverside walk.
Especially do I like the place where the Neva is calm and like a gigantic
mirror reflects to the tiniest detail the majestic portico of the Rimiyantsev
Museum, a corner of the Senate and the scarlet curtains in the home of
Countess Laval.
In the long winter nights the dwelling is lit up inside and the scarlet
curtains flame like a fire against the dark background, and I urn always
annoyed that the Neva is then covered with ice and snow and therefore the
decoration loses its true effect.
In the summertime I also like to meet the sunrise on Troitsky Bridge. A
marvellous, majestic picture.
In a genuinely artistic painting there is something that is more charm¬
ing and beautiful than nature itself the uplifted spirit of the artist, his
divine creativeness. On the other hand, there arc such wonderful phenomena
in nature before -which the poet-artist hows to the earth and can only give
thanks to the Creator for such a thrilling moment of rapture.
I often admire Shchedrin's landscapes (1) and especially was I captivated by
his small painting, "'Portichi Before Sunset." A fascinating work! But it
has never fascinated me so much as does the view of Vihorg from Troitsky
Bridge just before sunrise.
One time, having enjoyed to the brim this picture, which was not painted
by the hand of man, I walked over to the Summer Gardens for a rest. When¬
ever I happen to he in the Summer Gardens, I never stop on any of the alleys
which are ornamented with marble statues: those statues make the worst
kind of impression on me, especially the ugly Saturn gobbling up his equally
hideous offspring. I always pass by those clumsy gods and goddesses and
sit down to rest beside a pool from where I can admire the beautiful granite
vase and the majestic architecture of the Mikhaïlovsky castle.
Nearing the place where the main alley is crossed by a smaller one, and
where Saturn, surrounded by gods and goddesses, is depicted devouring his
child, I almost 6tumbled over a living person in a soiled smock of twill who
was sitting on a bucket directly opposite Saturn.
I halted. The boy (for he was really hut a lad of fourteen or fifteen) look¬
ed around and began to hide something inside his shirt-front. I came closer
and asked what he was doing there.
"I'm not doing anything," he replied bashfully. "Tin on my way to work
and I stepped into the park on the way." Then, after a moment's silence,
he added: "I was drawing."
"Show me what you drew."
He pulled out a quarto of grey stationery from his shirt-front and shyly
handed it to me. On the sheet the outline of Saturn had been copied quite
faithfully.
I held the drawing in my hands for a long time and feasted my eyes on
the smudged face of the author. There was something attractive in his thin,
(1) The Russian painter, Sylvester Shchedrin (1790-1830).
17
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

tSHEVCHENKO (Cont'd)
20
APN
A self-portrait of Karl Brüllov,
the "prince of painters", as he
was named by Shevchenko. A
portrait painted by Brüllov raised
the money needed to buy Shev¬
chenko's freedom from serfdom.
Shevchenko expressed all the
admiration he felt for Karl Brüllov
in his novel, "The Painter".
irregular features, especially in his eyes, which were intelligent and meek
as a maiden's.
"Do you often come here to draw?" I asked him.
"Every Sunday," he answered, "and if we happen to he working close hy,
I come on weekdays too."
"You are training for a house painter?"
"Also fine painting," he added.
"To whom are you apprenticed?"
"To Shirayev, the mural painter."
I wanted to question him in greater detail, but he picked up the bucket
with yellow paint in one hand and a large yellow brush that had been wiped
dry in the other and started to leave.
"Where are you hurrying so?"
"To work. I'm late already and when the master comes, I'll catch it."
"Come to see me Sunday morning, and if you have any drawings you did
yourself, bring them to show me."
"Fine, I'll come, but where do you live?"
I wrote my address down right on bis drawing and we parted.

Early on Sunday morning I returned from an all-night promenade and in
the hallway before the door of my apartment I was met by my new acquain¬
tance, no longer in a soiled smock of twill but in something resembling a
frock-coat of a brown colour, and with a roll of paper in his hand.
I greeted him and extended my hand to him. He sprang to my hand
'and attempted to kiss it. I snatched away my hand: I was
embarassed by his slavishness. Without a word I went into my apartment
while he remained in the hallway. I took off my coat, put on a smock, lighted
a cigar, and he still hadn't entered the room. I walked out in to the corridor
and looked about, but my friend had disappeared; I went downstairs and
asked the caretaker whether he had seen such a person. "I saw him," said
he, "a young fellow with papers in his hand, he ran out to the street."
I went out to the street but found no trace of him.
A sadness came upon me as though I had lost something dear to me. I
was dispirited all week until the following Sunday and couldn't figure out
what the sudden flight of my friend could have meant. When Sunday arriv¬
ed at last, I went to Troitsky Bridge at two o'clock in the morning and after
enjoying the sunrise I went to the Summer Gardens, traversed all the
alleys but my friend was nowhere about.
I was on the point of going home when I iemembered the Belvedere Apollo,
that is, the parody of the Belvedere god that stands by itself right beside
Moika street. I went there and there was my friend. Seeing me, he stopped
drawing and blushed to the ears like a child caught stealing cookies. I took
him by his trembling hand and led him like an offender to the pavilion
and in passing ordered the tavern waiter to bring us tea.
I showed my friend all the kindness I knewr bow and when he calmed
down I asked him why he bad run away from the hallway.
"You were angry with me and I got scared," he replied.
"To be angry with you was the farthest from my mind," I told him, "but
your grovelling was unpleasant to me. Only a dog licks hands, a human
being should not do it." This strong expression so affected my friend that
he seized my hand again. I laughed and he turned red as a lobster and stood
silent with his head bowed.
After drinking our tea we parted. At parting I told him that he must call
on me without fail either this very day or next Sunday.
I have seen my new acquaintance only three times and already I am drawn
to him, I have become attached to him, I have developed a liking for him.
And truly, there is something in his features that you can't help liking. Hi?
physiognomy, which seemed homely at first, as time went on appeared more
and more attractive. After all, there are such fortunate faces on the earth!
I went directly home so that my friend shouldn't have to wait in the
hallway. I walked up the stairs and there he was already, in that same brown
frock-coat, washed, combed and smiling.

"You're quite the nimble-foot," I said, "for you stopped over at your
quarters on the way, didn't you? How did you manage to do it so quickly?"
"Well," he answered, "I hurried to be home when the master returned
from Mass."
"Why, is your master strict?" I inquired.
"Strict and..."
"And cruel, is that what you meant to say?"
"No, I was going to say that he is a skinflint. He would beat me but actually
be would be glad that I was too late to have dinner."

We entered the room. On my easel was a copy I had «lone of a painting
by Velasquez that was on exhihition at the Slroganov Gallery, and li is eyes
fastened on it. I took the roll from his hands and began to inspect it.
Everything that disfigures the Summer Gardens was there, from the sacchar-
inely smiling goddesses to the hideous "Phraclitus" (1) and Hcraclitus.
What struck me about these not-at-all-poor outlines was their remarkable
similarity to the originals, especially the sketches of "Phraclitus" and Ilera-
clitus. They were more expressive and, truth to tell, uglier than the originals,
but nevertheless you couldn't look at the drawings without being moved.
The famous Nevsky Pros¬
pect in St. Petersburg
(19th century engraving).
This broad avenue crossed
the city now Leningrad
from east to west, in a
vast bend of the RiverNeva.
Roger Viollet
I was glad at heart over my discovery. At that time the idea didn't even
come to my mind to ask myself what I would do with my diamond in the
rough in view of my more than limited resources. Actually, the thought did
cross my mind even then, hut was immediately set aside with the proverb:
"God is not without mercy, and a Cossack is not without luck."
"Why don't you have a single drawing with shadings?" I asked, returning
the roll to him.
"I drew all those sketches early in the morning, before sunrise."
"So you have never seen them in the light?"
"I've gone to look at them in the daytime, but you can't draw then, with
the people walking about."
"What do you intend to do now: stay and have dinner with me, or go
home?"
He was silent for a minute and then, without lifting his eyes, said almost
indistinctly:
"I would rather stay, if you'll let me."
21
(1) The author probably means Democritus, the Greek philosopher.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

tSHEVCHENKO (Cont'd)
"And how will you square it with your master afterward?"
"I'll tell him that I was sleeping in the garret."
"Then let's go to dinner."
When we arrived there were as yet no customers at Madame Yurgens' place,
of which I was very glad because it would have been annoying to have some
smoothfaced bureaucrat smirking stupidly as he eyed my friend who was far
from being a dandy.
After dinner I had intended to take him to the Academy and show him
"The Last Day of Pompeii," not everything at once. After we had dined,
however, I proposed that we either take a promenade on the boulevard or
read a hook. He chose the latter and I made him read aloud in order to test
him in that subject. I fell asleep as he read the first page of Dickens' famous
novel "Nicholas Nicklehy," hut neither the author nor the reader were to
blame for this I simply couldn't say awake because I hadn't slept the
previous night.
When I awoke and went into the next room, my usually chaotic study
appeared pleasant to the eye: there were no cigar butts or tobacco ashes
anywhere to be seen, everything was tidied up and swept clean, even the
palette, which hung on a nail with dried paints on it, was cleaned and glistened
like glass; meanwhile, he who was responsible for all this harmony sat by the
window, drawing the mask of Thorvaldson's (2) famous model, Fortunata.
All this was exceedingly pleasant to me. Those services clearly spoke in
his favour. However, and I don't know why, I didn't show my satisfaction.
1 corrected the sketch he was doing, put in shadows, and then we left for the
"Kapcrnaum" for tea. "Kapcrnaum" is another name for the "Berlin" tavern
on the corner of the Sixth Line and the Academy Lane that's how it was
named, I believe, by Pimenov (3) during his boisterous student days.
While we were having tea, be told me the story of his life. It was a sad,
mournful talc, but be told it naively and simply, without a shadow of complaint
or reproach. Until that confession I had been thinking of means to improve
his upbringing, hut having heard the confession I even stopped thinking about
it: he was a serf.
(2) The Danish sculptor, Bertel Thorvaldsen (1779-1844), author of the famous
Lion Monument in Lucerne, Sioitzerland.
(3) The Russian sculptor, Nicolas Pimenov (1812-1864).
With its bridges, canals and
stretches of water among the is¬
lands on the River Neva,St Peters¬
burg has beert called "The Venice
of the North ". Below, a bridge over
the "Simniaia Kanavka" (the little
winter canal) which recalls the
famous Bridge of Sighs in Venice.
Left, the Summer Gardens, crea¬
ted for Peter the Great, which
Shevchenko used as a refuge
where he could practice drawing.
A.P.N, photos
