Above, head and neck of bridled horse decorates
both sides of this black-figured Attic vase (560-
550 B.C.). Below, another vase painting showing
Theseus killing the Minotaur, the famed mythological
monster of the Cretan Labyrinth (about 540 B.C.).

PANTHEON OF GREEK
GODS AND HEROES
The scenes from Greek mythology shown here
were painted over 2,500 years ago on Attic
black-figured vases now in the collection of
the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
Photographs and descriptions of 56 of these
vases and vase fragments recently appeared in
a special fascicule (1) prepared by Dietrich
von Bothmer. It was published under the
auspices of the International Council for Philo¬
sophy and Humanistic Studies with financial
help from the Metropolitan Museum and from
Unesco. The fascicule has now been added
to the Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum, a vast
"catalogue" of the world's antique vases which
the International Academic Union has been
assembling since 1922. Many countries have
contributed to the Corpus whose 118 fascicules
now constitute a planned and detailed record
of some of man's finest antique art treasures.
(1) "Attic Black-figured Amphorae", published by Har¬
vard University Press, 79, Garden Street, Cambridge,
Mass. U.S.A., from whom this and other U.S. fascicules
in the " Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum " may be ordered.
Do not order from Unesco.
24
Four men and a youth competing in a foot race. They
appear on a prize amphor, one of the Panathenaic vases
linked with the festival of Athens, held to celebrate the
union of Attica under Theseus (about 520 B.C.).
All photos
New York.
1963, The Metropolitan Museum of Art,

A scene believed to depict the apo¬
theosis of Herakles. The woman in
the chariot, holding the reins and the
goad, is probably Athena, goddess of
wisdom. On far side of horses are
Apollo and Hermes (about 530 B.C.).
Dionysos, in the centre, turns his head
towards a flute-playing satyr. To
the right of Dionysos stands Hermes
holding wine pitcher (530-520 B.C.).
Dionysos, god of wine, of fertility
and of the theatre, shown between
two dancing satyrs. In his left hand
the god holds a drinking horn. Vase
painting dating from about 520 B.C.
25
