On these pages we present an
extraordinary series of photographs
taken by the Swiss photographer,
Georg Gerster, which show step
by step how the frescoes discov¬
ered at Faras were freed from
the sand, removed from the walls
and prepared for transport and
later restoration. Left, workers
cart off last basketfuls of sand
from the chapel revealing one of
the most magnificent of the Faras
frescoes The Nativity. It measures
7x4 m (below, left). How the
frescoes were got off the walls is
little short of miraculous. Right
first the fresco is cleaned and
sprayed with a protective coating,
and tissue paper is applied to the
surface, impregnated with hot
beeswax. Far right, phase two :
veil of muslin is spread over the
tissue paper and again hot bees¬
wax is ironed on to it. As the wax is
applied the motifs of the painting
appear. The size and condition
of the fresco determines how
many layers of muslin are applied.
Photos © Dr Georg Gerster, Zurich

A FRESCO IS REMOVED
a story in pictures by G. Gerster
When the fresco is thoroughly dry and stiff it is gently pried away
from the wall with various instruments. This is an operation demand¬
ing infinite patience and skill especially when separating one layer
of paintings from another. As many as three layers of paintings
have been found on some walls. Professor Michalowski leader of
Polish Archaeological Mission in Nubia (on right) supervises work.

A FRESCO IS REMOVED (Cont'd)
20
another. To win the race against
the waters of the Nile, Professor
Michalowski was finally obliged to
mobilize the services of every available
specialist he could find In Poland.
In May 1964, fifty-seven cases filled
with frescoes left Faras by boat for
Wadi Haifa, a Sudanese town that has
already been partly evacuated by its
people. From here twenty-five cases
were sent on to Khartoum, capital of
the Republic of the Sudan, with
frescoes that will eventually be placed
in the city's new museum.
Other cases, carrying 52 frescoes
which the Government of the Sudan
has presented to Poland, were taken
to Port Sudan and embarked on a
Polish freighter.
In Khartoum conservation work
is being supervised by Josef Gazy, a
Polish specialist who was responsible
for their removal from the church at
Faras. Similar operations have already
begun in the workshops of the
Warsaw Museum.
The frescoes will be given minute
examination on both sides and every
detail of their condition, even down
to the traces left by termites and
burrowing wasps, will be recorded..
Specialists will go over them, studying
irregularities and blemishes, the under¬
lays of paint and any incrustations that
could cause damage or discoloration.
Other studies may throw light on
several mysteries. For example, how
did artists of the 7th century A.D.
prepare paints whose brilliance re¬
mains undimmed after so many centu¬
ries? We may know the answer after
samples of these paints have been
analyzed by the laboratory at the War¬
saw Museum.
But shall we ever know the names
of the artists of Faras? The discoveries
there have shown that the Christian
art of Nubia, unlike the Egyptian Coptic
art, had origins closely linked with
the art of Byzantium. The painters
of Nubia indeed drew inspiration from
this source but it is their own origina¬
lity, sense of the picturesque and a
kind of naivete that has earned a unique
place in Christian art for the works
they painted in Faras.

Photos © Dr. Georg Gerster, Zurich Above, from left to right, fresco is completely detached from wall. All superfluous mud is
carefully scraped from the back and the painting is then attached to a prepared wooden
framework. The fresco is then pulled on to a wooden packing frame for its final journey.
Below, twenty arms lift the Nativity across the sands as it leaves the ruins of Faras en
route for Khartoum. Of the 169 frescoes unearthed at Faras, Poland has been granted 52.

IRONING OUT FRESCOES. Photos on this page show conservation work on
thousand-year-old Faras frescoes now being carried out at Warsaw museum. Left,
specialists undertake minute examination of front and back of each fresco. Tracing
paper is used to note slightest anomaly, incrustations, etc. Below, back of frescoes
is scraped down almost to the painted layer and the plaster is then treated chemically
to eliminate harmful salts which could alter and damage colours. Above, ironing ope¬
ration on front of fresco melts the beeswax and muslin layers are removed one by one.
22
Colour page, opposite
Machines and construction material crowd the area before the Great Temple of Abu
Simbel as work begins in spring of 1964 on protective cofferdam, 360 metres long.
Impregilo.
Centre colour pages
Left : Sanctuary in splints. After being dismantled stone by stone, the Kalabsha temple,
as big as Notre Dame cathedral, has been rebuilt 30 kilometres from its original site.
Right: Before being moved to safety in 1964, these sphinxes lining the sacred avenue
leading to the temple of Wadi-es-Sebua were submerged for nine months of the
year by the encroaching Nile. Under the avenue a new temple has been found.
Bottom : Pylon of the Wadi-es-Sebua temple during dismantling operations in the
summer of 1 964. The temple will be rebuilt in the same area but on a higher level.
Photos © Tony Saulnier
