FLOODS !
FLOODS !!
FLOODS
by Maurice Pardé
54
he sight of a large river in flood ls a memor¬
able experience. As the flow of water suddenly
Increases, rising by as much as 20 or 30 feet In a few
hours, it sweeps all before it, tumbling bridges, uprooting
and carrying away trees, tearing down houses and
covering the countryside with mud, sand and rocks. This
is Nature revealed in a mood of wild rage and devastating
power.
Equally Impressive, though less savagely spectacular,
is the type of flood that sometimes spreads out from the
lower reaches of large rivers. Stretching further than
the eye can see, the floodwaters are sometimes 30 to 60
miles in width and extend along the river for 300 to
600 miles or more.
Long before men began to spread over the earth, floods
ravaged Its surface. At the very dawn of history we
find man afflicted by them. Stories of flood tragedies,
like the epic of Noah and the Ark, are woven into the
traditions and folklore of many ancient peoples. And
sometimes, traces of the floods recounted in these stories
have actually been found by modern archaeologists.
Once floods were accepted as accidents unpredictable
and unavoidable. But men have learned more about the
part rivers play In the great "hydroiogic cycle" and are
now using this knowledge to predict floods, in some cases
to control the damage done by them and in others to
prevent them from happening.
To find the most .effective ways of combatting floods,
science has set out to learn as much as possible about
the major ones: their basic causes, the levels they reach,
their maximum discharges, the total volume of water
produced and the speeds of their rise and fall. Each
river network has its own distinctive features, or perhaps
it would be truer to say that many rivers can be placed
in distinctive categories. One of the basic aims of
Potamology (the scientific study of rivers) is the identifi¬
cation of these "river species."
The River Ardèche. a western tributary of the Rhone
River in France, is a typical example of the kind of river
where sudden floods occur. The Ardèche quickly swells
to Its greatest size when it receives between seven and-
eight inches of rain in a matter of hours from its 730
square miles of catchment upstream from Vallon. Many
other Mediterranean rivers in France, Spain and Italy
are just as easily aroused and are sometimes equally
redoubtable.
In many subtropical and tropical regions the effects
of rapid flood rises on the rivers are even more alarming.
In such regions great downpours of four to eight inches
of rain may fall within an hour over a surface of from
20 to 70 square miles or over an even greater area. River
levels rise with terrifying speed; sometimes within hours
the flood has reached its peak.
In contrast, on very long and gently sloping rivers like
the Mississippi and the lower Yangtse-Kiang, the peak
is reached only after the waters have been rising for
four or six weeks. They sometimes take even longer to
arrive if the floods are caused by successive downpours
whose effect is continuous and cumulative.
The amounts of water involved seem slight when cal¬
culated in relation to each square mile of the receiving
area. But when we look at the gross figures of the
volumes of water flowing they are seen to be enormous:
nearly 3,000,000 cubic feet in August 1954 for 540,000 square
miles on the Yangtse-Kiang at Hankow; more than
300,000 cubic feet including the water overflowing the
banks for 1,200,000 square miles on the Mississippi at
Vicksburg in May 1917.
The rainfall which causes major floods of this kind
covers a huge area 700,000 square miles or more and
is thus well below the average Intensity of the downpours
on the Ardèche and still less so the deluges of places like
Texas, the Philippines or Japan, all of which are confined
to small areas. For Instance, in 1931, the Yangtse-Kiang
above Hankow received about 18 inches of rain, but over
a period of two months.
The essential cause of the unprecedented floods on the
Volga, 2,400,000 cubic feet in the Kubyshev region for

(Q Anpfoto, Amsterdam
470,000 square miles, is the melting snow, whose water
equivalent, including additional river inflows, totals some
12 inches within a single month. And the giant floods
of the Yenesei and the Lena in the U.S.S.R.possibly
totalling respectively 1,040,000 and 960,000 cubic feet
which are the highest in the world after those of the
Amazon, are no doubt due to thawing snow which, added
to the rainfall, amounts to seven to eight inches in a
month, as far as can be estimated.
Floods which are from twenty to a hundred times
slower in rising and falling than the ultra-rapid ones
nevertheless attain colossal proportions because of the
enormous amount of water flowing and the immensity of
the area they cover. Between these two extremes nature
produces a wide range of floods of intermediate size and
varying characteristics.
HIowEVER, major river floods are not caused
exclusively by excessive rainfall or abnormal
thaws or a combination of the two. They may also occur
without any exceptional increase in water flow when the
river bed is blocked, usually for only a period, by obstacles
of a solid and bulky kind.
Sometimes the river itself is responsible. Blocks of
ice may pile up in narrower or shallower sections of the
river channel. Blockages are formed across slow rivers
subjected to intense cold, either when the surface is
frozen or much more frequently, when the thaw drives
the frozen debris downstream.
One example of this kind is the disastrous flood on the
Rhine at Coblenz and Cologne in January 1784. In
Cologne the levels of the waters were at least 10 feet
higher than in any earlier known "iceless" floods. Ice
too played a part in the flooding of Budapest when in
March 1838 the Danube rose six feet above any previous
(or subsequent) recorded level. At the time of the Hun¬
garian catastrophe, a storm wind drove the waters and
ice before It and more than half the buildings in Pest
were destroyed.
Even higher and more watertight obstacles can be built
up in deep and narrow mountain reaches by the arrival
of inflowing glaciers.
Spectacular examples occur in the Indus system behind
the Himalayas or as it passes through the wild gorges
several thousand metres below the peaks. In 1840, a lake
820 feet deep was formed by an obstacle In the Indus at
the toe of Nanga Parbat, and one 196 feet deep was creat¬
ed In the Chayog, a tributary of the same river, upstream
of the Chang-Kumdan glacier in the Karakoram in 1939.
The worst feature of these obstructions ls that sooner
or later they break up and waves of swirling and roaring
ice and debris plunge Into the valleys where they sweep
away and crush everything In their path.
Glaciers can also be the cause of other disasters that
are not always predictable. In the night of July 12-13.
1892, the Tête Rousse glacier to the south of Mont Blanc
suddenly released 7,000,000 cubic feet of water enclosed
in a pocket at a height of more than 10,000 feet.
Rushing down the mountain side this mass of water
scooped up rocks and earth from the slopes until it in¬
creased five-fold, forming a terrifying stream of "lava"
the term used for floods which contain more mud, sand,
pebbles and rock than water. There were 175 victims,
most of them in the little town oí Saint-Gervals.
Flood disasters occur above all where river-beds have
been made too narrow by Nature or have been restricted
by man-made works, or where the slope ls too small
to carry away the high discharges that can occur on
these rivers. In Canada, for example the memorable
April-May 1950 flood on the North Red River coming
from the United States caused unbelievable damage In
Winnipeg and nearby, despite the fact that its discharge
at the time was not considered dangerous by specialists.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
55

FLOODS (Cont'd)
The river mouth wandered 300 miles
56
As on many other sites, the riverside populations had
increased the already dangerous narrowness of the river
by constructing far too many buildings, including many
factories and warehouses, in the flood plain.
Yet even allowing for the results of man's thoughtless¬
ness and rashness In siting homes in valleys subject to
flooding, it is clear that material damage is in fact
directly proportional to the power and the nature of
the floods In any given river sector.
In the tragic disaster of the Riera de las Arenas and of
other small and very steep Catalan rivers in the hilly
country behind Barcelona at Tarrasa, Rubu, Sabadell, and
other villages, there were a number of causes for the
flood which killed more than 700 people in the night of
September 25-26 1962.
Firstly, furious discharges of water, occuring in an area
of a few dozen square miles, were produced by storm
rainfall of short but crushing intensity more than four
inches in three-quarters of an hour. A second reason was
the Irregularity of the river beds, whose width and depth
were far too small to contain the discharges. The crown¬
ing misfortune was lack of foresight In choosing locations
for residential and Industrial buildings. At places where
the bridges were too small and too low, wreckage piled up
before "exploding" and sweeping all before it. Buildings
were shattered and carried away. The roaring masses of
water unleashed In these Catalan streams were as deadly
as the torrential "lava" already described.
'ivERS of all sizes draining vast, subarid
.regions, which are virtually unprotected
against erosive runoff by their scant vegetation, may
Increase their volume by 20% to 30% or more through
the addition of mud.
Towards Its entry into the vast deltaic plain, the Yellow
River, the Hwang Ho, has been known to carry down more
than 500 kgs. of sediment per cubic metre of water, in
spite of its relatively gentle slope. Although these minute
particles do not slow down the discharge as would bulkier
fragments, the river-bed still cannot contain the water
during heavy floods. The water level is swiftly raised by
the dropping of the extra solid load especially of fine
sand and the river flows over what is actually a flat yet
still protruding embankment covering an area of more
than 58,000 square miles.
When the river has broken through one of its dykes,
its murky waters engulf the land and in some places leave
layers of mud, several yards thick, around the surviving
houses. The waters are unable to return to their former
course and several times have flowed to the sea on first
one and then the other side of the Shantung Peninsula,
250 to 300 miles from their former mouth.
On September 29, 1887, the Hwang Ho flood waters
rushed through a breach in the southern dyke upstream
of Kalfeng. Within a few days they had reached the
Hwal, itself a dangerous river, and then flowed on to the
Yangtse-Kiang. A million Chinese are said to have
perished during this catastrophe.
On the Yangtse-Kiang, floods can threaten as many
as 25 to 30 million people. An International enquiry
showed that in the floods of July and August 1931, some
140,000 people were drowned or were crushed beneath the
wreckage of their homes. Many more died of pneumonia,
typhoid or hunger.
On the North American continent, and in past times
(in 1882, for example), the inadequately banked and
dammed Mississippi invaded vast areas, but they were
then far less populated. In April and May 1927, when
the Mississippi transformed 35,000 square miles into a sea
of muddy water, there were 214 victims.
The Ohio is another U.S. river subject to major floods.
Its swollen waters are often partially or even entirely
responsible for the great Mississippi floods. In February
1937. it surpassed its previous highest level by nine feet
at Cincinnati and by ten feet at Louisville. In March
1936, the disastrous flood on the upper Ohio alone rose
^
¿N,
WATER SNAKE. This
striking air view of the Ken¬
tucky River, a tributary of
the Ohio River ¡n the United
States, was taken as raging
floods swept through the
towns of Hazard (top) and
Lothair (bottom) last year.
Some. 25,000 people were
forced to flee their homes.
Photo © Associated Press
«H
*-*
above the highest flood level ever recorded by nearly
five feet at Pittsburgh, where 110,000 people were left
homeless and some forty lost their lives.
Another memorable U.S. flood, but this time further
West, devastated the Kansas River valley and the valleys
of the neighbouring Neosho and Osage rivers in July 1951,
yet caused only 19 deaths. Records show that a previous,
but smaller flood in this area in May-June 1903 claimed
over 100 victims. The low casualty list in the recent
flood points to remarkable progress made in flood warning
and rescue arrangements.
Another U.S. flood, almost as disastrous, occurred in
New England in August 1955. Violent currents, flowing
down steeper slopes than those in Kansas, made these
waters even more sudden and violently erosive. Fed by
the torrential rainfall from cyclone Diana, and following
a super saturation of the ground by cyclone Connie a few
days earlier, the flood raised the River Delaware to greater
heights than anyone could recall. But even more as¬
tounding and terrifying were the increases on modest
coastal rivers like the Naugatuck and the Quinebaug,
or small rivers like the Farmlngton and Westfleld which
run Into the Connecticut. Almost 180 people died in
this flood.
Floods that produce sudden and far more overwhelming
discharges of water during cloudbursts can make a host

of streams in at least one half of the United States
irresistible and devastating.
Of the ultra-rapid type of flood in France, those in the
Cévennes, Languedoc and Roussillon, although nothing
like as powerful as the Texan floods, often have disastrous
results.
On September 22, 1890, some 40 people were drowned
by the Ardèche and its tributaries. Nearly 70 years later,
on September 30, 1958, the Ardèche flood was less terrible,
but the Gardon and the Cèze, which always rise at the
same time, reached record heights and claimed 36 victims.
Other floods which France experiences are less swift
but even more striking because of the size of the area
inundated, the rivers responsible being very large ones.
Two notable floods of this kind occurred between June
23-25, 1875 and March 3-6, 1930 in the basin of the River
Garonne.
The first, in which quite exceptional floods swept down
the Pyrenean rivers, the Ariège and the upper Garonne,
caused an unprecedented disaster. Five hundred people
perished, including more than 200 in Toulouse. The
water was 10 to 15 feet deep in the streets of Agen.
In March 1930, flood levels once again rose almost as
high In Agen. This time the water came not from the
upper Garonne, but from the Tarn, the Aveyron and the
Agout whose maximum flows were perhaps such as occur
only once in a thousand years. There were 200 deaths.
Including 120 at Molssac.
In May and June 1858, flood water swept over the
smiling and fertile Loire Valley from the Bec d'Alller down
to Nantes at the river's mouth as the dykes gave way in
160 places. Water covered more than 400 square miles.
For many centuries, man has endeavoured to protect
towns and rich and populated valleys by building earth
dikes along one or both banks of rivers.
An area of 20,000 square miles of land towards the
mouth of the Mississippi and its tributaries, are safe¬
guarded in this way against flood risks by 2,800 miles of
dikes.
However, by their very success in preventing flooding
these river bank defences concentrate the water In a
confined channel and thus greatly Increase the speed of
the floods and hence their maximum discharge capacity.
On the lower Mississippi at its confluence with the Ohio
River, the progress made between 1882 and 1937 In extend¬
ing and improving dikes has also raised the heaviest river
discharges by from six to ten feet. The smaller number
of dike failures all along the River Po in Italy almost
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
57

Photo Cuban Delegation to Unesco
FLOODS (Cont'd)
Early in October 1963, eastern Cuba was ravaged by catastrophic floods. Swollen by rains
from a cyclone, the rivers Contramaestre and Cauto and several tributaries overflowed their
banks. Hundreds of square miles of land disappeared under the waters. Over 1,000 people
were drowned and thousands lost all their possessions. Above, salvaging a stranded bus.
Curbing an angry torrent
throughout the past century have similarly been offset by
an obvious rise in the water level three feet or more in
certain sections where the bed had not been deepened
at all.
This has led to the extra expense of raising the crest
and thickening out the body of the dikes to enable them
to hold In the higher water levels that they have them¬
selves made more dangerous. Then, on short stretches
which have to be safeguarded at all costs, the earth
embankments are replaced by narrow vertlcle concrete
floodwalls.
In very critical situations, dikes are gradually raised
with sacks of sand and cement to form a makeshift
barrier which prevents them from being overtopped and
thus inevitably destroyed. In August 1954, during one
of the greatest of all floods on the Yangtse-Kiang, as
many as 280,000 workers at a time laboured for weeks,
progressively raising the crest of the dikes for a dis¬
tance of 85 miles. Their efforts saved three large towns-
Hankow, Wuchang and Hanyang from inundation.
I NSTEAD of raising the banks with dikes, it is
sometimes considered more advisable to deep¬
en the bed by dredging. However, it has often been found
that the level and surface relief of the bottom conforms
to a certain natural balance governed by the slopes and
the solid and liquid discharges of the river. Thus, even
after dredging the waterway eventually restores the
former levels by depositing gravel or sand.
In other cases, one or several river bends are lopped
off by digging a straight channel which soon takes all
the flow. Shortening the course increases the slope,
often sufficiently for the accelerated current to carve out
a deeper bed at the bottom. This lowers the flood levels,
as it did on the Mississippi where, after 13 bends had
58 been cut off the drop was from five to ten feet between
the confluences with the Arkansas River and the Red
River.
When topographical conditions allow and relatively
limited damage is likely to be caused to existing property,
new beds, by-passes or diversions can be made to switch
excessive surplus discharges away, from areas to be pro¬
tected. For example, the Sutter by-pass on one side of
the city of Sacramento in the United States, and the
Yolo by-pass on the other, are used during flood level
conditions to relieve the normal bed which passes through
the city. Again, upstream of New Orleans, the Bonnet
Carré floodway on the right bank of the Mississippi di¬
verts substantial dischargesnearly 200,000 cubic feet
in 1937 towards Lake Pontchartraln and the sea.
Another flood antidote which has captured popular
imagination is re-afforestation. However, certain aspects
of its effects are still not sufficiently well-known, and in
the main, the results so far obtained have been irregular
and somewhat unpredictable.
In one Important respect, the function of re-afforesta¬
tion cannot be questioned. A good forest overburden
will always reduce erosion and hence the carrying away
of solid matter. This helps to prevent the possible silting
up of reservoirs and above all the silting of river beds
and the rise in their level following floods. However the
quantitative effects of re-afforestation differ immensely
from one basin to another, depending on the interplay
of the different factors involved.
In the vast majority of small basins and in almost
every situation, the effect of re-afforestation is favour¬
able, not so much on the total flood volume but on the
maximum discharges of water. Woodland has several
properties which tend to reduce these discharges: the
interception of the water by branches and especially by
leaves and needles, the usual permeability of the soil,
disturbed and worked over by the roots, the curbing of
runoff by undergrowth or by wood debris.
Woodland is sometimes completely successful in pre¬
venting rivers ( from becoming swollen. However its pro¬
perties are obviously most effective when dealing with
moderate downpours, when temperatures are high and

after long periods without rain. Against heavy rain
falling on vegetation and ground that has already been
soaked a forest is virtually Ineffective.
Even when the full impact of afforestation on floods ls
known, It should be remembered that these effects are
more or less proportional to the percentage of wooded
area In a particular basin. Many people, tend to forget
that Increasing the wood area from 10 to 20% or even in
certain cases 50% will hardly alter the flood situation.
And in most heavily populated and modern countries, the
practical possibilities for retlmberlng are no greater than
these.
A sure remedy, for floods, provided it can be applied,
Is to build dams big enough to intercept the dangerous
discharges for as many hours or days as may be needed.
This ls the water which, if it were to flow off naturally
beyond the reservoirs, would flood the places In need of
protection.
The Chinese have recently completed dams which pro¬
mise to tame the floods of the Hwai River. They have
built an even more elaborate structure across the Yellow
River at Sanmen, in a rocky narrows not far from the
entry to the delta plain. The dam is 300 feet high
with a storage capacity of 2,275,000,000,000 cubic feet. The
most formidable maximum discharge that could be
expected will be reduced to a fifth by the reservoir.
In Texas, the Travis reservoir on the Colorado River
can cope with 84,000 million cubic feet of water which is
more than the total volume of the worst sudden but brief
floods which are let loose in this river basin.
| ozENS and even hundreds of other examples
could be given of Isolated or Interrelated
reservoirs now in service which are designed to reduce the
maximum flood discharges either permanently or in
emergencies. Many such reservoirs exist in the Massif
Central, in France, in the Harz Mountains and the high-
lying areas of the Rhineland in the Federal Republic of
Germany and in the mountains of Bohemia. There are
many more in Japan and in the United States. In the
Tennessee valley network, for example, there are 27
dams storing as much as 945,000 million cubic feet of
water. And on the middle Missouri, three dams alone
Peck, Oahe and Garrisonwould be capable of
stopping, if necessary, more than 2,800,000,000,000 cubic
feet which is more than the total annual discharge of
the river.
On many rivers quite excellent results are obtained by
combining several methods: reservoirs, dikes, Improved
bed-lines, removal of bends, diversions and so on. In
addition roads and railway tracks are moved away from
river courses and raised on embankments.
When a project for any river basin is drawn up, the
hydrologist first has to calculate the maximum discharges
that are likely to occur, the total volumes of water that
may flow and the duration of the longest anticipated
floods. He is, in fact, trying to determine the charac
teristics of floods that are only likely to occur once every
100, 500. 1,000 or even 5,000 years or more.
Probability computations are used for drawing up these
forecasts based on all the past river and rainfall data
recorded in the basin.
Much shorter-term forecasts with precise data are
needed by people living close to rivers that have not been
effectively protected against flooding. The inhabitants
must be given enough time to remove themselves and
their possessions to safety. The ability to produce these
forecasts depends on various factors: the anticipated
time-lapse between the flood warning and the arrival
of the flood waters; and whether the floods are caused
by rainfall or snow or to something happening on the
river itself.
In the present state of scientific knowledge, it ls im¬
possible to predict with certainty several months or weeks
In advance that there will be a rainstorm on a given
day or even within a given week.
However, reasonably accurate predictions are often
made 24 or 36 hours in advance as to whether a rainstorm
of a certain intensity will fall on a given basin or not.
But in general, it ls not possible to say with great preci¬
sion how long the rainfall will last or what its total
volume and varying Intensities will be.
The element of doubt In working out temperatures ls
much smaller and thus it ls easier to know how much
snow will melt on the next day and the following one.
When a rainstorm has already produced flows of water
that are liable to swell the rivers, an efficient communica¬
tions system enables a good tentative assessment to be
made of likely flood levels.
The most reliable short-term forecasts are above all
hydrometrical. They are based on accurate information
from stations upstream where the discharges or levels
have been sucesslvely recorded.
In basins where extensive experience of observations
has removed some uncertainty factors effective and even
remarkably forecasts can be made, as in the case of the
very heavy floods on the middle and lower Mississippi,
where peaks of 40 to 60 feet can be predicted to within
about four inches a fortnight or a month ahead.
However, for places that are invaded and devastated
by floods within an hour or so after the end of torrential
downpours of the type that occur In Texas or even in
the Cévennes, It will still be very difficult and sometimes
impossible to give warning in time In spite of improved
telecommunications.
Maurice Parde is professor of physical geography and
river hydrology at the University of Grenoble, France. His
many works on hydrology include "Fleuves et Rivières"
(Rivers and Streams) published by Armand Colin, Paris,
1947 and "Potamologie" (Potamology) published by the
University of Grenoble in two volumes, 1954.
-r^K?
THE DELUGE. An 11th
century mural painting in
the church or St. Savin-sur-
Gartempe, France, depicts
Noah's Ark afloat on the
waters of the Flood. This
deluge is described in the
Bible, which relates that the
the rain "was upon the
earth for forty days and
forty nights", and the story
is also told in some texts
written in cuneiform. Tales
of great floods are woven
into the traditions and le¬
gends of many ancient
peoples. Sometimes traces
of such floods have been
found by archaeologists.
Archives Photographiques. Paris
59
