14
British Council
When Shakespeare arrived in London the first
public playhouse had only opened a few years
earlier, in 1576. Theatre and drama, however, were
already vigorous and expanding and before long a
"theatreland" had grown up in Bankside, seen in
the foreground of the panoramic view of London
Town shown at top of page. Engraved in 1616,
this shows two octogonal-shaped show places of
the day. Flags flying from the Globe Theatre (on
the right) for which most of Shakespeare's plays
were written and from its neighbour. The Bear
Garden, announce that a performance is sched¬
uled. Theatregoers arrived by boat or came
across London Bridge, which was then covered
with high buildings. Above, a model of a
typical Elizabethan theatre; Right, an artist's
impression of a play in progress at the Globe.
lO Reproduced by permission of the Trustees of the British
Museum
THE
by Marchette Chute
This article is copyright Reproduction prohibited

LONDON THAT WAS
SHAKESPEARE'S
When William Shakespeare came to London In
the 1580's, it was still in many ways the
mediaeval city that Geoffrey Chaucer had known. The
wall that surrounded the city was still intact, and the only
concession the authorities . had made to the increased
traffic was to open a new gate, called Moorgate, which
gave access to the fields to the north. The old monastic
foundations had been changed into residences and tennis
courts and even into factories, and the beautiful little
chapel on London Bridge had become a warehouse, but
London was still a city of churches and they dominated
the lives of its inhabitants.
The service at St. Paul's Cathedral was now given in
English, but the building was much as it had been except
that its wooden spire had vanished. It had caught fire
some twenty years earlier and so many citizens had
gathered to watch the blaze and hamper the fire fighters
that the famous steeple had burned down to its square
stone base . . .
In every way the tight little mediaeval city that Chaucer
had known was pushing against its confining walls under
the pressure of an expanding and increasingly excitable
population. The fall of Antwerp had made London a
substitute commercial centre and the religious war on the
Continent had doubled the foreign population of London
in thirteen years. Every few years the government
brought out another ordinance on the subject and the
penalties were strict, but in spite of the efforts of the
courts, the people went on packing themselves into the
overcrowded city, adding to what the citizen of a smaller
town bitterly called that "vast, unwieldy and disorderly
Babel of buildings which the world calls London."
Meanwhile the city government went on gallantly trying
to enforce a mediaeval code of behaviour that had been
nearly obsolete in Chaucer's day and was now little more
than a wistful idea. The mayor and the aldermen clung
to the conviction that If enough laws were passed it would
somehow be possible to turn their sprawling young giant
of a city into something small, neat, compact and
comfortable. They observed with horror the flaunting of
their authority in the suburbs, where men like James
Burbage put up buildings that had no place at all in a
Christian commonwealth (1), and they still struggled to
keep the city in a state of mind of which their great¬
grandfathers would have approved.
(1) The author is referring to the erection of London's first
theatres.
15

The
The mayor and aldermen were heavily handicapped in
this attempt by the fact they got no support at all from
Queen Elizabeth. When a bill to restrict Sunday pastimes
was passed by both houses of Parliament in 1585, it was
promptly vetoed by the Queen who herself went to
shooting-matches and plays on Sunday and saw no reason
why her subjects should not . do likewise. It was her
opinion that no amount of ordinances would keep a
Londoner from enjoying himself, and that the wisest
course to pursue was to make a government profit on the
money he spent.
She gave a patent for licensing gaming-houses to
Thomas Cornwallis in 1576, in spite of a strict law against
gaming in London, and justified it with the statement
that the Londoners "secretly or openly ... do commonly
play and ... no penalty of the laws or statutes aforesaid
hath heretofore restrained them." On the same basis
she gave licenses for bowling-alleys and the manufacture
of dice and playing cards; and the fencing clubs >and
theatre owners could always turn to the Queen for
protection when the attacks of the city fathers became
especially violent. Elizabeth was a true child of the
Renaissance, in this matter at least, and her attitude was
one that the mayor and aldermen were incapable of
understanding.
The truth was that the city authorities were trying to
maintain medieval standards in a city that was no longer
medieval in spirit. A new spirit of curiosity had
developed, an Intellectual ferment that made the old ideal
of blind obedience almost impossible to enforce. London
no longer lived In comparative Isolation but was
beginning to feel all the influences of Renaissance Europe.
Above all, it felt the stirring of new winds from Italy.
16
h or the average Londoner Italy was still the
place of strange poisons and passionate love
affairs, to be mistrusted as the home of the wicked
Machiavelll; but English architects travelled in Italy and
brought back new designs. English sportsmen did their
riding and fencing in the Italian manner, and when a
poet wrote love songs he imitated Petrarch. There was a
fury of translation from the Italian of novels and plays
and poems, and the brilliant Italian actors penetrated
England and flourished for at least a season in London.
The people of England and especially of London, still
took a rather provincial view of foreigners. Visitors from
the Continent spoke with some bitterness of the self-
satisfaction of the English, whose highest praise for any
foreigner was that it was a pity he was not an
Englishman . . .
An Englishman knew his own country was the centre of
the world, but he felt a deep interest in knowing how the
men of lesser nations lived. Nearly every young man of
birth took a tour abroad and this was also the era of the
great explorations, when boys from small English villages
came back from long voyages financed by London
merchants to tell of the outlandish wonders they had seen.
Occasionally these wonders could be seen in London
hustle and bustle
of a restless city
itself, like the gloomy Indians In brown taffeta, that
Walter Raleigh brought back with him. Londoners like
Richard Garth and William Cope started collections of
Instructive curios from other lands, and in Mr. Cope's
collection the respectful visitor could see costumes from
Java and Arabia, African charms, porcelain from China
and a long, narrow Indian canoe hung from the ceiling,
to say nothing of such special wonders as an embalmed
child, a unicorn's tail, and some little flies "which glow
at night in Virginia instead of lights, since there is often
no day there for over a month."
Some Londoners may have doubted this description of
Virginia, but no one would have doubted the unicorn,
except what one expert on natural history called a
"vulgar sort of infidel people" who believed only in cows
and sheep. Unicorns were mentioned even in the Bible
and it was well known that the horn of the animal,
pulverized and boiled in wine, made an excellent mouth¬
wash.
In any case, the greatest source of education to the
average Londoner was not museums, or language teachers
The bellman, or night
watchman, on his
rounds in the London
of Elizabethan days.
From " Shakespeare's
England ", Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1 950
or college endowments. His greatest source of education
was books. It was the invention of printing that set the
one deep gulf between the Middle Ages and the Renais¬
sance, and the difference between Chaucer's audience and
Shakespeare's was the difference between a period when
a book was a rich man's toy and a period when it was
available to the whole of the middle class.
The average Londoner did not look upon a book pri¬
marily as entertainment for an idle hour. The purpose
of reading was to tell him something he wanted to know,
and books poured from the presses to tell him how to
keep accounts, how to survey land, how to play the cittern
without a teacher, how to take spots off velvet, or cook,
or ride, or write a good hand. There was information on
how to graft plants, how to compute interest, and what
to do "when the physician is not present," and there were
cook books and dream books and books on the art of
navigation for amateur mariners.
Elizabethan London was the home of the short-cut, with
each of its inhabitants wanting to know as much as
possible as quickly as he could. Nor for him was the slow,
laborious grounding in the classics and rhetoric on which
Oxford and Cambridge spent so much time. He could buy
a book of classical quotations, conveniently arranged
under subject matter, to be used whenever he needed
them, and to improve his vocabulary there were books
that offered lists of effectives similes and other aids to
rhetoric.
If an energetic and restless Londoner could not find
time to settle down and read a book, or if he lacked the
necessary sixpence or shilling, there was a still quicker
and cheaper way of getting Information. For a penny a
Londoner could buy an Illustrated ballad, a single sheet
of paper with an engaging woodcut and a vigorous rhyme

to be sung to some popular tune. These broadsides
occasionally reported bits of history or told stories of
Biblical and classical subjects, and a "proper ballad dia¬
logue-wise between Troilus and Cressida" was not un¬
usual. But. chiefly they kept the public informed on
interesting contemporary news events, especially murders,
fires and other public disasters, the death of prominent
people and monstrous births both at home and abroad.
A more sober observer of the current scene could pay a
little more money and buy news pamphlets that would
keep him informed on the state of the wars in Europe,
accounts of the exemplary courage of the English, or of
the atrocities committed by the wicked enemies of
England, or even a book with a special map of France
showing all the fortresses. There were more books on
news events than on any subject except religion, and the
government saw to it that the approach was just as well
controlled . . .
Any of these books and broadsides could be bought in
the book stalls that were chiefly clustered together in
St. Paul's churchyard. Building space was short In the
city and the booksellers had first erected sheds in the
area and then changed them into real shops. The book
stalls were open by seven in the morning and here the
cheap reprints of plays and the shilling novels jostled for
place with translations from the French and Italian and
handsome folios on law and medicine and theology.
From" Shakespeare's England " Clarendon Press. Oxford, 1950
Illustration from a popular ballad of Shakes¬
peare's time based on "The Spanish Tragedy"
a play by Thomas Kyd. These ballads could bo
bought for a penny. They bore an engaging
woodcut and a rhyme to be sung toa popular tuno.
any London shows cost the happy population
I nothing at all. No one had to pay to see the
Lord Mayor's show and cheer the wicker-work giants or
to see the water games on the Thames. Queen Elizabeth,
that great amateur showman, was given to making
sudden, spectacular appearances by torchlight, and when
she opened Parliament she was carried through the streets
in a red velvet cloak and a gold crown, while twenty-
four glittering maids of honour rode in single file behind
her. It was an age of the most determined dressing-up,
and a knight saw nothing undignified in appearing as
Eve in a tilt-yard show, with apples hanging on his
armour and long hair attached to his helmet . . .
If a Londoner liked to look at strange animals there
was the zoo In the Tower, where four lions, a tiger and a
porcupine could be peered at through the wooden lattices
after a judicious tip to the keeper; and for a time one
of the houses on London Bridge housed a melancholy
camel. A traveller from Kremzow reported that he saw
in London a cow with six legs and a porpoise. He also
saw a woman pigmy six thumbs high, a boy with a head
like a pig, and (by an association of ideas that would
seem normal to any Londoner) the Earl of Arundel being
led to his imprisonment in the Tower.
The Londoners especially liked their entertainment to
have an element of conflict and suspense in it, and they
went in large numbers to the Star Chamber hearings at
Westminster. The final stages of these trials were open
to the public and aroused such interest in the theatri¬
cally-minded Londoners that the audience would start
arriving at three o'clock in the morning to be sure of
getting a good seat and the usher of the chamber made a
small fortune in tips.
Betting members of the population spent much of their
"Afflicted with these strange
flies" (Romeo and Juliet).
Piles of garbage left in the
London streets bred flies
by the million in hot weather.
From " The Spider and the Flie "
by John Heywood, 1 556
time watching cock fights In an arena near Smithfleld,
where admission was a penny and the cocks who fought
on the round, straw-covered table were usually well for¬
tified with brandy. Even more popular were the bear-
baitings, which were patronized by everyone from the low¬
liest tinker to the loftiest of visiting noblemen, and a
visit to the Bear Garden was as much standard procedure
with the average London visitor as seeing the tombs at
Westminster Abbey . . .
Best of all, however, there were plays, and whatever a
Londoner's interests might be, there was sure to be a
play In town that would suit him. If he read the gory
penny broadsides and went to executions, he could go to
the theatre and see the best contemporary murders re-
enacted on the stage, with property limbs flapping about
and real blood flowing. If he liked processions, he could
see kings and councillors at coronations and in battle
order and at other noble events, for the plays never
omitted an opportunity for pageantry "where the drums
might walk and the play ruffle." If he were interested
in natural wonders he could see much of zoological Interest
on the stage, where pigmies warred with cranes, and
dragons were as realistic as hoops and painted canvas and
gunpowder could make them. If he were interested in
life in other lands, he could go to a play like "The Black¬
smith's Daughter" and shudder at a tale of treachery
in foreign parts, and if he were Interested in politics he
could go to "Pompey and Caesar" or "Catiline's
Conspiracies" and mark the danger of treason in
high places... Any popular story, from Samson to Henry V,
found its way to the stage to satisfy the greatest theatre-
going public in the world . . .
he nature of this Elizabethan audience has
been much misrepresented, chiefly by
nineteenth-century scholars, and among those that have
been unjustly treated are the London apprentices.
They have been pictured as a riotous, noisy group of
young clods who, as groundlings, would only appreciate
the broadest kind of ranting and horseplay, while their
elders and betters in the higher-priced seats were
smilingly able to appreciate the finer things that the
theatre had to offer.
This point of view can be well documented, but the
documentation comes from a rather prejudiced source.
It was the London Council that was always viewing the
youth of the city with disapproval that an older genera¬
tion usually feels for a younger one. It was the opinion
of the Council that every young man should spend his
time working very hard for an older one, and that any
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
17

SHAKESPEARE (Cont'd)
Apprentices visit
'Satan's ChapeF
sign of Independence or lack of subservience to an
employer was a really serious offence.
The Ideal apprentice was not supposed to go to a music
or dancing school, and some of his employers would have
been equally pleased if he had not been allowed to go to
plays. "Whosoever shall visit the chapel of Satan, I
mean the Theatre, shall find there no want of young
ruffians", Innocent young lads who had become quite
corrupted through seeing plays. "Many of nature honest
and tractable have been altered by those shows and spec¬
tacles and become monstrous." and the Council united
with the Puritans In agreeing that nothing could be worse
for the morals of an apprentice than going to the theatre.
The apprentices themselves did not think so, and they
Hocked to the theatre. But a penny was a large sum of
money to a boy who was learning a trade and he expected
good value for it. Moreover, standing places could not
be reserved and he had to arrive at the theatre early to
be sure of a good location. From a complaint of the
mayor's on the subject, It seems clear that the theatre
began filling hours before the show started, and since the
groundlings had to stand both during this period and
through the whole action of the play, they demanded
much more in the way of entertainment than the com¬
fortable citizens in the seats overhead. If the groundlings
felt they were being cheated they were not slow to express
themselves, and most of the contemptuous remarks about
their mental incapacity came from the playwrights whose
plays had not had a popular success.
20
s a matter of fact, the apprentices belonged
Las a class to one of the most privileged and
intelligent groups in London. A landed gentleman did
not hesitate to send his son up to London to learn to be
a goldsmith or a draper, and in the ranks of the appren¬
tices were all the future aldermen and mayors of London.
Each of them was treated by his employer as a member
of the household and they belonged entirely outside the
ranks of the unprotected, exploited labourers with whom
London was unfortunately familiar. They were the future
businessmen of London and their only crime was their
youth and the fact that they loved the theatre.
Another section of the Elizabethan audience that has
sometimes been misrepresented is the women. It was
rather arbitrarily decided in the nineteenth century that
women seldom went to plays In Elizabethan times. Oc¬
casionally a coarse tinker's wife might get in among the
groundlings or a fine lady sheltered by a mask might be
escorted to one of the expensive seats, but the London
housewife stayed home and wove cloth and kept her house
clean as a good woman should. This may have been
the Victorian conception of womanhood, but it was cer¬
tainly not shared by the Elizabethans.
From the first the reformers had centered their special
attention on the women of London, since It was well
known that few "women come from plays... with safe and
chaste minds." One writer devoted a whole section "to
the gentlewomen citizens of London" and besought them
when they felt nervous and unhappy not to go to plays but
to visit a neighbour or read a good book. Another writer
tried to terrify them with tales of citizens' wives who
sinned and then confessed on their death beds that it
was the initial mistake of going to the theatre that had
turned their thoughts from a contemplation of virtue and
started them down the slippery path to perdition.
The citizens' wives paid no attention to all this advice,
for the women of London had always done what they
pleased and expected to go on doing it. England was
known as "a paradise for women" and nearly every
foreigner was startled by the amount of freedom they took
"they generally take up a wonderful laughter and shout
Susanne, London
together with one voice," and Gosson admits to having
done the same thing himself. "Many times we laugh
so extremely, that striving to bridle ourselves, we
cannot." Gosson happened to be writing after he had
given up making plays and abandoned the theatre, and
he added that this kind of enjoyment was very unsulted
as their right. "The womenfolk of England... have far
more liberty than in other lands, and know just how to
make good use of it."
The traveller from Kremzow noted that a throng of
spectators had a great many women In it "for the women¬
folk in England wish to be in at everything," and another
foreigner noted it as "particularly curious" that
women went into the taverns alone or accompanied by
other women . . .
The playwrights themselves were very well aware that
a large part of the success of a play depended on the
approval of the women. There was always an epilogue
spoken at the end of the show, with a request for applause,
and although very few of the epilogues of Shakespeare's
plays have survived, three of them are addressed to the
women in the audience. For
if they smile
And say 'twill do
the play would be a success . . .
Stephen Gosson, a playwright of the period, had
described the wholehearted enthusiasm with which a

Detail of a model of Elizabethan London as it appears, beyond a reconstruction of a garden
of the period, from a window of the Long Gallery in the Shakespeare Exhibition at Stratford.
This Gallery opens the exhibition's "summer" section depicting the Bard's rise to
fame and prestige in London (see page 18). Showing some 40 contemporary portraits of
the great figures of the period, it has been called "an exhibition within an exhibition".
London audience settled down to enjoy Itself in the
theatre. If the play was a tragedy the susceptible
Londoners dissolved into sympathetic tears, "weeping
and mourning" with a rich vicarious satisfaction at the
woes portrayed on the stage. If the play was a comedy
to a Christian commonwealth. "When such excess of
laughter bursteth out that we cannot hold It, there is no
temperance. . . . Where no temperance is, there is no
wisdom ..."
here had always been a certain amount of
opposition to the acting profession in London,
and it crystallized when a whole building was put up
with no other purpose but to give plays. The plaster was
hardly dry on the walls of the theatre before the London
preachers began to wail about the temple of sin that had
been erected practically in their midst. Every current
disaster that struck Lpndon, Including the earthquake of
1580, could be traced to God's anger because this heathen
development, with its glittering walls and rich costumes,
had been allowed to flourish in the otherwise pure air of
the city.
These pulpit attacks had a certain promotion value to
a manager who was trying to fill a large theatre; for the
London preachers depicted the sinful delights of that
"gorgeous playing place," as they called it, with such
fascinated horror that they must have supplied an
excellent advertisement for the place. As the sober
journal of Sir Roger Wllbraham Indicates, the Elizabethan
business man was well aware of the value of this kind
of publicity. Wllbraham tells the case of a printer at
the turn of the century who found himself loaded with
unsold copies of a certain book. "He caused a preacher
in his sermon to inveigh against the vanity thereof; since
which it hath been six times under press, so much it was
in request ..."
An Elizabethan audience had become highly susceptible
to the use of words, trained and alert to catch their exact
meaning and full of joy if they were used well. But this
meant, as the basis of any successful stage production,
that all the words had to be heard clearly. The actors
used a fairly rapid delivery of their lines and this meant
that breath control, emphasis and enunciation had to be
perfect If the link that was being forged between the
emotions of the audience and the action on the stage
was not to be broken.
When Shakespeare first came to London, the problem
of effective stage delivery was made somewhat easier by
the use of a heavily endstopped line, where the actor
could draw his breath at regular intervals and proceed
at. a kind of jog-trot. But during the following decade
this kind of writing became increasingly old-fashioned,
giving way to an intricate and supple blank verse that
was much more difficult to handle intelligently; and no
21

SHAKESPEARE (Cont'd)
Above, Shakespeare's birthplace in Stratford. A centre of
pilgrimage for admirers of the great dramatist from all over
the world, it has been transformed into a museum. Right,
Shakespeare's memorial in the Holy Trinity Church, Strat¬
ford, where the poet is buried. The bust, which was placed
on the church wall a few years after Shakespeare's death, is
the work of a London tombmaker named Gheerart Janssen. Photos Unesco Courier Archives
His greatest monument :
the playgoers of the world
22
one was more instrumental In bringing the new way of
writing into general use than Shakespeare himself . . .
It was in London, for instance, that Shakespeare
learned French; and French was taught by Frenchmen
who worked in competition with each other and used oral,
conversational methods that were designed to get
colloquial French into the student's head as quickly as
possible.
When French was finally accepted Into the
grammar school curriculum it was subjected to
the heavy emphasis on rules and grammar with which
the Latin tongue was already burdened, and Shakespeare
was probably very fortunate that no one tried to teach
him English by the same system. All the rules, the ritual
and the reverent embalming were focussed on Latin, and
as a result the writers of the late sixteenth century had
a lighthearted sense of freedom where their native tongue
was concerned because it had never been laid out in the
schoolroom and expounded.
Much respect was given to the Latin language, but
all the affection, the excited experimentation and the
warm sense of personal ownership went into the English.
If a writer needed an effective word he could not go to a
dictionary for it. There were no English dictionaries,
although Richard Mulcaster remarked it would be a
praiseworthy deed to compile one. The writer could
either reach back into his memory, a practice that forced
every writer to be also an alert listener, or else he could
invent a new word entirely.
There was still some doubt among thoughtful men
whether it was quite respectful to the language to use It
in so light-hearted a fashion. George Puttenham
apologized for using such "strange and unaccustomed" new
words as idiom, method impression, numerous, penetrate,
savage and obscure. Gabriel Harvey was scolded for
using such abnormalities as theory and jovial and negotia¬
tion; and Ben Jonson, who could never forget his classical
education, was horrified by a fellow playwright who used
such outlandish words as damp, clumsy, strenuous and
puffy.
This use of new words could degenerate into complete
confusion in the hands in Incompetent writers but it
gave Shakespeare exactly the freedom he needed. He
felt at complete liberty to pick up effective new words
and combinations of words wherever he could find them,
and a play like Hamlet is so full of them that it would
have made a schoolmaster turn pale if he had had any
responsibility for teaching his charges the English lan¬
guage. Fortunately he had no such responsibility, and
young William Shakespeare was free to discover the great
reaches of the English language as a freeborn and
independent citizen . . .

It ls known that William Shakespeare Joined the Cham¬
berlain's company when it was formed in 1594 because he
is listed as one of the three actors who received payment
for that year's Christmas performances at Court. It is
not known whether he worked for the company earlier,
when It was under the patronage of Lord Strange, since
his name is on none of the scattered lists that have
survived; but he remained with this group of actors for
the rest of his professional life.
The men who made up this company were for all
practical purposes closer to Shakespeare than his own
brothers, for he worked with them summer and winter,
most of the day and often well into the night, for the
next sixteen years. They were his fellow craftsmen, his
close personal friends, and in one sense as much the tools
of his art as the words he used. They were the medium
through which he operated as a playwright to reach the
emotions of his audience, and it was one of the most
fortunate things In Shakespeare's fortunate life that he
worked with so able and intelligent a group of men.
An Elizabethan acting company was organized In such
a way that each member was heavily dependent on his
fellow members, and the economic Ufe of the troupe
depended on selfless and intelligent co-operation. There
was joint ownership of costumes and properties and
scripts, and In the case of Shakespeare's company a
hitherto unheard-of step was eventually taken and there
was joint ownership of a theatre building . . .
Shakespeare had never concerned himself with the
safety of his plays, and it may be that he thought they
were less valuable than the land. But his fellow actors
thought otherwise, and seven years after his death they
reared him their own kind of monument. It was the
complete edition of his plays and ls known as the First
Folio . . .
When Hemlnges and Condell gathered the plays of
Shakespeare together in the First Folio, they did it with
the same kind of love that made them willing to care for
the orphaned children of their fellow actors. "We have
but collected them, and done an office to the dead, to
procure his orphans guardians; without ambition either
of self-profit or fame; only to keep the memory of so
worthy a friend and fellow aUve as was our
Shakespeare ..."
Hemlnges and Condell grew old and died and were
buried near each other in the parish church of St. Mary
Aldermanbury. The Puritans came into power and
closed every playhouse in England. The last of Shakes¬
peare's descendants died and the direct line became
extinct. But Shakespeare's plays went on being read, and
in every generation there was an increasing number of
people who loved him. Hemlnges and Condell had wished
him "such readers" and given him the chance to get
them. Every year their number Increased, and they have
now built a monument to him that extends over the
whole of the world.
This text is made up of excerpts from "Shakespeare of
London" by Marchette Chute, copyright (c) 1949 by
E.P. Dutton & Co., Inc., New York, and is reproduced telth
the kind permission of the publishers. Marchette Chute,
author and biographer, is a specialist on the Elizabethan
period. She is a member of the National Institute of Arts
and Letters, New York, and a Fellow of the Royal Society
of Arts, London. Her inost recent work is a tico act play.
"The Worlds of Shakespeare", written in collaboration
with Ernestine Perrie and published last year by Dutton.
"Shakespeare of London" (U.S. edition $ 4.50) has also
been published by Smithcrs and Concilie, Toronto, Canada
($5) and by Seeker and Warburg, London (15/-). Paper¬
back editions of this work have appeared in the U.S.A.
(Dutton Everyman Paper-back, $1.55) and in Canada
U.M. Dent and Sons, $1.75). Other paper-backs of Mar¬
chette Chute's works are "Geoffrey Chaucer of England"
and "Ben Jonson of Westminster" (U.S., $1.55; Canada,
$1.75).
STAMP SALUTE
FOR THE BARD
For the first time in their history British stamps
recently bore a portrait head other than that of
Great Britain's monarch. The new head was that
of William Shakespeare and the break with tradi¬
tion was made in celebration of the 400th anni¬
versary of the poet's birthday. Selected from the
series of stamps issued on April 23, those below
depict Shakespearean characters Feste the Clown,
Romeo and Juliet and Henry Vflanked by the
heads of Shakespeare and Queen Elizabeth II ;
stamp on right shows graveyard scene from Hamlet.
» 2. S, ç .
23
s^chN*»^
