The upper Chinese character (right),
means "woman" and is pronounced
nü. The lower one means "child"
and is pronounced tzu. Placed
together (far right) the characters
are pronounced hao and signify
"good", "well" and, in a wider
sense, "friendly". Thus an abstract
idea is expressed by a symbol formed
with two concrete characters, each
representing a word sign and a sound.
30
TO CHINESE
In Chinese writing the same characters
can have different meanings. To
differentiate these meanings a small
ideographic sign is added. These
"keys" form part of the whole
character but are not pronounced.
In the examples shown on left,
character 3, pronounced sang, means
mulberry bush or tree. It is made up of
yu (1) which formerly meant "hand"
and of mou (2) which means
"wood" or "tree", and which serves
as a key. Sang can also mean
"throat" (4) when the character
k'ou (5), "mouth", is added to
it as a key. Fang (6) means "square ".
It becomes "plank" (7) when the
key mu (2), meaning "wood" or
"tree ", is added. Fang also means
"to spin " (8) when the key mi (9)
indicating "silk" or "textiles" is
added. Character 10, Fang, means
"to ask about " when the key yen (11)
"words" is added.- The character for
"words" is simply "mouth " (5)
with several additional strokes.
tt

N
Unesco
SHOP SIGNS IN HONG KONG
Shop signs in Chinese characters are a strikingly decorative feature of this Hong-Kong street.
The graphic beauty of the characters used both in China and Japan have enabled writing to
evolve as a work of art. Those of particular grace and beauty are used to decorate even
the most everyday objects. Chinese decorative script is a specialized branch of study.
I early one-quarter of
I the world's population
still uses a form of writing which ori¬
ginated In China over 3,000 years ago.
Chinese writing Is In a class on Its
own. It Is not an alphabetic script
and each character represents a com¬
plete word. As a symbol and as an
Image, each character also has artis¬
tic and philosophical significance.
During Its evolution, however, this
script has long ceased to be figurative.
It has become a stylistic expression of
the material to be communicated.
Since the completion of Its develop¬
ment, however. It Is no longer figu¬
rative. It simply Indicates stylistically
the essential of what It has to express.
Indeed, It Is not even possible to say
It was ever entirely figurative
In origin for no document has ever
been found that would confirm this.
The oldest examples are the "oracle
bone" Inscriptions dating from about
1400 B.C. Animal bones and tortoise
shells were suspended over a fire until
cracks appeared and these were then
fashioned by soothsayers Into signs
which they "read." Already at that
time, the signs had an abstract linear
construction.
It Is probable that up to the 8th
century B.C. the sole users of writing
were scribes versed In magic and
soothsaying. Then, some two cen¬
turies later, the concentration of
power and Increased authority of the
State brought many changes to the
Chinese world. Knowledge and use
of writing now passed to government
officials and the "technicians" of
that time. Writing thus tended to
become a simple method of communi¬
cation and of recording Ideas.
In 221 B.C. the Chou Dynasty,
which was based on Confucianism,
was eliminated by the rulers of the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

Chinese
ideograms (Wd) Unesco photos
Ch'in Empire. The new sovereign,
Ch'ln Shlh Huang-tl, a despotic ruler
who united China, devised a form of
writing far simpler than the one used
under the Chou Dynasty. The new
writing, known as Small Seal, or hsiao
chuan, had 3,000 characters and was
primarily designed for use by stu¬
dents and schoolchildren.
.But the seal characters in Chinese
writing, with their sinuous ornamen¬
tation, were still too difficult for
everyday needs. During the Han
Dynasty (206 B. C. - 220 A. D.) a
superintendent of prisons Invented
official li shu writing, in order, it Is
said, to simplify prison administra¬
tion. It Is from li shu that the basic
forms still In common use derive.
These forms underwent changes down
the centuries, the trend being towards
a greater systematization and styliza-
tion. The invention of paper in Chi¬
na in the 2nd century A.D. did much
to facilitate the advancement of
writing.
Because of Its graphic
	'wealth and Its ftylized
forms, writing quickly gave birth to a
new form of art, calligraphy. As an
early Chinese author wrote: "Speech
expresses what is in the mind, and
writing portrays it." It was this prin¬
ciple which guided the calllgrapher
In his aim of combining the strokes
of a character into a complete and
harmonious whole.
Many peoples In the Far East
adopted the Chinese characters in
whole or in part, or drew upon them
in evolving their own script. The
Japanese may have adopted them as
early as the 4th century A.D., but
the first known example of Japa¬
nese writing dates from 712 A.D.
This is the Kojiki, the oldest Japanese
historical work. Because of the poly¬
syllabic structure of the Japanese
language syllabic characters had to
be added to Indicate grammatical
inflexions phonetically. The first
attempt In this direction was made
in the 8th century.
In the following century the Japa¬
nese adapted from Chinese characters
a set of phonetic syllables for in¬
flexions, the sogana, later called hira-
gana. Another more angular form of
writing, katakana, was invented at
the same period and is nowadays used
mainly for the transliteration of
foreign words.
The Koreans also tried to use the
Chinese characters phonetically and
this led to the invention of the Idu
script of which very few traces
remain. In the 15th century a pho¬
netic alphabet covering all the sounds
In the language was invented.
But even earlier, in 1403, the
Koreans had already Invented print¬
ing with movable type: (Gutenberg,
32 the "father" of printing in Europe
was only a few years old at the time).
A
'l 7 *5
4. -
t » r - \\L> .4 Y, *
s
** 3 ..<.
t i f
xâ
» %%
t>kS A
'2f
t}#
s
W&4
& \ ft !
- v Ai v- ^"> 'il ^ Y
Calligraphy, in the eyes of the Chinese, is just as much afine
art as painting. Writing is so close to painting that many
Chinese artists are also authors. Text and image is often com¬
bined to form a single work of art. Above, text and figura¬
tive drawing on the page of a manuscript by Tsen Yen-tung.

'UNESCO- 7-'JXj C0£Hg§J¡fi<Olg;*:|±
il« dUSäla-ttW^^XitÄM^Place de
Fontenoy, Paris 7e, France) T't-iileflT
V^0
To compose a newspaper in Chinese a printer needs a case of 7,000
characters, and composition is done by hand. In Japanese about
2,000 characters are required and the work can thus be done by a
monotype composing machine. Efforts are now being made to develop
a composing machine capable of dealing with texts in Chinese.
The Japanese make simultaneous use of three forms
of writing : hiragana, a phonetic syllabic writing
which indicates grammatical inflexions, katakana.
whose angular characters are mainly used for
foreign words and Chinese characters, called kanji
in Japanese. Above, text taken from the Japanese
edition of The Unesco Courier includes all three
forms of writing, plus the Latin letters used to
indicate the magazine's editorial address in Paris.
FROM CALLIGRAPHY
TO PRINTING
Kneeling in the traditional posture of ancient
scribes, girls in a Tokyo secondary school paint
banners for New Year celebrations. In Japan
and China, calligraphy, is taught in school
and in Japan magazines are devoted to this art.
33
