INTERNATIONAL
CONCORD by Gilbert F. White
uINTiL fifty years ago man tended to manage
streams, great and small, for a single purpose
affecting only a small area. True, a few ancient river
structures in China and Iran served the joint purposes
of mechanical water power and irrigation or of flood
control and navigation, but by and large construction
was for a single purpose.
Shortly after the turn of the century the idea of inter-
grated development of streams found currency in plans
for individual water basins. The technology of moving
earth cheaply in great quantities, of building with
concrete, and of transmitting electricity long distances
made this possible.
One aspect of the Idea was to manage water for several
purposes at the same place. The thirteen new dams on
the Volga River, for example, serve not only to store water
for navigation and for urban water supply, but generate
huge blocks of hydro-electric power. The great new
dam rising on the Lower Volta River In Ghana will not
only provide for navigation facilities downstream but will
generate power on which an alumium industry will be
based.
A second aspect of this idea is that river basins in¬
creasingly have been treated as units. Instead of design¬
ing projects for solely one reach of a stream, projects
for water control now are seen as fitting into a broader
network throughout the drainage basin. This is the case
with the Damoder Valley and other basin projects in
India, in the Snowy Mountains of Australia, with most of
the newer river schemes in the Soviet Union and the
United States, and with the planning that is going on in
a number of the basins of Latin America under the
sponsorship of the Economic Commission for Latin
America.
Still a third aim that has become prominent in the last
twenty-five years is the vision of using large-scale water
control works to affect basic changes in the life of the
people of the entire region. This was the goal of the
Tennessee Valley Authority in the United States which
used a system of dams to generate power, control floods,
and provide navigation in such fashion that soil and
forest resources would be Improved and the people's
income and employment pattern would be bettered.
CONT'D ON PAGE 36
TEAM WORK
ON THE INDUS
Down the River Indus and its five tri¬
butaries one of the world's greatest ri¬
ver systems pours an annual waterflow
double that of the Nile. Some 40 mil¬
lion people in West Pakistan and ten
million more in India rely on the Indus
to irrigate 30 million acres of farm land.
In September 1960 a long-standing dis¬
pute over the use of the Indus waters
was settled by India and Pakistan which
agreed to share them through a vast
international river development plan. Eight
countries including India and Pakistan,
and the International Bank are helping
to pay the cost of dams, artificial lakes
and an irrigation system. Irrigation will
no longer be at the mercy of seasonal
climatic changes or fluctuations in river-
flow. The project will also increase
hydro-electric resources and give better
flood protection to both India and Pak¬
istan. Right, a mighty dam wall on
the Indus at Gudu, Pakistan. Left model
reservoir for studying sluice gate and
water flow operations.
Photos © Paul Almasy. Paris

33

INTERNATIONAL CONCORD (Cont'd)
36
The tricky art
of taming nature
The idea of integrated river development now is
widespread. It ls applied to management of small
mountain valleys as well as to huge basins reaching to
the ocean. It ls carried out with great care in a number
of the streams of the Soviet Union, notably the Volga-
Kama, Don, Dnieper, and Syr-Darya.
The United States has used this concept in plans not
only for the Tennessee but for the whole upper Ohio,
the Missouri, the Colorado, and perhaps most notably
for the Columbia and central Callfornian basins. In
only a few places, such as parts of the arid Colorado
basin in the U.S.A. and the 111 basin in central Asia has
development reached what might be considered maxi¬
mum. In most basins water still flows to the sea unregu¬
lated and the power of its fall remains unharnessed.
Each year, however, sees additional water regulated and
additional stream reaches captured by construction of
dams.
The great Integrated developments have taken place
chiefly on streams which lie wholly within one country
or in a single nation's portion of a stream. Thus, the
developments on the Rhone have been planned solely
within France in the first instance and those on the
Tigris-Euphrates were designed wholly for Iraq. Only
a few international streams have received integrated
treatment although the international streams account
for a large proportion of the drainage areas of the world.

|ome of the mighty rivers of the worldthe
'Nile, the Amazon, the Congo, the Ganges-
Brahmaputra, La Plata, the Amur and othersare dis¬
tinctively international streams.
Until recent years only a few of these had received
unified, co-operative treatment from the countries which
contribute the water and share in the opportunity to
use it. The Danube has been the subject of collaboration
in hydrologie data collection and navigation regulation
for a long time (see photo story p. 38). Agreements for
the maintenance of navigation works and, more recently,
the management of polluting wastes have developed In
the Rhine In Western Europe. International accords
affect much of the water of the Nile.
On the North American continent after many years
of negotiation Canada and the United States have
agreed on related plans for the Columbia basin. On the
southern border, long-standing treaties affecting the
regulation of the Rio Grande and Colorado are operated
by Mexico and the United States, but revisions must be
considered as new conditions arise.
Perhaps the outstanding case of direct investment in
an international stream is on the Indus River where
under the leadership of the International Bank for Recon¬
struction and Development a special programme of river
development has been planned by India and Pakistan
with a condominium of other interested countries (see
page 33).
The most elaborate collaboration In planning of inter¬
national river development before actual construction
has taken place is in the Lower Mekong where four coun¬
tries, Cambodia. Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam have joined
in carrying out basic scientific and engineering studies
(see page 46). In this work they have been joined by
eighteen other countries and several foundations and
international agencies.
It now is possible to find teams of French and Indian
engineers who are designing water management works
in Cambodia using maps based on Canadian air photo¬
graphs, geology from an Australian study, hydroiogic
data from a United States programme, and reconnais¬
sance survey work from Japan. A co-operative inter¬
national study currently is in the organizational stage
for Senegal drainages in West Africa, also with the spon¬
sorship of the United Nations.
Integrated river programmes place special demands on
the Interlocking of scientific, technological, educational,
and cultural activities. A great river basin is an ex¬
tremely complex web of relationships which show them¬
selves not only in the hydroiogic cycle of water but in
the movements of eilt and in the movements of people
and their products.
Governments have learned that when a dam is built it
is more than a single structure which stores water from
the flood season to be used in the dry season. It alters
the regimen of the river downstream and thereby affects
the flow and quality of water and the river channel. It
changes the fish and plant population of the water. It
may have a profound Impact upon the peoples way of
earning a living, and it may disturb roads, market faci¬
lities and the channels of government.
Quite aside from such instances as, for example, above
the high Aswan dam on the Nile, where valuable archseo-

BAIKAL
Worlds
deepest
fresh-water
lake
With its volume of 5,300 cubic miles,
of water. Lake Baikal in southern
Siberia is tho greatest fresh-water
lake in tho world. It is also tho deepost
(5,400 feet) and has a length of 390
miles. Tho animals and plants found
at Baikal aro ono of its most remark¬
able features. About 1,200 species
and varieties of animals and about
700 plants have been found there.
Some of tho animals aro quito uniquo.
Baikal is fed by 336 rivers, but only
one flows from the lake the Angara
River. The rain and snow that fall
each year on the lake total 2.2 cubic
miles enough water to fill Lako
Zurich in Switzerland twice over.
© Tass-APN
logical remains are threatened by reservoir construction,
water management brings into play new forces that
may profoundly alter the society which they are intended
to aid. It does not always follow that a huge concrete
dam, however appealing It may be as a symbol of eco¬
nomic development and mastery of Western technology,
will yield net benefits to the area where it is built. The
cost it imposes upon society may exceed the gains which
flow from it.
If agricultural extension, credit and marketing facili¬
ties do not shift to help farmers use the new opportu¬
nities effectively, an irrigation structure may fail to
improve their output. Moreover, it may carry the hazards
of disease. Today more than 100 million people in the
world are suffering from the debilitating disease bilhar-
ziasis whose spread has been largely encouraged by
construction of irrigation projects which were intended
to build up the economy of the very population which is
debilitated by the disease.
It would be preferable before a river management pro¬
ject were undertaken to forecast with a fair degree of
accuracy what its effects would be upon flows of water,
silt, people, and income in a given culture area. Today,
however, only a part of these Impacts can be foreseen.
The best that can be done is to marshal as much special
study and judgment as can be obtained before fateful
decisions are made as to further harnessing of the
earth's waters.
It Is not enough simply to develop engineering designs.
These must be based as far as possible on accurate scien¬
tific knowledge of the phenomena of water and ecological
relationships which will be changed. These effects must
be measured not only in the direct -costs of construction
and operation, but in the broader benefits and costs of
changes in productivity and culture which will result
from them.
But even gains in productivity cannot be assured unless
there ls knowledgeable effort to assure the cultural and
social conditions in which change may take place. Often
this revolves upon education. Thus science, technology,
social science, and education are mutually dependent in
arriving at fruitful management of the earth's rivers.
Gilbert F. White has served as a member of the Unesco
Advisory Committee on Arid Zone Research and is the
author of many works on natural resources including
"Science and the Future of Arid Lands," published by
Unesco in 1961 (republished 1963). He is chairman of the
Department of Geography of the University of Chicago
and has worked on water conservation and development
problems for the Mississippi Valley Committee and other
U.S. water authorities. Professor White is well known to
readers of The Unesco Courier (See "Thirsty LandsPast
and Future," May, 1962).
37
