FALL-OUT HAZARDS
NOW & YESTERDAY
tIN 1954, following a long series of atomic and
hydrogen weapons' tests, scientists first drew
public attention to the fact that the atmosphere, the oceans
and the land surfaces of the globe were being contaminated
by radioactive fall-out.
They revealed that great quantities of radioactive
substances ejected into the atmosphere by each explosion
were being caught up by air currents, carried across the
globe and slowly deposited on land and sea; these radio¬
active elements were then being rapidly absorbed by
plants, and were entering the bodies of men and animals
through vegetable foods.
Many scientists of the world warned of the great dangers
presented to humanity by the rise in the radioactivity of the
environment, and called for an end to the testing of atomic
and hydrogen weapons.
In 1955, the United Nations set up a special committee,
consisting of leading scientists from 15 countries, to make
an objective assessment of the health hazards of radiation
from nuclear explosions. In 1958 this committee reported
to the U.N. General Assembly that if the tests went on at
no greater rate than that of 1954, hundreds of thousands
of people would succumb to hereditary disease, and to
by Alexander M. Kuzin
Member of the U.N. Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation
leukemia and cancer caused by the increased radiation
background.
Meanwhile, the logic of the arms race caused each new
series of nuclear text explosions to be considerably more
powerful than its predecessor. There was a consequent
increase in the radioactive contamination of the atmosphere,
of the earth's surface and of the human body.
When an atomic, and especially a hydrogen bomb, is set
off in the atmosphere, it produces huge quantities of neu¬
trons which transform the nitrogen of the atmosphere into
radioactive carbon (C-14). Small quantities of C-14 are
always present in the atmosphere where they are formed
through the action of cosmic rays. But the nuclear tests
produced a rapid increase in the level of C-14. The 1958
tests alone raised the content of C-14 in 1959 to almost 30
per cent above its natural level, and the 1961-1962 tests
increased this concentration by nearly 90 per cent over
and above the normal quantity.
Atomic explosions also produce large amounts of two
other radioactive substances strontium-90 and caesium-
137. The 1961-1962 explosions nearly doubled the content
of strontium-90, as compared with the earlier tests and 11
there was a similar increase in caesium-137. Both these
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IRRADIATED
MOUSE
NORMAL
MOUSE
HOW
RADIATION
DEFORMS
AN EMBRYO
The extreme vulnerability
of an embryo to the effects
of atomic radiation is illus¬
trated strikingly in these
X-ray photos. In compar¬
ison with the normal new¬
born mouse (right) the sec¬
ond (left) is stunted and
shows marked bone mal¬
formation. It had been
exposed to radiation eleven
days after its conception
the equivalent of four
weeks of development in the
case of a human embryo.
© from "Radiology" n° 3, 1952
J^fc W ...
1*4
"4 «a £
12
FALL-OUT HAZARDS (Cont'd)
are long-lived isotopes, with a half-life (1) of about 30
years, which easily penetrate the human system through
food and then cause protracted irradiation of the internal
body tissues.
When nuclear explosions take place, the level of radio¬
activity is also increased by short-lived isotopes (like
iodine-131) which easily find their way into milk and thus
into the bodies of children, thereby increasing the possibi¬
lity of subsequent disease. The average levels of radio¬
active iodine content in milk rose sharply in the years of
the most intensive nuclear tests.
The danger of which the scientists had warned was
mounting from year to year. Reporting to the U.N. General
Assembly in 1962, the U.N. Scientific Committee unanim¬
ously emphasized that the immediate prohibition of nuclear
blasts would be of the greatest benefit to mankind.
Many organizations called for the cessation of nuclear
tests and an end to the contamination of the environment
with radioactive substances as a first step towards the
relaxation of international tensions and to general disarm¬
ament.
Thus the nations of the world hailed with satisfaction the
signing on August 5, 1963, of the Moscow Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, Under Water
and in Outer Space. Thanks to the Treaty, no products of
(I) The time needed tot halt of the origina/ atoms of a radioactive substance
to disintegrate.
radioactive explosions have been poisoning the world
around us for the past year or more.
Has there, in fact, been any change in the amount of
radiation to which people have been exposed during that
period? Information reaching the U.N. Scientific Commit¬
tee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation indicates that there
has already been a reduction in the amount of radioactive
substances being absorbed into the human body, especially
in the case of children. There has been a sharp drop, for
instance, in the amount of short-lived isotopes in the
surrounding environment. In 1963-1964, their average
absorption by the human body was down to less than one
per cent of the amount absorbed during 1961-1962, when
the tests were on. As 1964 runs out, it will be virtually
impossible to detect any pollution of the earth by short¬
lived radioactive substances.
But long-lived radioactive elements such as strontium-90
and caesium-137 pose greater problems. Intensive
research over the last ten years suggests that their rate
of fallout n-ns its course in twelve to eighteen months
from the lower strata of the atmosphere, but takes much
longer to complete up to three years or more when
coming from the upper atmosphere layers.
The bulk of the radioactive debris from the 1961-1962
explosions, actually produced fallout in 1963. Thanks to
the halt of testing in the sea, on land and in the air, new
fallout in 1964 can be expected to drop by 30 per cent, as
compared with 1963.

On the basis that radioactive debris remains in the
atmosphere for an average of two years, it is safe to say
that as from 1965 there will be a sharp cumulative drop
in the fallout of strontium-90 and caesium-137. The overall
amount of strontium-90 and caesium-137 in the soil is still
rising and will contine to rise for another two or three years,
when it too will decline due to radioactive decay.
But in spite of the increase of strontium-90 and caesium-
137 in the soil, far less of these substances will be absorb¬
ed by human beings in 1965 than was the case in 1962-
1963. The reason is that these elements penetrate plants
in two ways. Through its roots a plant takes in calcium
from the soil and also radioactive strontium, which has
similar chemical properties. Its roots also absorb caesium-
137 along with potassium. This process will continue for
some time to come. But fresh radioactive substances
which are deposited directly on the leaves of growing
plants are absorbed at a much greater rate. In the years
of peak fallout, the bulk of the radioactive contamination
of vegetable foods took place through new fallout.
Thanks to the Test Ban Treaty new fallout began to
decrease as early as 1964, and a considerable reduction is
expected in 1965. This will lessen the radioactive pollution
of foods and reduce the entry of radioactive substances
into human beings and animals through the food they eat.
Over the years the reduction will be even more marked.
With the cessation of tests, our environment will be grad¬
ually cleared of artificial radioactive carbon (C-14).
Although it has a long half-life (nearly 5,000 years), it will
be disappearing as it dissolves in the waters of the oceans.
This year the U.N. Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation estimated that if the Test Ban Treaty is observed,
the artificial radioactive carbon content is bound to fall
from 85 per cent over and above the natural level in 1964,
to 60 per cent in 1969, and that it will be down to three per
cent by the end of the century.
Children are the most sensitive to the effects of radia¬
tion. That is why there has always been so much concern
over the fact that during the tests large amounts of radio¬
active iodine, radioactive strontium and radioactive caesium
were being absorbed by children via milk, and that the
strontium-90 content in children's bones was increasing
from year to year. However, their food is now being freed
of these noxious elements. It is entirely free of radioactive
\ \
A scientist at a nuclear research centre uses a
a special atmospheric dust sampler to test for
radioactivity in the air. Particles drawn in by
this device are tested with a Geiger counter.
CEA
iodine, and the amount of other radioactive substances is
dropping.
Many thousands of children would inevitably have fallen
victim to disease if the tests had been continued; many
other potential victims will be spared over the next few
years by the strict observance of the Moscow Treaty.
Banning Nuclear Tests in the Atmosphere, Under Water
and in Outer Space.
The Moscow Test-Ban Treaty marks a first stage in the
easing of international tension ; it also demonstrates tho
possibility that the threat of thermo-nuclear war can bo
averted, that the use of nuclear weapons can be banned
and that agreement can be reached on general and com¬
plete disarmament the present hope and goal of all whose
concern is for the future of mankind.
NUCLEAR WEAPONS BANNED IN SPACE
Resolution of the U. N. General Assembly, 17 October, 1963 :
The General Assembly... determined to take steps to
prevent the spread of the arms race to outer space,
Welcomes the expressions by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States
of America of their intention not to station in outer space any objects carrying nuclear
weapons or other kinds of weapons of mass destruction;
Solemnly calls upon all States:
a) To refrain from placing in orbit around the earth any objects carrying nuclear
weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, installing such weapons
on celestial bodies, or stationing such weapons in outer space in any other manner;
b) To refrain from causing, encouraging or in any way participating in the conduct
of the foregoing activities. 13
