24
'My dear Kepler, what would you say
of the learned who steadfastly refuse
to glance through the telescope ?'
GALILEO has related how, in 1609, he received a report from abroad on
the construction of a spyglass and applied himself to the invention of
a similar instrument. "First," he wrote, "I prepared a tube of lead, at
the ends of which I fitted two glass lenses, both plane on one side while on
the other side one was spherically convex and the other concave. Then
placing my eye near the concave lens, I perceived objects three times closer
and nine times larger than when seen with the naked eye. Next I constructed
another one... Finally, sparing neither labour or expense, I succeeded in
constructing for myself so excellent an instrument that objects appeared
nearly 1,000 times larger and over thirty times closer than when regarded
with our natural vision." Galileo eventually built hundreds of telescopes
(left, two of these now in the History of Science Museum in Florence).
His telescope was to bring a new vision to man, though not until intense
resistance had been overcome. "My dear Kepler," wrote Galileo to his
friend, the German astronomer, "what would you say of the learned here,
who, replete with the pertinacity of the asp, have steadfastly refused to
cast a glance through the telescope? Shall we laugh, or shall we cry?"

T;he pages of history are filled with coincidences
of persons and events which were we to notice
them would strike us as extremely Interesting and at times
highly significant. Two such coincidences mark the dates
of the birth and death of Galileo.
Galileo GaUlei was born in Pisa on February 15, 1564
and died In the village of Arcetri near Florence on January
8, 1642. Now, 1564 was the year of Michelangelo's death,
1642 the year of Isaac Newton's birth. With the death of
Michelangelo, the ItaUan Renaissance and its era of
artistic splendour comes to an end. With Newton, the
foundations of modern science, as we know and respect it
today and which Galileo's great pioneer work did so much
to create, are at last firmly established.
It is in this sense that it can truly be said of Galileo
that he marks the end not only of a period in history but
of a form of civilization. For thanks to his scientific
attitude and discoveries a wide breach was opened to
challenge the metaphysical and cosmological foundations
of his time.
The artistic and Uterary explosion of the Italian Re¬
naissance had not taken place within the pedantic circles
of the universities; instead it had burst forth and develop¬
ed in the highly refined atmosphere of the courts and
palaces of fifteenth and sixteenth century Italy. During
this time the universities had remained steeped in their
medieval traditions and trappings. Learning, both
phUosophical and theological, was purely speculative in
nature and reposed entirely on the doctrines of Aristotle
which had dominated Western thinking for two thousand
years. The science of the university scholars was reduced
to little more than abstract book-learning and, isolated
and divorced from reality, had lost all contact with the
exciting new techniques which were then being developed
by craftsmen and artisans across the face of Italy and
Europe.
The university scholars had taken over unchanged (and
Indeed were very proud of it) all of Aristotle's views of the
physical and cosmological laws governing the world, to
which had been added the system of astronomy devised
by Ptolemy of Alexandria In the second century of our era.
The Catholic Church had not only given Its support to
these views but had actually adopted them as the official
Church doctrine. The natural philosophy of Aristotle as
well as the astronomy of Ptolemy taught that the Earth
was the centre of things and that the heavens, with the
stars, the Sun, the Moon and the Planets, revolved around
It in twenty-four hours.
According to Aristotle the universe was divided Into two
separate and totally distinct realms the heavens and
earth.
In the heavens (the domain of astronomy) everything
was celestial or godly by nature and hence perfect, eternal
and incorruptible, the stars and their concentric spheres
all moved in perfect circles as did the Sun and the
Planets. Like everything else beyond the Earth these
were perfect, everlasting and immutable.
The Earth (governed by the laws of physics) was
imperfect, unstable, everchanglng and perishable. All __
natural and spontaneous motion could only be In a straight "
CONT'D ON PAGE 27

Galileo presents his astronomical telescope to the Doge of Venice on August 24, 1610,
offering it as a gift to the Venetian Republic. The same year, Galileo left his post at Padua
University for Florence where he had been appointed as philosopher and mathematician to
Cosimo II de Medici, grand duke of Tuscany. Painting by Luigi Sabatelli (1772-1850).
Galilean Tribune, Florence
THE MAJESTY OF THE COSMOS
26
cannot without great wonder, nay more, disbelief, hear it being attributed
to natural bodies as a great honour and perfection that they are impassible,
immutable, inalterable, etc. : as, conversely, I hear it esteemed a great imperfection to be
alterable, generable, and mutable.
It is my opinion that the Earth is very noble and admirable by reason of the many and
different alterations, mutations, and generations which incessantly occur in it. And if,
without being subject to any alteration, it had been all one vast heap of sand, or a mass
of jade, or if, since the time of the deluge, the waters freezing which covered it, it had
continued an immense globe of crystal, wherein nothing had ever grown, altered or
changed, I should have esteemed it a wretched lump of no benefit to the Universe, a
mass of idleness, and in a word superfluous, exactly as if it had never been in Nature.
The difference for me would be the same as between a living and a dead creature. I
say the same concerning the Moon, Jupiter, and all the other globes of the Universe.
The more I delve into the consideration of the vanity of popular discourses, the more
empty and simple I find them. What greater folly can be imagined than to call gems,
silver, and gold noble, and earth and dirt base? For do not these persons consider
that, if there were as great a scarcity of earth as there is of jewels and precious metals,
there would be no king who would not gladly give a heap of diamonds and rubies and
many ingots of gold to purchase only so much earth as would suffice to plant a jessamine
in a little pot or to set a tangerine in it, that he might see it sprout, grow up, and bring
forth such goodly leaves, fragrant flowers, and delicate fruit?
GALILEO
Dialogue on the Great World Systems

GALILEO (Cont'd)
THE FIRST EXPLORER
OF THE MOON
The first celestial body on which Galileo trained his
telescope in 1609 was the moon. The sketches (below)
made by Galileo to illustrate his discoveries cannot
convey the sense of wonder and delight this new picture
of the moon awoke in him. The lunar landscape that he
saw through the telescope was not the smooth and
spherical surface that many philosophers had believed
it to be. What impressed Galileo was that it looked
like a ghostly "earthly" landscape. He described it thus:
"more and more peaks shoot up as if sprouting, now
here, now there, lighting up within the shadowed portion ;
these become larger, and finally they too are united with
that same luminous surface which extends further. And
on the earth, before the rising of the sun, are not the
highest peaks of the mountains illuminated by the sun's
rays while the plains remain in the shadow?... But on
the moon the variety of elevations and depressions
appears to surpass in every way the roughness of the
terrestial surface..." And Galileo calculated the height
of the mountains with an astonishing precision. Science
still agrees with his estimate that they are four miles high.
:&r
:
P *
«1 v. -.
m\ **>
»
'The best years
of my life7
line: heavy bodies fell downwards, toward the centre of
the earth (the Earth Itself being motionless in the centre
of the universe), while light bodies moved upwards. All
other forms of motion on earth, according to the Arlsto-
teUans, were "violent," that is, produced by some external
force acting upon a body. This movement ceased imme¬
diately the force was removed. Bodies fell at dliferent
speeds while certain elements, such as fire, moved
upwards. That the Sun, the stars, the Moon and Indeed
the whole universe rotated around the Earth appeared
obvious to anyone gazing up at the heavens while the
Earth seemed stable and solid beneath men's feet.
It was on this "commonsense" basis that physics and
astronomy were taught at the University of Pisa when
Galileo entered it as a student in 1581, seven years after
his family had moved back to Florence.
Galileo entered the "Faculty of Artists," as It was then
called, with the intention of taking a degree In medicine,
but he never completed the course, and after four years
left the university for good. But as a student he had
already made his first Important discovery in physics.
Watching a lamp swinging from side to side in the
Cathedral of Pisa he noticed that though the distance of
each swing was reduced sharply as the movement died
down the time taken for every full swing to and fro
remained practically the same. Thus was born the law
of the lsochronism (or equal time) of the pendulum which
was later applied in the invention of the pendulum clock
the first mechanism to make possible the constant and
accurate measurement of very tiny Intervals of time.
he importance of this discovery, however, was
far greater than this first practical appli¬
cation. It gave science an Instrument capable of making
the precise measurements required by astronomy and
experimental mechanics. Galileo himself made use of the
pendulum principle to demonstrate aspects of the law of
inertia.
Towards the end of his studies at Pisa, Galileo was
drawing more and more towards mathematics; he
concentrated In particular on the works of the great
Greek scholar Archimedes and developed a special Interest
in geometry and mechanics.
By 1589 he was so well versed In these subjects that the
University of Pisa appointed him as its Professor of
Mathematics, a post he held for three years. During this
period he carried out his experiments on falling bodies
and, as legend has it, dropped objects of dliferent weight
from the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa to prove that
they would fall with equal velocity and with uniform
acceleration.
After writing treatises and dialogues "On Motion" (in
Latin, according to the tradition, under the title De Motu)
GaUleo then embarked on more original research in the
field of mechanics and constructed his Bilancetta, a
hydrostatic balance for weighing substances in water.
Galileo's fame as a scientist was now spreading in aca¬
demic circles. He passed on the results of his research
to other scholars, and established close personal contacts
with some of the most distinguished philosophers and
mathematicians of his time.
Galileo's reputation and scientific training as well as
the help of Influential friends now procured for him the
post of Professor of Mathematics at the University of
Paduaan appointment made by the Senate of the Vene¬
tian Republic.
Padua provided the ideal element for Galileo. He
remained there from 1592 to 1610 ,and in a letter to a
friend written many years later when he was old and
blind, he recalled this period as "the best 18 years of my
Ufe."
Padua, a neighbouring city to Venice, had preserved to
the full its ancient and vigorous university tradition. It 27
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
© Paris Observatory

GALILEO (Cont'd)
Dust turned to stars,
was the cultural capital of the Venetian Republic, whose
Senate took an Immense pride in the university and
allowed its Faculty and students the greatest freedom of
thought and opinion. The nobility of Venice was also
passionately drawn to the arts and sciences, and its
members were proud of have friends among the pro¬
fessors of Padua.
In the lively atmosphere of this university, with its
exuberant outlook and its opportunities for free, critical,
open-minded discussion, Galileo was quick to form new
contacts and friendships. He became a well-known figure
in Paduan and Venetian circles. Here he formed a close
and lasting friendship with a noblemen, Glanfrancesco
Sagredo, who later became one of the interlocutors of the
famous Galilean Dialogues. Watching the dockyard
workers of Venice at their tasks Galileo found new and
rewarding material for scientific reflexion.
Like most of the university professors of his day, Gali¬
leo had a number of students lodging at his home to whom
he gave private tuition. He also set up a small workshop
under the direction of a mechanic named Marcantonio
Mazzolani, where geometrical, astronomical and naviga¬
tional instruments were made. One of these was the
famous "geometrical and military compass" conceived by
Galileo in the first years of the seventeenth century. It
was a kind of sliderule with which certain operations
In arithmetic and geometry could be done mechanically;
it was also used to solve problems relating to fortified
works.
It was also from this workshop that the famous telescope
that Galileo constructed with his own hands in 1609 is
believed to have come. By introducing the telescope as
a scientific Instrument Galileo revolutionized astronomy
and cosmology and laid the foundations of modern science.
As Galileo himself relates, he set out to make the
telescope fired by his inborn desire for knowledge and his
urge to verify the findings of others in this case because
he had heard that a spectacle-maker in the Low Coun¬
tries had devised an optical instrument "by means of
which visible objects though very distant . . . were
distinctly seen as if nearby."
After many attempts he managed to produce a telescope
which though not very powerful was of sound design, and
then others, one of which he presented to the Venetian
Senate. Then, realizing the vast possibiUtles of the
instrument for astronomical research, he began to use
It himself for scanning the heavens.
The results were at once so encouraging that he was
spurred on to continue his research and extend his
investigations. So great was his enthusiasm that all his
discoveries in the realm of astronomy came in one tre¬
mendous explosion of new-found cosmic knowledge,
within the space of a single year.
It is nowadays difficult for us to imagine how Galileo
felt when, looking through his telescope for the first time,
he beheld the heavens spangled with stars that no man
had ever seen before. What he witnessed was the repudia¬
tion of all the traditional theories, in fact of everything
that philosophers and astronomers had ever taught the
ImmutabiUty of the heavens.
But was it not perhaps the fault of the instrument?
Was it deceiving his eyes? What was he to believe the
wisdom handed down over the centuries or the evidence
of his own eyes? He had, after all, tested his telescope
on nearby objects also visible to the naked eye and these
CONT'D ON PAGE 30


GALILEO (Cont'd)
Bowed but unconquered
had not been altered In appearance, but merely magni¬
fied.
Perhaps indeed this was a sign that a new era was at
hand and that Copernicus had been right to attack the
Ptolemaic system after all? And if this new instrument
could be used to explore the uncharted expanses of the
heavens It would perhaps prove beyond doubt the validity
of the Copernican theory of astronomy, whose simplicity
had already convinced Galileo of its worth.
Such doubts as these must have assailed Galileo as he
continued his research; each night brought new elements
to add to the already formidable body of irrefutable
evidence against Ptolemaic astronomy and Aristotelian
cosmology.
One of the first discoveries which Galileo made, after
being struck by the amazing number of fixed stars, was
that both the Milky Way and the great Nebulae were
themselves composed of multitudes of stars and not of
particles of dust, vapour or clouds as traditional astronomy
had always maintained.
The first celestial body he studied was the Moon,
according to tradition a smooth, uniform and precisely
spherical body composed of absolutely pure matter. Gali¬
leo saw at once that it was "uneven, rough and full of
cavities and prominences"In other words, traversed by
valleys and mountains. He noted too that it was unevenly
Illuminated.
Thus the Moon, by its shape and its surface, appeared
to closely resemble the Earth. This disturbing resem¬
blance refuted the ancient dogma of Aristotle about the
heavens being both perfect and incorruptible: it also
challenged the worth of the entire traditional cosmolo¬
gical system, and threatened in consequence the accepted
metaphysical one and the theological system founded upon
this.
On the night of January 7, 1610, while Galileo was
observing the planet Venus, he noticed three more cel¬
estial bodies which, unlike the fixed stars, appeared to
move around the planet as if this was the centre of their
system. Continuing his observations on succeeding nights
and noting the regular periodicity of these stars, Galileo
deduced that they were Indeed satellites, and by January
14 he had discovered yet a fourth satellite of Jupiter.
Thus he reasoned, there exists in the Universe another
centre of rotation other than the Earth. Because of the
actual movement of the Moon and the apparent move¬
ment of the Sun, the fixed stars and the entire celestial
sphere, the Earth had hitherto been regarded as the uni¬
que axis of the cosmos. Now, more and more proofs were
found to support the Copernican ideas of cosmology.
Galileo decided to reveal his discoveries to other scien¬
tists. He did so in March 1610 in a sixty-page pamphlet
entitled Siderius Nuncius (The Starry Messenger) which
was published in Venice. The reactions it provoked rang¬
ed from enthusiasm to suspicion, curiosity and distrust.
Above all it gave rise to endless discussion.
To clarify his position Galileo left Florence, where he
had gone to live after leaving the University of Padua and
being appointed philosopher and mathematician to the
Court of the Medicis, and set out for Rome. Here, in the
spring of the year 1611 he was given a triumphal recep¬
tion. The fathers of the Collegio Romano, the supreme
authority in cultural affairs at that time, recognized his
discoveries. The select Accademla del Lincei (the lynx-
eyed), presided by Prince Federico Cesni, elected him a
member (the sixth), an honour he prized so highly that
thereafter he always signed himself "GaUleo Linceo."
PYTHAGORAS
While in Rome and on his return to Florence he pressed
on with his research, calculated the time taken by the
"Medicean Stars" to rotate around Jupiter and journeyed
ever further into the new world revealed to him by his
telescope.
The telescopes he made and others copied from them
were by now to be found in all parts of Europe. Scientists
and laymen fired with curiosity scanned the skies with
the aid of these new instruments and in no time at all
more had been added to the knowledge of astronomy
than in all the thousands of years gone by.
On July 25, 1611, Galileo observed that Saturn was
"triple-formed." His telescope was not powerful enough
to show him the rings around this planet. He saw it as
an oblong-shaped rather than a spherical body, and even
as having three parts a larger central body flanked by
two smaller ones. It was not until 1655 that Huygens, the
Dutch mathematician and physicist, using a much more
powerful instrument, perceived the ring around Saturn.
In the meantime, Galileo had also observed the spots,
on the sun. This was a revelation of major importance
for the supporters of the Copernican system for it dem¬
onstrated that the Sun itselfthis "noble" and "per¬
fect" body was also subject to changes not acceptable to
Aristotelian theory. Galileo was able to show that from
observations of these spots one could prove the rotation
of the sun, and even compute the speed with which it
rotates upon Its axis.
Already as early as December 1610, Galileo had observed
the phases of Venus which was another striking proof that
the centre of the orbit of that planet was not the Earth
but the Sun.
30
If he had been solely a mathematician and an experimenter our tribute today would be reserved
for his scientific genius. But he was also a philosopher who felt in duty bound to share his
discoveries and his ideas with the whole world. Though fully aware of the antagonisms that
this attitude would arouse, and of the difficulties and even dangers he might face, he persis¬
ted until the final trial; his seeming defeat, in fact, heralded the triumph of the new concepts.
RENÉ MAHEU
Director General of Unesco
In a message to the city of Pisa on the occasion of the 4th Centenary of Galileo's birth

THE BOOK
THAT SHOOK
A WORLD
More than 2,000 years ago Pythago¬
ras, the Greek (bust far left) and his
followers accepted the idea that earth
rotates on its axis and travels around
the sun which is placed at the centre
of the universe. But the ideas of Aris¬
totle, the Greek philosopher (4th
century B.C.) on the earth's immo¬
bility at the centre of the universe
continued to dominate the Western
world. Ptolemy's astronomy of the
2nd century AD, was also based on
this idea. In 1543, Nicolaus Coper¬
nicus, a Polish astronomer (right)
published his " De Revolutionibus ",
which claimed the earth revolved
around the sun. In 1 632, Galileo, wrote
his Copernican manifesto, the Dia¬
logue on the Great World Systems.
The frontispiece of the original edition
(left) shows Copernicus debating the
systems with Aristotle, whose follow¬
ers continued to oppose the new
Copernican view of the universe.
K ' J > %':U
05
4<ry . ÈÎLiÊfïMà
EsWsS'1 «LISI
COPERNICUS
In the books and letters by which he announced his
discoveries to the world of learning, Galileo consistently
affirmed his belief in the theories of Copernicus, which
had now been confirmed by so many convincing proofs.
But it was above all in one single work that he described
all the results of his years of research in astronomy and
mechanics. This was the Dialogo sopra i due massimi
Sistemi del Mondo (Dialogue on the Great World Systems)
whose pubUcation in 1632 was the signal for an onslaught
on Galileo by all the forces of reaction: all those who
refused either to understand or to concede the facts that
had been proved by experiment and reasoning.
Galileo had already received a sharp warning in 1616
and had been told not to uphold or teach the Copernican
doctrine which the Church had condemned as erroneous;
and he had, officially at least, bowed to this injunction.
When Maffeo Barberinl, who had often shown marked
favour to GaUleo, was elected Pope with the title of Urban
VIII, the scientist believed that he could now freely and
openly express his scientific views. Thus, after visiting
Rome in 1624 to pay homage to the new Pope, Galileo set
about completing his Dialogue, which, in reaUty, he had
been pondering on since his days in Padua.
For publishing this work Galileo was summoned before
the Tribunal of the Inquisition. He was charged with
violating the injunction of 1616 in that his new book,
while paying Up service to official views, was in fact
defending the Copernican doctrines.
The trial lasted from February 1633 Into the summer of
that year. Galileo was condemned to imprisonment and
ordered to recant. Subsequently the prison sentence was
commuted to confinement in the residence of the Grand
Duke of Tuscany in Rome; and he was later authorized
to move first to Siena, and finally to Florence.
Despite the condemnation, which was to have far-
reaching repercussions on scientific life In Italy, Galileo
did not capitulate. He worked on until he had completed
his greatest and most mature work, Discourses and
Demonstrations on Two New Sciences, which was pub¬
lished at Leyden in 1638.
The Dialogue on the Great World Systems and the
Discourses are Galileo's major works and together form
the basis of modern dynamics.
In the Dialogue, GaUleo embarked on his great defence
of the Copernican doctrine; in the Discourses he developed
the theme of his earlier work in far greater depth and
detail, confirming his conclusions by practical demonstra
tions. In this work Galileo set out the results of half a
century of scientific research, systematically expanding
and summarizing his discoveries and conclusions.
The measure of Galileo's greatness was that he saw
through the superficial and deceptive appearance of quite
ordinary, everyday things and grasped the reality behind
them that other men had never been able to perceive.
The key to Galileo's achievement was the completely new
method of scientific research that he himself had devised.
GaUleo made use of a powerful battery of arguments
in his assault on the theories of traditional science. He
advanced the universal principle of relativity, formulated
the law governing the free fall of bodies, defined the prin¬
ciple of inertia and studied the composition of motions.
And, perhaps most Important of all, he considered the
problem of the "truth" and the "validity" of I he science
of the universe from a viewpoint that still "modern."
Galileo used a revolutionary approach. His weapon was
the principle of relativity and with it he swept aside all
arguments advanced against the Idea that the earth
rotates. From the most commonplace experiments and
observations came principles that none of Galileo's pre¬
decessors had been able to grasp or expound.
The Galilean principle of relativity maintains that it ls
impossible to tell, from mechanical experiments carried
out within a given system, whether that system is in a
state of rest or in uniform linear motion. In this way
Galileo refuted arguments against the earth's rotation
based on facts observed on the earth Itself, that ls, from
within the same system.
To support his hypothesis Galileo used the example of a
ship. He pointed out that it is Impossible for anyone
Inside a vessel to tell whether it is in motion simply by
observing animals or objects In movement within, since
there are no observable relative changes between these
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
It is not true that after reciting (his) abjuration, he
muttered: "Eppur si muove. " It was the world
that said this not Galileo.
BERTRAND RUSSELL
The Scientific Outlook (1931) 31

'In questions of
science the authority
of a thousand is not
worth the humble
reasoning of a single
individual.'
Galileo Galilei
Galilean Tribune. Florence
GALILEO (Cont'd)
animals or objects due to any movement by the ship.
Moreover, he affirmed, there ls no absolute motion, either
celestial or terrestial, rotatory or Unear, upwards or
downwards; there is only motion in relation to a point
that is assumed to be fixed.
To determine whether celestial bodies are stationary or
in motion, astronomers still take as their point of refe¬
rence three axes traced within the solar system (and called
the Galilean axes In honour of the great scientist) by
which motion can to some extent be measured, though
subject always to relativity.
Some of the commonest arguments to support the view
that the earth is motionless had been based on observa¬
tion of moving bodies, and more particularly of projec¬
tiles, on Its surface. And these movements of course
showed none of the effects which it was wrongly believed
should be produced by the earth's rotation.
But although the principle of relativity had now
provided a satisfactory explanation on this point, there
still remained the problem of the "spontaneous" move¬
ment of bodies and the "violent" motion of projectiles.
By experiments, Galileo demonstrated the error of
Aristotle's theory that the velocity of a freely-falUng body
is directly proportional to its weight, and showed that all
bodies in free fall towards the earth have the same velo¬
city. These experiments led Galileo to his studies on
Inclined planes.
Objects dropped from towers or buildings could only be
observed in movement for a matter of seconds and thus
little Information of value was obtained from such experi¬
ments. With the Inclined plane, however, it was possible
to prolong the time of fall and to control and measure
the velocities produced.
By experiments of this kind and others carried out with
a pendulum. Galileo demonstrated that all velocities
reached in descending from the same height, but along
planes of different Inclination, are nevertheless always
equal. He was thus able to formulate a new basic princi¬
ple of dynamics: the principle of inertia. This states
that the velocity of a weight moving along an inclined
plane accelerates In proportion to the angle of slope of
the plane, and accumulates enough energy (allowance
32 being made for the effects of friction and air resistance)
to return, like the pendulum, to the same height from
which it started.
Galileo became blind a few years before his death in 1642,
but continued to work energetically. He maintained his scien¬
tific correspondence and, as shown in this painting by
Luigi Sabatelli, dictated his ideas to his disciples, Vincent Vivi-
ani, the mathematician, and Evangelista Torricelli, the physicist.
The formulation of the principle of inertia becomes
complete when it is shown that, unless outside forces
intervene, a body remains at rest (which even the Aristo¬
telian school admitted) or in uniform motion. This was
a postulate which ran counter. to all the ancient theories
on the contrast between natural and "violent" motions,
and it affirmed that these motions, which had hitherto
been regarded as entirely different in nature, could
actually be combined.
Applying the principle of inertia, the law of free-falling
bodies and the principle of the composition of motions,
Galileo was able to split up projectile motion into its
component parts: the motion of inertia operating in the
direction and at the velocity of the initial impulse, and
a downward motion due to gravity. The result is a para¬
bola. Galileo was now able to draw up the first firing
tables, which are reproduced in his Discourses.
This, in my view, was one of the greatest moments of
Galileo's scientific career. He was now possessed of
the facts that were required in order that the work begun
by him might be completed by the English scientist, Sir
Isaac Newton, nearly half a century later. Newton was
able to complete his elaboration of the scheme of the
Universe by applying to the motion of heavenly bodies
Galileo's analysis of the dual forces (inertia and gravity)
which govern the trajectory of projectiles. Thus were
laid the foundations of modern scientific development.
GaUleo had faced the humiliation of his condemnation
with firm courage, convinced beyond all doubt that his
was the path of truth. This was his "Credo," and he
never ceased to proclaim it to the world.
"We have found a strange footprint on the shores of
the unknown. We have devised profound theories, one
after another, to account for its origin. At last, we have
succeeded in reconstructing the creature that made the
footprint. And loi It is our own."
ARTHUR S. EDDINGTON
The Language of Science (1954)
