Above, young programme producers at work in the radio studio
of the Tamagawa Primary School, Tokyo, Japan. Nowadays
tape recorders, microphones, TV, films and other audio-visual
aids are familiar classroom items in all parts of the world, giving
new scope and interest to education. Right, children from the
same Japanese school listen to language lessons on tape.

NEW SIGHTS
AND SOUNDS
IN THE
CLASSROOM
by Anne Darnborough Photos : Unesco-Tamagawa Gakuen. Tokyo
he sights and sounds of radio, television,
newspapers and film are today becoming as
familiar in classrooms around the world as blackboards
and chalk in some cases even more so.
Increasingly, the dual role of the mass media in
information and education is being recognized through¬
out the globe. The developing countries, where the
lack of communication and educational facilities is
greatest, realize that the new audio-visual aids can
revolutionize the teaching of subjects as varied as
languages, geography and science.
World Communications a recent Unesco report (see
page 4) shows how these media are being used today: by
some countries to enrich already adequate schooling, by
others to supplement inadequate teaching resources and
elsewhere to bypass the barriers of illiteracy, or to combat
It directly.
Rural areas of less developed countries, the poorest
In means of communication, are also generally those with
12 the fewest schools.
This fact underlines the crucial role of the mass media
in promoting education as well as economic and social
advancement generally. Unsurpassed in speed, range and
impact, the mass media offer unlimited possibilities for
providing both technical as well as general education on
a broad scale.
This is why many African governments are encouraging
the development of a rural press to reinforce their
literacy programmes. Ghana and Nigeria, for example,
print weeklies for country areas, mostly in vernacular
languages.
Radio's possibilities in education are being widely
explored. The developing countries are giving priority to
this medium and the more developed countries are
extending its scope.
Almost every South American country now uses radio
as an educational aid. Radio "schools" in Colombia
reach 170,000 elementary school listening groups each day.
The Peruvian government stations as well as 14 inde¬
pendent stations regularly transmit educational pro¬
grammes. Private stations in Chile are required to
broadcast the Ministry of Education's school and popular
educational programmes which are compulsory listening

for all schools. The Argentine Education Ministry uses
the national radio system to broadcast to more than 300
schools daily. In Central American countries, commercial
stations must provide free time for educational broad¬
casts to schools and for public interest, cultural and new
programmes.
Educational programming is a major feature of Asian
broadcasting. Two recently established "radio and TV
universities" in mainland China have enrolled 19,000
college students. All-India Radio has established 2,000
radio farm forums throughout the country and broad¬
casts special programmes to some 18,500 schools. Radio
Pakistan transmits special educational programmes for
adults in local languages from all stations.
Nearly all European countries broadcast to schools and
lay varying emphasis on educational and language pro¬
grammes for the general public. Poland's University of
the Air enrolls some 200,000 student listeners. Denmark
conducts an "Evening High School" and a "Sunday
University". The BBC's London and Far Eastern services
transmit 150 "English by Radio" lessons a week, in the
world's biggest language-teaching operation.
In the United States there arc 187 non-commercial
educational stations operated by universities and state
and municipal authorities.
Educational programmes are broadcast on a regional
basis In the U.S.S.R., and in Australia are received by 94
per cent of schools.
Television is not yet widespread in the developing
countries but those using it give an Important place to
educational programmes. Western Nigeria, for example,
broadcasts three hours dally for schools and finds that
these programmes are widely viewed by the general public
as well. Educational programmes form one-sixth of
Kenya's service. Northern and Eastern Nigeria also
concentrate on educational broadcasts. The Rhodesian
service is under contract to provide school programmes
regularly.
In Chile, all stations are educational and operated by
universities. Venezuela's one government-owned station
broadcasts educational and cultural programmes for about
six hours a day. .¡3
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

NEW SIGHTS & SOUNDS (Cont'd)
TV lessons in 24,000 Japanese schools
All-India Radio broadcasts courses in science, English
and Hindi for secondary schools from Its experimental
transmitter. Japan, In contrast to most Asian countries,
has a highly-developed TV network and Its educational
programme, which covers 42 per cent of the population
Is received in 24,000 schools. In Oceania, an extensive
educational service is being organized for American
Samoa.
In the United States, more than 60 educational stations
are run non-commerclally by schools, universities and
foundations. TV Instruction beamed from transmitters
In high-flying aircraft and covering 78,000 square miles
has been developed, indicating what communication
satellites might do on a much larger scale for educational
broadcasting.
Television for schools is receiving increasing attention
in Europe and has been particularly well-developed in
Italy and the United Kingdom. In the U.S.S.R., a high
percentage of viewing time is devoted to educational
programmes for children and adults. The "People's
University" programme offers courses in science and
technology, arts and English.
(ocumentary and educational films have spread
throughout the world and are being produced
In increasing numbers by feature film producers, govern¬
ment agencies, Industrial concerns, foundations and
various non-profit organizations of a cultural, scientific
or educational character. In many countries, the film has
become an accepted part of the school curriculum, some¬
times being used to enrich an already adequate course of
Instruction, sometimes to supplement instruction where
there is a deficiency of textbooks, equipment and qualified
teaching staff. With the aid of mobile units, educational
and documentary films reach audiences previously un¬
influenced by the cinema. Throughout Africa, Asia and
Latin America, these units find their way to remote
villages whose Inhabitants can often neither read nor
write. Particular use of these mobile units is being made
in Africa.
In South America the employment of films for educa¬
tion in rural areas is mainly In the planning stages. In
Asia, the cinema is regarded mainly as an entertainment
medium. However, Japan, India and Israel all have
outstanding Information film services.
While many European countries use the film for
educational purposes to a limited extent, only a few
countries, such as Finland and the Netherlands have made
it an integral part of school curricula.
Canada has one of the world's most highly-developed
educational film services and widespread use is also made
of such films in the United States. Cuba, Australia and
New Zealand, among other countries, maintain units for
the production of short information films.
The U.S.S.R. produces several hundred instructional
films yearly and 23,400 mobile units screen them
throughout the region.
In a foreword, World Communications draws attention
to the programme Unesco has undertaken at the request
of the United Nations to help the developing countries
build up their mass media. The United Nations
emphasized that the information media have an im¬
portant part to play in education and in economic and
social progress generally and that new communication
techniques offer special opportunities for spreading
education swiftly.
14
Unesco-Eric Schwab
A TV history lesson for Italian schools makes a greater impact because of its
authentic classroom atmosphere. Cameras switch from teacher and blackboard to

a live class in the studio, these lessons are part of a three-year course of voca¬
tional education for boys and girls who have completed their primary schooling.
