In a workshop in El Khalil (formerly Hebron), a master crafts¬
man keeps a watchful eye on the molten glass in his ancient
brick furnace. Today as in past centuries, this city of western
Jordan is famed throughout the Middle East for its glass
production. Using techniques unchanged by time, its crafts¬
men make a jewellery of translucent glass with a predo¬
minantly blue-green tint. Ancient Hebron ranks among
those of the world's oldest cities that are still inhabited.
A
.w *.*
'4J*1
ip Paul Altnasy, Paris

Craftsmen of the
Phoenician coast
3,000 YEARS
n
GLASS-MAKING
by Anita Engle
Roman vase discovered in a
burial cave on Mount Carmel.
C Keren Hayesod, Jerusalem
he period covered in this article extenas irom
the first recorded references to glass-making
on the Phoenician coast in the 15th century B.C., until the
ancient industry was brought to an end in the 15th cen¬
tury A.D. by the Mongol invasion which destroyed the
ancient patterns of life all over the Middle East.
No matter to what sources one turns for enlightenment
on the origins of glass-making, whether legend, mythology
or history, one is invariably brought back to the Phoeni¬
cian coast. Archaeology too corroborates that the area,
which in ancient times extended south of the bay of
Acco (Acre) and north of Byblus, was active in the manu¬
facture of glass from a very early period.
This Ls not surprising, when one realises that the ori¬
gins of glass-making are tied up with the beginnings of
metallurgy. From 2,600 B.C. onwards, the narrow strip of
Canaan known as Phoenicia was acting as a long bridge
between Mesopotamia, the cradle of technology, and
Egypt, the ever-open market for goods, ideas and crafts¬
men. It was no one-way traffic. The glass industry, like
that of the bronze, ivory, dyeing and textile industries,
was subject to a constant interplay of Influences and
stimuli between Mesopotamia and Egypt, as sometimes
one country was in the ascendency, and sometimes the
other.
It may never be possible to ascertain whether or not the
craft of glass-making actually originated at the mouth of
the Belus. Nevertheless, it remains a fact that the oldest
traditions of glass-making that have come down to us
are centered on this mysterious little river, today called
the Naaman, In Western Galilee.
The classic association of the River Belus with glass-
making is to be found in Pliny's Natural History. Pliny
has been so maligned and so misquoted that it is
worth giving his perfectly reasonable statement in full.
It has been taken from the 1962 translation by Elchholtz
in the Loeb Classical Library, Book XXXVI.190.
"That part of Syria which is known as Phoenicia and
borders on Judea contains a swamp called Candebla on
the lower slopes of Mt. Carmel. This ls believed to be the
source of the River Belus, which, after traversing a dis¬
tance of five miles, flows Into the sea near the colony of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd)
The 'molten stone' of the Pharaohs
Ptolemals (Acco). Its current ls sluggish and Its waters
are unwholesome to drink, although they are regarded as
holy for ritual purposes.
"The river is muddy and flows in a deep channel, reveal¬
ing Its sands only when the tide ebbs. For it is not until
they have been tossed by the waves and cleansed of
Impurities that they glisten. Moreover, it is only at that
moment, when they are thought to be affected by the
sharp, astringent properties of the brine, that they become
fit for use. The beach stretches for not more than half a
mile, and yet for many centuries the production of glass
depended on this area alone.
"There is a story that once a ship belonging to some
traders in natural soda (natron, an Egyptian product) put
in here and that they scattered along the shore to pre¬
pare a meal. Since, however, no stones suitable for
Grape-cluster glass ves¬
sel from Sidon, dating
from the 3rd Cent. A.D.
© Frederic Neuburg
supporting their cauldrons were forthcoming, they rested
them on lumps of soda from their cargo. When these
became heated and were completely mingled with the
sand on the beach a strange translucent liquid flowed
forth in streams; and this, it is said, was the origin of
glass."
Pliny takes no responsibility for the story about the
origins of glass-making. He is merely repeating what was
"common knowledge" among the Greeks for centuries
before his time. This story may well be one of the many
travellers' tales circulated after the Greeks began their
contact with Egypt in the 7th century B.C. For it is from
Egyptian sources that we have the first documented In¬
dications of glass-making on the Phoenician coast.
They were not writing about glass as such, unfortun¬
ately. Glass merely makes its appearance incidentally, as
part of the vast booty which the Pharaohs of the 18th
Dynasty began to bring back from Syria and the Lebanon
after Tuthmoses Ill's dramatic capture of Megiddo in the
15th century B.C. The lists of items, and their places of
origin were engraved on the walls of the temple of Amen-
Re, at Karnak, where Tuthmoses deposited his booty.
From the Phoenician coast came "green stone, every
costly stone of the country, and many stones of 'sparkle'..."
The latter is a mysterious hieroglyph referring to a costly
stone, and having a fire determinative. In other words,
a "molten stone."
This sparkling molten stone must have been a translu¬
cent glass, and of a type peculiar to Phoenicia, for we
have other references to glass as it was known in those
days; namely, the blocks and pieces of "artificial lapis
lazuli from Babylon" which the chiefs of Assur and Shi-
nar sent to Tuthmoses III as Indications of their good will.
The earliest vessels of glass known to us,, the beautifully-

TREASURES
IN THE SAND
The oldest traditions of
glass-making seem to be
linked with the banks of
the Belus, a little river today
called the Naaman, in wes¬
tern Galilee. Pliny, the Ro¬
man naturalist, relates that
some merchants encamped
on the sands of the River
Belus placed their cooking
pots on blocks of soda and
that the heat from the fires
fused the sand and the soda
to form glass. What is
known for a fact is that
the ancient Syrian glass-
makers found the sands in
this area ideal for their
work. Left, the former
course of the Belus before
it was diverted 20 years
ago during the draining of
nearby swamps, the home
of water buffaloes (right).
Photos © Keren Hayesod,
Jerusalem
I r.j
coloured little cosmetic jars of Egypt, only begin to make
their appearance after Tuthmoses III conquered Phoenicia
and Syria. They reached their highest development and
eventually declined within the 200 years that the Egyp¬
tians used the Phoenician harbours as bases from which
to keep the annual tributes of precious commodities, arti¬
ficers and slaves flowing from the merchant princes of
Canaan.
Both to honour the peoples of the conquered territory,
as well as to proviae a record of their own magnificence,
Roman vase in green-
tinted transparent glass.
Haaretz-Museum, Tel-Aviv
the Pharaohs set up shrines to their own gods and monu¬
ments to themselves alongside the local sacred sites. The
closeness of Egyptian contacts with the River Belus is
seen in the Memnon monument, a statue in honour of
Amenophls III, which was still standing at the mouth of
the Belus in the 1st Century A.D., when Josephus men¬
tions it. Perhaps it resembled the two colossal statues of
this self-aggrandizing monarch which can be seen today
on the plain West of Thebes.
The Egyptians did further honour to the sacred, glass-
sand-producing river of the Canaanites by giving it the
same name as their holy Nile. "Sehor" they called it.
which means the water of Horus. This Ls the Shlhor
Livnat" which we find cited in the Dlble as the border
between the tribes of Asher and Zcbulun.
Glass to the ancients had a deeply mystic slgniilcance.
The glass paste, therefore, the objects made from them,
and the beautiful but limited range of colours Introduced
into them, were so highly valued because of their reli¬
gious significance. The place where the Item was made,
or even where the sand came from, would be part of its
mystic value. It Ls not necessary to go Into the O.slrls-
Adonis cults which were associated with the River Belus
to understand how the processes of glass-making would
be taken to symbolize the soul's transformation Into beau¬
tiful, Imperishable life, after the dross of the body had
been purified by the flames. Nor why the superstitious
would feel that a jar of this magically-tinted glass in the
tomb with them was an assurance of Immortality.
The formative period in glass-making In Egypt was
under Amenophls II, who followed up his father's cam¬
paigns in the Lebanon, returning with more treasures and
slaves. Supplies from the Phoenician coast were vastly
augmented by grandson Amenophls III. from whose
reign, and that of his son, Akhenaten of Tel Amarna fame,
we have the most plentiful supplies of ancient Egyptian
glass.
Like the other imported treasures, the glass, In whatever
form it came, and the enslaved artificers, would be sent to
the temple of the god. or to the mortuary temple of the
Pharaoh himself. There would be small workshops
attached to the temples, for we find the high priest of
Memphis bearing the title "director of the glass factory."
It ls interesting to speculate whether among the slaves
who escaped from Egypt with the Children of Israel were
descendants of those craftsmen which the Illustrious 18th
Dynasty records having brought in such quantities from
Phoenicia over a period of 200 years.
If so. the ex-slaves may well have rejoined their kins¬
men on the Phoenician coast, for It is here, in the area of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd)
Fiery furnaces of Babylon
the River Belus, that we find the first reference to glass-
making In the Bible.
This is In Deuteronomy 33, which records the blessing
which Moses bestowed on each of the tribes before his
death. In Verse 19 the seafaring tribe of Zebulun, here
linked with that of Issachar, is assured that "they shall
suck of the abundance of the sea, and of treasures hid
in the sand."
The Mldrash, which Ls a collection of oral legends,
derived from many sources and going back to remotest
antiquity, elaborates on this. Zebulun, it is related, once
complained to the Holy One: "Lord of the Universe, to
my brethren you gave beautiful land, and to me you gave
the sea. To my brethren you gave fields and vineyards,
and to me you gave sand." To which He answered: "Yes,
but did I not give you the snail (the purple murex) ? Did
I not give you glass?"
Although traditions older than recorded history are
embodied in the Blessings of Moses, it is, nevertheless,
possible to extract certain facts. The noted Biblical exe-
gete, the late Prof. Robert Pfeiffer, has ascertained that
the blessings in Deut. 33 were recorded during the time
that the Northern Kingdom was at the height of its power
and prosperity under Jeroboam II (785-746). Archaeology
reveals that industries of various kindsamong them the
dyeing Industry which, from later Hebrew writings, appears
to have been associated with glass-making as a village
craft flourished exceedingly at this period. This would
suggest that glass-making was one of the industries of the
prosperous Israelites at the time when the Northern King¬
dom was finally absorbed by the Assyrians in 721 B.C.
Glass-makers, then, would be among the varieties of
craftsmen taken into exile to enhance the splendour of the
Assyrian capitals.
Were any of these captive glass-makers from the King¬
dom of Israel, or their descendants, among the craftsmen
who produced the highly developed recipes collected in
Assurbanlpal's library at Nineveh, on the- banks of the
Tigris, some 50 years later? For the time being, one
cannot say.
Assurbanipal (668-626), one of the last of the great
Assyrian kings, caused to be collected in his capital copies
and translations of every Important book (clay tablet) to
be found in the temple cities of Mesopotamia. These
tablets included magical spells for every occasion, treatises
24
Egyptian mask of "glass
paste", made in a mould
of carved stone and
dating from 1500 B.C.
Victoria and Albert Museum.
London
on medicine, chemistry, geology, etc. Among them were
recipes for making varieties of coloured, gold, and clear
glass. There were also instructions to the glass-makers
regarding the type of fuel to use, and the manipulation of
the furnace.
The Assurbanipal tablets are the earliest literary record
of the plant and processes of glass-making. As they are
copies, they probably date back much earlier. They reveal
a highly developed and unsuspected glass industry in
Mesopotamia in the 7th century B.C., some four hundred
years after Egypt had faded out of glass history. There
is another aspect which is very important for our know¬
ledge of how this Industry developed In antiquity.
The tablets reveal, relate Prof. R.J. Forbes, in "Studies
in Ancient Technologies" that "by the 7th century
glass furnaces had developed considerably in Mesopotamia,
and the glass-workers had gone a long way in the battle
for sustained and intense heat. Here in Mesopotamia
we must see the origin of the reverbatory furnace which
is the pre-condition of glass-blowing."
In other words, when they learned how to make a
Model of a Phoenician
vessel (1300 B.C.)
Maritime Museum. Haifa
furnace that could maintain a high enough temperature,
the glass-makers were able to bring their glass batch to a
state of liquifaction where It could be blown into a variety
of shapes, Instead of merely being wound round a core,
or pressed into a mould as previously.
The final development of the Babylonian glass furnaces
must have taken place somewhere on the Phoenician coast,
for it is here, some 500 years later, that the history of
glass-blowing begins. The time lag fits in well with the
fact that in the pre-scientific age, the average time-span
for new technological developments was about 500 years.
A clue as to how these techniques came from Babylonia
to the Phoenician coast can be found in the Bible.
When the Persians, under Cyrus and Darius, became
the conquerors of the Middle East, they "turned again the
Captivity of Zion" (Psalms 126). The returning exiles
brought with them new ideas, new methods of writing (the
Hebrew script used today), new art forms, and new techni¬
ques acquired during their sojourn in the great cultural
centres of the ancient world. Some of these exiles must
have been glass-makers who returned to the traditional
centres along the Phoenician coast.
The Bible does not refer to the return of these Northern
exiles, because the books of Nehemia and Ezra were
written by and are concerned almost solely with the doings
of the priestly caste centred in Jerusalem. But one can
find references to them, the simple people, the craftsmen,
in later Hebrew writings, such as the Mishnah and the
Talmud, which deal with the laws pertaining to the
everyday life of the people, not only within the confines
of the Holy Land, but also in the neighbouring areas, such
as Tyre and Sidon, or wherever there was a community
large enough to maintain a synagogue.
The return of craftsmen to the Phoenician coast may
have begun during the time of Darius (521-485). The
Bible reports that he encouraged a further return of Baby¬
lonian exiles. And it was he who began to co-ordinate
the great Persian Empire by establishing new trades,
industries and methods of commerce. He aimed at de¬
veloping the economic structure of his own country, up to
then a backwater, and to create means of exchange for
the Greek products which the Persians wanted.
Certainly the harbours along the Phoenician coast took

on new life after the Persian conquest and so did glass-
making. The majority of the pre-blown vessels to be seen
in museum collections belong to this period from the
6th to the 4th centuries B.C. While similar In many
respects to the beautiful cosmetic jars of Egypt's 18th
Dynasty, they are in reality quite different from them
(and often inferior in colour and form to those made
almost 1,000 years earlier).
Achziv, a point on the Phoenician coast some 35 km.
south of Tyre and some 16 km. north of the great natural
harbour of Acco, must have been one of the centres of
glass-making at this time. Although recorded references
to it are sketchy, since it was always overshadowed by
Acco on the one side, and Tyre on the other, nevertheless
Achziv was an important town from early history, and the
remains of an ancient harbour are still to be seen there.
Was this one of the old glass-making centres to which
the Babylonian exiles returned? There ls some evidence
to support this belief. The Mishnah refers to Achzib
(Chezib) as that part "which they that came up from
Babylon in the time of Ezra occupied." And archaeological
finds indicate glass-making in that area from the Persian
period, through the Hellenistic, early Roman, Byzantine
and Islamic periods. Apart from the glass fragments
scattered everywhere in the area, and some glass slag,
complete vessels from Achziv can be found in museums
and private collections in Israel, and elsewhere. (In par¬
ticular, the Haifa Museum of Ancient Art has a collection
of B.C. 6th-4th century sand-core vessels all very similar
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Victoria and Albert fiu^um, tondon
A raro examplo of the early
glass-maker's art, this 2nd or 3rd
century miniature portrait is en¬
graved or stippled through gold-
leaf and backed by blue glass.
Remains of a Roman colonnade
at Byblos, the Phoenician port
which established trade links
with Egypt in early times. Ships
leaving Byblos carried wood
from Lebanon and glassware
from Phoenician workshops.
© Paul Almasy. Paris
25

GLASS-MAKING (Cont'd)
Products renowned from Gaul to China
to each other. One of them is labelled "found at Achzlb,"
the others "from the Phoenician Coast").
Tyre would certainly have been a centre of glass-making
during the period of 400 years or so that it took for the
Imported Babylonian furnace techniques to develop into
the glass-blowing stage which ushered in the first golden
age of glass at the beginning of the Christian Era.
However, until Crusader times, records mention only Sldon.
This may be due to the fact that during the Persian
period, from which time we begin to get direct references
to glass-making on the Phoenician coast, Sidon superseded
Tyre as the leading city of Phoenicia. The type of many-
coloured ungüentarla or perfume bottle which is charac¬
teristic of the Persian period was widely distributed by
Greek traders together with their Attic pottery. Later,
they distributed the mould-pressed and lathe-turned
vessels which were found In the most far-flung areas of
the ancient world during the Hellenistic period. Sidon
was probably their chief port of call along the Phoenician
coast, and it ls Indeed the Greeks who made Sldon syno¬
nymous with glass-making, with the Phoenicians, and with
Phoenicia in general.
By the time the Romans came to the Middle East
that Is, around 63 B.C., Phoenicia was widely famed for its
glass and glass-makers. That is not to say that they were
making the most beautiful glass in the ancient world.
The Alexandrian glass-makers were doing that. From
Alexandria came the rich gem-like pastes, the vessels
carved like rock crystal, and the millefioris. This profit¬
able trade in imitation of the fabulous precious and semi¬
precious stones of India and the nearer East which reach¬
ed the Roman market via Alexandria, kept the Egyptian
glass-makers tied to their static cutting and moulding
processes. This left the Phoenician glass-makers free, in
fact eager, to experiment with competitive techniques.
This brings us to the greatest single advancement in the
history of glass-making: the blowing iron, which has been
rated one of the great discoveries of mankind.
It has been put with admirable conciseness by Mr. W.A.
Thorpe, author of "English Glass": "Inflation was de¬
veloped in Syria, probably at Sldon, about the third to
first centuries B.C. It was a commercial development by
a commercial people, who wished to enlarge the usefulness
of their wares. The Pax Romana gave them their chance,
and they took it, and they kept it. When they first made
sale for the new wares, the industrial world was still
clinging to Greek routine. For a time Sidon manufac¬
turers were tied to shapes and patterns which did not
emerge from Syrian glass processes or from the Syrian
mind . . . When they blew free, glass became a new art."
By "Greek routine" Mr. Thorpe refers to the
vessels made by blowing glass Into moulds
imitating the shapes and decoration popular in vessels
of other materials. For the first time mass production
of decorated glass became possible as this new process
replaced the tedious work of the older artists.
"Hallmarks" were introduced by these enterprising
master craftsmen of the Phoenician coast. Vessels
¡stamped with names like Aristón, Artas, Jason, and Ennion
of Sldon became known all over the Roman world. The
names were Greek, because Greek names and language
had been fashionable since Alexander's conquest 300 years
earlier.
Ennion ls one of those who is believed to have migrated
26 to Italy, or possibly to have set up a branch there. He is
the most famous of the glass-makers, and each of the
handful of pitchers and vessels signed with his name fetch
several thousand dollars today. Their appeal is only to
the connoisseur. The static pressed designs in rather
lifeless blue or amber glass look much like our cheaper
type of machine-moulded glass, which, fundamentally, is
only a sophisticated modification of the ancient process
Invented in Sldon.
Strabo, who actually visited the area in 25 B.C., verified
Sidon's early importance as a glass-making centre by
adding that the sand of the Belus was taken there to be
"cast" into glass. Twenty-five years after the latest date
for the discovery of glass-blowing, Strabo does not appear
to know that a revolution had taken place in the art of
glass-making.
Sldon would probably have had a large-scale factory-
type of production. But not all the glass would have been
produced under such circumstances. Home industries must
have been the order of the day rather than the exception,
and many of the vessels exported from Tyre and Sidon
would have been collected by itinerant merchants going
from house to house. There is a charming picture in
Proverbs XXXI. 2412 of the woman of worth who "maketh
fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles unto the
merchant." In the original Hebrew, the word "Ca-
naanite" is used, not "merchant". "Canaanite" has a dual
use in Biblical times, meaning both the inhabitants of
Canaan (which Included the Phoenicians), and those who
dealt in trade.
IIt is the cottage type of industry which is so
vividly illuminated in the Hebrew laws and
regulations compiled in Galilee during the first centuries
of the Christian Era. They -cover almost every aspect
of the industry, from the different types of ovens and
furnaces, to the sale of the finished items. There must
have been a phenomenal production of glass in Palestine
at that period, judging from the fragments which one
finds in every ploughed field, with endless variations on
the theme of the glass-thread decoration. Slag from glass
furnaces of the Mishnaic period (from the 2nd to the 5th
centuries A.D.) are comparatively plentiful as well. The
writer, without making any particular effort, has collected
specimens of glass slag from eight sites, six of them in
the area of the Phoenician coast.
Among the items made out of glass wejre plates, bowls,
wine and water flasks, trays, pickle and preserve jars, cups,
pitchers, vases, perfume bottles, cosmetic jars, milk
funnels, urinals, feeding bottles, glass spoons, mirrors,
funerary urns, coffins, trays, architectural decorations,
including pillars; bracelets, beads, rings.
Like the earlier vessels, the blown glass travelled to
Gaul, South Russia, India and China. Presumably it was
In the inevitable clay jar that this fragile cargo was
transported by ship, by donkey, or by camel caravan. As
Mr, Thorpe traces in the introduction and early chapters
of "English Glass," the glass-makers of the Phoenician
coast followed their markets to Italy and Gaul, laying the
foundation of a European glass industry which bore the
marks of their ancient origins right into the 16th century.
These glass-makers spread throughout Asia as well. All
traditions associated with glass-making in the countries
of the East, including India and China, claim "Syrian"
origins.
In spite of the changes which took place in Palestine
and Syria after the Moslem conquest in the 7th century,
there appears to have been no cessation of glass-making
on the Phoenician coast.
Tyre regained its supremacy. William of Tyre in the
12th century refers both to the fine sand and the many

Keren Hayesod, Jerusalem
Roman glass vases from burial caves on Mount Carmel, dating from between tho 1st and 3rd
centuries A.D., reveal graceful forms and decorative styles already achieved by Near East craftsmon.
beautiful vessels famous for their transparency which
were "carried to far distant places and easily surpass all
products of the kind..."
Benjamin of Tudela also writes about Tyre in the 12th
century. He describes it as having a magnificent port,
frequented by traders "from all parts," adding: "About
400 Jews reside in this excellent place . . . (they) are
shipowners and manufacturers of the far-renowned
Tyrian glass ..." In Sidon he found some 20 Jewish inha¬
bitants, who were glass-makers, and in Antloch about 10.
By this time Damascus had become the centre of a new
development in the Eastern glass industry, the richly
enamelled Saracen glass beakers and mosque lamps. But
the Belus was still an important source of sand, Sir J.
Mandeville recording, during a trip to Palestine in 1322,
that "Men comen fro fer watre be shlppes and be londe
with cartes, to fetchen of that gravelle."
The Venetians provided shipping, services and supplies
for the Crusades. In return they secured special privi¬
leges and quarters on the East Mediterranean coast. By
1124, at the height of Crusading success, they were firmly
established in Jerusalem, Acre, Sldon, and particularly
in Tyre. Raw materials together with craftsmen were
exported to Venice, and as early as 1224 there was à glass-
blowers' guild there.
When Tamerlane took Damascus In 1401 and virtually
extinguished the Syrian glass Industry by deporting its
craftsmen to Samarkand, Venice replaced the East as the
world's centre of fine glass-making, although it was some
two centuries before Venice could begin to rival the wares
of Syria.
Anita Encle is a Canadian-born writer now living in
Israel. The above article is a summary of the independent
research she has been doing for the past ten years on the
history and origins of ancient glass, which is to be
incorporated into a forthcoming book tentatively entitled
"Cracked About Glass." This will be a Mediterranean-
wide survey of ancient centres of glass-making, particu¬
larly those areas whese glass-making is still carried on in
the ancient manner.
27
