The great waterfall of the Iguassu River, on the frontier be¬
tween Brazil and Argentine (237 feet high and one and a half
miles wide) is even mightier than Niagara Falls. Every
second more than 61 ,660 cubic feet of water pour over the
Iguassu Falls to supply the need (per second) of
a community of 80 million people. The River Iguassu rises
in eastern Brazil and runs for 380 miles before joining the
Parana River on which there are the even larger Guayra
Falls which have the biggest outflow of water in the world.
© Alias, Paris
\
*
V
*

The International Hydrological Decade
A WORLD-WIDE PROGRAMME
OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
et
by Michel Bafisse
OJUR need for water is constantly increasing, whether wc arc
turning a tap in our own home, irrigating our fields or
running the cooling equipment in our nation's electric power stations and
industries.
There is an automatic increase due to population growth. Because of this
increase alone, in 20 years time we are likely to be needing more than three
cubic metres of water where two suffice today. The overall
improvement of living standards to which all men aspire, the fight against
hunger through the irrigation of more land for food growing, the creation and
expansion of new industries all foretell the need for even greater water supplies
throughout the world. Though it is difficult to calculate the exact amount,
it is safe to say that in 20 years' time the demand for water will roughly
double.
Such a rapid increase in water consumption can only be met through water¬
works programmes of tremendous scope and diversity. In many places wc
shall be obliged to turn to increasingly remote and inaccessihlc sources for
our water, or obtain it through the costly processes which purify polluted
water for further use or remove the salt from sea-water.
In any case, whether we are concerned with transporting water over great
distances, storing it in reservoirs or maintaining its quality, the installation and
construction work involved in doubling our water supply within the next two
decades will cost a fabulous amount possibly several millions of millions of
dollars for the world as a whole.
Faced with such a situation it is obvious that we should search as widely as
possible and with every available means for those sources of fresh water that
seem to be the least costly. But where do these sources exist? Only a
sustained and co-ordinated programme of scientific observation and research
in hydrology will tell us the answer. This is the purpose of the International
Hydrolological Decade.
The water resources in a region, or a country or even for the whole world ^
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

can only lie estimated through quantitative studies of the water "balance sheet"
of the river basins. As with any balance sheet, we first have to add up the
entries on the "credit" side, that is, the quantities of water that are received
in the form of rain or snow. Then we have to total up the "debit" side: what
happens to this rain, how much of it runs off to the rivers, how much seeps
underground, how much evaporates into the atmosphere, how much is absorbed
by plant life and then discharged into the atmosphere by the process of trans¬
piration. Other studies relating to changes in the quality of water or the
impact of man's actions on the hydrologie cycle are also needed.
All this work and all these aspects of research are the domain of hydrology
the science of the world's waters, the different forms in which they exist, their
circulation and distribution over the globe, their physical and chemical pro¬
perties, their interactions with the environment, including their responses to
human activity.
As everyone realizes, there is always a period between the discovery of
scientific facts and their practical application. In hydrology, however, we still
know too little about many aspects of the subject to be able to produce rational
solutions to water supply problems that will be facing us tomorrow. There are
plenty of examples to support this view.
The chief problem for the hydrologist, for instance, is that he has to deal
with a most unreliable clement. During certain months or years, the river
levels are low and wells run dry. Agriculture and hydro-electric production
arc hampered by shortages of water. Conversely, some periods are too wet and
disastrous floods are unleashed.
If hydrology is really a science, it should enable us to forecast the behaviour
of the natural phenomena Avith which it deals. The hydrologist should be
able to tell the dam builder what the maximum flood level is likely to be over
the next 100 years. He should be able to forecast how much water will be
available during a dry summer. Unfortunately, in the field of hydrological
forecasting we have still no reliable means of finding out these things, since
Ave lack records of observations carried out over a sufficiently long period, and
because we still know too little about the laws governing fluctuations in climate
and the movement of Avater.
uInderground water reserves are much larger than those on the
surface, but as they are unseen we tend to underestimate them.
It is vitally important that Ave make use of these underground reserves, but
never blindly or haphazardly. For example, where does the water come from
Avhich avc find in one or another of the underground water bearing layers (the
"aquifers") ? How does it move? How is it renewed? The age of an under¬
ground aquifer the time the Avater has been there may vary from a few
weeks to several thousand years. The aquifer may even be completely
"fossile" and never be renewed at all. And if this water is used, what effect
Avili it have on the discharge and future level of the water table? What are
the laAvs of hydrogeology? Despite the immense progress of recent years, all
these questions have still not been fully ansAvered.
Water storage in a natural reservoir under the earth, free from evaporation
and sedimentation Avhich plague surface dams, the pumping of these sources
and even replenishing them should their supply become exhausted all these
offer the engineer a vast field full of remarkable possibilities. But here too his
action must be based on accurate knoAvledge of the phenomena he is using or
creating, and so far Ave are only just beginning to glimpse this knowledge.
A similar need for scientific research exists in the branch of hydrology that
deals Avith the quality of Avater. In nature there is no Avater like the pure Avater
defined by chemists, made up only of hydrogen and oxygen. River water,
ground-Avater and even rainwater ahvays contain other dissolved or suspended
elements, and these, even Avhen present in small quantities, play an important
role. In the case of irrigation fanning, for instance, every drop of Avater brings
with it a little salt: the Avater evaporates but the salt remains and gradually
6 poisons the soil and plants. In general Ave now know Iioav to remedy this
problem of salinity with the help of leaching and drainage. But many ques-
A
GROWING
PROBLEM...
fe»&r-'
Water bubbles and foams as it
reaches the surface through an
artesian well drilled deep under the
desert at Ouarga in the Sahara.
The hidden water is reached at
widely varying depths : 240 feet at
El Golea, 3,280 feet at Ouargia and
nearly 5.000 feet at Touggourt.
The reserve of water locked up
in the immense artesian basin of
the Sahara has been estimated at
16 million million cubic yards.
© J.-D. Lajoux
Every day the city of New York
uses up over 1,000 million gallons
of water. These supplies are
checked weekly for purity, and
beach and harbour water is
watched constantly. Here an engi¬
neer of New York's health depart¬
ment takes samples in the harbour.
usis

Thanks to irrigation in the south
of the Sudan, some 250,000
acres of parched land have been
reclaimed for crop-growing. But
here, as in other parts of the
world, the effects of irrigation on
the quality of the soil and on
underground water reserves has
created still unsolved problems.
© Paul Almasy, Paris
...IN
EVERY
COUNTRY
iij; ' *m n
Í 583:
m - 4 - - -
** 2 m - -i îl 4
HsitilL
tions remain unanswered regarding the effect of irrigation and drainage on the
quality of ground-water and the possibility of maintaining the ground-water
level below the zone of plant roots Avhile bringing to the surface the water
necessary for irrigation.
What happens exactly in this thin layer of soil which preserves the moisture
necessary to plant life? What form, liquid or vapour, docs the water take in
this zone? What forces act on the water, depending on the kind of soil pre¬
sent? How long will this life-giving moisture last? Evaporation from the soil
and transpiration of vegetation are responsible for the direct return to the
atmosphere of more than half of the water which falls on the land.
How exactly do these phenomena, which represent an enormous loss of
resources, occur? What part does a forest play in the Avater balance-sheet
of a given area? Does it act merely as a Avatcr-consuming mechanism operating
through the absorption and transpiration of trees, thereby reducing the
quantity of runoff which reaches the rivers or, on the contrary, does it result
in a slow seepage into the earth which can later be recovered in the form of
ground-water, while at the same time avoiding erosion? These arc the kinds
of problems which have still to be resolved in relation to all known yardsticks
and all the different cases which arise in nature; the ansAvcrs will only be
found through a vast programme of scientific research.
CIENCE has never progressed in isolation. To increase interna-
"tional contacts between hydrologists is already an effective
way of promoting hydrology, just as international co-operation among physicists
helps to promote physics.
However, in the case of hydrology the subject itself has an international
character. Rivers and ground-water reserves know no frontiers. No country,
however large, can hope to have within its borders all the possible kinds of
hydrological situations which must be studied and compared so that basic
conclusions can be drawn. The presence and distribution of water on a
continent or in any area of the globe is the result of water circulation on the
earth as a whole; in other words, hydrology's laboratory is the world at large.
There are still other reasons to justify an international programme. Every
country, whether economically developed or not, is facing problems created by
the rapid development of hydraulic resources. But everywhere there is a
shortage of top specialists and technicians in hydrology. While more have
to be trained the best use must be made of those we already have, in order
to help the many countries which are still inadequately equipped in this field.
Finally, more students must be encouraged to take up hydrology; public and
official interest in water problems must be aroused, before even more difficult
situations arise; and every appropriate scientific resource should be put at the
service of hydrology. We shall only achieve these goals by creating a strong
force of public opinion, which Avili only make its full impact if internationally
based.

The variability of hydrological phenomena from year to year mitigates
against the concentration on an international programme over a short period
during one year for instance as has been the case in other fields of science.
This is why the idea of a decade was proposed. From the hydrologist's view¬
point a 10-year study is not a very long one. Hydrologists prefer wherever
possible to work from observations made over much longer periods. But a
decade should give time for many scientific investigations and enable the
goals which have been set at the international level to be reached.
The general programme of the International Hydrological Decade was
worked out by an intergovernmental meeting of specialists held at Unesco's
headquarters last April. It is a vast programme, embracing all aspects of
hydrology. The meeting also singled out plans for action during the first
part of the Decade, which is due to begin early next year. These plans
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A unique stocktaking of our resources
are based on the contributions for the general programme proposed by nearly
60 nations.
An initial group of activities covers the collection of basic data. Thanks
to the Decade, observation of hydrological events the quantities of rain and
snow that fall, the discharge of rivers and underground sources, the amount
of sediment that is moved, etc should be given a major boost, especially in
the developing countries.
Basic data of this kind are not only the raw material of hydrological
research; in many cases they will be of practical use to engineers for the
simple reason that if in 20 years time water works are to be constructed on
a river about Avhich little is known at present, now is the time to start making
hydrological observations.
Comparisons can only the made at the international level and a general
pattern of rules deduced on the basis of uniform and reliable measurements.
This is why hydrological stations in each country will be designated as Decade
Stations. In the well-equipped countries, this simply means that some existing
stations Avili be chosen and given special tasks. But in other countries Decade
Stations Avili have to be built, so as to create an international network that is
sufficiently dense and representative.
A second group of activities Avili deal with inventories and water balance
sheets, starting with those of the small basins and working up to the large
rivers, to continents and even to a world scale level. Research of this kind
assumes that sufficient basic data already exist to bring out a pattern which
alone can give an overall picture of the basin concerned. For a better under¬
standing of the hydrologie cycle as it operates in various natural, characteristic
areas, corresponding for instance to different climates, many countries will
set up "'representative basins" which may cover a surface area of seA-eral
hundred square kilometres. These areas will include at least one Decade
Station, and comprehensive observation facilities. "'Experimental basins,"
Avhich will be smaller than the representative basins, Avili also be set up. Here,
the natural conditions will be deliberately modified the vegetation will be
changed for instance so that the effect of these modifications on the hydro-
logic cycle can be studied.
Electric generating stations use
enormous amounts of water. To
overcome the problem of obtaining
water on this scale, ways have been
devised to make use of the same
water again and again by pumping
it through cooling towers, like
the one shown below at Etiwanda,
in California. The hot water
evacuated from the generating plant
is taken to the top of the tower. As
it drops to the bottom it is broken
into droplets by millions of wooden
slats and crosspieces inside the
tower and cooled by huge fans.
usis
A final group of projects will investigate a broad range of prob¬
lems involving scientific research in its strictest sense.
Scientists Avili be looking for answers to the kind of problems that have already
been mentioned. Every branch of hydrology runoff, soil moisture, evapora¬
tion, movement of ground-water, the dynamics of lakes, estuaries and deltas,
the evolution of glaciers or the geochemistry of Avater raises a whole series of
fascinating problems of immense theoretical and practical significance.
The International Hydrological Decade is planned as an international ven¬
ture in scientific co-operation. It is up to individual countries to make
Avhatever contribution they can to the programme. Since hydrology concerns
many different sectors in every State, National Decade Committees are being
set up to co-ordinate national activities. Some forty such committees have
already been formed. To provide oA'erall direction at the international level, it
is planned to set up, during Unesco's General Conference in November, a
Decade Co-ordinating Council comprising representatives from 18 countries.
Unesco plans to make a major contribution toAvards the success of the
Decade, by arranging for the exchange of scientific information, the organi-
8 zation of working groups and, in particular, the training of hydrologists in
countries where they are most needed. Other U.N. organizations, above alL
-
J

INDUSTRY NEEDS
220 GALLONS OF
WATER TO PRODUCE:
the World Meteorological Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organi¬
zation are also preparing to contribute actively to the Decade. Finally, many
international scientific organizations will also participate, especially the Inter¬
national Association of Scientific Hydrology which has Avorkcd for more than
forty years for the advancement of this science.
The International Hydrological Decade is a unique co-operative scientific
undertaking which will bring immense practical results. It will promote rapid
development of hydrological knowledge and should provide reliable scien¬
tific foundations on which to base the complex and delicate decisions which
governments must soon take if man is to obtain all the water he needs.
440 to 880 lbs of coal
20 to 140 lbs of steel
15 to 45 lbs of paper
4 1/2 lbs of rayon
Michel Bâtisse, a French physicist and engineer, has been a member of Unesco's
Department of Natural Sciences since 1951. A specialist in arid zone problems,
he was appointed as co-ordinator of Unesco's Major Project on Arid Zones in
1957. Since 1960 he has been head of the Division for Research Relating to
Natural Resources, which is launching the International Hydrological Decade.
