WORLD S
by William C. Kvaraceus
A 2 O T H
CENTURY
DILEMMA
O:jn the following
pages we commence
publication of a series ofarticles
presenting the findings of a
Unesco inquiry into juvenilede-
linquency. Two aspects of this
challenging social problem are
discussed in this issue : What
is a juvenile delinquent ? and
Why does delinquency exist?
Unesco's inquiry formed part
of a programme of studies into
problems of social inadapta¬
tion among young people. The
full report will be published
in a forthcoming Unesco study,
"Juvenile DelinquencyA Prob¬
lem for the Modern World".
Part One
of a
Special Inquiry
LMOST every language in the world now has a
i phrase to single out youngsters whose beha¬
viour or tastes are different enough to incite suspicion if
not alarm. They are the teddy boys in England, the
nozem in the Netherlands, the skinn knuttar in Sweden.
The French call them blousons noirs, the South Africans
tsotsis, and the Australians bodgies. In Austria and the
Federal Republic of Germany they are the Halbstarken, in
Taiwan the tai-pau, in Japan the mambo boys or taiyo-
zuku, in Yugoslavia the tapkaroschi, in Italy the giovani
teppisti, in Poland the hooligans and in the U.S.S.R. the
stiliagyi.
But we have no right to assume that every teddy boy
or every blouson noir is actively engaged in delinquency.
These names often mislead people. It is unjust to assume
automatically that a youngster who likes rock'n'roll music
or bizarre clothing is on his way to becoming a delinquent,
if he is not one already. Too often the adult world has

IDE STORY
From the French film "Terrain Vague" T) G.R.A.Y. Films-Manuel Litran
used the word "delinquent" to express anger or bewilder¬
ment at adolescent tastes. In fact many educators and
psychologists object to the expression "juvenile delin¬
quent," for the public has used it too often and too glibly
to describe young people who, in some way, offend them.
Not every minor who breaks a rule or who behaves
offensively should be considered a delinquent. After all
it is rare for the behaviour of young people to consistently
conform with the standards that adults set and expect
them to attain.
The differences from country to country with regard
to offences and penalties merely emphasize how divided
the world ls on who is a delinquent, who is not, and what
should be done about it. A widespread form of "delin¬
quency" in Cairo is the collection of cigarette butts from
the street, though this is not an offence in other parts
of the world. A recent survey in India showed that In two
urban areas, Lucknow and Kampur, the second most com¬
mon juvenile offence was vagrancy.
A few years ago in Hong Kong, juveniles brought before
the magistrate's court reached the startling figure of more
than 55,000 and yet over 90 per cent of them had com¬
mitted only technical breaches of the law such as hawking
without a licence. In these cases, one might well ask If
such examples of delinquency are not simply the acts of
the abandoned, the ill-fed or the desperate child.
In Lagos, Nigeria, a delinquent ls primarily an offender
against the unwritten laws of the home; here disrespect
and disobedience are regarded as serious offences.
Thus, statistics on the numbers of children prosecuted
for delinquent acts can sometimes be misleading unless
we know the nature of the offences and what particular
law they violate, and how the children were apprehended
and classified as delinquents by the authorities.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
Teen-agers on a powder keg
What is there In common between the boy who collects
cigarette butts in a Cairo gutter, the Nigerian who defies
his family, the American who uses a switch-blade or the
European who commits larceny? The differences between
'them are striking yet all may be lumped together as
"delinquents."
In most countries, the upper age limit under the law
for Juvenile offenders varies from 16 to 19. In the United
States, It differs very much from State to State. In
Wyoming, for example, a boy ls legally an adult at 19 while
a girl ls considered a minor until 21. In Connecticut, the
upper limit ls 16.
The minimum age at which a child ls held responsible
for his acts and brought before any kind of court again
fluctuates from country to country. For example, it is
fixed at 7 in the United States, at 9 in Israel, 10 in Great
Britain, 12 In Greece, 13 in France and Poland, 14 In
Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Italy, Norway, Switzerland and Yugoslavia.
And, finally, punishments laid down by the laws and
also penal methods vary greatly from country to country.
Corporal punishment was once legally accepted by a
large number of countries: today a judge can still order
it In Burma, Ceylon, India (with the exception of the
Bombay region), Iran, Iraq, Pakistan and Thailand.
Yet even when statistics on delinquency are judged with
the greatest reserve for no neat rows of figures can fully
express the extent of the problem their meaning ls clear:
delinquency Is increasing everywhere. The offences range
from stealing, vandalism and property offences, petty
extortion and gambling to violent behaviour, rowdlness,
truancy, Immoral or Indecent conduct, drinking and drug
addiction.
I n almost every city in the world where delin¬
quency exists, so does the juvenile gang
which has become a modern social institution. Despite
striking national differences, the teen-age gangs are
generally aimless groups of rootless, restless, unemployed
adolescents who most frequently meet on street corners.
Some gangs have committed murder while others do
nothing more offensive than mimic or insult passers-by in
the street.
But these gangs, Innocent or evil, are an important
element in the over-all pattern of juvenile delinquency.
Looking at delinquency In a world-wide context, one does
not often see individual youngsters becoming delinquent
each in his own fashion, but rather a number of boys
participating in joint activities that derive their meaning
and pleasure from a set of common sentiments, loyalties
and rules.
Many gangs are tightly organized; some have little
cohesion and drift apart quickly. The majority of these
gangs often do things which to the rest of the world seem
almost purposeless in their malice.
In Poland, teen-age gangs have damaged railroad trains
and molested passengers for no apparent reason. In
Saskatchewan, Canada, groups of boys have entered pri¬
vate homes (when the owners were away) and mutilated
expensive furnishings without attempting to steal a single
object. In Chiengmai, Thailand, a band of youths, with
a symbol of a white eagle tattooed on their arms, found
their greatest diversion In terrorizing or Injuring outsiders
at such times as they were not engaged in challenging a
rival gang to a war.
In Argentina, gangs of boys have gathered in cafés or
bars to insult or humiliate other customers or passers-by;
after this, they have sometimes wrecked a parked car. In
the Philippines, reports on teen-age gangs indicate the
6 same urge for vandalism. Several youngsters cruised
through the city of Manila in a car and went on a ram¬
page, breaking glass windows of fashionable stores and
residences. For several nights this particular gang kept
the police of three adjacent cities busy trying to track
them down and guess where they might strike next.
Some Juvenile delinquents, however, have clearer goals
in mind. Their satisfactions come from more profitable
acts. Racketeering or petty extortion are good examples.
A gang in Detroit, Michigan, which was composed of
fifteen boys from 13 to 16 years of age, organized a racket
in which all the smaller children of the neighbourhood
were forced to pay five cents for the Insurance of not
being molested on the way to and from the local cinema.
A report from India indicates that gangs of young boys
and girls have learned to be highly successful smugglers
of illicit liquor and drugs. In Israel, a juvenile court judge
has described the theft of cars by groups of young people
as a "striking new feature" because hitherto, gang
behaviour has been rare.
We should not assume, however, that these gangs
are always constantly active and that their
membership remains unchanged, year in and year out.
In each country, the patterns of their activities fluctuate
like the lines on a fever chart.
In the past, reports on the backgrounds of a cross-
section of juvenile delinquents always seemed to indicate
that these children were raised in poor living conditions.
A recent United Nations report points to a radical
change in this tendency. Today it can no longer be
said that juvenile delinquency is confined to a particular
social or economic group. There are numerous and
increasing indications that children from the higher-
income brackets are also becoming delinquents. In
France, the expression blousons dorés (jackets of gold) is
a somewhat ironic reference to delinquents from richer
families than those of the blousons noirs.
The problem of delinquency is by no means confined to
those children who are labelled as delinquents because
they were brought to the attention of law-enforcement
agencies. In every country there are also groups who for
a number of reasons, are not referred to the police or the
authorities. In some cases, their families or schools pro¬
tect them, or the complainant is reluctant to press
charges. It is this second group which complicates the
problem.
The first the known delinquents can be compared to
that part of a huge iceberg that juts above the water.
But the second group of unrecorded, or uncounted, delin¬
quents, is much like the submerged (and much larger)
part of the Iceberg, hidden beneath the water. In the
United States, a recent survey revealed that a relatively
large number of teen-age boys admitted that they had
committed serious acts of delinquency which had never
become a matter of court record. These were the' sons of
middle and upper Income families.
I ore and more studies from sources in many
parts of the world have pointed out that the
number of "hidden" or untabulated delinquents is more
substantial than previously guessed and these Include a
growing percentage of children from financially stable
homes. But "hidden" delinquency is a problem in econo¬
mically deprived groups, too.
One of the richest collections of twentieth-century
myths surrounds the subject of delinquency. Most of
these myths are harmful for they lull many people into
believing they know more about this question than ls the
case. Usually, these myths are over-simplified versions of
what causes delinquency.
In many people's minds, the cause of delinquency can
be clearly traced to the cinema. They cite films which

Europress, Paris There is no reason to assume automatically that a youngster who
likes rock'n'roll music or bizarre clothing is on the way to becom¬
ing a juvenile delinquent. Too often adults use the word " de¬
linquent" to express anger or bewilderment at adolescent tastes.
seem to glorify or "glamourize" criminal or delinquent
behaviour.
The very broad generalization might be made that some
films can have a provocative effect; but they can rarely
be blamed directly for any type of deviant or criminal
behaviour.
No doubt there are numerous films and television pro¬
grammes that have had some harmful Influence on certain
children. This Influence might even affect the child
unconsciously. Many valid and sensible criticisms have
been made of cinema and television programmes and
comics, but it is an unscientific and somewhat over-sim¬
plified speculation to blame them entirely for delinquency.
Many children who are lonely, or unhappy in some way,
find solace by going to the cinema, watching television
and reading comics to an excessive degree. But delinquent
behaviour is due to much deeper and often more subtle
Influences than the films alone, or a constant diet of tele¬
vision programmes, or even a library of lurid comics.
Another widespread myth is that the absence from
home of mothers Is responsible for delinquent children.
The crucial Importance of a mother's relationship with
a child cannot be denied, but there ls again little scientific
proof that the effects produced by a mother's absence
Invariably include delinquent behaviour.
It is also widely believed that "broken" homes have
caused or Increased a good percentage of all Juvenile
delinquency but here again the available data on the
subject does not substantiate this as an over-all expla¬
nation.
A child ls not apt to benefit when his parents separate
for, after his infancy, he needs a father as much as a
mother. But the mere physical presence of parents ls
hardly enough. The so-called "broken" home is not
always more destructive to a child's growth than a home
where the parents live together in an emotional atmo¬
sphere of tension or unhappiness.
There are always people who point to slum areas as the
source of the problem. But research has shown that slum
clearance In Itself, while highly commendable, is not the
over-all answer to preventing or wiping out delinquency.
Some people have reached the harsh conclusion that all
Juvenile delinquents are stupid, if not retarded, and that 7
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
The myth of juvenile delinquency
they behave as they do because they lack intelligence.
There ls hardly any reliable scientific information to
support the premise that delinquents are consistently less
Intelligent than other children or adolescents. On the
contrary, many delinquents have turned out to be
extremely bright when tested according to their own
backgrounds.
According to another myth delinquents "inherit"
certain tendencies that make anti-social behaviour in¬
evitable. Scientists have refuted the "bad seed" theory
for children cannot Inherit a "wicked" nature. Because
of many factors, they can and do grow up to become
unhappy and desperate people, but they are not born as
predestined delinquents or criminals.
»ne much publicized theory In Europe about the
cause of delinquency blames children affected
by the war conditions of 1939-1945 for the increase in
crime. But detailed studies in England show that these
children, who are now young adults, "contribute no more
and no less than their share of juvenile delinquency,
perhaps because the circumstances of the deprivation
called forth a very positive response in the general
community."
Once the myths and misunderstandings about delin¬
quency are exposed, the average person begins to perceive
that generalizations are useless. Such explanations as
slum living, broken homes, films and deprivation fall to
provide us with universal and realistic reasons. Some¬
times, each of these may be one among many factors that
shape a child's life, but no one factor can be accepted as
the single over-all reason for the thousands and thousands
of delinquent cases.
To begin to understand the problem of delinquency, we
must recognize that delinquents often do the same things
for vastly different reasons and to achieve very different
results.
To illustrate these differences as far as reasons and
results go here are examples of boys each of whom might
be considered a juvenile delinquent.
15-year-old American, John G., from Los
^Angeles, California, Is one of twelve members
of a street gang called the "Sharks." That gang has an
Inflexible code of values, standards and morals. All the
members have sworn allegiance to this peculiar code and,
for John G., it is the most serious and important
emotional commitment of his life.
Last summer, he and four other gang boys stole a car
that was parked in the neighbourhood. They abandoned
the car, a mile and a half away, the next morning around
4 a.m. When John G. was questioned by a juvenile court,
he made no attempt to explain why he had done It or to
express regret. He had previously been in trouble for
breaking windows and slashing the roofs of convertible
cars with a razor.
His background showed that both his parents worked
and their combined incomes were meagre. Their apart¬
ment was too small for the five members of the family.
John G.'s record in school was poor and his teachers
resented his pose of boredom and contempt. His attitude,
In school or outside of it, was spiteful and malicious, yet
a psychiatric examination revealed no pronounced emo¬
tional disturbances and a normal intelligence.
By conventional standards, John G. might be considered
as a disgrace by his law-abiding parents, as a failure by
his school and as a threat by his community. And yet
there is a telling logic in what he does. All of this delin¬
quent's most offensive acts won the approval and respect
of the people he most admires: gang members of the
"Sharks."
Perhaps every future project that John G. embarks on
will threaten or clearly violate some rule established by
the school, the community or the law, but he will con¬
tinue to be warmed by the admiration of the "Sharks."
His conduct is right by the standards of his own street-
corner subculture, although it happens to be wrong to the
outside world.
A 13-year-old English boy, Basil P., comes from a
prosperous family in London. Basil does not do well in
school, much to the disappointment of his father who
also studied there and had a fine record. Basil's most
conspicuous difficulty Is poor reading; in any subjects
requiring much effort in reading he is apt to become
distracted or lazy. He might have remained an anony¬
mous or sub-standard student, but for the fact that
several of his teachers and many of his classmates know
that Basil has "a habit of taking things."
The boy makes no attempt to deny it. For a long period
he has been pilfering objects from other boys, stealing
both valuable and trifling things. Basil does not hoard
them but often gives them away to classmates, consciously
increasing the risk that the original owner will see his
possession and claim it.
Once, Basil stole three gramophone records from a
music store. He says he ls "sorry" he steals, he does not
know why he does it and he wishes he could stop. His
parents are horrified, his teachers are annoyed and some
of his classmates despise him.
A psychiatric examination revealed that on a deep
symbolical level the objects Basil stole stand for, or
replace, something unconsciously desired but somehow
© Rapho. Paris

The many myths and misun¬
derstandings surrounding
juvenile delinquency are
usually over-simplified ver¬
sions of what causes it.
Some put the blame on
slums; others point to activi¬
ties of teen-age gangs in
new suburban housing deve¬
lopments. But such expla¬
nations as slum living, bro¬
ken homes, films and depri¬
vations fail to offer universal
and realistic explanations. No
one factor offers a single
over-all -reason for today's
increase in delinquency.
Dominique Roger, Paria
forbidden or unattainable. Basil is now to receive psy¬
chiatric help and treatment.
Do we consider this child as a "hidden" delinquent?
Basil was emotionally disturbed, whereas John G. was not.
Can every anti-social act be considered a neurotic
symptom?
A 17-year-old African, Pierre N.. travelled from his
home village on the Ivory Coast to try to find a Job In
the nearest city. He hoped to be employed in a hotel.
Pierre N. could read and write, speak two languages and
was a bright youngster. In the city, he was caught by a
clerk when trying to steal a shirt from a store. To the
judge, Pierre explained that his own clothes were shabby,
he had no money and he hoped a new shirt would make
a better Impression when he looked for a job.
Is Pierre a juvenile delinquent? If he had been success¬
ful the first time, would he have continued to steal ?
Does all stealing by young people clearly constitute an act
of delinquency?
The considerable differences between these three case
histories only begin to show the hazards of lumping all
adolescent misdeeds under the label of juvenile delin¬
quency.
It ls not always so easy to decide who ls a socialized
delinquent, who is an emotionally disturbed child and who
commits a single offence motivated by an overt and
obvious need. It is meaningless to talk diagnostlcally of
"the delinquent." It ls just not possible to declare that
a child ls a juvenile delinquent In the same way as the
clinical diagnosis affirms that a child ls an epileptic.
In most cases, a delinquent act may mean a fulfilment
of a personal need at the conscious or unconscious level,
and this act, usually a violation of what we consider law-
abiding behaviour, Is a symptomatic one.
Truancy, a violation of both school and legal precepts,
ls one example of symptomatic behaviour. In one case,
truancy may be regarded as a symptom of the healthy
rebellion of a normal adolescent who stays away for one
day. In another instance, truancy may be a sympton of
a child's genuine inability to face and cope with the fear¬
ful realities of dally life.
Perhaps our own realization of how very little we know
about the nature and cause of these symptoms can
encourage us to look at the problem of delinquency with 9
new curiosity and new compassion, and with an open
mind.

0 WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
WHY SHOULD
THIS HAPPEN?
'smart alecky' youth who wore pegged trousers
^and a flattop haircut began six months on a
road gang today for talking back to the wrong judge.
M. J., 20, of M., was fined $25 and costs in Judge E. R.'s
Superior Court for reckless operation of an automobile.
But he Just didn't leave well enough alone.
'"I understand how It was, with your pegged trousers
and flattop haircut,' R. said in assessing the fine. 'You go
on like this and I predict In five years, you'll be in prison.'
"When J. walked over to pay his fine, he overheard
Probation Officer S. tell the judge how much trouble the
'smart alecky' young offender had been. 'I Just want you
to know I'm not a thief,' interrupted J. to the judge. The
Judge's voice boomed to the court clerk: 'Change that
Judgement to six months on the roads'. "
This anecdote taken from a press report headlined
"Judge Imposes Road Gang Term for Back Talk" clearly
points out the hostility that many adults even those in
responsible professional roles rather proudly display
towards those young people who Impress them as trouble¬
makers.
Not even the most sympathetic person can deny that
very often the actions of delinquents are harmful and
often revolting to other people and to community life.
Many law-abiding citizens thus feel justified in
condemning the behaviour of juvenile delinquents and
pressing loudly for stronger punishment.
Admittedly, the delinquent must learn to face the
natural consequences of what he does and realize that
he must accept a personal responsibility for his life. But
threats will not accomplish this and neither will bribes
or beatings. Sometimes punishment confirms delinquency.
It can have a compelling psychological effect on the child
who comes to believe that he deserves it and, so, must
also Justify it.
N
10
| OTHiNG Is more discouraging about the problem
of juvenile delinquency, aside from the tragic
results to the children involved, than the lack of clear and
immediate solutions. Understandably, most people whose
lives are affected by it (even slightly) want a sure-fire and
immediate plan of action. And they are all too often the
people who clutch at the belief that juvenile delinquency
has a single cause and, therefore, a single solution. This
Is never true.
We must accept the fact that delinquent behaviour,
which stems from so many combinations of factors,
cannot be treated or controlled until several scientifically-
evolved theories about the individual offender have been
checked. The child must be considered completely apart
from his fellow offenders. His life at home, his problems
at school, his relationship with his parents, his own self-
image and his personality must all be carefully revealed
and evaluated. Even this sort of meticulous and expensive
research does not provide the answers or solve the
question of how to help. It can always provide, however,
much more insight as to why a child chooses often un¬
consciously to be a juvenile delinquent.
But what are the theories? What are the views of the
world's specialists on human behaviour?
In the psychoanalytical field, there are many theories.
One says that delinquency, as with any other form of
defiant behaviour, results from severe frustrations suffered
by a growing child. Another, that juvenile delinquency
ls an expression of rebellionand clearly not a rebellion
for something but against something.
B'ewildered parents may ask, " A rebellion
'against what?" Here again, the answer
depends on the individual child who may be striking out
against what he unconsciously feels is an unwarranted
lack of love on the part of his parents. In other cases the
answer may be found in situations which seem threaten¬
ing or, simply, in the terrible doubts of the child about
himself.
Of course these are condensed explanations of very
complicated theories. It can never be assumed that every
anti-social child is trying to get revenge, or to be
compensated, for not being loved. If it were suggested
to a juvenile delinquent with a long record of offences
that he acts the way he does because of hidden feelings
that he cannot "identify" himself, the idea would seem
preposterous, or ridiculous, to him. For he does not really
know himself, or his own inner crises, or what has made
him the person he has become.
Another theory suggests that juvenile delinquency is
perhaps the failure of a young boy to be able to identify
himself with what psychologists call a "male authority
figure." This naturally means the child's father, the
dominating and consistent male influence in his life. If
there ls no father, if he is rarely at home or even if he
is a dim or withdrawn figure in the child's life, a small
boy may come to feel a very deep insecurity about his
own image of himself as a man. This may seem a pre¬
cocious worry to adults but it ls a valid one for the child.
And this worry will have a strong Influence on the child.
In the broadest sense any adolescent who ls unsure of
himself can appease his worries or will try to by being
aggressive. Here ls where one of the rare positive state¬
ments about all delinquent behaviour can be made: it is
remarkably aggressive. Aggression, however, ls not a
simple act and may show Itself In a variety of ways.
Aggression may be verbal, it may consist of destructive
acts, it may be sexual. Aggression may be directed
towards one's self, towards the world, or both.

Almost every professional person who has studied and
tried to analyse human behaviour agrees that children
who feel they are not loved or wanted can be very severely
damaged by such deprivationreal or Imaginary. This
also applies to children who sense that their parents' love
ls not really consistent and depends on too many things.
If a 6-year-old is constantly told that If he ls "good"
he will be loved, is It unreasonable of that child to feel
that this love ls a conditional thing? Feeling a lack of
love, or feeling that love ls a promised reward, not a
genuine and steady emotion, the child may develop an
overpowering fear. This fear may express itself In
aggressive behaviour based on anxietyand a long cycle
begins. The child whose parents do not love him as a
person feels betrayed or abandoned by them.
I aladjusted children and adolescents are
I usually those youngsters who have suffered
from these feelings. The courage to love and trust others
falls them. Dr. Lucien Bovet, a consultant In mental
health to WHO, has written: ". . . all the measures, advice,
detention, psychotherapy, or any other procedure applied
to a delinquent have a common aim; this primary aim is
to foster the growth in the delinquent of stable, secure,
emotional relationships with some person who gains his
confidence.
"By whatever paths, in fact, the delinquent arrives at
delinquency, we find in the factors leading to crime a
common denominator in the following vicious circle:
insecurity, anxiety, aggression, guilt, and insecurity. In
the same way, the common denominator of therapy is
security re-dlscovered."
Security re-dlscovered often means helping the child
to be able to enter Into trusting and affectionate relation¬
ships. It ls a long, fragile process and yet, without a
capacity for affection, no contentment or adjustment will
ever be possible.
I n analysing Juvenile delinquency In Poland, a
specialist has written: "The first command¬
ment of hooliganism enjoins the delinquent to force the
submission of others but never to submit himself. A
fellow who cannot hold his liquor, who gets thrashed In
a fight, who becomes sentimental over a girl, or shows any
emotion in any response, or who uses a "big word' in all
seriousness (I.e., speaks in the conventional language of
adult authority without the proper sarcasm), is said to
have 'chickened out.' He believes In physical fitness and
lives by brute force. He despises sentimentality; to him
life is ideally the Indulgence of Instinct." This descrip¬
tion can include many juvenile delinquents, not Just those
of one country.
Adolescence is a complex period. Few adults are very
sympathetic, considering that they, too, went through the
same process of growing up and often failed, in less
conspicuous ways, to achieve their own maturity. It ls
hard to remember, after so many years, the helplessness
a child often feels. An Australian specialist has wisely
written that adolescence ". . . is often a period of tur¬
bulent emotion and a time when love, tolerance and
imagination were never more in demand yet never harder
wholly to accept."
(To be continued)
By whatever strange and devious paths a young person
becomes a delinquent there exists in the factors leading
to crime the following vicious circle: insecurity, anxiety,
aggression, guilt and insecurity. The start of this cycle
may be rooted in feelings of not being loved or wanted.
William c. kvaraceus is a Unesco specialist on problems
of social inadaptation among youth. Dr. Kvaraceus, who
has taught at Boston University, is now Professor of Edu¬
cation and Director of Youth Studies at the Lincoln Filenc
Center for Citizenship and Public Affairs of Tufts Uni¬
versity, U.S.A. He is the author of Juvenile Delinquency
and the School and The Community and the Delinquent.
11
