SCRIPTS
SHROUDED
IN MYSTERY
An outstanding feature of the great advances ¡n
archaeological research in the 19th century was
the decipherment of many of the ancient languages
brought to light. At the beginning of that century
not a word could be read of the hieroglyphic system
of writing of the Egyptians, one of the earliest used
by man. Yet 22 years later the code had been
cracked, and now documents covering three
millennia of civilization have become an open book.
The cuneiform scripts used by the Sumerians,
Babylonians and Assyrians were all deciphered
during the 19th century. The 20th century itself
has seen the decipherment of two more cunei¬
form scripts, (the Ugaritic script of Ras Shamra,
I N 1908 an Italian mission working at Hagia Triada,
near Phalstos, in Crete, brought to light a script of
which only one example exists. It was inscribed on
a flat terra-cotta disc about six and a half inches In
diameter which was found In an outbuilding of the
Minoan Palace. Next to It was a broken tablet
inscribed with the Cretan Linear A script that has
been dated to about 1700 B.C.
On either side of the terra-cotta disc is a text
impressed with a hitherto unknown form of hierogly¬
phics arranged In bands spiralling to (or from) the
The undecipher
centre. The signs, which seem to have been stamped
by means of 45 different wooden and metal punches,
number 241 in all and are divided into 61 groups
of characters (which might represent words or sen¬
tences) separated by vertical lines. The script is
considered to be a syllabic one: there are too few
Spiralling lines of
a unique and still
mysterious hierogly¬
phic writing cover
this clay disc found
in an outbuilding of
the Minoan Palace
in Crete. The signs
on it were probably
pressings of indivi¬
dual seals. Dated
to about 1700 B.C.
Editions Arthaud Paris -
© Michel Audrain
26

Syria, and that of the Hittites) as well as the
Hittite hieroglyphic script. In 1953 came the
decipherment of Minoan Linear B. More recently
important work has been done on the Mayan
hieroglyphic script by the use of electronic
computers (See Unesco Courier, March 1962).
To all these results scholars in many countries
have contributed. It is to be hoped that with
the tools of modern science, the remaining
"mystery" languages will one day find their
decipherers. Below, we describe five of the
most famous of the undeciphered scripts
extant.
R. J. Spector
ed Phaistos disc
characters for a pictographic script and too many
for an alphabetic one.
Archaeologists and classical scholars have been
trying, right from the start, to decode this script on
the basis of internal evidence the only evidence
existing, in the absence of a bilingual key such as
the Rosetta stone. Sir Arthur Evans himself con¬
cluded, from the warrior element discernible in
various signs, that It was the text of a sacred song
of victory, and he considered it to come from the
south-west coast of Asia Minor.
The main difficulty Is that no-one knows what lan¬
guage the text was written in it has been variously
adjudged to be Philistine, Lycian, Carian, Greek,
Cypriote, Libyan, Anatolian and Semitic or even
whether it was written from right to left, or the
reverse. J. Chadwick, of Cambridge University, the
collaborator of Michael Ventrls in the decipherment
of Minoan Linear B, took the latter view. He drew
particular attention to the use of punches, and des¬
cribed it as a remarkable anticipation of the inven¬
tion of engraving and printing. It was hard to believe,
as he significantly pointed out, that the preparation
of the set of 45 punches would have been under¬
taken solely for the production of one disc. Thus,
companion pieces may one day be found.
Some examples of the results achieved by would-
be decipherers give an idea of the hazards involved.
An English Investigator, in 1931, took the language to
be Greek, ascribing to each character a syllabic value
and expanding each sign-group to form a phrase.
Thus one five-character group, which she read as
an-sa-ko-te-re, was expanded Into Ana, Saô, koô,
thea, Rê, which she translated as "Arise, Saviour!
Listen, Goddess, Rheal" A Greek scholar favour¬
ed Semitic, and produced a partial "rendering"
in 1948:
Supreme - deity, of the powerful thrones star,
Supreme - tenderness of the consolatory words,
Supreme - donator of the prophecies,
Supreme - of the eggs the white..."
Professor S. Davis, of the University of Witwaters-
rand, Johannesburg, who has made a close study of
the disc during the past few years, initially inter¬
preted it as relating to a votive ceremony conducted
by King Nokeul of Phaistos to mark the consecration
of the palace. His latest findings are due to be
published shortly in book form.
Seals of
the Indus
FROM the valley of the Indus (Pakistan) comes
an enigmatic script of which many examples
abound. They are variously dated to about the
third or second millennium B.C., before tho Indo-
Aryan invasion, and were brought to light In tho
excavated cities of Mohenjo-Daro (Punjab) and
Harappa (Sind) as well as In some smaller towns.
They take the form of stone, copper or Ivory seals
or amulets. Similar material has been found at
various Mesopotamian sites, and it is considered that
the Indus and Sumerian cultures may have been
related.
Becauso of tho
striking similarity
between the In¬
dus Valley script
(on left) and tho
writing of Eastor
Island (on right),
somo scholars
havo triod to esta¬
blish connoxlons
betwoon tho two
dosplto tho dis¬
tance botwoen
tho two plocos.
From "The Alphabet"
by David Difinger.
London. 1949
The writing appears to be pictographic, but all
attempts at decipherment have so far failed. Calcu¬
lations of the number of signs range from about 250
to 400 (some authorities regarding certain of them
as graphic variations of others). Taking a mean
figure of about 300, it is clear that the script cannot
be either alphabetic or syllabic, nor yet purely
ideographic.
It is therefore assumed to be partly ideographic
and partly phonetic (probably syllabic), and that it
also contains some determinative signs (like Egyp¬
tian, Linear B etc.). Since most of the inscriptions
are seals (or amulets), it is likely that they mainly
represent proper names. The absence of other
inscriptions implies that some perishable material
must have been used.
Theories advanced connect the script with early
Hittite writing or with early Elamite; B. Hrozny, the
famous Czech decipherer of Hittite, related it to the
Brahmi script (which is now given an Aramaic origin).
One bold researcher, Father Heras, S.J., ascribed
syllabic values to the characters and deduced that
they represented a language which gave birth to the
Dravidian tongues of South India.
27

SCRIPTS SHROUDED IN MYSTERY (Cont'd)
From H. D.. Die Schrift
Signs written in Linear A, a still unde-
ciphered script from Crete. Found on
monuments and clay objects and
sometimes even written In ink, it is
believed to date from about 1750 B.C.
Texts
from Cretan
monuments
ONE of the many conjectures made during
the long efforts to decipher Etruscan
texts was that the language had con¬
nexions in Crete. This idea was destined to
bedevil for years the decipherment of another
script brought to light in Crete and given the
name of Minoan Linear B.
It was only after he had discarded the idea
of Etruscan as the key to Linear B and had
turned to Greek instead that the English lin¬
guist Michael Ventris succeeded in decipher¬
ing and reading it. (1) But another Cretan
script, known as Linear A, which has about 48
signs In common with Linear B, still awaits its
decipherer. It has been dated to about. 1750
B.C. and may still have been In use about
1450 B.C.
Inscriptions in Linear A, which derives from
Cretan hieroglyphics, have been found on
stone monuments and clay objects, and there
are even examples written in Ink. Unlike
Linear B, none of them occurs outside Crete;
and so the script, consisting of 85 signs plus
obvious hieroglyphs and figures, is widely
believed to convey the non-Greek language of
the autochthonous Cretan population. And,
indeed, the elements of Linear A are particu¬
larly ill-suited to the Mycenaean Greek of the
former. In particular, the view that Linear A
could be Greek has been forthrightly discount¬
ed by J. Chadwick, Ventris' collaborator.
Dr. C. Gordon, the American expert on
Semitic languages, has equated it with Baby¬
lonian Akkadian; and Professor Davis, has
also suggested Semitic affinities. Others, like
Dr. L. Palmer, the Oxford University philo¬
logist, have suggested that it may contain an
Indo-European language other than Greek, and
that it is possibly related to Hittite and the
other earlier languages of Anatolia.
Talking woods'
of Easter
Island
EASTER Island, 2,500 miles west of Chile, in the Pacific,
is famous not only for Its huge stone images but
also for the mysterious wooden tablets Inscribed with
pictographic characters which were found there. At pre¬
sent, about 15 of them remain. They are mainly fragments,
of all sizes up to 6 feet, and are known as kohau rongo-
rongo, or "talking woods."
The signs (500 different ones in all) were Inscribed with
a shark's tooth, in a continuous serpentine system in which
and this Is the unique feature of the Island script every
other line was upside down, so that the reader has to
turn the tablet round at the end of each line.
According to local tradition, Hotu-Matua, the ancestor of
the Easter Islanders, came to the Island (in the 12th or 13th
century A.D.) in two big boats manned by 300 warriors,
bringing with him 67 of the inscribed wooden tablets.
Many of the characters have an external likeness to those
The enigma
THE science of decipherment of languages began almost
five centuries ago with the discovery of some inscribed
tablets at Gubbio, near Perugia, in Italy. The now
celebrated Iguvine tablets (from Iguvlum, the ancient name
of the site) were inscribed with a script devised from a
Greek model by the Etruscans, a mysterious people whose
(1) See "The Case of the Four-Handled Jars"
Unesco Courier, March-April 1955.
The
From The Alphabet", by David Diringer. London. 1949
Model of a calf's liver made in bronze by the
Etruscans and found at Piacenza in Italy. It
is inscribed with the names of Etruscan deities
and was used to teach apprentice soothsayers.
28

of the Indus script, as pointed out by the Hungarian scholar,
G. de Hevesy ; but according to the anthropologist, the late
Alfred Metraux, the similarities were the result of small
adjustments changing of proportions, obliteration of
details, etc. and there was no evidence of a corresponding
identity of phonetic values. A recent attempt at decipher¬
ment by Thomas Barthel, a German ethnologist, has been
said to indicate that the language was Polynesian and that
the Easter Islanders came from Rangitea, one of tho Friendly
Islands, 1,500 miles away.
© Musée de l'Homme. Paris Wooden fish, one of the tablets and other objects inscribed with pictographlc
characters found on Easter Island, in the Pacific. These hieroglyphs woro inscribod
with a shark's tooth. They depict human beings, animals and ceremonial objocts.
of the Etruscans
origins are still unknown, but who passed on to Rome,
and hence to the world, much of its culture and its alphabet
(which gave rise, In Its Latin dress, to all the Western
European alphabets).
Most of the Iguvine tablets were actually inscribed in
Umbrian (a Latin-type language) written In a script which
was an offshoot of thé Etruscan. But interest In the Etruscan
people, once stimulated, continued to grow and received
fresh impetus from the humanists of the Renaissance.
Over the centuries, slow but steady progress has been
made In' reading the alphabet, culminating in 1880 with
the identification of the last outstanding letter.
However, although we can now spell out all the mass
of. Etruscan Inscriptions that have meanwhile been un¬
earthed, it has still not proved possible to understand more
than a fraction of their contents. The Etruscan language
itself remains an enigma.
Altogether there are about 1,000 inscriptions, the great
bulk of them, are short funeral ones giving little more
than names and indications of ancestry. The fuller docu¬
ments Include a clay tablet containing about 300 words,
a bronze replica of a calf's liver inscribed with the names
of Etruscan deities, and a linen manuscript originally in
the form of a roll and later cut Into strips and used as
swathings for the mummy of an Egyptian woman of the
Graeco-Roman period. This text, now in the Zagreb mu
seum, provides more than 5,000 words, and Is still un¬
translated.
In the absence of bilingual texts of any importance, the
decipherers have had to rely on internal evidence. The
repetitiveness of the funeral inscriptions has been a
positive help in this connexion: the meaning of a list of
about 100 recurrent words compiled by the eminent Etrus¬
cologist Professor Pallottino is now quite certain, and
many short phrases and sentences can be conjecturally
Interpreted.
We know the Etruscan for the numerals up to 6 (although
we are not sure of their exact order). They are mach,
zal, thu, huth, ci, sa. A typical inscription reads : "larth
alethnas arnthal ruvfialc clan avils LX lupuce," meaning
"Larth (Lars, in Latin) Alethnas, son of Arn (Arruns) and
Ruvfi, died at 60 years."
Clearly, this strange language Is unlike any other known
to us, especially the Indo-European ones. Many experts
agree with Herodotus, who ascribed to the Etruscans an
Oriental origin and said that they came to Italy by sea
in the early centuries of the first millennium B.C. No
certain cognate has yet been found, but one conjecture
is that there are affinities between the Etruscans and the
Lydians, whose last (and most famous) king was Croesus,
and who lived on the west coast of Asia Minor.
Their script, too, Is still practically undeciphered, but their
language is believed to have been non-Indo-European.
29
