i "
I
;
*. T
Mi .
"at'V
r, x.
i?--*
.^^
M
ar.l
I
£7
ÉË *&
rw
^
24
This fearsome looking monster from Chile is actually
only half a millimetre in length. A member of the col-
lembola family, it is one of the tiny animals which
inhabit the soils of temperate and tropical countries.
Drawing © Poivre, Ecological Laboratory, Brunoy, Francs

A SAFARI ARMED
WITH MICROSCOPES
by Janos Balogh
RAVAGED FOREST
In ever more extensive
areas of Africa forests
are being torn up to
make way for crops
(left). But deforestation
is not without its dan¬
gers Left without pro¬
tection topsoil is quick¬
ly washed away. Today
scientists are studying
problems of the "sick
soils" in tropical Africa.
© H. Zicsi
TINY GAME HUNT
Two members of the
expedition which made
a census of soil fauna
in the Congo (Brazza¬
ville) collect specimens
for examination from
their catch of well over
half a million. These tiny
animals help to main¬
tain the life of the soil
and thereby increase
the size of harvests.
Paul Almasy. Paris
Through their application to agriculture, recent discoveries in soil biology
have an important role to play in economic development. Unesco is es¬
pecially concerned with research into the soil problems of tropical
and sub tropical regions where each year soils become increasingly
impoverished. As part an its extensive programme in soil science, Unesco
sponsored the sending of a scientific mission to Africa from October 1963
to January 1964, to survey, collect and compare the animals found in
the soil of the Congo (Brazzaville). Similar missions are to be sent to
Australia, New Guinea and Central and South America. Below we publish
an article by the leader of the Unesco mission to the Congo (Brazzaville).
Iin school geography books of the
1 19th century the maps showed, many
blank spaces marked "unexplored." Since
then men have penetrated the densest jun¬
gles and crossed the most remote deserts, and
the last empty spaces have disappeared from
the world's maps. But this is true only in
a strictly geographical sense. A modern bio¬
logist still sees plenty of vast empty spaces
awaiting exploration by "Stanleys" and
"Brazzas" from among the world's scientists.
Today's expeditions of
however, are nothing like
set out a century ago. The
invited by the government
country. His equipment too
only arms he carries are
devices for capturing and
explorer-scientists,
the parties that
modern explorer is
of an independent
has changed. The
a microscope and
conserving Insects.
The discovery of a new species of mammal
or bird is now so rare that it earns news¬
paper headlines. It thus seems all the more
astounding to hear that during the past five
years scientists have discovered more than
400 hitherto unknown species of animals in
different parts of equatorial Africa. All these
creatures are minute: most measure less than
half a millimetre and even the largest never
exceed one millimetre.
Why should scientists take the trouble to
search for such tiny living creatures? Why
is so much money spent to send out missions
to jungles and savannahs on operations which
seem to have no immediate value? Certainly no
one would claim that this kind of research
brings any immediate improvement in the
food production of the regions concerned.
In this case, as in many others, science has
to look to the future. The research being done
here might be compared with a doctor's
examination of a patient. For in many ways
the soil of tropical regions is like a sick orga¬
nism. In their original, healthy state these
soils were covered with virgin forest. Down
the years great stretches have been cleared
with no regard to the consequences. Heavy
tropical rains falling on these deforested
areas wash away so much of the humus, or
vegetable mould, that the forests never grow
again.
Because unsuitable methods are often used
to cultivate the land in most areas of trop¬
ical Africa harvests are pitifully small and
each year the soil becomes more Impo¬
verished.
In the past twenty years scientific research
has shown that close links exist between the
minute fauna In the soil and the life of the
soil Itself and consequently with the quality
and size of the crops it produces.
It hardly seems believable that tiny crea¬
tures, not even one millimetre In length, should
determine whether harvests are lean or plenti¬
ful. Yet the results of scientific research are
irrefutable. In Central Europe It has been
shown that on every two and a half acres of
arable land the minute creatures living in the
soil produce substances equivalent to 25 tons
of organic fertilizer. This far exceeds the
amount of organic and synthetic fertilizers
which are used to feed the soil under the most
advanced methods of modern farming. The
tiny soil fauna thus Improve the soil at no
cost to man and on a scale which he is at
present unable to match. It Is not surprising
that science Is now taking a keen Interest in
the work of soil fauna, and that our expedi¬
tion should have been sent to the Republic
of the Congo (Brazzaville).
Our mission can be summed up as a
broad census and stock-taking of all
the animals living In the soil, from earthworms
to microscopic fauna. It took three of us
working as a team three months to make this
census In five different regions of the country
covered by tropical jungles and forests,
savannahs and crops.
Collecting specimens of soil fauna Is cer¬
tainly one of the most unusual forms of 25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SAFARI WITH MICROSCOPES (Cont'd)
Mysterious creatures
that fertilize the soil
A collembole from
New Zealand, one of
the innumerable spe¬
cies of a family of
soil animals whose
members are often
invisible to the naked
eye. Between 10.000
and 200.000 of these
creatures may live in
a square yard of soil.
An Andean collem¬
bole. These soil ani¬
mals have very poor
vision and thus rely
on their organs of
smell intheantennae.
26
Drawings (p Poivre,
Ecological Laboratory.
Brunoy, France
hunting. The ordinary hunter carries a rifle
and the entomologist a net, but the soil zoo¬
logist goes back to the most ancient hunting
techniques and sets traps for his quarry.
The simplest technique we used was to sink
plastic containers the size of flower-pots into
the soil of the virgin forest. Each one was
protected from the rain by a metal cover and
contained a liquid chemical product to pre-
serve the tiny creatures which
it trapped. Another of our
methods was to place some forest
soil on a sieve over a funnel
leading to a flask containing pres¬
erving fluid. As the earth grows
drier the little animals burrow
deeper and deeper until they fall
Into the funnel and are carried
to the flask.
We set hundreds of these
traps and collected an enormous
quantity of soil animals well
over 500,000 according to a pro¬
visional count. After we have
analyzed and catalogued this
huge collection we shall be able
to publish a report on the fauna living in the
soil of Africa's virgin forests and also
determine the role it plays in the formation
and loosening of productive soil.
One of our most interesting finds was that
forest humus Is formed not only at soil level
but also among tree foliage. We thus confirmed
the finding of Professor Delamare-Deboutte-
vllle of the Ecological Laboratory at Brunoy,
near Paris, who has already observed that
plants can take root in the dust which some¬
times accumulates in the axils of tree branches.
We ourselves noted that where virgin forest
vegetation is really dense, dead leaves can
accumulate among the branches and the
lianas which cling to the trees. Rain reduces
the leaves to a form in which soil animals
can make their habitat and the
excrement of these creatures
falls on the forest floor like an
unceasing rain of powdered
manure. Even worms are some¬
times found in this "suspended
detritus," of which we collected
many samples from the Congo
forests. Studies are now being
made of the fauna found in this
humus from high in the air.
In the Sibiti district in the
heart of the virgin forest country
we came across groups of pygmy
peoples. Had we been ethnologists we should
certainly have made good use of these en¬
counters, but in fact we were more concerned
in studying one of the most interesting
animal species in the forest, the giant nephila
spider.
The nephila is one of the most fascinating
creatures of the region. The females are
often between three and five centimetres in
size whereas the male barely exceeds eight
to twelve millmetres. The disproportion
between the weights of the two sexes is even
greater. It is as if a woman weighing 50
kilogrammes (110 lbs) were to have a husband
weighing two and a half kilogrammes.
An explanation for the existence of these
dwarf male spiders has been offered by the
evolutionist theory. The female is so vora¬
cious that it often devours the male. The
smaller males have escaped this fate more
often than those whose size offers a more
substantial meal. Thus by a process of natu¬
ral selection operating over millions of years
a race of tiny males has been evolved.
We have seen six or more of these dwarf
males gathered around the female's web and
waiting an opportunity to approach her.
Finally one of them will set off for an encoun¬
ter with the female. The Instant the female
attacks him, the little male releases a thread
and quick as a flash descends to safety.
The giant nephila's web is spun from
threads that are golden-yellow in colour and
often measure a yard in diameter. Mada¬
gascar's ancient kings were traditionally
buried in a shroud made from the giant
nephila's web and such shrouds are sometimes
still found in the old royal burial places on
that Island. About half a century ago an
effort was made to acclimatize the giant
nephila in Europe so as to use its thread for
producing textiles. But with the development
of synthetic fibres the experiment was
abandoned.
The tiny males are not
the only visitors to these
great golden webs. Spider
parasites make their
homes in them and
scavage the remains of
the female's banquets,
collecting tiny mosquitoes
which she disdains on
account of their size.
The two or three families
of guest spiders living
on each web pay for
their meals by keeping
the web clean.A collembole
found in the
Congo region. Altogether we spent
110 days in the Congo
(Brazzaville), a fascinat¬
ing country of great
beauty, especially the spectacle of the Stan¬
ley Pool betwen Leopoldville and Brazzaville
where the Congo resembles an immense lake.
Here masses of a lovely aquatic plant named
the water hyacinth from its handsome large
blue flowers, form great floating islands on the
surface of the waters. A native of America, it
was only recently imported into the Congo but
it has so quickly infested large stretches of
the river that it is now a threat to navigation.
During our mission we travelled over
3,000 miles through the Congo with no wea¬
pons more offensive than our entomologists'
tweezers. Less than 90 years ago the explo¬
rer Stanley had literally to fight his way
through the same regions. Africa has indeed
changed in the past century and is destined
to change even more in the near future.
Our expedition was only the first of many
scientific missions which in the years ahead
will study the soil fauna of equatorial
regions.
Prof. Janos Balogh, a soil biologist, is head of
the zoological research group of the Hun¬
garian Academy of Sciences and is president
of the Hungarian Zoological Association. Prof
Balogh, who has discovered over 300 hitherto
unknown species of animals living in tropical
soils, is the author of many scientific works.

A. Zicsi
SCOURGE OF RIVERS
Early this century a tropical South American floating aquatic plant, named the
water hyacinth from its handsome large blue flowers, made its appearance in
Africa. It began to spread with terrifying speed, choking great rivers, blocking
irrigation canals and smothering dams. Efforts to halt its progress by spraying
weedkiller from helicopters have been unsuccessful and scientists are still seek¬
ing ways to check this invader plant. One possible solution might be to induce
the manatee or sea cow which feeds off the water hyacinth to take up residence
in African rivers (See The Unesco Courier, Feb. 1963, p. 23). Below, a carpet of
water hyacinth plants that now infest large stretches of the Congo River.
© Paul Almasy
27
