'SUPER-BACILLI'
A NEW CHALLENGE TO MEDICINE
|ne difficulty in large-scale campaigns against
tuberculosis using modern drugs in the
appearance of tubercle bacilli that are "resistant" to their
action. But, as the International Union against Tuber¬
culosis declared recently: "We hear a great deal about
the resistance of the bacillus. But not enough is said
about another form of resistance: that coming from Igno¬
rance, apathy, and lack of interestin a phrase: the
resistance of Man." Immunization, diagnosis and treat¬
ment offered on a community-wide scale are nothing but
empty gestures if the public is not willing to make full
use of these services. There is need for active and
continuing co-operation of both the individual and the
community.
Doctor and patient have often different points of view.
The doctor wants to "follow up" his patient, while the
patient tries to keep away from his doctor. Both in the
sanatorium and at home, the patient is far from being
always co-operative. Despite the serious nature of his
illness, there all too often comes a time when he revolts
against the tiresome routine of taking his daily quota of
drugs.
Even sanatorium patients have been known to throw
their pills out of the window. They want to believe that
there is no need for further treatment, to think that they
are already cured; the truth is that the course of the
disease Is merely interrupted. They have only one idea
in mind: to leave the sanatorium and get home as soon
as possible, regain their freedom and resume their normal
activities.
When this human weakness is a real problem even
under strict hospital routine, then It Is not surprising that
the discipline of the home-patient, who has to take the
drugs dally on his own initiative, easily breaks down.
H uman resistance to the discipline of taking
potent drugs regularly for a long period means
that the tubercle bacillus is subjected to only a half¬
hearted attack and this gives it the time to mobilize a
drug-resistant population. Once this has happened there
is no reprieve: the bacillus that has been "immunized"
through the patient's negligence produces other bacilli
just as impervious to the effect of the drugs to which
it is resistant.
Doctors have the greatest difficulty in dealing with
these "super-bacilli," which respond only to a few costly
drugs that may be dangerous and must therefore be
administered under close hospital supervision. To provide
such special treatment on a large scale would place an
Intolerable burden on the strained economies of most
of the developing countries.
The consequences of defaulting from treatment are
extremely serious: not only does the patient get worse,
but he may succeed in spreading drug-resistant bacilli to
healthy Individuals who, in turn, become untreatable by
the normal methods.
Perhaps the only way of dealing with the "resistant"
patient is, after all, to supervise him and make sure that
he takes the medicine at his home or at the health centre.
If drug treatment could be given Intermittently, say once
a week, instead of daily, medication could be supervised
even in developing countries. The Madras Chemotherapy
Centre has been investigating this possibility: twice-
weekly ambulatory treatment with isoniazid and strepto¬
mycin gave the same spectacular results as daily
administration of isoniazid and PAS: more than 90 per
14 cent, of advanced cases cured. Stimulated by these
unexpected and encouraging findings, the Centre has
begun to study the feasibility of a once-weekly regimen.
Applicability on a mass scale, economy, convenience,
and reduced toxicity: these are the truly impressive array
of advantages offered by the latest possibilities in the
treatment of a disease that has plagued mankind since
the beginning of history.
Tuberculosis is an international health problem and
must be solved on a world-wide basis. Although varying
enormously from the large underprivileged areas of the
world to the highly industrialized countries, the tubercu¬
losis situation is of serious concern to all.
tvEN those few countries which are gradually
eliminating the problem within their own
frontiers cannot hope to be safe as long as tuberculosis
is rampant elsewhere. The increasing rapidity and
volume of international transport, the migration of
workers across national boundaries tend to intensify the
risk of infection. Another cause for worry is that as
tuberculosis becomes less frequent in a country the
natural resistance of the population may be expected
gradually to diminish, and this at a time when the anti¬
tuberculosis services are likely to relax their vigilance.
Tuberculosis must be conquered everywhere.
Since it came into being in 1948 the World Health
Organization (WHO) has assisted national governments
in bringing tuberculosis under control by providing expert
advice and teams of specialized personnel.
Under its guidance, mass vaccination with BCG, the
first weapon against tuberculosis, has been extended to
most parts of the world. However, the very first large-
scale vaccination campaigns were launched by the "Inter¬
national Tuberculosis Campaign" which was set up after
World War II by the Scandinavian countries to aid
nations which had been most seriously ravaged by the
disease.
More recently, when effective antituberculosis drugs
became available, the rational use of this powerful weapon
in the many countries where hospital facilities are limited
or non-existent was investigated through special projects.
It is clear that none of the weapons against tuberculosis
can be used in exactly the same way in every country.
Conditions and resources differ and different strategies
have therefore to be developed. To meet this need
WHO has co-operated in pilot projects for tuberculosis
control in numerous countries.
I n all of these activities the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) has been a partner
of WHO. With the joint assistance of WHO and UNICEF
more than 150 million people have been vaccinated in
campaigns in 61 countries, tuberculosis control training
centres have been set up in many parts of the world and
more recently pilot projects in tuberculosis control for
about a third of the world's population have been started.
Another important partner in the world-wide fight
against tuberculosis is the International Union against
Tuberculosis (IUT). A frequent obstacle to the efforts
made by governments to control tuberculosis is a lack
of sustained co-operation by individuals and by commu¬
nities. It is here that the IUT and its constituent
voluntary tuberculosis associations can play a decisive
part: what governments cannot do national, regional and
local associations often can. The Mutual Assistance
Programme of the IUT has been designed specifically to
supplement the governments' efforts by mobilizing and
maintaining nation-wide support.

WHO. Spooner
MASKED & GOWNED
AGAINST INFECTION
Stringent precautions against infection are taken in this tuberculosis section of a research
laboratory. Staff work in gowns and masks and all items of equipment are coloured
red to avoid possible confusion with material from other research sections. Research
leading to discovery of drugs with direct action against the tuberculosis bacillus strep¬
tomycin, p-aminosalicylic acid and isoniazid has sharply reduced mortality rates.
15
