ON August 5, 1963 the world learned with relief
that a Nuclear Test Ban treaty had been signed in
Moscow (see page 2). This treaty will go down in history
as the first important step on the road to complete disarmament.
Concluded between the United Kingdom, the United States
and the U.S.S.R., it has since been countersigned by over
100 countries. The banning of nuclear tests in the atmosphere,
in outer space and under water, brought not only a feeling of
relief, but also an immense hope. In May 1964, the Executive
Board of Unesco welcomed the Test Ban treaty as "a noteworthy
contribution towards the easing of international tensions, as
tangible proof of the possibility of a peaceful settlement of
international problems and as a step towards paving the way
for agreement on general and complete disarmament" and it
expressed the hope "that this treaty will gain universal support".
The first effects of the treaty have become apparent: there has
already been a significant reduction in the level of radioactive
contamination whose threat for all mankind would have become
steadily greater if nuclear weapons tests had continued. This
was announced recently by the U.N. Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation. On page 11 one of the mem¬
bers of this committee. Prof. Alexander M. Kuzin, a prominent
Soviet bio-chemist, reveals how the health hazards from
radioactive fall-out are being reduced. Below, Professor Linus
Pauling evokes some vital world problems of the nuclear age.
On June 19 of this year the noted U.S. scientist, Linus
Pauling, spoke at Unesco House in Paris on Science Education
and its Responsibilities. Professor Pauling has the rare dis¬
tinction of being a double Nobel Prize Winner. For his efforts
over the past two decades on behalf of world peace and to
outlaw war he received the 1962 Nobel Peace Prize (awarded
in 1963); his discoveries in molecular chemistry won him the
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1954. Professor Pauling was invi¬
ted to speak under the Unesco programme to promote a series
of university lectures by distinguished visiting scientists. The
Unesco programme has been organized to show how impor¬
tant is the role of science in the world we live in today. Below
we present a few salient passages from Prof. Pauling's address
dealing with the Test Ban Treaty, modern nuclear weapons
and the need for disarmament.

NUCLEAR WEAPONS
AND WORLD SANITY
by Linus Pauling
Nobel Peace Prize 1962
Nobel Prize for Chemistry 1954
The world's stockpiles of atomic weapons are now believed to
total the equivalent of 16,000 twenty-megaton bombs. The power
of a single twenty-megaton bomb is equal to the effect of a 1,000
bomber raid of World War II, repeated day after day for 14 years.
Above, a European city destroyed in the battles of World War II.
©APN

M'-*'
--%>
f*
l T is the duty of society as a whole to make the
important decisions regarding social, political
and economic matters but it is the special duty of the
scientist to contribute with his special knowledge and
understanding to a greater extent than other people and to
help his fellow citizens to reach the right decisions.
When the Bomb Test Treaty was being discussed last
year there was one point that was very difficult to com¬
prehend and yet which it was vital that everyone be made
to understand. That was the nature and amount of the
damage done to the people of the world and to the pool
of human germ plasm (that is, to our unborn children) by
the radioactive materials liberated in the testing of nuclear
weapons. Never before had it been dangerous to people
the world over for military establishments to carry out tests
of their future weapons; but now damage has already been
done to members of the human race by the nuclear wea¬
pons tests.
One of the great discoveries of the last few years has
been the unravelling of the mechanism of heredity. Scien¬
tists have found that the genes are molecules of deoxyri
bonucleic acid (DNA) which constitute the units of heredity.
These genes, as they are passed on from parents to chil¬
dren, determine the nature of the new organismsour
offspring.
There are about 100,000 genes in the fertilized ovum,
50,000 coming from the father, 50,000 from the mother. If
the embryo has a poor collection of genes it will die before
reaching term. Whether a child is healthy or not after
birth is largely determined by the genes. Seven per cent
of the children born have gross congenital physical or
mental defects, and it is estimated that about half of these
defects are due to mutated genes. For example, about
one child in twelve hundred is born with a newly mutated
gene for achondroplasia, which affects the cartilage so
that the long bones of the body do not grow. Most of
these children die in infancy but some survive. They are
achondroplastic dwarfs with large hands, large heads but
with short "long bones". This is just one of the thousands
of ways in which gene mutation can increase human
suffering.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

NUCLEAR WEAPONS (Cont'd)
The threat to unborn millions
High energy radiation, it Is known, causes gene mutation,
and it is possible to estimate the amount of gene mutation
resulting from radiation from caesium 137, carbon 14 and
other radioactive nuclei produced in the testing of nuclear
weapons and liberated into the atmosphere. These radio¬
active substances, and particularly carbon 14, will continue
to produce defective children for thousands of years.
If the human race survives and world population conti¬
nues at a reasonable level, then I have calculated (and the
U.N. Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radia¬
tion reached essentially the same conclusion, as did also
the Federal Radiation Council set up three years ago by
the U.S. government to study the damage done by high
energy radiation) that the bomb tests carried out thus far,
and amounting to 600 megatons, will in the course of time
affect sixteen million children so severely that they will
suffer gross physical or mental defects or embryonic, neo¬
natal, or childhood deaths.
BOUT one per cent of this total, or 160,000 In¬
fants, will be stricken in the first generation, but
the damage will continue with only slight decrease genera¬
tion after generation, year after year, for thousands of years.
The figure of 160,000 may seem like a small number when
compared to the four million or so children who are born
each year with gross physical or mental defects caused by
natural radioactivity and cosmic radiation which cannot be
prevented and other causes of gene defects hard to control.
Nevertheless we should not say that a few thousand
additional defective children born each year are not a
matter of any concern to us. As President John F. Kennedy
said In a broadcast to the American people on the Test
Ban Treaty in 1963, "the loss of even one human life or
the malformation of even one baby, who may be born long
after we are gone, should be of concern to us all. Our
children and grandchildren are not merely statistics towards
which we can be indifferent."
I should point out that estimates on this subject are very
difficult to make. The figures I have just given are uncer¬
tain, and everyone should learn to understand the meaning
of probability and uncertainty, that is, probable error. The
figure of 16 million that I have indicated is usually described
as being uncertain by a factor of five either way. So
perhaps the sacrifice we are making is only three million
persons one-fifth of 16 million, or perhaps it is 80 million
five times the 16 million, and of course the uncertainties
may be really greater than this.
Now, one 20-megaton bomb detonated in the atmosphere
or at the surface of the earth liberates radioactive materials
into the atmosphere which will, according to the best
estimates that we can make, cause gross damage or death
to 550,000 unborn children. This is the probable sacrifice
of the testing of a single H-bomb by any one nation.
Everyone must understand this.
We know that large amounts of high energy radiation
produce cancer. If we accept the principle that high
energy radiation even in small amounts is also cancerogenic
as I believe it is then it is possible to calculate the
sacrifice of human beings now living to the bomb tests.
The estimated figure is that two million human beings now
living will die five, ten, fifteen or twenty years earlier than
otherwise because of cancer or other diseases produced
by the high energy radiation liberated in the bomb tests
carried out so far. This is about one person in fifteen
8 hundred in the world, and it gives us some idea of the
nature of atomic weapons in so far as the tests go.
Of course there would be a tremendously greater amount
of contamination with radioactive materials all over the
earth if there were to be a nuclear war. In addition to the
destructive and lethal effects of blast, fire, and immediate
high energy radiation, there would be the effects of local
fall-out, so that survivors within hundreds of miles of where
the bombs exploded would generally be exposed to about
half of the lethal dose that causes acute radiation sickness
and death within a few days, and these survivors would
have their portion of the pool of human germ-plasm
seriously affected. Their lives would be shortened consi¬
derably on the average by some ten or fifteen years by
exposure to this high energy radiation.
Let us now turn to another question the stock-piling of
nuclear weapons. The amount of explosives existing in
the world is enormous, but there has been very little
discussion of how great the world's nuclear stock piles are.
The standard nuclear bomb today is the 20-megaton
bomb. (One megaton equals a million tons.) The Soviet
Union has detonated a 60-megaton bomb, which was appa¬
rently only the first two stages of a 100-megaton bomb. A
100-megaton bomb involves only about three and a half
tons of explosive material and probably can be carried in
a single large rocket from one continent to another. But
100-megaton bombs don't make very much sense because
a 20-megaton bomb is big enough to destroy any city on
earth. '
A 20-megaton bomb exploded over any city on earth
would destroy it completely and kill most of the people in
it. It would produce a crater of twenty kilometres in
diameter; it would set off fires 50 to 100 kilometres away,
producing a tremendous fire storm and would damage
people by the immediate high energy radiation and by the
radioactive fallout. Even people 300 kilometres away would
be killed.
During the second World War there were some great
bombing raids on German cities. In one such raid, on one
night, one thousand aeroplanes each carrying four tremen¬
dous one-ton blockbusters destroyed much of the city of
Hamburg and killed an estimated 75,000 people. If there
were to be such a raid on, say, Paris today and another
such 1,000 plane raid tomorrow, and then another the next
day and so on day after day for fourteen years, the explo¬
sives delivered would have the power of one 20-megaton
bomb.
Y estimate is that the stock piles of the world
comprise about 16,000 of these 20-megaton
bombs or the equivalent of them. Now, there aren't 16,000
large cities in the world and one might well ask why this
irrationally great amount of explosive material has been
produced. I shall answer this by saying that it is because
the system of science education has been faulty in the past
so that the people who were making the decisions could
not have had a clear understanding of what they were doing
if indeed anyone did make the decisions, for there has
been some doubt as to whether the development of these
tremendously great stock piles was the result of decision¬
making rather than some sort of accident and shifting of
responsibility primarily in the United States and the Soviet
Union and perhaps too in Great Britain to some extent.
And yet in the Franck Report written by scientists work¬
ing on the atomic bomb project in the U.S. in 1945, a
prediction was made of the future nuclear situation in
the world which has turned out to be correct up to the pre¬
sent time.
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

WRITINGONTHE
WALL. Of what
was once a man
there is left only a
shadow on a wall.
For a single instant,
on August 6, 1945
at Hiroshima, the
man's body absorbed
the radiation and
heat from the atomic
blast and traced the
the outline on the
building behind. The
man vanished. The
ladder remained.
© Asahi
i^V. ^**k-
- &&* - jSfc$wiM
$&
N^è*^îS
"n.
V-i-
» . -
»"' '. ' f..i Ï
&
^
<'*mmi#*' *
" 'iw !
* -.
c?-*' .*.-. ¿; ^
¿.
ipm
&f*

NUCLEAR WEAPONS (Cont'd)
The goal of disarmament no longer a dream'
320,000 megatons is my estimate of the size of the
world's present nuclear stockpiles. If ten per cent of
the stockpile (32,000 megatons) were to be used in a
nuclear war with the bombs exploded on the average
within a hundred and fifty kilometres of the targets (you
don't have to hit the target in order to get the result) then
60 days after the day on which the war was fought and
we assume that It would cover Europe as a whole, all the
Soviet Union and the United States of the 800 million
people living in these regions, 720 million would be dead,
60 million severely injured, and there would be 20 million sur¬
vivors with only minor injuries, but having to cope with the
problems of complete destruction of all cities, metropolitan
districts, and means of communication and transportation,
complete disruption of society, death of all livestock, and
gross radioactive contamination of all growing foods. This
would be the end of this part of the world, and how great
the damage would be to the rest of the world no one has
been able to estimate in a reliable way.
One can understand why it has been said over and over
again that no dispute between nations can justify nuclear
war. U Thant, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
recently said: "Anybody who proposes the use of atomic
weapons for destructive purposes is, in my view, out of
his mind." We are forced now, in the way that Alfred
Nobel foresaw, to abolish war from the world. But it is
a difficult and complex problem. And yet I feel that
everyone must accept this conclusion. It is the duty of
everyone to work in whatever way he can to achieve the
world from which war has been abolished. This the only
rational course for the world to follow.
The partial test ban treaty signed at Moscow last year
was a great step forward. I regret very much that this
treaty was not made three years earlier, during the long
period when no bomb tests were carried out by any nation
except France, which only made very small bomb tests.
Of the total of 600 megatons tested, 450 megatons or
three-quarters of the total were tested in the last three
years. Millions of unborn children were sacrificed because
of the inability to see that the test ban solution could have
been accepted three years earlier. I hope that further
mistakes of this sort are not made. I am grateful for the
bomb test treaty, but of course we must move forward.
The test ban treaty is just the beginning.
The further steps that need to be taken were clearly
outlined, I think, in the great speech that President Kennedy
gave in the United Nations in September 1961, when he
said: "The goal of disarmament is no longer a dream. It
Is a practical matter of life or death. The risks inherent in
disarmament pale in comparison to the risks inherent in a
continuing, unlimited arms race."
F the proposals he made, one, the banning of
nuclear weapons in outer space, has been ac¬
complished by resolution in the United Nations. (For text,
see page 13.) As for stopping the production of fis¬
sionable material, some steps are being taken in this
direction by agreement between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
The steps toward general and complete disarmament
will, 1 think, be taken only with great difficulty. I should
like to see some action taken in the meantime that would
decrease the chance of outbreak of a devastating nuclear
war, perhaps through some psychological or technological
accident or through some combination of circumstances
such that even the wisest of national leaders could not
prevent the descent to catastrophe.
In my Nobel lecture in Oslo last December [delivered on
the occasion of the award to Prof. Pauling of the Nobel
Prize for Peace] I proposed that the American stock pile
of nuclear weapons and the Soviet stock pile of nuclear
weapons should, separately, be put under joint national and
international control, so that the Soviet nuclear weapons
could not be used except with the permission both of the
Soviet Premier and of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and that the American nuclear weapons could not
be used except by permission both of the President of the
United States and of the Secretary-General of the U.N.
I also proposed that there should be in authority in the
control stations in both countries, United Nations personnel
as well as Soviet personnel in the U.S.S.R. on the one hand
and U.N. personnel as well as American personnel in the
U.S.A. on the other. I believe that even a first step in this
direction, the step of having United Nations observers in
these control stations, would be of much value in increasing
our security and decreasing the chance that these weapons
would be used.
I LOOK forward to the time when there is in
existence in the world a satisfactory system of
international law taking the place of war. In working to
abolish war from the world we are working also for human
freedom, for the rights of individual human beings. It is
war, militarism, and extreme nationalism that are the great
enemies of the individual human being in every country. I
believe that as we achieve the goal of peace in the world
and disarmament, we shall see great improvement in the
social, political and economic systems of all nations and
in the rights of individual human beings all over the world.
The idea of replacing war by world law is an old one and
it has continued to be advanced up to the present time.
Only now has the time come when it will be accepted. As
Nobel said, "When it becomes possible for two army corps
to annihilate one another in a second then war will be
abandoned." It is now possible not only for two army
corps but for two great nations to destroy one another
essentially and completely in a period of time little longer
than a second in a few hours.
Seventy-five years ago the Norwegian legislature, the
Storting, took the lead in proposing that there be a requir¬
ed system of arbitration for disputes between nations.
The Storting at that time said: "The Storting is convinced
that this idea has the support of an overwhelming propor¬
tion of our people. Just as law and justice have long ago
replaced the role of the fist in settling disputes between
man and man, so the idea of settling disputes among
peoples and nations by arbitration is making its way with
irresistible strength. More and more, war appears to the
general consciousness as a vestige of prehistoric barbarism
and a curse to the human race."
We have now come to the time in the history of the world
when we shall eliminate this vestige of prehistoric harbar-
ism, this curse to the human race. And I believe that
we are fortunate to be able to contribute to the achieve¬
ment of this great goal, when not only shall we have
abolished war with its suffering from the world but also
have made it possible to utilize the resources of the world
and the discoveries of scientists and the results of man's
labour for the benefit of human beings all over the world.
I believe that we shall in the course of time build a world
that is characterized by social, political and economic jus¬
tice for all human beings, and a culture worthy of man's
intelligence.
