DISARMAMENT AND
THE DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
IISARMAMENT would be bound to have favou¬
rable effects on the development of interna¬
tional economic relations. The political detente that would
accompany an International disarmament programme would
in Itself Imply that nations were willing to reconsider their
economic relations with one another. The consequent
relaxation of international tensions would provide a sound
basis for reduction of trade barriers and for modification
of existing trade agreements and trading practices.
In the long run this would encourage an expansion of
international trade, a more rational international division
of labour and a more effective use of the world's resources.
In the short term it might help conversion by generating
new demand for exports from existing sources of supply
that could be satisfied fairly easily from existing capacities.
The promotion of economic and social development in
developing countries is one of the most important ways
in which the resources released by disarmament could be
put to use.
The world's military expenditures appear to far exceed
the combined gross investment expenditures of the less
developed areas; they are probably at least five times as
large and may be much greater. A much larger volume
of resources could thus be allocated to investment for
productive development in these countries even if only a
fraction of the resources currently devoted to military
purposes were used in this way.
Assuming that the necessary national development pro¬
grammes and social and Institutional reforms were effec¬
tively realized, developing countries would be able to
absorb a considerably larger flow of productive investment.
The total amount of foreign capital required by the
developing countries, over and above their domestic
resources devoted to investment, is estimated to range
from $6 thousand million to $10 thousand million annually.
Would disarmament release in sufficient quantity the parti-
The latest atomic submarines cost some
$160,000,000 each. With this money over
50 cities could each be provided with a
modern $ 3 million hospital.
The total cost of developing one of the
latest supersonic fighter planes has been
estimated at over $6,500 million. This
would build 600,000 new $10,000 homes
to house more than three million people.
26
cular resources required for economic development? Is
the present institutional framework of aid tc developing
countries likely to be affected by disarmament?
In the longer run, productive capacities can be adapted
to any changed patterns of demand, and provided that the
needs of the developing countries are known in sufficient
detail, no serious problems should arise in matching
resources to uses. Even in the short run, however, it
seems probable that a significantly large proportion of the
resources absorbed for military use would indeed prove
to be of a type useful for investment in developing coun¬
tries. An important proportion of military expenditure
absorbs the output of heavy industry and of the engineering
and construction industries. The output of these industrial
sectors could undoubtedly make a valuable contribution
to the industrialization of the less developed areas and
to their accumulation of social capital. Transportation and
communication equipment, an important component of
military expenditure, is urgently required by developing
countries.
I ISARMAMENT would also release scientific
research workers and engineers, who could
be utilized for other purposes. In the event of disarma¬
ment, it should prove possible for the industrialized
countries to provide greater technical assistance and
thereby help remove one of the serious limitations to
development efforts in these countries. Furthermore,
disarmament would free from military service in both the
more advanced and the less developed countries large
groups of young people. Past experience in utilizing
their good will and enthusiasm in a number of countries
indicates that when completely freed from military preoc¬
cupations, many of them could make an important contri¬
bution to economic and social development in developing
areas.
Discussions in the Economic and Social Council and
the U.N. General Assembly have frequently emphasized
the importance of the savings to be derived from general
disarmament. The basic position of the General Assembly
on this matter in 1953 was defined in an unanimous reso¬
lution which declared:
"We, the Governments of the States Members of the
United Nations, in order to promote higher standards
of living and conditions of economic and social progress
and development, stand ready to ask our peoples, when
sufficient progress has been made in internationally
supervised world-wide disarmament, to devote a portion
of the savings achieved through such disarmament to an
international fund, within the framework of the United
Nations, to assist development and reconstruction in
underdeveloped countries."
