FRESH WATER FROM THE SEA is produced in this giant distillation plant
the world's largestat Kuwait, on the Persian Gulf. Kuwait once used to
import fresh water by tanker, but in the past 15 years a series of sea-water
distillation plants have been built to meet the needs of Kuwait's ever-expanding
petroleum industry. ,which provides fuel for these plantsnatural gas and oil.
Photos© Paul Almasy. Paris

WHERE WE STAND WITH
WATER DESALTING
by Ronald S. Fenton
Water, water everywhere, nor any drop to
drink." The words of the Ancient Mariner
in Coleridge's famous poem evoke the feelings of many
a shipwrecked seafarer, adrift In the immensity of the
ocean, but unable to slake his thirst.
Covering three-quarters of the surface of the globe,
the oceans contain practically all the world's water
supply, but in a form so heavily impregnated with all the
minerals that have been washed out of the land that it
would be fatal to drink it in anything like the quantities
normally required by the human body. Human beings
only survive because a very small fraction of ocean water
daily changes its form by natural processes and moves
to places where men, animals and plants can use it.
If only ocean water could cheaply be separated from
its salts and brought to places where fresh water ls
desperately needed, some of man's most pressing prob¬
lems would be solved. Arid lands would be relieved
from the fear of drought and in economically-developed
lands the threat of water shortages due to population and
industrial growth would be a thing of the past.
Conversion of sea or brackish water to fresh is not a
new idea. For many centuries man has known how to
do It; just boll the sea water and condense the resulting
vapour. The basic method is as old as history. Starting
with the Ancient Greeks, sailors have been distilling sea-
water in this way for over 2,000 years. Even primitive
man desalted water, but in this case by evaporating the
water to obtain the salt.
Wider application of distillation came with the advent
of the steamship and its requirement of fresh water for
boilers. Since then shipping owners have found that
distilling sea-water is generally much cheaper than
setting aside cargo or passenger space to store it; the
différence In costs can amount to 545,000 a year for a
medium-sized tanker.
Iesalting ocean water is thus no longer a
problem on board ships and is now common
practice. Its real significance today is for the relief of
water shortages on land. That is why scientists and
engineers are searching for more efficient and economical
ways of converting water from the world's greatest,
cheapest natural resource the oceans and from vast
reserves of inland brackish water, into water fit for use
in the home and by industry.
The technique of desalting is already well advanced.
Widely-scattered land based plants now in operation have
a total estimated daily production capacity of about
40 million gallons. But this is still only a "drop in the
ocean" it is no more than would satisfy the water needs
of an American industrial city of 350,000 people.
The reason is that only special economic and geogra¬
phical situations have so far justified the setting up of
large desalting plants. One example is Kuwait, on the
Persian Gulf, where vast petroleum resources began to be
developed on a giant scale about 15 years ago. At that
time water had to be imported by tanker at exorbitant
cost. Since then a series of large-scale water distilleries
has been built, fueled by natural gas and oil. Today
these plants produce well over 10 million gallons a day.
Yet although the fuel ls virtually free, the water is not
cheap compared with the cost of supplying water in
many other parts of the world. But for Kuwait desalting
water was cheaper than importing It.
Normally, the costs of providing water In areas lucky
enough to be endowed with a good, natural supplyare
much lower than for any other commodity on earth.
Thus, water supplied by desalting processes will only
become competitive with water from conventional sources
when technological Improvements have increased the
efficiency of these processes and brought down the basic
costs of production.
he stumbling block in the use of distillation
to make the oceans supply the water needs
of industry is the cost of providing the large amounts
of energy needed for the conversion processes.
There are already encouraging signs, however, that the
gap between the cost of water produced by desalting and
water from conventional sources is closing up. Since
1951 intensive research and development in the United
States have brought down desalting production costs,
even In pilot demonstration plants, from #5.00 per 1,000
gallons to between $1.40 and $1.00, as compared with an
average cost of $0.40 for municipal water delivered to the
public. At the same time conventional water costs have
been climbing slowly, thus further closing the gap. Some
specialists maintain that within the next decade or so
further technological improvements may reduce the cost
of desalted water to between $0.40 and $0.60 per 1,000
gallons.
The Important programme of research and develop¬
ment in the United States which produced these lower
cost conversion results was initiated In 1952 by the
Office of Saline Water. This U.S. agency was establish¬
ed by the Department of the Interior to "develop new
or Improved conversion processes . . . conduct research
and technical development ... to make engineering
studies to ascertain the lowest investment and operat¬
ing costs and to determine the best plant designs and
conditions of operations."
Since then It has been attacking these problems with
the help of demonstration plants erected in Freeport,
Texas and San Diego, California (both with a dally pro¬
duction capacity of one million gallons) and at Webster,
South Dakota. Other demonstration plants are being
built in North Carolina and New Mexico. All five employ
different techniques for desalting water. The U.S. saline
water conversion programme ls certainly the most exten¬
sive In operation today.
Another achievement in the campaign to reduce produc¬
tion costs comes from the island of Aruba In the Carib¬
bean. Here, a large distilling plant has been combined
with a thermal power station. Steam passes through
the turbines to generate electricity and ls then used
to heat the sea water. About half the water produced
on Aruba is used by an oil refinery, and the remainder
is the sole source of supply for some 54,000 people on
this completely waterless Island.
Another place where it has been found worthwhile to
set up a sea-water distillation plant ls Guernsey, an
island in the English Channel. Ordinarily Guernsey gets
enough rain to produce a bumper crop of tomatoes on
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

WATER DESALTING (Cont'd)
Squeezing molecules through plastic pores
which Its economy largely depends. But about once In
every eight years a drought occurs at a critical time and
the tomato crop fails. When the islanders found that
for the price of crop insurance premiums they could have
a desalting plant, they built one with a capacity of
500,000 gallons a day. Though it will not be used very
often, It represents an investment in a cheap form of
crop insurance.
Until recent times seagoing distillation plants were
simple contraptions in which salt water was boiled in a
kettle atop which was attached a coiled metal tube that
trapped the steam and condensed It to a trickle of fresh
water. Modern water stills are vastly more complex
and more efficient. Most of the heat applied to water at
one stage ls recaptured and transferred to the next stage
to vaporize more water.
But the chief problem ls still the high cost of power.
Can atomic energy offer a solution? Some scientists
now maintain that with further research it will be
possible to combine the production of electricity and the
conversion of ocean water in giant atomic power plants
and thereby produce both electric power and fresh water
at costs well below today's figures.
These scientists have calculated that water can be pro¬
duced for about $0.25 per 1,000 gallons In plants delivering
1,000 million gallons of fresh water daily. They main¬
tain that even this low cost could be further reduced
through the use of breeder reactors which differ from
present conventional atomic reactors in that they
literally breed or create additional fuel supplies as a by¬
product.
Distillation, of course, is only one of many methods
now known for desalting water and, in terms of present
knowledge and experience, it is so far the most efficient
and widely-used process. Distillation plants produce
very pure water: less than ten parts of salts for one
million parts of water. It makes little difference In cost
whether the process starts with sea-water (35,000 parts
per million) or brackish water (1,000 to 10,000 parts per
million).
The costs of an entirely different type of desalting
process known as electrodlalysls, however, vary with the
salt content of water. In electrodlalysls the energy
consumed ls proportional to the amount of salts remov¬
ed. Thus, where the need ls to make brackish water fit
for human needs it has a basic advantage over distilla¬
tion. Little energy is needed to purify brackish water
(typically about 2,000 parts of salts per million) to a level
that meets public health standards for drinking water
(500 parts per million in the U.S.A.).-
Electrodlalysls depends on plastic membranes that act
somewhat like chemical sieves. This is how they work
in the case of the common salt found in sea-water. Each
molecule of salt is composed of one atom of sodium and
one of chloride. When salt is dissolved in water it splits
into two particles called ions one a negatively charged
atom of chloride and the other a positively charged
atom of sodium. In electrodlalysls the electric current
causes the two kinds of ions to flow in opposite direc¬
tions through banks of plastic membranes forming a
series of compartments. The process leaves less salty,
though not entirely purified, water in one compartment
and more salty in the next, and so on down the entire
bank of membranes.
The amount of salts retained in the water can be
adjusted as required to the level needed in drinking
water, for instance. (Water produced by distillation is
unpalatable because nearly all the salts have been re¬
moved.) Many commercial plants use electrodlalysls and
countries which have set up such plants include Israel,
Japan, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union and South
Africa.
iNother promising method on which research
lis now being pursued is the desalting of sea-
water by freezing. The first ice that forms when sea-
water freezes contains practically no salt and can be
melted down Into fresh water. Freezing has two big
advantages over distillation: less energy is required to
freeze water than to vaporize it; there is no formation
of mineral deposits on equipment as is the case when high
temperatures are used. Offsetting these advantages are
the need for expensive mechanical equipment to handle
Ice by the carload and the difficulty of eliminating the
salt water and brine which tend to cling to the crystals
of frozen fresh water. A good deal of the fresh water
produced has to be used for washing the crystals. But
the stage has now been reached where demonstration
plants have been built and are operating on an experi¬
mental basis.
Among all the methods of desalting the simplest is
distillation by the heat of the sun. Its chief attraction
is' that it makes use of energy supplied absolutely free
of charge. The apparatus used is simple and relatively
inexpensive to build. The typical solar still consists of
a trough of salt water beneath a slanting roof of glass
or clear plastic. The water slowly evaporates, condenses
30
'HARD' WATER IN
THE FAR NORTH
In the Far North Eskimo wives keep their
stocks of drinking water as blocks of
solid ice piled up in the open air (left).
When only sea water is available this
can be frozen to remove the salt a
method employed in the Arctic seaboard
areas of several regions. Shallow basins
are filled with six inches of sea-
water and when the salty water has
frozen to a depth of just over half an
inch, the ice is collected and the brine
beneath poured away (the first ice that
forms when sea-water freezes contains
practically no salt). Plants which desalt
sea-water by freezing are now being
used experimentally in several countries.
© Paul Almasy, Paris

BONNEVILLE SALT
FLATS in the United
States stretch for miles
acrossthe northwest cor¬
ner of the state of Utah.
Today, an unbroken
line of telegraph poles
marches to the horizon
and roaring motor cars
set world speed records
on this natural race
course. Bonneville Salt
Flats and the surround¬
ing Great Salt Lake
desert are the former
bottom and shores of a
vast fresh-water lake
that covered over 20,000
square miles in this
area between 10,000
and 15,000 years ago.
The part of it that
is left today is called The
Great Salt Lake. Under¬
ground water, seeping
up from below the for¬
mer lake bottom, and
rain waters, continuous¬
ly dissolving salts from
rocks, have left evapo¬
rated sal:ne deposits
estimated at more than
one thousand million
tons. Recovering this salt
is now a major industry.
Photo Fritz Goro. from Life
Magazine© 1963 Time Inc.
on the under side of the roof, and trickles down into a
gutter. Solar distillation plants are naturally of the
greatest value to areas that are not only rich in sunshine
and poor in other fuels, but also where land space is not
at a premium. They take up a lot of space if used for
large-scale desalting and U.S. engineers have estimated
that an Installation covering 40 acres would be needed
to irrigate 120 acres of farm land.
While electrodlalysls and distillation have already
proved their worth and freezing shows progressively en¬
couraging results, scientists and engineers are investigat¬
ing at least a dozen other desalting processes. One new
line of research concerns the use of plastic membranes
of a somewhat different type from those used in electro¬
dlalysls. In this process the membranes simply strain
salt ions from sea-water. The pressure of a powerful
pump squeezes the water molecules through the mem¬
brane pores, leaving the salt behind.
Those working on desalting research do not anticipate
anything approaching an Immediate major advance that
would revolutionize development in their field. They are
up against the hard fact that taking salt out of water
has much in common with oll-refinlng: both Involve
chemical separations that demand much energy and
expensive equipment.
Nevertheless, present research promises to lead to
significant economies that will expand the potential use
of desalted water. Development of cheaper or long-
lasting membranes would cut the cost of electrodlalysls.
New methods for controlling boiler scale the hard
coating of mineral deposits that tends to be deposited on
hot metal surfaces by sea or brackish water would lead
to increased efficiency In all distillation processes.
Engineers are also trying to gain more efficiency by In¬
genious combinations of different processes.
Each new Installation results in some improvement and
paves the way for more efficient operation. The expe¬
riences with new and larger plants coupled with continu¬
ed research efforts should hasten the day when more
of the world's people with no reasonable source of Iresh
water may have access to the benefits of high-quality
water produced by desalting plants.
31
