MARINE METROPOLIS. Strolling citizens dot the vastness of "Independence Square" at the port of
Cotonou, Dahomey, where a rising metropolis and fast-expanding port offer one of Africa's most striking
examples of urban planning and economic development. Building in background is Cotonou's Congress Hall.
INVESTMENT
I by H.M. Phillips
he economics of education and Investment in
human resources has been one of the
neglected subjects in the science of economics, though
the great founder of modern economics, Adam Smith
in his Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, placed great
stress on education. In the middle and at the end of
the next century, other great economists notably Karl
Marx and Alfred Marshall also stressed the influence of
education on economic and social development. But for
much of the first part of our century the subject has
had little study. It is only in the last few years that
a growing number of economists have been making it
one of their principal pre-occupations, and that the
words "human capital" are coming into widespread use.
When an economist speaks of "investment in human
resources" or refers to the creation of "human capital,"
he covers all of the activities which increase the effective¬
ness of the human factor in production. These include
education, training in Industry, basic research; science,
applied technical research and development, and the
creation of all types of knowledge which increase pro¬
ductivity. He also covers the means for the better
distribution of such knowledge, communication media,
fellowships, libraries, travel abroad, as well, of course,
as all measures in the field of health, nutrition and
social organization which improve man's output. While
we are concerned here mostly with education, no aspect
of human resource development can be neglected with¬
out grave economic waste.
The sudden recognition by economists of the role of
education in economic development caught some edu¬
cators by surprise. Used to their high calling
as custodians and transmitters of human and social
values they had not sufficiently realized that they held
in their hands one of the most powerful means of 9
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE (Cont'd)
Teamwork for educators and economists
wiping out the pathetically low living levels prevailing
over most of the globe. Finance ministers were also
caught by surprise. Used to regarding education as a
purely social expenditure, they suddenly found their
economists on the side of the education ministers, and
educational budgets as a whole are Increasing more than
proportionately to total budgets and population growth.
The words "human capital" can easily be misunder¬
stood and they are repugnant to some people because
they see In the use of them a materlallst view of human
personality, and perhaps they are best avoided. There
are two assurances needed. First what must be in mind
Is investment in people, and not the using of people as
if they were Investments. Secondly economics has
to be defined In the final analysis as the science of
how to Increase consumption rather than production,
i.e. the satisfaction of human needs, desires and expec¬
tations.
Economists have seldom disagreed on these points.
J. S. Mill stated: "the human being I do not classify as
wealth. He Is the purpose for which wealth exists."
Marx, in the same vein, wrote : "Modern industry,
indeed, compels society, under penalty of death, to re¬
place the detail-worker of today, crippled by lifelong
repetition of one and the same trivial operation, and
thus reduced to the mere fragment of a man, by the
fully developed Individual, fit for a variety of labours,
ready to face any change of production, and to whom
the different social functions he performs are but so
many modes of giving free scope to his own actual and
acquired powers." A century later, Keynes was writ¬
ing: "consumption to repeat the obvious is the sole
end and object of all economic activity."
While economics has to express itself in the form of
measurable human preferences, and Is therefore mainly
concerned with matters which can be measured, "psychic
Income" as well as "physical income" has long had re¬
cognition in economic analysis so long as It can be
expressed in terms of preferences. The economist draws
the demand curve; he does not make it. Moreover, even
in the narrow sense of economics, the desire to work
is a fundamental part of man's nature and a great
source of satisfaction to him. There Is nothing de¬
meaning in thinking of man in his economic aspects
so defined, even though he is also made for bigger
things.
Clearly what is required in an approach which Is
"convergent" to use the term Mr. René Maheu, the Di¬
rector General, has Introduced into Unesco's programme.
The problem Is not only to use the educational system
as an Instrument to raise living levels, but to use It
to enable man to protect and to develop his highest ac¬
complishments and aspirations. Of the world's popu¬
lation of 3,180 million, 40 % are under 15.


These young people will be the mature
population of the world in 1990 and
2000, when they will hold in their
hands man's vast technological power
and with it man's destiny.
But because of the poverty in so many parts of the
world today great numbers of these children are not at
school. Only half of the child population of five to
fourteen years of age is at school, and a large number of
these do not complete the full primary school cycle.
There is therefore an urgent task for educators and
economists working together on the economic aspects of
education.
«A Poets, as well as economists, have likened men to
money. Lorca in his volume Romancero Gitano says
of the death of the gipsy, Autonito el Camborio, Viva
moneda que nunca se volverá a repetir (living coin
which can never be minted again). Antonlto, the gipsy,
was illiterate and could not read Lorca's poem. There
are ' 700 million illiterates in the world today, and, as
Lorca saw, they have stamped on them the Irreplaceable
mintage of the human individual. No man must receive
less respect because he is illiterate. But every man
has the right to be literate.
Lorca himself, who wrote this famous line, was shot
while still in his thirties. With his death, the world lost
the full years of his genius, which can never be repeated.
It is a terrible thought that there is
an international convention for the
preservation of monuments and
works of art in times of war, but
none for the preservation of human
capital.
From the tragic death of a poet it is, I fear, piling
on the agony to take the reader to a further subject of
depression, the chamal houses of the Middle Ages. But
the first econometrician (economist-statistician) of
human resources, Sir William Petty, lived at the time of
the Black Death, the greatest single destroyer of human
capital in history the power of the plague microbe far
exceeding man's own destruction of man.
A witness of the plague in London, he estimated sta¬
tistically that it would have been worth while, in eco¬
nomic terms, for the bodies of the plague victims, since
they were the chief sources of infection, to have been
put in gold coffins and transported out of London. The
capital value of the lives saved would have far exceeded
that of all of the gold Involved. Sir William Petty
was an educational pioneer as well as an econometri¬
cian. He described the education of his day as a "rabble
of words."
In his book "Advice to Samuel Hartlib," he advocated
a more practical education, and said: "For we see
children do delight in drums, pipes, fiddles, guns made
of elder-sticks and bellows' noses, piped keys, etc., paint¬
ing flags and ensigns with elder-berries and corn-poppy,
making ships with paper and setting even nut-shells
a-swlmming, handling the tools of workmen as soon
as they turn their backs and trying to work them¬
selves, fishing, fowling, hunting, setting springs and
traps for birds and other animals, making pictures in
their writing-books, making tops, gigs and whirligigs,
quilting balls, practising divers tricks upon the cards, etc.,
with a million more besides." The controversy between
the "rabble of words" and the "gigs and whirligigs" and
"setting even nut-shells a-swimming" schools of thought
still persists today in the writings of educators and
economists.
Sir William would have been delighted to read in the
reports of the Community Education Centre at Djajagirl
that modern Indonesian children write their texts on
dried banana skins, on planks, and on the sand, when
their notebooks are used up, and new ones have not
arrived. Ingenuity is one of the most precious economic
assets.
For the next great econometrician of human capital
let us move to Soviet Russia in the early 1920's, when
a country which is now an industrial giant was going
through the first troubled years of its transition from
an underdeveloped country. In 1924, Professor S.G. Stru-
mllin, doyen of Soviet economists and still working today
In Moscow at a ripe old age, undertook a scientific
analysis of the value of years of schooling of different
length in raising the output of wealth.

© Paul Almasy
For this Indian woman from an isolated valley in the Andes, the
streets of a large modern city are an entirely new world. Edu¬
cation could help to make this the everyday world of her children.
His studies showed the large superiority of producti¬
vity of workers who had had formal schooling, together
with vocational training, as compared with those who
had only training on the Job. Many people had. of
course, been aware of this before, but no-one had estab¬
lished clear-cut results based on statistical. measurement.
These and similar studies, since Strumllln himself was
one of the architects of the GOSPLAN, led to the
concentration of the Soviet Union on education over
the following years.
It was estimated In 1960 by the Oxford economist. John
Valzey, who has contributed so much to the study of
the economics of education, that the U.S.S.R. had, for a
period of over 30 years (starting, of course, at a lower
level than the Western European countries and with a
higher proportion of young age-groups), Invested bet¬
ween twice and three times as much of Its national
product in developing education than had the average
Western European countries.
In the lnter-war years, economists were mostly con¬
cerned with problems of stability, having seen the world
economy shaken periodically to the base by devastating
Industrial slumps. It was not until the solution to this
problem was found through the revolution in economic
thought brought about by Keynes, that attention was
concentrated on development.
The division of the world into the
developed and underdeveloped coun¬
tries with a growing gap between
them was seen as a danger equal to
or greater than that of the great
slumps.
The new thinking which took place on development
brought with It new light on the role of human resources.
In a study made for the United Nations in 1948, Professors
A Lewis, T. Schultz, A. Baltra and G. Hakim an expert
group from the U.K., the U.S.A., Chile and the Lebanon
stated : "In our opinion most underdeveloped countries
are In the situation that investment in people is likely to
prove as productive, In the purely material sense, as
any Investment In material resources, and In many
cases investment In people would lead to a greater flow
of goods and services than would follow upon any com¬
parable Investment In material capital."
Over the next few years pressure was high from the
governments of the economically less-developed countries
to have education treated among top priorities In their
request for assistance, the political demand for better
education being very intense In those countries; while
in the developed countries Interest was stimulated, not
only by the new economic thinking and the demands of
technical progress, but also by the power competition
between the western group of countries and the socialist
republics.
Professor Schultz, studying the economic progress of the
United States, has estimated that between 1919 and 1957,
with the addition of only one per cent of total inputs of
tangible capital and labour, real Income had Increased
at the rate of about three per cent per year, the rest being
attributable to a somewhat mysterious "residual factor"
in which education played a prominent part. Professor
Denlson, using a different approach, found the contribu¬
tion of education to economic growth In the U.S.A. in the
period 1929 to 1956 amounted to about 23 per cent of the
growth rate of national product.
Work was also done in Norway by Professor Aukrust,
who came to a similar conclusion In respect of the growth
of national production of his country between 1900 and
1955; while in the United Kingdom, Professors Reddaway
and Smith showed that capital and labour Inputs
accounted for only a quarter of the Increased output per
head in manufacturing industries between 1948 and 1954.
CONT'D ON PAGE 28
11

INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE
These studies dealt mainly with education as a factor
In production, but attention was drawn to its role as an
item of consumption. By "consumption" is meant that
people want education for their children quite apart
from Its economic value, and are prepared to pay a
lot for it, because it contributes to the enjoyment of
life and Is a social and individual asset. It was also
noted that It is an Item of consumption which is
an economic and social end In itself that Is to say, it
is one of the components of living levels.
A few years ago the United Nations set up an Expert
Group on the definition and measurement of living
levels. This group selected twelve indicators which cov¬
ered the whole range of human needs, including both
those measurable in monetary terms and those which are
not. Among the twelve Indicators selected, the third
was education, and in the assessment made of the prio¬
rity of the different indicators, it was preceded only by
expectation of life and infant mortality rates (clearly
It is better to be uneducated and alive than educated
and dead), and national average food supplies (man can¬
not live by bread alone, but needs bread to live).
Further, education seems to be, as John Stuart Mill
maintained, the only item of consumption not subject
to the law of diminishing utility. One may, of course
say of a particular curriculum that as needs change its
utility diminishes, but it would be most unlikely for
anyone to claim he had all the education he could
usefully possess. Indeed, the evidence is, the more edu¬
cation people have, the more they want. A report by
the British adult educational societies showed that the
three quarters of the population who finished school at
14, and the four per cent who finished at 17 to 20, were
each represented by a quarter of society-members.
This does not, of course, mean that there is no limit
to the amount of education people should be given at
public expense. Indeed, the economics of education
Is concerned precisely with trying to determine what
proportion of national resources should be devoted to
education. Ideally, this would be done by measuring
the cost and benefits of education, and investment would
be made In education wherever the benefits exceed those
of alternative forms of Investment.
However, while it Is possible to measure the costs of
education. It is extremely difficult, to measure its future
benefits.
The mysterious residual factor already mentioned
consists not only of education, but also of research and
the whole range of man's skills which make physical
resources productive. Clearly, research is an indirect
return on education of very high value.
28
Estimates show that as of 1955 the
return on the average dollar invest¬
ed in hybrid corn research in the U.S.
was at least 700% per annum.
Results of this kind and it is unfortunate that all
research Is not as successful as this spring from high
levels of education. But the highest inventive skills of
this kind, whether scientific or organizational, have to
be supported by ranks of middle technicians, and by
entrepreneurs or educated farmers who will exploit
market possibilities, and complementary technical and
vocational education is required. Further, they need
to operate in a society with an Informed electorate, and
to operate in a society where there is a sense of indivi¬
dual opportunity based on a broad educational system.
In an American context we may note the findings by
Dr. G. Lewis and Professor C.A. Anderson from their study
of the social origin and social mobility of businessmen in
the city of Lexington. The enquiry covered all the
businessmen in a city of 100,000 persons and showed
that "the most Important single factor favouring busi¬
ness success was education." If we look at economically
underdeveloped areas, we find the same kind of data.
A survey in a backward rural area
in Jamaica showed that "for persons
in low status occupations, education
is the main channel of social mobi¬
lity. "
The whole question of the relation of education to
social mobility and social structure, is, however, a diffi¬
cult one. Education can also be a conserving force. And
even in societies with the best legislation and intentions,
people receive better education than others because of
original privileges of wealth and parenthood. Studies
in developed as well as developing countries illustrate the
danger of generalization as to the effect of education
on social structure without careful study of the particular
society and type of educational system involved.
Interesting studies have been made on this aspect by
Professor D. McClelland of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology of the relation between economic progress
and what he calls "the need for achievement" or "n
achievement," a desire to do well, not so much for the
sake of social prestige, but for the sake of an inner feeling
of personal accomplishment. McClelland has applied
laboratory findings to workers in factories and has also
conducted a study of history relating degrees of "n achie¬
vement" and economic growth on the one hand, and
with education and "n achievement" on the other.
In modern times it is in the school that motivation for
"n achievement" is developed at an early age by school
examinations, the desire to emulate in competitions,
games, etc. All these, of course, presuppose that the
values transmitted by the society are progressive and
entrepreneurial; unless they are, the school can be the
custodian and transmitter of traditional forces opposed
to change. One must always remember that education
is what educators make of it.
The difficulty with the "n achievement" approach is
that it seems to make too easy assumptions as to what kind
of activities are worthwhile. Thus the young Buddhist
performing his year's service in the priesthood shows
high "n performance" in spiritual terms, but the begging
bowl which he carries reflects his performance in eco¬
nomic terms. Indeed, the more "n" he is, the more
aversion he will have to economic gain, while doing his
priestly service.
The question of what is of economic utility and what
is not is a difficult one. Some years ago a firm making
ball-point pens received an order from a developing
country for a large number of tops of pens. The firm

© Paul Almasy The world-wide expansion of education will call formulions of new teachers. Despite advances in teaching aids the
teacher remains the life core of education. Here, future science teachers are given practical laboratory experience.
queried the request. Had a mistake been made? Not
at all. The pens were wanted by people who could not
write, but put the tops of pens in their breast pockets
for prestige purposes. Sheer waste? A small and harm¬
less Imposture like high heels worn by short band
leaders? A good, advertisement for literacy.
Education tends to reduce excessive population growth.
An interesting speculation which I have heard made is to
suppose that developing countries experiencing the "popu¬
lation explosion" the average rate of population growth
of the poorer countries of the world is 70 per cent higher
than that of the wealthier countries Instituted as their
first priority compulsory education up to the age of
16 limited to females.
Whatever may be the political difficulties of such a
course, the effect would probably be to cause a direct and
immediate reduction of population expansion since many
births take place in that age group. This measure
would also create a better educated female population
which would be a source of recruitment for teachers
in primary educational systems, as well as increasing
the efficacity of teaching in the homea form of edu¬
cation not dealt with here, but of great importance.
The cost of education varies from country to country,
according to the demographic situation. Most developing
countries have a larger proportion of children to total
population than developed countries, and the relative
cost of teachers' salaries in relation to average income
is higher. The usual pattern seems to be that about two-
thirds of the annual cost of education consists of the
salaries of teachers. Education is therefore proportion¬
ately more expensive if the same standards are aimed at.
It is an unfortunate fact that normally the poorer
a country is, the more relatively dear is its unit cost
of education. It is not easy to make comparisons of
expenditure on education between countries, but It seems
that the percentage of national income spent on edu¬
cation varies between 2 per cent and 6 per cent, the
highest levels being attained in Japan and the U.S.S.R.
There Is another approach to measurement of the eco¬
nomic returns of education, which has attracted much
interest. A rough description of It is that it takes
the average earnings over a lifetime of people In occu¬
pations for which specific degrees of education are
required, and compares them with the earnings of people
without the same degree of education.
Professor G. Becker, in his studies for the United States
National Bureau of Economic Research, using a method
similar to this, estimated, that as of 1950 the U.S. male
population was earning 14.8 per cent annually on what
they had privately invested in obtaining their high-
school, college and university educations. If public costs
were added, the rate was about 11 per cent.
At the other end of the scale of economic develop¬
ment. Professor Oscar Lewis, in a survey of a slum area
on the outskirts of Mexico City (1) employing simpler me¬
thods, showed a close relationship between the Income
and the years of schooling of the Inhabitants even a
bare modicum of extra primary education enabling mem¬
bers of a poor community to outstrip the income of their
neighbours. This research gave results similar to that In
the Soviet Union which were described earlier, under¬
taken by Professor Strumllin.
(1) See "The Children of Sanchez," Random House, New
York, 1961 ($7.50); Seeker and Warburg, London, 1962 (36/-);
Penguin Modern Classics (paperback ed.), London, 1964 (8/6). «q
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INVESTMENT IN PEOPLE (Cont'd)
A call for millions of new teachers
The foregoing material, while perhaps impressive as
Indicating the overall economic value of education, is not
usable as a practical guide to specific educational plans
and programmes. It indicates only a pre-disposltlon to
Invest in education unless it is clear that there Is some
other Investment which is of more vital Importance.
Governments, therefore, are still faced with an extreme¬
ly difficult problem In evaluating actual educational
plans and programmes in relation to other alternative
investments. On this Issue many of us lean to the more
specific method of finding out what are the educational
requirements of a given economic and social plan or
perspective of a given country.
In the same way the cultural demand from education
can be derived from the standards which the society
wishes to set.
Sometimes society's standards are
higher than the economy can bear,
and in these cases there has to be a
30
slowing up of educational expansion
until such time as the economist has
created the necessary resources.
But here again because of the long-term effects, direct
and Indirect, It Is unwise of finance ministers and planners
to be too rigid and to try to pin back education to narrow
economic limits, because of the impact of education on
the vitality of the whole economic and social system.
There Is much evidence that careful and long-range
planning of education builds up In society the "residual
factor" which acts as a stimulus to and a multiplier of
production, as well as meeting manpower needs.
What are likely to be the educational priorities of the
developing countries from an economic standpoint?
Clearly they should take action in the field of vocational
and technical education needed to fill existing gaps in
skilled manpower. In such cases the return is huge.
Then there is vocational and technical training for
known expansions of Industry, and in new States lacking
administrative cadres the quick training of administrators
and managers for Industry is also of the highest priority.
But "crash" action of this kind rapidly peters out unless
it is based on long-term extension of secondary, technical
and higher education, and this takes us at once to one
of the most vital needs of the daynamely educational
planning. Very close attention has to be paid to future
demand, which has to be met by planning now.
At the same time, the problem of the unemployed "white
collar" worker Is a serious one in many developing
countries, as is the surplus of lawyers and the shortage
of engineers, and the drift of young labour from the
land. It Is here that close co-ordination is required
between economic planning and educational planning.
The newly developing countries are advancing on new
ground. Better educational systems and Improved curri¬
cula are required. Aiming at quick growth with small
resources, they cannot afford the waste Involved of
leaving this to chance. Nor is it an answer to say that
In the older countries "laissez-faire" produced the
necessary results. Serious errors and dislocations In
educational development occurred in these countries at
various times. One of these has been over-specialization
on the part of students taking technical training.
Increased emphasis is now being placed on accom¬
panying technical training with a good general educa¬
tion In the developed countries because of the increased
rate of technical change, and In the developing countries
because of the need for flexibility in the use of their
limited resources.
While technical and secondary education have the
clearest economic returns, no country can obtain really
high or even medium-high leaving levels widely spread
over the population without a compulsory school system
of at least seven years, covering the primary grades and
extending into secondary a substantial proportion of
better pupils. Moreover, widespread literacy among the
adult as well as the pupil population is necessary not
only to Increase the productivity of labour, but. for social
and political purposes.
Importance must also be given to adult education in
subsistence areas to give people incentive to rise above
the poverty line and in rural areas to move from subsis¬
tence production into the market economy. This will
help to break the vicious circle of governments being
unable to raise taxes for education because of lack of
revenue, which in turn is due to a large proportion of
the population remaining outside the monetary economy.
Countries divided into literates and illiterates are dual
societies, where part of the population is not in the
position of being fully "legitimised" members of the
nation able to read, write and take effective part in
political and legal processes. What is true of individual
nations also applies to the world as a whole.
The world is today a dual society,
with hundreds of millions of people
who have had no effective education,
who cannot read and write.
Even for their children compulsory education of seven
years is still a future hope rather than a present fact.
Literacy programmes do not fall within the normal
planning of the formal educational system and call
for a special approach. There is, of course, a close inter¬
lock between the extent and effectiveness of primary
education in a country and its rate of literacy. Today,
the number of illiterates in the world is increasing, despite
adult literacy campaigns, because compulsory primary
education does not yet cover the large population of
children swelling every year the number of adult
illiterates. This is one of the results of "the population
expansion".
The approach of the economist to literacy is that
adult literacy campaigns should be related to the work
environment, and then spread out over the whole
country. Thus the first and most productive step is to
make literate all the country's factory workers. The
productivity of literates in factories as compared with
illiterates is so well established that the cost of the
literacy programme in factories is paid off in a short
time.
Further, the financial burden can be and should be
transferred from the State to the industries concerned
who will recover it later in the additional efficiency of
the labour force. Then the central government should
extend literacy campaigns to the public services, the

post offices, railways, etc., dealing not only with the
literacy of their employees, but utilizing the same facilities
to the families and relatives. This could be done by
passing the cost on to the consumer of public services,
with the State only paying the central charges for teacher
training, the production of materials, etc. Then rural
areas where there are large-scale projects of development
or modernization schemes or other forms of inter¬
vention in development through river valley projects,
etc. should be treated in the same way as factories.
The cost of the salaries of the teachers and of the
buildings should, as far as possible, be borne in the costs
of the projects themselves.
As resources become available, the central government
should extend over the whole country facilities for
creating literacy, training first the most productive age
groups and the most fast developing regions in order
to obtain the most rapid returns on the investment In
literacy. The development thus brought about and the
increase of the central budget should then be used as
early as possible to put the whole country on a uniform
basis of literacy as part of citizenship rights.
In addition to creating a well-planned educational
system and effective measures to eradicate illiteracy,
it is necessary for the developing countries to give
increased attention to science and technology. Here
again, the approach of the economists is a selective one.
Not all research leads to the huge returns we noted
earlier in the case of hybrid seed corn. Some research
is extremely costly and is on economic grounds best
carried as part of the costs of production of large scale
Industry.
A number of developed countries rely heavily on the
importation of research results rather than creating their
own research facilities. Japan is historically such a
case, although today it is planned to double the amount
of per capita income which is spent on research between
1960-1970 from just over one to two per cent. Germany,
currently, is spending very much less on research, even
allowing for its special military position, than either the
U.S. or the UK., and its importation of foreign patents
is very high.
Many developing countries spend less than a i% of
their gross national product on research and develop¬
ment activities whereas in the case or the U.S.A., U.S.S.R.
and U.K. the amount rises from 2.5 to 3 %, a good deal
of this, or course, being for military purposes, but at the
same time having substantial application to industrial
production as a whole. The importance of scientists in
economic growth, like the role of education, was greatly
neglected In the past.
In 1940 there were only 200 doctors
of philosophy in physics in the whole
of the U.S.A., and many less in the
European countries. In 1961 the
annual rate of production of Ph.D.s
in physics was 561.
Today the employment of scientists of all types Is
growing at a rate four times that of over-all employment.
The great expansion of science and development of
technology which is taking place calls for increased
effort in the social sciences. Man is not showing the
same mastery over himself and the problems of his
social and political environment as he is obtaining over
the physical world. The great advance which has taken
place in the last half century in man's power to create
material wealth, and in technology, could, with im
provements of social and political organization, solve In
a few decades the world's problems.
The danger is that technology will steer the ship instead
of providing the motors, and that opportunities for
leisure, culture and the full flowering of the human
genius will become the secondary instead of the pri¬
mary objective. Once again we come back to the concept
of convergence. A great effort is called for in the
social and the human sciences, and in our schools in
improving both the philosophy and the practice of educ¬
ation. In education the factor of quality as well as
quantity must never be overlooked.
The newness of the economic approach to education
calls for special understanding and collaboration between
educators and economists. Education is one of the most
sensitive aspects of national policy, and economists, when
moving into the field of educational planning In company
with educators, have to be closely Informed as to the
social and political as well as the economic aspects of
education.
Some countries regard education policy as too important
to be left to local authorities. Others regard it as too
important to be left to the central authorities.
It would be a strange world in which
we were all educated on a single
system under methods chosen only
for their economic efficiency.
At the same time the task of educational expansion is
so great that it can only be done by eliminating waste in
existing educational systems as well as expanding them.
All this calls for the close International co-operation
which it is Unesco's role to sponsor.
Unesco's has educational planning to the forefront
of its draft programmes and budget for 1965-6, which
includes over $5 million out of Its educational budget.
International aid for education, Including emergency
programmes In Africa and the Middle East, has been In
recent years probably of the order of $130 million
annually; while direct country to country aid has
amounted to about $500 million. The International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development and the International
Development Association have, in their new programme for
aid for education, already granted credits of about $20
million to countries.
But international aid will never be a solution in itself.
It can only be a stimulus and a supplement (though a
vital one) to national effort. The educational budgets of
the developing countries amount annually to about $14
thousand million, and in most countries education Is the
greatest single employer of trained manpower.
The great expansion of education which must take
place will call for millions of new teachers. For the years
1950 to 1970 the developing countries of the world will
probably need more than 700,000 additional secondary
and two-and-a-half million additional primary teachers.
Teachers, despite mechanical advances, remain the life
core of education. The teacher's profession is about
to meet a tremendous and unprecedented challenge.
H. M. Phillips is economic adviser and director of the
Economic Analysis Division of Unesco's Department of
Social Sciences. He is. the author of many studies on
economic and social research in education, on the human
factor in economic development and on demographic and
manpower problems.
31
