DELIGHTS
A page from the
O
'riTRO PAVLYCHKO, a well-known young
mia7i poet, is a writer on the staff of the
rary monthly "October" in Lvov.
NLY feeble minds live on hope", said the late
Goethe. But the words spoken by the wise
Gcethe are only partly true. Hope is a characteristic of all
minds, the mediocre and the great alike, and even of the
most realistic, down-to-earth minds. Hope is our nurse and
the most affectionate and constant of lovers, faithful to the
end. It flatters the credulous imagination of the all-powerful
czar and the famous sage, of the impoverished labourer and
of someone as poor and wretched as myself; and it lulls our
doubting minds to sleep by recounting wonderful fairy-tales
which all of us believe spontaneously (though not
unconsciously).
It is indeed a feeble mind which believes that pears can
grow on willow-trees. Yet why should I not believe that I
shall be in St. Petersburg, even though it may be winter
time, and that I will again see those familiar faces so dear to
me, my splendid Academy, the Hermitage Museum, which I

OF THE ENGRAVER'S ART
diary of Shevchenko, June 26, 1857
have yet to visit, and that 1 wiii go to the opera, the resplen¬
dent, entrancing opera.
Oh, how sweet it is to believe in such a marvellous future.
I would be no more than a cold and unfeeling atheist if I
did not believe in hope, this wonderful, spell-binding god.
Here is how I have decided to arrange my life, with my
friends' help, of course. First of all I must no longer think
about painting. To do so would be like believing that pears
grow on willow trees. Already, in the past, I was never an
outstanding painter, and thus even less so today. The
greatest virtuoso may become a common or garden bala¬
laika player if he lets ten years go by without practising
his art. So I had better give up any idea of painting.
I hope, though, to devote myself entirely to engraving.
I believe that to achieve this goal I must limit my daily needs
to strict essentials and concentrate entirely on the study of
this art. Meanwhile I will make sepia copies of famous
works for future engravings. I think that two years' study
will be enough.
Next, I will return to my beloved Ukraine where life is so
pleasant, and there I will start work on my engravings. The
first will be "The Barracks", after Teniers. My immortal
Master, the great Karl Brüllov, said that people would
willingly come all the way from America just to glimpse
that masterpiece. And you can rely on the judgement of a
great man like Brüllov.
I now prefer engraving to all other fine arts. And not
without reason. A good engraver spreads what is educa¬
tional and beautiful throughout the community. His work is
of value to men and pleasing to God. The engraver's is the
finest and noblest calling that exists. How many works of
art which are only accessible to the rich would moulder in
little-known galleries were it not for the engraver's mira¬
culous needle: a divine calling indeed.
13
