A special Unesco report
TODAY'S TRENDS
IN WORLD
COMMUNICATIONS
i Paul Almasy. Paris
Every day, some 300 million copies oí daily
newspapers, 400 million radio receivers and
130 million television sets bring news and information to
the people of the "world. Over 212,000 fixed cinemas and
many thousands of mobile units provide them with
entertainment and information.
These facts emerge from a 380-page report, World
Communications (1), just published by Unesco, which
gives the latest information on press, radio, film and
television facilities throughout the globe. It also
highlights trends in these media during the past decade.
Significantly, all the mass media, except the daily press,
expanded more rapidly during this period than world
population, which increased by 26 per cent. The world's
total of radio receivers advanced by 60 per cent; the
number of fixed cinemas doubled and the total of TV
4 (1) Published In Paris 1964; price 47/stg., $9.50, 33 F. (cloth bound);
also published In the U.S.A. as a co-edltlon with the Unesco Publi¬
cations Center, New York.
sets tripled. Dally newspaper circulation rose by no more
than 20 per cent.
Many gains in press, radio and film were scored in the
developing countries. Television, almost unknown in
1953 in Africa, Asia and Latin America, has spread
swiftly to all parts of the world. Nevertheless, the
cinema has maintained a leading role in the world of
entertainment, its weekly total of spectators equalling
one-eighth of the world's population.
There has been a world-wide growth in the news agency
field. As many as 155 agencies are now operating in
80 countries, compared to 96 agencies in 54 countries a
decade ago.
Another striking trend has been the growing use of the
mass media for education in both developed and
developing countries (see article page 12).
World Communications emphasizes, however, that the
information media are very unequally shared between
nations and points out that some 70 per cent of the

Unesco's latest global report on press, radio, films and TV shows that though information media are outpacing population
growth, they are still very unequally shared, 70% of the world lacking adequate facilities. Europeans, for example, buy
38% of world daily papers and North Americans 23%, while Africans, Asians and South Americans together only buy 26%.
Above, study in intent readership offered by youngsters around a street-corner magazine vendor's pitch in Lima, Peru.
world's peoples, living in over 100 countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America, still lack adequate communication
facilities: in terms of daily newspapers there should be
at least 10 copies for every 100 people.
Europeans buy 38 per cent of world dally papers, and
North Americans 23 per cent, while Africans, Asians and
South Americans together buy only 26 per cent. In the
United Kingdom there are 51 copies of daily papers for
every 100 people the world's highest level compared to
only one paper for every hundred Africans or Indians.
In most countries throughout the world, dally news¬
papers have increased in circulation since 1950. Some of
the larger countries have registered significant advances.
The general interest dally press of the United States,
with a total of 59 million copies, claims a rise of four
million since 1954. In the same period, dally circulation
has expanded by five million copies in Japan and nine
million in the U.S.S.R. to reach a level of 39 million in
each country.
It seems clear that newspaper publishing now stands
on the verge of the most important technical revolution
In Its 400-year history.
In the field of printing itself, electronics and automation
have solved many problems in production control, espe¬
cially on high-speed rotary presses, as well as in actual
production. This is a feat which few believed possible
as little as 15 years ago.
There has been a vast improvement in rotary offset
printing, due largely to the use of photocomposition,
better Inking, faster etching methods, the electronic
engraving of plates and electronic control of registers.
Indeed, the days of conventional printing in raised type,
used since the time of Gutenberg and Caxton, appear to
be numbered. Its place will probably be taken by various
forms of photocomposition or filmsetting, that is, of
printing plates prepared from photograph negatives,
including both text and illustrations in the same process, 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Unesco-Paul Almasy. Paris
WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd)
From carrier pigeons to satellites
with a great gain in speed, versatility and economy.
A major result of these advances is that the need for
skilled technicians will be minimized.
Within a decade or two, it seems, only the mass
circulation newspapers and magazines will be printed as
they are today, though they will doubtless be able to
convert to the new processes eventually. The fact that,
for the time being, these techniques are particularly
suited to small circulation dailies, to weeklies and other
periodicals is of special interest to the developing
countries.
Newspaper publishing has also benefited from the
application of new telecommunication techniques, in
association with news agency development. These
advances have been made more particularly in the
developed countries. In Japan, newspaper and news
agency interests undertook post-war research on the
facsimile transmission of ideographs, as well as on
Monotype and Teletypesetting, as a means of raising
efficiency and conserving manpower. This culminated,
in 1959, in the simultaneous publication of newspaper
editions In Japanese cities hundreds of miles apart.
In 1962 a New York daily went a stage further with the
simultaneous publication, by high-speed facsimile and
Teletypesetting, of editions in Paris and Los Angeles, the
rate of transmitting material being 16 times the normal
speed by cable and radio. Later in the year, the same
newspaper transmitted several articles, by photo-
facsimile, to its Paris edition through the first commu¬
nications satellite, as well as seven pages to and from the
satellite.
These developments, It was foreseen, pointed the way to
the simultaneous production of newspaper editions
throughout whole regions and, ultimately, of "global

FIRST TRANSATLANTIC
LIVE TV VIA TELSTAR
Television experienced a spectacular development in 1 962 when
the first live programmes were relayed across the Atlantic by
means of Telstar, a communications satellite. Eighteen countries
in the Eurovision network participated with the United States
in these exchanges, viewed by an audience of over 200 million
in Europe and North America. The first image across the Atlantic
was a shot of engineers at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the
United States (below). This transmission, relayed by Telstar
as it circled the globe, was picked up by the giant horn antenna
at Pleumeur-Bodou in western France (left) and by a British
station at Goonhilly Downs, from where, a few days later, the
first transmissions of colour TV via satellite went to the U.S.A.
C.N.E.T.. Paris
newspapers." The subscriber would dial a telephone
number and the front page of his "paper" would appear
on his television screen, remaining there until he pressed
a button, when it would be replaced by the second page
and so on. He would, in fact, be able to view not only
his local newspaper but papers in all countries in this
way.
Recent advances in telecommunications culminated on
July 19, 1962 in one of the most dramatic events in news
agency history. On that day the world news agencies
entered the space age by using the first communications
satellite to relay dispatches by telephone and teleprinter
between continents. London and New York newspapers
also exchanged dispatches through the satellite.
It was foreseen that three "stationary" satellites, each
orbiting over the equator at a speed synchronized with
the rotation of the earth, could provide any type of
telecommunication service over the whole globe. Pro¬
fessional organizations of the press, such as the Inter¬
national Federation of Newspaper Publishers and the
Commonwealth Press Union, prepared for further develop¬
ments in the expectation that facilities of this kind would
be available to press and other users by 1968.
Ironically, the conditions of modern life have at times
forced a return to "new-old" techniques of com¬
munications. A somewhat fanciful example Is reported
by Reuters, which transmitted news dispatches by carrier
pigeon In 1850 and by communications satellite In the
historic experiment of 1962. The agency states that
pigeons have come back as carriers of newsfllm Items
across metropolitan areas. Pigeons are not worried, as
dispatch riders can be, by traffic Jams.
Many of the problems encountered In the field of the
press do not arise, or are less acute, In radio broadcasting,
and the developing countries In particular are giving
priority to this medium In expanding their information
facilities. Since 1950, the number of radio receivers for
every 100 people in all regions has Increased much more
rapidly than the ratio of dally newspapers. Only two
regions, Africa and Asia, now average fewer than five sets
per 100 people, suggested as a minimum of adequacy by
Unesco. The Americas, Europe, Oceania and the U.S.S.R.
exceeded this level by from 10 to 73 sets on a regional
basis.
here has been a parallel Increase in the
number of transmitters. Africa had 140
transmitters In 1950 and 370 in 1962. The number in
Europe rose during the same period from 566 to 2,700.
The total more than doubled In South America, almost
tripled in Asia and almost quadrupled In the U.S.S.R.
It is evident that, despite the world-wide challenge of
television, radio has a long and active future before It as
a medium unsurpassed In speed, range and economy.
Like the press, radio in the developed regions Is a
well-established medium. But, again like the press, It
has experienced many technical changes since 1950 and
Is on the threshold of new developments.
In recent years the transistor has brought "pocket
radio" within the reach of millions of people In all
regions. But the transistor receiver is no longer a
toyan object of Interest only because of Its diminutive
size. It is now a high-grade instrument capable of giving
both the volume and quality of sound usually associated
only with sets having four or five valves and working
from power mains.
Ieanwhile, the trend towards "miniaturi¬
zation", spurred by the revolution In elec¬
tronics and the development of space satellites, Is making
for still smaller receivers and other radio equipment.
Even now, the transistor Is being superseded by micro-
components such as the tunnel diode, which is already
in mass production. Within a decade, It Is expected by
some technical observers, the wrist-watch radio, powered
by the heat of the listener's body, will be generally
available. Such developments are giving further stimulus
to the mass production of low-cost receivers for use in
the developing countries. These developments are
moving so swiftly as to anticipate the day when there
will be one receiver for every family In the worlda
target which would at present require over 400 million
additional sets.
The past decade has witnessed the increasing adoption
of frequency modulation (FM) broadcasting, which
provides the listener with a high quality signal relatively
free from Interference and, moreover, employs hitherto
unused very high frequencies in the overcrowded radio
spectrum. The experience of a number of developing
countries, particularly in Europe and North America, has
shown that FM broadcasting for local services is capable
of expansion in a way which would relieve much of the
present burden in the low, medium- and high-frequency
bands and thus improve conditions for national, regional
and International transmissions. The introduction of FM
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd)
120 million more TV
sets in ten years
broadcasting Is therefore of special interest to the
developing countries, and particularly to tropical areas
affected by solar Interference.
Meanwhile, the high quality of FM transmissions has
stimulated a whole Industry catering to the radio-de¬
veloped taste for high fidelity musical recordings.
Coupled with this has been the development of stereo¬
phonic broadcasting which, by using two matched sources
of sound, gives breadth, depth and movement to musical,
theatrical and other programmes.
.fter only 27 years since its initial direction to
^a mass audience, television has established
Itself as a potent medium of information, education and
entertainment throughout the world. It was in 1936 that
the British Broadcasting Corporation inaugurated the
first public telecasts. The second world war halted tele¬
vision development. But, with the coming of peace, the
developed countries began to turn their electronics
industries to peaceful purposes.
Television is now expanding with fantastic speed. In
1950, Africa, South America, Asia and Oceania had no
television receivers at all. Today, countries in every
A mountain of pulp
wood framing the
Parliament buildings
in Ottawa symbolizes
Canada's role as the
world's largest producer
of newsprint. Publishers
in the U.S.A. and Cana¬
da consume more than
half the world's news¬
print production. De¬
mand for newsprint and
other printing paper in
many of the developing
countries is slowly in¬
creasing, but still reflects
the serious shortage
of newspapers and
other kinds of printed
information in most
parts of the world.
© Malak Studio, Ottawa
Deberny et Peignot. Paris Pellerin
A NEW ERA
IN PRINTING
A technical revolution is taking place
in printing today through the increas¬
ed adoption of photocomposition or
filmsetting in place of the use of
raised type. Left, a glass type-wheel
in the photographic unit of an
ultra-modern electronic photosetting
machine. This rotating disc, only
8 inches in diameter replaces three
tons of normal lead matrixes. It has
1,440 characters. In operation a stro¬
boscope light passes through the se¬
lected character on the disc into an
optical system which projects the light
in the form of a type character on to
sensitized film. As the light lasts only
a few microseconds, the image is
"stopped" on the film without halting
the rotating disc. The machine is ope¬
rated from a main keyboard similar to
that of a standard typewriter with
additional keys for various type com¬
posing functions. A second keyboard
controls sizes and kinds of type.

region maintain services. The world total of sets has
risen from a mere 11 million in 1950 to 130 million in 1963.
The number of transmitters has also increased
spectacularly during the same period, from 130 to 2,380.
For the first time more than half the world total of TV
receivers is to be found outside the U.S.A. Europe has
registered the greatest increase of all regions from
15 to 1,160.
IInternational programme co-operation has
become a regular feature of television develop¬
ment. Most exchanges so far have been made through
telerecordings. The direct transmission of programmes
across frontiers has progressed rather slowly because of
the need for link stations, coaxial cables and converters
to permit transmissions on one line definition (number
of lines and band-widths) to be received by another
system.
However, 18 Western European countries now exchange
programmes through Eurovision, sponsored by the
European Broadcasting Union, and with the United
States. Six Eastern European countries and the U.S.SH.
exchange programmes through Intervision, and also
co-operate with Eurovision in programme exchanges.
Nordvision links the Scandinavian countries. Bilateral
exchanges make available a wide range of other
programmes.
Many Asian, African and South American countries arc
unable to meet production costs for independent pro¬
grammes, or even the costs of better quality Imported
programmes. As a result, their television screens often
reflect the less impressive cultural standards of "popular"
commercial television in the developed countries. Never¬
theless, some of the developing countries are boldly
imaginative in their use of television facilities for
education.
In the field of reception, both small and "full size"
transistor sets, which work by battery or off the mains
and can thus be used Indoors or outdoors, have been
developed. It Is expected that, as in the case of radio,
the transistor will before long be superseded by even
smaller components which will make possible the
production of diminutive "handbag" sets, operating In
colour. Also foreseen is the manufacture of home sets
with the picture tube separated from the receiver. These
sets would be built into a wall for better viewing.
In the field of transmission, colour television is being
actively developed in the United States, Japan, the
U.S.S.R. and a number of European countries. Advances
are also being made in stereophonic television. Other
Innovations are the use of video tape the recording of 9
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD COMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd)
Film shows from outer space
both sound and picture on magnetic tape rather than
slowly-processed film; more "miniaturization" of cameras
and, hence, more "live" coverage of news; and the de¬
velopment of the transistorized tape recorder, by which
a picture can be seen as soon as it Is recorded and thus
can be edited on the spot.
A new dimension has meanwhile been given to an
old medium through "theatre-vision", described as "a
marriage between the living theatre and closed-circuit
television". By this means audiences in out-of-town
theatres can see plays or operas transmitted hundreds of
miles by telephone from a city theatre and projected on
large cinema screens.
he most spectacular development in television
history was the relaying, in 1962, of live pro¬
grammes across the Atlantic by means of the first com¬
munications satellite. Eighteen countries In the Euro-
vision network participated "with the United States in
these exchanges, viewed by an audience of over 200 mil¬
lion in Europe and North America.
During the first four months of the satellite's operation,
47 intercontinental transmissions were conducted, in¬
cluding five in colour of remarkable clarity. This
inspiring co-operative effort pointed to the coming of
world television, with all the diversity and enrichment it
will hold for the viewer of the future.
Apart from a few countries, mainly in North America
and Europe, where television has developed most exten¬
sively, the cinema has continued to expand both in terms
of film production and exhibition and has retained its
pre-eminent role in the world of entertainment. Since
1954, an increasing number of countries have entered
into film production and, at the same time, the total
number of fixed cinemas has doubled from over 100,000
to 212,000. Their present weekly audience of 376 million
equals one-eighth of the world population.
The principal gains were scored by the U.S.S.R. and
the developing countries, where mobile units further
expanded the cinema audience. Throughout most of
Africa and Asia, however, the number of cinema seats
still fell below the level of two per 100 persons, suggested
as a minimum of adequacy by Unesco.
For several decades the United States, which still
maintains a predominant role in world markets, was the
largest producer of feature films. Since the mid-1950's,
however, American output has trailed behind that of
Japan, India and Hong Kong. In 1960, there were 26
countries which produced 20 or more features annually.
They included 12 in Europe, 8 in Asia, 2 in North America,
2 in South America and 1 in Africa, plus the U.S.S.R.
In the production field, there have been significant

O Jan Lukoj, Pragun
Forest of TV aerials
sprouting on the urban
skyline in Great Britain
(left) reflects the fan¬
tastic expansion of tele¬
vision since 1950 the
world total of receivers
has risen from 1 1 million
to 130 million! Apart
from a few countries,
mainly in North America
and Europe, where TV
has developed most ex¬
tensively, the cinema has
also continued to expand
both in terms of pro¬
duction and exhibition.
Significant advances in
the techniques of film
production (above)
have also been made
and are helping the
cinema to retain its pre¬
eminent role in the
world of entertainment.
Paul Almasy. Paris
advances in camera design, with the accent on 70 mm.
cameras for "wide screen" films which put the viewer
completely Into the environment of the picture. Of
special Interest to amateurs, research workers and other
specialists has been the contrasting development of 8 mm.
cameras with sound. Advances have also been made
in the production of colour films for screening both In
cinemas and on television, as well as In stereophonic
sound and optical systems which assure better images
for both of the media.
Nother development, of particular interest to
'tropical and semi-tropical countries, Is the
production of projectors which use the sun as their
source of light and can be employed to screen fllmstrlps
In remote, non electrified areas.
New types of cinemas, such as "drive-ins" for motorists
and "theatroramas," are making a fresh appeal to
potential cinemagoers and, as in the United States for
example, are helping the industry to regain part of the
audience lately lost to television. Some of these units,
located in new suburban shopping and recreation centres
with adequate car-parking space, have been more speci¬
fically classified as "drive-to" cinemas.
The development of closed-circuit television, which
links groups of cinemas for the screening of special
events, presages the time when the projection booth for
hundreds of halls will be located in a single television
station. These and other advances point the way to the
gradual integration of the cinema with television.
This is, In fact, already being realized in the realm of
space technology, where narrow- and wide-angle tele¬
vision cameras are being increasingly employed in
communications, metereological and astronomical satel¬
lites, as well as in space exploration vehicles. The screen¬
ing of film Images transmitted directly to the earth
from outer space may be expected to give further stimulus \\
to what has been described as "the renaissance of the
cinema".
