BURMA
FAMILY
IN
TRANSITION
by Ni Ni Gyî
The 324 foot spire and
gleaming dome of the
Shwehmawdaw Pagoda
dominate the skyline of
the city of Pegu, 60 miles
from Rangoon, the Bur¬
mese capital. "Chin-
the", giant statues of
mythological animals,
guard the entrance to
this pagoda which was
largely destroyed by an
earthquake some 30
years ago. It was even¬
tually rebuilt with the
help of funds subscribed
by the people of Burma.
© J. Ph. Charbonnier -
Realities
hat her grand-daughter in short sleeves and
high-heeled sandals should be at a cocktail
party with a glass in her hand (even though it be orange
or tomato Juice) is hardly a picture that my grandmother
Daw Mein Ka Lay would have imagined In her wildest
dreams half a century ago. We have certainly come a
long way since the ya-hta-lone, the Burmese horse and
buggy days. In her time Ma Mein Ka Lay, as my grand¬
mother was called, was dedicated to the home and spent
all her time at household chores, and would never go out
at night except maybe to a pagoda festival, and then only
In the company of the whole family.
Thus it Is evident that even the staid and conservative
Burmese culture which had always boasted of being
Impervious to the influences of "foreign matter" is show¬
ing signs of thawing...
My family cannot be described as a typical Burmese
family, as the typical Burmese family would live on a farm,
be literate In Burmese only, be engaged in farming and
maybe never get to the big cities except on a pilgrimage.
My family can best be described as urban (we settled
down in Rangoon when my father retired from govern¬
ment service) with the socio-economic status of a middle-
class family, and we are staunch Buddhists...
It should be interesting to find out the changes that
have taken place from the days of my grandmother, who
lived under the last reigning Burmese king, to mine, the
post-Independence days. The span of time Includes
Burma under the rule of Burmese kings, the British
regime, Japanese rule, re-occupatlon by the British and
independent Burma...
In my childhood the family was made up of my grand¬
mother, father, mother, my sisters, an aunt (my mother's
cousin) and cousin who was really a poor relative living
with us. The family was mobile In the sense that it
moved wherever my father was transferred (he was the ^3
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WOMEN OF BURMA (Cont'd)
Children of the calendar
principal of a high school) and he was posted in each
town for a few years at a time...
The family system was very strong and absolute respect
and obedience were shown all along the line. Even the
children had to obey the next In line, according to their
ages. The deep-seated belief is that one is to show
respect for people even if they are one day older than you
are. My grandmother, being the oldest in the household,
formed the apex of authority and respect and she was
followed by father, mother, aunt and cousin down to the
children, from the eldest to the youngest. Burmese
children from childhood are instilled with the idea of
absolute reverence for the following in the order given:
Lord Buddha, his teachings, the clergy, parents and
teachers. This Is the reason why implicit obedience is
accorded the parents.
The attitude Is somewhat changed now; the trend is
towards more rational obedience, and relations between
my mother and ourselves are on a more informal plane.
I noticed as a child there was never any familiarity or
outright friendliness between my grandmother and my
father or mother; she was treated with too much awe to
allow that. Whereas now, if my mother makes a certain
decision, we are able to explain things to her and even
disagree with her and she takes it in the best light. In
fact, when I accompanied my husband on a world tour
In 1955 my mother was very much against it, but I was
able to make her understand my point of view and even
got her blessing for the trip...
I n the matter of giving names to children there
lis still much adherence to tradition. Every
Burmese child's name depends on the day of birth. Since
time immemorial, wise men have laid down a code
making certain sounds synonymous with certain days of
the week. To give myself as an example, as I was born
on a Saturday my parents could only name me from one
of the following sound: "ta", "hta", "da", "na".
In other words my name could being with only the T,
D or N sounds. Accordingly I was named Ni Ni. It is
only a first name and has nothing to do with my father's,
since In Burma we do not have family names. No strict
Burmese family will have any other criterion for choosing
a name for a baby. Thus in Burma it is quite easy to
guess someone's day of birth once you hear the name.
The only modern touch In the matter of names is that
most modern families are coming to realize the confusion
caused by having only personal names and are beginning
to add the father's name to the daughter's for purposes
of identification.
For example, just as Mary, daughter of Mr. Smith, is
Mary Smith, Ni Ni, daughter of U Maung Maung Gyi, is
now called Ni Ni Gyi. Wives, too, are beginning to take
on their husband's names in addition to their own, thus
if I wanted to be modern I could call myself Ni NI Nyunt,
as my husband's name is U Hla Nyunt.
In the matter of education, my grandfather went to a
monastery where he learned the three Rs but more of
religious instruction. My grandmother went to a lay
school were she studied the three Rs and scriptures as
well. The reason for the girls going to a lay school was
that it was not proper for the monks to teach girls. By
the time my mother went to school, Rangoon could boast
of a modern school called the Empress Victoria Buddhist
Girls' School and my mother and aunt were proud to be
its pupils and to learn English there. At that time my
*m maternal grandmother's idea was to give them enough
"modern education" to enable them to read English news¬
papers and she made them leave school after middle
grade. It was strongly felt that a full education was
only for the men...
The philosophy with regard to education had greatly
changed when we reached school age. My father, in
particular, had a very practical philosophy. Since he had
no sons he was determined to give his daughters the best
education he could. He explained that the best legacy
parents could give children was education, and often
repeated the well-known cliché that education is a pot
of gold that no one can steal. He thus sent us as boarders
to a convent renowned for its high standard of education.
My grandfather was at first very much against the idea
of our going to an English school where we wore only
European clothes and were given English names. He
could not for a long time resign himself to the Idea that
we were giving up our national dress (even though tem¬
porarily) and our own names for the sake of learning to
speak English, but he finally gave way in favour of the
cause of education.
In our generation two of the daughters got the benefit
of. foreign education. One of my sisters went to study in
England before the war. At that time the usual reaction

Photos © J. Ph. Charbonnier- Réalité«
In an open-air restaurant set amid the stalls of a Rangoon market, Burmese families (left)
enjoy a meal of "mohinga " (soaked rice pounded and passed through a sieve before being cooked)
accompanied by fish or meat and sauces. This animated scene contrasts sharply with the Rangoon
marriage group (above). The young wife wears a traditional bridal robe and her husband is
dressed in a tunic and a ceremonial "paseo", a kind of sarong reserved for great occasions.
to the idea of a young unmarried girl going abroad was
not very favourable. Quite a few of our elderly relatives
criticized my parents for letting a young girl go alone
to a stange country, where she might be exposed to the
"wild ways of Western civilization." When I went to
study in the United States as a State scholar a decade
later opinion had changed considerably and my going
abroad met with complete approval from everyone.
t the present time every family takes pride
lin having a member going abroad to study.
In fact things have reached the point where even elderly
people would love to go abroad if "they could only get
the chance," at least on a pilgrimage. This is a clear
indication of social change and changing attitudes
towards travel and the lessening of suspicion of the West
and what It has to offer.
To return to the matter of dress: my grandmother wore
white cotton jackets (almost Chinese style) complete
with cloth buttons, fixed her hair up with one or several
combs on the top and walked sedately so that not even
her ankles showed. Her tight sleeves came down to her
wrist and her longyi to her ankles, and her hair for formal
occasions was done up like a cake on her head.
The above style of dress still prevailed until the end
of the war. However, the post-war fashion is to wear
short or three-quarter sleeves and now the present
generation of teenagers and young girls go in for sleeveless
jackets, brassieres, short knee-length skirts and high-
heeled sandals.
I feel it is pertinent to write a few lines here about
certain Innate beliefs and mores that neither education
nor modern times can shake off. In spite of the fact that
the Burmese woman has "gone modern" in more ways
than one, it Is almost paradoxical to see the way she
sticks to certain of her ultra-traditional ways. Speaking
for myself, I will never leave on a journey on the "bad"
days of the month and will invariably undertake major
items like choosing the day for the wedding, shifting
house, buying property, etc., only on the "good" days, and
these "good" and "bad" days are specified on each month
of the Burmese calendar.
To give another example, I would never bath or shampoo
my hair while my husband was away on a journey unless I
had definitely asked for permission to do so, prior to his
departure, as washing one's hair when a member of the
family is away Is believed to bring Ill-luck to the traveller.
On the other hand I fight with grim determination against
the custom that one is not to cut one's hair or nails on a
Friday, Monday or on the day you were born, and I do
It any time the necessity arises. Nor do I adhere strictly
to the mealtime custom of giving the first serving of every
dish to the oldest or masculine member of the family.
If a husband and wife are eating together, traditionally
the wife is not supposed to help herself to anything until
she has given a small spoonful to her husband first. This
custom is fine in that it is a symbol of respect, but we
find it more convenient to by-pass it and have done so
by mutual agreement between ourselves. If, however, my
15
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WOMEN OF BURMA (Cont'd)
World of the new
'rice winners'
mother or any elder Is with us for a meal, both my husband
and myself are prompt with the symbolic gesture.
One feature of our generation which was not common
In the time of my mother and grandmother is the emer¬
gence of the career woman. Burmese women have always
been noted for their shrewd business acumen and their
ability to stand on their own as village chiefs, and have
even sat on the throne at different stages of Burmese his¬
tory, but their taking to regular careers is a new pheno¬
menon.
The rising cost and standards of post-war living have
made it necessary to have two incomes in order to live
well. Although, the husband's Income may be sufficient for
the basic needs of the family, any additional income
contributed by the wife will afford the family the extra
amenities of modern living. In addition to this economic
reason, the modern educated woman feels a sense of
independence in having her own career and is thus eager
to make use for the excellent opportunities now offered
to educated women. Besides, it adds a touch of prestige
to the family's reputation as both are bread-winners.
I n my grandmother's and mother's day, the
I position was reversed. The husband took
pride in the fact that he was the sole "rice-winner" and
that his wife could afford the luxury of staying home.
We find that the modern career woman-cum-housewife
Is heavily burdened with social obligations after office
hours. In addition to her own professional social
contacts, she Is also expected to keep up with her
husband's. Consequently, the woman who combines the
roles of housewife and career woman has a full-time job,
out-of-offlce-hours professional obligations, her evening
social engagements, and the task of running a home,
does take a great deal out of the modern woman . . .
The Burmese woman has always had a distinct place in
public life. Theoretically speaking, there is no social or
legal . barrier to her holding any position in the. land.
Throughout Burmese history, the position of -Burmese
women has always been on a par with that of men.
Traditional law recognizes us equally with men and all
through our history we have had full Inheritance rights.
However, apart from the days when women ruled the
country, the Burmese women have not taken any great
Interest in politics. There is no great political conscious¬
ness such as is to be found in some other countries.
Accordingly, there is no Burmese counterpart of the
political stature of Mrs. Pandit, Mrs. Sun Yat Sen or Mrs.
Roosevelt . . . This apathy towards politics may be
attributed to the general passive philosophy of the
Burmese Buddhist mind.
We have certainly come a long way from the days of
my grandmother. We have marched forward but with
restraint. If In some ways the pendulum of social change
has swung too fast, it has been because we were swept
on by the Inevitable chain of social evolution.
Tt/1 ». *> rt°
From "Bangkok" by Martin Hurlimann
© Thames' and Hudson, London, 1963
ni ni gyi was educated in Rangoon. Burma, and in the
United States where she went to study as a State scholar.
fg She has sitice held several literary posts. She is married
to U. Hla Nyunt, a leading Burmese scientist, whom she
met tohile a student at Columbia University, New York.
