THE FLAGS ARE NOT
In a series of three films for TV screening entitled "The
Flags Are Not Enough", the United Nations and Unesco have
reported on social and economic development in the world
during the present United Nations Development Decade.
Since these productions were first distributed last year they
have been shown on all the world's major TV networks.
The three films "Generators of Hope", "Life is Short" and
"The Widening Gap" were written and produced by Stephen
Hearst and are presented with a commentary by Alistair
Cooke. We publish below an adaptation of the English script
of "The Widening Gap".
26
Iuring the next half-hour another Ave thou¬
sand human beings will join us on this earth.
Two in three will inherit a life of want. One in three
a life of comfort.
Today there are many reasons why we should take a
good look at the small world of ease and comfort and
the huge and growing world of poverty.
Between the two there is a widening gap. It is not
a gap between the rich and the very poor, but one
between all those who have a job, a comfortable bed and
reasonable health, and the rest the two thirds of the
human race that is usually side and always close to star¬
vation.
Many people think that the 20th century with its mar¬
vel of technology has bridged this gap, and is paving
the way for everyone Into a land of milk and honey.
They are quite wrong. The gap is widening mainly
because the rich countries are getting richer faster than
the poor countries are emerging from their poverty, and
for the first time in history the depressed two-thirds of
the human race knows this.
One human being in three accepts clean water as a
fact of life . . . Two others don't know what it looks or
tastes like. These are simple contrasts but the two
worlds they reflect are so complicated that It is not
easy to explain why they grow further and further apart.
In the developed world, one farmer can feed 23 people.
In the underdeveloped world, one farmer can barely feed
himself. All the power generated in India could not run
New York City. Two-thirds of the people on earth earn
about one hundred dollars each a year. The privileged
third earns one thousand dollars. Here a man strains
to turn a water wheel . . . Elsewhere, a wheel is the
symbol of speed and comfort.
Yesterday a camel driver may have thought that his
was the common lot of mankind. Today he sees another
world and its wealth on the move. He always knew he
was poor. Now he feels poor. For the first time, he begins
to wonder about his poverty. Is it his fate to be poor?
What brought this about? When did It happen?
Each civilization in turn has believed itself to be the
centre of the world a great improvement on what had
gone before. But all these civilizations had one thing
in common: They were deeply rooted in agriculture and
were thus at the mercy of drought and famine.
They had their doubters, but only among men who had
gone to other parts of the world and seen other marvels.
When Marco Polo returned from China to his native
Venice, he felt that the superior civilization was the
one he had left behind.
It was the beginning of self-doubt; and of that curio
sity which set men first to roam the physical world, and
then to explore and share the world of ideas. One
century discovered raw materials; and the next disco¬
vered the knowledge of how to transform them. These
energies combined to cleave a gap between the old agri¬
cultural societies and the new industrial ones, and then
to use the old for the profit of the new. So, the gap
widened. The people with the new knowledge moved
ahead quickly while monuments to the old knowledge
were engulfed.
Today, every part of the world ls the neighbour of all
the others. The flags at U.N. Headquarters proclaim that
the aspirations of all men are equal. But the flags are not
enough. In over a hundred countries the means are not
equal, nor the training, nor the skill, nor the capital.
This is how Paul Hoffmann of the United Nations sees
the situation: "Poverty and hunger were just words to
me until I saw poverty and hunger in the Far East.
Then and only then did I understand Gandhi's descrip¬
tion of the life of an Indian peasant as 'an eternal
compulsory fast'; and today, with exploding populations,
in order to win the fight against poverty, many countries
are going to have to run fast just to stand still.
"And the problem is aggravated as peasants move from
poverty in the country to unemployment in the cities.
Life is very marginal for these people. They are accused
sometimes of being obstinate, of being unwilling to
take a chance. This is not the case; they dare not
take a chance.
"Even though he doesn't dare take a chance he is
determined to achieve a better life for himself and his
children. When I say 'he' I am talking about hundreds
of millions of people in the less developed countries.
What he needs is insurance against disaster as he
moves to modernize his agriculture and his industry:
help from his own government and help through external
aid. If he gets this assistance, progress can come by
peaceful evolution.
"If he doesn't get this assistance then he will be
tempted to try violence. The bluntest and most accurate
answer as to why we should be concerned is that we
must be. Morally, we can't escape concern ; politically,
we can't avoid it and economically, all our interests
dictate it."
The size of the job is tremendous, but the earth is
tremendously rich. We have only begun to map its
buried or unused resources, but we know already that
there ls hardly a land that could not become a developed
country.
Meanwhile, the essential element of fertility and rich
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

ENOUGH
United Nations
Flags of 113 nations, the member states of the United 97
Nations, fly at U. N. Headquarters in New York. In the Z7
background is part of the U. N. Assembly Building.

The widening gap
crops, water, rolls unused Into the ocean. The yield of
the soil ls pitifully low in the very countries whose peoples
live off the land.
In Latin America, 57 per cent of the people live off
the land. In Asia, 73 per cent. In India, a farmer earns
about 18 cents or ls 3d a day. In Africa, three-quarters
of the people grow their own crops, exactly as their
ancestors did.
In simple terms, a farmer in Latin America, in Asia, in
Africa produces one tenth as much as a farmer in West
Europe or North America.
While the developed world, to maintain its prosperity,
is caught up in the momentum of its need to produce
and produce for itself the underdeveloped world, just to
stand still, requires a vast work force. But by 1970, there
will be 300 million more people in the underdeveloped
world many more than primitive skills can support or
feed.
How can we prevent the "explosion" of these baffled
and desperate millions? How can we bring the two worlds
into a sensible balance?
The United Nations has surveyed this world problem
and decided that what we need is nothing less than a
world effort. The U.N. General Assembly has called the
1960's the United Nations Development Decade. It has
defined the needs of its economic growth and social
change, from now till 1970.
We can no longer hide the contrast between the two
worlds. Everywhere the messengers from the developed
world are to be seen automobiles, machinery, etc., and
28 they mock the world still chained to the water wheel.
A man may know how a tractor works, but lack the
training to mend it, and there is no magic that can
give it him overnight. But there ls a talisman for these
people, a new word: "education." As Professor Arthur
Lewis, an economist of international stature, recently
put it:
"Most underdeveloped countries have nibbled at educa¬
tion in one way or another. For prestige reasons, quite
a lot of money is going these days into universities, and
quite a lot of money is going into primary education in
order to wipe out illiteracy.
"Not half enough money, not a quarter enough money is
going into the Intermediate kinds of education. It is at
that secondary level that you really staff up a society."
There is no question of forcing education on unwilling
or bewildered people. They want it and will walk miles
to get it. All over the underdeveloped world children are
hypnotized by the word "school." Mothers start riots
when the local politician fails in his promise of a school
by the autumn.
Education has become a precious latch-key the sure
escape from the prison of poverty.
And there is a sad Irony. In quickly developing places,
the means sometimes arrive before the humans who can
use them. Thus we find well-equipped laboratories but
only a trickle of students. On the one hand, too few
high schools to train students for the university; on the
other, too few of the university students stay home
they are lured abroad by scholarships. Some buildings
could well carry a warning legend: "Built at the wrong
time for the wrong students."
For countless bright boys, the primary school is the
end of the road. They know too much to go back to the

*.- y
UN. -Unesco photos
old life, too little to go forward to a new one. As Professor
Lewis has also pointed out:
"You can't begin to tackle this problem without a very
large expenditure of capital. Some of this capital can
come, Indeed does come, from outside. But the great
bulk of it has to be found inside the countries, either from
the savings of the people or from the savings of the
government.
"The people save very little, partly because they haven't
got the savings habit, partly because they are very poor.
And therefore, in underdeveloped countries a great deal
of reliance has to be placed on savings from the govern¬
ment, on having a level of taxes which is sufficiently
high to cover the whole of the government expenditure
on current account and also to make capital available
for agriculture, for housing, for helping out the small
manufactures with loans, and so on.
"Even in the case of countries where there ls a general
recognition that one should move forwards, and that
moving forwards means that the great masses of the
people have to be educated and given the incentive to
improve themselves, some fall by the wayside because
politicians find other things so much more interesting."
There is another side of the problem: the production
and pricing of the crop you live by. Something as
humble, say, and essential as peanuts. A country is urged
to produce more; and It does; only to find that the
world market is against it.
Since 1948, the underdeveloped countries have Increased
their farm exports by 33 per cent; but the value of these
exports on the world market has gone up by only 4 per
cent. This is yet another simple, sinister way in which
the gap between the two worlds widens. For these
countries, a fall in the price of a single crop can wipe
out the value of all the foreign aid they receive. If
coffee fetches less than It used to, people may be drink¬
ing it at the grower's expense.
We all know by now that developed nations are giving
substantial aid to low-Income countries. But it's often
unco-ordlnated and competitive.
Britain has built an artificial harbour for Ghana . . .
There is vast and diverse French aid to West Equatorial
Africa . . . Yugoslavia puts up a tanning factory in the
Sudan in exchange for its products . . . The United
States, Britain and the United Nations all help to cons¬
truct the Volta Dam; and in Asia the Bahkra Dam is a
monument to generous aid.
One of the Soviet Union's widespread commitments ls
to build a steel mill in India and train its workers.
Canada helped with India's first atomic reactor. Inter¬
national financial help builds railways In Pakistan. In
Latin America, the United States In particular has
helped a whole continent Into the industrial age. In the
West Indies, American help replaces the slums with
decent housing.
These are samples only. But all the aid so given ls
Itself only a sample of the aid that is needed. But other
people too are citizens of member states of the United
Nations. What has the United Nations done for them?
The honest answer is not much, if we look at their
needs. A good deal if we look at the available means.
In the words of David Owen, Head of the UN's Technical
Assistance Board:
"Agricultural production has been increased in many
lands, schools have been started and thousands of young
people who would otherwise have had no education have
been provided for. Industrial efficiency has been improv¬
ed, trade for new industries has been increased, and the
health and vitality of a vast number of peoples through¬
out the world has been transformed."
This is on the plus side. But It is hardly a beginning.
It is not that we are ignorant about the immensity and
CONT'D ON PAGE 32
29

THE FLAGS (Cont'd from p. 29)
U.N. -Unesco
In some countries 50% of all the energy used comes from the muscles of men and beasts. In
others, thanks to a technological revolution, practically all energy is non-human. Most of the
world is still waiting for the technical means that can release resources locked in the soil,
in the sun and in the sea. Above, a shot from the U.N.-Unesco film, " Generators of Hope"
No Utopia by next Monday
the variety of these people's needs. They have been
accurately and conscientiously studied. But the helping
nations each work independently, often in conflict and
without a plan, and the will to combine is weak. So
that all the aid given to the underdeveloped world
amounts to a bare fifth of what we know to be necessa¬
ry. Of that fraction, the United Nations has been able
to supply only a fraction. The gap ls not visibly narrow¬
er. Perhaps, it would be good if all the helpers could
begin the new decade by admitting their failures.
"We have made many mistakes," says David Owen.
"We spread our resources out far too thinly. We have
undertaken technical projects which were good in them¬
selves, but were from an economic standpoint somewhat
implausible. Then there was the problem of doing things
in a hurry. Starting off university work before we were
sure we had the high schools producing the students to
go to these universities. And undertaking the develop¬
ment of industries before we were sure that the world
market justified the development of industries of the
kind which we had In mind."
And yet there have been astounding successes.
It is not biased to say that some governments and
peoples prefer to get help through the United Nations,
since an international team is trusted and its motives
are above suspicion. International aid could achieve far
more if governments gave more money. But governments
depend on public opinion, which at present appears too
divided to make its weight felt.
Utopia by next Monday morning. This too Is a fact
of the 1960's. Over half the world's population is under
twenty-one; and the idea that age equals wisdom is mock¬
ed by the ferment in the blood of the young people every¬
where: the new conviction is that a better life can be
had and must be had.
Is there a reasonable way to satisfy this craving? Here
ls what the economist and writer, Barbara Ward Jackson
has to say:
32 "I know a lot of people will say that this is nonsense,
that economic assistance to underdeveloped areas is an
essential part of governmental policies these days, and
governments are giving considerable sums in economic
assistance. But I wonder whether we really do It with
a right and central purpose.
"Nations give it for their own national interests; they
give it to stop the people they don't like; they give it to
gain friends for the quarters they do like. I don't think
they see it as a potentially International effort to carry
the revolution of science and technology In abundance to
all mankind, which Is now possible. And because of this,
I don't think that the positive purposes are put in proper
perspective, nor frankly, do I think we do enough.
"I would like to see the one per cent of national income,
which ls talked of as the contribution of the wealthy
nations to the poor (and which isn't reached inciden¬
tally) as a minimum, as a starting point. After all, we
all grow by three per cent a year, at a minimum, and
therefore if we were to devote one per cent to the deve¬
lopment of poorer nations we shouldn't exactly be worse
off. We might perhaps be slowing down our own rate
of wealth-making a little. But that doesn't seem to me
to be a tremendous sacrifice to this cause."
The income of the underdeveloped world can be raised
by a quarter in this decade, if the effort to raise it is
not jarred by national jealousy and confused by pulling
in different directions. This decade has set a race be¬
tween education and catastrophe. We could, in only ten
years, make the world a more decent place for maybe
four humans in ten instead of for three.
The world cost of armaments may well be equal to the
income of the whole underdeveloped world. It is a grim
piece of arithmetic.
The children themselves will soon learn, for the first
time, that men can increase their capacity, that a poor
man can with the right help change his lot. Rightly
given, that help would be part self-interest, part intelli¬
gent goodwill, and no part charity.
In ten years from now the flags of the nations could
salute a prouder truth than the fact of sovereignty; the
fact that millions had learned to take pride in being
a member of the human race.
