The Huge Charnel-House (440 * 770 cm.) Detail.
"A macabre dance around an atomic explosion."

Nine tapestries on man
in the atomic age
Mankind after Hiroshima. (437 x 292 cm.)
W;far and peace have frequently inspired
the painter and artist down the ages.
But the theme of war and peace in the atomic age is
now the subject of an arresting series of nine tapestries
just completed by the world -renowned French artist,
Jean Lurçat, whose modern works during the past
40 years have been instrumental in reviving the
ancient art of tapestry. Lurçat has named his latest
efforts Le Chant du Monde (Song of the World). The
nine works woven in glowing colours have a total
length of 230 feet and cover a surface of 3,230 square
feet. We present here some details of these tapestries
which were recently exhibited at the Louvre in Paris.
As a contrast to four images depicting the horrors of a
nuclear holocaust in which all man's works and
mankind itself would be destroyed, Lurçat presents
five others evoking the triumph of peace. Lurçat
has commented on his works in these words : "Our
generation has lived through two wars and now over
our heads and over all those who are to follow us
there hangs a terrible threat: the atomic horror. That
is why I have called my first panel The Great Threat;
it also explains why I have shown a sinister-eyed
eagle hovering above the world and a buffalo spraying
poison over all things living or as yet unconceived."
But Lurçat believes that human reason will prevail :
his nightmare images of mankind annihilated and art
and civilization reduced to dust give place to Man in
the Glory of Peace. He is now working on a sequel
to Song of the World; its themes will be love,
friendship and everyday joys.

The Great Threat (440 x 900 cm.) "The atomic mushroom cloud convulses the world and man seeks refuge
from the pursuing monster in a Noah's Ark."
19
Man in the Glory of Peace (437 * 1316 cm.) Detail,
on his head and carrying the laurels of peace."
"Man with an owl, the symbol of wisdom.
