Soon after the First
World War, two French
scientists, Albert Cal-
mette and Camille Gué-
rin, gave the world the
first effective weapon
against tuberculosis :
BCG vaccine (Bacillus
Calmette-Guérin). To¬
day, hundreds of mil¬
lions of doses of BCG
have been administered
throughout the world.
Right, Camille Guérin
at the Institut Pasteur,
Paris in 1960, a year
before his death. Photo
in the background is of
Calmette (1863-1933).
WHO. René Caloz

wo French scientists, Albert Calmette and
Camille Guérin, gave the world the first
effective weapon against tuberculosis.
Léon-Charles-Albert Calmette, was a former naval
doctor who took up research on bacteriology, first becoming
Director of the Pasteur Institute at Lille, then Sub-
Director of the main Pasteur Institute at Paris. With his
closest collaborator, the veterinarian Camille Guérin, he
had published a "Contribution to the study of the
vaccination of bovids against tuberculosis" shortly before
the First World War.
In it the two scientists described how they had cultivat¬
ed the tubercle bacillus on potato boiled in glycerlnated
beef bile, using a virulent strain of bovine origin. After
about three weeks the bacillus was found to have lost
some of its virulence. But it was not until years later,
after the operation had been repeated more than 200
times, that Calmette and Guerin succeeded in evolving
a new kind of bacillus, harmless, yet capable of conferring
a state of immunity when administered by vaccination.
Animals inoculated with this bile-cultivated vaccine
proved resistant- to tuberculous infection.
Shortly after the end of the Second World War, Cal¬
mette felt that the time had come to test the effects of
this vaccine in man.
On July 1 1921, in a Parisian apartment, a baby received
three 6-milligram doses of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(BCG), administered orally. Since both the child's
mother and the grandmother who was bringing him up
were suffering from tuberculosis, there was a good chance
that he would become Infected. Yet six months later he
was developing normally and healthily.
Then the vaccine was tried out on a larger scale: 664
babies in the crèche run Dr Weill Hallé, paediatrician at
the Paris Hospital of Charity, were vaccinated without
any ill effects.
Henceforth Calmette was considered as the leading
authority on tuberculosis. He published a paper In the
Journal de l'Académie de Médecine, entitled "Trial of a
vaccine against tuberculosis Infection" in which he
summed up 20 years' work in a few pages. The vaccine
began to be widely used. The Pasteur Institute was
authorized to send ampoules of BCG abroad, and vaccina¬
tion were carried out In Barcelona, Montevideo and Rio
de Janeiro; in Argentina, Cuba, and Poland; in Dakar,
Saigon and Sao Paulo; and in the Balkans.
Nevertheless, there were some dissenting voices. At the
Trudeau Sanatorium, Saranac, N. Y., Dr Petrolf asserted
that the vaccine had retained pathogenic qualities. In
Switzerland, some authorities pronounced it dangerous.
In Vienna, Dr Kraus, Director of the Institute of Sero¬
therapy, forbade the use of BCG In Austria. Even in
France, Calmette was attacked.
Nevertheless he went on organizing demonstrations and
controlled experiments, and succeeded in turning the tide
of opposition. He submitted his case to an International
jury of experts, convened by the League of Nations, which
concluded that BCG was indeed effective. \\
CONT'D ON PAGE 13

Victory over calumny
and suspicion
Suddenly there was a tragic development. Out of 252
children in Lübeck, Germany, who had been vaccinated
with BCG between December 1929 and April 1930, 71 died
and 27 fell ill, five of them dangerously so, the cause being
a serious tuberculosis infection.
Protests flowed Into the Pasteur Institute from all sides.
An Inquiry was held, and revealed that Calmettc's work
was not at fault. The Institute Issued a statement:
"Either the BCG culture was accidentally Infected by a
virulent tuberculosis germ from other cultures In the lab¬
oratory at Lübeck, or else, through carelessness, llasks
or tubes containing virulent tubercle bacilli were unfor¬
tunately placed In the same drying-cupboard as the BCG
cultures and substituted for them In the preparation of
the first vaccine emulsions in January 1930.
" The idea that BCG could suddenly have become
virulent after being administered to the children Is unten¬
able. There Is therefore no doubt that the children In
Lübeck received a virulent tuberculosis culture Instead of,
or mixed with, BCG."
A lawsuit was started. Then German bacteriologists
revealed that the conditions In which the BCG strain
had been kept in the laboratory were unsatisfactory.
A serious mistake had been made. In a culture that had
been used In the preparation of the vaccine, BCG was
found mixed with virulent bacilli from a strain forwarded
to Lübeck by a laboratory In Kiel. It was proved that
the tragedy had been caused by a blunder at the Lübeck
laboratory. The doctor responsible was sentenced to two
years' imprisonment, and Calmette and his Institute were
exonerated.
A million small children In all parts of the world
had already been vaccinated with BCG. But,
as if to exemplify the old saying "If you Hing enough mud,
some of it is bound to stick," BCG was to be viewed with
suspicion for a long time to come.
Today its value Is no longer In question. Full recogni¬
tion finally came In 1948, when 300 delegates from all
parts of the world took part In the First International
BCG Congress. BCG vaccination Is now compulsory in
several countries, including France and the U.S.S.R. The
vaccine Is manufactured by more than 50 laboratories In
different parts of the world, from strains supplied by the
Pasteur Institute.
By June 1924, Calmette and Guérin had vaccinated 217
children. Today several hundred million doses of BCG
have been administered, 150 million of them in campaigns
undertaken by WHO and UNICEF In more than 60
countries.
Further Indisputable proof of the value of BCG was
obtained in a recent intensive trial of the vaccine among
35,000 young people living In highly industrialized
communities in Great Britain. There were 80 per cent
less cases In those who had received BCG than in those
who had not, and this reduction has by now been main¬
tained for more than eight years after vaccination. It
has often been argued that the unfavourable sociological
and economic conditions and the high exposure to Infec¬
tion found in developing countries would lower the value
of BCG. A controlled study in India, supported by WHO,
has however recently revealed the same degree of protec¬
tion as that found in the British trial.
Being economical and easy to apply, BCG vaccination
couldIf used systematically and continuously over the
next few decades bring about the elimination of tuber¬
culosis as a public health problem in any developing
country.
13
