THE HIGH WALL
OF THE LOW
COUNTRIES
Unesco-A. Tessora
:.:j¿aj£&
ALL ROUND DEFENCE
The great Haringvliet dam is one of the most
remarkable engineering projects ever devised
to overcome a double threat from sea and river.
It has been provided with 17 large sluices
(each 62 yards long) through which excess
water and ice from the Meuse and Rhine rivers
can be allowed to reach the sea. This group
of sluices in the open sea will have an overall
length of 1,092 yards (drawing above). Left,
the huge sluices during construction. The
arms of the dam will reach to the islands of
Voorne and Goeree. Roads built along the
dam walls will turn them into causeways.
Juring the next 25 years the Netherlands will
carry out a gigantic engineering project thanks
to the progress of modern technology and the efforts of
a people who over the centuries have literally wrested
their land from the sea.
The Netherlands is a country that has challenged the
sea and won a resounding victory. With much of its
territory situated at lower levels than the high tides of
the powerful North Sea, the Netherlands has not only
defended itself, but has expanded its land area thanks
to a remarkable system of pumping stations and coast
defences running for over 1,000 miles. For over seven
centuries Its people have multiplied the sea dikes, greatly
reducing the coast line in the north. One simple dike,
the Barrier Dam, 20 miles in length, has pushed back
48 the North Sea 50 miles and shortened the coastline by
nearly 200 miles. Behind its massive walls, the former
Zuyder Zee has become a fresh water lake called the
Ijselmeer, and part of It has been drained to give the
Netherlands over half a million acres of new land.
Other, shorter sea-arms in other coastal areas have also
been closet, by dikes.
Yet even with all its formidable sea defences the
Netherlands suffered a reverse in 1953 when a terrible
storm surge of tide and wind broke through several dikes,
submerging parts of the islands in the south west.
Through the tremendous efforts of its people, the
Netherlands filled the breaches and drained out the
inundated lands within a year. And within three weeks
of the disaster a commission had been set up to study
the problem of sea defences and to decide whether to
raise existing dikes or to dam off altogether the sea arms
in the region known as the Delta Area, where three
CONT'D ON PAGE 61

Netherlands Information Service
GIANT DAMS
AGAINST
THE SEA
Under the "Delta Pro¬
ject" massive dams will
close off four broad deep
sea inlets : the Haring-
vliet (construction dates,
from 1957 to 1968); the
Brouwershavensche Gat
(1963-1970); the Eas¬
tern Scheldt (1964-
1978) and the Veersche
Gat (1957-1962). Sec¬
ondary dams will be
built in the Zandkreek,
the Grevelingen and the
Volkerak. When the pro¬
ject is finished, the
coastline will be shorter
by 435 miles and inun¬
dation by the sea will
no longer threaten the
southern Netherlands.
NORTH SEA
Brouwershavensche Gat Dam
Veersche Gat Dam
THE DELTA
PLAN
eih »rater dimmed off ¡> ihown in DARK GREY
49

/
t' .' i K ^
*% iß-
© Mastboom Vliegbedrijf-Hof meester
;>» -
rjse*?
i KLM Aerocarto
THREE ISLANDS
BECOME ONE
In April 1961 the last of seven great
sluice caissons was moved into place
to close the gap in the Veersche Gat
dam (above). The caissons were left
in position to serve as the core of the
dyke which has since been completed
(left). This dam and a secondary one
in the Zandkreek are parts of a single
project, the Three-island Project, in
which they link the islands of Walcheren
North Beveland and South Beveland.
By thus completing its arterial network,
the Netherlands has given an economic
boost to this part of the country.
AMSTERDAM
:thehaguej
;haaq;
-ROTTERDAM^
THE
NETHERLANDS
LVii Ifllf»JM3¿i
This drawing shows what the Netherlands would look tí
like if it had no dikes. The dotted line marks the ¡5
present frontier of conquests over the sea. On these M
reclaimed lands live two-thirds of the population of II
the Netherlands. If the inhabitants were to leave H
0 . . MUM
P ,	 , 60MILCS1
and Amsterdam would disappear beneath the sea.
From " Holland Rides the Sea", by Klaas Graftdik. World's Window Ltd., Baarn

THE HIGH WALL (Cont'd from page 48)
rivers the Rhine, the Meuse and the Scheldt run Into
the sea.
Thus was born the Delta Project a complex of
engineering works to give new control over the sea. The
work will take 25 years to complete and will bring a
physical and economic transformation to a large part of
the country.
Under the Delta Project four major sea-arms will be
dammed off (see map) and secondary dykes will be
constructed. This will give protection against the sea to
the entire south west of the country. Two of these sea-
arms, the Niewe Westerweg and the Wester Scheide, the
approach routes to the ports of Rotterdam and Antwerp,
will be left open, but their dykes will be raised and
strengthened. To allow the discharge of excess waters
or blocks of ice coming down the Meuse and the two lower
Rhine arms the Waal and the Lek a block of 17 sluices
is being built in the dam enclosing the Haringvliet
estuary. To make this possible a giant construction pit
was made which, when the enclosed waters had been
pumped out, formed a man-made island. The 17 sluices
built here will have a total length of over half a mile.
The Delta Project is more than a weapon to defeat the
sea. It will have a tremendous effect on the fresh water
economy of the Netherlands. Today salt water penetrates
canals and drainage channels and Infiltrates to the land
on the Islands and in the coastal areas of the mainland,
harming the soli by salt Impregnation. When the new
dams are built, fresh water from the rivers will be used
to desalt canals and land alike. An immense reservoir of
fresh water will be built up behind the dams in exactly
the same way that the immense IJselmeer lake was filled
by the River Rhine when the Zuyder Zee was closed olí.
Three dams will be built on the lower Rhine to allow
part of Its waters to flow to the IJselmeer instead of
directly to the sea. Similarly, water from the Meuse and
the Waal will be diverted via Rotterdam.
The Delta Project will also give an important boost to
the Netherlands' economy. An interconnecting system of
roads will be built along the dams, linking hitherto
isolated islands with the mainland. The broad beaches
of Zeeland will also become more accessible. And the vast
new expanses of fresh water will become a paradise for
devotees of water sports and sailing.
Not all the landscape of
the Netherlands has the
checkerboard appearance
of these fields divided by
drainage canals. But if
all the country's ditches
and canals were laid end
to end they would still
cover two-thirds the
distance to the moon.
© KLM. Aerocarto
51

//... Ä^
52
POWER FROM
In the Netherlands, the windmill is still a familiar
part of the landscape. There are fewer today,
of course, than in the 18th century when they
numbered some 9,000. But of the 1,750 that
still exist, some 1,300 are still doing a job of
work grinding corn, sawing wood, pumping
water from the canals. Despite the development
of more powerful pumping apparatus many of
the windmills are still doing the work they were
built for many years ago. Some have been
kept in a perfect state of repair for centuries.
Symbols of a long history of hard work and
ingenuity, the windmills of the Netherlands are
classed as historic monuments. There is even
a "Windmills Association" whose efforts are
deployed to preserve and restore these graceful
and picturesque buildings and, when possible,
to extend their working life. Left, a windmill
at work draining water from a polder reclaimed
land protected by dikes. Above right, adjust¬
ing the angle of a windmill sail. On the skill of
this man depends the efficiency with which the
mechanism will capture power from the winds.
How a series of windmills are used in relays to
pump water uphill from one canal to the next
until it is high enough to run back to the sea.

53
