THREE VILLAGES
UNDER A MICROSCOPE
Left, pupil teachers
in the science lab¬
oratory of the Thai¬
land-Unesco Rural
Teacher Education
Project at Ubol,
Thailand, 400 miles
from the capital,
Bangkok. This joint
venture by the
Government of
Thailand and Unes¬
co was launched
eight years ago to
train more teachers
for primary schools.
The Rural Teacher Training College at Ubol is one of several educational
projects that Unesco is assisting in South-East Asia, particularly in Thailand,
where the Unesco Regional Office for Education in Asia is situated. Above,
Thai youngsters play a lively game of musical chairs between classes in a
Thailand village school. Below, a young miss gets her regular weight-and-
height check-up in a village school. The teachers in this school come from the
nearby Ubol training college. During their second year of training teachers
have 11 weeks of practical teaching experience in "laboratory" schools near Ubol.
Below, a building with striking modern lines where some 500 fledgling
girl teachers live during their two year course at the Ubol teachers'
training college. There are now|J4 similar colleges operating in Thailand.
DURING the past year or so three
remote country villages in Thailand
have been put under the micro¬
scope. In Napa, In the central rice-
growing plain of the Bangkok region,
Udorn, on the edge of the jungle in
the north east, and Umeng, in the far
north near the Burmese border, a cross-
section of some 200 children and their
families have been observed, studied
and interviewed at length, each commu¬
nity survey lasting about six months.
These operations are part of a unique
survey carried out by the Bangkok
Institute of Child Study, founded nearly
nine years ago jointly by Unesco and
the Government of Thailand. The study
was carried out because Thailand, like
many other countries, is trying to improve
and extend its education system, and
knowledge about the nature of the child
is the cornerstone of any development
in education.
During the survey, researchers have
been asking questions such as "What
do you fear most In school and out of
school?" "What do you enjoy most and
why?" "What kind of responsibilities
and home tasks do you have and how
do they effect your going to school?"
"Do you like having girls (or boys) with
you In class?" Mothers have also been
interviewed and the general make-up
of each village with its economic and
social structures has been thoroughly
investigated.
In Thailand today social changes are
taking place in rural areas where, as
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
19
Photos Unesco R. Greenough


Pupil teachers at Ubol
training college in Thai¬
land learn English aided
by up-to-date audio
visual teaching devices.
While mastering the
intricacies of the lan¬
guage, particularly its
pronunciation, they sit
in separate booths using
tape recorders and indi¬
vidual earphones to
listen to the playback
of their own voices.
About 1 ,000 young men
and women are cur¬
rently taking Ubol's two
and four year courses.

Three villages (co-rd)
20
in most Asian villages, little has changed
in the past century until recently. New
ways of behaving and living challenge
traditional customs. The staff of the
Bangkok Institute therefore has been
investigating the factors in home, school
and community life that affect the adjust¬
ment of children to learning and to
becoming responsible citizens.
They have been seeking the answers
to questions like these: "What are the
existing and potential points of stress
and strain on children entering school?"
"What kinds of teaching methods and
what aspects of educational programmes
are best fitted to ease the transition from
one kind of society to another?" "What
techniques may lead to conflict between
the child and the school or the child
and the family?"
No final conclusions from the survey
will be available until a fourth village,
in the south towards the Malay penin¬
sular, has been visited later this year.
But it is already clear that from the
experience gained by the researchers
it will be possible to evolve a new
methodology which can be used for
similar investigations in other Asian
countries.
This is already of great value because
the methods and yardsticks used in
Western surveys of child and family
psychology have been found to be of
little value in Asia. Any system of
education is part of a whole pattern of
values, social aspirations, traditions and
folkways. An attempt to transplant
educational ideas, techniques or methods
bodily from one culture to another may
destroy this pattern.
SOME differences were at once
apparent when tests used in
Western surveys were applied to
Apian children. It was found that in a
general way the Asian child's mind is
more contemplative, more shy and
withdrawn, less impulsive and aggressive
and less competitive than that of the
Western child. The survey showed too
that the Asian child has a tremendous
and genuine desire and respect for
learning, probably due to the influences
of the village Buddhist temples which
for many years were the sole repositories
of education.
Side by side with these surveys, the
Bangkok Child Institute has been
carrying out a nation-wide programme in
curriculum evaluation. Nearly 300
schools, some 70,000 children and 1,200
teachers have been involved in an
operation which made use of tests
and questionnaires. Achievement tests
were devised to measure a child's abili¬
ties in arithmetic, reading, writing, geo¬
graphy and natural sciences.
In addition to its research work, the
Institute has a training programme as a
graduate school for Bangkok's College
of Education with two-year courses in
general, educational and clinical psycho¬
logy, child development, statistics and
physiology, leading to a Master's Degree
in Education. Sixteen graduate students
are now taking this course. Fellow¬
ships, including some from Unesco,
have been granted to students from 1 1
countries, emphasis being given to pro¬
vide facilities for training Asian students
in research and teaching methods for
use in Asian villages.
The Institute's work is directed by
Dr. Lemaimas Saradatta, a leading Thai
woman educator, and its staff includes
two Unesco specialists and a number
of Thai graduate researchers.
