Unesco-Rex Keating OASES FOR SUCCOURED TEMPLES. Four special sites have been set aside by the U.A.R. to receive the temples
of Egyptian Nubia which have been or are to be dismantled to save them from the waters of the Nile. The first of
these oases has been set near Aswan for the temples of Kalabsha, Kertassi and Beit-el-Wali. The second, located
near Wadi es Sebua will receive the temple of Wadi es Sebua itself and that of Dakka. Near the ancient site of Amada
will be the third with Amada temple and the tomb of Pennut. Above the hill of Abu Simbel a fourth oasis will group
the two temples of Rameses and Nefetari and nearby the rock-hewn chapel of Jebel Shams and the rock temple of
Abu Oda. The Sudan is creating an "oasis" In a special arranged park in the Khartoum museum for the temples of
Aksha, Buhen, Semna West, Semna East (Kumma). Photo shows thousands of blocks of stone from dismantled
temples temporarily stored on the Island of Elephantine, near Aswan awaiting to be transferred to their new site.

NUBIA'S SANDS REVEAL
THEIR LAST SECRETS
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
I T has been a momentous experience to be able
I to follow the progress of the Nubian campaign
since 1960. The archaeological discoveries alone, I feel,
have more than justifield the enormous efforts made by so
many nations.
Interestingly enough, some of the most remarkable finds
have occurred on what at first appeared to be unpromising
sites. When the full history of the International Campaign
comes to be written as I hope it will be one day it will
reveal to us the amazingly broad sweep of events that have
been encompassed in this, vast, breath-taking enterprise
of international co-operation and international generosity.
This history will certainly show that the sums of money
spent in Nubia were minuscule indeed when compared with
the fantastic results achieved. In terms of scientific results
alone the rewards have been of the highest importance.
To the layman, perhaps, scientific results may not always
seem spectacular or correspond to the fabulous treasures
often associated with the world of the Pharaohs of ancient
Egypt. Nevertheless, a simple potsherd or a gazelle skin
covered with inscriptions in "Old Nubian", a row of
mudbrick walls or the graffiti scratched on stones by
pilgrims lost in the desert are the stuff from which many
a new page of history has been written. Soon a whole
new panorama of Nubia in prehistoric times will unfold
before us as is already evident from the palaeolithic remains
discovered on the plateaux above the Nile and the Neolithic
drawings preserved on the rocks.
Until the recent excavation of Buhen who would have
dared to imagine that a flourishing town of metal workers
existed 3,000 years before our era near the Second Cata¬
ract where Upper and Lower Nubia met. Magnificent
examples of Nubian military architecture of the classical
Middle Kingdom (second millenium B.C.) were of course
known, but before the Unesco campaign began most of
Mirgissa had not yet been unearthed and the great fortress
of Buhen itself was buried in sand until three years ago.
Nor did anyone suspect that the Nubians of the Middle
Kingdom period vied with the garrisons from Egypt in the
construction of fortifications. With the exception of the
magic caches of "execration texts" bearing the names of
tribes regarded as enemies, placed in the foundations, the
Nubian fortified village is revealed as the counterpart and
opposite number of the Egyptian fortress. The use of
rounded bastions and zig-zagged gateways shows that
Nubian military architecture existed far earlier than had
once been believed.
From the New Kingdom period of Nubia a number of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

NUBIA'S LAST SECRETS (Cont'd)
on the heel of discovery
cemeteries have been found whose funerary furnishings
reveal hitherto unknown aspects of the civilization of that
time. But the sands of Nubia held a more sensational
surprise in store for the Egyptologist. On numerous occa¬
sions archaeologists had found references almost every¬
where in the region to a temple of Horus at Baki (Kuban)
which was apparently one of the most important temples
of Egypt from the 15th century B.C. onwards. And yet
in the area where it should have existed on the west bank
of the Nile the only remaining temple was the sanctuary
of Dakka, dedicated to the god Toth by Nubian monarchs
of the Roman Ptolemaic era.
And then, in the summer of 1963 when the dromos, or
sacred avenue of sphinxes of Dakka was being dismantled
by the Antiquities Service of the United Arab Republic the
whole missing temple suddenly emerged from the sand, its
reliefs glittering with traces of the original colour. The
temple had lain hidden for over two thousand years
beneath the stones of Dakka itself! It had been dedicated
by the great Pharaoh Thutmosis III to the falcon deity Horus
to watch over the route leading to the gold mines in the
area. Thus on the eve of being engulfed forever Nubia has
again given up a hitherto unknown monument to posterity.
One piece of good luck always leads to another, the
saying goes. Indeed no sooner had the temple of Horus
been found than word was received that diggings in the
area of a little rock-hewn chapel just south of Wadi es
Sebua had uncovered a temple of almost gigantic propor¬
tions built during the reign of Amenophis III. In the archi¬
tecture of this edifice archaeologists quickly recognized
the prototype of various structural forms later adopted in
the famous temples of Abu Simbel. More discoveries were
yet to come.
From beneath an altar that had escaped destruction
during the period of Akhenaton and the Tell-el-Amarna
heresy, archaeologists recovered an object placed there
when the temple was founded, and which provides the key
to the entire theological system of this sanctuary. The
object was a representation of the egg of creation, the
two original halves of which, so the sacred texts of Egypt
recount, were deposited on the hill of Hermopolis, tradi¬
tionally associated with the creation.
S EVERAL days later another find of the first
'magnitude was made at Wadi es Sebua, that is,
the recovery intact of the Coptic vase used in the conse¬
cration ceremonies which transformed this great temple into
a Christian church. Since that time, the vase had remained
hidden in the ground before the Christian altar.
This brings us to one of the most rewarding phases of
the entire Nubia campaign the astonishing enrichment of
our knowledge concerning medieval Nubia. It was long
believed that previous explorations had completely
exhausted the subject and that nothing new remained to
be learned. For forty years, in fact, no one had considered
it worthwhile to undertake any new investigations in this
field. Yet from the day in 1959 when the foundation stone of
the citadel of Ikhmindi was found to the latest unearthing of
the city of churches at Tamit in September 1964, is one
continuous story of exalted discovery: Faras and its
majestic frescoes, the church of Abdallah Nirgi and its
decorations, the cathedral of Kasr Ibrim and the extra¬
ordinary "testament" of Bishop Timotheos the Nubian, on
his scrolls in Coptic and Arabic.
These are just a few examples from the dozens and
dozens of discoveries that have come out of Nubia, some
g of which are described elsewhere in this issue, and every
one of which is an important contribution to science.
A whole chapter could be written on the anthropology
of Nubia and its people, and especially the aspect that
touches closes on archaeology, namely, the houses of
Nubia. For the first time, the remains of ancient Nubian
houses were examined by archaelogists with specialized
knowledge of architecture. On site after site they were
amazed to find how closely the Nubian dwellings resembled
the type of house built in the time of the Pharoahs.
And so the history of Nubia can at last be written. Most
of the credit must go to the archaeologists who have
worked to save its monuments. Had it not been for these
operations the discoveries I have just described would
probably .never have been made. Never before have the
resources of archaeology been applied with such thorough¬
ness and care in seeking the relics of an ancient land.
N EVER in the entire history of archaeology has
I there ever been such close co-operation be¬
tween different sites and missions in the field. With the
launching of the Nubian campaign a bridge was laid between
working and research methods of a strictly archaeological
kind, whose limitations have now made them outdated, and
modern techniques which have come to the help of research
and conservation.
One of these is photogrammetry, which has now come
to be considered as one of the standard techniques used
on archaeological sites. Yet not many people realize that
the first example of its systematic use occurred in the
Nubian campaign when it was used not only in its simplest
form, for taking stereoscopic photographs but in the more
complicated processes for contour plotting and the recon¬
stitution of three-dimensional models. Thus one can say
that here too the Unesco appeal has played a vital role
and enabled archaeology to move ahead into a new phase
of progress.
Many countries have responded to Unesco's appeal
and by their efforts and good will have carried the results
well beyond the primary objective of saving Nubia's
temples. Along with the plan to regroup the reconstructed
temples in three special "oasis" zones or to establish them
in surroundings recalling their original sites it is proposed
to create communities and farmlands nearby.
Who would have dared to believe when the Nubian
Appeal was first launched that such a plan could be applied
coherently over an entire country? Until then it had merely
been proposed that certain monuments or at most a famous
site be protected. We have come a long way indeed in
four years.
No less unique is the fact that some fifty nations have
joined forces, not for reasons of aggression or defence,
but to help safeguard an entire cultural heritage in danger
of being engulfed forever. All that human effort could
save has been preserved, and with it a spiritual message
to be handed down to future generations. These nations
have revived hope in the Nubia of tomorrow as it becomes
a symbol for Egypt, like the star Sothis, as a harbinger
of the life-giving floods of the Nile.
If one wished to summarize the Nubian campaign in a
sentence, there could be none more appropriate than the
words of the Director-General of Unesco when he said,
"Faith in an ideal can move mountains."
CHRISTIANE DESROCHES-NOBLECOURT is Curator of the
Egyptian Antiquities Department at the Louvre Museum, Paris, and
Unesco Consultant to the Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt
in Cairo. She has carried out many archaeological excavations in
Upper Egypt and has written numerous works on Egyptology. One
of these. " Life and Death of a Pharoah : Tutankhamen ". is being
published in ten countries: U.K. ed.. Rainbird Ltd., London; U.S.
ed.. New York Graphic Society, New York.
