SPORT IS ED
by René Maheu
We publish below extracts from an address given
by M. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco,
on October 28, 1963 at the conference called in Paris
by the International Council of Sport and Physical
Education. M. Maheu deals with the threat to the
principles of competitive sports created by chau¬
vinism and what has been' called "shamateurism".
These questions were debated by the Council and
also were the subject of a long report by the former
French tennis champion, Jean Borotra. This interna¬
tional conference met on the occasion of the
centennial anniversary of the birth of Baron Pierre
de Coubertin (1863-1937) who was responsible for
the rebirth of the Olympic Games in modern times.
h or the revival of the Olympic Games we have
to thank Pierre de Coubertin who, in 1892
when he was barely 30 years of age, launched the idea
during the jubilee of the Union of French Athletic Clubs.
Two years later the revival was officially proclaimed at
the Sorbonne in Paris, and the first Olympic Games of
modern times took place in Athens in 1896.
"Why did I revive the Olympic Games?" said Coubertin.
"To dignify and invigorate sport, to make it independent
and durable and thus better fitted for its educational role
in the world today; to honour the individual athlete
because of his real value to the community as a stimulus
to physical exercise and to exalt feats that encourage a
healthy competitive spirit."
Coubertin reiterated these ideas, though in more deve¬
loped form, in "The Philosophical Bases of Modern Olym¬
pics," a message which he broadcast from Berlin in August
1935, a year before the 11th Olympic Games.
If, on this occasion, Coubertin was perhaps somewhat
too ambitious in claiming that modern Olympics should
be considered as first and foremost a religion, the reason
was his own fervour. But the other ideas in his Olympic
philosophy form a logical and compact whole of lasting
value which the most lucid minds should make a point
of studying.
Olympics, said Coubertin, postulate the existence and
assembly of an élite of athletes, an élite whose ranks are
open to anyone able to meet a single condition supe¬
riority in sport. The process of selecting this élite itself
implies a broad "democratization" of sport, and, conver¬
sely, the accomplishments of the élite help to popularize
sport among the mass of the people.
Indeed, in a now familiar axiom, Pierre de Coubertin
declared: "If 100 people are to take up physical culture,
50 must already be engaged in sport; if 50 are to practise
sport there must be 20 who specialize; if 20 are to specialize
there must be five capable of superlative feats."
Coubertin affirms too that we have nothing to fear from
these "superlative feats," but that, on the contrary, "it
would be Utopian to try to saddle athletics with a code of
compulsory moderation." Athletes must have absolute
freedom to overstep all bounds. That is why they were
given the vigorous motto, citius, altius, fortius ever
faster, higher and stronger, "the motto of those bold
enough to challenge existing records," in other words to
thrust back the bounds of the hitherto unattainable.
CONT'D ON PAGE 7 © Paul Almasy

s
> m
>***
ffr*£

A UNIVERSAL SPORT
Sports events have become the great popular spectacles of our time and of these
the most universally appreciated is football. An ancient game, it was played by
the Spartans as early as 500 B.C. In medieval Italy, teams of as many as 27 a side
lined up for matches between cities. A somewhat brawl-like kind of football became
so popular in medieval England that it was eventually banned by law, partly because
it diverted the yeomen from archery practice. It was only restored to legality by
Charles II in the 1 7th century. The skill and excitement of football and the enthusiasm
of its spectators are reflected in these photos. Above, Pelé, the "star" of the Bra¬
zilian team scores a goal. Below, Brazil's goalkeeper, Gylmar, dives across the
goalmouth (the ball rebounded from the post). Right, crowd scene in an African
stadium shows just how popular football has now become on this continent.
Associated Press
i Paul Almasy. Paris
6

SPORT IS EDUCATION (Cont'd)
© Keystone
Need for a careful
reappraisal
The moral conduct of athletes must be equal to the
standard of their performance In the field. Pierre de
Coubertin asks them to constitute an "order of chivalry"
which scrupulously observes a code of honour based on
fair play. He counts on the Olympic Games to bring this
home so strongly that not only will the example be
followed at all sports meetings international, national
and local but the spectators too will feel its impact.
For Coubertin the idea of a "truce" was also an impor¬
tant aspect of the Olympics. He saw it as a modern
evocation of the "sacred truce" of antiquity, established
by Iphitos, King of Ells, in agreement with Lycurgus,
which for nearly 12 centuries was respected at Olympia,
so that all quarrels, misunderstandings, factions and
hatreds cease during the Games. The alliance of
enthusiasm with the spirit of fair play found in compe¬
titive sports opens, in natural consequence, the way to
mutual respect and understanding and to friendship Itself.
"Hatred and violence," said Coubertin, "are attributes
of the faint-hearted."
Sport is Indeed an order of chivalry, combining honour
and a code of ethics and aesthetics, recruiting its members
from all classes and all peoples, mingling them In concord
and friendship throughout the length and breadth of the
entire world.
Sport is also a truce. In our technological way of life,
ruled by an inexorable law of toil, in which we arc only
what we 'have, and have only what we earn, sport is the
hallowed pastime, a princely gift to enrich our hours of
leisure. In an era of antagonisms and conflicts, domi¬
nated by the drive for power and by pride, it ls the
respite of the gods in which fair competition ends In
respect and friendship.
Sport, too, is education, the most concrete and the truest
kind of education that of character. Sport is knowledge
because it is only by patient study and self-rcvclatlon
that a sportsman can go from strength to strength.
Sport is culture because the transient movements it
traces in time and space for nothing but the sheer
pleasure of doing so, as Plato has it illuminate with
dramatic meaning the essential and therefore the deepest
and widest values of different peoples and of the human
race itself; it is culture, too, because it creates beauty, and
above all for those who usually have the least opportunity
to feast upon it.
I f there is one unchanging factor in Coubertin's
humanistic concept of sport, from the Paris
proclamation in 1894, his profession of faithright down
to the Berlin message of 1935 his testament it ls unde¬
niably the dual belief that sport is democratic and inter¬
national by nature and vocation. Half a century of extra¬
ordinary development in sport has shown how right he
was on both these points: his words have come true and
his spirit has triumphed.
But is it a betrayal of his memory to point out that this
confirmation and triumph have come about in conditions
which call for a careful reappraisal, and even a bold
revision of certain ideas or practices that he originated?
I personally do not think so; I feel that he, with his
remarkable open-mlndedness, would be the first to under¬
take the necessary reappraisals.
On the first point the democratization of sport does
anyone nowadays not see and realize that this democrati¬
zation, the conditions of urban life and, of course, the
raising of the level of athletic performance, have pro¬
foundly altered the conditions in which the athletic élite
is selected?
The famous axiom remains true: sport needs its cham- 7
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SPORT IS EDUCATION (Cont'd)
'The champion is no longer an amateur'
pions. But, unless the circumstances are exceptional,
it ls no longer true, as It was in Coubertln's day,
that the champion can emerge, train, establish
himself and give the full measure of his potentialities
which ls properly not only his individual vocation but
also his rôle in society in that state of independence of,
and indifference to, the economic contingencies or rather
necessities of ordinary life which confers what is called
amateur status, and which at the time Pierre de Coubertin
no doubt considered essential to the spirit of the Olympic
Games.
hough amateurism is the right thing for the
general run of those who practise sports, to
try to make amateur status obligatory for the élite of the
sports world means with certain exceptions that prove
the rule imposing falsehood on that élite. In this res¬
pect, we must be honest enough to admit that the ethical
concepts of Pierre de Coubertin relate to a social situation
and a stage in the technical development of sport which
are now out of date.
Nor were they those of Ancient Greece, for apart from
the fact that the democracies of antiquity secured leisure
for their citizens at the price of slave labour, the Olympic
victors were what we today should call "State athletes."
The social conditions and sports technique which gave
Pierre de Coubertin his frame of reference were those of
his timeof Victorian England and, in general, of the
middle-class Europe of the early decades of this century.
Today it is practically impossible for the champion to
emerge from the rank and file of sportsmen unless special
arrangements are made for him to become a State athlete
or a university athlete or an athlete sponsored by some
commercial firm. Strictly speaking, he is no longer really
an amateur at all.
Why should we be so reluctant to admit that he is a
professional? Is an artista painter, musician or writer
disqualified because he receives a fee? Why should we

think that money (or some equivalent material gain)
dishonours athletic champions when it does not dishonour
poets?
In point of fact, it is falsehood that dishonours; and
it is high time, in my opinion, to admit what everyone
knows to be the truth; that most champions and budding
champions at best observe only the strict letter of the
outmoded standards of amateur status.
The problem of the champion and the future champion
is not whether or not they are professionals. The real
problem, in practical and social terms, is that while
practising sport for a few years as a virtual profession,
they must at the same time learn another for the not
far distant day when they will no longer be physically
able to keep up the championship standard. This
difficulty is a very real one and deserves the fullest
and most considerate study. Nor will it be easier to
reach a fair solution if we deny the obvious fact that
the champion is obliged to live the life of a professional
athlete.
This is what I wished to say about the first point,
namely the democratization of sport and the training
of its élites. As for the second point internationalism
no one will be surprised, I imagine, that for Unesco this
is a matter of vital importance. Here again we must
have the courage to look squarely at the facts and say
frankly what we see.
Sport has, of course, developed on an extraordinarily
wide scale. It is probably the aspect of modern life
which is most widely encountered throughout the world
the only one, perhaps, which ls common to both
industrialized communities and developing countries. It
is also, in a steadily increasing degree, one of the most
vigorous forces in international relations. There are few
international exchanges, encounters or contacts which
arouse so much mass feeling as sports events.
But though It ls becoming more and more international
in fact, is present-day sport truly international in spirit,
as Coubertin thought and wished it to be? There are,
unfortunately, plenty of reasons to doubt that it is.
In point of fact, nationalism, chauvinism and even racism
are more and more apt to win or should we say lose?
the day in international sports events. The passions
and emotions that these events arouse and that are
amplified and broadcast to the four corners of the
earth by the powerful modern mass media of the press,
radio, television and cinema, arc but rarely inspired,
it must be acknowledged, by the ancient moral law and
social virtues once presided over by Zeus Phlllos, god
of friendship. It is high time to act if we wish to prevent
the Altis of Olympia from degenerating Into the Roman
Circus or the Hippodrome of Byzantium.
LÖPNING KORTDISTANS
in the 19th century by the goalkeeper of an ice-
hockey team. Above, comparative images show
that in the world's oldest sport, running, move¬
ment and style are still the same as in Antiquity.
Photos £> Paul Almasy, Paris
Let my meaning be clear. I am not suggesting
that we should try to curb the emotional
appeal of the sport event, which has become the great
popular drama of our time. This would be absurd, and
for that matter, impossible. One of the functions of such
events, and certainly among the most salutary, ls the
same, though at a much higher degree of intensity, as
that assigned by Aristotle to all drama: the well-known
catharsis, the purging of passions and Instincts. Nor can
there be any question of trying to deprive the athlete of
the admiration he receives, especially from his fellow-
countrymen. Like any other form of excellence, athletic
feats deserve to be admired, and it ls natural for those
who have most in common with the victorious athlete to
feel this unquestionably fine sentiment more strongly
than others.
But just as no sports contest can fall to stimulate
the desire for victory, so none can be without rules and
ethics. It is these rules and the ethics which inspire
them that distinguish sport from the savage struggle for
life whose name is war. It is compliance with these norms
that transforms a feat into a virtue, and since these
norms are. by definition universal, it follows that although
the feat may be ascribed to a given country, the virtue
itself belongs to man.
What is more barbaric than this identification of
the public with the champion, this appropriation by
a nation of the victory won by an Individual or by
a team? These flags, these anthems, these banner
headlines In the newspapers, screaming "Wc won..."
or "National defeat," must surely seem to us a monstrous
exaggeration of the spontaneous reactions of the crowd,
even a shameful exploitation of its most generous
impulses. In any case, this is the opposite of catharsis:
it is nothing less than a return to a primitive outlook.
I think the time has come for an energetic reaction,
including the abandonment of certain practices which
have become part and parcel of the Olympic Games,
either with the consent of Coubertinsuch as the singing
of national anthems or in spite of him such as the
classifications by nations, which, as we know, is not
officially recognized. Only in this way can we hope
to restore sport, and by this I mean sport as a whole,
including athletes, organizers and spectators, to its
international vocation of promoting friendship among the
peoples.
Is this too much to ask? I am certain that Coubertin
would be the first to denounce the deviations from his
creation and the chauvinistic exploitations of it. In
1935 writing about International sports events, he
affirmed: "We must reach the stage where applause on
such occasions and with even greater reason at the
Olympic Games is given purely for the feats themselves,
to the exclusion of any national preference. There
should be a truce to all exclusively national feelings;
these should be, as it were, 'temporarily suspended'."
