DROPS IN THE HYDROLOGIST'S BUCKET
WHEN WATER
GROWS OLD
The idea of water "growing old" Is one
that never occurs to most people. In the
popular 6ense water begins to "age" from
the moment It Is collected In a receptacle.
However water Is actually "born" the
moment It condenses from a cloud and falls
to the earth as rain, snow or hail. Water,
In fact, starts to "age" the moment It begins
to run over the surface of the ground and
starts from watercourse to watercourse on
Its way to the sea.
If It starts to Infiltrate Into the ground,
where it will circulate and be stored, Its
chances of "survival" Increase considerably.
Today, the dating of waters that have
been stocked In the water-bearing rocks of
the earth's crust for thousands of years or
perhaps only for a few centuries has
assumed great importance.
When the "water capital" of a given area
Is being exploited it Is Important for water
engineers to know how far this "capital"
has already been drawn upon when catch¬
ment or pumping begins. This means they
must find out the ratio between the volume
of water which each year reaches the water¬
bearing terrain the aquifer and the
volume of water extracted from it. This
gives an Idea of how long the stock will
last.
Nowadays underground water is looked
on less and less as a fully-renewable
natural resource. It tends more and more
to be "mined" like ores, whose eventual
exhaustion can be predicted. This calls
for a change in the outlook of the user,
and so greater efforts are being made to
recharge the aquifer, that Is, to build up
its reserves by injecting water into the
ground so that this can subsequently be
recuperated for man's use.
Research into the dating of water enables
us to follow the effect of these restocking
operations on the evolution of underground
reserves. Use is made of radioisotopes,
such as tritium or carbon 14, to determine
the age of an underground water supply.
Isotope tests have shown that large
underground stocks of water may well have
been deposited (especially In arid lands)
during the rainy periods of the Quaternary
Age when, long before the present desert
climate, forests grew in the Sahara.
FRESH WATER
SPRINGS IN THE SEA
'WATERBORNE' WELL. Fishermen's wives at Ganvié, in Dahomey,
draw drinking water from an artesian well which has been sunk through
© Paul Almasy Paris l^e '3ec' °* a 'a9oon t0 reach a fresh water pocket situated far beneath it.
40
What could be more surprising than to
watch a fishing boat leave the Greek coast
at Corinth, or the Moroccan coast at Agadir,
and make for a predetermined spot In the
open sea to take aboard a supply of fresh
water?
Yet these Greek and Moroccan fishermen
have long been doing this thanks to the
knowledge, handed down from generation
to generation, that at certain points fresh
water springs In the relatively shallow sea¬
bed send water to the surface that Is
practically uncontaminated by salt.
These springs are generally fissured beds
of limestone that drain surface water from
the land and release great quantities of
fresh water through faults or fractures on
the sea-bed. Detailed studies of sub¬
marine springs have recently been made
In Greece with a view to recovering these
wasted water supplies for the benefit of
the nearby land which is in dire need of
them. The presence of the sea-water
from which they emerge, the instability
of the water-mass pressures and, finally,
their relative Inaccessibility, all complicate
the task of recovery.
Geological research of the kind used to
locate oil deposits on the shore or under
the sea has led to the catchment of artesian
pockets of fresh water beneath the sea¬
shore at Istanbul In Turkey and at Recife
in Brazil at depths of between 500 and
650 feet. Here the techniques of the
geologist have joined hands with age-old
experience and knowledge of Greek and
Moroccan fisherman.

USIS RAINMAKERS. Scientists are seeking ways to control the weather. Such research may reveal ways of
bringing rain to areas which now suffer from drought and of protecting other areas against floods, cyclones,
hailstorms and tornadoes. Above, a cloud of ice fog produced by throwing a can of water into cold air (minus
40 degrees C.) during weather research experiments in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, U.S.A.
WATER WITH
A CUTTING EDGE
The many uses of water, from its role as
a basic necessity for men, plants and
animals to the part it plays alongside coal
and oil in supplying energy, are well known.
Less well known is the fact that the power
of water may be used In factories and
workshops like a cutting tool, with the
simple difference that it will never get
worn or need sharpening.
In September 1961 the Bulletin of the
Water Information Center in the United
States reported that a big machine-tool
factory at Los Angeles had designed and
built a machine in which a fine stream of
water with a pressure of over 14,000 lbs
per square inch is used to cut cement,
wood and plastic . materials. For cleaning
all kinds of metallic surfaces, this device
works more quickly and efficiently than
any existing abrasive material.
Basically, it Is the old story of the drop
of water which falls on to a stone,
gradually eating a hole In It, though now
adapted through new technological know-
how for use In modern Industry.
CITY BUILT
ON A 'JELLY'
The centre of Mexico City, and in
particular Alameda Square and the Fine
Arts Theatre, is subsiding at the alarming
rate of nearly 12 inches a year.
Mexican engineers blame the continuous
pumping operations that go on near the
city for this subsidence. The explanation
Is as follows:
At the beginning of the Quaternary Age,
the area of Mexico City had been a large
and very deep valley which was closed
abruptly" by a flow of lava from Mount
Popocatepetl, Mexico's largest volcano.
Once sealed off, the valley rapidly
became a lake between 2,000 and 2,600 feet
deep. This In turn was gradually filled with
volcanic ash from subsequent eruptions.
Finally, only a shallow depth of water was
left while deep down the ash instead of
settling formed a glutinous mixture with
the water until the land became rather like
a jelly In consistence.
The present site of Mexico's capital was
still a lake when the Spanish conquistadores
arrived in the country, and when the Aztecs
established their capital there they were
thinking of its natural defensive advantages.
But the "ground" here Is actually composed
of"15% of solid matter suspended in 85%
water.
Pumping operations In this waterlogged
earth creates a vacuum under more recent
surface alluvia and gradually the under¬
ground structure is being destroyed. That
explains why the stage and reception
rooms of Mexico City's Opera house and
neighbouring buildings sink lower and
lower each year.
The city's centre Is now about 35 feet
below its original level, and is thus even
lower than the surface of Texcoca Lake all ^
CONT'D ON PAGE 43

%xf:wa
I *
w./ ad0
-1p-^-
1 -*liil r .-~*pr#^ *7 t eau
r.jr
. '
\
pr ../?#rj "«
m « BT 1
-
\
J f -
»
42
MAY THE
RAINS COME
Eloquent hands speak the thoughts of an Indian farmer as he waits for the summer monsoon to bring the
longed-for rains. Drawn inward by low pressure over the heated interior of Asia, the summer monsoon carries
moisture from the Indian Ocean and brings downpours to countries of south-eastern Asia. All rural life in
these regions is regulated by the monsoons. When the rains fail or are late, drought brings severe famine.

UMBRELLA TIME
IN BOMBAY
A signboard in Bombay, India, announces
the approach of the monsoon. Now the
stifling May days are counted until down¬
pours bring relief to land and people alike.
\
s of v
Photos © Magnum - Brian Braka
CITYBUILTON (Cont'd from page 41)
that now remains of the once vast lake on
which the Aztec rulers built their capital.
This situation, coupled with one of a
more geographical kind, namely that tho
town Is situated in an enclosed Inland
basin, has created a serious problem of
waste-water disposal for the municipal
authorities. Since the basin is completely
closed, the water can neither be returned
into the ground nor evacuated into a canal
or river. Furthermore the roads leaving
Mexico City situated at an altitude of
7,870 feet climb up to 9,190 feet and to
even higher levels before they are free to
turn down the Atlantic slopes on one side
or the Pacific slopes on the other.
Thus the only possible way to dispose of
sewage water Is to pump It out of tho
enclosed basin and into the Atlantic basin.
How Important this pumping has become
can be gauged from the fact that over four
million people live In tho area.
The public health services and tho
government Itself keep constant watch on
the multitude of pumps used for this
operation for a general breakdown would
allow Invading sewage waters to flood the
city to first floor level within 24 hours.
DEW MOUNDS AND
'LILY RESERVOIRS'
The ancient peoples living In desert areas
built "dew mounds" of large flint pebbles
around each fruit tree and vine to attract
the dew and convey it quickly to the roots
of the plants.
Today, people still find ways of collecting
dew which condenses naturally in some
local areas. An Ingenious method of dew
collection has been devised by a farmer on
the Island of Brava In the Cape Verde
archipelago. There Is little rainfall In tho
Cape Verde Islands and It never rains
during the long dry season. But the land
is generally shrouded by heavy mists or
fogs and this produces much natural
condensation on to the leaves of plants and
directly on to the soil. This moisture is
often sufficient to carry crops through the
dry season. But drinking water is in short
supply and the farmer In question had to
transport water for some distance.
However, he noticed that dew was
condensing so heavily on the leaves of a
giant lily that it dripped on to the soil. So
he tied the leaves In such a way that the
dew dripped from leaf to leaf and down to
the ground. He then planted 60 of these
lilies in a row down a slope and made a
gutter from the highest to the lowest by
placing the large boat-shaped leaves of
other lily-plants on the ground. At the end
of the gutter he constructed a small
reservoir, from which he has since collected
an average of 200 litres of fresh water
daily. When the fog Is dense his row of
plants collects 600 litres in a day.
43
