"Man Through His Art" series
is shortly to be published. Entit¬
led "Music", it will contain 20
reproduction plates of master¬
pieces from different lands. We
are happy to be able to offer
our readers a preview of the
stimulating introduction to this
second art portfolio. The series
is published with Unesco's fi¬
nancial help, within the frame¬
work of its Major Project for
East-West Understanding, and
is sponsored by the World Con¬
federation of Organizations
of the Teaching Profession.
.** ..-,;
Boston Museum of Fine Arts, U. S. A.
Oil painting by Degas, the French artist. This double portrait represents
the Spanish guitarist. Pagans, with Degas' father sitting beside him.
THROUGH HIS ART: MUSIC
by Roger Hinks
THE distinction In kind between
music and the visual arts the
one art existing in time, the other in space
is a fundamental one, and is valid In
any time or place. You cannot play music
or read poetry backwards, and make sense.
Whereas it is indifferent whether you begin
to examine a building inside or outside;
or whether you look at the front of a statue
first, or the back ; or whether you start
looking at a picture from the top right hand
corner or the bottom left: the examination
of the whole will take some time, but it is
the spectator's own time; and the choice of
the order of experience is left to him, for
he is an active participant in the process
of appreciation. But a poem, a play, a
symphony have to be experienced in just
that order; and the public has to submit,
all its members responding together simul¬
taneously.
In all countries, there are probably people
who are impatient of this constraint, who
claim the right to take in their own im¬
pressions, in their own time and at their
own pace. Such people, perhaps, are by
nature refractory to music and poetry and
drama ; they feel at ease only with paint¬
ing, sculpture, and architecture. Yet all the
while a kind of unheard, unhurrylng music,
echoes unendingly in the background of
their minds; and they seek to fix it and
point to it In the still but somehow vibrant
shapes of certain works of visual art.
For there are musical pictures, just as
there are unmusical ones, pictures that are
positively hostile to the whole notion of
music. Often enough, the least musical
pictures (in our sense) are precisely those
in which the persons represented are most
busily .engaged in "making" music, or in
which musical Instruments are most con¬
spicuously displayed. In how many pictures
of a musical company do we not feel that
the persons involved are (as amateurs)
merely displaying a polite accomplishment
for the sake of social prestige, or (as pro¬
fessionals) exhibiting their virtuosity to an
admiring, and usually self-admiring, public?
Yet there are, of course, pictures which
really do, in Pater's phrase, "aspire to the
condition of music:" pictures In which the
music is intrinsic, emanates, almost in spite
of themselves, from the men and women
involved resounding, as It were, in the very
pictorial texture of the piece.
Not all pictures of people "making" mu¬
sic are musically unconvincing: In not a few
cases the artist is a sufficiently good
psychologist to be able to convey by ex¬
pression or gesture the rapt and self-forget¬
ful look of those who have really lost them¬
selves in the sounds conjured forth. For
it is not difficult to judge whether the mu¬
sicians are serious or not: whether they are
truly absorbed in their playing and 6inging,
or are smirking at the audience.
Or again: there are plenty of truly mu¬
sical pictures that represent the pauses
In the performance rather than its actual
movement. In fact, many musicians, when
they are being painted, prefer to be exhibit¬
ed as tuning up: It exempts them from
the obligation to put on an act of concen¬
tration for the spectator's benefit; and
it creates the atmosphere of suspense,
when music has just sounded and is soon
to be heard again that moment which is ext¬
ended from the rhythm of the music itself
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

MUSIC (Cont'd)
Rhythm and melody
in an art of silence
24
to the Intervals between the movements.
There are Indeed persons so musical that
they only perfectly enjoy the Intermission,
because only then can they reflect In tran¬
quility upon the emotion just past, and anti¬
cipate confidently the emotion Just to come.
It Is thus that one may interpret some of
the most inspired renderings of musical
intermissions, for example, Glorglone's
"Concert Champêtre". The music hangs in
the air, vibrates In the memory: for some
lovers of painting and music, at least, such
pictures are the most musical of all.
For pictures of music are rarely so sug¬
gestive. Painting, after all, Is essentially
an art of stillness: to bring in the ideal
dimension of time, in which music has Its
being, Is to invite disquiet. In seventeenth-
century Holland, the music-lesson, with the
fumbling beginner and the patient master, is
a commoner theme than the assured per¬
formance.
The difference between the European and
the non-European approach to the relations
between sight and sound in the arts is
hard for either to determine. The European
may feel, for instance, that the Chinese and
the Indians and the Persians are nearer to
him in their visual expression of musical
sensibility than, say, the Egyptians, the Afri¬
cans, or the Pre-Columbian Americans; but
he will find it hard to define exactly why
this Is.
No doubt where the rhythm Is most mark¬
ed, and the dominance of time, or duration,
most absolute, the visual arts are furthest
away from music, and the plastic equivalent
to sound hardest to discover and to hold.
One may witness, as it were, drummers
drumming, harpers harping, and trumpeters
trumpeting: one's experience may explain,
more or less, what those drum-beats, harp-
plucks, and trumpet-blasts sound like; and
one's imagination does its best.
But one cannot fully sympathize, or em¬
pathize, unless the artist has managed to
find a visual symbol for the musical effect:
by means, for example of brilliant colour
to render strident sound. The legendary
blind man who felt that scarlet must be like
a trumpet-blast gives again in Nicholas de
Staël's "The Musicians", where the flaming
reds and yellows juxtaposed with sharp
blues do convey with real conviction the
pungency of jazz.
Where, on the other hand, melody pre¬
vails, the rise and fall of the tune can be
suggested in the flow of line; and the
musical intervals in the spacing of shapes,
on the purest Pythagorean principles. In
this sense It is meaningful to describe as
"musical" certain compositions of Gothic
and Renaissance architecture which are
explicitly based upon the Greek philoso¬
pher's relation of number and pitch, and
whose proportions may in consequence
suggest the static relationship of sound and
space. And since colour can be measured
spectroscopically In terms of wavelengths,
it is not fanciful to detect certain affinities
of colour and pitch.
More plausible, however, Is the conten¬
tion, often made when analysing the effect
of Persian miniatures, that there Is a real,
if empirical, connexion between the size of
a patch of colour and the intensity of its
tone and tint; and that melodic sequences
may be easily imagined from the arrange¬
ment of coloured patches as well as from
the movement of the linear pattern. These
relations are, no doubt, a matter of personal
feeling in the sensitive spectator, and
cannot be scientifically demonstrated; but
they are not necessarily the less valid for
that.
Asian music, being purely melodic and
free In rhythm, can be suggested by the
flowing, swaying lines of the design, and
its tonality may be implied by the chroma¬
tic range of the whole composition. Here
at least the European Is at a disadvantage:
he has lost the power to respond emo¬
tionally to any modes but the major and
the minor, which he still equates with
"cheerful" and "sad" moods.
On the other hand, the European does
respond very readily to the clear and
"singing" colour of a Perian- miniature, to
the voluptuous movement of an Indian
sculptured frieze or fresco, to the rhythmic
calligraphy of a Chinese scroll, even if he
knows he Is missing all the overtones and
associations that make them precious to the
Asian mind and eye. And he knows that
the richness and variety of his own musical
and pictorial tradition have been purchased
by the sacrifice of purity, clarity and
directness.
By comparison with the art of Asia his
own art has shown a certain evasiveness, a
certain tendency to obliqueness in Its
musical analogies. But when in recent
years the European artist has wished to
create a permanent ¡mage of movement In
time, he is forced (like Matisse) to rely
upon the Intermediate art of the dance,
where alone music becomes visible, but
whose effect Is of its very nature as eva¬
nescent as music itself.
Roger P. Hinks, who died last year,
was curator of Greek and Roman
antiquities at the British Museum,
London, from 1926 to 1939. His books
on the history of art include: "Caro-
lingian Art", "Myth and Allegory in
Ancient Art" and "Caravaggio".
SS^gZ
All orders and inquiries should be
sent to the following addresses.
UK. edition: Educational Produc¬
tions Ltd., East Ardsley, Wakefield,
Yorkshire; school ed. 21/-, general
ed. 30/-. Canadian edition : The
Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ont.;
school ed. 55.00, general ed. 88.00.
U.S. edition: The New York Gra¬
phic Society, Greenwich, Conn.;
$7.95. For Scandinavia: Interna¬
tional Publishing Co., Box 404, Ore-
bro, Sweden; 45 Kr.
PLEASE DO NOT SEND OR¬
DERS TO UNESCO.
Ü
The temple of Borobudor was
built between 750 and 800 A. D.
It consists of six superimposed
terraces, the wholestucture being
covered with small "stupas"
(Buddhist chapels) and crowned
with a central stupa 52 feet in
diameter. In addition to the rows
of reliefs, there are hundreds of
images of the Buddha and other
statues. Borobudor is the finest
example of Central-Javanese art
and reveals the affinities that
exist between this art and the
medieval art of Bengal (India).
Below, detail of " Celestial
Musicians ". Right, lute players.
fTi Musée Guimet Archives, Paris -
Goloubev
RSft
Ç&ï ^
?é
