ON CELLULOID
by Anne MacDermot
With a shrinking world and a growing desire
on the part of all of us to "learn the other
man's language" so we can communicate with each
other, many people look at a shy film-maker who speaks
to people In 53 countries and wonder how he does it.
For more than 20 years Norman McLaren has been work¬
ing out of Canada's National Film Board. In this time he
has produced a stream of short films that have caught
the attention of film audiences all over the world. No-
one can ignore a McLaren film. You are either delighted,
startled, or enraged. And yet their impact is not in
words McLaren speaks without using words and not
in length the films are seldom more than five minutes
long. He does not preach. The purpose of his films?
"To give the Intellect a rest," McLaren says. And yet
these little films do have a message of beauty, of humour,
of peace. More than that, they betray their creator as
"one of the film world's gentlest people."
It all started when he was a young student. Born
in Scotland, in 1914, McLaren went to Glasgow for art
training. Like others at that time, he became fasci¬
nated with. the possibilities of a comparatively new toy
called film. He could not afford a camera so one day
he got hold of an old print, washed off the emulsion
and, taking a brush and coloured inks, painted his own
strip of films directly on the clear celluloid. The re¬
sult, "Colour Cocktail," was awarded a prize by the
acknowledged doyen of British documentaries, John
Grierson. McLaren went to London and with the General
Post Office Film Unit produced a series of short, vivid
films: "Hell Unltd," "Book Bargain," "Mony a Pickle,"
"Love on the Wing."

DIRECT ANIMATION
With their direct appeal to
eye and ear, the cartoons
of Norman McLaren have
cut clear across language
barriers in all parts of the
world. In his works,
McLaren speaks, but with¬
out using words, and
draws his cartoons directly
on to the film itself. Left,
the animator at work. His
technique is one of direct
animation for he uses no
camera but simply an ordi¬
nary pen and Indian ink.
Right, McLaren's apparatus
which holds the film while
he draws. It reflects the
image of the figure just
drawn on to the frame on
which he is now working.
The sheet in the background
with numbers indicates the
length of each sequence
of action in the film.
Photos : National film Doard of Canada
He moved to New York and there turned out "Allegro,"
"Sherzo," "Loops," "Rhumba," and "Boogie Doodle." In
1939, John Grierson once again stepped into his life. He
was asked to go to Ottawa where the dynamic Grierson
was building up what is today the Film Board. McLaren
accepted the job as head of the Animation Department,
on condition that he be given freedom to go on experi¬
menting with hand-painted films. In the decade that
followed he was to turn out some of his best-loved films.
What are they like? As the Film Board began to
distribute McLaren's films dozing theatre-goers in such
distant points as Rome, Johannesburg, Washington were
jolted out, of their seats by a small explosion on the
screen in front of them. Showers of sparks, stars and
whirling snowflakes rained down and the audience hardly
had time to catch its breath before the film stopped, as
abruptly as it began, like a giant Roman candle dropping
its last star into the night.
"Fiddle-de-Dee," for instance, is a cavalcade of riotous
colour. The images McLaren has painted on each film-
square, dance and streak across the screen to the wild
accompaniment of an old-time fiddler. "Begone Dull
Care" is a beautiful blues evocation set to the music of
jazz pianist Oscar Peterson. "Hen Hop" is a joyful little
film in which a hen motif leaps and bounds in a tricky
jive step.
McLaren made all of these by working on the film
base, frame by frame, etching, painting, counting squares
to synchronize them with the soundtrack. People inside
and outside the Film Board began coming to see how
he did it. He would show anyone who wanted to learn.
In fact his generous help, even during periods of frantic
production, have made him a legendary figure of thought-
fulness among colleagues (It was Grierson who called
him one of the film-world's gentlest people.) Few have
managed the concentration of hand and eye that go
into McLaren's intricate films. One thing, however, be¬
came apparent.
McLaren's films had a direct and Immediate appeal
to the eye and ear, regardless of language. Also this
one-man film producer had succeeded In turning out
films without the need of cameras, scripting, cutting and
all the other complicated processes that go Into most
cinema production.
In 1949, his abilities were called upon by Unesco. Mc¬
Laren joined a team to work on an experiment In visual
education in West China. Called "The Healthy Village,"
the project was designed to teach people who couldn't
read or write some of the rules of health.
From a cupboard in the Montreal offices of the Film
Board where I visited him, Norman McLaren pulled out
some of the work his pupils did at that time.
"The Chinese have a fine feeling for form," he said,
holding up a strip of film. "They are good draftsmen.
Here's a film strip, for instance, on 'Safe Water - Safe
Food.' "
He held it up to the light and showed the delicate 21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ETCHCRAFT ON CELLULOID (Cont'd)
One-man film unit
A SAD, MYSTERIOUS
scene taken from the film,
" A Little Fantasy on a 1 9th
Century Painting". The
film brings to life a well-
known work, "The Isle of
the Dead " by Arnold Bo-
ecklin (a 1 9th century Swiss
painter). It was made on
the basis of a single black
and white drawing which
evolved as different elenv
ents were added or removed
as shooting progressed.
etching against the black surface. In another film, there
were beautiful colours, rich plum and royal blue.
He dug into the box he was holding. "These are
animated drawings, done on rice paper. They show
how a log of wood is cut, carved and made into a plough,
step by step," he explained.
In China, McLaren had supervised 12 artists and
showed them the graphic teaching value of poster, pic¬
ture books, mobile devices, fllmstrips, slides and finally,
animated movies. While McLaren was in China the
big change In government occurred, but he did not leave
the project before a good number of Chinese who had
never seen a film before were given the key to make
their own productions.
Four years later, the government of India called upon
him to give the same kind of lessons. In co-operation
with Unesco, McLaren spent three months in Delhi and
three in Mysore. This time, the emphasis was on prac¬
tical problems and in his Montreal office McLaren
showed me some more samples: "The Rearing of Silk
Worms," "Compost Manure," "The Treachery of the
Money-Lender."
He remembers his students as serious and hard-working.
One of them, a lad named Obaid-al-Haque, later came
to Canada and spent a year with the Film Board.
It was after his trip to India that Norman McLaren pro¬
duced what many consider his most powerful film.
"Neighbours" is not the first film he had made using
a camera (a series of delightful French Canadian folk¬
songs, C'est l'Aviron, La-Haut sur les Montagnes and
Photos: National Film Board of Canada
22
FOLKSONG in the French-
Canadian tradition, " Là-
Haut sur les Montagnes "
was one of a number of
folklore cartoons produced
by McLaren. These were
made by photographing a
series of pastel drawings.

Poulette Grise had been made by photographing a suc¬
cession of pastel paintings) but it was a new technique
for McLaren in that he used live actors and photographed
them In puppet-like movements which give the elfcct of
very violent pantomime.
The film ls McLaren's longest. It runs nine minutes
and tells the story of two neighbours, sitting out in
their back yards, chatting and reading the newspapers
from their respective deckchalrs. The mood changes
when one glances down and notices a pretty little daisy
growing in the grass between them. The other follows
his glance. They both wonder to whom It belongs.
Suspicion, hatred and fear flare up. The men grapple,
attack each other's households, murder the wives and
children and finally kill each other. In the end the
daisy ls blooming in the grass between their graves.
The film ls undoubtedly the powerful comment on
war McLaren Intended it to be. It aroused a storm of
international controversy, taking prizes at international
film festivals but horrlying some audiences.
The next time McLaren used the "plxlllatlon" method
(live figures photographed as for an animated cartoon)
the film was "The Chalry Tale." Audiences once again
chuckled with glee. There was no fighting in this one.
'"Rhythmetlc" ls another favorite and here McLaren
uses cut-outs. Made to Introduce school children to the
business of learning numbers, and perhaps take some of
the bogey out of "Now it's time for our arithmetic lesson",
"Rhythmetlc" is a rollicking little film in which numbers
slide together, add, subtract, meet each other and
re-group to make sums, until suddenly all is upset by a
run-away zero which won't keep in line, sighs, deflates
like a flat tyre, tips like a dizzy egg in an egg-cup.
For La Merle McLaren once again uses a traditional
French folk tune (as in the popular "Fiddle-De-Dec")
and the elegant little film has taken Its share of prizes.
usic has always been as Important to McLaren
as the visual side. It is natural, perhaps, that
he should have found a way of bringing it too under the
supervision of the Individual making the movie. He began
experimenting with two little films, "Dots" and "Loops."
By drawing with pen and Indian Ink along the margin of
35 mm. film, where the soundtrack usually runs, he produc¬
ed his own "music".
"This was a primitive method", McLaren explained
some years ago. "After this we developed a system for
producing a more refined kind of animated sound."
What he had designed was called a "composertron"
and consisted of a complete set of cards representing the
chromatic scale. When the cards were photographed to the
left side of the film, where the soundtrack runs, they
added up to a new kind of "music". The technique had
been evolved to some extent by the Russians, Avzaamov
and Rimsky-Korsakoff, the German, Rudolf Phennlger
and two Englishmen, Jack Elliott and C. E. Buckle,
McLaren used it for several passages in the film, "Bllnklty
Blank", and another Film Board producer, Maurice Black¬
burn, used animated sound as the fourth instrument In
an ensemble for the McLaren film, "Phantasy."
By this time, McLaren's name had become known all
round to the world in film circles. However, he hates
personal publicity and found being famous a drawback.
Like every true artist he is happiest at his own drawing
board. There he continues to touch the imagination of
people all around the world by sending out dancing little
films that cross all boundaries.
23
