THE SURGE TO THE TOWNS
by Barbara Ward
I n 1953 something quite new happened in the
I Chinese fishing village of Kau Sai, which lies
on one of the many islands in the territory of Hong Kong:
several fishermen sent their daughters to school. Pre¬
viously this had been the privilege of sons only. But in
the early 1950's Kau Sai was becoming prosperous. Some
of the fishing junks were fitted with diesel engines;
catches were larger and more regular, incomes higher.
With higher incomes, wives and daughters, as well as
sons and grandsons, wanted to buy things. The city had
plenty of things to sell, but to find the shops you needed
to be able to read read the shop signs, the street names,
the figures on the buses and their destinations. Modern
communications were laid on, travel and goods were at
the women's disposalbut first they had to be able to
read.
Paul Almasy, Paris
In the village literacy was not necessary; town living,
even town visiting, was difficult without it. The
schoolgirls of Kau Sal Illustrate very neatly the inter¬
dependence of the many different factors in contemporary
social change.
More than that, they illustrate also the surge towards
the towns. Between 1951 and 1959 four young fisher boys
left the village prosperous though their families undoub¬
tedly were for work in the city, and one girl was lucky
enough to marry a townsman.
This, which made her the envy of every other woman
and the ideal of every schoolgirl in the village, meant
that she went to live in a wlndowless cubicle about 9 feet
long and 5 feet broad, whose hardboard walls reached a 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

From the most beautiful scenery to a slum
: 3
height of about seven feet and which was flanked by six
or seven similar cubicles with whose occupants (together
with those who slept in the passageway) she now shares
a common kltchen-cum-lavatory about ten feet square.
The fourth floor of the tenement which contains this
cubicle is reached by a steep, straight stairway, a yard
wide, down which all refuseincluding night-soilhas
to be carried, and which, being no tenant's property, is
no tenant's business to keep clean. The tenement is, of
course, only one In a street of such buildings, and in
scores of such streets. There is a standplpe for water
about a hundred yards away. The good fortune of this
girl, who now has two children both under three years old,
is still the talk of her old friends in the village. She has
achieved their highest ambition: she lives in town.
What has she gained? In the eyes of her friends and
herself two precious things: freedom from the ceaseless-
ness of toil in the village, and access to glamour and
excitement. Both the "push" from the country and the
"pull" to the towns are here reflected. There is no doubt
that in most countries peasant rural Ufe is an endless
round of physically demanding work.
Chinese fishing families are perhaps an extreme
example, since they live always (men, women and
children) on their boats and many of them work far into
the night; moreover they are driven all the time by the
constant desire to make good in the material sense. By
no means all the other nationalities in South and South-
East Asia share this motivation, and, without it, most of
them, living in a climate and environment which do not
force absolutely continuous effort, do in fact lead a less
strenuous life.
Nevertheless, even for them, the work Is usually
demanding and unending; often especially so for the
women who, in addition to the inescapable dally chores
of child care, cooking, cleaning, collecting water and
firewood, laundering, and other domestic duties, usually
have the more continuous, if less arduous tasks of agri¬
culture laid upon themplanting out, for instance, and
weeding.
Though Ceylon's women
themselves and men's atti¬
tudes towards them have
changed, only a relatively
small number of women
have in practice been able to
add to their traditional roles
of wife and mother or change
their position in comparison
with men. In Ceylon most
people live in rural areas
where change has hardly
occurred at all. Right,
paddy fields rise tier upon
tier like a giant staircase in
the countryside of Ceylon.
I n the towns tasks disappear ; water comes
I from a tap (what is a hundred yards or so
down the street compared with a quarter of a mile or
more on a rough village path?); food can quite often be
bought ready cooked; charcoal and firewood are in the
market; there is electricity. All this and glamour too:
things to see, shops to look at, the cinema, a fire engine,
buses, crowded pavements, curious foreigners, rich people,
perhaps processions for funerals and weddings. The
fascination of town life for the imaginations of peasant
women is not hard to understand.
The question of how far their expectations are fulfilled
can hardly be answered. For the fisherman's daughter
from Kau Sai they undoubtedly were. Though to middle-
class Western eyes she may appear to have exchanged a
healthy open-air Ufe in some of the most beautiful scenery
In the world for an overcrowded slum, she is a truly
happy woman. She told me so; and I could see that it
was true. But for the pavement sleepers of other parts
of Hong Kong (or Calcutta, or Bombay, or elsewhere) I
cannot say.
Overcrowding, unemployment, slum housing these are
common in all large Asian cities and there are probably
many who wish they had never left the land. But we
do not always see the alternatives. We need information,
more factual studies of the relative advantages of poor
town and poor country living and the actual reasons
behind the decisions to migrate.
Moreover it is as misleading to think solely in terms of
poverty and overcrowding as it is to ignore them. Asian
towns have their well-to-do inhabitants too. Further¬
more, in Asia as elsewhere, it is town life that gives the
greatest opportunities for recreation, cultural activities of
all kinds, education, diversified employmentafter all,
as the derivation of the word shows,'towns are the seats
of civilization. And, as often as not they are also the
places in which it is easiest for traditionally secluded
women to emerge from purdah.
In this they are atypical. Apart from city-states like
Singapore, the proportion of the total population living
in towns containing a population of 20,000 or more
nowhere in our region exceeds 22 per cent, and the average
is not much above 10 per cent. In North America it is
42 per cent (1950), in Europe (excluding Russia) 35 per
cent, in the U.S.S.R. 31 per cent. One of the difficulties
in the way of mutual understanding between East and
West is that the overwhelming majority of Asians are
villagers or small-town dwellers still.
Nevertheless it is certain that there is a surge towards
the towns in Asia, and that it is increasing.
Barbara Ward is a British author and an assistant editor
of "The Economist". A former lecturer at Harvard
University, she is at present a visiting lecturer in the
department of anthropology at Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York. Among her most recent books are "India
and the West" (1961) and "The Rich Nations and the
Poor Nations" (1962).
