THE SWORD AND THE PL
14
"HERE are so many competing claims for
usefully employing the resources released by
disarmament that the real problem is to establish a scale
of priorities. The most urgent of these claims would
undoubtedly already have been largely satisfied were it
not for the armaments race.
The resources liberated by disarmament within any
country could be employed in part to promote economic
and social progress at home and in part to expand foreign
aid. The main civilian purposes for which the freed re¬
sources whether domestic or foreign in origin, could be
applied, may be classified as follows:
Raising standards of personal consumption of goods
and services;
Expanding or modernizing productive capacity through
Investment In new plant and equipment;
Promoting housing construction, urban renewal,
Including slum clearance, and rural development;
Improving and expanding facilities for education,
health, welfare, social security, cultural development, scien¬
tific research, etc.
The resources freed by disarmament could ultimately be
used for any one or more of these purposes and in any
combination. Labour can be retrained and, where ne¬
cessary, can move to other areas. As old equipment
becomes obsolete it can be replaced by new equipment
oriented to new patterns of demand. In the long run,
there should be little difficulty in adapting resources to
needs.
BY contrast, in the very short run the range of
choice may be somewhat more limited. It takes
time to turn swords into ploughshares or to make an office
clerk or factory worker out of a soldier. Studies in some
Industrial countries have shown that the productive
capacities released from military use would be much more
immediately adaptable to the increased output of consumer
durables and industrial equipment than to the production
of houses, food clothing or educational facilities.
Thus, in the transition period, countries may wish to
take into account not merely the unsatisfied needs for
higher consumption, investment and foreign aid, but also
the extent to which alternative patterns of new expenditure
would take full advantage of the particular resources that
disarmament would make available. Some major military
powers now have fairly confortable margins of productive
capacity. In these cases it is unikely that disarmament would
generate many new demands that could not fairly readily
be satisfied from available resources.
In the centrally planned economies, even though they
have generally been operating approximately at capacity,
the transfer of industrial capacity and labour force to the
production of goods for peaceful uses could be achieved
in a relatively short time. This transfer could be readily
achieved by measures formulated within the framework of
the general economic plans which can ensure a desirable
balance between demand and resources.
In the developing countries the principal resource
released, apart from the purely financial, would be man¬
power, both skilled and unskilled. In some cases a signi¬
ficant proportion of Industrial and transport capacity would
also become available for other uses. In many there would
also be considerable savings in foreign exchange. The
effective utilization of released resources would depend
upon the soundness and vigour of development program¬
mes and the volume and character of aid received.
Personal consumption and productive investment. Among
the alternative uses of resources released by disarma¬
ment, increased personal consumption might well absorb
a large share. It is fair to suppose that even in the
developed countries there would be strong pressure
on governments to raise the level of living. Disarmament
would, in particular, offer an important opportunity to
raise incomes of low income sections of the population
and to facilitate equalizing the rates of pay for men and
women.
Part of the gain from disarmament could also take the
form of an increase in leisure as, for example, through a
reduction in average working hours without a correspond¬
ing reduction in real income, or through an increase in paid
vacations.

OUGHSHARES
A NEW
PROTOTYPE
BOMBER
WITH FULL
EQUIPMENT
One year's
salary for
250,000
teachers
30 science
faculties
each with
1,000 students
75 fully
equipped
100- bed
hospitals
50,000
tractors
or 15,000
harvesters
mm
In most countries, however, not all the resources freed
by disarmament would be allocated directly to consumption,
no matter what the level of income might be. In the first
place, a substantial portion of the released resources would
be used for expansion of productive capacities because
only such expansion can provide a firm basis for further
increases in consumption.
Social investment. Social investment is an impor¬
tant alternative both to private consumption and to indus¬
trial and agricultural investment. Its claims rest partly
upon the clear urgency of the direct need for improved
social amenities, and partly upon the fact that growth of
industrial and agricultural productivity is dependent upon
developments in education, housing, health, and other
fields. Since social investment has had to compete with
military claims for state funds, it (like aid to developing
countries) has probably been particularly affected by the
armaments race.
I N the United States the National Planning Asso¬
ciation estimated at the end of 1959 the cumu¬
lative expenditure requirements for selected governmant pro¬
grammes over the next five years. These estimates were not
intended to be precise but simply represented a summary of
the existing programmes of development and improvement in
various fields over the next five years. The significance
of these estimates, which imply annual average expenditures
of $66 thousand million, may be judged from the fact that
the present spending of the Federal, State and local gov
ernments on all these programmes amounts to about $30
thousand million per year. It is therefore apparent that
these programmes could absorb much or most of any
resources released by disarmament.
In the Soviet Union the task has been set of achieving
a sharp improvement in living standards within the next
twenty years by raising the Income of the population and
also by expanding social benefits (education, health pro¬
tection, social insurance, housing construction, etc.). As
stated in an official document, "general and complete dis¬
armament on the basis or an appropriate agreement be¬
tween States would make it considerably easier to overfulfil,
the planned improvement in the living standards of the
working people".
The problem of urban renewal is world-wide. In 1950
about 80 per cent of the world's population was still living
in rural areas. Between 50 and 60 million people are being
added to the world's total population every year, mainly to
its urban areas. In Asia as many as 500 million persons
may be added between 1950 and 1975 to the population of
cities with over 20,000 inhabitants. In Latin America,
sixty-two cities with over 100,000 people accounted in
1960 for some 40 per cent of the region's total. In Africa
a considerably higher rate of growth is taking place in
urban areas than in rural areas. Rapid urbanization is
characteristic of Europe and North America.
The rural and urban environments in many countries are
both deteriorating, mainly under the impact of this rapid ,.,.
growth. The social and physical symptoms are bad hous-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGHSHARES (Cont'd)
A new approach to world-wide
prosperity through disarmament
ing, poor community services and delinquency, the para¬
lysis of city traffic, and in many of the less developed
countries an absence of sanitation and a high incidence
of communicable disease. In many metropolitan cities of
such less developed countries "squatters' settlements"
already contain a considerable part of the population.
In India alone approximately $1 thousand million a year
will be required to house the new inhabitants of cities with
over 100,000 people. The provision of city-wide services,
utilities and transportation would at least double the needed
investment.
In Latin America it was estimated by the Organization of
American States in 1954 that an annual investment of $1.4
thousand million was required over a period of thirty years
to wipe out the housing backlog, to replace obsolescent
dwellings and to provide new homes. According to rough
THE FIRST STEPS
"We have taken the first steps along the pathway
to disarmament. Last year saw the test ban treaty,
the direct communication link, and the U.N. reso¬
lution against nuclear weapons in space. This
year both the Soviet Union and the United States
have announced reductions in the production of
fissionable material for nuclear weapons.
"Each of these steps point in the direction of
effective control of arms. Each moves us a small
way along this long and difficult road.
"We must not hesitate now that the journey has
been begun. We must redouble our efforts until
it is completed."
Lyndon B. Johnson
estimates by the United Nations Bureau of Social Affairs,
as many as 150 million families in the less developed coun¬
tries are in need of adequate homes. These immense
requirements are contributing in many developing countries
to the maintenance of a level of spending on housing and
urban development such that the pressing claims of directly
productive sectors have to be curtailed.
In the Soviet Union a housing shortage still exists despite
the building of dwellings for nearly 50 million people in
a five year period. In order to overcome the shortage and
house every family in "a separate, comfortable apartment",
an increase in twenty years of about 200 per cent would
be required in the existing housing facilities. To reach
this goal the average annual housing construction needs
to be raised from the target of 135 million square metres
in 1961-65 to 400 million square metres in 1976-80.
Another field in which the supply of social capital is
16 deficient in many countries is road and air transportation.
The rapid increase in the stock of automobiles and the lag
in road facilities in these countries during the post-war
years have been accompanied by extraordinary congestion
and a rising accident rate. Airports and other air facilities
are also deficient in many developing countries as well as
in some more advanced economies, and investment in civil
aviation will claim a share of the resources freed by dis¬
armament.
The development and conservation of natural resources
provides another important field for increased outlays in
the event of disarmament. In the United States it has been
estimated that Federal expenditure requirements up to
1980 in the field of water resource development alone total
almost $55 thousand million, while $173 thousand million
will be needed for non-Federal programmes. The Soviet
Union could advance the preparation and implementation
of a number of important nature-transforming projects in
various parts of the country in order to improve living and
working conditions for the people. There is, for example,
a plan to divert part of the waters of the Pechora, Vychegda
and Ob Rivers (now flowing into the Arctic Ocean) into
the basins of the Volga and the Caspian and Aral Seas.
This would bring about a considerable change in the climate
and in living conditions in Central Asia and in the southern
European part of the Soviet Union. In the developing
countries there are also many important multipurpose
schemes for the conservation and the utilization of water
resources. (See "The Unesco Courier", July/August 1964.)
HE world's demand for water is growing much
more raoidly than the supply. Increasing sup¬
plies are needed not merely in order to keep pace with
the rapid rise in population, but also in order to meet the
still faster growing needs for irrigation and industry. Further
expansion necessitates increasingly heavy investment in
obtaining access to other sources, including the purification
of sea water.
Other urgent requirements for natural resources develop¬
ment and conservation exist in the fields of forestry, soil
and watershed conservation, rangeland conservation, park
and recreational development and fish and wildlife con¬
servation.
Investment in health, education and social services.
There is an urgent need for improvement in health ser¬
vices throughout the world. In many countries
the ratio of doctors, dentists and other medical personnel
to the population is inadequate and even falling, and there
are also great deficiencies in the supply of hospitals and
hospital beds as well as of other basic health facilities.
In some of the poorer countries of Europe, for example,
the medical facilities available to each doctor have been
estimated to be as little as one-fiftieth of those in the better
equipped countries. Yet even in the richest countries
there is great need to improve standards of medical ser¬
vices. In Canada and the United States, for instance, the
deficit in hospital beds has been estimated at from a quarter
to a half of the existing number. In the developing coun¬
tries the need for improved medical care is obviously
greater. Infant mortality rates are in excess of 100 per
1,000 in many of these countries as opposed to rates of
20 to 30 per 1,000 in economically advanced countries.

"Complete disarmament cannot be effected in
a single step, although each step should be in
that direction."
Jawaharlal Nehru
An indication of the magnitude of investment require¬
ments for medical care may be gained from projections for
the United States. The present rate of construction, plus
a limited programme of renovation, modernization and
increase in rehabilitation facilities, would require at least
$15 thousand million over the next decade instead of the
$9 thousand million that would be needed if such changes
were not carried out. In the Soviet Union it has been
officially suggested that hospital accommodation might be
increased by 40 per cent (that is, by several hundred
thousand beds) at low cost by converting into hospitals
part of the buildings now in military use.
In most developed countries educational needs are rising
and are bound to expand even more rapidly; withthe ever
wider spread of technical progress there will be a rising
premium on a higher educational background, on better
scientific and technological skills and on a broader range
of knowledge. At the same time greater efforts will be
directed towards reducing the drop-out rate of the less
talented and towards ensuring that an increasing proportion
of the highly talented reach upper levels. The realization
of all these purposes would imply the devising of new
kinds of education and provision of adequate means so
that people keep abreast of the latest developments in
knowledge.
OST of the developing countries still have illi¬
teracy rates of well over 50 per cent of the
population aged fifteen years and over. The cost of edu¬
cational requirements in developing countries is exemplified
by a recently adopted African programme (1). The total cost
of this programme is expected to increase from $590 million
in the first year to $1,150 million in 1965, $1,880 million
in 1970 and $2,600 million in 1980. It ¡s assumed that
the share of national income devoted to education will
rise from three to four per cent between 1961 and 1965, and
thereafter will increase further, reaching 6 per cent of
national income by 1980. This means that the difference,
amounting in the same years to $140 million, $450 million,
$1,010 million and $400 million, respectively, would need
to be covered by foreign aid.
There are also urgent requirements for expansion in
social services. Even the most advanced countries have
too few child welfare services, vocational rehabilitation
agencies, community centres and other special services.
The recent acceleration of population growth and of
technical change make it certain that the need, and the
demand, will grow. Social investment therefore is likely
to claim increasing resources, to which disarmament
would make a welcome contribution.
Scientific research for peaceful purposes. Amongst
the major powers a significant part of the national
research and development effort currently serves military
purposes. With disarmament it would thus become
possible to encourage programmes of basic scientific
research in fields which have hitherto been neglected, and
to mobilize great scientific potential for the solution of
some of the world's greatest problems in medicine, urban
development and reorganization and the technical prob¬
lems associated with the economic development of the
developing countries. If human ingenuity, in the space
of a very few years, has so vastly increased man's powers
for destruction, it should be able to make an equally
massive contribution to peaceful and constructivo achieve¬
ment.
I:IN some instances satisfaction of the needs al¬
ready described will require international co¬
operation. Serious gaps exist in the permanent world-wide
network of meteorological observing stations and in the
corresponding telecommunication facilities, and far more
funds are needed for basic research on improving meteoro¬
logical services. There is also considerable scope for in¬
ternational co-operation in developing world air transport
facilities.
THE CRUCIAL PROBLEM
"We are all faced with many outstanding interna¬
tional problems. Not all of them are equally impor¬
tant or urgent. Some of them concern the relations
between individual countries, others affect the
interests of the peoples of a number of countries
and continents. But there is one problem whose
solution is awaited with hope by the people of
all countries, big and small, whatever their social
system and way of life the problem of disarma¬
ment. Whether mankind will head towards war
with its disastrous consequences or whether the
cause of peace will prevail depends largely on
whether or not the correct solution is found to
that problem."
Nikita S. Khrushchev
(1) United Nations Economic Commission for' Africa and Unesco: "Outline of
a Plan for African Educational Development"; the plan covers thirty-five States
and territories of Africa.
Disarmament would also open up possibilities for joint
international ventures of an even more ambitious kind,
including the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful
purposes, space research, the exploration of the Arctic
and Antarctic for the benefit of mankind and projects to
change the climates of large areas of the world. Joint
research into the earth's interior may lead to discoveries
that would be of real value to the whole world. In
addition, joint projects to assist the development of the
developing countries as well as programmes of co-opera¬
tion in the social and economic fields could be undertaken.
These international projects could have a major impact
on world living standards and civilization.
It is evident that the resources freed by disarmament
would not be large enough for the many claims upon them.
Though it would take active decisions by governments in
the light of national and international needs to set in motion
programmes for employing the released resources, it
seems abundantly clear that no country need fear a lack \~¡
of useful employment opportunities for the resources that
would become available to it through disarmament.
