THE
THIRSTLESS
CAMEL
The Unesco Courier draws its
readers' attention to a most beau¬
tiful book just published entitled
"Animal Worlds " by Marston
Bates portraying the infinite va¬
riety ofanimal homes to be found
on land and in the waters of our
planet. Recommended by the
World Wildlife Fund as "not only
a thought-provoking and beauti¬
ful 'art book' but an authoritative
introduction to natural history,
the book emphasizes that the
destruction of the animals' world
is the path to destruction of man
himself." The text is supplemen¬
ted with 242 illustrations. 100 in
full colour by some of the finest
wild life photographers. Pub¬
lished in the U.S.A. by Random
House Inc., New York. ($15)
and in Great Britain by Thomas
Nelson St- Sons Ltd. (84J-). The text
alongside is reproduced from
"Animal Worlds", © 1963, Random
House. Reproduction prohibited.
A.P.N.
Two-humped Bactrian camels from central Asia.

^» S everyone knows, there are two
living species of camels: the larger,
one-humped dromedary of North Africa
and Arabia; and the two-humped, hairier
Bactrian camel of central Asia. These
are geographically widely separated from
their nearest relatives, the llamas of
South America. Many kinds of fossil
animals of the camel type, however, are
known from Europe and North America,
showing that at one time they were a
common and widely distributed group of
grazing animals. Our present camels
and llamas, then, are relics surviving
from the geological past. Why they sur¬
vived, or why all of the others became
extinct, is anyone's guess.
ONE can argue as to whether any of
the present-day camels are truly
wild. Or on the contrary, one can main¬
tain that no camels are truly domesticated.
The latter line of reasoning, used by many
people experienced with camels, is that
camels are simply stupid enough to allow
men to use them up to certain limits.
The stories of camel stupidity and obsti¬
nacy are endless enough, and maybe it
was this low I.Q. that led to their extinc¬
tion in all parts of the world where no
one bothered to look after them. There
are, to be sure, herds of two-humped
Bactrian camels wandering over the
plains of central Asia, but these wild
animals look no different from those
raised by men, and the two interbreed
freely. In the case of the African dro¬
medaries, any apparently wild animals are
supposed simply to have wandered off
from some camp or caravan.
Stupid or not, camels have been very
useful to the peoples of the Old World
desert areas, carrying considerable loads
for days across waterless terrain. How
large a load they can carry, and how
many days they can go without water,
depend on who is telling the story and
probably also on the camel and on the
weather conditions. Camel facts are
scarce, which is what led Knut Schmidt-
Nielsen to study their physiology.
Schmidt-Nielsen [a Norwegian scientist,
working with a subvention from Unesco
see "The Camel, Facts and Fables",
Unesco Courier, N° 8-9, 1955] found that
in the cool winter months in North Africa,
grazing camels were not watered at all;
they got all of the water they needed from
the plants they ate. He decided to see
what would happen if a camel were put
on a very dry diet; for this purpose he
tried thoroughly dried dates stuffed with
peanuts. Camels, it developed, do not
take to new food easily, but he finally
got one animal to eat this diet, until the
oasis where he was conducting the
experiment ran out of peanuts. It turned
out that in cool weather a camel could go
for several weeks without drinking even
on this dry food, but it steadily lost
weight. Camels, Schmidt-Nielsen disco¬
vered, could lose up to 25 per cent of
their body weight without apparent ill
effect. When offered water, however,
they would rapidly drink enough to bring
their weight back to normal: one animal
drank twenty-seven gallons of water In
ten minutes.
The water is not stored in any parti¬
cular place not in the hump, which is
pure fat, nor in the stomach, though this
always has digestive Juices. Like the
kangaroo rat, the camel manages by
being very economical in its use of
water. The urine is highly concentrated,
and sweating is greatly reduced. Camels
meet the sweat problem by not trying to
maintain a steady body temperature. On
a warm day, body temperature wil rise
up to 105 degrees F. before sweating
starts; during the cold night body tempe¬
rature drops, so that it may be as low
as 93 degrees F. at dawn, which gives
the animal a head start in meeting the
heat problems of the day. Body tempe¬
rature fluctuations, however, are much
smaller in the case of animals with free
access to water. The camel's hairy coat
also serves as insulation against the
heat of the day, an animal that was
shaved produced 60 per cent more sweat
to control body temperature than animals
with normal protective hair covering.
DONKEYS are also fairly successful
animals In dry country, and Schmidt-
Nielsen decided to compare them with
camels. He found that under similar
conditions, a camel could go for seven¬
teen days without drinking, a donkey for
only four days. The donkey maintained
a much more constant body temperature
and had to use sweat for this. Both
could lose up to 25 per cent of the body
weight, but the donkey could get it back
much faster by drinking in two minutes
instead of the camel's ten. It would
take a man several hours to drink an
amount of water equivalent to a quarter
of his body weight. Marston Bates
