irai
Wondrous structures, ranking among
the most magnificent on earth, are in
danger of disappearing...
These monuments do not belong solely
to the nations who hold them in trust. The whole
world has the right to see them endure. It is
therefore with every confidence that I invite
governments, institutions, public or private foun¬
dations and men of goodwill everywhere to contri¬
bute to the success of a task without parallel in
the past.
VITTORINO VERONESE
Director-General of Unesco (1958-1961)
This is not the first time that mankind
has reacted generously to a noble cause.
' But this is the first time that interna¬
tional fellowship has found expression
on so large a scale in matters of culture, and that
governments have committed their States to such
an undertaking. It is also the first time that this
same fellowship has invoked the principle that
certain religious, historical and artistic monuments,
in which mankind has expressed its deepest convict¬
ions and highest aspirations, belong to the whole
human race and are part of its common heritage,
regardless of when they came into existence or the
place where they happen to be.
Culture, an essential element of the intellectual and
moral solidarity of mankind has thus been recog¬
nized by States, for all the world to see, as an
important factor in their co-operation for the pro¬
motion of peace by the spirit to which the members
of Unesco have pledged themselves. That is the
significance of this event which will itself make
history.
RENÉ MAHEU
Director-General of Unesco
U.A.R. Antiquities Service

VICTORY
NUBIA

THE KIOSK OF KERTASSI REBUILT ON ITS NEW SITE (SEE PAGE 7)
HE flooding of Nubia began this autumn.
The new High Dam at Aswan, the famous
Sadd el Aali, which is to bring millions of people in the
valley of the Nile a prosperity they have never yet known,
Is nearing completion. The barrier across the great river
was closed in May, 1964. The waters are now slowly
rising behind it, transforming the antique land of Nubia
into a great artificial lake.
Only four and a half years have gone by since Unesco
drew the attention of the world to the cultural heritage of
ancient Nubia, and to its unique assemblage of historic
monuments, art treasures and sites teeming with archaeolo¬
gical riches which because of the needed High Dam were
to be lost to mankind. Since then, the United Arab Repub¬
lic and the Republic of the Sudan, under Unesco's auspices
and with the collaboration of more than fifty other countries,
have laboured carefully, but hurriedly, to save all that could
be saved.
Today, most of the work which had to be done has been
accomplished. Yet, despite the rising waters, certain un¬
completed projects are still being carried out. A tempor¬
ary cofferdam is protecting the Abu Simbel temples from
the rising Nile so that they can be cut out of their rock.
For technical reasons owing to the special character of
the site and its location north of the High Dam at Aswan,
by Ali Vrioni
Director, Monuments of Nubia Service, Unesco
the salvage of Philae must wait. And archaeologists are
now conducting a gigantic exploration of the upstream
portion of Sudanese Nubia, which will be flooded only a
few years from now, at the final stage of the formation
of the 300-mile long lake.
However, with the closing of the High Dam, the Inter¬
national Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia has
reached a turning-point. It is a good moment to take stock
of what has been achieved.
This has been a campaign unprecedented in the cultural
history of mankind. For the first time the world has seen
organized international action to save monuments and
archaeological wealth which, in law, belong only to the
two countries where they are located. Never before in
history has it been proposed to spend such large sums
for a salvage operation of such monumental proportions.
The United Arab Republic and the Republic of the Sudan
began by trying to save Nubia with their own resources.
The task was by far too great. Both countries recognized
that they were only the custodians of Nubia's ancient
wonders and that the loss of these wonders would be
a loss to all mankind. In the summer of 1959, the U.A.R.
and the Sudan turned to Unesco. 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

VICTORY IN NUBIA (Cont'd)
Victory for cultural co-operation
Unesco viewed the idea of international action in Nubia
as a special challenge. The monuments by themselves
fully justified world intervention but Unesco felt that more
than just Nubia itself was at stake.
The twentieth century has become an age of startling
transformation, and its changes everywhere on the planet
threaten the heritage of the past upon which man's cultural
life depended. For years, Unesco has been promoting
regulations and methods for the protection of works of art,
monuments and sites in all countries. But, in protecting our
common artistic heritage, there must be a worldwide feel¬
ing of responsibility. The time had perhaps come to put
the Idea of international common effort into practice.
Certain misguided fears might be felt that the high
cost of the salvage of Nubia, under Unesco's sponsorship,
would mean curtailing programmes to advance education
of human welfare. Unesco had to show that this was
not true and that cultural and spiritual progress could
not be thought of as competing with basic education and
social and technological progress ; all these activities fit¬
ted Into a common pattern and had to be pursued at the
same time. Failure to maintain the cultural and spiritual
values of mankind would certainly bring on the failure of
efforts for education and material and social development.
The Director-General of Unesco launched his appeal to
the nations on 8 March 1960. Some sceptics scoffed at
NEW MEANING
More than four years have passed since
the Director-General of Unesco launched
his appeal to all nations to help safeguard
the monuments of Nubia. To attain the
goal set by Unesco has been no easy task;
indeed at times it seemed almost hopeless.
Yet those who pursued it never lost faith
even in the most difficult days. Today the
Nubian Campaign has given new, deeper
meaning to the words " international co¬
operation ."
ABDEL MONEIM EL SAWI
Under-Secretary of State
Ministry of Culture
United Arab Republic
the possibility of mobilizing international support of such
magnitude. Everyone agreed, however, that the enterprise
was in harmony with the whole concept of Unesco, one of
whose functions under its Constitution was to assure "the
protection of the world's inheritance of books, works of
art and monuments of history and science."
After four years of struggle against difficulties which
have often seemed insuperable, after many disappoint¬
ments and even threats of failure, the battle of Nubia Is
now won. Countless inestimable works of art and historical
documents and monuments of the first rank are no longer
in danger. Nineteen temples have been saved comple¬
tely dismantled and either already re-erected at their new
sites or in storage awaiting the building operations.
But from the very start, the rescue of the temples of
Abu Simbel has stood as the symbol of the whole cam¬
paign. Their beauty had defied the centuries; they now
challenged the skill and ingenuity of engineers. The
project finally adopted to save them from being submerged
calls for the two temples to be cut into blocks and re
constructed 64 metres (over 100 feet) above the present
site.
The cost of the operation has been estimated at 36 mil¬
lion dollars. International contributions for Abu Simbel total
over 17 million dollars. Of this sum the United States alone
has contributed $12 million; France $1 million; Italy $856,000
and Sweden $500,000. In all, 51 responses have come to
the Unesco appeal, some with what may seem modest
sums but which in view of the size of their national budget,
constitute significant contributions (1). Unesco had set as
its goal the sum of $20,500,000 so that only three million
dollars is now needed from donor sources to close the
small gap.
By November 16, 1963, the Government of the United
Arab Republic which has pledged to meet the difference
between the funds raised through international aid and the
cost of the project, was in a position to sign an accord
with an international group of firms for the rescue ope¬
ration at Abu Simbel to begin without delay.
Monuments however are only one aspect of the Nubian
campaign. As urgent, or perhaps more so, was the need
to explore the area archaeologically before it was flooded.
For the past five years Unesco has co-ordinated an unpre¬
cedented campaign of exploration, carried out by archaeo¬
logical expeditions from virtually every part of the world.
The results have exceeded all expectations. Important pre¬
historic sites have been discovered and excavations
between the first and third cataracts have helped to provide
missing links in the prehistory of Central Africa and that
of Egypt. At least three new culture groups have been
identified. A new chapter in history may well be forthcoming
when all the finds made in Nubia are ultimately deciphered,
classified and analyzed. With a few insignificant exceptions
the whole lower area of Nubia 400 kilomètres of the Nile
valley has been explored and recorded archaeologically
and in the upper stretches of Sudanese Nubia the work
is in full swing. Never in the history of archaeology has
so vast a programme of exploration and excavation been
carried out in such a short period of time.
The monuments of Nubia, which were insufficiently
known before Nubia was flooded, will now be visited by
millions of people. In their new sites, they will certainly
become great centres of attraction, focal points for the
cultural interest of the world.
A principle has been established, put into practice,
tested in the fire of action: the principle that cultural wealth,
wherever it may be found, belongs to and enriches all
mankind, and that all mankind should therefore participate
in its preservation.
