© Paul Almasy, Paris

CEYLON SILENT VICTORY (PART 1)
by Subada Siriwardena
he coming of the British to Ceylon in 1796
marked the start of a new era in the history
of this country, which from then onwards began to
undergo the many changes that paved the way for its
present emergence as one of the leading countries in
South-East Asia. Plantations of coffee, tea and rubber
were introduced, and with them the economic develop¬
ment of the country began. With the introduction of
British government the seeds of democracy were sown.
With the improvement of the means of communications
the country was opened up and became more closely knit.
The traditional legal systems of the country were
supplemented and modified to meet modern requirements.
Health services began to be within the reach of everyone.
Education began to be considered the right of all irres¬
pective of sex, creed or ethnic group, and not as the
privilege of a few. More than in anything else there
opened a new chapter in the life of women in this
country.
Traditionally, society in Ceylon was ordered strictly on
a caste basis, which roughly corresponded with a class
basis. Those who belonged to the so-called higher caste
were the rich upper class, who were landed proprietors
and who held responsible posts In government. Until
the country fell Into the hands of the Portuguese, the
Dutch and later the British, these posts ranged from
those of ministers and commanders-in-chief down to
village headmen, and after the British occupation, from
maha mudaliyar down to the village headmen. All the
paddy cultivators, too, belonged to this Golgama caste,
although they were not rich. The rest of the people
belonged to the so-called lower castes, each with its
traditional caste occupation (1).
Buddhism was the religion of the Ceylonese and Hin¬
duism that of the Tamils, until Christianity obtained
converts from both Ceylonese and Tamils. Moslems have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
(1) For example: Karava caste (fishermen) , Berava (drummers) ,
Salagama (cinnamon peelers), Vahumpora (toddy tappers),
Durava (minor arts and crafts), Rada (washermen), Navandanna
(blacksmiths, silver and goldsmiths), Rodiya (outcasts). The
caste structure of the Tamils is very similar, but the Moslems
have only a class structure.

WOMEN OF CEYLON (Cont'd)
Most fathers
decide...
always followed Islam. Religion was the basis of the
culture and the way of life of the people.
In traditional Ceylon it was difficult to draw a hard
and fast line between town and country. Even today
three-quarters of the population consists of rural people,
and the distinction between rural and urban society is
something that has been developing only since the begin¬
ning of the twentieth century.
To be a good wife and mother was considered the
ideal and the perfection of womanhood in all religions
and caste groups from the earliest times and even after
the coming of Christianity. Religion also fostered this
ideal of the perfect wife-mother for the Ceylon woman.
Careers were not meant for women... Economically
gainful employment for women was unheard of until
the coming of the British. Girls had none of the oppor¬
tunities open to boys to get a formal education in the
pirivena schools run by Buddhist monks or at the feet
of Hindu Brahmin teachers. The few women who
happened to be literate had been taught at home by
their fathers, or elder brothers, or other elderly male
relatives.
Women's position in Ceylon was far from favourable,
and they were always considered inferior to men in all
aspects, and as a constant source of trouble and wicked¬
ness. Even the Buddha is said to have at first refused
to admit women to the Sasana (Buddhist clergy) because
it was considered very difficult for a woman to lead the
austere life of renunciation, since her mind is more prone
to be fickle, unsteady and emotional than that of a man.
I t Is the general belief among Buddhists that
one must be a male to become a Buddha, and
that arahantship (the second highest state of "enlighten¬
ment") is more difficult for women to attain. To be
born a female is itself considered the result of bad karma
in a past birth, and much merit has to be accumulated
to be born a man. Hindus have the corresponding belief.
It is these beliefs that moulded women's position in
society.
Woman was expected to be an affectionate and sub¬
missive helpmate to man. She was to be the responsible
one in the domain of household duties, of bearing and
rearing children, cooking and cleaning, sewing and
mending, and ministering to the needs of the husband,
parents and parents-in-law and children. It was
contemptible for a woman to shirk, these duties which
had been assigned to her by birth itself...
Today, with the progress of compulsory education,
cultural influence from the West and universal franchise,
society itself has changed radically. Caste is less rigid
and class less coincident with it. The acquisition of
education and wealth has been responsible for a visible
mobility In society resulting in the growth of a new
middle class to which may belong people of any caste,
creed or ethnic group. The majority of the middle class
are clustered In the cities and towns. The quest for
money and education has further resulted in the rise of
a working class of skilled and unskilled labourers, also
clustering in the towns except for those working on the
tea and rubber estates.
Thus, today's society can be roughly divided into rural
and urban sectors. The rural category can be subdivided
into the non-cultivator land-owning upper class and
the working class engaged in small-scale paddy and
other cultivation or in labour. The urban society can
be divided Into the elite upper class, educated and well-
off, In Important administrative positions or in business,
the middle class, educated and moderately well-off in
white-collar jobs, and the working class, performing
skilled or unskilled labour, with or without a primary
8 education, and poor. All the previously mentioned castes
are represented in all these strata of urban and rural
society In Ceylon.
These and other changes in the structure of society
In modern Ceylon have not been without their repercus¬
sions on the life of women. There are now equal oppor¬
tunities for education from the primary school to the
university for both men and women.
In 1957, English and vernacular schools totaled 8,188
of which there were 618 boys schools, 540 for girls and
7,030 mixed. There were 986,333 boys and 846,741 girls
attending school, and 1,990 young men and 728 women
at the University of Ceylon.
Women now have equal opportunities for employment
In any profession or occupation, excepting the Civil
Service, and today women in Ceylon do have more chance
of promotion. But at the same time it must be said that
though Ceylon's women themselves and men's attitudes
towards them have changed, this still applies only to a
few men, and relatively few women are actually able
to avail themselves of the opportunities open to them.
The position of women has changed, but only for a few.
The old ideal is still popularly accepted, that is, that of
getting married and being a successful wife and mother.
Only a small percentage of women, and those especially
in the urban areas, have been able to add to their roles
or change their position In comparison with men. But
Ceylon is largely a rural country and the majority live
in rural areas where change has hardly occurred at all.
Men of the upper and middle class, even those who
have gone through a higher education course at the
university or other institutions, prefer to marry stay-
at-home wives with a dowry; not salary-earning, educated
career women. They also feel that a woman with a
higher education and a monthly salary would acquire
a sense of indépendance and not be sufficiently sub¬
missive to their husbands. Such men often resent women
going out to work or undertaking such activities as
driving a motor-car or cycling.

Thus, many highly educated career girls find it difficult
to marry men of equal social and economic status and
often continue to Uve as spinsters. Only a handful are
fortunate enough to find husbands who demand neither
old-fashioned submissiveness nor a dowry. It is true
that working-class men and those of the lower middle-
class, where incomes are insufficient to make ends meet,
do want their wives to add to the family income by going
out to work, but once they become economically well-off
they too would wish to keep them safe at home.
As a result most fathers decide to give their girls only
a secondary education and stop their schooling after
that or even earlier. Instead, they wish to collect money
for their daughters' future dowry and trousseau, and
train them in household work. Rich parents want their
girls to learn accomplishments like music and dancing,
which are considered assets in getting a husband with
social prestige perhaps a doctor, a civil servant or a
lawyer. But generally speaking, extra pains are not
considered worth while in educating girls on equal terms
with the boys.
Ost of the women of the present generation
who are educated are asserting their rights
silently, but effectively, and have found themselves in
paths of employment which were never trod by women
before. Thus today we have women who are highly
qualified teachers, university lecturers, doctors, lawyers,
(1) In July 1960, Ceylon elected the first woman Prime
Minister in the world.
librarians and Members of Parliament and, recently,
even a woman Cabinet Minister (1).
During 1958, more women students than men entered
the University of Ceylon. In the teaching profession,
for the year 1957, there were 27,101 women, as against
28,309 men, and of these 890 were graduate women
teachers. The nursing profession is entirely a woman's
profession. Many more are employed as sales-girls,
typists, stenographers and clerks.
All this is the result of education, especially the spread
of English education. And the cost of living is so high
that most husbands are beginning to feel that It would
be a blessing to have an additional Income. Nevertheless,
for various reasons according to surveys of the city of
Colombo and two villages made by the writer, from ten to
20 per cent of the children of school age today are not
attending school. Thus, most girls are not in practice
able to avail themselves of the opportunities theoreti¬
cally open to them.
Girls are today going to foreign universities at their
own expense or through scholarships sponsored by
Unesco and the International Federation of University
Women, etc. They go for courses ranging from uni¬
versity academic courses to courses In home science,
nursing and beauty culture. Many educated women are
engaged In social service work, running crèches, female
adult education, poor relief work, etc. The Lanca Mahila
Samitiya Is a women's association for such voluntary
work.
There is many a working mother In every social class
who, after the husband's death, has had to shoulder the
burden of bringing up the family entirely alone. n
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SILENT VICTORY
(Part 2)
I was born on December 12, 1928, in a township
called Bope in the southern province of Ceylon.
My father came from a village In Kalutara district and my
mother from another village in the Matara district, both
low-country villages. They both belong to families doing
paddy cultivation as an occupation.
My father's parents were both illiterate but well-to-do
farmers, and father was the youngest child in a family
of thirteen. He was educated in the pirivena schools
at the feet of Buddhist monks and was successful in the
Cambridge examinations through his own efforts. He
acquired a government scholarship to the University of
Oxford, where he received his B. Litt, in Western Classics.
From there he proceeded to Berlin University, where he
did further linguistic studies and to Queen's College,
Benares, for a further course in Sanskrit. He was head
of the Department of Indo-Aryan Languages at the
University of Ceylon for some time.
My mother's parents were both literate, and were also
rather well-to-do farmers. She was the fifth in a family
of eight children. She was an uncertified Ceylonese
teacher when she was given in marriage at the age of
24 to my father, who was in his forties at the time. No
dowry had been asked or given. The parents had deci¬
ded for her and she had simply to consent. My father
did not wish her to go out to work, and with reluctance
she had to give up her job. Within one year after
marriage I was born. My grandmother and my mother's
elder sister helped to bring me up as a baby. After two
years my brother was born and when he was two years
old a sister also arrived.
Wse lived in a country house surrounded by a
large garden and paddy fields, with the
tributary of the Kalu Ganga flowing past on one side.
Our childhood was a very happy one until my father
died of a heart attack when I was just 11 years old. My
father was strict, but also a lovable companion. He used
to play with us indoors and outdoors and take us bathing
in the river, and he helped me in my studies. He did not
make me read books all the time. He took me out for
walks and made me observe the surroundings, and
recounted incidents about his travels abroad. He Instilled
in me as a young child the Idea of what a long, unending
but happy process learning is. He took me out on visits
to the "Sunday Fair," to the city of Colombo, and to my
paternal relations In the village, who were all Illiterate,
hardworking and simple farmer folk.
My father never for a moment forgot or belittled his
native village or even the areas around it. As a monu¬
ment of his love for the villagers, he founded an English
school for them with his savings, the first and the only
such school for miles around, at that time the early
1930s. Very low fees were levied and he was the prin¬
cipal. This school was handed over to the government
one year before he died in 1939.
On my father's death the burden of bringing up the
family fell on my mother's shoulders. More than any¬
thing else she strove to meet my father's last wish on
his death bed to give us children a good education.
The other important influence in our lives has been
my maternal uncle, who is a Buddhist monk engaged
for the last twenty-five years in missionary work in
Penang (Malaysia). He has been my spiritual guide ever
since the death of my father, and even now we seek his
advice on all Important matters.
By the time I was 14 my mother had trained me to
cook and sew and look after the younger ones. We were
all also sent to both Christian and Buddhist English
schools in the cities of Panadura and Colombo. Later
my brother and I both graduated at the University of
10 Ceylon, but my sister gave up school after a few years.
CONT'D ON PAGE 12

WOMEN OF CEYLON (Cont'd)
Career woman
but...
I was given in marriage In 1956 at the age of 27 to
my husband, who was 30 at the time. The marriage
was arranged by my parents, but subject to my consent.
My husband is a Food and Drugs Inspector, educated
in Ceylon and England. Dowry was not asked or given
at our marriage, which was an orthodox Ceylonese
Buddhist ceremony but for the fact that it was held at
a public hall. We are of the same caste and religion.
We live with my own mother and her family in Kandy,
an arrangement which is very convenient for me as our
baby daughter, who was born within a year after our
marriage, can stay happily at homewhile I continue
with my university work.
Immediately after graduation I took to the teaching
profession, the vocation I had chosen ever since I was a
little pupil under my great father; and I acquired the
diploma in education at the University of Ceylon three
years after graduation and on the eve of my marriage.
My husband soon understood my desire to continue to
learn and, as he was convinced that I would not assume
undue independence, he allowed, and indeed encouraged,
me to start reading for the M.A. in Education. This I
am now doing.
I travel dally to the university in my own car, which
I drive myself. My husband takes pride in my work,
even in the face of some criticism from his colleagues.
I have not seen a husband more interested in his wife's
continuing to study, even denying for himself much of
the attention traditionally due from a wife.
B.ut although I have a certain amount of ln-
1 dependence which most women in Ceylon do
not enjoy, this does not mean that I have deviated much
from the ideal pattern of the wife and mother: My
position at home follows very much the traditional
pattern. My husband decides all important matters, and
often it is acceptable to me. He commands and I obey.
Except on scholarly matters it is not for me to argue
with him. I have to accept the fact that he knows best
and that this is all for my own good. I never go out
or do anything outside the precincts of the home without
his permission. But we do discuss important matters
together, although the tendency is for him to decide
finally. I feel quite happy and secure in this manner.
We have no special preference for either sons or
daughters, and when our daughter was born we were
both happy. She is given the comforts that we can
afford, by way of food, clothing, toys and attention. As
a rule once we are back home for the day after work,
we give her our company and it is seldom that we leave
her to go out for an evening. We should feel sorry to
deprive her of our company them. She loves to play
and talk to us. I feel very proud that I breast-fed my
daughter for ten full months, just as my mother did for
me.
We hope to give her the best education available in
this country, and later even in England if she turns out
to be enterprising and interested. We shall leave it to
her whether or not to choose a career or what career to
choose. Whether she has a career or not, we wish to see
her happily married to an intelligent, educated good-
natured, ' well-mannered and understanding Ceylonese
Buddhist. Provided these characteristics are there we
do not mind her making the choice of the young man
without allowing us to arrange her marriage.
Subada Siriwardena is a Ceylonese educationist. Since
writing this article she has obtained her M.A. and
\2 !S now working for a Ph. D degree in education. She
intends to publish a loork on "Growing up in a Ceylon
Village" in the near future.
