NEW TOOLS
TO MAP
OUR HIDDEN
MINERAL WEALTH
by J. M. Bruckshaw
28
MAN-MADE GEYSER
A column of water
boiling shoots sky¬
wards from a newly-
drilled well in Reyk¬
javik, capital city
of Iceland. The
water will be con¬
trolled and fed into
the city's hot water
system for commer¬
cial and domestic
heating. From the
Poles to the Tropics,
geophysical and geo¬
logical knowledge
and techniques have
been mobilized to
aid the prospection
for minerals and
other valuable na¬
tural resources hid¬
den underground.
Their success in de¬
tecting underground
water resources has
led to many areas,
particularly those in
Africa, being opened
up for development.
Petur Thomson-World Bank

AIRBORNE SURVEYS
The Increasing de¬
velopment of in¬
struments enabling
magnetic, electro¬
magnetic and radio¬
active prospection to
be carried out from
the air has given
vast new scope to
the world-wide
search for hidden
mineral deposits. Air¬
borne geophysical
surveys have achiev¬
ed outstanding suc¬
cess in the search
for oil. The boom
trailing behind the
survey aircraft (right)
contains a magneto¬
meter which is used
to locate and map
the distribution of
rocks with magnetic
properties, such as
strongly magnetic
iron ores like magnet¬
ite, which is often
associated with other
mineral deposits.
Litton Industries. U.S.A.
he search for minerals of Importance to the
community has always confronted man with
major problems. The earlier discoveries, many of them
accidental, were generally of ore bodies outcropping at the
surface or those with a very thin superficial cover which
could be penetrated at little cost by trenching or by shaft
sinking. But once the shallower deposits had been located
and exploited, it became far more costly and difficult to
discover those at greater depths.
Thus it soon became evident that some guidance was
necessary to reduce this cost. Initially this guidance was
obtained from geological knowledge of the characteristics
of the deposit and its environment and from theories of
its genesis and mode of formation. This information and
the detailed study of the surface geology, which could be
extrapolated downwards, indicated the most likely sites
for the discovery of ore deposits, thus resulting in in¬
creased discoveries and reduced costs.
Unfortunately with increasing depth the projection
downwards of the surface geological picture became less
reliable. This is especially the case in the presence of
an unconformity a break In the geological sequence
which can result in there being little or no relationship
between the deeper rocks and those near the surface.
Following earlier sporadic investigations a real effort
was made about 1920 to discover if some of the geophysi¬
cal techniques, which had been found so successful In the
study of the structure and properties of the earth as a
whole could be used on a small scale to reveal similar
information about local geology.
The very promising results obtained, particularly In the
search for oil in the Texas-Louisiana Gulf Coast of the
United States, encouraged further field exploration and the
development of specialized instruments and led to yet
another application of science that has been of economic
benefit ever since.
The methods which were employed In the initial stages,
and which continue in more sophisticated guise up to the
present day, may be regarded as the classical techniques of
geophysics: the study of the earth's gravitational field, of
the earth's magnetic field and of earthquake waves. To
these must be added those methods which employ the How
of direct or alternating current through the earth anda
more recent development the study of the radioactive
properties of rocks.
The first of these methods has led to a knowledge of the
shape and size of the earth and also to modern Ideas of
the structure of continents and oceans. Its use In the
prospection for minerals ls based upon the fact that the
presence of rocks denser than their surroundings leads to
a locally high value of gravity. Thus the ability to
measure in detail very small variations in gravity from
place to place permits deductions concerning the distri¬
bution of densities In the upper few miles of the earth's
crust. In the early days the gravity field was investigated
by the Eötvös torsion balance, but this has now been
superseded by modern gravity meters capable of detecting
variations in gravity of two or three parts in 100,000,000.
The existence of local anomalies in the earth's magnetic
field had long been realized and attributed to the distor¬
tion of the regular field by the presence of rocks of marked
magnetic properties. Indeed, the magnetic method of
prospection was the first to be exploited for economic ends;
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

MINERAL WEALTH (Cont'd)
Underground exploration from the skies
30
shortly after It had been demonstrated that the earth
behaved as an enormous magnet, crude instruments, such
as the miner's dial and the miner's compass Were brought
into use In the search for strongly magnetic iron ores such
as magnetite.
The influence of large magnetic deposits on the magne¬
tic field may sometimes be spectacular, as at Kursk In
Russia where the strength of the field ls increased by a
factor of about five. Many rock formations are slightly
magnetic generally because they contain low concentra¬
tions of magnetite and they also can modify the local field.
Modern field magnetometers are sufficiently sensitive to
detect and measure these effects and to indicate the dis¬
tribution of magnetic material underground.
he study of earthquakes, particularly of the
time of different shock waves through the
earth, has given us a picture of the structure of the earth
as a whole and, in the case of near earthquakes, of the
structure of the continental and oceanic crusts. This has
been possible because, as the shock waves are transmitted
through the earth their paths are changed by reflection
and refraction at boundaries between rocks through which
the waves travel with different velocities.
In seismic prospecting, the earthquake is simulated by
the detonation of a buried explosive charge. The shock
waves travel through the various rocks, undergoing
refraction and reflection as they cross boundaries separat¬
ing rocks of different properties, and are detected at the
surface by carefully placed instruments which, amongst
other things measure the time of transit of the shock
waves from explosion to detector. A suitable analysis
of the data allows the position of the boundaries between
the rocks to be located, revealing the general geological
structure with its patterns of dipping beds, faults, anti¬
clines, synclines, unconformities and other characteristic
formations.
The electrical methods depend for their success upon the
wide range of the electrical conductivities found in rocks
and minerals. When a current is passed through the
ground it distributes itself in such a way that the resis¬
tance to its flow is minimum, I.e. there is a concentration
of current in rocks of high conductivity and a reduction
of current in those of low conductivity. Thus an examina¬
tion of the current distribution allows deductions
concerning the variation of electrical conductivity in the
ground.
The radioactive method was originally developed for the
search for radioactive deposits, but the varying content of
radioactive minerals in rocks enables us to differentiate
between rock types under certain conditions.
The methods already described may be applied In a
variety of ways to search for mineral deposits. Some
minerals have exceptional physical properties which pro¬
duce local distortions of the gravitational or magnetic
field. Examples are the high density of minerals such as
galena, chromite, barytes, etc., which modify locally the
gravity field. The case of magnetite which has large
magnetic properties has already been mentioned, while
many base metal sulphides have excellent electrical con¬
ductivity, which distorts the flow of current through the
ground.
More frequently the mineral sought may have no
exceptional physical property which permits direct loca
tion, but it may be associated with another suitable
mineral. Thus many mineral deposits have magnetite or
other magnetic mineral associated with them which can
be detected by magnetic prospection methods.
Again, gold often occurs in quartz reefs and the low
conductivity of quartz may be used to trace the reefs. In
such cases a geophysical indication is no guarantee that
ore is present but It at least narrows down the number
of sites to be examined.
Frequently ore deposits are genetically related to certain
geological formations, as for example, those resulting from
igneous activity. In this case, and depending on the pro¬
perties involved, one or other geophysical method may be
used to determine the position, size and inclination of the
formation and so limit the potential zone of min¬
eralization.
Finally the deposition of ore may be controlled by local
geological conditions. Ore may be confined to certain
formations, or be associated with rock contacts or with
faults. The local structure is often revealed by the geo¬
physical investigations and thus indicates the most
promising drilling sites. Indeed the search for oil is
reduced to a search for structures with which oil may
be associated, such as an anticlinal trap, a fault trap, etc.
Naturally in this Indirect approach more than one
method may be employed as, in the search for oil where
the magnetic, gravitational and seismic methods all play a
part. Similarly the magnetic and electrical methods are
frequently combined in the search for ore bodies.
Geophysical techniques were developed for use on land
under a variety of conditions ranging from those of the
Louisiana swamps to those in the Arctic. However, the
extension of geological studies to the offshore continental
shelves, and the vast mineral potential of these areas,
encouraged the development of methods for use at sea.
Thus gravity measurements can now be made by means
of underwater gravity meters lowered to the sea floor, and
today, experiments with ship-borne gravity meters giving
a continuous record of gravity along the ship's track are
in progress.
In spite of the great difficulties caused by the motion of
the ship, the sensitivities achieved already approach those
necessary for prospecting.
I| n marine seismic prospecting the situation is
even better since the mobility of ships allows
greater areas to be covered In a given time with a similar
accuracy to that obtained on land. In fact on land the
speed of operation may be severely restricted by rough
topography and by vegetation and the inaccessibility of
some areas.
Accordingly, instruments have been developed for
magnetic, electromagnetic (one of the many electrical
methods) and radioactive prospection from planes.
In addition to the greater speed with which an area
can be surveyed by air, these methods have the further
advantage that a continuous record of the variations in
the field is obtained, whereas on the ground the measuring
instruments are set up at a series of discrete stations
between which estimated values have to be used.
Airborne geophysical surveys have been made exten¬
sively In all parts of the world and will continue for very
many years. Their outstanding success has been achieved
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

OIL GUSHER
GOES WILD
A fiery column spouts from a blazing oil well in Venezuela. These spectacular oil fires may blaze
for many months and are often only extinguished by costly and hazardous operations led by 31
one or other of the handful of men in the world capable of mastering such flaming geysers
of oil and gas. In the meantime, millions of gallons of oil have gone up in smoke and flame.

*1
%i
».
«c . *i^
Litton Industries. U.S.A.
MINERAL WEALTH (Cont'd)
SEISMIC PROSPECTING. By studying the behaviour of shock waves set up by earthquakes
as they are changed by reflection and refraction at boundaries between different layers of rocks,
geophysicists have obtained a picture of the internal structure of the earth. In seismic prospecting
the earthquake is simulated by a series of explosive charges and the time of transit of the resulting
shock waves to detecting instruments is measured. From the data obtained, a record of the
contour of the earth below with its geological structural patterns is obtained. Here, columns
of earth spout upwards as a series of explosions are set off by seismic prospectors.
Fewer drill holes, more oil
in the search for oil, and the oil industry was responsible
for their development. A very high percentage of all oil
used has been found by the use of these techniques.
The mining industry has taken over the tools developed
for oil exploration but since the war methods especially
adapted to its own needs have been developed. Geo¬
physical prospecting methods find an important use in the
search for underground water resources, and many areas,
particularly In Africa, have been opened up for develop¬
ment as a result.
Recent composite surveys (frequently sponsored by the
United Nations) have included airborne, magnetic, electro¬
magnetic, and radioactive surveys and photogeology. All
available geological and geophysical data have been used
in the search for mineral wealth. The speed with which
these surveys can be carried out makes the system of
extreme value to new countries where an essential part
of establishing a sound economy is the discovery and
exploitation of natural resources. In the completely
different field of civil engineering geophysical methods
have been used for site investigation of dam emplace¬
ments, bridge foundations and tunnels and naturally have
32 added to the certainty of planning.
The main economic advantage of geophysical methods
stems from the fact that their use cuts down the number
of drill holes necessary to examine an area. Drilling gives
by far the most positive information, but it is without
doubt the most expensive method of exploration. By the
use of geophysics the most promising areas are delineated.
It is unfortunate that many formations of no economic
value can produce results Identical with those of an
economic area, and it is obvious that a suitable structure,
revealed by the methods already described, may be barren
of mineral. Some, but not all uncertainty may be
removed by geological and geochemical considerations and,
supplemented by these disciplines, the methods form a
very potent tool.
In the case of oil, wells based upon non-technical
considerations have a success rate of 1 in 30 compared to
1 in 5 or 6 when based on geological and geophysical
investigations. But, as even today the quantity, the qua¬
lity and frequently the nature itself of ore cannot be
determined, there are still some important problems of
exploration to be solved.
j. m. bruckshaw is head of the Geophysics Department
and professor of Applied Geophysics at the Imperial
College of Science and Technology, London.
