The most celebrated
of all Ethiopia's legen¬
dary stories is that of
the meeting between
King Solomon and the
Queen of Sheba, and
the birth of their son
Monelik, who founded
the Ethiopian ruling
dynasty some 3,000
years ago. It is also
the most popular of
all folk art themes in
Ethiopia where it has
been portrayed in the
same form (right) by
many generations of
painters. Below, an
Ethiopian artist works
on a series of paintings
recounting the story of
Solomon and Sheba.
i' Paul Almasy, Pans
18

A FOLK TRADITION
CENTURIES OLD
by Otto A. Jäger
HE history of Ethiopia goes back over 3,000 years to the
time of Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. According to
tradition the queen bore King Solomon a son, Menelik, who became Ethiopia's
first ruler and founded the royal dynasty. Modern Ethiopia ha9 developed in
an unbroken historical line from the ancient (Ist century A.D.) Axumite King¬
dom which took its name from its capital city at Axum.
Christianity has been Ethiopia's official religion since early in the 4th
century A.D. when the reigning monarch at Axum was converted to this faith.
Except during the five years of Italian occupation (1936-41) Ethiopia can look
back on 3,000 years of independence.
Ethiopian art, especially painting, has always been an art of the people.
This same tradition is found in every branch of artistic expression from
architecture, music and dancing to woodcarving, pottery, wickerwork and
the products of silversmiths' and goldsmiths' skills Ethiopia has produced
many specially talented artists, particularly architects and painters, whose
masterpieces now universally recognized as such mark periods when
Ethiopian emperors embarked on ambitious projects or when there was an
upsurge of religious fervour.
Ethiopia lies mid-way down the continent of Africa yet culturally it belongs
to the world of the orient. How has this come about ?
Lake Tana in northern Ethiopia is the source of the Blue Nile arid men
followed the banks of this river northwards to the Mediterranean and Ale/en-
dria; from Egypt others passed southwards to the highlands of Ethiopia.
Close ties were thus formed with the Mediterranean Cushite culture of Egypt
CONT'D ON PAGE 22
19


ART OF ETHIOPIA (Cont'd)
IMAGES
OF
DAILY
LIFE
DANCE OF THE PRIESTS. Liturgical dances are performed in Ethiopia on
the occasion of great religious festivals such as the " Timkat " (Epiphany) when
the populace is symbolically rebaptised and on Palm Sunday. Above, to
the sound of drums and sistrums lines of priests perform dances accord¬
ing to a time-honoured ritual. Below, artist's impression of the scene.
20
Photos © R. Michaud

*> *í
v
ON THE ROAD TO MARKET. All rural life in Ethiopia revolves around the weekly village market. When market
day arrives farmers and their wives (above), some carrying umbrellas of plaited reeds, set off from home laden
with produce. The group in the painting below includes a priest (second from left) wearing a white turban.
BOATS MADE
FROM
PAPYRUS
<¿XW¿ <r<r'% » :'\5R\

ART OF ETHIOPIA (Cont'd)
Meeting place
of two
continents
Other African territories south of the Sahara had no such natural lines of
communication.
To the east the narrow confines of the Red Sea were a bridge rather than
a gulf between Ethiopia and "Arabia Felix" ("Fortunate Arabia" as the Yemen
was named by early European geographers), in whose fertile territories there
was wealth and a high level of culture. The constant traffic between the
shores of the Red Sea took the influence of Arab culture far into Ethiopia.
Again, West and South Africa had no contacts of this kind.
Ethiopia's contacts with other more distant civilizations were made possible
by a natural phenomenon of the weather, the monsoon, which blew from
Africa to India from April to October and from India to Africa during the next
six months. Using these winds ships sailed safely and swiftly from Africa to
India and, with the turn of the monsoon, back to Africa again. We are told that
2,000 years ago as many as 70 ships laden with spices and fabrics from India
dropped anchor in a single day in the Ethiopian harbour of Adulis on the
Red Sea. At that time Ethiopia exported ivory, leopard skins, monkeys, gold,
slaves, myrrh and musk.
Ethiopia's unique geographical position is also shown in the racial compo¬
sition of its people. A high proportion of Egyptian Cushites and Semite
peoples from southern Arabia, a smaller percentage of indigenous African
peoples and small groups of oriental origin all mingled in the ethnic cons¬
titution of Ethiopia several thousand years ago.
Just as these different peoples merged in Ethiopia and became a homo¬
geneous new one, so Ethiopia took over cultural influences from outside its
borders and recast them in new forms of expression. This was chiefly made
possible by the country's geological character, a "mountain fastness" which
bred in its inhabitants a special appeciation of the hermit's life and an outlook
divorced from earthly concerns.
I N Ethiopian art the after-life and the irrational figure pro¬
minently and allusions to the other world, as perceived by
its people through myth and magic, determined the main lines of its deve¬
lopment. Painting is not realistic, but tends rather towards abstract forms.
This art is always of a religious kind. In the pre-Christian era its main
concerns were with life after death and the adoration of the moon, the earth
and water. In Christian times its contemplation has been devoted to God's
sphere, to heaven and hell and to angels, saints and devils.
One of the earliest characteristic elements of Ethiopian art is the braid
motif found on a wide variety of objects from parchment paintings to silver
crosses. These silver crosses were made by the "lost wax" process, being
first modelled in wax and then encased in clay. When the clay was heated
the wax ran out, after which the mould was filled with molten metal.
The braid motif with its endless intertwining lines is probably a symbol of
eternity. The same motif is also found in Coptic art generally, woven into
fabrics, carved in wood and stone, worked in silver and gold and painted on
parchment. The braid motif is also commonly found in early Irish miniature
religious paintings to which, strangely enough, Ethiopian miniatures often bear
a remarkable stylistic similarity. Among other characteristic motifs found in
Ethiopian bas-reliefs and illuminated manuscripts are the ornamental repre¬
sentations of people and animals.
The most important remains of Axumite culture dating from pre-Christian
times are the funerary monuments. They were cut from a single block of
stone and the tallest of them were over 100 feet high. The only one still
standing in Axum is 88 feet high. These monuments probably symbolize the
dwellings of the dead kings in the world beyond the grave.
Compared with these Ethiopian monuments, Greek or Roman temples of
about the same period have a far stronger "earthbound" quality, with heavy
roofs resting on columns that seem to anchor them still more firmly to the
ground. In contrast the remarkable Ethiopian works have practically no
foundation and their forms suggest celestial dwelling-places that have been
planted in the earth like an arrow fallen from the sky.
Ethiopia's other unique religious monuments are its rock churches which
probably date back to the 13th century. They have the appearance of carefully
planned structures built of squared stones and beams, but have in fact been
entirely hewn from the natural rock and so remain one with their foundations.
Here again inspiration seems to have come from above, leaving its imprint
on the surface of the ground, in contrast to European temples and cathedrals
which rise upwards from man-made foundations. The Ethiopian building is
like an engraving; it is as if God had impressed His seal upon the earth.
Along with architecture, painting is a widespread and vigorous form of
Ethiopian artistic expression. Early murals, executed in the old Ethiopian
style, are found at Deir Makaryus in the desert between Cairo and Alexandria.
At Farras in Nubia there, are 9th-century wall paintings which are to some
extent related to the Ethiopian style.

Pliulos iO H. Midland
THE MINSTREL. In former times the "azmari" or minstrel was
attached to the Ethiopian court or the houses of noblemen (above).
Today he is a wanderer (below) and travels from village to village
accompanying his songs on a "masenko", a kind of one-string fiddle.
From the 13th-century onwards the number of paintings from the Ethiopian
monastery schools in the region of Axum, Lake Tana and Lalibela and from
the Gunda Gunde monastery increased. The fullest and most varied expres¬
sions are on the pages of manuscripts. Decorative designs adorn the chapter
headings and pictures illustrate incidents from the life of Christ, the Virgin and
the saints. Some of these masterpieces were reproduced in "Ethiopia: Illu¬
minated Manuscripts" one of the albums of colour reproductions in the
Unesco World Art Series (See "The Unesco Courier", December 1961). The
style of the paintings is abstract and visionary in contrast to the lifelike
representations of the same period in Europe.
In early times there was probably no secular painting in Ethiopia. The
earliest paintings of this type, which are actually examples of Ethiopian folk
art, date from the 19th-century. Their subjects are legends, battles, judge¬
ment scenes and ¡mages of everyday life. By far the most common subject
for these folk art paintings is the 3,000 year-old legend of the meeting
between the Queen of Sheba and King Solomon.
Otto Jacer is the author of several works on Ethiopian painting including
"Aethiopische Miniaturen" {Ethiopian Miniatures) published by Mann,
Berlin, 1957. He was a contributor (with Jules Leroy and Stephen Wright)
to the album of colour reproduction, "Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts" ,
in the Unesco World Art Series. A pediatrician, Dr. Jager has worked as
a specialist for the World Health Organization.
23
