MÊÊMi
fl c ^Rr "*
iMüíHf|Ti|W|6í p>
.« i r* ""**r *W
20
Unesco-Rosten
NEW NAMES IN THE TABLE OF ELEMENTS. When
all the known chemical elements were classified
according to their atomic weights in 1869 the last
on the list, N° 92, was uranium at that time the
heaviest known element. Since the fission of uranium
the production of new elements (by irradiation of
existing substances) has raised the total in the Periodic
Table of Elements to over 100. Among the new names
are neptunium, einsteinium and mendelevium (named
after Dimitri Mendeleyev, who arranged the first
table of elements according to the periodic law).


PUGWASH
kINCE they were inaugurated in 1957 the
Pugwash international meetings have come to
occupy an important place in the world forum of thought
and discussion on the implications of modern science for
the future of mankind. In September of this year the
13th Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs
brought together an international group of prominent
scientists and scholars in Karlovy Vary, Czechoslovakia.
The meeting held far-ranging discussions on a host of
questions with political implications such as measures for
reducing tensions and dangers of war, the current status
of proposals for arms limitation, progress in achieving
comprehensive disarmament, problems of collective
security, and two questions of particular interest to
Unesco, the role and the responsibility of the scientist
in the cause of peace and economic development of the
emerging countries.
On the role and responsibility of the scientist in advanc¬
ing the cause of peace the Pugwash Conference presented
its conclusions in clear and unequivocal terms. "In our
time," it said, "two challenges have been placed before
mankind: to abolish war and to create a world advancing
toward greater and more universal wellbeing."
The Pugwash Conference declared that the first
challenge called for universal disarmament and peaceful
co-operation among countries having different economic
and political systems and that the second implied that this
co-operation must be not merely passive but active and
constructive. The Pugwash Conference pointed out that
both challenges are the result of the scientific revolution
and hence that scientists have a personal and professional
responsibility in both areas.
"The increasing role and importance of science in a
contemporary society," the Pugwash statement declared,
"inevitably results in an increasing influence and respon¬
sibility of scientists in the economic, cultural and political
development of nations. They should use their influence
to promote further reduction of international tensions, and
increases in international contacts and co-operation. They
should help their governments in the development of poli¬
cies contributing to permanent peace and in the well-being
of all people."
HE Pugwash conferences owe their name to
the little Canadian town of Pugwash in Nova
Scotia where the first meeting was opened on July 6, 1957.
The idea for Pugwash was born as a spontaneous
movement among scientists seeking an international
exchange of ideas on the impact of science on human
affairs. The first meeting was sparked by a bold statement
on the dangers of war signed by a roster of internationally
famous scientists headed by Albert Einstein and Bertrand
Russell. On the agenda of the first meeting were three
challenging topios : (1) the problem of radiological dangers
(2) problems of atomic disarmament (3) responsibilities
of the scientists in the atomic age.
Pugwash conferences have maintained their original
informal character. Those participating attend as indivi¬
duals and not as representatives of their respective coun¬
tries. They are present as scientists, often of Nobel Prize
winning stature, who have given much thought to the
implications of science on modern society. An increasing
interest is being shown by governments in the Pugwash
conferences. At the September 1964 conference messages

A world movement on the responsibility
of the scientist in world affairs
were received from the heads of several governments as
well as from the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The Pugwash Conferences have come to be known as
one of the great scientific meeting grounds of scientists
from countries with different economic and political systems,
national Pugwash committees have been set up on all
continents and the Pugwash conferences are increasingly
being referred to throughout the world as "The Pugwash
Movement."
HE Unesco draft programme and budget for
1965-66, in referring to the continued co¬
operation between the Unesco Secretariat and associations
of scientists who are concerned with the problem of
economic and social development as affected by
disarmament, singles out for particular mention the
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs.
Important Pugwash conferences have been held in recent
years in Great Britain, the U.S.S.R., the U.S.A., India,
Austria and other countries with the focus of attention
broadening to include the consideration of international
scientific co-operation and the role of scientists in aid to
developing nations.
From the Pugwash deliberations in Vienna in September
1958 came a seven-point declaration reflecting the unani¬
mity of opinion of 70 leading scientists from all parts of
the world. This declaration stressed the necessity of
ending war, of ending the arms race, what war would mean,
the hazards of nuclear tests, the need for scientific
co-operation, the development of technology in the service
of peace and the responsibility of scientists.
As the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists wrote: "Future
historians may look on September 20, 1958 as a significant
date, and on the Vienna Declaration as an important docu
ment in the history of man's transition io living in tho
scientific age." (1)
The seventh and eighth Pugwash conferences held in
Stowe, Vermont (U.S.A.) three years later, in 1961, wore
perhaps even more significant and produced a virtual
"Charter for International Co-operation." They demons¬
trated strikingly the belief of scientists everywhere in
international co-operation in all areas of science. All
participants agreed on the urgent need for large scale
expansion of present international co-operation, not only
in pure science, where such co-operation has been tradi¬
tional, but also in large technological undertakings such as
space rocketry, drilling through the earth's crust, global
weather prediction, and technical assistance to newly
developing countries.
As participants permitted their imaginations to roam
freely over all areas of scientific endeavour in which inter¬
national co-operation and sponsorship could lead to vastly
accelerated progress, the atmosphere became charged
with enthusiasm and the dark clouds of political conflict
seemed to recede. As one participant observed "it was
an exhilarating experience."
Among the questions taken up at the September 1964
Pugwash conference were some of the long term conse¬
quences of disarmament on the development of science
and technology. Unesco, which has a special interest
in this problem, sent two top-ranking officials (the director
of its Department of Application of Science to Develop¬
ment, and the deputy-director of its Department of Social
Sciences) as observers to the meeting. It is hoped to
establish continuing working relations between the Unesco
CONT'D ON PAGE 33
(1) "The Third Pugwash Conference" by Eugene Rabinowitch. Quoted in "The
Atomic Age (Scientists in National and World Affairs)" an antholoay of articles
taken from "The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists" Z945-/962. Edited by
M. Grodzins and E. Rabinowitch. Basic Books Inc.. 1963. S10.
UNESCO'S PROGRAMME ON PEACE AND DISARMAMENT
WHAT are the ideas of the man
in the street on disarmament and
its long term consequences ?
What image does the general public
have of a world without arms ? What
use should be made of the resources
freed by disarmament? A public
opinion survey on these questions is
being made in France, Norway and
Poland by the European Centre of Co¬
ordination of Research and Documen¬
tation, located in Vienna (Austria)
with help from Unesco. Results of
the survey will be available next year.
This is one example of the peace
research and studies on the effects of
disarmament which Unesco is carrying
out or sponsoring, following the publi¬
cation of the historic United Nations
report on the Economic and Social
Consequences of Disarmament in 1962.
Further development of these activities
is foreseen in Unesco's proposed pro¬
gramme for 1965-1966.
One of the long-term consequences
of general disarmament is the opening
up of vast possibilities for the
development of science and the appli¬
cation of science and technology,
especially in the developing nations.
Unesco is setting up a scientific study
group to consider how resources even¬
tually released by disarmament could
be used for basic research and also
applied to new, creative programmes
of international co-operation in science
and technology.
In several countries in which disarm¬
ament would have far-reaching
effects, Unesco is carrying out a study
of how to increase the transfer from
developed to developing countries of
some of the potentially huge resources
for education which would become
available through disarmament. Re¬
sults of this research will be published
next year.
Unesco will maintain close contacts
with national, institutes and centres
concerned with peace research. Many
of these organizations are now group¬
ed in an international peace and
disarmament research association.
Facts and figures about well over
100 institutions working on problems
of peace will be given in an Interna¬
tional Repertory being prepared for
Unesco by the Peace Research Insti¬
tute in Oslo, (Norway). Unesco will
pursue its collaboration with the
Pugwash Conferences on Science and
World Affairs whose aims are closely
related to Unesco's activities in this
area.
21

PUGWASH (Cont'd from page 21 )
secretariat and Pugwash in the study of this important
question.
One of the highlights of the Pugwash meeting was the
official announcement that the Swedish government had
decided to establish an international peace research
institute to mark Sweden's 150 years of unbroken peace.
Three research projects have thus far been mentioned for
possible study (a) the establishment of a modern seismo¬
graph system (the so-called seismic cross) in Swedish
territory as an aid in detecting underground explosions of
nuclear weapons; (b) studies of economic and social
problems of disarmament (c) development of needed
resources for a growing population. Other projects will
certainly follow.
Over a hundred persons from 19 countries attended the
1964 Pugwash meetings including two Under-Secretaries
of the United Nations, 1950 Nobel Peace Prize Winner
Ralph Bunche and Vladimir P. Suslov As 1965 has
been named United Nations International Co-operation
Year it is expected that a large part of the
Pugwash Conference which opens in Venice next April
will be devoted to international co-operation in science and
international co-operation to help the developing countries.
As the Vienna Pugwash conference declared:
"The extremely low level of living in the industrially
underdeveloped countries of the world is and will remain
a source of international tension. We see an urgent need
to forward studies and programmes for the effective
industrialization of these countries. This would not only
improve the level of living of the majority of the population
of the world; it would also help reduce the sources of
conflict between the highly-industrialized powers. Such 33
studies would offer fruitful scope for co-operative efforts
between scientists of all nations."
