)n January 21, 1964, a Unesco Travelling Exhibition, "The Art of
Writing" was inaugurated at the Staatliche Kunsthalle, in
Baden-Baden, Federal Republic of Germany. Its fifty panels with their hundreds
of photographs and explanatory texts present the story of writing: the birth and
evolution of different systems and their subsequent impact on the life of man.
The Unesco exhibition was prepared by Willem J. Sandberg, former head of
the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam, in collaboration with Dr. Dietrich Mahlow,
head of the Staatliche Kunsthalle, in Baden-Baden, according to a plan drawn up
by Dr. Marcel Cohen, professor emeritus in the School of Modern Oriental
Languages at the Sorbonne, in Paris. Specialists from other countries also gave
their help.
In this issue The Unesco Courier has made extensive use of illustrations and
texts from this exhibition, which will later visit other countries. The catalogue of
"The Art of Writing" is a richly illustrated 130-page volume with a preface by
Professor Etiemble, of the Sorbonne, and an introduction by Dr. Marcel Cohen,
from which the following text has been drawn in slightly abridged form. The
catalogue has already appeared in German; English, French and Spanish editions
are in preparation.
The vast panorama of the art of writing is not only of historical interest ;
in an age when illiteracy is recognized as a challenge to the world, it reminds
us that writing is still, as always, a basic condition of all human progress.
¿Mlf flfc-Mf a* tfAtí*» #$h W
**?f!X í A
àftf

THE ART
OF WRITING
The first "texts" were "stories without
words" told in drawings (pictographs).
Signs shown here are memory-aids made
by the Cuna Indians of Panama. They
are for use by the singers of a ritual chant
describing the quest for the fugitive soul
of a sick man. The lines run alternatively
from right to left and from left to right
Unesco
tf »fit f
ttf ft Pi
i
s I $.»1
WT1! è i
Tí
By Marcel Cohen
he story of has had many beginnings
In many dlllerent places. Though no more
than a single moment on the time-scale of human history,
it is nevertheless one of immense Importance.
Recent discoveries suggest that as much as half a million
years ago there may already have been human beings who
possessed tools, weapons and utensils stone Implements
that still survive and other artifacts of which no trace
remains because they were made of vegetal materials.
Only In comparatively recent timesprobably not more
than 40,000 years ago do we find man as we now know
him (in terms of brain development), not only equipped
with some comparatively well-designed implements but,
in the case of certain peoples, also able to engrave, shape
and paint images of living creatures that are pleasing to
modern tastes.
It is clear that for these far-oíí peoples, aesthetic and
utilitarian considerations were already closely linked.
They appear to have believed it useful to produce like¬
nesses, in certain conditions, and to use them In appro¬
priate ways (in conjunction with spells and rites Invol¬
ving touching or transfixing) to ensure plentiful game and
fruitful hunting. Their pleasure probably stemmed from
the actual work of creation and from contemplating what
they had fashioned in the dim, uncertain light of their
cave homes.
Nor was this modelling of figures, whatever magical
value may have been attributed to them, their sole
artistic outlet. Even everyday objects reveal ornamental
features, and Jewellery was also made and worn.
During the gradual evolution of speech into a perfected
instrument it Is probable that ways were found of
replacing it and also of preserving It to a certain extent.
This brings us to the "signs" (taken in a broad sense)
which preceded writing and which have survived along¬
side it for various uses.
Art. or at least a graphic skill which takes its place,
is the basis of all systems of representing speech by visual
means. All these have their origin In pictography (from
the Latin root "to paint" and the Greek root "to trace
or write"). The earliest form of pictography can be seen
in the various types of embryo writing, where a fragment
of speech is represented in such a way that anyone
seeing it can grasp its message, although it Is not broken
up into words, and thus there is no actual link with a
particular language.
Generally speaking, these are "stories without words,"
representing situations by pictures or objects by signs.
The form and use of these signs vary in the different
societies which employ them, all of which have remained
at a low level of economic development as is the case with
hunting, fishing and simple farming communities in
Africa, Northern Asia, America and Oceania.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd)
A 6,000-year-old history
In a quite different category are the memory-aid
plctographs. These are devoid of descriptive details and
merely serve professional narrators as memory-aids for
their recitations.
Genuine writing, involving the breakdown of sentences
into words represented consecutively a new sign of
powers of observation and abstraction emerges only in
societies which have advanced to the stage of town
building. This presupposes complex, regular trading,
particularly for the supply of food to the towns from the
country, and above all, the development of architecture at
the hands of craftsmen and artists.
RCHffiOLOGisTS have been unable to trace any
L written documents going back further than
about 4,000 B.C. Broadly speaking, then, writing, which
is not one of the strict necessities of life, has a history of
about 6,000 years. Even now it is not yet In universal
use, since nearly half the population of the world still
does without it.
In an ideal, truly pictographlc script, each word would
have to be represented by a recognizable special sign,
which is called the rebus system, or, more accurately,
the "straight" rebus system still employed nowadays for
certain games, with various additional conventions. For
Instance, a circle with rays would mean "sun," a drawing
of some headgear would represent "hat," and animals
would be represented by conventional drawings.
Such object-symbols are at the same time word-signs;
as the meaning they convey has no relation to the sound
of the words, they are used Ideographlcally and are thus
known as ideographs. As regards form, so long as the
drawings are realistic, they may be described as hiero¬
glyphs in the broad sense of the term, from the name
given by the Greeks to the characters used in ancient
Egyptian writing: (hieros "sacred" and glypho "carve").
If these ideographs represent whole words, as single
units, the system can be used regardless of the pronuncia¬
tion of the words, and can therefore be read in different
languages. A great number of different drawings would
of course be needed to cover a variety of themes.
In the next stage of invention, we find sounds being
represented, and writing becomes at first and only to a
limited extent a phonetic notation (from the Greek phone
"sound"). But picture-writing or ideography is still the
basis of the system although use is now made of a
"transferred rebus" procedure. This calls for a thorough
analysis of a given language. It may then be seen, for
instance, that it Includes short words with "homophones"
(the same sound) ; thus a sign can be saved, for example,
by using the same one for "sun" and "son".
Going further, and breaking down words into their
constituents, we can split up some words of more than
one syllable; for instance, the word "pantry" could be
written by combining conventional symbols for a "pan"
and a "tree." The writing here, though still ideographic
in form, is now directly connected with the language
concerned and its sounds.
When telling the story of writing, it is usual to begin
with the Central American systems even though this is
chronologically incorrect. The reason is that Central
America is the only place, as far as we know, where a
pictographlc or hieroglyphic script developed without any
schematization.
That is why this empirical classification would still hold
good even if the present-day efforts to decipher Mayan
and Aztec documents were to bring to light a mixture of
ideographic and phonetic systems, such as we find in the
more ancient writings of the Old World.
An urban stage of civilization, including the use of
writing, had been reached in Central America. The Mayan
Empire seems to have been in existence by the fourth
century A.D., but after various vicissitudes it had to all
intents disappeared even before the Spanish conquest in
the sixteenth century.
uiNs bear witness to the advanced stage of
. development reached in Mayan architecture,
with its pyramids and monumental stairways. And
writing was closely bound up with the architecture, large
hieroglyphs being carved on the steps of stairways.
Stucco figures and frescoes have also come down to us.
The Mayas also produced codices on parchment or
paper, painted in colour with figures or characters of
varying size, arranged in carefully aligned squares. Many
of the figures were stylized and some imaginary, suggesting,
that all sorts of legends and myths were connected with
them. It is said that only the families of priests and
great lords knew the Mayan script. But the carvings on
monuments were there for all to see and must have served
for explanations, in the same way as the statues and

EMBRYOS
OF WRITING
The earliest dements from which truo
writing gradually developed woro tho
images drawn, carved or painted with
which ancient pastoral and hunting pooplos
marked a route or a sito or commemo¬
rated some oxperienco. Somo signs were
figurativo and their subjects aro easily
identified. Others, like tho primitivo signs
shown here, aro abstract in form and their
exact moaning still escapes us. From loft
to right : a moon-shapod form and an outlino
with two stars at its extremities (prehis¬
toric rock paintings from Spain); rock-
carved figure which was found in Brazil.
stained-glass windows of Europe's Romanesque and Gothic
cathedrals. We also know that one of the beliefs in
the Mayan civilization was that the same events periodi¬
cally recurred. The Mayas, therefore, must have thought
it worth while to set down any facts which would help in
making future predictions.
The Aztecs, who established themselves in Mexico in
the fourteenth century and whose civilization was in¬
fluenced by that of the Mayas, must also have built
monuments, but little trace of them was left after the
Spanish conquest. Fortunately, whereas only three
authentic Mayan manuscripts are known to exist, scores
of Aztec manuscripts have been preserved. Some contain
religious and others historical and geographical informa¬
tion; place-names recorded in the Aztec documents have
provided examples of transferred rebus-writing.
For instance the town Coatlan is represented by a ser¬
pent, and below it two teeth . complete with their gums,
the meaning conveyed being "the place of serpents."
"Coatl" is the word for "serpent," but to indicate the
place, the preposition "tlan" (in the place of) is repre¬
sented by the sign tlantli (disregarding the ending) mean
ing "teeth." By this phonetic analysis the complete sign
indicates the pronunciation as well as the sense.
It is also because of the mechanics of Its system of
writing that we now turn to Chinese, which goes back
only to the middle of the third mlllenlum B.C., Instead of
to the scripts of which we have the earliest evidence. The
Chinese system comes close to the ideal form of picto¬
graphy in that, in principle, there is one drawing, I.e. one
character, for each word, which Is itself an Invariable
monosyllable.
While this is perfectly true, linguists do agree that
in fact, in many cases two words are often Joined to form
a kind of compound. There are thousands of characters,
and one needs to know about 3,000 of them In order to
read ordinary texts, while dictionaries for scholars con¬
tain over 40,000 characterseven more if rare words are
Included.
These characters are phonetically associated with par¬
ticular groups of sounds. Many of the sounds have come
CONT'D ON PAOE 9
WORD
AND
ORNAMENT
The art of representing speech
by visual means springs from a
graphic skill, whxh was first used
as a means of ornamentation.
Right, two Elamite decorative
motifs. The Elamites, who lived
to the north of the Persian Gulf
and to the east of the Tigris,
lost their independence to Assyria
about 640 B.C. The script
which they evolved and used for
five centuries later fell into disuse.


HITTITE
& MAYA
GLYPHS
The Hittites, a group of peoples who
inhabited Asia Minor and northern
Syria, were already using their own
form of hieroglyphic writing in 1500
B.C. Later they came to use the
Babylonian cuneiform writing. De¬
signed for the needs of religion, the
Hittite writing was reserved for
inscriptions on monuments (left).
It was only when cuneiform writing
had been deciphered that it became
possible to tackle the hieroglyphs
with the aid of a few existing bi¬
lingual texts and by searching for
keys to the Hittite language through
a careful analysis of monuments.
(See Unesco Courier, Feb. 1963).
Almost 20 centuries later the Mayas
of Central America employed a
form of hieroglyphic writing closely
linked with sculpture and architec¬
ture. This writing was used by
the rulers of a theocratic state for
their religion and the remarkable
calendar they devised. About one
third of all the characters discovered
relate to this calendar, and they
have now been deciphered (See
Unesco Courier, March 1962). Right,
two Maya full figure initials heading
a series of glyphs and symbolizing
periods of time (7th century A.D.).
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd)
Stones that speak
Unoico
to denote a variety of objects, and in order to differentiate
their meanings, keys or radicals of varying complexity
(consisting of 1 to 17 strokes), and ideographic in cha¬
racter have been added.
The system is thus both ideographic and phonetic. It
has survived down to the present day, despite the diffi¬
culties it puts in the way of learning how to read and
write. Latin-type script has recently been used for
teaching reading before pupils go on to master the old
characters, some of which have also been simplified.
here is no doubt that most of these characters
are complicated, consisting of a number of
small strokes applied with the tip of a brush. The practice
of writing, which was once confined to educated people
such as government officials and members of the wealthy
classes, is today taught almost universally in China.
Aesthetic considerations are of major importance. Each
minute character, occupying an imaginary square, each
at a regular distance from Its neighbour (punctuation
marks being used to Indicate groupings), is a miniature
work of art. The work of skilled calllgraphers, pro¬
fessional or otherwise, has always been as highly esteemed
in China as the drawings and paintings of artists, and
writing is often used as a decorative element.
From inscriptions on monuments and documents brought
to light in Egypt, we know that as long ago as 3.000 B.C.
there were organized states there with large cities where
writing was in use. This was composed of hieroglyphs
with elegant little drawings oí recognizable objects
(though some of the signs probably represented conven¬
tional gestures).
Used In monuments, including small stelae with
inscriptions carved on them, and in paintings on Inner
walls of funerary chapels, these carved or painted pictures
were still being made almost up to about the beginning of
the Christian era. They then gave way to alphabetic
script borrowed from the Greeks for the transcription of
Coptic, which is a later development of the Egyptian
language, still preserved today for Christian liturgical use.
After a thousand years or so, a cursive form of writing
developed alongside the monumental style. For this every¬
day form Ink was generally used, and the signs lost their
pictorial character, being systematically simplified for
rapid execution. This is the first instance to be cited
where the need for speed in writing counted far more
than clarity for the reader. But in this cursive form of
writing, which was modified at different periods (the
earlier characters being known as hieratic and the later as
demotic) the fundamental system remained the same.
It was a complex system, so that once the tradition was
lost. It became difficult for scholars accustomed to the
alphabetic system to decipher hieroglyphic texts. Most
of the symbols were Ideographic word-signs which ori¬
ginally denoted objects either by direct representation
(straight rebus-writing) or by transfer of ideas, without
breaking them up Into constituents, in the case of words
with similar meanings. With the help of these two
systems, the number of signs could be reduced to a few
hundred, thus placing far less strain on the memory for
learning the outlines, but creating ambiguities for the
reader.
Accordingly, two additional devices (in the form of signs
not intended to be pronounced) were adopted in order
to facilitate reading. The first type of sign, derived from
the existing Ideographic symbols, specified categories of
meanings <human beings and their actions, animals,
utensils, etc.) and are similar to the Chinese keys or
radicals.
CONT'D ON PAGE 12

10
Mît» , . , ^jS-eüai-nX^rtt^líé-.
PTOLEMY
Above, the name of the Pharaoh Ptolemy, as it
appears on the Rosetta Stone; right, Cleopatra.
LEOPATRA
& PTOLEMY
GAVE CHAMPOLLION
HIS MISSING CLUE
CLEOPATRA
Right and below, Champollion's original
drawings which accompanied his let¬
ter to the Académie des Inscriptions
announcing his remarkable success. The
letter and drawings with their explanations
were published in Paris in 1822. Right,
Champollion gives in demotic script and
hieroglyphs a series of names he identi¬
fied, including Ptolemy, Cleopatra, Alex¬
ander and Berenice. In the bottom cor¬
ner he has signed his name in hierogly¬
phic form. Below, part of a table of
phonetic signs from the demotic and hi¬
eroglyphic scripts of the Egyptians to¬
gether with corresponding Greek letters.
Unesco photos
.-.'//. //-'.
tVi ccri/niu K>/c'reJ¿yil./ii¿Jtu cT i'Dctuj/tciia oe¿ jnttcrlJ Cjy/i/itJlJ
British Museum, London-Kunstarchiv Arntz. The Hague
The Rosetta Stone takes its name from the town in the Nile Delta a few miles
from where it was found in an ancient fort in 1799. This black basalt stele
was inscribed with a decree dating from 196 B.C. and defining the honours
to be rendered to Ptolemy V in the temples. The stone bore three versions
of the same text. The first was composed of 14 lines of ancient Egyptian
hieroglyphs; the second had 32 lines in demotic (an everyday script derived
from hieroglyphs) ; the third had 54 lines written in the Greek tongue and
script. In the part shown above, the name of Ptolemy figures in the sixth
line in a cartouche (one of the oval figures enclosing royal or divine names).

I N September 22, 1822, a young French scholar who
was passionately interested in Egyptology burst into
the room in the French National Institute, in Paris, where his brother was
working. He had hardly the time to cry out "Je tiens l'affaire" (I've got
it) before he collapsed in a dead faint. Jean-François Champollion,
poor and exhausted by overwork, had just solved the riddle of Egyptian
hieroglyphic writing. A few days later when he had recovered, Cham¬
pollion announced the great news in a letter to Monsieur Dacier, the
secretary of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettre«, in Paris.
Although eight years earlier, an Englishman, Thomas Young, had
managed to recognize the cartouche with the name of Ptolemy in hiero¬
glyphics on the trilingual Rosetta Stone, no further progress had since
been made.
In 1821 Champollion made a capital discovery. Counting the hiero¬
glyphic signs on the Rosetta Stone and the word« of the corresponding
Greek text, he found the hieroglyphs outnumbered the Greek words
three to one; thus it took several hieroglyphs to form a single word.
Using a demotic script written on papyrus, he confirmed the hieroglyphic
form of the name Ptolemy and, in 1822, succeeded in deducing and
writing with almost perfect accuracy the name of Cleopatra. He now
had 11 letters as a basis for future decipherment. His findings were
confirmed when he deciphered the name Thutmosis and he thus opened
the way for a complete understanding of hieroglyphs the key to ancient
Egyptian history which had been lost for 1,500 years.
For the Egyptians, pictures and hieroglyphs continued to be closely
associated even after the hieroglyphic script had become syllabic and
its signs given phonetic value regardless of their original meaning. For
three thousand years hieroglyphs remained the basis of monumental
writing because of their artistic qualities.
11


ART OF WRITING (Cont'd from p. 9)
Ingenious
triangles
baked in clay
The second type, an aid to the pronunciation of the
signs, consisted of phonograms or phonetic complements
representing only the consonants of short words (one or
two consonants) to indicate the pronunciation, without
regard to the sense. In the uni-consonantal signs, the
most common of all;*we have the equivalent of the letters
used at a later stage*.
These phonograms, which represent the detailed
breaking down of words into their components, were used
by themselves to show suffixes and prefixes, as the word-
signs represented word roots only. This system is there¬
fore a mixture of Ideographic and phonetic writing.
There must have been early examples of this writing
serving utilitarian purposes, but being on fragile materials,
they have perished. The oldest surviving documents are
narratives of contemporary events. Documents relating
to everyday life, as well as commemorative writings, have
come down to us from a later period. Pictures of groups
of scribes, writing apparently from dictation, show the
beginnings of the practice of multicopylng texts, In other
words of compiling books.
The engraving of characters on scarabs used as seals
was one of the very earliest uses of writing, to judge by
remains from civilizations like that of the Indus Valley
cities, roughly contemporary with the earliest Egyptian
kingdoms, and where the only objects found bearing
writing (in a script which has not yet been deciphered)
are seals.
IIn another part of what, for Europeans, Is the
Near East, there developed at practically the
same time a system of writing similar in concept to the
Egyptian but executed in a very different way. Nearly a
thousand years separate the pictographic accounts refer¬
red to above (dating from c. 3500 B.C.) and the classic
cuneiform writing adopted for two languages which
played a great part in the religion and literature of this
region: Sumerian, whose linguistic affiliations have still
to be established, and Akkadian (Assyro-Babylonlan) or
Eastern Semitic.
The original, rather crude drawings without any artisUc
grace gradually evolved Into combinations of strokes
with a small triangle at one end, resembling nails, and
other triangles with two sides extended to produce an
arrow-head or wedge shape (hence the term cuneiform
writing), made by pressing the tip of a sharpened reed,
lightly or heavily, into a clay tablet before baking. Tliis
material has demonstrated its power of survival.
The many Mesopotamlan scribes, whose intensive studies
included grammatical comparisons between the two
languages they used, developed a real calligraphic art
with their angular tools. They arranged their texts with
great Ingenuity, fitted an astonishing amount of minute
writing Into small areas, and cleverly arranged their blank
spaces.
This type of cursive writing on soft material was used
by skilled stone-carvers on small monuments, particularly
stela?, the walls in miniature found in conjunction with
the majestic Mesopotamian architecture and its often
colossal sculptures.
As In Egyptian, most of the signs (about 500 in the case
of Old Sumerian) are word-signs derived from former
picture-symbols. Many Sumerian words are monosyllabic,
with a vowel between two consonants, and others are even
shorter (a vowel alone or a vowel plus a consonant).
In both Sumerian and Akkadian the same signs are used
4 2 to express different meanings. Sound-transfer was used
CONT'D ON PAGE 14
Louvre Museum. Paris - M.
Detail of the "family" relief depicting King Umanshe of
Lagash on a carved limestone plaque dating from about
2400 B.C. The king carries on his head a ceremonial contri¬
bution of mortar for building the temple; beneath him
are officials. Script and figures are closely intermingled.

CUNEIFORM SCRIPT
British Museum. London - Kunstarchiv Arntz, The Hague
A Sumerian cylinder seal dating from about 2250 B.C. The name engraved
on the seal is illustrated with a scene depicting the release of the Sun-god.
Born from the point of a reed
HE Sumerians in Lower
Mesopotamia rank with
the Egyptians, the Cretans and the
Chinese as the earliest inventors of
an efficient system of writing. They
took the first step from the picto¬
graphlc to the syllabic system and
thus helped to develop writing as
we know it today. About 3000 B.C.,
the Sumerians made seals, used as
property marks, and then employed
word-signs picturing the object re¬
ferred to. These original "picto-
graphs" were then given phonetic
values resulting in a greater de¬
scriptive precision. This was now
a "rebus-writing", a word that was
difficult to render pictorially being
shown by the sign for another word
with the same or similar sound. It
thus became possible to write
almost any combination of spoken
words. By 2500 B.C., the writing
had evolved into a few wedge-shap¬
ed strokes from which the name
"cuneiform" is taken. It was writ
ten on tablets of damp clay with a
stylus often the sharpened point
of a reed. The Babylonian and As¬
syrians and later the Hittites and
Persians took over the cuneiform
script from the Sumerians and
adapted it to their own languages.
Sometimes an explanatory picture
was included with the writing to
guide the illiterate. But pictures
and script now had no need of each
other. Reading and writing began
to spread throughout Mesopotamia.
How some Sumerian pic-
tographic signs developed
into cuneiform script. The
word is first represented
by a drawing. This turns
on its side, then becomes
schematic when written
with a stylus on a clay
tablet, and finally, in an abs¬
tract form, becomes an
efficient syllabic method
of writing. Thousands of
tablets and texts have been
discovered on sites in Me¬
sopotamia and deciphered.
Right, from top, signs ori¬
ginating as a bird, a fish,
a donkey and an ox.
From " A Study of Wiitlng " by
I.J. Gelb. Univorsity of Chicago
Press, 1963

MEN
OF
LETTERS
One of the most momentous
developments in the history
of writing occurred in the
Near East, one of the busiest
highways of the ancient world.
In the 2nd and 1st millennia
B.C., the cuneiform and hiero¬
glyphic syllabic scripts no
longer met the needs of inter¬
national trade and commerce.
Efforts were made to produce,
an alphabetic script using only
20 to 30 signs. The Phoeni¬
cians, a roving people, now
spread their highly practical
script which proved easily
adaptable to most languages.
It took root, especially in their
North African colonies. In its
Aramic and Greek versions it
threw out two mighty bran¬
ches which finally covered
a large part of the world.
Left, Aramaic inscription on
the bas-relief of King Barra-
kab of Zenjirli (c. 750 B.C.).
Middle East Museum, Berlin- Ma'ribor
ART OF WRITING (Cont'd)
The emergence of the alphabet
14
in both languages, either for short words or for parts of
long words, but (in contrast to Egyptian) a vowel was
always included in the phonogram. Because Akkadian
took over Sumerian characters with their meanings and
added others by breaking down Semitic roots, it is
especially rich in signs with many different meanings,
which can often be differentiated only by their context.
The cuneiform signs were used In much the same way
as the Egyptian, word roots being usually represented by
an Ideograph. There are fewer determinatives than in
Egyptian, but Akkadian has more than Sumerian. Reading
is made possible by the use of phonograms or phonetic
complements, which are used for both word-endings and
word-beginnings, not only for affixes but also for parts of
the root, whether or not an affix is added. In any case,
reading was always a complicated operation and only
possible for someone who had studied thoroughly the
different meanings of any given symbol.
Cuneiform writing, with its use of ideographic and
syllabic phonetic signs, spread as a vehicle of civilization
south-eastwards to Elam, where an early hieroglyphic
system of writing had ceased to develop; in the middle
of the third mlllenlum, the Elamites adopted the cunei¬
form script, making particular use of its phonograms.
In the second mlllenlum, a hieroglyphic system and
cuneiform writing were both used in the Hittite country
to the northwest of Mesopotamia. The great number
of Ideographs used here have helped in the decipherment
of inscriptions by giving a general idea of their content.
In the .ffigean Islands, Crete and Cyprus, distinctive
civilizations developed whose writing also began with a
hieroglyphic stage. The use of phonograms apparently
started fairly soon, with words being systematically
broken up into syllables consisting of a consonant followed
by a vowel.
The number of fairly complicated characters in these
scripts is much smaller than in the combined ideographic-
phonetic systems. (Minoan Linear B, for instance, has 80
and Cypriote 55). No records in languages used before the
Hellenic Indo-European invasions have been deciphered.
Of the syllabic scripts, scholars have succeeded in reading
Greek of c. 1450 to 1200 B.C. in Crete and on the continent
at Mycenae, before the Greeks had received the alphabet.
They have also deciphered texts from Cyprus dating from
about 500 B.C., when the Greeks elsewhere had already
been using the alphabet for some time.
We do not know exactly how or where the alphabet ori¬
ginated on the Eastern shores of the Mediterranean. Like
other scripts, it was probably pictographlc in origin. But
attempts to establish a relation with certain hieroglyphic
records from Phoenicia have failed; nor is there any cer¬
tainty that it is connected with some Inscriptions found
in Sinai, possibly dating from c. 1800 to 1500 B.C., con¬
taining a small number of signs more or less resembling
crude drawings.
What is certain, however, is that in the region of the
main scripts of the Near Eastern civilizations, and two
thousand years after them, the alphabet was invented

The Phoenicians introduced their system
of writing to their colonies, including
Carthage, where this inscription was
found on a Neo- Punic votive stone.
¿n.:*/fM+^4^*"': +3+ "'
From "The Alphabet", by David Diringer, London, 1949
HI?
L
liit i »if 4**;: 1
The Iberian inscription on the piece of pottery
(above) is written from right to left, like
Phoenician script on which it is probably
based. It is believed to date from about 400 B.C.
di:*
* i
Left, extract from a letter written
by a Touareg woman of North
Africa. This writing, still used in the
Sahara, derives from Punic script.
From La grande invention de l'écriture et son évolution, by Marcel Cohen, Paris, 1 958
only once, so far as we know, in the form of a phonetic
system of writing, based on the smallest components of
words. It thus consisted of very few characters (hardly
mere than 20) with simple outlines not representing any
object. This ushered in the reign of sound-signs or letters.
It was a moment of capital importance when man
reached a clear appreciation of the internal structure of
his speech and made practical use of this understanding.
This happened in a region of small city-states, whose
prosperity was apparently maintained by trade with
distant lands across seas or deserts, and in which the citi¬
zens probably took a fairly large part in government. As
a skill possessed by more and more people, writing was
thereafter to become a growing force in the development
of the intellectual aspects of civilization.
The history of the alphabet, from its beginnings to the
present day, is a complex one. It includes the ways in
which the alphabet spread under the impulse of events,
the emergence of national differences in the shapes of
characters (reflecting, to some extent, different aesthetic
tastes), the choice of different ways of supplementing
phonetic symbols (in particular, the representation of
vowels) and the various methods used in delimiting words
while taking Ideographic needs into account.
Paradoxically enough, the first confirmed use of the
alphabet is found on tablets unearthed in Ugarlt (in
Northern Phoenicia), bearing cuneiform characters writ¬
ten from left to right. These tablets are believed to date
from between 1600 and 1200 B.C. and the language used
is a form of Western Semitic closely akin to Aramaic.
The characters which were to develop into our alphabet
made their appearance in Phoenicia and the neighbouring
regions, in the case of both Canaanite and Aramaic, at
least as early as 1000 B.C. (some archaeologists say 1300
B.C. In the case of certain Phoenician monuments).
This alphabet had 22 letters, all consonants, from which
it is concluded that since there must have been vowels,
the latter were merely Ignored and the letters In fact
represented syllables with vowels not indicated, so that
they constitute an intermediate stage between the sylla¬
bary and a fully developed alphabet.
The letters vary In size, with some extending upwards
or downwards above or below the two imaginary parallel
lines limiting the body of the small letters. The first
impression is of a cursive script (with the characters
separated), adopted for use on the hard material of
sarcophagi or funerary stelae. In the early Inscriptions
and in the only one known in Moablte, another Canaanite
language, the words are generally separated by dots. The
direction of writing Is from right to left.
At Its beginnings (c. 1000 B.C.), Aramaic, another Western
Semitic language, had almost the same shaped characters
and was also written from right to left.
The adoption of the consonantal Semitic alphabet by
the Greeks, possibly about 1000 B.C.. either by direct 15
borrowing from the Phoenicians or by some channel of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd)
Journey from alpha to omega
propagation in Asia Minor, had far-reaching consequences.
The first was the completion of the alphabetic system by
the addition of letters denoting consonants and vowels.
If they were to represent their language clearly, the
Greeks could not do without vowel signs, and they found
a simple means of writing vowels by using letters repre¬
senting Semitic consonants which did not exist in Greek.
In this way the phonetic principle was fully applied.
As regards the actual writing, the direction, after some
hesitation, became established from left to right. For
what we call capital letters, the Greeks adopted a more
or less rectangular form, not extending above or below
the line, and with a pronounced lateral symmetry, thus
effecting a definite aesthetic improvement. Later on, for
rapid manuscript work, quickly-written small letters came
Into use.
Writing must have made Its appearance in India some¬
where about the fifth century B.C. Although it was
almost certainly borrowed from the consonantal Semitic
alphabet, the shapes used from the beginning for the
majority of the letters differed sufficiently to throw some
doubt on this theory. What is certain is that a system of
vowel-notation grew up differing greatly from that of
the Greeks and leading to the formation of a syllabary
alphabet. The characters by themselves are read as a
consonant followed by the vowel a, which occurs most
commonly; signs (and not letters) following, preceding
and above or below the body of the letter denote vowels
of different tones, either short or long. Words are not
separated within the sentence, but the sentence ending is
Indicated.
There is not just one Indian system of writing, but a
variety of different scripts, with different forms of calli¬
graphy, the direction of writing running from left to right.
IIt Is fascinating to follow the fortunes of the
alphabet in the different parts of the world to
which writing has penetrated in varying degrees for
diverse uses: Its journeys along trade routes and in the
steps of religion, the changes in its outlines due to the
materials employed, the differing relations between calli¬
graphy and other arts, and the variations in the extent
to which a given alphabet was suited to the spelling of a
particular language, etc.
It was not only the Canaanite and Aramaic branches
which derived from the early Semitic prototype; a south¬
ern branch is represented mainly by the South Arabian
Inscriptions, with symmetrical characters (probably in¬
fluenced by Greek) ; and the practice of writing alternate
lines from right to left and from left to right, which is
often found In large monumental inscriptions, is an aid
to continuity in reading for anyone looking up at a
façade. The Ethiopian writing derived from this branch
runs from left to right.
As an offshoot towards the West we have the Libyan-
Berber script, not used over a wide area, which also had
symmetrical characters of distinctive appearance, arranged
In columns on ancient stelae and read upwards.
In the Semitic area where the Aramaic language itself
gradually ousted Canaanite, Ugaritic, Akkadian (and
Sumerian). Aramaic writing developed differently into
various distinctive forms read from right to left. One was
the "square Hebrew," which is now the official script of
the State of Israel; others were the Syriac of the minor
State of Edessa, which still survives as a religious script,
and the Palmyrene of another little State, Palmyra, which
soon disappeared after providing the first examples of
letters joined together. These linked letters were more
often found in another small centre on the fringe of Ara¬
bia where the Nabataean script was used.
Outside the Semitic area, Aramaic writing was carried
northwards into much of Asia, among Iranian, Turkish
and Mongolian-speaking peoples.
16 In the south of the Semitic area itself, the Bedouin of
Arabia borrowed their writing from the Nabataeans. With
the rise of Islam this innovation was to have enormous
consequences for writing. The Arabic script Is a rapid
linked form of cursive, especially with the omission of the
vocal punctuation above or below the characters, which is
used in the case of the Koran and for teaching. It lent
itself to all sorts of calligraphic exercises and refinements,
in which some stylization was used, but it was also widely
employed ornamentally on both objects and monuments,
particularly on sections of ornamental stucco. Being used
by Moslems other than Arabs, it spread through Near and
Central Asia, through parts of India and of the Malay
archipelago, and in various regions of Africa.
The Indian scripts covered the area in which Indo-
Aryan languages are spoken, reaching as far as Nepal,
and the area In which the Dravldlan languages are used,
to the south; but, following Buddhism (which was not to
survive in India itself), they reached Tibet in the north
and part of Indo-China and most of the Malay archipe¬
lago in the south-east. The letters forming these different
scripts represent syllables, and the variations between the
scripts, unlike the slight differences to be found in Arabic-
type alphabets, are such that each one is quite distinct
from the other.
The Greek script, in its classic form, has always re¬
mained confined to a limited area. It nevertheless
The script now used in the state of Israel is basically the same
kind of "square Hebrew" shown above on a 5th century A.D.
dedicatory inscription. It comes from the synagogue of Naaran.
Kufic writing ¡s a beautiful, monumental script which takes its
name from the Mesopotamian town of Kufa and its school,
where the script was practised by famous calligraphers from the
end of the 7th century A.D. Below, a Koranic Inscription in Kufic.
Unesco photos.

expanded within this area in a variety of ways, undergoing
relatively substantial changes at different times and in
different directions. Eastwards, we should not overlook
the existence in antique times of certain now extinct lan¬
guages of Asia Minor such as Phrygian (although at least
some of these languages may have received the Semitic
system of writing at the same time as Greek did, or even
before it). With the spread of Christianity, Greek script
was used in Africa for Coptic and for the language of the
Nuba people. For a time, to the north of the Black Sea.
it was used to write the Germanic language of the Goths.
j reek script then took the form still used for
I the Slavonic languagesthe Cyrillic alphabet,
with Its distinctive but very similar characters as it
followed the path of the Eastern Church (Greece Itself
being an exception). Aberrant imitations, incorporating
elements from a different source,.were used for the Arme¬
nian and Georgian languages. The Soviet Union Is now
extending the use of the Cyrillic alphabet, to many of the
regional languages, including Finno-TJgrian, Turkic and
Mongolian, replacing Arabic characters in some cases.
Westwards, alphabetic writing spread in antiquity as
the result of cultural Influences and apparently without
any particular religious implications. It did so above all
In Italy, both among the Etruscans, whose mysterious lan¬
guage has still to be deciphered, and, either through the
Etruscans or by some other means, among the Italic
speakers of Indo-European languages, especially the
Latins.
A northern variety, in the Alps, apparently gave rise
to the runes, the characters used in the ancient Germanic
and Scandinavian alphabets, which in the Scandinavian
countries had a certain magical significance.
The characters of the Latin capital-letter script, like
the Greek, were largely symmetrical in shape and very
clear. This script was thus well suited for monumental
Inscriptions; when need arose the characters could be
made large enough to be read from a distance. For every¬
day use and the writing of books, all sorts of dlllercnt
forms were adopted; these have their own distinct history
in which aesthetic tastes and the practical need for recon¬
ciling speed and legibility both played a part.
In the sixteenth century came the Gothic book-hand, a
script curiously reminiscent of the ogival architectural
style, found in the latest manuscripts and In incunabula;
contemporary with this was a particularly badly formed
cursive which was succeeded by the outstandingly neat,
clear form known as the humanistic script, on which our
printed characters are still based.
The Latin script spread throughout Europe, first with
the Roman administration and later on, with the gradual
extension of the Roman Church, as far as the frontiers
of the Cyrillic script. Thereafter, with European naviga¬
tion and colonization, it reached much of the rest of the
world, including the Americas. It Is now by far the most
widely spread.
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
IN THE PATH
OF HOLY BOOKS
In the 9th and 10th centuries B.C.,
when the many small Aramean States
in Northern Syria fell one by one
under the domination of the Kingdom
of Assyria, most of the people were
deported. This enforced migration
had an unexpected result. The Ara¬
maic language and script spread across
the whole of Assyria. For over one
thousand years Aramaic was the
language of trade and commerce from
the Mediterranean to India. Writing
and religion became increasingly linked
as Judaism, Christianity and Islam
set forth their doctrines in sacred
books. The spread of religion also
disseminated the script in which it
was written down. Today, for in¬
stance, Arabic script is used not only
for the Arabic language, but also
with added signs for many other
languages of Muslim peoples. It
was from Aramaic that the text now
known as "square Hebrew" deve¬
loped, and parts of the New Testament
were originally written in Aramaic.
Right, a 15th century manuscript of Uighur
writing. (The two upper lines are written in
Arabic). The Uighurs were a Turkic people
of Central Asia. Their writing came indirect¬
ly from Aramaic and was the 1 2th century
official script of the Mongol emperors.
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris-Kunstarchiv Arntz, The
Hague
yt\U-<)J,A*U!>j&* tMlXsr^O^'5 tcssjr

18
Archaeological Seminar of the University of Halle. Federal Republic of Germany
1 _ A bestiary of elephants,
tigers, and rhinos intermin¬
gles with mythological characters
and still undeciphered inscrip¬
tions on the seals made by the
people of the Indus Valley. These
plaques and seals, dating back
some 5,000 years, attest the use of
writing by this ancient civilization.
IU3ÊL
2 m An 18th-century manuscript
in Gujarati, which began to
be widely used in India from the
11th century A.D.
3 - A Tibetan woodcut for print
ing. Around the figure of a
winged horse are inscriptions
cut in reverse. The people of
Tibet still use the Indian writing
they adopted in the 7th century.
4 - A 16th century nuptial stele
from Mysore, India. Texts
surrounding the dancers are
Telugu, the most widely-used
script in southern India.
R _ Manuscript in Mongolian
script which is read down¬
wards and from left to right.
Top line is written in a Tibetan
script. Mongolian script is deri¬
ved, with various additions, from
the writing of the Uighurs, a
Turkic people.
Westdeutsche Bibliothek, Marburg-
Maribor
Musée Guimet, Paris
frdW<^ww'3v*t
:¥*iJmiX&i
A FAMILY
Musée Guimet, Paris
^-4^4 an
India- systems of writing did not evolve
from he script used in the Indus Valley
nearl ¡y 5,000 years ago. They made their
appearance about 1,000 years before the
present era, in a highly developed Indian
civilization in which sacred texts had
been orally transmitted for centuries.
The ancestor of India's present systems
of writing was probably introduced about
600 B.C. by traders coming from places
where Aramaic writing was used. (The
influence of Aramaic was felt as far as
Mongolia).
The most ancient examples known
inscriptions carved on rocks and on
columns in the time of King Asoka (272-
231 B.C. show that there were already
two types in use. One of these, Brahmi,
spread throughout India and is the
basis of all later regional scripts. The
other, Kharoshthi, was used only in the
northwest. The direction of these Indian
scripts, written from right to left, indi¬
cates their Semitic origin.
The spread of Indian civilization soon
brought its writing to distant peoples.
Thus, Gupta, a variation of the ancient
Brahmi, reappeared in East Turkestan.
Tibetan writing also derives from an
Indian source, as do Burmese, Siamese
Cambodian, Balinese and Batak (in central
Sumatra).
Modern Indian scripts are divided into
two main groups : those employed res¬
pectively in north and south. The classic
northern script is the Dcva-nagari, now
being increasingly used for writing San¬
skrit and thus replacing the many local
writing systems that were formerly em¬
ployed. Many other languages have their
own scripts derived from ancient forms.
In Southern India Tamil (spoken by
about 18 million people) has a precise
and practical script whose outlines
contrast strongly with heavily orna-
ented forms of writing such as Sinhalese.
19


ART OF WRITING (Cont'd from p. 17)
The onslaught
of the machine
Through its use in schools opened by missionaries,
the Latin script has been adapted to the needs of the
Malagasy language In Madagascar and of Vietnamese in
Indo-China. It has also been adopted by the Indonesian
and Philippine Republics for their national languages.
In mainland China, it has been employed In the case of
minorities which had no written language, and it is now
also being taught to the population at large. It is also
being used for African and Amerindian languages.
With the addition of certain conventional signs it Is
used for the transcription of other alphabets and for pho¬
netic notation.
Throughout its history, the development of writing has
been linked with that of artifacts the materials used for
writing on, the writing Instrument, the liquid used for
writing. For a long time it depended on the manual skill
of carvers and other copyists. A major turning-point was
reached when texts were multi-copied thanks to printing
processes, the prerequisite for which was a paper industry.
The history of multiple prints began In China in the
second century A.D. Wood-engraving was practised in
the sixth century. Movable type goes back to the eleventh
century In China and Korea. In Western Europe, after a
limited use of wood-engraving, the manufacture of mova¬
ble type and presses in the fifteenth century opened the
way to the development of books and broadsheets, result¬
ing in a vast extension of reading, even though education
was not yet general. Needless to say, the printing industry
required new kinds of technically skilled workers.
In the nineteenth century, we find simultaneously a
very great quantity of printed material, including daily
newspapers (thanks to constantly Improved machines),
and general education In countries with a developed in¬
dustrial civilization.
I;In the age of electricity, the accelerated pro¬
gress of industry, to which writing as an
intellectual tool contributed so much, has produced
various alternative means of satisfying the needs for
which writing caters: improved communications, record¬
ing, transmission and general diffusion of information,
education, publicity and advertising and entertainment.
The telephone, cinema, radio, T.V. and the tape-recorder
are encroaching on the field of correspondence, news¬
papers, textbooks and novels.
The position of writing still seems to be unchallenged
for at least some of the uses to which it was first put,
earlier than the book, that is, for authentication in all its
forms: certified communications, contracts, formal com¬
memorations, edicts or judgements, religious texts to be
repeated word for word, testaments and official legislative
and judicial records. There seems little doubt that It will
also continue to be used for private correspondence,
personal records, and the notes and jottings of authors
and writers.
To what extent the mechanical recording of speech will
also affect these uses, and how much writing (by hand or
in the form of typescript) will continue to be used for
the actual preparation of various forms of recordings, are
questions to -which the answers are still uncertain.
To what extent will the mechanical recording of speech
affect all these uses and how much of writing will actually
remain in use to prepare these same recordings? These
are all questions for tomorrow.
marcel cohén is director of the Ecole Pratique des
Hautes Etudes in Paris and professor emeritus in the
School of Modem Oriental Languages at the Sorbonne.
He is the author of many works on languages, including
the monumental Les Langues du Monde (Languages
20 of the World), written in collaboration with Antoine
Meillet.
HOW EUROPE
TO WRITE

Inscription on a column
dating from the early 7th
century, on Lemnos, an
Aegean island. The writ¬
ing, as yet undeciphered,
is in a language which
has many analogies with
Etruscan. The two may
have had a common origin
in continental Greece.
From L'Écriture et la Psychologie
des Peuples, Armand Colin. Paris.
1963
5 '^Al
V -O <o
w^
Etruscan tomb inscription.
The development of this
alphabet, initially borrow¬
ed from the Greek, con¬
tinued during seven cen¬
turies of Etruscan history.
.xa X
CO
From Buonamici. Epigrafía etrusca.
Florence. 1 932
About 1000 B.C. the Phoenician alphabet was transmitted
to the Greeks, probably by Semitic traders. Characters in
the oldest Greek inscriptions have much in common with
Phoenician ones and, like them, are written from right to
left. The Greeks perfected the alphabet by using separate
letters for the vowels, since vowels did not exist in Semitic
texts. Later the new alphabet was written from left to right.
Greek settlers introduced writing to Italy, where the
Etruscans were the first to practise it, probably from the
8th century B.C. The Etruscans, like the Phoenicians, wrote
from right to left (see page 28). Their alphabet was adopted
by the Romans who gave It a new form in which it spread
throughout the world.
It was also from the Greeks that the peoples of Eastern
Europe received the alphabet. Germanic runic writing is a
developed and modified form of certain north Italian alpha¬
bets and appears to have been used in Scandinavia in the
3rd century B.C. Early Slavonic scripts evolved from Greek.
Right, one of the
oldest Latin inscrip¬
tions (about 600 B.C.).
It is carved on the
"Black Stone" found
in the Roman Forum.
Alinari, Florence
A rock-carved design
from Sweden. A my¬
thological hero, Sigurd,
kills the dragon Fafnir,
whose body is covered
with runic inscriptions.
Early Germanic sagas
abound with instances
of the magic power of
runes and treatises
were also written on
their use for magic.
Kunstarchiv Arntz, The Hague

ART OF WRITING (Cont'd)
CALLIGRAM
COMPOSITIONS
Arabic characters forming the fanciful
impression of a nightingale (right).
This 19th-century Arabic calligram is a
quotation from the Koran promising
entry to Paradise to those who do
good during their lifetime. Left,
letters of an imaginary alphabet are
used in this calligram composition
by the Swiss painter, Paul Klee.
Unesco photos
ECHOES FROM THE STORY OF WRITING
On these pages we present
extracts from " L'Ecriture et la
Psychologie des Peuples " (Writ¬
ing and the Psychology of
Peoples), a work recently pub¬
lished by Armand Colin, Paris.
In this volume of 18 studies,
eminent scholars explore the
connexions between the history
of writing and the psychological
and sociological characteristics
of different peoples.
EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHS
The hieroglyphic system of writing is
remarkably precise and If its rules are
followed exactly, there is little chance of
mistakes being made. Another of its
advantages is that it can be written from
left to right or from right to left, In lines
or In columns. In nearly all cases the
direction chosen Is the contrary to our own
system. The orientation of a text Is linked
to those hieroglyphs that represent living
things or objects of unsymmetrlcal shape.
When these are turned to the right, the
inscription should be read from right to
left; when they are turned to the left the
text should be read from that side. Texts
can thus be arranged in a great variety of
ways.
JEAN SAINTE FARE GARNOT
22
Signature of Charlemagne. The
Emperor merely added his own
flourish to the monogram already
painted for him by the copyist
on documents which were
prepared for his signature.
THE SCRIBES OF SUMER
Towards the middle of the third millen¬
nium B.C. there were already schools of
writing throughout the land of Sumer.
Records of the period reveal that there
were several thousand scribes. There
were the "junior" and "high" scribes,
scribes of the temple, and "royal" scribes
of the palace and scribes specialized in
particular kinds of administrative work... it
was a man's profession; and ¡n Sumer it
was also one which carried with it great
prestige. Several of these professional
writers rose to high government rank and
some even became rulers of the country.
Some time later, In the days of the
Assyrians and the Babylonians, the profes¬
sion of scribe was opened to women.
RENÉ LABAT
A BATTLE OVER BOOKS
The story of the book as a vital part of
everyday life begins shortly after the start
of the Alexandrian Era, about the middle
of the 2nd century B.C. It is closely linked
with the results of Alexander's conquests,
with the development of culture in general
and with the creation of the great schools
of philology. This, then, was the opening
of an era that has since moulded human
existence: the era of books. At the same
time the problems of writing and book pro¬
duction became inter-related to some extent.
Several common factors determined the
development of writing and of books. One
of these was the expansion of papyrus-
making; another was the increased use of
the Greek script among peoples who were
not exclusively Greek in origin. An
Egyptian,, for example, was obliged to learn
Greek as a schoolboy of today learns a
foreign language. An added stimulus to
cultural growth was the rivalry existing
between the great Hellenistic cities.
Pergamum, in Asia Minor, an active and
often successful rival of Alexandria, invent¬
ed a new writing material, "pergamum",
now known to us as parchment.
Early in the 2nd century A.D., a conflict
arose over the use of papyrus or parchment
for book-making and over the form of
books: between the "volumen" and the
"codex". The "volumen" was a long roll
with writing only on one side; the "codex"
was made of a series of sections written on
both sides. These sections were placed in
the order required and were protected by a
binding or cover. The "codex", especially
the parchment codex, seems to have
developed more rapidly in the Occident
than in the Orient.
This battle over the different kinds of
books was waged over a long period and
in many ways. Not only were "codices"
sometimes skilfully fashioned from papyrus,
but book-makers also used papyrus and
parchment sheets in the same volume.
ALPHONSE DAIN
am*, m f-
Pf5fc>hKnf¿
^^^
A " ballot paper" bearing
the name of the Athenian
statesman, Themistocles
(471 B.C.) and used on the
occasion of his banishment.
According to Greek custom
a potsherd or tile or even
a shell (ostraca) was used
in such cases, and on it was
written the name of the
person being sent into exile.
From " ostraca " we now
havetheword "ostracize".
CHINESE 'NOBLE' ARTS
The formal and scholarly aspect of the
most ancient Chinese writing suggests that
it was once a more or less jealously guarded
prerogative of a restricted circle or élite.
History and archaelogy have now confirm¬
ed that this was so..
It is already significant that writing was
once regarded as one of the Six Arts:
rituals, music, archery, chariot . driving,
writing and the science of numbers (that is,
basically, the art of soothsaying). According
NEW ESKI MO SCRI PT
Despite their archaic air these cha¬
racters are a modern creation: a sylla¬
bic form of writing evolved for the
Eskimos of Canada. Their meaning
also has a modern ring : " First Confe¬
rence of the Arctic Co-operatives.

to Confucian traditions, all these activities
were designed to contribute to the education
of the "superior man"; but Instead seem
to have formed the basis of "noble" arts
linked with magic.
With the growth of the imperial power
early in the Han Dynasty (2nd and 1st
centuries B.C.) the code of ethics of the
nobility and the ritual practices of antiquity
were restored and given a new interpre¬
tation In the Interests of the State. It was
thus a ritualist concept of writing which
developed among the ruling classes. The
emperor became the guardian and sole
arbiter of standard writing practices, and
writing itself became an affajr of state.
Because writing was regarded as a collec¬
tion of symbols used to represent and evoke
all living persons and because it was
accepted that the emperor's chief function
was to allot to each person his name and
station, no changes could be made in
writing by those who used it. The emperor
alone was authorized to proscribe certain
signs and to introduce new ones.
JACQUES GERNET
CALLIGRAPHY
The fact that Chinese writing soon led to
a complex and scholarly art form is due to
its graphic wealth and stylized forms. Its
aesthetic aspects and functions are thus
far more developed than those of other
scripts. Unlike the hieroglyphic writing of
Egypt, with its immutable outlines, or Arabic
script, it has more than a purely ornamental
value. It constitutes an art in its own
right, In which the individual personality
of the calligrapher finds full expression.
That Is why processes for the accurate
reproduction of calligraphic work were
developed In China even before techniques
were evolved for the everyday diffusion
of texts. The practice of making impres¬
sions in stone appears to date back to
r^c n
La. bnL^bnr>> A_oAc -DO.ÜO-
dXF ywnr^j
about 500 A.D., but Is still employed today
because It offers a cheap and effective way
of reproducing examples of skilled calligra¬
phy; it In no way encroaches on the
purpose of ordinary printing which is de¬
signed to meet quite different needs.
JACQUES GERNET
ROMAN STREET SIGNS
In the Roman world of Augustan times
(63 B.C. to 14 A.D.) many citizens could
read but few had the means to assemble
a library. However, as the teaching of
writing seems to have occupied an impor¬
tant place in the education of slaves there
must also have been numerous Individuals
who managed to constitute a library by
borrowing books and then having them
copied in their own homes.
By the middle of the 1st century A.D.,
the Romans had ceased to think of writing
in its exclusively utilitarian role; they disco¬
vered its aesthetic possibilities. Painted
inscriptions began to be used to ornament
the streets, along with signs bearing figures
and designs. A book page became a work
of art.
ROBERT MARICHAL
EARLY BEST-SELLERS
Along with the books found on the
shelves of collectors there already existed
in the 16th century the equivalent of our
present-day newspapers and magazines
the vast collection of printed matter
consisting of news Items recounting Impor¬
tant events. Some of these works came
into the hands of a very large public. For
example, one unpublished inventory reveals
that the stock of a Parisian bookseller in
1540 included 250,000 prayer books. Ano¬
ther bookseller had 30,000 devotional
books. Counting together all the published
editions of Luther's translation of the Bible,
the total number of copies would run to
several hundred thousand. By 1560 the
number of copies of works bearing Luther's
name could be reckoned, if not in their
millions, at least as having exceeded the
one million mark. I discovered In a 17th
century inventory references to 30,000
copies of various dramatic works, including
10,000 copies of plays by Corneille; at this
period, theatrical works were widely read.
HENRI-JEAN MARTIN
