-»3
I will praise to the heavens
The enslaved, the humble, the mu
Keeping vigilant watch in their mids|
I will speak out in their name
TARAS SHEVCHENKO
10 Portrait of Taras Sh|
ed towards the ei
by the Russian artis

REBEL WITH A CAUSE
by
Dmitro
Pavlychko
One hundred and fifty years ago, the great Ukranlan poet and painter, Taras
Shevchenko, was born near Kiev (see "The Unesco Courier," July-August 1961).
Shevchenko gave his talents and his life to the cause of an oppressed people.
To commemorate Shevchenko's birth, "The Unesco Courier" tells on the following
pages the story of this poet of courage, and presents extracts from his poems, his
diary and his novel, "The Painter", and reproductions of some of his drawings and
paintings. Freed from serfdom at the age of 24, Shevchenko became a celebrated
portrait painter in St. Petersburg. But he never forgot the humiliations suffered
by the people of the Ukraine and in his poems he castigated the Czarist tyranny.
After ten years of exile in Central Asia he returned to St. Petersburg, where ho
died at the age of 47, In his lifetime only 17 of his poems were published. Today
translations have been made in 42 languages of more than 200 of his poems and
of his novel and these works are now known across the world.
It happened on April 25, 1838 In St. Peters¬
burg, in the home of Karl Brüllov, "the
prince of painters." A stocky youth, with
reddish hair, called Taras Shevchenko had
just received from the poet Zhukovsky a docu¬
ment for which the sum of 2,500 roubles had
been paid. It was an expensive piece of
crested paper on which the feudal lord, Engel-
hardt, had written: ". . . this man Shevchenko
is hereby free to choose whichever way of life
he wishes."
Until then Shevchenko had been Engle-
hardt's property, his serf, whom he had long
tried to turn into his lackey. But he failed,
for as Shevchenko wrote later: "To tame a
Cossack child is like trying to tame a fleet-
footed deer in the wilds of Lapland." Having
discovered a talent for painting in his re¬
bellious young Cossack, the feudal lord
apprenticed him to a despotic hack painter,
hoping thereby to acquire a household painter
of his own.
It so happened that the young man's talent
made a great impression on Karl Brüllov who,
with the help of several other Russian artists
and men of letters, raised the money to buy
Shevchenko's freedom. The price that was
paid 2,500 roubles was a staggering sum,
since according to reviews of that time forty
roubles would buy an entire family, Including
a skilled coachmaker.
"Whichever way of íife ... ?" Shevchenko
thought he had chosen his way of life long
ago, and forever. He had already chosen it
when, as a tattered and hungry orphan, he
wandered from one Ukrainian village to ano¬
ther in search of somebody who would teach
him to paint. Painting that was his aim in
life. And now, as he stood before the "divine"
Karl Brüllov, he already imagined himself a
student of the Academy of Fine Arts. He was
not even discouraged at the thought that the
great Brüllov had graduated from this Aca¬
demy at the age of 17, while he was already
twenty-four. Now at last he had gained
the freedom for which he had longed for so
many years and he felt that the prospects
open to a free man were boundless. This was
the happiest day In Shevchenko's life.
And yet this day also marked the beginning
of the tragedy that was to torment the future
poet throughout his Ufe. Shevchenko's per¬
sonal freedom always seemed to be In constant
conflict with the strongest of all his emo¬
tions his love for his own people, still living
in a state of slavery. An honest man cannot
feel free if his people continue to languish in
captivity. There can be no individual free¬
dom If that freedom is enjoyed by one man
alone.
This tragic conflict only became fully
apparent later when as a student Shevchenko
returned to the Ukraine In 1843 having mean¬
time tasted of all the Joys of a free life. How
he had changed during those fifteen years of
absence from his loved Ukraine! And the
Ukraine? She also had changed. She had
suffered bitterly during all those years and the
Czarist chains had eaten deeper into her flesh.
Shevchenko dedicated to the Ukraine his
first little book of poems, TheKobzar (1), which
was published in St. Petersburg In 1840. These
poems showed that Taras had never forgotten
his people. The memory of the Ukraine had
been constantly with him even amongst the
roofs of the capital which he painted while
"studying" with Shlrlayev (a guild-master of
painting and fresco decoration) and in
Brüllov's studio where, instead of making
drawings of Greek gods, he wrote poems about
Ukrainian maidens and rebels and about
"what happened In the Ukraine In bygone
days."
But now that he saw his enslaved people
again, he realized that they were enjoying but
little admiration, respect or sympathy from
anyone. He must find the right words to rouse
(1) Player of the kobza, an Ukrainian musical ins¬
trument resembling a guitar.
11
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

tSHEVCHENKO (Cont'd)
them to the great struggle for freedom. And
so Shevchenko the romantic became Shev¬
chenko the realist.
In St. Petersburg in 1844 he wrote an
explosive poem, The Dream, powerful enough
to shake the palaces of the mighty on the
Neva embankment. The Dream was Shev¬
chenko's first truly revolutionary poem. It
expresses all his innermost feelings and
convictions: his grief as a Ukrainian, the indig¬
nation of his social conscience, his love of life
and the caustic bitterness of a man who prefers
death to slavery.
No one, before or after Shevchenko, has
drawn so complete and true a picture of the
Russian Empire of the czars as he, no one
has ridiculed as he did Its mendacious and
sham magnificence or penetrated so deeply
Into the hearts of the enslaved peasant masses
and the minds of the city slum-dwellers. No
one had spoken so simply and sincerely in
their name. Shevchenko tore the shroud of
hypocrisy from the Russian monarchy, and
revealed exploitation, and lawlessness, vice and
chauvinism, stupidity and falsehood.
We know that many writers tried to strike
a death blow at the regime. But no one has
succeeded so well as Shevchenko:
"I watch: the czar comes close
To him who ls of highest rank
And whops him on the nose! . . .
Poor fellow, he just licked his lips
And poked him right in the pot
The next in line! . . . Then that one gave
A smaller fish a clout;
That one punched still a smaller fish,
And hestill smaller fry,
Until the smallest at the end
Got theirs and opened wide
The palace gates, and poured outside
Into the city streets
To put the boots to common folks;
Then those began to screech
And holler fit to wake the dead:
'Our little father deigns to play!
Hooray, hooray, hooray, hooray !'
I laughed out loud, and that was all;
I own, in the melee
I too got banged."
Shevchenko Indeed "got banged": he was
sentenced to ten years' exile.
Though by no means the first of his country's
notable writers, Shevchenko was certainly the
true founder of Ukrainian literature; under his
pen the full wealth of the Ukrainian language
and Its every nuance find expression in works
that speak of universal Ideals.
The full breadth of Shevchenko's vision is
apparent in one curious episode of his life.
Having returned from exile and being impa¬
tient to begin serious work again, he was
preparing his tryptlch Fate, The Muse and
Glory. He then met, at the beginning of 1858,
in the salon of Count Feodor Tolstoy, an
American Negro tragedian, Ira Aldridge, who
was on a theatrical tour in St. Petersburg.
The two men soon became almost insep¬
arable friends. In the evenings Shevchenko
would visit Aldridge in his dressing room at
the theatre and, in the afternoon, the actor
would sit for his portrait in Shevchenko's
wretched little room.
This brief but moving friendship between a
man who had been a serf in his youth and
another who had belonged to an enslaved race
was Itself a simple everyday expression of the
great human ideals that inspired the struggle
of the Ukrainian poet who wrote:
"Will justice for man ever come? It must, it
[must.
The sun will rise and scorch all evil,
And then the dawn will come."
Right, "Council of the Elders" in a Ukrainian village
(etching, 1844). Below, the central, seated figure
in the same group. All Shevchenko's artistic work is
filled, as are his poems, with his affection for the
Ukraine. He painted the beauty of its vast landscapes,
depicted its ancient customs and expressed his hatred
of the tyranny to which his people were subjected.

