MY
FIRST STEPS
IN
SPACE
by Aleksei Leonov
arch 18, 1965 is a date that will be remembered in the
history of astronautics. On that day, Aleksei Leonov
became the first man to leave a space vehicle and walk
about in outer space. The thrill he experienced as he emer¬
ged from the capsule, hurtling around the earth at more
than 28,000 kilometres an hour, and what he saw during
his extraordinary adventure Is recounted to us in this article
specially written for the readers of The Unesco Courier by
Aleksei Leonov himself. Photographs are reproduced from
the colour film taken by Leonov and his colleague aboard
4 Voskhod II, P. Belyayev. This film was given its world pre¬
mière at Unesco House, Paris, on IVIay 6, 1965.
Photos © APN

The outer door of Voskhod ll's air lock opens into cosmic space. Aleksei Leonov emerges slowly into
the blinding sunlight. Far behind the astronaut (right of photo), the curving edge of the sunlit earth.
O NLY the unforgettable moments at
the take-off and the recollection of
the long months of flight training forced me to believe
in the reality of the scene that unfolded before my
eyes as I viewed the spaceship while i floated through
the vacuum of space. Voskhod II sailed with an awe¬
some majesty, its antennae like the whiskers of
some monster probing the emptiness of space. Its
portholes looked like enormous eyes contemplating
fixedly my each and every movement. The lenses of
the television and photographic cameras were trained
on me.
Before me blackness: an inky-black sky studded with
stars that glowed but did not twinkle; they seemed immo¬
bilized. Nor did the sun look the same as when seen from
Earth. It had no aureole or corona; it resembled a huge
incandescent disc that seemed embedded in the velvet
black of the sky of outer space. Space itself appeared as
a bottomless pit. It will never be possible to see the
cosmos the same way on Earth.
Below me our sky-blue planet drifted by. It did not look
round but completely flat, like a giant physical map. Only
the curvature of the horizon showed that it was round.
Everything about me looked like a scene from a science
fiction film. The only thing missing was the electronic
music. This was the fantastic setting I was to work in.
Interplanetary exploration has been developing at an
unprecedented tempo. Four years ago my countryman
Yuri Gagarin, spent only 108 minutes in space. Today
spacecraft make flights lasting several days. Nor is space
flight still restricted to the cosmonaut-pilot. Last October,
Voskhod I carried aboard not only the cosmonaut Vladimir
Komarov but also a scientist, Konstantin Feoktistov, and a p
doctor, Boris Yegorov. 3
In the future spacecraft will be spending more and more
time in orbit, and there will probably be several in flight

!l

Freed from the effects of gravity,
Leonov floats In the silent immensity
of outer space, protected from Its
deadly vacuum by his pressure suit.
Here there Is no top and no bottom.
The earth with Its curving silhouette
passes before him. It Is partly cover¬
ed with clouds, but during a few minu¬
tes Leonov saw the Mediterranean,
the Volga River, the Ural mountains
and several large Siberian rivers.
Photos © APN.
MY FIRST STEPS IN SPACE (Cont'd)
I unstrapped and floated into the airlock
at the same time. The number of crew members will also
increase. Scientists are already studying the problem of
setting up permanent stations in orbit. Man will naturally
want to explore other planets.
But if this is to be possible man must learn to assemble
heavy spacecraft directly in orbit. He must be able to pick
up the crews of orbiting space laboratories, move from
one ship to another in cases of emergency or simply main¬
tain contact with fellow human beings during interplanetary
flight. For this to be feasible, man had to learn to leave
his spacecraft and find the best way of doing so. But the
question arose was it possible for man to leave a space
vessel and survive? If so, could he work in space? Could
he, for example, carry out the assembly work that is
indispensable to the rendezvous of spacecraft?
This is what the great Russian scientist, Konstantin
Tsiolkovsky saw as an answer to these questions in 1926.
He wrote:
"It is easier to perform work of every kind in space
than on earth. In the first place, there is no limit to the size
of the projects that can be undertaken, and the most frail
materials can be used since they are not endangered by
stress and strain since space is weightless. In the second
place, man is able to work here in any position that he
desires provided that his feet or another part of his body
are firmly held in place. There are neither vertical nor hori¬
zontal planes; there is no top or bottom. One cannot fall.
"No object not even the heaviest can crush a man at
work, for it falls nowhere even when unsupported. No
member of the body, regardless of its size, is subject to the
pressure of another member. Objects displace themselves
at the slightest touch irrespective of their mass and dimen¬
sions. All that is needed is a single impulse proportional to
the mass and to the square of its velocity: then the bodies
are in perpetual movement."
This was no more than a theory, though an ingenious
one, based on his knowledge of the Laws of Mechanics,
but it had still not been confirmed in practice.
As a result of the flights of artificial satellites and
manned-spacecraft, scientists had theoretically defined all
of the problems connected with man's exit into space.
They were familiar with the ambient conditions in space:
the intensity of radiation, the effect of weightlessness.
But no one knew exactly how man would react to weight¬
lessness in the open space of the cosmos.
Pavel Belyayev, commander of Voskhod II, and I had the
good fortune of being chosen for the space flight of
March 18 that aimed to give the first answers to these
questions and to verify in practice the hypotheses and cal¬
culations of the scientists. We believe that we have
resolved these problems and justified the hopes that had
been placed in our flight.
This is what happened.
Two minutes after the ship had been placed in orbit we
began making preparations for my sally into space. There
was no time to waste admiring the wonders and beauties
of space; this would have to wait until our mission had been
accomplished.
During flight training on Earth we had tested time and
again the air lock controls and the systems regulating
man's body condition as he steps forth into space; and
we rehearsed the exit and re-entry procedures. We
had tested them under conditions simulating those with
which we would be actually confronted. In spite of this,
as the ship went throught its first revolution we rehearsed
the operation once again.
When we were over Kamchatka Commander Belyayev
started preparing me for my exit from the craft. He helped
me to put on the cylinder containing my air supply. I
checked the connexions linking my breathing mixture to
the spacesuit. Belyayev opened the inner door of the
air lock. Together we fastened to my spacesuit the tether-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MY FIRST STEPS IN SPACE (Cont'd)
I found the spaceship bearing down on me
cable that would keep me attached to the ship. Built into
the tether was the telephone cable that would be my link
with the ship and Earth. I unstrapped myself from the
seat and floated into the chamber of the air lock.
I gave a hand signal to the commander. The inner door
closed behind me. Belyayev at once began to empty
the chamber of air in order to equalize the pressure with
that outside the ship. I could feel this happening from
the way my spacesuit became inflated. Suddenly the outer
door of the air lock opened out into space. A blinding
burst of sunlight poured into the chamber of the air lock.
So brilliant was the light it seemed as if someone were
welding close by with an acetylene torch.
I
8
MADE my way forward in the lock toward the
exit and poked a bit of my head out. We
were over the Mediterranean. I was in a hurry to leave
the lock, get a look at the Earth from space and see the
ship, but Commander Belyayev restrained me: the time¬
table had to be followed precisely.
Before we were over Simferopol, Belyayev signalled me
to cast off. In my impatience to get out, I pushed off too
vigorously from the edge of the air lock and left the ship
like a cork popping from a bottle. Below directly under¬
neath me was Kerch. I saw the Black Sea, the blue
swath of the bay near Novorossisk, the cloud-capped
mountains of the Caucasus. Visibility was magnificent. I've
done a great deal of flying in my time, more than 550 hours,
but I find that you see everything better from space, the
relief is much sharper than from an aeroplane. I distinctly
saw, for example, that the region of Sochi was enjoying
fine, sunny weather.
I found myself spinning and was powerless to control
it. I had had the same experience when Belyayev and I
were practising in the aeroplane-laboratory the technique
of exit and re-entry under conditions of weightlessness.
So I did nothing about it. I merely waited for the kinking
of the tether to slow down the rotations. And, as I ex¬
pected, I noticed that the angular momentum was decreas¬
ing little by little. I was, of course, still turning on a
transversal axis. I could have checked this by grabbing
hold of the tether, but I preferred to keep on rolling
because this enabled me to see better.
BELOW the majestic green mountain ranges of
the south of our country floated by. I reco¬
gnized the Volga; then I saw the Urals, and the mighty
Siberian rivers, the Ob and the Yenisei.
I removed the lens guard of the motion picture camera
that was to photograph all of my movements in the vacuum
of space. It was mounted on a special stand near the
edge of the air lock. A moment later, to pull myself for¬
ward, I tugged rather vigorously at the tether and found
the ship bearing down on me. I warded it off with my
hands, otherwise I might have knocked my pressurized
helmet against its hull. By stretching out my arms I was
able to break the impact. It is clear that once man has
adapted himself to the extraordinary conditions in space,
he can move about in a sufficiently co-ordinated and pre¬
cise manner.
While I was drifting in space, I was always in telephonic
contact with Pavel Belyayev and with Earth. I spoke to
Yuri Gagarin who was on duty in the control room of the
spaceport. I heard Radio Moscow announce the launching
of our craft.
While over the Yenisei, Commander Belyayev gave me
the signal to re-enter the ship. I was feeling wonderful,
in excellent spirits, and was in no hurry to leave open space.
So I pushed off once again from the edge of the air
lock as I wanted to find out what produced the angu¬
lar movements immediately following the push-off. It turned
out that these movements were caused by even the slight¬
est displacement in the angle of the force of thrust in
relation to the axis of the space capsule.
I then carried out Commander Belyayev's order and
began to approach the ship. On the way I picked up the
camera from its support.
I wanted to enter the air lock directly, but this proved
anything but easy. The inflated spacesuit constricted, my
movements. I had to use all of my strength to re-enter
the air lock. But before long I was back in the cabin
alongside Pavel Belyayev.
.0 ended the experiment in which a man climb-
'ed out of a capsule into space. I had spent
twenty minutes outside the cabin. During this time, Vos¬
khod II had gone far from the Mediterranean over which
we has been travelling when I first went into the air lock;
we were now approaching the Pacific Ocean.
Was I afraid?
I am often asked whether I was frightened when I left
the ship to enter space, whether I thought my life was in
danger. Each time my reply is the same: "No, I was
not." Now, why waán't I afraid?
In orbit my spacesuit was the only thing protecting me
from the sun's rays, from radiation, sudden variations in
temperature, and other phenomena no less dangerous to
man. But I had faith in the spacesuit and in all of the
equipment on board the capsule. My faith was born in the
long months of training that preceded the flight.
An integral feature of the Soviet school for space
flight training is that the cosmonauts participate directly in
the development and testing of all the new systems and
equipment that have been produced for their mission. They
have no secrets for us; we know exactly how they will
function in space.
Both Belyayev and I, for example were in on the design¬
ing of our particular ship, the air lock and its controls,
the spacesuit and all the new gadgetry and equipment that
our spaceship had and Voskhod I didn't. All these pro¬
jects were approved in our presence. We tested the
equipment ourselves, not wishing to rely exclusively on
professional testers. After the tests we suggested modi¬
fications which we felt were essential, and the constructors
and engineers never failed to take account of our recom¬
mendations.
It was also reassurinq to know that if anything went
wrong during my flight in space Commander Belyayev, who
is also one of my best friends, could always come to my
assistance. If necessary, he could even have de-pressur-
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

warn
© APN
COSMONAUT IN A HALO
OF DARKNESS AND SUNLIGHT
This image of Leonov spinning
in space has a dramatic, unreal
quality. Brilliant rays of sunlight
piercing the velvet black of the
sky in outer space have struck
the camera lens and trace
strange, ghostly patterns of light.
9


MY FIRST STEPS IN SPACE (Cont'd)
Next goal : a rendezvous in outer space
10
¡zed the ship, abandoned it and, with the aid of a spare
tether, himself climbed into space.
Under these circumstances why should I have been
afraid? Quite honestly, if I had been afraid, I don't think
I'd have gone aboard the space capsule.
At the spaceport, after returning from our landing spot,
the journalists asked me, "Which was your greatest moment
of joy, when you came out of the capsule or when you
climbed back into it?" I replied that my greatest thrill had
been leaving the spaceship. And I wasn't being boastful.
O UR flight confirmed all the hypotheses of the
scientists. It is really possible for man to leave
a space vehicle and move about outside. More than that,
he can also work in space successfully. Naturally he must
learn to co-ordinate his movements and train himself to
act under the unusual conditions of weightlessness. But
this is not a terribly complex problem.
I think that scientists and engineers can now give serious
thought to the problem of linking up spacecraft, of
assembling heavy spacecraft in orbit for interplanetary
travel, and of setting up permanent space station labora¬
tories.
The air lock system was also given a thorough testing
during the flight. In my view scientists have found the
method highly satisfactory for exiting into space. What
advantage does this air lock system have over the complete
depressurization of the ship?
In the future, exiting into space will be required for
transfering from one ship to another or to allow a rendez¬
vous between . spacecraft or to carry out repairs while in
orbit. In all likelihood, this will be the work or selected
cosmonauts and not of all members of the crew. For it
would make little sense for all crew members to wear
spacesuits as, in fact, they would be compelled to do if the
cabin were depressurized.
It would be far more logical for the one or two cosmo¬
nauts who are going to perform the work to don spacesuits,
then to leave by the air lock and seal the inner door. This
would enable the other crew members to carry on their
own activities inside a cabin where normal conditions pre¬
vail, as was done, for example, by the crew members of
Voskhod I Komarov, Feoktistov and Yegorov.
Let us consider another problem: the rendezvous of
spaceships. It is extremely unlikely that spacecraft will
succeed in linking up porthole to porthole. What probably
will be required is a linking chamber similar to the flexible
"concertina" device which joins up the carriages of passen¬
ger trains.
Our flight demonstrated that cabin pressure can be main-

tained if an air lock is used for exit and return.
Commander Belyayev verified that there was no variation
in the pressure of the cabin either when I left or when
I returned. Thus at no time was it necessary for him to put
on a spacesuit. This is most important; the spacesuit is
anything but ideal for working inside the cabin.
As for working conditions in the cabin, they are in no
way different from those in an .ordinary room. Through¬
out the flight of Voskhod II, the cabin temperature never
exceeded 18 degrees centigrade. At no time did we
perspire excessively which would have resulted in dehydra¬
tion of the body. If we did perspire occasionally, it was
simply the result of physical effort or over-exertion.
When we weighed in after the flight, we had both lost
500 grammes Qust over one pound); neither of us attributes
this loss to our sojourn in space. In all probability it was
due to the fact that prior to the flight we were weighed in
the morning, and after our return, in the evening. In other
words our flight was normal in every respect.
Through The 'Unesco Courler, I should like to thank all
who have congratulated Belyayev and myself on the mission
that it was our privilege to carry out.
SOVIET ASTRONAUTS VISIT UNESCO
On May 11, two Soviet astronauts, Valentina Tereshkova
and . her husband, Andrian Nikolayev, were received at
Unesco House by the Executive Board of Unesco, meeting in
Paris. After the chairman of the Executive Board, Mr Moham¬
med El Fasi, and the Director-General of Unesco, Mr René
Maheu, had welcomed the astronauts, Professor Norair Sissa-
kian, chairman of the 13th session of the Unesco General
Conference, spoke briefly on Man in Space. Valentina
Tereshkova became the world's first spacewoman on
June 16, 1963. She remained in space for 70 hours, her
capsule orbiting the earth . simultaneously with that of the
Soviet astronaut, Valeri Bykovsky. The previous year, on
August 11, 1962, Valentina Tereshkova's husband made a
space flight of 64 orbits aboard Vostok III.
Leonov had the Impression of taking
part In a science-fiction film. Left, In
this close-up shot, the hand of the
astronaut, outlined against the mass
of the earth, has just removed the
lens guard from the automatic camera
mounted on the space capsule. Right,
Leonov returns to the spaceship.
Here he enters the air lock and in a
moment will close its outer door.
When the commander of Voskhod II
has repressurized the air lock, Leonov
will open the inner door to the cabin.
Photos ©APN
