Few people are unaware today that the
scientific explosion is transforming our basic
patterns of living, but precisely how it has
done so and the important role of funda¬
mental research are still far too often mis¬
understood. In Unesco's programme science
has now been given priority on an equal
footing with education (see page 34). This
was reflected last year when a world-renown¬
ed scientist was elected President of the
13th Session of the Unesco General Confer¬
ence. He was Prof. N.M. Sissakian, principal
scientific secretary of the Praesdium of the
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. and a
world authority on space biology. Last year
he was elected a member of the International
Academy of Astronautics. Below we publish
an abbreviated version of the address he
delivered following his election to the distin¬
guished world post.
Unesco's General
Conference in session
in the main hall at
Unesco's H.Q. in Paris.
Unesco - R. Lesage

THE INTERNATIONAL PROS
I
4
N the history of civilization, science has always
been a force for progress. Today, under new
social conditions, it is becoming a directly productive
force. Every human activity is closely bound up in one
way or another with the utilization of the achievements
of science and technology.
Thus, two problems take on major importance: the
extension of theoretical, fundamental research in such
branches of science as physics, chemistry and biology ;
and the application of science to production.
After Galvani made his famous discovery of electric
phenomena in living organisms, several decades went by
before the appearance of the first electric lamp. Today,
any important discovery very quickly reaches the production
stage, outstripping the most optimistic hopes of its inventors.
Every one knows that the development of mathematics
determined the growth of mathematical logic and cyber¬
netics which, in conjuction with the achievements in elec¬
tronics, led to the manufacture of computers and automatic-
control machines that play so important and vital a part
both in science and technology. Achievements in
theoretical and experimental physics gave man mastery
over the nuclear energy of the atom, and are now helping
him to gain control over thermonuclear processes so that
they can be used as a mighty and practically inexhaustible
source of peaceful energy.
Achievements in modern science ushered in the era
of the exploration of the cosmos with the aid of artificial
sputniks, rockets and spaceships, and led to the creation
of the indispensable basis for a deeper knowledge of the
natural phenomena of the universe, bringing, as it were,
the planets of the solar system nearer to our planet. The
development of modern biology, biophysics and micro¬
biology provided the basis for the development of bran¬
ches of industry concerned with antibiotics, vitamins,
ferments and pharmaceutics, all of which are vitally impor¬
tant to human life. Thus, theoretical research conditions
practical scientific achievement, makes possible technical
progress and can sometimes lead to the creation of new
branches of knowledge and of production.
While economic independence is essential to the achieve¬
ment of full political independence, economic progress is
unthinkable without the development of natural and applied
sciences in every country and without the rapid transla¬
tion of results into practice. The investigation of nature's
regular patterns, the discovery of new laws which increase

PECTS OF SCIENCE
by
Noraïr M.
Sissakian
man's control over spontaneous natural phenomena, so
that he can utilize natural resources more rationally and
enrich them all this is the task of the natural sciences.
Knowledge of natural resources is especially important
for the developing countries which are now becoming
industrialized and transforming their agriculture.
The development of chemistry has become absolutely
indispensable. This science enables man to produce more
and better clothes, to create new materials which are
stronger and more efficient than natural materials, to
preserve food and to eat better. We have all become
aware in recent years of the growing importance of deve¬
loping the chemistry of natural compounds, together with
the study of the mechanism of biochemical synthesis and
the investigation of the biological effects on the soil of
the chemicals used to control plant and animal diseases.
It Is at present impossible to maintain high livestock pro¬
ductivity and high yields in agriculture unless chemicals
are used. On the other hand, the indiscriminate use of
chemicals is fraught with danger for the health of men
and animals. That is why problems of soil biology, bio¬
chemistry and cell biology are so important and must be
investigated.
New technical principles involving the widespread appli¬
cation of the laws of living nature have emerged, as, for
example, in problems concerning reliability in technology
or in increasing the efficiency of mechanisms and tech¬
nological systems. At this level, complex interdisciplinary
study of the brain takes on a special importance.
The close links between science and education and the
growing role of science in our modern society have led
Unesco, to accord a priority to science in its programme
similar to that already given to education. It is impossible
to speak of the effectiveness of education if its results
are not incorporated in technical and scientific projects
and do not lead to the solution of technical and scientific
problems. In turn, the effectiveness of education is
determined by scientific and technical achievement.
Certain fears have been voiced in the past and unfor¬
tunately are still being reiterated by some people that
our planet's sources of energy are being rapidly exhausted
and that we shall be unable to feed an increasingly vast
population. Present-day achievements in the natural
sciences and in technology have answered these fears j)
and show that all grounds for pessimism are unfounded.
As I have said, recent discoveries in physics have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

INTERNATIONAL PROSPECTS OF SCIENCE (Cont'd)
An assessment
of world needs and resources
6
opened the way to controlling thermonuclear reactions. A
solution to this problem would fully satisfy the power
requirements of all mankind and for all time. As to our
capacity to provide adequate food supplies for the entire
population of the world, the following figures can be
quoted. The total, surface area of arable land, plantations
and orchards in the world amounts to 1,400 million hec¬
tares, while pastureland covers 2,600 million hectares, i. e.
only 11 to 12 per cent of the total land area. Let us
assume that these figures remain unchanged until the end
of the 20th century. By this time overall yields will have
risen to the level already reached in many countries of the
world: three tons per hectare of arable land and one ton
per hectare of pastureland. Even if we base our calcula¬
tions on these minimum figures, total production by the
end of the 20th century will amount to 7,000 million tons
of standard cereal units. This is sufficient to feed twice
the population which will inhabit the earth by the end of
the century, according to United Nations estimates.
HESE calculations do not include food resources
of the oceans and seas where the major part
of the organic matter formed on the earth is found. However,
so far the biological and mineral resources of the oceans
have only been sporadically exploited. It is only natural
that the rapidly increasing population of the earth should
want to use them to the fullest extent. This has now become
possible thanks to the rapid progress of science and
different technological developments. A recent French film,
"Le monde sans soleil " (World Without Sun) gives a good
idea of the wealth of resources in sea and ocean and of
the peculiarities, variety and beauty of marine life.
The biological riches of the oceans are mainly food
resources. They are a source of proteins the most
frequently deficient item in diets. They are also a valu¬
able food supply for birds and animals, and an essential
element in a variety of technological processes. Accord¬
ing to the most conservative estimates, the world catch
of marine food products will reach 50 million tons in the
near future. But this is not a ceiling. The figure can
be raised in the near future to 100 million tons a year.
The experience of Peru, which in the last ten years has
increased 200-fold the fishing haul in the central part
of its Pacific seaboard, is a striking pointer to future
prospects.
A knowledge of the laws governing production of
organic substances by marine organisms is essential if
we are to make use of the rich biological resources of
the ocean and increase productivity. Without this know¬
ledge it is impossible to project fishing standards or to
develop new strains or new fishing grounds.
The chemical and mineral resources of the ocean are
inexhaustible. Almost all the known chemical elements
in the Mendeleyev's Periodic Table occur in sea water or on
the ocean bed. So far, because of existing traditions in
economics and technology, it is mainly cooking salt, bro¬
mine, magnesium and calcium that have been extracted
from sea water. And yet, reserves of iron and manganese
in the sea and the ocean amount to 200 thousand million
tons, while oil and gas reserves on the sea-bed are com¬
parable with continental deposits, and may even exceed
them.
The study of seas and oceans and the exploitation of
their mineral and food resources raise many national and
international problems. They will have to be solved if the
fishing industry is to be developed, useful species accli
matized, useless and harmful organisms removed and the
industry diverted from one species to another and from
area to area, in order to preserve ocean resources from
exhaustion and create a stable source of raw materials.
Unesco must play an ever-increasing role in solving these
problems.
In another sector, the demineralization of sea water
opens up broad prospects for the satisfaction of mankind's
growing demand for fresh water. Not so long ago there
was no shortage of water over the greater part of the
world. At present the demand for fresh water has grown,
and is continuing to grow, to such an extent that the prob¬
lem of a water "famine" has arisen.
The provision of public water supplies for expanding
towns and rural communities goes hand in hand with an
increase in individual consumption. Agriculture, for reliable
harvests, needs irrigation, which demands ever increasing
quantities of water. Industry, and particularly the chemical
industry, uses tremendous amounts. This is why the ques¬
tion of the quality of water and the distillation of sea
water are now among the most important scientific and
technical problems of our time.
To solve these problems, the use of atomic energy is of
the greatest importance. The demineralization of sea water
through international co-operation and research by scien¬
tists from many countries is one of the main goals in the
application of atomic energy to peaceful uses. Atomic
energy should cease to be a potential weapon capable of
destroying man's material wealth and cultural treasures;
it should be made the means of turning deserts into
gardens and of meeting man's increasing needs for fresh
water.
But the demineralization of sea water is still not in every¬
day use. The collection and rational use of existing fresh¬
water supplies are thus of far-reaching importance. One
example of the successful solution of this problem Is the
construction of the Aswan High Dam with the prospects
it offers for the agricultural and industrial use of water and
for cheap water power.
ROBLEMS of water supply are complicated not
only by the fact that water is required in greater
quantities than ever before, but also because man replaces
much of the water he draws from his reserves by conta¬
minated waters, the majority of which are toxic even in
the weakest solutions.
Because of this toxicity, particular forms of fauna and
flora are destroyed, their reproductive process is damaged,
their fertility reduced and the quality of their progeny
lowered. Owing to the testing of nuclear weapons, various
radioactive substances fall into reservoirs. The peoples
of the entire world must achieve a complete cessation of
all types of tests of atomic weapons. The struggle for
a clean atmosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere therefore
becomes a task of prime importance.
According to a report by the World Health Organiza¬
tion, waterborne diseases, including typhoid, dysentery and
cholera, strike down five hundred million people every
year and cause the death of five million babies. In this
connexion it was decided at the most recent World Health
Assembly to take steps to expedite the preparation of
national programmes for ensuring that drinking water is
safe to use.
But the elimination of infectious diseases depends not
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

Unesco-Australian Commonwealth Film Unit
Aboard an océanographie research ship in an expedition sponsored by Unesco, a crew
member takes samples taken from the sea for laboratory analysis. In 1959 Unesco sponsored an
expedition to the Indian Ocean, joined by 24 countries. This survey will continue until the end
of 1965. In 1963 Unesco launched a seven-country expedition in the tropical Atlantic Ocean.
7

INTERNATIONAL PROSPECTS OF SCIENCE (Cont'd)
only on the protection of water from contamination, but
also on a profound understanding of the biochemical and
physiological processes which take place ¡n the cell, and
the organism as a whole. In this connexion, the co-ordina¬
tion of activities between the various organizations in the
United Nations system and the international non-govern¬
mental organizations is of growing importance.
There is a vast and rapidly developing scientific field
where international collaboration is particularly needed:
the earth sciences. Today, geophysicists are agreed that
it is quite impossible to grasp the laws governing the deve¬
lopment of the earth's crust by carrying out observations,
however thorough, in a single region. Only synchronized
and uniform observations throughout the world, only the
study of every object and every process, using all the
available methods and technical means, can substantially
further man's understanding of the nature of the processes
taking place in the earth's crust. It is particularly impor¬
tant to plan ways in which man may master these tre¬
mendous forces, these processes that unleash energy far
surpassing anything we have produced artificially, and
subordinate them to his will.
International scientific co-operation, successfully initiated
on an unprecedented scale during the International Geo¬
physical Year and since continued through new international
projects, should therefore aim not only at conducting
research in certain countries but also at applying the
results of this research to improve living conditions for
all peoples.
I
8
T is no mere chance that Unesco has been
called upon to play a leading role here.
Unesco's support of such international projects in the earth
sciences as the international project for the study of the
upper mantle, international oceanography research, the
International Years of the Quiet Sun and the programme
for the study of icebergs, earthquakes and volcanoes, will
help not only to make possible scientific observations that
build up the over all picture, but also to organize such
observations in developing countries. The creation of
suitable observatories, laboratories and services will lead
both to the general progress of science in these countries
and to the discovery of new natural resources. Foundations
will be laid for an active harnessing of nature that can be
effective only if undertaken on a world-wide scale.
Unesco's action under its seismological programme has
become particularly important. An overall picture of pro¬
gress in seismological research and in anti-seismic
construction has been obtained through missions carried
out in many earthquake-prone countries. With the know¬
ledge thus obtained it should be possible to solve the most
urgent problems of regions where the danger of earth
tremors is greatest. The mapping of danger zones and
the adoption of special measures, protective and construc¬
tional, will save human lives and prevent costly damage.
There is every reason to hope for fruitful results from
international co-operation in this field.
The significance of education is best exemplified by the
popular saying that an illiterate man cannot see even from
a mountain top. Education is of the greatest economic
and social importance especially nowadays when the
harmonious development of man's mental and physical
faculties must satisfy the needs of all sections of society,
serving as an essential basis for continued progress. As
for problems in the field of public education, every aspect
of these economic repercussions must be studied. One
example we may quote is the work of S.G. Strumilin, a mem¬
ber of the Soviet Academy, who has attempted to assess the
economic consequences of the development of educa¬
tion. Prof. Strumlin has reached the following conclusion:
the value of the work done by a person who has had four
year's primary education is 43 % greater than that of an
illiterate person, 108 % greater if he has had a secondary
school education and 300 % times greater if he had a higher
education. Taking these figures as a basis for calculation,
CONT'D ON PAGE 32


INTERNATIONAL PROSPECTS OF SCIENCE (Cont'd from page 8)
An uninterrupted creative process
32
we see that money spent on education (approximately
2-3 thousand millions), can yield far higher returns
(approximately 70 thousand millions) in a few years' time.
If education is to be made more efficient, it must be
soundly planned. Social, economic, demographic, geogra¬
phic, organizational and other factors must be taken into
account in educational planning. In other words it must be
closely related to overall planning of national economic
development.
Great importance attaches to the social and economic
aspects of the question. The very nature of work is being
transformed as a result of changes in industrial relations
and the increasing degree of mechanization and automa¬
tion of production. . Industry today increasingly needs
highly trained workers, and technical education must meet
this need.
HE experience gained by the Soviet Union and
certain other countries in the elimination of
illiteracy and the rapid development of education underlines
the fact that reading, writing and arithmetic must be taught
initially in the pupil's mother tongue. The problem of creating
a written form for each language and teaching, primary
school pupils in their mother tongue is therefore immensely
important for the young, developing countries. A revision
of teaching programmes and a full use of technical aids
can not only contribute to the further development of
primary,, secondary and higher education, but also to
campaigns for adult literacy.
Problems arising in relation to education and scientific
and technical development cannot possibly be solved
unless serious attention is paid to the training of scien¬
tists and other specialists in each nation. Every develop¬
ing country must have its own national scientific centres
an academy of sciences or scientific councils and also
a network of scientific research institutes to serve the
main fields of economic and cultural development. Unesco
should furnish the developing countries effective assistance
in creating a national and regional framework for the deve¬
lopment of science.
Unesco's social sciences programme frequently comes
under discussion. The best way to increase the effective¬
ness of activities and research work in the social sciences,
it seems to me, would be to reveal the tremendous pos¬
sibilities which general and complete disarmament could
open up for the development of education, science and
culture.
We have only to consider the scale of the resources
needed for financing educational programmes and for
training technicians in all countries especially the deve¬
loping countries to realize what immense possibilities
the achievement of disarmament would bring. Studies of
the social, economic, cultural, scientific and technical
consequences of disarmament; an investigation of ways to
remove the effects of colonialism in developing countries;
a stepping up of the campaign against racial prejudice and
discrimination; efforts to foster greater mutual understand¬
ing of different ideas, methods and principles all this
would help Unesco to solve problems assigned to it by
its Constitution.
Works of art are of value only if they bring happiness and
if they help people to live richer lives and to judge world
history and world events correctly. This, to a great extent, is
why the works of the great masters of the past have
achieved immortality. Let us take the example of the
Venus of Milo. Greek by origin, Parisian by residence,
triumphantly touring from continent to continent, she has
become a citizen of the world. Or, as another, take
Eisenstein's film, "The Battleship Potemkin," which has
been winning acclaim in many countries for several
decades. The same will probably be true of the film
"West Side Story."
Every people has its favourite writers, artists and com¬
posers. The works of literature and art that have won
the esteem and affection of a people become the heritage
of all mankind. Surely this is borne out by the fact that
the works of Michelangelo and Shakespeare, Rembrandt
and Beethoven, Tagore and Maxim Gorky, Rodin and Mark
Twain, give joy and delight to all nations of the world. And
what enjoyment we derive from the still too little known
cultural heritage of Africa and Latin America.
Unesco would fulfil its role better if it used all the
means at its disposal to ensure that the cultural values
of mankind were' instrumental in furthering humanistic
principles, and in spreading and strengthening the concepts
of peace, friendship and international understanding.
The future of the whole world and the social, scientific
and technological progress of mankind depend on the
education of our young generation. Peace would be In
mortal danger if racial prejudice and revengeful and mili¬
taristic ideas were to triumph, The education of the youn¬
ger generation in the spirit of mutual understanding, peace
and friendship among nations, regardless of national dif¬
ferences and political and religious convictions is there¬
fore the sacred duty of Unesco and of us all.
A realistic assessment of the world in which we live
reveals the existence of economic, social and political
contradictions. However, the use of force to settle problems
can no longer be localized it will have dire consequences
for the whole of mankind. Therefore the repudiation of
force in settling problems and the subsequent application
of a policy of economic, cultural, scientific and technolo¬
gical collaboration and peaceful coexistence, are the right
path to be followed in relations among nations.
The peoples of all countries should make every effort to
achieve the complete cessation of all types of tests of
atomic weapons and to achieve general and complete dis¬
armament and the strengthening of economic, cultural and
scientific collaboration among countries with different
social systems in the name of the progress of all mankind.
IEWED in the light of social, scientific and tech¬
nological progress, the satisfaction for all time
of the food and energy requirements of mankind, the
elimination of infectious illnesses, the conquest of cardio¬
vascular diseases and cancer, the consequent achievement
of unprecedented longevity and a happier life than has yet
been known, and an unparalleled flowering of education,
science and culture now begin to appear real and close
at hand.
By its very nature and substance life is a contradictory,
an optimistic affair. It is the result of an uninterrupted and
stupendous creative process. We must all labour
incessantly to extend this process and to implant humanistic
principles more firmly in mankind while striving to remove
all obstacles that lie in the way.
Until now, it has always been considered normal that
an organism should age with the passing of time; this was
held to be a natural law. But man, armed with science and
the principles of humanism, is triumphing over this natural
phenomenon.
Unesco does not age with the years, for young states
are constantly joining it, its working methods are being
perfected, and its work is bearing fruit. May I express my
firm belief that our Organization will take an increasing
part in achieving the noblest aims of our age the streng¬
thening of peace and of fruitful collaboration in the field
of education, science and culture.
