Sanctuaries
astride
frontiers
by François Bourlière
I;IS it pure chance or a happy omen ? After
centuries during which jealously guarded
frontiers were the most obvious outward sign of "territorial
behaviour" on a national scale and the living symbol of an
absence of understanding between peoples, the last few
years have brought us face to face with a curious phe¬
nomenon. On every continent and even in Europe, where
friction and open discord have been at their bitterest, there
is a growing number of "protected zones" astride the fron¬
tiers of two or even three neighbouring States.
In general, they occur in regions oustanding for their
spectacular scenery, for their "natural monuments" and the
special plants and animals that abound there. These regions
have rapidly become great centres of attraction for tourists
and have now joined the special localities in the world into
which flock young people of every nationality. Within a few
years a place that was once a barrier may, on the contrary,
become a meeting place.
CONT'D ON PAGE 17
ITALY-FRANCE. The ibex, a
member of the wild -goat family
was in danger of complete extinc¬
tion in Europe until the species
was gradually re-introduced into
the Alpine valleys of Switzerland and
France from herds raised in the area
of the Upper Aosta Valley that has
now become the Italian Gran Para-
diso National Park. Since its creation
in 1953, the French National Park
of La Vanoise has shared a common
frontier with the Gran Paradiso Park.
© Michel Strobino, Geneva

POLAND -SOVIET UNION. By tha
end of the First World War the herds of
wild bison which once roamed the
forests of Europe had been completely
wiped out. All the surviving bison were
in zoos; by 1930 only 40 animals re¬
mained. Since then, thanks to the efforts
of the International Society for the
Protection of Bison, formed on the sug¬
gestion of Poland, the European bison
has not only been saved from complete
extinction, but its numbers have increas¬
ed considerably. From stocks raised in
Polish breeding centres the first new
herd to be allowed to roam freely was
released in 1952 in the great forests
around Bielowecza (photo right) where
Polish and Soviet reserves now meet on
the frontier. Poland has also been export¬
ing bison to enable other European
countries to start breeding new herds.
SPAIN-FRANCE. Below, a herd of
izards (the chamois of tha Pyrenees)
climbs a névé of frozen snow on the
9,000 feet high Pic du Midi d'Ossau.
The protection offered to these and
other mountain animals by the long-
established Spanish Parque Nacional
de Ordesa will be increased if efforts
now being made to establish a French
national park in the Pyrenees are
successful. The combined reserves
would assure the future of the brown
bear and izards on the mountains and
the birds of prey that still nest there.
A
© H. Heimpel
La Vie des Bêtes - François Merlet
ê
f
»
^&tm

5/-vL*
*
SANCTUARIES ASTRIDE FRONTIERS (Cont'd)
All that is required is. for parks established by two neigh¬
bouring States across their common frontier to co-ordinate
their programmes' of preservation and planning and also for
traffic controls to be organized at the entrances to protected
zones for everything to change very rapidly. Roads that
were once the preserve of customs officials and frontier
guards become increasingly used by people in civilian
clothes townspeople on holiday. Shelters and youth
hostels gradually replace guard posts and customs houses.
Tourists from both sides of the frontier discover, with sur¬
prise, how alike they are and that they possess a common
heritage. Gradually, the wall becomes a bridge.
Which are today's main "protected zones" astride the
frontier regions of two or three neighbouring States? In
Europe, the oldest and perhaps the most famous is on the
frontier between Poland and Czechoslovakia where the
Tatras National Park adjoins the Czech reserve bearing the
same name. Both parks together form a natural region as
spectacular for the tourists as it is of interest to the
naturalist.
In a wonderful setting of forests and mountains, speci¬
mens of almost all the great carnívora which have dis¬
appeared from the rest of the European continent, the
brown bear, the wolf, lynx and wild cat, are free to live far
from all interference. On mountain ridges, chamois and
royal eagles are to be found today as in the past. Rare
black storks nest regularly in the valleys. A fact of out¬
standing importance is that administrators of the Polish and
Czech parks hold working meetings together at regular
intervals and the numbering of game as well as the arrange¬
ment of tourist itineraries are organized in common.
Almost as interesting a region is to be found on the
Franco-Italian frontier in the western Alps. In 1922 the
former Aosta royal hunt was transformed into the Parco
Nazionale des Gran Paradiso, famous throughout the world
for its herds of ibex and chamois. This park was the only
ibex reserve in the Alps and was the centre from which
this species was reintroduced gradually into Switzerland
and France.
Since 1963, the Pare National Français de la Vanoise has
shared a common frontier with the earlier established Ital¬
ian park. The ibex and chamois can now pass In and out
of these magnificent mountain regions and out of reach of
the rapacious hand of the poacher whose depredations
have, until now, prevented the natural revival of the "Capra
Ibex" in the French Alps.
The Spanish Parque Nacional de Ordesa has been in
existence for a long time. It is situated in one of the wildest
and most picturesque regions of the central Pyrenees.
Those in France concerned with the preservation of wild
life hope that before long a national park in the Pyrenees
will be established on the northern side of the frontier.
This would ensure that the famous Cirque de Gavarnie is
protected from vandalism. If this second reserve can be
established reasonably quickly and if the area of the Parque
de Ordesa can be enlarged even slightly, the future of
the brown bear, of the izard, or wild goat, and of several
predatory creatures in the Pyrenees will be finally assured.
In another setting far from the great chains of mountains
that lend themselves better than anywhere else to the estab¬
lishment of national parks and recreational areas, another
fine example of international co-operation for the protection
of areas of refuge for threatened animals is found in the
protected zones of the forest of Bielowecza on the Soviet
Polish frontier.
This magnificent primeval forest with its fine oaks, lime
and fir trees, all that is left of the European virgin forests,
has always been particularly well looked after by the Polish
preservers of wild life and by naturalists. It was here that
the last herd of European wild bison found refuge and it
was also here that this interesting ungulate was saved from
complete extinction. In 1952 when there was stock of
beasts large enough to maintain the species, the first herd
was freed. They now roam the great forest lands.
In spite of territorial changes following the Second World 1 1
War when the Polish-Soviet frontier was made to pass ' '
through the middle of the forest, preservation of wild life
has continued to develop. The Soviet Government at that
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

Champion sprinters
off fftie animal world
The African cheetahs, or hunting leopards, in these remarkable close-up
views look for all the world like a family party of domesticated cats. Cheetahs
are easily tamed and have cat-like characteristics: they purr when stroked,
climb trees and have the cat's tree-scratching habit. Their non-feline features
are their long legs, blunt non-retractile claws and paws resembling a dog's.
Weighing about 1 00 pounds, they can cover a quarter of a mile at an average
of 45 m.p.h. and have been known to sprint for short distances at over
70 m.p.h. (the top racehorse speed ever recorded is 45 m.p.h.). In ancient
Egypt they were used to hunt gazelles and hares (themselves top-rank
sprinters) and in the 15th century it is reported that Armenia's kings kept
hunting packs of over 100 cheetahs. Today cheetahs have become rare in
Asia and are also disappearing in Africa; in the extreme south and north
they have been completely exterminated. Hunting of the cheetah has
now been generally prohibited or else is strictly controlled in Africa.
Photos © Myers, Nairobi

* -
(
¡fe, ' '/ ' V^\
láJ X
*WX*;1

SANCTUARIES ASTRIDE FRONTIERS (Cont'd)
time created a reserve to cover the part of the forest on
its side of the frontier. Hundreds of thousands of tourists
each year now visit this wild region.
Next to Europe, tropical Africa contains the greatest
number of protected zones lying astride neighbouring State
frontiers. The most spectacular region in Africa is the area
surrounding Lake Edward containing the Albert National
Park and the Queen Elizabeth National Park situated in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, in Rwanda and in Uganda.
This area contains examples of almost all the natural
surroundings of the Ethiopian region.
With an area of some 2 1/2 million acres, these two
national parks include an astonishingly varied countryside
such as the glaciers of Ruwenzori, the incandescent lava
lake of Nyiragongo, the rain forests of the Ituri, the savan¬
nah land of the tree-euphorbia in the plains of Rwindi-Rut-
schuru and the country bordering the Kazinga Channel.
Some of the most spectacular animal species live there,
often in densely populated herds including mountain gorilla,
chimpanzee, elephant, hippopotamus, forest and savannah
buffalo, okapi, topis, water buck and Uganda cob. There
are few areas In Africa where so much wild life can be seen
UGANDA-CONGO-RWANDA. Next to Europe
tropical Africa has the greatest number of protected zones
lying astride neighbouring frontiers. The most spectacular
region is the area containing the Albert National Park and
the Queen Elizabeth National Park situated in the Demo¬
cratic Republic of the Congo, in Rwanda and in Uganda
and surrounding Lake Edward where this photo of Afri¬
can marabou storks was taken. Thousands of marabous
have been killed for the soft white coverts of the under-
wing and tail, used for trimming women's clothing.
in the course of a journey involving so few miles.
An area made up of the Serengeti National Park and the
Mara Reserve situated further to the east and astride the
frontier between the Republic of Tanzania and the Republic
of Kenya also constitutes a unique ecological region but
very different from the one just described. Livestock,
including over a million zebra, wildebeest, Grant and Thom¬
son gazelle, in addition to quite a considerable number of
giraffe, black rhinoceros and, of course, carnívora (lion,
cheetah, leopard, hyena, jackal and others) live in these
immense plains and emigrate with the movement of the
rainbelts.
A few miles away, the giant Ngorogoro Crater provides
us with one of the natural wonders of the world (See Unesco
Courier, Sept. 1961) while the Gorge of the Olduvai contains
a unique sequence of fossilized deposits from Homo Habilis
and Zinjanthorope to Homo Sapiens. Nowhere else on earth
provides more data on the complex history of the emergence
of man in the world.
The "W" National Park of the Niger (named after its
W-shaped form) in West Africa, lying astride the three fron¬
tiers of Niger, Upper Volta and Dahomey is, to some extent
a kind of western counterpart of the two spectacular regions
of East Africa just described. Considerable herds of ele¬
phant, buffalo, hippopotamus, antelope and cob as well
as the great carnívora are found there.
Unesco and nature conservation
Alain Gille Problems concerning the conservation of the world's
natural resources and particularly its wildlife have always
been one of Unesco's major preoccupations. In this
vast field it has collaborated closely with the U.N. Food
and Agriculture and the International Union for Conser¬
vation of Nature and Natural Resources.
Important developments have taken place in Africa,
in particular, following an international conference on
the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources in
Modern African States, held at Arusha (Tanzania) in
1961. In 1963, a Unesco mission led by Sir Julian Huxley
made an on-the-spot-investigation of nature conserva¬
tion problems in Ethiopia. At Ethiopia's request Unesco
has now sent three specialists to help the country carry
out a conservation programme. A Unesco Regional Cen¬
tre for Science and Technology, whose creation was
decided by the recent Unesco General Conference, is
now being set up in Nairobi (Kenya). One of its tasks
will be to help African governments solve their conser¬
vation problems.
Asia's conservation problems will be discussed at an
international conference to be held in Bangkok under
Unesco's auspices later this year.
In Latin America, the Charles Darwin Station, an
international laboratory equipped for important scientific
research, was inaugurated in January 1964 in the Gala¬
pagos Islands a zoological site with unique characte¬
ristics. Its creation came about through close and con¬
tinued co-operation between Unesco, the International
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources,
the International Charles Darwin Foundation for the
Galapagos Islands and the government of Ecuador.
The first international conference of world-wide scope
aiming at the development of national parks and an
increased understanding of the problems involved was
held in July 1962 at Seattle (U.S.A.). Among other recom¬
mendations the conference proposed the creation of
national marine parks; several such parks have now
been set up and projects for others are being studied.

TANZANIA-KENYA. The
largest of land animals,
elephants have few ene¬
mies to fear except man.
Until recently elephants
ranged over the whole of
tropical Africa from sea
level to the forests of such
snow-capped peaks as
Kilimanjaro in East Africa.
Because of unrestricted
hunting to obtain their
huge ivory tusks (record
length 11ft. 5 inches) they
have disappeared from a
number of regions. In
the past forty years ele¬
phant reserves have been
set up and the elephant
population has increased
in certain areas. In Uganda,
it was estimated at 23,500
head in 1959. Right, an
elephant gives himself a
dust bath in the Mara
Reserve situated on the
frontier between the Repu¬
blics of Tanzania and Kenya.
© Myers. Nairobi
There are at present not many "protected zones" astride
international frontiers in America. On the Canadian-United
States frontier, the area made up of the Glacier National
Park and Waterton National Park is an exception and it
bears the propitious name, The International Peace Park.
Species of the great temperate mountain fauna, from the
giant grizzly bear to the white Rocky Mountain goat live here
in a majestic setting of high mountain ranges. With a little
patience and luck one can sometimes approach to within
a few metres of the timid mountain goats.
Unfortunately, in Latin America the proportion of wild life
has not reached the same stage of development as in other
countries. There are, however, encouraging signs of future
collaboration between people interested in wild life pro¬
tection in the various countries. Brazil and Argentina have
established two adjoining national parks around the famous
Iguassu Falls with an area of 640,000 acres which will
ensure the protection of not only the incomparable falls
themselves but also the interesting forest fauna and flora
of this part of the temperate tropics.
It is to be hoped that this first example of concern for
wild life will be followed by others, particularly in the Repub¬
lics of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador in the Andes
Mountains. Here, the mountain forest areas and the strange
paremos, or mountain plateaux, are deteriorating at an
alarming rate.
We may wonder why national parks are not found well
within countries rather than in frontier areas, which in fact
facilitates the joint development and exploitation of poten
tial wealth from the tourist trade and the natural resources
in these frontier regions.
There are at least two reasons for this. Frontiers bet¬
ween States often correspond with natural barriers, par¬
ticularly high mountain chains which have always been
relatively underpopulated and where there is little agri¬
cultural and industrial development. It is, therefore, not
surprising that natural vegetation and wild animal life should
be better preserved in such economically marginal areas.
But this is not always the case. Sometimes nature takes
advantage of man's hostility towards his neighbour. It is
not difficult to find examples of countries where extensive
forest and plain with. their fauna, wet lands and islands owe
their prolonged protection to the restrictions on movement
by people as well as on land development imposed by
military and customs regulations.
By a curious irony of fate, human antagonism has in this
case served the cause of wild life. It is for generations
to come to seize the opportunity of ensuring the continued
existence of the countryside and natural monuments which
owe their survival to their ancestors' mutual suspicion in
times past.
FRANÇOIS BOURLIERE is President of the International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources. He is a professor
at the Faculty of Medicine in Pans and also lectures on animal
ecology at the Faculty of Sciences. Among many other works he has
written a "Natural History of Mammals" (Harrap, London 1955 21/--
Knopf, New York, 1956, $5 00).
21
