r
TOOLS OF ART SUR¬
GERY. One of the most
delicate of all restoration
operations is the removal of
the paint used to retouch
a work during past restor¬
ations. When this old paint
is exceptionally hard and
resists the use of solvents,
the restorer has to scrape it
away gently with pencil-
shaped engraver's tools (left).
WARPED WITH AGE. Works executed on wood are often the
most fragile of all paintings. Right, detail of Van Eyck's masterpiece,
"Adoration of the Lamb," painted in 1453. This face was photograph¬
ed under a raking light while the work was being restored in Brussels.
The cracks in the paint have been caused by the warping of its
wooden panel support; the wood itself has split along the graining.
Left, restorer at work on a panel of the "Adoration of the Lamb".
PROBING RAYS. The first step in any restor¬
ation is a thorough examination of the painting
and its support (wooden frame, canvas,
nails etc.), X-rays are used to probe inside the
work and its backing. X-ray below clearly
shows the outline of a cradle used to strengthen
the frame about 70 years ago. From photographs
taken by infra-red, ultra-violet and fluorescent
light the state of each layer of paint is revealed.
Photos © A. C. 1_ Brussels

The
care
of
old
paintings
Few of the works of art that have come down to us from the past
are as fragile as paintings. To protect them from the ravages of time
and to preserve or restore their original beauty are problems that
have for long preoccupied the curators of museums. In the past
many masterpieces have suffered from well-meaning but clumsy
attempts at restoration and some of the work done by certain res¬
torers has been attacked as "sacrilegious" or destructive. Until
recently, the care of old paintings was the subject of violent contro¬
versy. Even today certain kinds of damage are still irreparable, but
at least we now know how to avoid causing harm to paintings. It
is now recognized that each painting needs individual study and
treatment and for this purpose there exist elaborately-equipped
laboratories "art hospitals" where with the help of ultra-modern
techniques, restoration attains the highest aesthetic standards. Since
1946 the sum of experience and skill in different countries has
been pooled increasingly through the efforts of the International Council
of Museums. Through this perfection of conservation techniques
the art restorer has become better equipped to deal with the complex
problems of his calling and is able to avoid the errors of the past.

THE CARE OF OLD PAINTINGS (Cont'd)
Five-year cleaning
for 'Last Supper'
Solano's copy of "The Last Supper" leaves
the Abbey of Tongerloo for treatment in the
Brussels "art hospital". Below, cloth-tipped
rod serves restorer as arm rest and also
protects painting from accidental damage.

Leonardo da Vinci's most famous mural, "The
Last Supper" (1494) was reproduced on canvas
by one of his pupils, Andreas Solario. This
giant work (see also back cover) went from Italy
to France and then to Belgium where it is
preserved in the Abbey of Tongerloo. It has not
come through its travels unscathed. It suffered
serious damage when it was hidden underground
during the troubled times of the French Revo¬
lution. And blundering attempts to restore it
in the past have not improved its condition.
In 1959 it was decided to hand it over to the
skilled restorers in the Institut Royal de Patri¬
moine Artistique in Brussels. Here a team has
been working over the painting inch by inch
for the past five years. Its restoration is not
yet finished, but already the work has regained
an original vigour and vitality that varnishing
and retouching had obscured and deformed.
Unesco - René Caloz
nsnssRfii'Nt']
r^^^^
S^ v «9
fit ; ' W+. - :J^Ê w_
Br] ' "*
9
UW . -±imM
i
m. fl w y .'M
*w . '^BÉk- A<4Í
Top, patiently and carefully a specialist removes varnish and overpainting
applied by earlier restorers until he reaches original paint. In the process any
traces of damage to the original work are also revealed. In infra-red photo
(centre) old repairs on this detail from "The Last Supper" are clearly visible.
Bottom, the same detail after cleaning. Damaged parts have been brought
to light, and at the same time original values are restored to the faces.
Photos ©ACL, Brussels
