Love letter or household
accounts? With her stylus,
this young Roman woman
makes a gesture characte¬
ristic of reflection. The
stylus, a sharpened reed
or a pointed Instrument of
bone or Ivory, was used
to scratch letters on soft
wax tablets like those held
by this woman. Tied
together by cords, these
tablets formed a small
note-book called a "co¬
dex." The Romans also
wrote on parchment and
on paper made from
papyrus pulp (Mural at
Pompeii. 70 A.D.).
© Handke, Historisches Bild¬
archiv, Bad Berneck, Federal
Republic of Germany.
fa *i\"
. - i

*i"
ANCESTORS OF THE BALL-POINT PEN
o RIGINALLY the Chinese wrote with a bamboo
reed sharpened and cut like a pen: the matter
written with this had to be of uniform thickness. On the
bones employed in divination characters were incised with
a metal point. But the writing-brush, although its invention
is traditionally ascribed to Meng-T'ien under the Ch'in
dynasty (third century B.C.), already existed in the twelfth
century. It is not only represented on a pictogram of Anyang,
but at least three bones and a potsherd carry characters
traced with a brush. So Meng-T'ien did no more than
perfect the shape and composition of an instrument which
was already in being.
Writing materials in the Middle Eastern and classical
worlds were very varied. One reason was that after the
invention and spread of alphabetic methods the use of
writing proportionately increased, and consequently also
demanded lower priced material even if it was more
perishable. Naturally the increase in written documents
and the lower price of writing material went hand-in-hand
with the increase in the number of readers.
We start, then, with writings carved with chisels or simi¬
lar Instruments on rocks or plates or stone and marble
by Luigi Pareti
stelae. They might also be cut on the fronts of buildings,
or on tablets of bronze, copper, lead, or precious metal,
and later on coins and weights; or again they could be
scratched or tooled on tablets and seals of unbaked clay
or terracotta. To these were now added other writings
achieved in diverse ways.
Some were traced with the stilus on smooth wooden
tablets, or on tablets smeared with white paint {tabulae
dealbatae) or coloured. Others were written with the
small reed called a "calamus", and with ink {atramentum),
on light and plastic material. Leaves of papyrus pulp, or
some similar substance, are an example mentioned by Pliny,
and there was writing on olive leaves (the petalism at
Syracuse for instance), on linen bandages (especially those
used as coverings for mummified corpses in Egypt), on
earthenware sherds {ostraka) and so on. Later on Phoeni¬
cian influence was particularly responsible for the use of
calf-skin for expensive documents; and sheepskin (Perga-
mena) came in from Pergamum in Asia Minor. Skins were
used for inscribing the ancient treaty between Rome and OC
Gabil and also for a cypher employed at Sparta: for the "
latter strips of skin were wrapped in a spiral on to a cylinder
of given size and then inscribed, in such way that they
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE ANCIENT WORLD (Cont'd)
Assyrian royal library of 30,000 tablets
26
could only be read if they were wrapped once more round
an identical cylinder (scutate).
In ancient Egypt it was already the custom, when one
wanted to write a complete document or a definitive part of
a work, to paste one pressed papyrus leaf (byblos) on to
another and so to construct long strips; these were wrapped
together into a roll (volumen) and kept in a store (thece).
Herodotus (II, 92) speaks, of this device, though he does
not tell us when Greece acquired it: probably it penetrated
to Ionia in the days of Polycrates of Samos in the sixth
century, and to the rest of Greece about 500. Where tablets
or smoothed skins were used, they were joined together
into codices; and these, on account of their high price,
were often used more than once, the first set of writings
being cancelled and a further set being written over them.
A brief note must be made about the earliest methods
of writing in the American continents. Above all we must
mention certain mnemonic devices, like the notching of
sticks. There were the quipus or kipus, found especially
in Peru and Bolivia, which consist of a collection of strings
of different colours, with various types of knot either single
or in groups: these were genuine aides-mémoire for arith¬
metical data, for calculating the days or for matters of
statistical importance.
There were the wampum of the Iroquois in North America
which consist of figured and striped embroidery. In North
America too there were pictorial ideograms, carved mainly
on rocks, which were used to illustrate story-telling and to
keep records of arithmetical data: these often contain
representational figures with syllabic equivalents and look
like actual word-puzzles. Finally there are the illustrated
books of Panama, Colombia, etc., which helped in the
recitation of magical and religious texts.
But the Mayas and Aztecs of Mexico in early days
possessed real books made of folded bark: these were
covered with pictograms for ritual purposes, with calendars
for divination, with tribute registers and with annalistic
records. They also had stelae inscribed in bas-relief, on
which pictographic and syllabic elements are found side
by side.
But in all this the only objects likely to belong to late
antiquity are a bas relief on a stele at Vera Cruz and an
inscribed plaque now at Leyda7 These are assigned by
some scholars to the period around 320 A.D.
S written documents, both public and private,
'became more common, and as literary output
increased, it was necessary to consider better ways of
preserving and consulting writings, by bringing them toge¬
ther in suitable places. The classes of documents in question
were varied and important. The earliest which it was essen¬
tial to construct and preserve were state treaties, laws and
decrees, administrative acts, records of foreign relations,
chronicles both lay and sacerdotal, the acts of kings, and
the lists of priests and magistrates. All these were written
on relatively durable materials and were collected in royal
palaces, or in temple precincts and sacristies, or in the seats
of magistrates and of public assemblies.
Collections of official documents of these kinds are
known from finds. In Egypt the so-called Tell el Amarna
archives (14th century B.C.) contained the correspondence
with subject regions and neighbouring powers from the time
of Amenhotep III. In Crete we have the archives of the
Minoan palaces, and in the Hittite empire the archives of the
kings and leading cities.
In the ensuing period proper libraries came into being,
or at any rate departments for the preservation of literature
which adjoined the archives. One of the most characteristic
libraries known to us is that of Ashur-banipal (668-630), who
put on to its contents his stamp of ownership, his "ex
libris". Among these are 30,000 tablets of documents
contained in chests arranged on shelves. These include
receipts, levy lists, and his official and private correspon¬
dence. But in addition there are pieces of epic and mytho¬
logical poems; of liturgies and prayers; of magical writing,
psalms, oaths, and auguries; of annals, chronicles, and lists
of dates; of works on grammar and dictionaries; and of
astronomical calculations, tables of weights, and other
arithmetical writings. The king had sent scribes to many
places to copy ancient tablets. Another noteworthy library
is that of Nippur; and there were others owned by private
persons and by temples.
These Assyrian archives and libraries probably had their
precursors at Babylon and Bogazköy. They were followed
by similar institutions in the Persian capitals, among which
we know best the one instituted at Persepolis in the days
of Darius I.
HE first collections of literature, and therefore
the first libraries, in the Greek world must have
been made in the time of the sixth-century tyrants, Poly¬
crates of Samos and the Peisistratids of Athens. Later on
we are told of libraries belonging to individual literary men,
of whom the first is Euripides.
At the same time archives to preserve copies of important
private documents were on the increase. Examples of such
documents are conveyances, boundary plans, manu¬
missions, adoptions, and wills.
Education and the system of schools were also feeling the
effect of writing, and of written documents and work.
In early days the traditional ideas about religion and
techniques were learned in the family, or in priestly
colleges, or in unions of artisans, by means of mnemonic
methods. The teaching was oral, and the pupils com¬
mitted to memory what they learned. In our period this
was still the stage reached in education in India. The Indian
system of education was developing along clearly defined
lines. Writing was not used for religious purposes, and
oral tradition was therefore completely supreme: yet
instruction was confined to sacred matters. The study of
the Veda was given only to the first three castes, the Sudra
being excluded. From the beginning we see the sacred
texts being taught by a master and repeated by the pupils
in chorus "like the croaking of frogs" (Rigveda, VII, 103).
In Vedic times the religious students (ßrahmacarin) were
the educated class of India.
Their duties were to study the Veda, to serve their Brah¬
min masters (guru), and to maintain chastity. In very early
times the acceptance of a student into a school was con¬
ditioned by a complicated initiation ceremony, the upa-
nayana, through which the pupil received his second
(spiritual) birth and was therefore twice-born (dV/'/a). In the
Late Vedic period supplementary subjects, such as mathe¬
matics, grammar, and prosody, were added to the curri¬
culum. Education was originally confined to the Brahmins,
but was widened as time went on to include the Ksattriya
and Va/sya too: towards the end of our period a genuine
intellectual aristocracy came into being, with the Ksattriya
occupying a position at least equal to that of the Brahmins.
These are the circles in which Upanisadic thought took
shape. The sutra of Late Vedic times prescribe a detailed
curriculum, which already embraced all traditional Indian
knowledge, that is to say the six Vedanga (phonetics, ritual,
grammar, etymology, prosody, astronomy), together with
other ancillary sciences.

GURU AND DISCIPLES.
A 1 3th century stele of pol¬
ished stone from Konarak,
Orissa, India depicting a
Brahmin teacher (guru) of
ancient India, explaining
the meaning of religious
texts to his pupils. These
oral lessons, at first restric¬
ted to religious matters,
were later expanded to
include mathematics, gram¬
mar and scientific subjects.
© Victoria and Albert Museum.
London
£Á^mr.^
With other peoples, however, the use of writing became
an aid to education at an earlier stage. With some the basis
of education remained theocratic, for instance in Egypt or
among the Hebrews especially after the Captivity, when
it was carried on in synagogues. On the other hand in the
Graeco-Roman world lay education predominated; it was
sometimes private and sometimes public, the many forms it
assumed being dictated by the varying bents and environ¬
ments of the different peoples.
Within the precocious culture of the Ionian Greeks we
find a form apparently already known in the Homeric poems,
which was intermediate between instruction at home and
instruction at school, and which was provided by a "peda¬
gogue" privately employed. Side by side with this there
existed the genuine school, where physical education (the
palestra) was originally the main feature but gradually
tended to get separated from instruction in music and
grammar.
A law of Charondas mentioned by Diodorus (XII, 12-13)
is often cited as evidence that masters were paid by the
state and experiments in compulsory education were already
known in the seventh century; but in all probability this is
not the original law made at Catana, but a revision of it
made in the middle of the fifth century at Thurii. Doubt has
also been cast on the passage of Aeschines purporting to
describe Solonian legislation on education.
The first certain case of a . state school, recorded by
Plutarch, relates to Troezen in 480. Meanwhile particular
importance was assumed by the schools of a domestic, or
professional, nature which were gradually created to pre¬
serve and advance the writings of various groups the Epic
poets (Homeridai), the doctors (in the Asclepieia), the
philosophers, and the mathematicians (cf. the Pythagoreans).
The Dorian world, Sparta or Crete for example, presents
a contrast. There, at any rate from the ninth or seventh
century onwards, the paramount feature was a militarist
education provided by the state; and letters were sacrificed
in favour of physical and athletic instruction.
A characteristic instance of individual arrangements is
provided by archaic Rome. After the end of the domination
exercised in the sixth, century by the more civilized Etrus¬
cans, the well-to-do families preserved the custom of
sending their sons to get instruction at Caere (Vol. II Pt. I).
27
