This striking photo shows how the massive
walls of the fort of Sant'Andrea in Venice
have split open and begun to collapse into
the sea. The fort at the entrance to the
port of Venice, was built in the 16th
century by the famous architect, Michel
Sammicheli. In all parts of Venice great
monuments are gradually subsiding.
Soprintendenza ai Monumenti

VENICE
a sinking city
by Pietro Gazzola
State Inspector of Antiques and Fine Arts, Rome
^^W ITH its graceful buildings and the incomparable
magic of its light and colours, Venice is a spec¬
tacle that makes us forget the fragile foundations beneath
its architectural splendours. Venice, nevertheless, is a
sinking city.
Built on wooden piles driven into the mud of several
hundred tiny islands separated by a thousand canals that
are now its streets and avenues, Venice first used the sea
as a natural protective rampart against the hordes of bar¬
barians which swept over the mainland in the 5th century
A.D. Gradually it became one of the most beautiful and
unusual cities the world has ever known.
Washed by the clear waters of the Adriatic, Venice evol¬
ved, not in some haphazard fashion, but on the basis of
strict scientific principles. Its builders had precise know¬
ledge of the marine depths around it and were able to
calculate with accuracy the relationship between river
currents and the surge of the tides. The result was a
harmony so perfect that Venice seems to have arisen from
a single, almost miraculous act of creation.
But today this remarkable monument to science and
vision is in danger. Its deepest foundations are being
worn away and the city is slowly sinking, dragged down
by the subsidence of part of the lagoon bed.
Surveys show that Venice has sunk 111 millimetres (four
inches) in the past fifty years. Actually, according to the
Venetian Institute of Arts and Sciences, the subsidence
varies from place to place. Beneath the soaring Campanile,
or bell tower, of St. Mark's in the heart of the city, the.,,
ground has sunk 183 millimetres (seven inches).
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ST. MARK'S IN THE WATER. The Campanile of St. Mark's has sunk
seven inches in the past 50 years. Above, high tides have flooded the
famous square in front of the Xlth-century cathedral. St. Mark's and
the Doge's Palace in the background seem to be standing directly in the
Venice lagoon. The Campanile can be made out in air view, below.
Archivío Artístico

VENICE, A SINKING CITY (Cont'd)
When industrial expansion created a need for swifter,
more direct communications, Venice deepened its existing
canals and made new ones. But the courses of the new
waterways were contrary to Nature's system of currents
and upset the natural balance of the lagoon waters.
The old canals were man-made but they kept logically
to the meandering of the currents; artificially straight, the
new ones were subjected to a greater impact of tidal ebb
and flow. Currents and eddies of unprecedented force
began to strike at the foundations and sub-foundations of
the city until surface subsidence showed that they were
eating into the deepest layers. The most spectacular and
alarming symptom was the partial collapse of the walls of
the fortress of Sant Andrea on the Lido.
The only way to avert these dangers is to restore the
harmony of the system on which Venice Is "anchored"
before it becomes irreparably compromised.
Another danger threatening Venice is erosion. This has
become worse in recent years because of the great fleet of
motor boats which have progressively replaced the gondola,
once the traditional means of transport in a city of 378
bridges where the use of motor-cars is ruled out. The
great surge of water raised by the passage of these power¬
ful motor boats through the canals gnaws away at the
city's foundations.
Erosion is also to blame for worsening decay in the
foundations of buildings attacked by salt water, whose
corrosive power is Increased by the deposits of oil ejected
from motor launches. Since the canals were deepened
they have been more affected by tides, and as tidal move¬
ments carry off sand from one part of the sea bed to
CITIES IN A CITY.
Each square or "campo"
of Venice is a miniature
replica of the piazza
San Marco with its bell
tower, its church, foun¬
tains and open market.
Campanile in photo
above right can just
barely be seen to left
of square. Venice boasts
not only its innumerable
canals and bridges,
large and small, but a
meandering network of
narrow streets and alleys
which no motor vehicle
could possibly enter.
AIR VIEW. Washed by
the waters of the Adri¬
atic, Venice was built on
370 tiny islands in the
lagoon. An automobile
and railway viaduct
(foreground) leads from
the mainland into the
city like an umbilical
cord. At the end of
the viaduct motorists
must leave their cars and
"take to the boats."
Venice's main water¬
way is the S-shaped
Grand Canal which cuts
the city in two. To the
seaward side of Venice
is the Lido beach.
Photos O Archivío Borlui
another, erosion increases. The famous Lido beach, for
example, has been reduced to a narrow ribbon of sand
whereas a few miles away, at Punta Sabbioni, a new beach
is being built up.
The exceptional structure of Venice poses singular prob¬
lems and demands constant watchfulness and super¬
vision by the city authorities. With its magnificent Byzan¬
tine, Gothic and Renaissance buildings and others of a
distinctively Venetian style it presents a unique architec¬
tural ensemble. But these buildings too are subject to
ills, old and new: saline erosion, the droppings of pigeons,
pollution from the air. All these take their toll, eating away
the ornamental facades of palaces and churches and
modest houses alike.
Decay has gradually reduced whole areas to a state of
picturesque semi-ruin, where the inhabitants seem to care
less and less about the state of the buildings and where
many edifices of great architectural beauty now serve as
storehouses or have become slum-dwellings. Yet even
these less important architectural elements still add
something to the character of the city and should be pre¬
served and revived.
Only a comprehensive plan of rehabilitation can save
Venice. In view of the vulnerability of its foundations the
whole. question of transportation will need to be reviewed.
Individual solutions will have to be found for each prob¬
lem, including possible revision of the paths of canals
and the rehabilitation of the poorer districts. This will not
only open the way to further social and economic progress,
but will safeguard the city's great wealth of monuments
13
