UNESCO AND THE WORLD
OF BOOKS
by Julian Behrstock
0^ OOKS permeate the whole of Unesco's pro-
*^ gramme to such an extent that it is difficult
to isolate and define them as a separate factor. They are
basic to the achievement of almost all of the Organiza¬
tion's objectives universal primary education no less than
the mutual appreciation of cultural values or the advance¬
ment of science and technology.
Unesco's interest in books stems from its Constitution,
which assigns to it the promotion of "the free flow of
ideas by word and image" and of measures designed "to
give the people of all countries access to the printed
and published material produced by any of them." Twenty
years later this Constitutional point was reaffirmed by the
General Conference of Unesco in a resolution calling atten¬
tion to "the importance of publishing activities" and laying
the foundations for a new programme of action in the
book field.
As this new programme takes shape, a backward glance
at the work of the preceding two decades also shows a
wide-ranging record of achievement. For example:
A Universal Copyright Convention was established assur¬
ing a just recompense for authors and at the same time
encouraging the publication and distribution of their works
in countries other than their own. The Convention filled
a significant gap in international copyright legislation.
An international agreement was adopted removing tariff
and other trade obstacles to the free flow of books. The
agreement became widely accepted as an international
standard for the unimpeded circulation of books throughout
the world. Two other international agreements granted
facilities for the international exchange of educational and
government publications.
A coupon scheme was instituted overcoming foreign
currency difficulties. Some 27 million dollars in coupons
were issued for the purchase of books and other publi¬
cations.
Postal and transport charges for the dispatch of books
were lowered as a result of Unesco proposals to interna¬
tional rate-fixing organizations.
In order to help chart systematically the world pattern of
the book trade, a recommendation was adopted establish¬
ing international standards for the uniform classification
of book statistics.
A centre for the promotion of reading materials in South
Asia was established at Karachi in 1958. It conducted
workshops and seminars on all aspects of the book trade;
encouraged the development of professional associations;
awarded some 50 fellowships for training abroad; and was
responsible for the appearance of about 400 publications
in the languages of the region.
In Africa two centres were set up which helped to
promote educational publishing. One, at Accra (Ghana),
held seminars in West and East Africa on the preparation
of textbooks, including the training of authors and illustra
tors. The other, at Yaounde- (Cameroon), equipped with
a publishing unit, printed textbooks for various classroom
levels as well as reading materials for newly literate adults.
Through the intermediary of Unesco, textbooks for African
schools were also printed abroad without charge.
Writers in the developing countries were encouraged
and trained at literary workshops and were awarded travel
grants for the gathering of material. In the specialized
field of science writing, the first of a series of pilot
projects was launched at Sao Paulo (Brazil) where Latin
American professors acquired training to undertake local
authorship of science materials for the classroom.
To stimulate and develop public libraries, which in some
countries account for the purchase of half of all works
distributed, model libraries were created at New Delhi,
Medellin (Colombia) and Enegu (Nigeria). Training centres
for librarianship were established at Dakar (Senegal) and
Kampala (Uganda). National bibliographical centres were
similarly assisted and publications issued which provided
up-to-date information on the availability of books.
A Unesco Collection of Representative Works served to
make more widely known, in translation, outstanding lite¬
rary works drawn from diverse cultures. Almost 200 works
were translated from some 40 different languages and
published in English and French. Index Translationum
was published annually listing books published throughout
the world during the previous year which are translations
from the original version. The 16th edition in 1965 listed
some 35,000 translations published in 69 countries (see
p. 34).
Studies were published, such as "Books for All", by
R.E. Barker, which reviewed and focussed public attention
on obstacles to the flow of books. ("The Revolution in
Books", by Robert Escarpit, which has just been published
in French [see page 4] is a sequel to the Barker study
published ten years earlier). A brochure on "Books for the
Developing Countries" has been published in 1965.
Studies on books were but one aspect of Unesco's
concern with publishing during the past two decades.
Unesco initiated or itself published a total of some 4,000
titles, in which an array of subjects in all its fields of
interest were looked at from an international point of view.
An indirect contribution to book promotion was the
Unesco campaign to combat illiteracy and so to add to
the ranks of the reading public the many millions at present
unable to read or write, who number more than two-fifths
of the adult population of the globe.
The list could be lengthened but it suffices to show the
broad range and concrete character of book activities
throughout the whole of Unesco's programme.
These activities evolved during a period of swift change n-t
in the world pattern of book production and consumption. ¿'
It was during this period from the mid-1 940s to the
mid-1960's that advances in printing, publishing and distri-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Textbooks make up 90 °/o of all books
in the developing nations
bution techniques made it feasible to produce low-priced
good-quality books on a vast scale. It was then, too, that
the paperback phenomenon achieved the proportions of a
"revolution", in which a million copies a day were sold
in one country alone.
T the same time, although the demand for
Lbooks in the developing countries surged
forward on the tide of indépendance, production remains
sharply below the requirements of their peoples. Asia
(Japan excepted), with more than half of the world's
population, accounts for only 17 per cent of the 400,000
or so book titles appearing annually throughout the world.
In Africa, fewer than ten countries regularly publish books
and the number of titles is less than two per cent of the
world total.
Hence the larger proportion by far of books being read
in most parts of Asia and especially of Africa continues to
be produced in technically advanced countries chiefly
those of Europe and North America. Yet, great as are
the present needs for books in the developing countries,
the spread of literacy and increases in population and
per capita income presage a more acute situation in the
years ahead.
Increasing the flow of books from present world centres
of production, however necessary, is recognized to be
only a stop-gap solution. National aspirations, expansion
of domestic industry and, above all, the production of
books closely attuned to the readers' culture and tastes
all these factors impel the developing countries to establish
their own capacity to write, publish and distribute books.
The creation of indigenous publishing industries in Asia
and Africa, however, encounters formidable deficiencies in
almost all the resources and skills required, ranging from
authorship to printing facilities, from paper supplies to
managerial personnel.
The first claim on meagre publishing facilities, moreover,
inevitably has been the production of books for the class¬
room. So pronounced has been the trend that textbooks
are now estimated to account for no less than 90 per cent
of all books read in the developing countries. The result
is an undiversified publishing pattern, offering relatively
limited fare for general readers, including new literates.
Thus, the "book gap", as it has come to be termed, widens
as the extension of education extends the demand for text¬
books to train new generations of readers whose book
appetites will, in turn, require a more variegated publishing
output.
I
22
T was against this background of striking tech¬
nological progress, on the one hand, and of vast
unfulfilled needs, on the other, that the General Conference
of Unesco, in November 1964, considered a proposal
submitted by the delegation of Czechoslovakia for Unesco
to embark on a new programme of book development. Two
months earlier a similar proposal had emerged from a
meeting convened at Washington, D.C. by the U.S. Agency
for International Development in which it was recommended
that Unesco should assume a role of leadership in the book
development field. The premise underlying both proposals
was that, in addition to its continuing book activities, the
time had now come for Unesco to make a concerned attack
on the central problem of helping to build indigenous
publishing capacity in the developing countries.
The General Conference resolution, adopted unani¬
mously, noted the importance of publications in "fostering
mutual understanding and economic and social develop¬
ment." It called for action "to stimulate and encourage the
publication of low-priced books, particularly for newly
literate adults and for young people in the developing
countries." Finally, it invited all concerned to study means
of strengthening international co-operation in the field of
publishing and dissemination of literature.
More specifically, the General Conference took three
decisions. The first was that the development programme
would be launched with a series of regional conferences,
the first for Asia in 1966; a second, for Africa, was envisaged
for 1967; and a third was to be held subsequently for Latin
America. Secondly, primary responsibility for the develop¬
ment programme was centred in one section of the Unesco
Secretariat, thus establishing for the first time a focal point
for the Organization's diverse book activities. Thirdly, the
General Conference invited the Director-General to con¬
sider presenting for 1967-1968 a co-ordinated programme
designed to promote the production and distribution of
books in the developing countries.
HE first of the regional conferences is scheduled
for Tokyo in the Spring of 1966. It will bring
together experts from all Asian Member States and in the
diverse fields involved ranging from authorship and copy¬
right to printing and publishing techniques. The purpose
will be to assess the long-term book needs of the Asian
countries and to draw up a programme of action.
It may be anticipated that the Asian countries will look
to the Conference above all for help in formulating
systematic policies for national book development in which
books are assured of adequate priority within the frame¬
work of economic and social planning. The Conference
may also assist the more advanced countries in shaping
and co-ordinating their bilateral aid programmes so as to
meet more effectively the needs of the Asian countries.
It ¡s hoped that the reports emerging from the Asian and
the subsequent African and Latin American meetings will
also serve as a basis for increased international assistance.
A parallel exists with the similar survey conducted by
Unesco in the three regions in the 1960-1962 period on
development of press, radio, film and television and which
resulted ¡n increased recognition of the mass media as a
sphere for technical assistance. The forthcoming cycle of
conferences should similarly establish the claim for books.
A hopeful sign for the future of the book development
programme is the confidence and interest it has already
elicited not only from governments but also from the
publishing profession. There is an evident feeling that
Unesco has a significant role to play in helping to harness
the forces of the revolution in books for the benefit of all.
JULIAN BEHRSTOCK is head of Unesco's Division of Free Flow of
Information, In the Department of Mass Communication, which deals
with Unesco's programme for book development.
