With the launching of the communi¬
cations satellite "Early Bird " (right)
from Cape Kennedy, U.S.A., on
April 6, the world now has a " tele¬
phone exchange " in outer space.
The new satellite will also be used
for transmitting telegraph messages
and TV pictures above the Atlantic.
Capable of transmitting simultane¬
ously 240 two-way telephone conver¬
sations, " Early Bird " has now to be
tried out experimentally for two
months. " Early Bird " is on an equa¬
torial orbit at a height of 22,300
miles and keeps pace with the earth's
rotation, thus appearing to hover at
the same spot. The telecommunica¬
tions revolution began a little over a
century ago with the electric telegraph.
To the world of the 1840s, the tele¬
graph with its lines alongside the
railway track (left) also seemed an
astounding invention at the time.

1865-1965 TELE
COMMUNICATIONS
A century
of international co-operation
4
he International Telecommunications Union (ITU),
oldest of the United Nations specialized agencies, is
celebrating its 100th birthday in 1965, designated by the United
Nations as International Co-operation Year. The ITU was born
as the International Telegraph Union, on May 17, 1865, when
the growing network of electric telegraph lines linking country
to country had shown the need for international agreement
on communication procedures and regulations. Thirty-five years
later the first radio transmissions opened up another new era
in telecommunication. Radio, broadcasting, television and other
technological achievements during the past fifty years have
all brought increasing responsibilities to the ITU. Today, as
the ITU enters its second century, the contributions it is
making to the development of space communications show that
it is already planning for the needs of tomorrow's world.

USIS
It might seem surprising that the ITU already has a cen¬
tury of achievements in peaceful international co-operation
to its credit. Nothing, surely, could be more modern than
telecommunications, with telex and television, with radio
helping us to reach out into space and the prospect of
our telephone calls travelling along beams of light. And
yet perhaps this juxtaposition of old and new is not so
strange. For what after all is "telecommunication" ?
Human societies, as they developed and began to
master the concept of distance, worked out a number of
ingenious ways for communicating over the vast areas
which separated them. Mostly, messengers of one kind or
another were used. But there were also methods involving
direct sight and sound drums in the jungle, beacons along
the coast, smoke signals on the horizon. These methods,
picturesque to-day, were strictly practical solutions
devised by man's imagination for overcoming the obstacles
that distance placed in the way of his basic need to
communicate. They were the first real telecommunications.
From the early dawn of civilization until a little over
100 years ago man did not get much further than the
written message, the drum, the beacon and the smoke
signal in his efforts to communicate at long distance. One
of the last devices was an "optical telegraph" or sema¬
phore invented by Claude Chappe, a Frenchman, at the end
of the 18th century. Signal towers with movable arms were
set on hilltops a few kilometres apart. Messages spelt out
by different positions of the arms were read by telescope
from one tower to another and passed on. The system
worked quite fast on clear days but was useless at night
or in fog.
With the development of electricity in the first half of _
the 19th century, man's capacity for practical achievement J
was suddenly enlarged a hundredfold. Nowhere was this
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Left, in 1791, a French
engineer, Claude
Chappe, first demons¬
trates his visual tele¬
graph system. Signal
towers with movable
arms were set on
hilltops a few kilo¬
metres apart. Mes¬
sages spelt out by dif¬
ferent positions of
the arms were read
by telescope from one
tower to another and
passed on. When, in
1 852, Chappe's system
was finally superseded
by the system of
electrical telegraphy,
France was covered
by a network of 556
semaphore stations
stretching over 3,000
miles (3,800 kms).
Laying the first trans-
Atlantic cable. In July
1858 a British vessel,
H.M.A. Agamemnon
(shown here) and an
American ship, the
U.S.N.S. Niagara, link¬
ed cables in mid-At¬
lantic and set out for
their respective home
ports. Eight days
later, on August 5,
1858, the first trans-
Atlantictelegraph mes¬
sage was transmitted.
ITU photos

TELECOMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd)
When telegraph networks halted at frontiers
seen more dramatically than in the invention of the electric
telegraph, of which the first known line was operated in
1837 and the first public line opened by Samuel Morse
in 1844. Its possibilities for commerce, for the new rail¬
ways, in diplomacy, in personal crises aroused an im¬
mediate tide of enthusiasm which, by 1849, had carried the
telegraph networks of European countries up to national
frontiers. And that was the start of the problems which,
sixteen years later, called into- existence the ITU.
At first, for example, international telegrams had to be
written down on a piece of paper and carried across the
border by a messenger at each frontier they passed. Then
there was the question of dividing the charges of the tele¬
grams between the countries which carried them. These
and other problems, for the most part totally new in inter¬
national relations, finally led the Emperor Napoleon III in
1864 to invite the major countries of Europe to a conference
to bring uniformity into the international telegraph system.
It was in May of 1865 that the delegates of twenty. nations
assembled in Paris. Among the states represented were
Baden, Saxony, Württemberg and a single Norway-Sweden.
The Turkish delegation had come part of the way on horse¬
back. Great Britain had not been invited because its tele¬
graph services, unlike those of other European nations,
were still in private hands. Paris at the time was discussing
Jules Verne's latest book, "De la Terre à la Lune" (From the
Earth to the Moon) a subject of some practical importance
to an ITU Conference 98 years later.
The Convention that was signed on May 17, 1865 created
the International Telegraph Union and brought common
rules to Europe's international telegraph system. Uniform
tariff rates were agreed on (except, understandably, for the
easternmost regions of the Russian and Turkish Empires)
and the French gold franc was made the currency for the
payment of International accounts.
HIS historic conference was followed in 1868
by one in Vienna which took a decision of
almost equal importance for the history of international
organizations. It set up a headquarters with a Secretariat.
The headquarters, established in Berne as the Bureau of
the Union, was under the control of the Swiss Government
until 1947 and started of with a staff of three Swiss citizens.
Modest though this beginning may have been, the principle
was made clear for the future that international government
organizations need a home and servants.
Throughout the rest of the 19th century the Union pushed
purposefully ahead, holding a succession of larger and
larger conferences in the romantically-tinted capitals of a
now-forgotten Europe. It revised and redrafted the Inter¬
national Telegraph Regulations, sternly forbade telegrams
against public order or decency, tirelessly wrestled with
legal and financial problems, wondered whether the wide¬
spread use of private codes might not be imposing too
great a strain-on ordinary telegraphists. In 1885 it also took
to legislating internationally for the telephone which had
been launched by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876. It grew.
In 1895 and 1896, the first successful wireless transmis¬
sions, crowning decades of research and experiment,
brought about what is still the greatest revolution in the
history of telecommunications. The invention of radio, one
of the proudest conquests that science can point to, will
always be associated with such names as James Maxwell,
Heinrich Hertz, Oliver Lodge, Alexander Popov, Guglielmo
Marconi and Lee De Forest.
T first regarded purely as a radically advanced
form of telegraphy, radio spread across the inter¬
national scene even more rapidly than the parent invention,
for the first time bringing ships at sea within the reach of
telecommunications. It became clear with equal rapidity
that international regulations were needed.
One major problem was highlighted as early as 1902,
when Prince Henry of Prussia, returning across the Atlantic
from a visit to the United States, attempted to send a
courtesy message to President Theodore Roosevelt, only
to have it refused because the radio equipment on the ship
was of different type and nationality from that at the shore
station.
Partly as a result of this incident, the German Govern¬
ment called a preliminary radio conference in Berlin in 1903
which prepared the way for the Berlin Radio Conference
of 1906. The 1906 Conference drew up the first Inter¬
national Radio Regulations, incorporating the principle that
ship and coastal radio stations must accept messages from
each other and adopting the SOS distress signal.
The problem of ensuring effective radio communications
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
The "heroic age" of radio broadcasting. In the early
1920's a radio service for the general public began to
develop. This raised the problem of sharing out radio
frequencies so as to avoid interference between
stations still one of the ITU's vital responsibilities.
CSF, Paris

A NEW ERA : SPACEVISION
New tools and new techniques have taken telecommuni¬
cations into the space age. Experimental communication
satellites placed in orbit around the earth have re-transmitted
television programmes across the Atlantic and have opened
a new era in long-distance communication. Left, artist's
impression of two communication satellites, "Syncom"
(top) and "Telstar". Below, first U.S. satellite commu¬
nications ship. Huge cupola on upper deck is the Radome
housing radar and other communications equipment. Right,
tracking a spacecraft orbiting the earth. Spacecraft is pin¬
pointed by bright light on map. It has just passed over
Zanzibar on its 16th orbit. Tracking stations are shown
on map and the circles around them indicate their range.
Photos usis
.1 .
"1^
jklS¿i§a!\TE
w
^#m.
k~*rs?
'****r

"¡A
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (Cont'd)
8
i CLEUummunibMi luno ii*umuy
15 per cent of radio spectrum for outer space
at sea were far from solved, as was shown dramatically
in 1912 when the desperate operator of the sinking "Titanic"
was unable to communicate with a ship within rescue
distance simply because its operator had gone off-duty
for the night. But a start had nevertheless been made
toward solving them.
The next decade saw great progress in the development
of radio and then, in the early 1920's, a new kind of radio
service began broadcasting. All -this gave rise to a new
problem how to share out the radio frequencies over
which transmissions travel so as to avoid the otherwise
inevitable interference between stations.
Since the use of radio constantly grows, it is a problem
which has to go on being solved all the time, and now
to-day, four decades and many conferences later, the inter¬
national responsibility for radio frequencies remains one of
the Union's heaviest and most vital jobs. The first move
was made at the Washington Radio Conference of 1927
which proceeded by allocating bands of frequencies to all
of the different radio services including maritime and
broadcasting.
In 1932, at Madrid, the organization took the formal
step of changing its name to the International Telecommu¬
nication Union, thereby embracing in its title the full range
of its new responsibilities. And indeed radio was bringing
in a new communication age. The 1930s saw the develop¬
ment of both television and radar. In the 1940s the speed
of the technological advance became more rapid. Wartime
broadcasting also made the world vividly aware that fre¬
quencies are free of frontiers. It was not hard to see that
much wider international agreement on radio would be
needed in the future.
Thus, two ITU Conferences met in Atlantic City in 1947
with the aims of magnifying and modernizing the Union.
Under an agreement with the United Nations, the ITU

'HIM
. »J '.%"!-
mm
;*-s?fe;'
M . :.-
k* .»»«Uf #
became a specialized agency and its headquarters were
transferred from Berne to- the traditionally international
atmosphere of Geneva.
As a result of decisions taken at Atlantic City, ITU head¬
quarters now harbour the staff of its four permanent organs
the General Secretariat, the International Frequency Re¬
gistration Board and two International Consultative Commit¬
tees (for radio and for telegraphy and telephony).
The advent of the Space Age has thrown the ITU a
new challenge, since man's exploration- of outer space
depends on radio. To meet the new demand, the Union
held a special world Space Radiocommunication Conference
in Geneva in 1963, at which more than 6,000 megacycles
were allocated for outer space (roughly speaking, 15 per
cent of the entire radio frequency spectrum).
Thus, this period of a hundred years, which began
with those who wanted to hear faster from abroad, has
been rounded off with those who want to listen closer
to the stars.
A hundred years of international co-operation. It can
be seen in the' regulations which govern the operation
of telegraphy, telephony and radio around the world. It
can be seen in the acceptance by ITU member countries of
the radio frequency allocations which determine the assign¬
ments they themselves make to their own radio stations.
It can be seen in the work of the ITU Plan Committee
which is drawing the blue-print for a future world network
in which telephone subscribers will' be able to dial each
other from anywhere to anywhere. It can be seen in the
Union's Technical Co-operation programme which is train¬
ing the engineers of new countries in the newest of tech¬
niques. It can be seen in the simple fact that it is pos¬
sible to telephone to another country or listen to a foreign
radio programme.
A hundred years of international co-operation which has
helped to make possible the amazing scientific and eco¬
nomic progress of this last century and which has, in
the quiet succession of its practical achievements, estab¬
lished the Union as a prototype of the sane collective
future that we seek.
In celebration of its centenary, the International Tele- Q
communication Union, in Geneva, is publishing a special **
book on the story of communications, "From Semaphore to
Satellite', by Dr. Anthony R. Michaelis.
