To the young people of the world
a message
from René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
for the New Year 7965
HE New Year opens. The institutions of the United Nations have decided
to dedicate it to the cause of international co-operation, which they intend
not only to celebrate with words, but also to demonstrate with deeds. May this then
be the theme of my message, which carries with it my very best wishes to you,
my young friends throughout the world.
International co-operation is both a necessity and an ideal.
It is a necessity for modern civilization, because the opportunities for development
which this civilization offers can only be exploited, the problems of development
which it presents can only be resolved, by organizing the communication of know¬
ledge, the confrontation of ideas, the pooling of resources and the conjunction of
efforts within increasingly extensive and complex systems which transcend the
boundaries of nations, however vast and powerful these may be.
It is also an ideal and by that I do not mean a dream, but a moral impera¬
tive for men are coming to realize more and more that they are morally as well
as physically interdependent. Each of us is increasingly aware that he cannot be
completely happy if others are destitute or live under bondage, that he cannot be
really at peace with himself if others are waging war against one another in short,
that he cannot attain his full stature as a man if injustice and want are preventing
other men all of them from attaining that stature, like him and with him. I say
all of them, for, once we admit in our thoughts or in our deeds, that some shall be
excluded from humanity's family, we lose a part of our own individual humanity.
Such is the twofold justification for this international co-operation, which institu¬
tions like Unesco are designed to serve, and I call upon you to dedicate yourselves
to it from now onwards, with all the enthusiasm and generosity of your young years.
For, although international co-operation needs sound organization and technique
if it is to be effective, it cannot be achieved by those means alone. Even more,
it needs a certain openness of mind, a certain warmth of heart, in short a readiness
to serve, which itself implies a conversion to human brotherhood.
It is to this great cause that I call upon you to dedicate yourselves.
Please do not misunderstand me. I do not ask you to abandon those tasks which
you are to undertake within the context of your family, your career, your country.
I only ask you to remember, when carrying out these tasks, that you also belong
to a larger family, a broader life and a vaster community, which is mankind. I
ask you to realize that the meaning and value of your existence go beyond the
immediate confines of your own personal destiny and that you are taking part in
the same splendid adventure as the rest of mankind, an adventure which calls for
understanding and effort from all. Lastly I ask you to regard every man you meet
as a brother, that is, as your equal in dignity, with the same needs and the same
hopes, regardless of his race, country, language, social status or beliefs.
You are growing up in a period of technological miracles. Your generation will
reach the stars, but it is Man that I should like you, above all, to reach, to respect
and cherish, in yourselves and in others.
May 1965 allow you to progress towards this goal through co-operation and
concord, justice and peace!
Good luck to you, my friends! Be of good cheer and a Happy New Year to you!
