Educational
around
Reviewing Unesco's present work and
future plans, the Unesco General Conference
heard the views of 94 speakers, forty-
seven of them Ministers of Education. In
discussions on the world's educational
problems delegates reported on develop¬
ments in their own countries. Here we
present a few educational highlights from
these discussions. For other news of the
Unesco General Conference see page 34.
Costa Rica
Education has always been given a high priority in Costa
Rica where the two first presidents were schoolteachers
and primary education has been free since 1869. In 13
years (1950-63) Costa Rica increased school attendance
in the 7-12 age group by 21% (to 88%). Today more than
half the country's population aged under 25 attend schools
or universities.
Republic of Korea
Ninety-five per cent of primary school age children (about
five million) attend classes. To meet classroom shortages,
some classes are organized in two or three shifts. Korea
has a high literacy rate (about 90%).
Cuba
A nationwide campaign has reduced illiteracy from 23% in
1958 to 3.9%. Over two million people (out of seven million)
attended schools and universities in 1963. Since 1958 pri¬
mary school enrolment has almost doubled (1,280,000) and
5,000 extra classrooms have been built. Free and compul¬
sory education will be increased from six to nine years.
Bulgaria
Since 1939 student enrolment has increased tenfold. Recent
statistics rank Bulgaria in fourth place in the world for ratio
of students to total popuplation.
Tunisia
Helped by an educational planning policy introduced in
1962 school attendance has risen sharply. Compared with
ten years ago primary school enrolment has more than dou¬
bled and secondary school enrolment has tripled. The 1965-
68 Plan for Economic and Social Development includes a
literacy programme for 250,000 agricultural and industrial
workers.
Mexico
Five hundred and forty-six new secondary schools will be
built in Mexico following a decree recently signed by
President Gustavo Doas Ordaz. Mexico is now building
primary -schools at the rate of 4,000 a year.
Saudi Arabia
Progress in providing education for girls is revealed by a
tripled enrolment in the past three years. Four special
schools for the blind have been opened, including one for
girls. A new university has been set up in Jedda, a higher
technical institute in Riydah and a petrology institute in
Dhahran,
Venezuela
Venezuela's campaign for literacy has reduced the national
illiteracy rate from 47% to 13% in six years. In the past
five years primary school enrolment has nearly doubled
and over 6,000 classrooms have been built. Over 26,000

the world
workers have been trained under a programme sponsored
by the Co-operative Education Institute which now plans
to give vocational training to 60,000 young people.
Iran
Secondary school graduates of military age are drafted
into an Educational Corps. After a short military course
and an intensive teaching course, recruits are sent to isola¬
ted villages for 14 months to teach children and adults.
Uruguay
In Uruguay, whose illiteracy rate (9.69%) is one of the
lowest in Latin America, education is free at all levels.
Over 95% of children now attend school. Secondary
school attendance has increased fourfold in the past two
decades with a sharp rise in rural areas. Over 35% of
university students and 53% of secondary school teachers
are women.
Ghana
Science teachers for secondary schools and teacher train¬
ing colleges are now being trained at the University College
of Science Education, Cape Coast. A Department of
Natural Resources is to be set up at the Faculty of
Technology of Kwame Nkrumah University and will give
science courses at a higher level.
Greece
Under a new law the following educational reforms are
planned: education at all levels from primary school to
university will be free; compulsory education will be
extended to the age of 15; new universities will be set up
at Janina and Patras and an Institute of Advanced Pedagogy
will be opened in Athens.
Congo (Brazzaville)
A five-year education plan will provide schooling for vir¬
tually all children between the ages of six and fourteen.
National goal for 1973 is to have nearly 5,000 classes and
over 220,000 pupils.
Democratic Republic of Congo
In the past four years primary school attendance increased
by half a million (to 2,000,000) and secondary school atten¬
dance has nearly quadrupled. The Congo has three uni¬
versities and ten institutes of higher education.
Libya
To overcome the shortage of secondary teachers, the
government has decided that all university graduates, except
those in medicine and engineering, will teach in secondary
schools for two years. This year the first engineers will
graduate from the Institute of Technology set up with
Unesco's aid.
Spain
The 1964-67 National Development Plan, includes the organi¬
zation of literacy classes for 1,700,000 adults; 5,000 teachers
have been trained in literacy class techniques. Education
is now compulsory up to the age of 14; a programme to
build 15,000 new schools has been launched.
Guinea
Under a seven-year economic development plan a campaign
has been launched to reduce the country's 90% illiteracy
rate. In the past six years primary schools have increased
five-fold to 1,459, and school attendance four-fold
to 170,000.
Malaysia
Malaysia devotes a quarter of its budget to education.
The introduction of free and compulsory education in 1961
has raised attendance of school age children to 94%.
\
X
In every part of the world progress in education depends on the
availability of more teachers on every level. Above, spacious hall of
the teacher training college at Ondo, 200 miles north east of Lagos
in Nigeria. Construction is not yet completed, but 450 students have
already been attending lectures since May 1964. Below, setting up
a library in the college. Unesco has sent a specialist adviser to Ondo,
has contributed audio-visual material and granted fellowships.
Photos Unesco - Almasy
