The menace
of the
bulldozers
by John O. Brew
President, International Committee
on Monuments
In the past 18 months Unesco has
carried out a broad inquiry into the
advisability of drawing up interna¬
tional regulations for the preservation
of cultural property endangered by
public and private works. The results
of this study based on replies from
some 40 member states were discussed
by the Unesco General Conference
which met in Paris last November,
and which felt that an international
instrument on this subject was needed.
It authorized Unesco's Director-Gene¬
ral to prepare a Draft Recommendation
to be submitted to the next General
Conference. The following article is
based on the preliminary Unesco study
prepared by Prof. J.O. Brew, Presi¬
dent of the International Committee
on Monuments and Director of the
Peabody Museum, Harvard University.
FOR centuries and even millennia, constructions
undertaken by man have destroyed vestiges of
his past. On the other hand, from that time In the remote
past when man evolved into a sentient being, some part of
his thoughts has ever been devoted to speculations about
his origin. The myths and folklore of our few remaining
primitive contemporaries bear witness to this pervading
tendency to speculate and seek evidence about the past.
All religions of which we have any evidence and all of our
various cultures are concerned with the history of how
they came into being, as well as with the present and the
future.
Formal attention to material remains as part of man's
search for knowledge of his past seems to have begun
with excavation in Italy and Greece of objects to provide
inspiration for the architects and sculptors of the Renais¬
sance. Later, in northern Europe, excavation produced
background for the romantic movement In literature and
art. In the New World, the first archaeological excavation
was an American Indian site dug by Thomas Jefferson in
Virginia in the latter part of the eighteenth century.
As the various peoples and civilizations of the world devel¬
oped and cities were built, as an increasing proportion of
the countryside was cleared for cultivation, destruction of
earlier sites or buildings was inevitable. Sporadic efforts
to counteract the results of such depredations appeared
during the closing decades of the nineteenth century. Tho
first archaeological salvage project in Poland was carried
out in 1883.
It was also during the mid-nineteenth century that Inte¬
rest developed In the preservation and restoration of monu¬
ments which had been erected earlier in history, at times
by peoples possessing cultural or religious traditions which
differed from the present populations. The famous Serpent
Mound in Ohio was saved from a housing development In
1887, excavated, and presented to the State of Ohio as a
State park by the Peabody Museum of Harvard University.
Perhaps the first attempts to modify or control modern
construction dated from this period, when groups of
buildings or even entire communities were protected in
order to preserve their character and historical aspect.
H OWEVER, it is the great technological develop-
'ment and expansion of population in the second
and third quarters of the twentieth century which produced
the crises with which we are now faced. National and local
governments have passed legislation which enables them,
or interested private bodies, to establish parks, and to
protect, preserve or restore national monuments and histo¬
ric and scenic areas for the enjoyment, recreation or educa¬
tion of the people.
Internationally, Unesco has not only sponsored instruments
dealing with some aspects of the problem of the safeguard¬
ing of sites and monuments, but has also aided many of
its member states, through the Programme of Participation
in the Activities of Member States, in the preservation of
their cultural heritage. The International Compaign to Safe¬
guard the Monuments of Nubia is an outstanding example.
There is no doubt, however, that extensive construction
projects will occur universally and will touch all countries,
great and small, in the next few years. No one with the
prosperity and well-being of mankind in mind could possibly
object to advantageous technological developments. The
benefits will be extraordinarily large to contemporary popu¬
lations. However, in attaining these indisputable gains, we
must also give full consideration to the other, more intan¬
gible, but none the less important, historical and cultural
values which play so great a part in the lives of all of us.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
33

MENACE OF THE BULLDOZERS (Cont'd)
The big culprits: motorways,
airports, dams and pipelines
Among the modern technological developments threat¬
ening our cultural properties, the best known are the cons¬
truction of dams for irrigation, hydro-electric power and
flood control. Eventually, this movement will spread to
almost all countries. These dams create pool areas of
various sizes, from small to extensive bodies of water.
Hundreds of them have already been built and are planned
in many countries.
These operations are particularly destructive of cultural
values in arid, semi-arid or prairie regions. In the great
Missouri drainage in the U.S.A., it Is estimated that 80% of
the prehistoric population lived directly on the banks of the
main stream or of its major tributaries. Dam construction
during the last fifteen years has submerged all of the
known sites of five major prehistoric cultures. The new
High Dam near Aswan will produce a pool extending from
the first to the third cataract on the Nile over 500 kilo¬
metres. (See our last issue.)
In dam construction projects, there are a number of
additional threats to cultural properties and sites apart from
those which may be included in the pool area. The cons¬
truction of a dam, particularly of a major dam, presupposes
a considerable network of access roads which almost
always damage archaeological sites or affect the ambiance
of existing monuments.
Then there is always the camp to house the construction
workers, which, in the case of a large dam, can achieve the
proportions of a good sized city. In addition, many dams,
even large ones, are earthen dams, which means that great
quantities of materials must be excavated and brought to
the dam site. Very often and, in fact, almost inevitably,
archaeological sites occur in the borrow areas from which
the earthen materials are extracted. All of these site and
material areas must be surveyed, and important sites exca¬
vated, before the work begins.
s!ëis
&$3i
34
NOTHER major threat to our cultural heritage
Ns highway construction. This might, in the long
run, be even more devastating than the river basin projects.
Many people still do not comprehend the damage to the
countryside occasioned by modern motorway construction.
The great transcontinental super highways programmes in
the U.S.A. and in Europe constitute, because of the width
of the right of way and the methods of construction, one of
the most active threats there is to our historical and
archaeological record. Many people consider that these
projects are more destructive than the construction of dams.
In highway construction, as in the dam projects, con¬
sideration must be given to areas quite outside the actual
right of way. The extensive quarries and borrow pits from
which gravels and other road metals are obtained also
constitute a major threat to archaeological sites. In many
areas of the world where such monuments as prehistoric
mounds, barrows and tels are found, these structures are
considered by highway engineers to be the cheapest and
easiest sources for material for fills and other construction
needs.
Another important aspect of modern technology in which
provision must be made for the conservation of cultural
values Is the construction of pipelines for oil and natural
\ %*
'"'VI'
The Great Serpent Mound in
Adams County, Ohio, U.S.A., is
one of the most famous of the
earth monuments raised by the
prehistoric ancestors of the Red
Indians in North America, where
many mounds representing birds,
bears and other animals exist.
The Great Serpent Mound (1,350
feet long) is the largest in the
form of a snake. In 1887 it was
saved from destruction as a pro¬
posed site for a housing deve¬
lopment. The ground was pur¬
chased by the Peabody Museum
of Harvard University, excavated
and presented to the State of Ohio.
Development Department. Ohio
(j
gas. Such projects, because of the accidental fact that
the sources of oil and gas are usually in regions of the
world which contain important prehistoric sites or monu¬
ments, almost always cut through and destroy significant
cultural remains.
The construction of power transmission lines, of both
underground and pylon types, is another source of damage
to sites. In Sweden, where these are always built by the
State, provision for archaeological salvage is made; In
countries where such construction is done by private com¬
panies, it is more difficult to control. In the U.S.A., effec¬
tive co-operation has been worked out between power com¬
panies and State and local museums in Arizona and New
Mexico.
Farming operations have always been a major threat to
archaeological sites and historic monuments. Clearing of
land and ordinary cultivation has probably done more
damage to such sites in the past than any other single
agency of our technology. Modern farming techniques,
however, have increased this danger greatly.
Cities are expanding at an extraordinary rate all over the
world. With this expansion comes, inevitably, the destruc¬
tion of thousands of archaeological and historical sites, as
well as many buildings which in themselves may not be
worth conserving as national monuments, but which, as a
whole, constitute a witness to a previous stage of develop¬
ment.
Along with the expansion of the areas of cities, there has
also come into being In recent years extensive projects for

^W*
the redevelopment of the centre of the city well. In
many European countries this was precipitated by destruc¬
tion through bombing during the Second World War. Most
important cities are built upon sites where people have had
their cultural centres for many centuries and, in fact,
millennia.
In the present decade, similar situations have developed
in cities which did not suffer from war damage. Not only
are urban areas expanding rapidly into the surrounding
countryside, but also the older, obsolete buildings in the
centres of cities are being taken down and large areas have
become subject to "redevelopment". In many instances,
the threat of such development has required that some of
the old buildings be scheduled as monuments and preser¬
ved. It is certain that this process will continue and provi¬
sion must also be made for salvage of the underlying
archaeological remains before new construction takes place.
Examples can be cited of work already done by many
Unesco Member States. In Norway, more than twenty
excavations have been made in urban areas which have
produced over 150,000 early implements and the remains
of thirty medieval ships. The problem of urban develop¬
ment in Sweden is perhaps the most extreme of all the
states. Thirty years ago, 85% of the population lived in
agricultural communities. Now only 15% reside on farms.
Provision is made for open areas and historical and
archaeological monuments in the urban developments, but
again this protection applies only to the most outstanding
sites. Protection must still be sought for many important
sites and buildings which will be destroyed in this urban
expansion and which are not of the first magnitude, entitling
them to national monument status.
A similar situation exists in India. Monuments and pro¬
tected areas preserve the outstanding sites, but in the
major urban developments, such as New Delhi and Bombay,
hundreds of significant sites or monuments cannot receive
this protection.
Another important threat to cultural properties is the
extensive modern construction development which includes
new factories, research establishments, airfields and mili¬
tary installations. Some can be considered under the
heading of urban development discussed above. Many,
however, cannot since they are deliberately placed out in
the countryside because they need more land than is readily
available in an urban setting.
It is still not generally realized how much land has been
taken over recently for such enterprises. Particularly since
the advent of jet planes, an appreciable amount of the sur¬
face of the earth is now devoted to airfields and the pre¬
paration of such fields involves the same type of bulldozer
levelling as is used to prepare fields for irrigated agricul¬
ture, with the concomitant destruction of the archaeological
sites or removal or destruction of historic buildings.
Manufacturing plants have also moved out into the
countryside and occupy increasingly large tracts of land,
which also has to be levelled and cleared of all previous 35
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MENACE OF THE BULLDOZERS (Cont'd)
The archaeologist alongside the engineer
36
encumbrances, including archaeological sites or ancient
buildings. In this category must also be placed military
and semi-military installations, research laboratories, atomic
energy plants, missile and space exploration establish¬
ments.
One of the older industrial operations which has been a
constant threat to archaeological sites is quarrying. Gravel
pits in particular have been destructive of palaeolithic sites
throughout Western Europe and especially in France, Ger¬
many and the United Kingdom. One of the more important
Early Man sites in North Africa was destroyed by gravel pit
operations in Casablanca In the early 1950's. Improved
modern techniques In this field and also in open pit and
strip mining have greatly Increased the potential damage.
So far we have only mentioned the more important of the
modern technological developments which are, with increas¬
ing rapidity, destroying our cultural heritage. There are
many others; new railroads, sewers, cable lines, canals,
levees, etc. Fifty and even only twenty-five years ago, this
was a matter of concern to only a few countries. Now,
however, it Is of world-wide importance. There is not a
single state whose national heritage is not endangered In
one way or another by these forces.
few countries have the type of strong central
control which might make It possible to bring
all of the various possible threats to cultural property by
new construction under a single regulation. These, how¬
ever, seem to be the exception rather than the rule. Major
governmental projects such as the construction of dams,
new land being opened for agriculture (e.g. the polders in
the old Zuyder Zee in the Netherlands or the Navaho
irrigation project in New Mexico (United States of America)
can be surveyed relatively easily, and monuments then
designated, objects preserved and archaeological excava¬
tions carried out.
In several countries, national services and organizations
have stimulated the interest of private firms and individuals.
In the western part of the U.S.A. and in the Arabian penin¬
sula, the private pipeline companies have, for the most
part, been very co-operative and have hired archaeologists
to excavate in advance of their construction crews; they
have even financed the production and publication of the
scientific archaeological reports. This has not always been
the case, however, and should be provided for by law.
The Archaeological Service in the Netherlands has over
200 correspondents throughout the country who help to
keep track of new finds. The service also has close liaison
In this matter with the Ministry of Agriculture.
In Norway, where an extensive inventory of prehistoric
sites exists, the Archaeological Service works closely with
the farm organizations. The question of budgeting is most
important here, as the farmer cannot be compelled to bear
the expenses of excavation.
In Sweden, the farmer is theoretically liable for the cost
of excavation, but in the case of extensive mound sites,
either the government or scientific foundations actually bear
the expense.
In Czechoslovakia, there are nine scientific organizations
which can excavate sites on farmland if these are brought
to their attention. In the U.S.S.R., the situation is some¬
what easier because there is no private farming and the
costs of excavation must be borne by the institution which
is working the site. In France, a classified site must be
preserved, with a protective perimeter around it, but no
satisfactory method has yet been devised to protect the
myriad sites which are not classified.
In Denmark, the advent of deep ploughing has caused
great difficulty in preserving sites. Although classified sites
have a protective perimeter, the farmer has a tendency to
plough closer and closer to the monument each year, and
controls must be instituted.
The problems involved in the safeguarding of monuments
and sites have become increasingly complex and urgent
owing to the scope and very rapid expansion of public and
private works of considerable magnitude contributing to the
welfare and economy of present-day peoples. It is impos¬
sible to provide an absolute safeguard for monuments and
sites, even if they are frequently the sole and, perhaps,
most important witnesses to the achievements of past
cultures.
On the other hand, various degrees of protection can be
considered, beginning with modifications to be made In the
plans of contemplated large-scale works in favour of im¬
portant monuments and sites; and with transfers of selec¬
ted monuments to areas outside of the zone directly affec¬
ted by construction. For those monuments which do not
possess sufficient importance or whose fabric does not per¬
mit transfer, careful records will have to suffice. Similarly,
a selected sample of an archaeological site can be excava¬
ted to provide scientific documentation of the past.
It Is necessary for the knowledge of our cultural history,
as well as for social and economic reasons, that such
measures be taken to safeguard monuments and sites en¬
dangered by public and private construction. This has
been recognized by many states which have taken steps
to ensure either the protection of sites and monuments or
their salvage.
