UM^:
SCIENCE
A NEW
SOCIAL
FORCE
by Mikhail Millionshchikov

*- V- ,
HE time has now come to enhance the role of
reason in the life of human society. In the world
of today there are various social systems; reason must
help us find ways for states with different social systems
to coexist on peaceful terms.
Nowadays, attempts to urge the "acceptability" of ther¬
monuclear war as an instrument of policy, and calls to
continue competing in means of mass destruction, are not
meeting with their previous success. It has become pos¬
sible to take practical steps which have made the danger
of world-wide thermonuclear war somewhat more remote:
among them, the Moscow Treaty banning nuclear weapon
tests in three environments, the United Nations resolution
calling upon states to refrain from placing weapons of
mass destruction in orbit in outer space, the curtailment
of the production of fissionable materials for military pur¬
poses and some reduction in the military expenditures of
the great powers.
If events could continue on this course it would afford
special satisfaction to peace-loving people; it would prove
that reason is capable of controlling the destructive poten¬
tial of the elemental forces which they themselves have
discovered and released. However, many factors still hang,
like the sword of Damocles, over mankind. One such
factor is the threat of thermonuclear catastrophe far from
eliminated still, and aggravated by the growth of the nuclear
arsenal and the heavy burden of the arms race. Another
is colonialism and racism; another, poverty, hunger and
disease; another, the illiteracy of hundreds of millions of
people; and yet another, the obstacles, still to be overcome,
in the way of a broad development of international trade and
of economic, scientific and technical co-operation.
In order to bring about a substantial improvement in
the situation, the appropriate course would be to follow
the example of the scientists, who achieve success when
they steadfastly seek bold new solutions to the problems
confronting science, and when they do so in an atmosphere
of co-operation instead of enmity. This atmosphere of
honest, mutually advantageous, workmanlike co-operation
and trust should also prevail in the relations among
peoples.
Lenin, the founder of the Soviet State, said that
the best way to celebrate an anniversary was to concen¬
trate on the problems still to be solved. Observance of
the International Co-operation Year will fittingly mark the
twentieth anniversary of the United Nations only if it really
moves mankind forward towards the solution of the prob¬
lems confronting it today.
When man becomes aware of the mortal danger that
hangs over him, all the other cares and wants that beset
him recede into the background. Security that Is the first-
priority problem whose solution is the vital prerequisite
for the solution of all the problems confronting mankind.
We have spoken of this matter so often In recent years
that the real meaning of these words Is gradually slipping
from our grasp; we are coming to regard them as a psycho¬
logical and political cliché, bereft of content. And yet
the real danger that threatens mankind, that threatens its
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

SCIENCE, A NEW SOCIAL FORCE (Cont'd)
For a greater unity of mankind
very existence, has never been as great as it is In our
time.
In the past two decades mankind has acquired the capa¬
city to destroy itself not once but many times over. Lest
this potential should turn into nightmare reality, all reason¬
ing people must find a settlement for the disputes which
divide them. We cannot, we dare not forget that in the
nuclear era the conditions in which human society exists
have undergone drastic change, and that a catastrophe
of .unprecedented dimensions may be unleashed unless
people who do not understand the changes that have taken
place in the world fundamentally alter their behaviour and
their way of thinking.
From the standpoint of the inherent logic of social deve¬
lopment and scientific and technical progress, a world
thermonuclear catastrophe is not inevitable. Yet the accu¬
mulation of weapons of mass destruction continues. The
danger of their being triggered off is growing.
I
26
|N the circumstances, scientists bear a special
responsibility. Representing the highest inte¬
rests of scientific and social progress, they must, I feel,
co-ordinate and pool their efforts with the efforts of all men
of goodwill in the noble cause of eliminating colonialism
once and for all and preventing a thermonuclear war. It is
now generally recognized that the surest way to solve this
problem is through general and complete disarmament
under strict international control. Only in a disarmed world
free from wars can science in its turn become completely a
constructive instead of a destructive force. The Pugwash
Conference of scientists Is doing what it can in the struggle
to prevent a nuclear catastrophe, not to mention the efforts
for peace that the World Council of Peace and many other
organizations are making.
Scientists and people in public life throughout the world
should work out an agreed programme for safeguarding
international security through disarmament. It seems to
me that one of the possible ways of achieving such a
programme might be to have an international year for the
preparation of disarmament. The implementation of such
a programme would undoubtedly assist in removing many
technical and political obstacles both to partial and to
general and complete disarmament. It might be agreed
to continue such efforts until suitable inter-governmental
agreements place disarmament on a solid foundation. At
the same time, this would place the entire question of
international co-operation in the scientific and political
spheres alike on a new plane, which is especially Important,
as in present conditions scientific co-operation Is insepa¬
rable from and determined by political co-operation, although
in turn exerting an increasing influence upon it.
HE unity of mankind in our time is evident from
the unity and close interdependence of the vital
problems facing people wherever they may live. Nowadays
scientific and political problems alike are indissolubly linked
with economic problems. The development of International
co-operation in the economic field by every possible means
lays a solid material foundation for the development of
political, scientific and technical co-operation. Here Inter¬
national trade should be the main avenue of approach. In
our day and age, trade not only drives out war and streng¬
thens peace, which In Itself promotes scientific and tech¬
nical progress, but directly accelerates such progress by
disseminating licences, patents, new types of products and
new technological processes. New independent states are
appearing on the international scene, and their peoples
are uprooting colonialism, destroying the economic and
political positions of foreign monopolies, altering the old
colonial structure of their economy and creating a new
structure. The time is not far distant when these countries
will no longer play the role of mere suppliers of agricul¬
tural and industrial raw materials for the world's markets,
a role bequeathed to them by the colonial era.
The development of international trade free from discri¬
mination and artificially erected barriers would provide a
sound basis for the establishment of friendly relations
among countries and would help to preserve and streng¬
then peace, confidence and mutual understanding among
peoples. For that reason, it is a matter of profound
concern to men of science that the International Co-opera¬
tion Year should consolidate the positive results achieved
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment and give a powerful new impetus to the development
of international trade.
At the same time, however, no single one of the various
possible areas of development of International co-opera¬
tion can claim a monopoly or can serve as a panacea.
Man's economic, political and scientific problems consti¬
tute a single interdependent system. As a consequence,
their solution also must be universal in scope, and must
be based on effectively co-ordinated international co¬
operation in all these spheres. From this angle, the first
important task Is to determine correctly, the basic and
primary link in the chain of problems confronting us.
lCIENCE has an increasing number of positive
political achievements to its credit; it is becom¬
ing an increasingly active social force of our time.
In the light of the experience gained, I would emphasize
that the development of international scientific co-operation
makes an appreciable contribution to the cause of peace.
A direct result of the fulfilment of the Antarctic programme
of the International Geophysical Year was the conclusion
in 1959 of the Antarctic Treaty, which proclaimed a sixth
of the earth as the first demilitarized zone and thereby
laid down the principle of reducing militarism's sphere
of action ¡n the world.
An International Year of Preparation for Disarmament
would also be a significant contribution to the cause of
international co-operation and would be fruitful both poli¬
tically and scientifically. There is no doubt that such a
heartening example would provide a strong stimulus for
further steps in that direction; and this is of vital impor¬
tance, for the International Co-operation Year is to usher
in a period of broad and many-sided efforts to bring
mankind closer to a world without weapons and without
wars, a world in which scientific and technical progress
will seek only the good of mankind and will help to create
conditions fit for human beings to live In.
By becoming a direct productive force, science Is creat¬
ing material and spiritual values on an unheard-of, gigantic
scale. Science Itself must also see to it that those values
are not destroyed. In our era science is called upon to
revolutionize not only the economic, social and political
life of society, but also its very way of thinking. By
penetrating and dominating all spheres of social activity,
scientific reason, as the most highly organized and most
disciplined mode of thought, can and must help to find
a rational solution for the problems of mankind.
MIKHAIL MILUONSHCHIKOV is a vice-president of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Science and acting president of the Kurchatov Institute
of Atomic Energy. He has taken an active part in the International
Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs.
