UNESCO & YOUTH... UNESCO & YOUTH... UNES
UNESCO'S work for youth cuts across all its major
activities. In developing its programme for youth during
its nearly twenty years of existence, Unesco has taken
special account of two major facts in the present-day world:
the increasing place and role of young people in the life of most
countries, and a vast expansion of out-of-school youth activ¬
ities. Unesco has worked closely with governmental and non¬
governmental bodies and has sponsored and helped to launch
a great number and variety of youth projects. We present
below a sampling of Unesco activities on behalf of youth.
LEADER TRAINING: Recognizing the need for regular
contacts between leaders of youth groups in different
countries, Unesco has organized seminars and information
and study courses in various regions. Study courses were
held in Rangoon (Burma) in 1952; Tokyo (Japan) in 1953
and Havana (Cuba) in 1954 and comprised lectures, dis¬
cussions and practical work which taught youth organizers
how ycung people can contribute to community develop¬
ment.
SPORTS COUNCIL: An International Council on Sport
and Physical Education was set up during the 1960 Olympic
Games in Rome. The creation of this council was one
of the results of the conference on sport, work and culture
the first broadly international meeting of its kind organ¬
ized earlier the same year by the Government of Finland
and Unesco.
UNESCO CLUBS: Hundreds of Unesco Clubs are now
active in nearly a score of countries spanning the world
from Australia to Finland and from Japan (100 clubs and
100 Unesco Associations) to France (280 clubs). Unesco
Clubs work for better international understanding and
spread information about Unesco's aims and work. They
are largely run by their young members and their pro¬
grammes include correspondence exchanges, group travel,
exhibitions, lectures, discussion groups and participation
in international voluntary workcamps.
AFRICAN FORUM: More and more young people in
Africa are reading a periodical that tells them about the
aims and work of the United Nations. Produced since
1963 by students at Ibadan, Nigeria, with assistance from
Unesco, it has now become a forum for young people to
express their views on international questions that concern
the U.N.
VOLUNTARY SERVICE: When Unesco created the Co¬
ordinating Committee for International Voluntary Service
in 1948, it had 18 member associations. Today it has
91 member associations from all continents. The Commit¬
tee serves as an information centre on international vol¬
untary workcamps and long-term service programmes, and
it has organized regional training courses for voluntary
service leaders in the developing countries.
00 YOUTH INSTITUTE: A special international institute set
up by Unesco has been working for the youth of the
world since 1952 at Gauting, near Munich (Federal Republic
of Germany). Surveys and meetings organized by the
Unesco Youth Centre have covered a broad spectrum of
youth problems and activities including the operation of
youth organizations, education in economics and science,
education for international understanding, the effects of
technological change and the eradication of racial prejudice.
EXCHANGING EXPERIENCE: In 1955 Unesco started
its system of Associated Youth Enterprises to promote the
exchange of experience among youth organizations in
different countries. Under this scheme a team of youth
hostel members from England, Australia, Pakistan, Ireland,
Spain, India and the Netherlands recently travelled from
London to Calcutta by the simplest and cheapest route.
A guidebook, "Overland Route: Guide to Western Asia",
based on their experiences has now been published.
STUDY GRANTS: Since 1952, 576 full travel grants and
189 partial grants have been made to leaders of national
and international youth organizations under Unesco's pro¬
gramme of Youth Leader Travel Grants. The grants have
enabled youth organizers to study youth activities abroad
and to pick up new ideas and techniques for use in their
own countries.
SCIENCE CLUBS: Last year Unesco helped to create
a special committee on science clubs. This committee
which has relations with science fairs, clubs and camps
in Eastern and Western Europe, the Americas, Asia and
Africa, is currently preparing a manual explaining how to
organize science programmes for young people, and a
comprehensive international directory of bodies sponsoring
such activities. (See page 40 for an article on the world's
science clubs).
GIFT COUPONS: Since Unesco's Gift Coupon Pro¬
gramme was launched 15 years ago, nearly a million and a
half dollars has been raised in large part by the young
people of the industrialized countries. Much of this money
has gone to help key youth projects in Africa, Asia and
Latin America, including farm schools, community and
international youth centres and hostels. Under the scheme,
individuals or groups in donor countries can choose from
a Unesco list projects which they would like to help. The
beneficiaries use the Unesco coupons as international
currency to buy needed science or teaching equipment.
YOUTH ON THE AIR: In collaboration with Unesco, the
radio and television networks of France and Belgium pro-

:0 & YOUTH... UNESCO & YOUTH... UNESCO &
duced a series of weekly international programmes on youth
earlier this year. The programme, "Youth in the World",
included discussions on sport, urban development, archaeo¬
logy, the developing countries, astronautics, workcamps,
folk music and Unesco Clubs interspersed with the latest
pop music and folk recordings. Among those who took
part in the programmes, along with a host of young people,
were Professor Noraïr Sissakian, the U.S.S.R. Academician,
who is a world authority on space biology and chairman
of the 13th session of Unesco's General Conference, and
Mr. Papa Diouf, president of the Senegalese Freedom from
Hunger Committee.
ORIENT-OCCIDENT: As part of its efforts to develop
education for international understanding and co-operation,
Unesco encourages the formation of youth clubs for inter¬
national relations, which are often called clubs of Friends
of Unesco. One recent example was the contact estab¬
lished between young workers in Saint-Etienne, France,
and Kokura, Japan, who have learned about the ways of
life in each other's cities from exhibitions which they
prepared and exchanged.
YOUNG PEOPLE'S DIRECTORY: Unesco has published
an international Directory of Unesco Clubs and Similar
Associations. It can be obtained free of charge from the
Public Liaison Division, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris.
With Unesco's assistance, the French Federation of Unesco
Clubs has brought out a manual, "Les Clubs Unesco:
Pourquoi, Pour Qui, Comment," explaining why Unesco
Clubs exist, whom they are for and how they work. The
manual is designed as a guide to setting up and running
international relations clubs. An English edition is in pre¬
paration.
CONFERENCE ON YOUTH: Last year, Unesco convened
an international conference in Grenoble, France, to take
stock of out-of-school activities and to lay foundations
for a long-tern* Unesco Youth Programme. It was the
first ¡nter-governmantal conference ever held on youth
problems. Delegates, including those from 70 Unesco mem¬
ber states, unanimously approved recommendations that will
guide the future development of out-of-school programmes.
In March 1965, Unesco helped the Government of Japan
to organize a regional meeting to plan the development of
youth activities in Asia.
FILMS: With Unesco's assistance, groups of young
women in Asia and Latin America last year carried out
surveys of the impact made on young people in their
countries by locally-produced and foreign films.
MUSIC AND YOUTH: Outstanding among Unesco's
work for the development of musical appreciation in young
people is its long-standing co-operation with the Interna¬
tional Federation of Musical Youth. This international
organization has member sections in 23 countries and new
groups are being formed in 17 others. Travel grants made
by Unesco have helped to make possible exchange visits
between members of these groups, and Unesco's support
and financial aid have enabled the International Federation
to send musicians on international visits to its member
sections.
YOUTH TODAY: Unesco is preparing a book on "Youth
today, its problems and activities". This work will present
for the first time a world picture of the trends and activities
of youth in the form of a broad comparative study. It
will also review present-day concepts on out-of-school
education, its aims and the ways in which it is used.
