BIOLOG
LOOKS
RACE
by Georghi F. Debetz
At a Unesco meeting in Moscow, twenty-two scientists
drew up and unanimously adopted, on August 18, 1964,
a 13-point statement on the biological aspects of the
race question (see page 8 for full text). Here the chair¬
man of the meeting reviews its work and conclusions.
"- ..' 8f . :; ". , yijjfig
Gallo-Roman sculpture from the
3rd century B.C., now in the Bo-
rély Museum, Marseille, France.
{('. Jean Suquet. Paris
4
ACISM is the^expression of a system of thought
which is fundamentally anti-rational. Hate and
racial strife feed on scientifically false ideas, and live on
ignorance. They can also derive from scientifically sound
ideas which have been distorted or taken out of context,
leading to false implications. To demonstrate these errors
of fact and of reasoning, and to spread knowledge of the
conclusions reached by different scientific disciplines,
Unesco convened in 1949 a meeting of scientists .from
different countries (1) to draw up a declaration on the
nature and significance of racial differences.
The text prepared by these experts and published by
Unesco in 1950 was well received by the public, but drew
some criticism from anthropologists and geneticists who
considered that it caused confusion between race as a bio¬
logical fact and the idea of race as a social phenomenen.
Unesco therefore called a second conference in 1951, this
time exclusively for specialists in physical anthropology and
in human genetics. This group drew up a new text in which
the main conclusions of the earlier declaration were main¬
tained, others amended and certain deletions made. The
text of this new declaration was sent to fifty geneticists and
anthropologists for their comments, and the results of this
inquiry, including favourable comments and adverse cri¬
ticisms, were published in book form under the title "The
Race Concept."
Since then Unesco's action has been focused more on
the social aspects of race than on the biological ones. On
the other hand, scientific advances in the field of human
biology during the past fifteen years have clearly shown
the need for a fresh study of the 1951 declaration and its
revision in the light of the latest biological discoveries.
It has also been felt that its scope should be enlarged by
encompassing several points, dealing with the nature and
forms of racial prejudice in inter-racial situations, that were
not previously covered.
Unesco therefore decided to hold two successive meet¬
ings: one in 1964 to cover the biological aspects, and a
second, in 1966, to deal with the social and ethical aspects
of the problem and to draft a statement which, taking
account of the results of the 1964 meeting, would englobe
both the biological and social aspects of the problem of
race.
The first of these meetings was held in Moscow in
August 1964 immediately after the VII Congress of Anthro¬
pological and Ethnological Sciences which had taken place
in that city. It was attended by anthropologists and ethno¬
logists from 17 countries (2).
During eight sessions twenty-five reports devoted to the
main scientific problems related to the study of human races
were discussed. At the last two sessions a 13-point decla-
(1) Brazil, France, India, Mexico, New Zealand, U.K., U.S.A.
(2) Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Federal Republic of
Germany, France, India, Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
Senegal, U.K., U.S.A., U.S.S.R., and Venezuela.

agi
^m
W&&MS'j&Äi
^
:,;o._
ration was drafted and adopted unanimously (see page 8).
This text will provide the biological elements for the new
declaration on race and racial prejudice to be drawn up
in 1966.
At one time the essential object of discussions between
anthropologists was to decide whether man had one or
several ancestors, whether the various races derived from
a single species of monkey or from a variety of species.
Today, this question can be regarded as finally settled. It
was not even raised during the 1964 Moscow meeting. The
declaration merely notes, as if to sum up earlier discussions,
that "all living human beings belong to a single species,
known as 'Homo Sapiens* and are derived from a common
stock origin."
The keenest discussion was concerned with the nature
of the concept of race as applied to human beings and
with the scientific evidence for this concept. It might be
thought that no discussion is called for on this question.
Everyone knows that as far as many physical features are
concerned, the people in various parts of the world fre¬
quently differ as regards colour of skin, type of hair, facial
characteristics, etc. It is true that the number of features
which all men have in common is very much greater and it
is equally true that such common features are biologically
of much greater importance than the divergent features.
At the same time, differences do exist and are evident at a
glance. If, for instance, we were to compare groups made
up of Congolese, Swedes and Mongols selected at random,
we would have nó trouble in identifying each of the three
groups. They would not even need to be dressed differently
or to speak. Their physical features alone would distinguish
them.
While everyone is agreed on this point, many anthropo¬
logists are now calling attention to another equally indispu¬
table fact. If, for example, one were to go on foot from the
sources of the Nile to the Nile delta, then across the Arab
countries of Asia, through Turkey, Bulgaria, Rumania and
the Ukraine to northern Russia and finally towards Mongolia
via the homes of the Udmurt, Bashkir and Kazakh peoples,
no difference of physical type would be apparent between
the inhabitants of any neighbouring points on this route.
However, if one were to compare the people encountered
at the beginning, middle and end of the journey, the
differences between them would be manifest. It is for
this reason, say the opponents of racial classification,
that the division of mankind into rigidly distinct categories
is scientifically unsound and results in a completely
unacceptable schematic approach.
On the other hand, those who believe that human races
should be recognized as distinct entities argue that the
existence of transitional stages between any kind of phe¬
nomena should not lead us to deny the reality of such
phenomena. The hypothetical traveller would not observe
any difference in climate between two adjoining points on
the route nor between the local fauna, yet classification by
regions is useful and even essential to a knowledge of .
climate and fauna. "Where is the dividing line between 3
the mountain and the valley?" ask the defenders of
classification. "Nobody denies the existence of valleys and
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

AFRICA (Uganda) AFRICA (Cameroon) AFRICA (Sudan) AFRICA (Egypt)
ASIA (Iran)
BIOLOGY LOOKS AT RACE (Cont'd)
ASIA (India) ASIA (Cambodia) ASIA (Philippines)
Racism : a distortion of scientific facts
mountains simply because they cannot point to such a
line."
Opponents of classification point out that physical fea¬
tures change not only in space but, even more, in time.
In central Europe as in other regions/the human head has
become much rounder over the last eight centuries but
more recently has tended to lengthen again; the average
height in certain countries has risen by 10 centimetres in
the last 100 years; and so on. Those opposed to classifica¬
tion likewise emphasize the considerable degree of indivi¬
dual variation in regard to all physical features.
The average width of face among the people of Azer¬
baijan, for instance, is one cm. less than in the case of the
Kazakhs; but this measurement varies from one individual
to another and some of the former have broader faces than
some of the latter. Supporters of classification admit this,
but argue that sometimes and even fairly frequently
women are taller than men. Is this a reason, they ask, for
denying the obvious fact that men are generally bigger
than women?
Having noted that opinions differed as to the importance
of racial classifications, participants in the Moscow meeting
nonetheless unanimously felt able to reach certain con¬
clusions which, while not wholly eliminating the disagree¬
ments, did Indicate that opinions might be brought more
into harmony with each other.
One of the points in their declaration was that "as
entities defined by sets of distinctive traits, human races
are at any time in a process of emergence and dissolution."
Still more important is another point in the declaration,
contending that "certain physical characters have a univer¬
sal biological value for the survival of the human species,
irrespective of the environment. The differences on which
racial classifications are based do not affect these cha¬
racters and therefore it is not possible from the biological
point of view to speak in any way whatsoever of a general
inferiority or superiority of this or that race."
All the experts attending the Moscow meeting were
specialists in the field of biological science. But a genuinely
scientific survey cannot be kept within the framework of
a single science. Biologists dealing with human beings
cannot bypass the phenomena of social existence. It is
indeed because of social existence, as the declaration
points out, that "human evolution presents attributes of capi¬
tal importance which are specific to the species." "As a
consequence," the declaration adds, "general adaptability to
the most diverse environments is in man more pronounced
than his adaptations to specific environments."
This is one of the most important biological differences
between man and all other biological species and derives
from the very nature of man and his social life. The follow¬
ing point in the declaration should also be noted: "For long
millenia, progress made by man, in any field, seems to
have been increasingly, if not exclusively, based on culture
and the transmission of cultural achievements and not on
the transmission of genetic endowment. This implies a
modification in the role of natural selection in man today."
Racism, a system which falsifies scientific facts, auto¬
matically ascribes to men all those phenomena observed
among animals.
The biological elements in the declaration adopted by the
1964 Moscow meeting are therefore a barrier raised against
racism. Man is primarily a social being and the funda-

r
EUROPE (Greece) EUROPE (Denmark)
ASIA (Japan)
7
AMERICA (Brazil)
EUROPE (Hungary) ASIA (Jordan)
On foot across the continents
A traveller making his way across the continents
would probably notice few differences in phys¬
ical type among the inhabitants of neighbouring
regions. Differences become obvious when
a comparison is made between people from
widely separated areas. Thus, say those anthro¬
pologists who reject the idea of racial clas¬
sifications, the division of human beings
into rigidly defined groups can only give a
schematic and scientifically unacceptable result.
Photos, from left to right : 1, 3, 4, 5, 6. 7, c Paul Almasy, Paris;
2, » C. Tardits; 8, UNRWA; 9. U nesco- Almasy ; 10, 13, Unesco;
11, Unations; 12. Unesco - P. A. Pittet; 14, SUDENE.
mental nature of his history is determined by social
phenomena.
As is well known, wherever racists are in power they
seek to set men of differing races against each other and
to use every possible means of preventing the natural
intermingling process of the human race. One of
the racists' favourite techniques for falsifying science is to
assert that interracial marriages are harmful and that the
children of such marriages are physically and psychically
"deficient."
Here, the declaration is clear and categorical: "It has
never been proved that interbreeding has biological dis¬
advantages for mankind as a whole. On the contrary, it
contributes to the maintenance of biological ties between
human groups and thus to the unity of the species in its
diversity." Noting that the individual hereditary characte¬
ristics of the parents naturally influence their offspring
(it may happen that the combination of certain such
characteristics has undesirable consequences), the declara¬
tion emphasizes that this is not a question of racial
differences and that "therefore, no biological justification
exists for prohibiting intermarriage between persons of
different races, or for advising against it on racial grounds."
The declaration once again stresses that racial differences
do not coincide with national, regligious, linguistic or cultural
differences. Here again, social phenomena exercise an
influence on the formation of racial, i.e. biological, differ¬
ences. "Human beings who speak the same language and
share the same culture have a tendency to intermarry, and
often there is as a result a certain degree of coincidence
between physical traits on the one hand, and linguistic and
cultural traits on the other," says the declaration. "But
there Is no known causal nexus between these and there¬
fore It Is not justifiable to attribute cultural characteristics
to the influence of the genetic inheritance."
Racists claim that races are not equal in respect of
psychic qualities. The psychologists who help to draw up
the 1966 declaration will be dealing with this point. However,
the biologists meeting in Moscow could naturally not pass
over this important aspect of the race question.
Like certain major anatomical traits in the human species,
the genetic capacity for intellectual development belongs
to those biological characteristics which are universally
valid, because of its importance for the survival of the
species in any natural or cultural environment. The peoples
of the world today appear to possess equal biological
potentialities for attaining any level of civilization.
Differences in the achievements of different peoples must
be attributed solely to their cultural history:
"Certain psychological traits are at times attributed to
particular peoples. Whether or not such assertions are
valid, we do not find any basis for ascribing such traits to
hereditary factors, until proof to the contrary is given.
"Neither in the field of hereditary potentialities concerning
the over-all intelligence and the capacity for cultural
development, nor in that of physical traits, is there any
justification for the concept of 'inferior' and 'superior'
races."
The anthropologists and other biologists who unanimously
adopted the biological elements of the declaration did not
do so solely as scientists but also as men. In their desire
to emphasize this aspect of their work, participants in the
Moscow meeting concluded' their declaration in the follow¬
ing words: "The biological data given above stand in open
contradiction to the tenets of racism. Racist theories can
in no way pretend to have any scientific foundation and the
anthropologists should endeavour to prevent the results
of their researches from being used in such a biased way
that they would serve non-scientific ends."
GEORGHI F. DEBETZ, a Soviet biologist, is a professor at the /
Institute of Ethnography of the Academy of Sciences In Moscow.
He was chairman of the Unesco meeting of biologists, held in
Moscow in August 1964.
