THE REVOLUTION
IN BOOKS
by Robert Escarpit
The tremendous changes ¡n the world of books over the past few decades have
now attained the proportions of a revolution. As Professor Robert Escarpit, the
French author and critic, has pointed out: "During the past 2,000 years the
book has gone through a series of mutations, all of them associated with its
fundamental purpose of communicating ideas. Today we are experiencing
the latest of these mutations, a mutation which is adapting books to the
needs of mass readership." Professor Escarpit was speaking at a press
conference held on June 10 to mark the publication by Unesco, of his study,
"The Revolution in Books." In the following article, especially written
for this issue devoted to books, Professor Escarpit reviews some of
the outstanding questions he deals with in "The Revolution in Books."
We also present salient passages from this important work on pages 11 to 15.
4
THE appearance of the mass-circulation book is
probably the most important cultural develop¬
ment in the second half of the twentieth century. Although
people everywhere have at last begun to show an interest
in this event, no one has yet clearly grasped its significance
nor fully realized that it is taking place. English-speaking
countries, for instance, often misname this type of book
"the paperback," although some paperbound books are
high-priced articles with a very low circulation. Elsewhere,
as in most European countries, it is called, even less appro¬
priately, "the pocket book" or, quite absurdly, "the pocket-
size book." It would be as reasonable to talk of "cheap
books" or "bulk-printed books."
Mass-circulation books are not distinguished by their
specific appearance nor by the number of copies printed
nor by the retail price. It is easy to find examples of all.
these characteristics, sometimes more than a century back,
whereas the mass-circulation book is a global phenomenon
whose constituent elements cannot be separated, a new
type of publishing venture which first took shape in 1935
with the appearance of the Penguin series in England.
The obvious features of mass-circulation books (some¬
times wrongly regarded as fundamental characteristics) all
combine to enable them to play their role, a role which
consists of changing the scale on which publications are
distributed, by providing new processes which open up still
unsatisfied areas of readership, ethnic groups or social
strata.
What is involved is not the adaptation of books to new
conditions, but a genuine mutation. The mass-circulation
book is as different from the classical book as was the
printed book from the manuscript and the manuscript from
the clay tablet. This mutation, in fact, will eventually change
the content of books, just as it is already transforming
the dialogue between author and reader which constitutes
the reality of literature.
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

© Paul Almasy. Paris SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE. Once a year, Spain's National Book Fair draws crowds
of buyers to the open-air bookstalls set up, like this one in a Barcelona street, in all parts of r
the country. In recent years Spain's publishing industry has made spectacular progress: in **
1964 it published 10,129 titles, an increase of 1,435 over 1963. Spain is now one of the twelve
countries which together produce three-quarters of all the books published in the world.

REVOLUTION IN BOOKS (Cont'd)
A million copies
quite normal
In other words, the whole of written culture as we have
known it for two or three centuries past is directly
challenged by mass-circulation books, and the cultivated
classes of our time are only wrong in feeling disturbed over
this development to the extent that such perturbation
reflects a niggardly attachment to values which have become
inadequate for the new dimensions of mankind.
To begin with, viewed as manufactured items, books have
at one bound caught up with other products of modern
industry; the book has been simultaneously adapted to the
demands of mass production and modern design. There
was virtually no technical difference between Gutenberg's
books and books produced at the end of the eighteenth
century; printers carried out identical operations and edi¬
tions remained about the same size, rarely exceeding a
few thousand copies.
Then, within ten to fifteen years, or roughly the length of
the Napoleonic era, everything changed. Printing was
mechanized and the book which had editions of from
between ten thousand and one hundred thousand copies
made its appearance. Editions of this order were still being
printed 130 years later between the two world wars, and
they are still produced in the traditional sector of publishing.
At the same time, however, mass consumer demands,
emerging from and affecting social advancement, penetrated
the cultural field. By the 1870s, these demands, which
exerted pressure on the whole complex of trade and
industry, were also affecting the media serving the field
of culture, and especially books.
As everyone knows, one of the first effects of mass
production in all fields was a decline in the aesthetic and
functional qualities of the product manufactured. Because
of their dual nature as physical objects and vehicles for
the communication of thought, books proved particularly
vulnerable to such debasement. "Mass produced" reading
matter became a by-product of the newspapers and
hawkers' books that were the only mass media of the time.
Such "poor man's books" often sacrificed either content
or appearance, and mostly both. At the beginning of the
century the working class reader in city or village could
only escape from the most stultifying type of reading by his
sheer determination to rise above the ugliness and unsuita-
bility of the reading material normally available to him.
I
6
T is not surprising, therefore, that such media
of mass communication as the radio and the
cinema, which from the outset had an aesthetic adapted to
their function, should have proved irresistible rivals to
books. Indeed when the 1930s came bringing restlessness
and more demanding standards, it might well have been
thought that books had lost the battle.
Such was far from being the case. Although no one
realized it at the time, a genuine revolution occurred in the
mid-1 930's in the thinking of our industrial civilization.
Raymond Loewy then wrote in the United States "The Loco¬
motive, Its Aesthetics," which anticipated his famous book
on industrial design, "Never Let Well Enough Alone."
A new type of functional beauty entered everyday life.
In Western Europe it was introduced by the "one-price".
stores, and in Moscow a similar function was fulfilled by
the newly-opened underground railway. Though this beauty
may not have been to everyone's taste, it nevertheless
suddenly lit up and humanized the dismal atmosphere of a
mass consumer world.
Industrial design, which thus became part of our
accustomed pattern a little before the Second World War,
has been defined as "a technique connected with the
creation of products, and aimed at studying the products
devised by a firm on the basis of such criteria as suitability
for use, beauty, ease of manufacture and reduction of cost
price."
Consciously or unconsciously, Allen Lane applied these
four criteria to book production when he founded Penguin
Books in England in 1935. Penguin books were the first in
the world to unite all the specific features of mass-circu¬
lation books. Pleasant to look at and convenient in form,
they enabled works of real quality to be distributed in
huge quantities and at a very low price. It should be
repeated that none of these various elements can be
considered separately; each depends on the others and the
whole secret of mass-circulation books lies in achieving
the right balance.
For the modest price of sixpence, the Penguin series
gave the public books that normally sold In a hardback
edition for ten shillings and sixpence more than twenty
times as much. Such sensationally low prices are now a
thing of the past, but one of the requirements of the mass-
circulation book is still that it should be sold at rock-bottom
price.
This price can be worked out very accurately. The price
at which a book is sold to the public is dependent on the
cost price of each volume in the original edition, and is
established on the basis of a simple formula. Some of the


USIS photos
costs of printing a book (type-setting, going to press, etc.)
remain the same no matter how many copies are printed;
others (such as paper and binding), are linked to each
individual volume and thus increase with the size of the
edition. In terms of cost price per volume these expenses
are incompressible. Fixed costs, however, decrease propor¬
tionately as the size of the edition increases, since they are
spread over a greater number of copies. The cost price
per volume thus diminishes accordingly.
There comes a moment, however, when the fixed costs
are spread over such a large number of copies that the
effect on the cost price is insignificant, and the latter, along
with the retail price then becomes stabilized at the lowest
level. The publisher's first concern must be to determine
this point, since only when it has been reached can he
benefit completely from the effects of mass production.
Everywhere books have their uses, from the kitchen
(how to prepare an Italian dish) to this cab rank
in Central Park, New York (how to kill time while
waiting for a passenger). Every day over one
million paperbacks are sold in the United States. In
1964 they totalled one third of all titles published.
serves only a small fraction of the population those social
strata or classes which produce the "cultivated" individuals.
In a highly developed country where the reading popu¬
lation (those capable of choosing and using reading matter)
represents 70 to 75% of the population, the real public
(those who make regular use of all types of reading matter)
represents at most 15 to 20 %, and the cultivated public
(those for whom the bookshops cater) barely 2 to 3%.
It is out of the question for the moment to reach the
whole of the reading population. But mass-circulation books
must spread far beyond the cultivated public and penetrate
the real public where they will have their most effective
social impact. This is what has happened, in the United
States, where before World War II best sellers rarely sold
100,000 copies, while editions of more than a million copies
are now commonplace.
BOOKS are not distributed solely through book¬
shops, but from an infinite number of sales
points, including drug-stores, self-services stores and book¬
stalls, with the backing of extensive advertising. Certain
countries, and especially the U.S.S.R., have developed
direct distribution methods through offices, factories and the
postal service. Finally, in the years ahead we will see an
extension of book vending machines which will increase
the bookshop's distribution power tenfold.
It is in this way that the boundaries of the "cultivated"
public are crossed. It should be noted, however, that
high sales figures do not necessarily mean that those boun¬
daries have been crossed. Many publishers, especially in
Europe, believe they are publishing mass-circulation books
because they have adopted the form and style of such
books and have increased their printing runs ten or twenty-
fold. All they have done in many cases is to saturate the
market offered by the cultivated public through the induce¬
ment of reduced prices.
The whole operation takes place within the old socio-
cultural frontiers, and this is especially true of countries
which have a large and active, though poorly-off, intelli¬
gentsia. There are countries where mass circulation starts
with sales of from five to ten thousand copies and others
where sales of between 50,000 and 100,000 still represent
limited distribution within the cultivated sector.
H OW far the publisher should go beyond this
point remains to be seen. For the purchaser
it makes no difference at all whether a book is published in
50,000 copies or in one million since the rock-bottom price
has already been reached. But the situation is altogether
different from the publisher's viewpoint. On the one hand
his financial investment is larger and the risk corresponding
greater; on the other hand, despite the reasonableness
and stability of the price, he cannot expect to distribute
a mass production book by the same methods he uses for
smaller editions.
This brings us to a third requirement of the mass-cir¬
culation book: new distribution outlets must be found. In
the most developed civilizations cultural patterns are still
more or less marked by the stamp of a civilization based
on a cultural elite. The bookshop network in particular
In short, the entry of books into the mass market can
affect them in other than material ways. Their content is
affected and, along with it, the use which readers make
of that content. The dialogue between author and reader
which constitutes the basic literary reality is being pro¬
foundly altered in its nature and in its machinery alike.
The. reading of the cultivated person is marked by an
active and conscious attitude. He reacts to what he is
reading by judgements, observations and reasoned conclu¬
sions, whether the work in question is "literary", in the true
sense, or functional. All these reactions combine to form
a "literary opinion" whose image returns to the author
through various channels: conversations, contacts between
publishers and booksellers, literary reviews and so on.
This feedback to the author is the specific and distinctive
feature of literary reality. It implies, incidentally, an
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

REVOLUTION IN BOOKS (Cont'd)
The paperback invades the university
extremely delicate balance. If the feedback signal is too
strong, in other words if the author is too conscious of
his public, his work may deteriorate.
If there is no feedback the author can only choose
between the sterile seclusion of the literary coteries and the
no less sterile use of mechanical techniques for capturing
and retaining the attention of the anonymous public like
any demagogue.
In mass circulation as we know it today, however, there
is no cultural feedback. The literary opinion of the
"masses" has no personal contacts, bookselling networks
or literary- criticism through which to express or transmit
itself and often has not even the opportunity to take
conscious form.
The publisher' of mass-circulation books in thus con¬
fronted with a difficult problem. On the one hand, in view
of the substantial capital involved, he must reduce the
risks of the operation by programming his production to the
maximum; on the other, he must offset the disadvantages
of having no feedback to guide him. The problem varies
according to the types of books he publishes. Here we
need only consider three types of books.
First of all, there are the functional books which represent
a known and recognized need. This to some extent guar¬
antees the sale of a considerable number of copies.
The typical example is the cookbook which continues to
rank among the best selling paperbacks in the United
States. Eating is a function which can always be relied on
and love of good food is one of the commonest of all
impulses.
The same applies to books needed by school and univer¬
sity students. In recent years the paperback has invaded
the American universities. This has revolutionized research
and teaching methods. Scientific textbooks, for example,
are no longer rare and expensive works to be placed on
library shelves where set timetables restrict their usefulness
and where they slowly grow out of date.
They are now cheap, attractively but unpretentiously pro¬
duced books which can be purchased for a modest sum
and which students are therefore ready to purchase. Even
if a student does not buy a book himself, the library can
offer him several copies without worrying unduly over the
possibility of their wearing out or being lost.
It is always possible, to reprint, bringing the book
. i
2*
I.1* él *^
ARISTOPHANE
VICTO»
IM «.O
US CHATIMENTS
0
f »»1AGE
imEllIlE HnaUMMUi
puMi-i'BiMoni jTrevrtT
riauAHDrcsrcTis
LI IUI M >
France France
Penguin
Reference
Books
Arthur Jacobs
a~ ;^s?;
United States
anptM JBI'I m-^i-wh««i
i ni,< i i m -s
United Kingdom
GIORDANO BRUNO
JOURNAL DE
//illIP. Wilt
fette mtfrt
Kasteel te huur
II H
59 Clare Lennart
Netherlands

up to date at the same time. In this way it benefits
from a genuine scientific feedback that expresses the views
of its users. In France this system has been employed for
many years in the Que Sais-Je? (What Do I Know?) series.
In their special field of scientific popularization and explan¬
ation, these little books had already discovered the formula
of the mass-circulation book in pre-war days, although
they were probably unaware of it at the time.
Another formula adopted in mass-circulation publishing
is to reprint a literary work which has already proved itself
in the cultivated sector. It may be one of the classics or
a book that has been outstandingly successful in an
ordinary edition. The formula of the classic is obviously
more convenient since the number of titles of works
retained in a country's historical consciousness is strictly
limited, .roughly about one per cent. Reprinting the classics,
therefore, presents few hazards and this explains why in
most countries paperbacks have produced an unhoped for
and reassuring flood of reprints of all kinds. Texts which
have disappeared from circulation now enter the public
domain and can be purchased at any bookstall.
At the same time, there is a limit to this wealth of material
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
The extraordinary deve¬
lopment of the paper¬
back has served to open
still wider the field of
research already well
explored by graphic ar¬
tists in producing illus¬
trated book covers. The
appearance of paper¬
backs, between one
country and another,
obviously reflects natio¬
nal tastes in illustration
and typography, but
their common denomi¬
nator is perfect legibi¬
lity combined with an
unconventionality that
touches the imagination
of the reader. All
covers, black and white
and colour alike, use
modern graphic forms
of publicity and imagery.
Federal Republic of Germany

REVOLUTION IN BOOKS (Cont'd)
Breakthrough to a vast public
and disadvantages in this practice. The number of classic
works which a literature can offer is not infinite, amounting
perhaps to a few thousand, and one can reasonably foresee
a point at which mass-circulation books in the more
developed countries will be offering scores of thousands of
different titles. A time must come then, which is not far off
in certain countries, when saturation of the market will
cause a slump in books of this type, and when the only
reliable outlet for these huge editions will consist of the
normal cultural consumption of schools, universities and
similar institutions.
But it is also possible to take up a best seller while it is
still enjoying a success, before it becomes a classic and
when the only process of selection it has undergone
one far less stringent than that of historical selection is
the. test of normal sales through bookshops.
This may be a very profitable practice, but unfortunately
many publishers have not yet understood the machinery
of this kind of sale. They wait too long after the book's
success in an ordinary edition before prolonging that
success in a mass-circulation edition.
z
o
A FAREWELL
TO ARMS
ERNEST
HEMINGWAY
On July 30, 1935 bookshops
and bookstalls in Great
Britain first displayed ten
new, paperbacked books in
bold orange, blue and green
covers decorated with a black
and white penguin. They
included novels, thrillers, and
biographies, of a standard
not often found at that time
among books sold for six¬
pence. Among the authors
of these first ten Penguin
Books were Ernest Heming¬
way (cover left), André
Maurois, Compton Mackenzie
and Agatha Christie. Penguins
broke new ground in pub¬
lishing and triggered off
developments which have
touched nearly every
book - producing country.
10
They imagine that the book's success in an ordinary
edition must be exhausted before launching it among what
they believe to be an extension of the same public. In
actual fact experience proves that the ideal moment for
switching a book from the ordinary to the mass-circulation
edition is at the height of its success in the former edition.
Far from interfering with its success in that form, the
mass edition provides a fresh impetus, exerting an infjuence
on the ordinary edition at the same time as it builds up its
own success through the interest the book arouses in the
cultivated sector.
In advanced twentieth century societies, the cultivated
public and the public at large come into contact daily,
often sharing the same media of communication and
expression. A book discussed in the literary columns of a
newspaper is not overlooked by readers of the paper who
are primarily interested in the sports pages or the crime
reports.
The solitary disadvantage of the system, therefore, is not
an economic one. It lies in the fact that the switching of a
book from the ordinary to the mass-circulation edition is a
unilateral operation. The book in question has been
lifted up and stimulated by a cultivated literary opinion.
Now it is imposed on the mass readership which unfortu¬
nately has no feedback circuit through which to bring its
opinion to bear on subsequent productions.
HIS brings us to the third type of mass cir¬
culation book the one produced directly for
the mass market and under pressure from that public.
These are, broadly speaking, the new literary books in the
usual sense of the expression. Unhappily, experience
demonstrates that such books are extremely rare. Publi¬
shers have not yet clearly understood the nature of the
instrument they possess. Still less do they know how to
use it. They are handicapped by obstacles of an institu¬
tional kind, unsatisfactory distribution channels, the
indifference or hostility of critics, representing the
opposition of the cultivated sector to the mass-circulation
book.
Even so, and this should be emphasized, the mass-cir¬
culation book will never destroy books in ordinary editions
or even the semi-de luxe book. On the contrary, by giving
unlimited scope to the bases for literary communication,
by transforming reading into a true, everyday activity, and
one which is an integral part of man's existence, it will
awaken a new interest in and a new enthusiasm for books.
Those who fear that the semi-de luxe book and the hand¬
some, top-quality book are doomed to be ousted by the
mass-circulation book are mistaken. The desire to own
books published in beautifully finished editions, solid and
lasting, pleasant to contemplate and to touch, represents
on the part of the reader, a final choice which can only be
the outcome of a long experience of reading. If so many
imitation de-luxe editions are now being distributed by
various clubs and if books are often regarded as decorative
elements or status symbols, this is because in such cases
the possession of a book is unrelated to the act of reading,
because there is a breach between the book and its
purpose.
As living standards rise throughout the world, the quality
book becomes accessible to more and more deeper and
deeper strata of the population; but reading, in the sense of
conscious reading, what we call literary reading, remains
the prerogative of a minority. Thanks to the mass-circulation
book, this situation is changing and we may fairly hope that
in the course of the next fifty years this type of book, the
"reading machine", will make its full contribution to the
life of the new societies which will inherit our world.
ROBERT ESCARPIT is professor of comparative litera¬
ture in the Faculty of Letters and Humanistic Sciences of
Bordeaux, France; professor at the Institute of Political
Studies, Bordeaux; and director of the Centre de Sociolo¬
gie des Faits Littéraires, Bordeaux. Professor Escarpit ¡s a
critic, novelist, literary historian and specialist in publishing.
He is also a regular contributor of humorous articles to the
Paris newspaper, Le Monde. His latest book La Révolu¬
tion du Livre (The Revolution in Books) has just been
published by Unesco, and will soon appear in English.
