Haroun Tazietî

On the night of September 27, 1965, the Taal volcano, in the Philippines, erupted
suddenly and violently, causing hundreds of deaths and widespread devasta¬
tion. Taal had already erupted three times since the beginning of the century.
Its last eruption in 1911 also caused heavy loss of life. The most recent catas¬
trophe is one more reminder of the vital need to keep constant watch over vol¬
canoes. Few eruptions fail to give some warning signs. If these are observed
and interpreted accurately and promptly, the local population can be evacuated
in time. Accurate methods of observation have now been developed. Principally,
these involve: the recording of earth tremors due to underground movements
of magma masses; the analysis of gases to detect changes in their composition
which occur before an eruption; and precise surveys of a volcanic crater as it
expands under the pressure of magma when an eruption is due. This last type
of diagnosis has been used by the American geophysicist, Robert W. Decker,
Last year he made repeated measurements with electronic equipment across
the Kilauea volcano crater in Hawaii, and recorded a 30 centimetre expansion
across its 4 kilometre diameter just before an eruption. Tellurometers, the in¬
struments used, have an accuracy of one millimetre per kilometre. Unesco is ac¬
tively developing a programme of international co-operation in volcano-logical re¬
search; since 1953 it has sent three missions to make on-the-spot investigations.
In 1964, Unesco sent a mission to Costa Rica following the eruption of the Irazu
18 volcano. This was led by the Belgian volcanologist, Haroun Tazieff, who de¬
scribes below the special problems of Irazu and the warning and protective mea¬
sures proposed by the mission.

"Volcanology is like medicine," says the famous Bel¬
gian volcanologist, Haroun Tazieff. "Before a doctor
can give a prognosis, he has to know his patient. It
is the same with a volcano: the better we know it, the
greater chances we have of predicting its behaviour."
In March 1964 a Unesco emergency mission led by
Haroun Tazieff spent several weeks observing the
"feverish" volcano of Irazu in Costa Rica. Bell-shaped
helmet seen in this photo is the latest type of protec¬
tive headgear worn by volcanologists. It can withstand
the shock of a 60-pound weight dropped from 500 feet.

CONFRONTING
THE
IRASCIBLE
IRAZU
by Haroun Tazieff
I RAZU, a volcanic peak over 11,000 feet high In
the massive cordillera that dominates Costa
Rica, lies fifteen miles east of the capital, San José. Since
the day in 1723 when it awoke with fury, destroying the
city of Cartago, then the capital of Costa Rica, it has erupt¬
ed at least eight times.
Irazu had been dormant for almost half a century when
it suddenly erupted on May 13, 1963. Huge'clouds of vol¬
canic ash shot skywards; the earth near the crater was
blasted open for hundreds of yards and covered with
several feet of ash. Nearly four miles from the crater
ash soon lay a foot deep.
Yet the greatest threat to Cartago and nearby commun¬
ities was not volcanic fire, but the combination of ash
and water. Tropical rains can transform volcanic ash into
a river of mud that sweeps everything before it trees,
rocks, house-sized blocks of lava at the speed of an
avalanche. This was how Herculaneum was burled during
the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 A.D. that also
wiped out nearby Pompeii.
In December 1963 a mud-flow coming down the Rio
Reventado on the slopes of Irazu advanced on Cartago
eight miles away, and swept through its lower section,
killing thirty persons and wreaking heavy damage.
Following this calamity, the Government of Costa Rica
asked Unesco to send an emergency mission to Ira7u
in order to study with Costa Rican engineers and scientists
the measures that could be taken to prevent a recurrence
of the disaster.
CONT'D ON PAGE 21
19

ff'*- '
IRAZU (Cont'd)
A verdant landscape of woods
and growing crops surrounded
the volcanic peak of Irazu
until May 1963 when vast'
clouds of smoke and ash began
to belch forth from the volcano
(left, still in eruption in Feb¬
ruary 1964). Vegetation of all
kinds has since disappeared
beneath the deadly,rain of ash
(right) which covers everything
within a range of 12 miles and
in places is several feet deep.
With the arrival of tropical
rains, the mass of ash becomes
a sea of liquid mud, forming
torrents which slide down the
slopes, sweeping all before
them. Below, a jeep used by
the Unesco mission to Irazu
follows a narrow track cut
into a desolate mountainside.
Photos © H. Tazieff
>
*-.-
r
*
J ¿¥£\
fc (£* IP*
-*ki%
,
- -, $&
*t%***- >
}
-'.- r+
X >
H
«
'
j|
'4 <*
¥ »
I
«- 1 jij»
y . *
d 8s " \
j -

^f *
'S
s ï
Deadly rain of ash
In February 1964 we were entrusted with this volcano-
logical mission to Irazu.
The Costa Rican Government was eager to know how
the eruption that had been going on since May 13, 1963
was likely to develop. The crater was throwing out vast
quantities of ash (fresh liquid lava and old solid lava
pulverized by the explosions) which was jeopardizing the
coffee crop Costa Rica's chief economic asset and to
some extent was perturbing the life of San José, the
capital.
Was the discharge of ash going to continue, intensify
or cease? How great a risk was there of a sudden violent
explosion that might endanger the communities around the
volcano?
Such questions were difficult to answer, in the first
place because the present state of volcanology does not
permit acéurate forecasting either of the intensity or
duration of an eruption. Secondly, in this instance the
absence of previous studies meant that even an approxi¬
mate forecast was out of the question.
Volcanic forecasts often very reliable concerning the
start of an eruption are based on changes in certain
chemical and physical factors, essentially the composition
of gases, their temperatures and pressures, the nature
and depth of volcanic disturbances, the nature of micro-
seismic tremors, the tilting of the ground and so on. But
it is not yet possible to forecast the duration of an eruption
in progress.
The Costa Rican Government placed at the disposal of
the mission two jeeps fitted with radio transmitter-receiv¬
ers; a tracked vehicle without radio; a fixed radio trans¬
mitter-receiver; a petrol driven power unit for charging
batteries; two banks of accumulators and a volcanic bomb¬
proof shelter which was installed in a trench dug at our
request through the rim of the crater.
This shelter, the first volcanic observatory to be set up
on the American continent, was constructed of seml-
cylindric. steel sections placed end to end and covered
with earth. Entrance to it was gained through a doorway
at the valley side of the trench, while two windows,
protected by sliding timber shutters, looked out on the
crater side. The whole was erected speedily and effi¬
ciently by the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity, to which
the members of the Unesco Mission would like to express
their gratitude.
Once completed, this observatory-shelter became the
base station. A seismograph, installed in a concrete pit,
and generally functioning 24 hours out of 24, was connected
by cahle to a pen-recorder placed in the observatory. A
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

FIRST OBSERVATORY-RE
Protection against heat, explosions, showers of debris and
other hazards of a volcanic eruption has always been a major
problem for the volcanologist. Here, on the rim of the Irazu
crater, engineers of the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity
IRAZU (Cont'd)
The big killer: avalanches of mud
22
radio station was set up in the observatory by the Tele¬
communications Service of the Guardia Civil.
The mission then set up two mobile seismological sta¬
tions by placing a set of instruments seismograph, ampli¬
fier, recorder and chronostat in each of the radio-equipped
jeeps. These mobile stations were used to locate the
exact position and depth of the earth tremors.
This part of the programme was at first seriously hamper¬
ed, partly by difficulties with the radio-telephone links, -and
partly by noise interference picked up in the populated
areas where the mobile stations had to be sited. Several
nights had to be spent in trying to reduce such inter¬
ference to a minimum, and this additional work caused
extreme fatigue, for during this time it was vital to maintain
the daily recordings and observations.
During the six weeks it spent in Costa Rica, the seismo¬
logical team used six miles of recording paper for its
seismograms. This enormous, volume of data was analyz¬
ed immediately it had been recorded, thanks to the devotion
of the experts who often worked 18 to 20 hours per day.
It was thus possible to provide the government with a
day-to-day record of the seismic activity of the volcano
during that period.
The first studies of the volcano and its activity showed
that -there was little immediate danger of a paroxysmal
explosion though the possibility of it happening in the
future could not be excluded or of an outflow of lava.
However, there was a definite and very serious risk for
the whole area lying on. the leeward side of the volcano
in relation to the prevailing winds. The danger was from
torrents (or avalanches) of volcanic mud, known also as
"mud-flows", or lahars. It is difficult to understand why
this danger is everywhere so seldom realized, for on the
average, lahars cause greater losses of life and property
over the whole world than outflows of lava or volcanic
explosions.
Lahars can either occur during the violent phase of an
eruption, due to the sudden melting of snow or ice by the
glowing lava or, in the case of a volcano with a crater
lake, through the ejection of the water (sub-lacustrine vol-

UGE IN THE AMERICAS
build a volcanic bomb-proof shelter of reinforced steel sec'
covered with earth for the Unesco mission. Photos sh<
stages in the construction of this armour-plated volcanic
observatorythe first to beset up on the American continent.
Photos © H. Tazieff
canic explosion). They may also be caused by the effect
of rain falling on the thick layer of ash, sand and dust
that has accumulated on the slopes during an eruption.
It was the third cause with which we had to deal at
Irazu. By the time we arrived in the district the dry season
had already lasted two months, during which the eruption
had neither diminished nor changed in nature. Immense
quantities of ash, with no rain to wash them away had
gradually accumulated on the lee side of the crater.
Although stable when dry, such a mass does not remain
so when wet, and it seemed inevitable that heavy down¬
pours during the rainy season would create torrents of
mud capable of devastating the inhabited areas on the
slopes and at the foot of the volcano.
Our exploration of the slopes at Irazu showed that the
thick layers of ash had built up chiefly in the upper valleys
of the rivers Durazno (to the west), Tiribi (south west),
Reventado (south) and to a lesser degree the Taras (south
east). Ash also covered the northern and western slopes
of the volcano, but the danger here was less because the
forests had not been cleared for pasture to the same
extent as towards the south.
On the southern slope the danger was greater because
of the lack of vegetation and the effects of previous
erosion. There would thus be few obstacles to slow down
or halt the progress of mud-flows once they -had started.
Less than 30 per cent of water is enough to transform
dry volcanic ash into liquid mud. As a mud-flow builds
up and surges to the bottom of a valley, its initial volume is
swollen with debris of all kinds and sizes that the mud
sweeps along with it: trees are uprooted, rocks and stones
are torn away from the sides and bottom of the valley.
It has been found that a lahar may increase its volume
sixfold in this way.
While it remains, in the higher part of the mountain this
mass is contained by the deep ravines, or quebradas. 0Q
These, however, usually peter out suddenly where the
slope decreases near the foot of the volcano. At this
point the mass of the lahar suddenly spreads out like a
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

IRAZU (Cont'd from page 23)
Interpreting
a volcano's
early warning system
fan, overflowing the banks of the river and destroying
everything in its path not only by flooding, but through
the tremendous battering-ram blows given by the rocks
and tree trunks it carries along.
To meet this danger two types of defence active and
passive can be adopted. Active defence consists of
diverting or deepening river beds, building dams or, as a
long term measure, drainage and reafforestation.
In the case of Irazu, with less than two months to go
before the onset of the rains, "active" defence methods
could have done no more than protect densely populated
places that were specifically threatened, and in particular
the city of Cartago on the lower reaches of the River
Reventado.
"Passive" defence techniques, on the other hand, could
be and were in fact put into effect immediately. Broadly,
these consisted of installing observation posts at carefully
chosen points. These posts functioned throughout the
24 hours, and were equipped with apparatus designed to
give the alarm, at any moment of the day or night and
whatever the weather, as soon as the warning level was
reached.

UR mission also recommended the installation
of automatic rain gauges which would transmit
a radio warning the moment rainfall reached a critical level.
We also suggested that automatic gauges be placed in the
ravines to alert the authorities to an excessive rise in the
water level.
This warning system had to be supplemented by careful
planning of the orderly evacuation of the people in the
threatened areas in case of an alert at any time of the
day or night.
Finally, arrangements had to be made for the eventual
rehousing of people whose dwellings might be destroyed,
and road maintenance carried out so as to provide alter¬
native escape routes to the main road, whose bridges, like
those carrying the San José-Limon railway, were threatened
with destruction.
The Costa Rican government decided to give effect to
the measures recommended by the Unesco Mission, which
can consider that its goal was achieved.
As it happened, two months after the departure of the
mission, the first lahars occurred at the start of the rainy
season. Only one life was lost whereas without the warning
system the death roll would have been heavy almost
certainly numbered in hundreds.
HAROUN TAZIEFF, Belgian geologist and volcanologist, is the
author of many scientific studies on volcanology and works for
the general reader. English-language editions of his books include :
"Craters of Fire", Hamish Hamilton, London, 1952; Harper, New
York, 1954; "The Orion Book of Volcanoes" , Orion, New York,
1961 (Volcanoes, Prentice-Hall, London, 1963); and "When the
Earth Trembles", Hart-Davis, London, 1964; Harcourt, New York,
1964. Haroun Tazieff has produced several prize-winning scientific
and documentary films on volcanic eruptions.

