I
METAMORPHOSIS
Bachofen, Geneva
To be called a "developing" country is a badge of honour
because it means that a nation has undertaken to lift itself...
out of the stage of economic underdevelopment and to do
in a few decades what in earlier history has usually taken
centuries.
Wilbur Schramm
in "Mass Media & National Development" *
THE years since World War II
might well be called the age of
international action a time during which
nations have pooled their efforts as never
before to solve problems too great for
single countries to overcome alone. Much
of this joint action has been taken through
a partnership of governments and their
peoples working together through the Uni¬
ted Nations and its specialized agencies
under programmes of technical co-opera¬
tion.
Technical co-operation for development
has been an important element of Unesco's
programme since 1946 when Unesco itself
was created. The launching in 1950 of the
U.N. Expanded Programme of Technical As¬
sistance brought about a tremendous in¬
crease in the breadth and scope of these
activities.
In the course of the past fifteen years
101 developing countries have joined with
Unesco In co-operative technical efforts
and have benefited from the skills and
* Published by Unesco-Stanford University Press,
1964. (t6.00 ; 301- 21 F).
experience of 3,000 Unesco technical
missions carried out under the aegis of the
U.N. Expanded Programme. In addition to
this, 3,824 senior and junior technicians,
scientists, specialists and officials were
granted fellowships abroad to enable
them to keep abreast of the latest technical
advances in other parts of the world.
It would be a great mistake to assume
that experts come only from the more
developed countries ; half of the countries
receiving aid are also supplying experts
to assist in the development of other lands.
India, the United Arab Republic and Brazil
to cite only three countries have sent many
experts to serve abroad.
By the end of 1964 Unesco had provided a
total of sixty million dollars worth of co¬
operative technical aid in the form of expert
missions, fellowships for study abroad and
technical equipment.
Unesco has committed itself so whole¬
heartedly to development that, in the words
of its Director-General, René Maheu,
addressed to the U.N. Economic and Social
Council in Geneva on July 9, 1965 : "this
now accounts for some two-thirds of all
budgetary and extra-budgetary resources of
the Organization."
"More important still, it has involved
Unesco to an increasingly greater extent
in operational activities and has thereby
brought about what amounts to a veritable
metamorphosis in the working methods and
immediate priorities if not in the spirit and
ultimate objectives of Unesco. This meta¬
morphosis has been so profound that one
is perfectly justified to speak of the birth
of a new Unesco, markedly different from
the Organization of the early years when
Unesco was basically an.agency for intellec¬
tual co-operation."
Unesco's programme of technical co¬
operation for development has laid special
emphasis since 1960 on three major fields:
development of education; development of
the sciences; development of the mass
media.
To make the fullest use of their human
and material resources, the developing
countries need not just money and mach¬
ines to forge the tools for economic and
social betterment but people who are prop¬
erly trained to use these tools, whether
they be simple lathes or complicated
equipment to operate large-scale industrial
plants.
When the U.N. Expanded Programme was
launched in 1950 Unesco had substantial
but nevertheless limited information on the
educational needs of the developing coun¬
tries and how it could best co-operate in
meeting these needs.
As a first step it sent out teams to survey
the educational situation and potential, as
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

METAMORPHOSIS IN UNESCO (Cont'd)
$60,000,000 for technical
missions, fellows & equipment
28
in Afghanistan, Burma, Libya, Thailand and
the Philippines. These surveys were not
only of great value to the countries but
enabled Unesco itself to work out a co¬
ordinated programme of technical aid and
co-operation, and set up urgent priorities.
Thus during the first five years of
Unesco's technical aid programmes rural
fundamental education was given priority
attention in development programmes initi¬
ated by a host of countries notably Cam¬
bodia, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Jordan, Korea,
Thailand, Sudan, and national fundamental
education centres were created by govern¬
ments with Unesco's help in order to train
various types of fundamental education
workers. In other countries (e.g. Afgha¬
nistan, Bolivia, Morocco, Tunisia) Unesco
experts helped in the setting up of national
fundamental education services, often inclu¬
ding facilities for producing inexpensive
educational materials.
Specialists co-operated with Unesco
member nations in the preparation of text¬
books for adults, literacy teaching, agricul¬
tural education, production or vernacular
language literature, women's education and
and rural handicrafts instruction. Other
Unesco experts collaborated in the launch¬
ing of fundamental education programmes
in Indonesia, Iraq, Libya, Paraguay and Peru
in co-operation with other U.N. agencies.
During this period Unesco gave special
emphasis to the development of regional
programmes for training fundamental edu¬
cation workers, especially in Latin Ame¬
rica, where the Regional Fundamental Edu¬
cation Centre for Community Development
(CREFAL) was opened at Patzcuaro, Mexi¬
co, in 1950 and also through the Arab
States Training Centre for Education for
Community Development (ASFEC) which
was established at Sirs-el-Layyan, U.A.R. in
1952. These two centres have since pro¬
vided many hundreds of trained workers for
the expanding national programmes.
ANOTHER major priority area which
emerged during the 1950s was
the field of primary education, in which
Unesco sent numerous advisers to many of
its member nations on a wide-range of
missions which included: advice in rural
education, teacher training, research in
teaching methods, use of audio-visual aids,
educational surveys, textbook production,
child psychology, establishment of model
schools and educational administration.
Particular attention was focused on Latin
America where a major project on the ex¬
tension and improvement of primary edu¬
cation was established at the end of 1956.
This major effort by the countries of Latin
America has brought together national
resources, supplemented by assistance
under Unesco's regular programme as well
as under the U.N. Expanded Programme.
Its purpose was to help the co-operating
states to come nearer to the goal of provi¬
ding education for all children of primary
school-going age.
Considerable growth in the third five-year
period of the Expanded Programme (the
early 1960s) coincided with the attainment
of independence by many countries, espe¬
cially in Africa.
Unesco co-operated closely with these
member nations in the programming of
educational development and the training
of their nationals. Regional training centres
were established in Santiago (1962), at New
Delhi (1962) and at Dakar (1964).
Regional conferences of ministers of
education and other officials responsible
for economic development plans were also
held to study the problems of education in
relation to economic and social develop¬
ment. The first such meeting, financed out
of technical aid funds, took place at the
end of 1950. It was held in Karachi and
it produced what came to be known as the
"Karachi Plan" which has been modified
since by subsequent meetings of ministers
from the Asian countries concerned.
WHILE major efforts in the fields of
fundamental education, primary
education and educational planning have
been prominent in the technical assistance
activities carried out by Unesco under the
Expanded Programme, other important fields
have also been covered. These include
secondary education, curriculum develop¬
ment, higher education, promotion of
education for girls and women, school build¬
ing construction and educational research
in teaching methods and materials, etc.
Regional centres have been established in
Addis Ababa for the production of primary
and secondary school textbooks and in
Yaounde for textbook production. In addi¬
tion, regional school building research cen¬
tres have been established in Khartoum,
Mexico City and Bandung (the last named
centre is being re-established in another
location).
In teacher training, a pattern of co-op¬
eration has developed whereby Unesco, in
conjunction with Unicef, has set up in-
service training courses under the Expand¬
ed Programme so as to improve the quality
of primary school teaching, and has given
technical advice on numerous projects in
the field of primary school inspection and
administration.
The end of the first five-year period of
co-operation was marked by a new trend
in which isolated activities gave way to
larger projects planned in the context of
broad long-range educational development
programmes.
In the fields of libraries, museums, read¬
ing materials and documentation, regional
centres have been established and regional
and country missions have been carried
out with assistance from the U. N. Expanded
Programme.
During Unesco's early years, its Science
Co-operation Offices based in Latin Ame¬
rica, the Middle-East, South Asia and
South-East Asia, had established firm
working relationships with the scientists of
their own region. It was felt, however,
that they were lacking information on
The world water shortage is so serious
that Unesco has this year launched a
Hydrological Decade a vast co-operative
programme of research into water prob¬
lems. Since 1962 Tunisia has studied the
use of saline water to irrigate its parched
lands. Above, water flowing in this canal
is used by a Tunisian experimental farm.
Right, construction of concrete bins for
growing and irrigating plants. Water
flowing from bins into the large pits
(foreground) will be measured to deter¬
mine loss from evaporation in the soil and
transpiration by the plants. Tunisia . is
carrying out this research in co-operation
with the U.N. Special Fund and Unesco.
Photos Unesco-Dominique Roger
developments in science in other parts of
the world. Thus, as soon as the Technical
Assistance Programme was started, a plan
was drawn up to establish, in several
member nations, centres of scientific and
technical documentation.
THE aim of these centres was to
collect the most important scien¬
tific periodicals and documentation publish¬
ed in the world, and to make them available
in a convenient and rapid way to the
scientists of the country or the region
concerned. The duration of the project
under the Expanded Programme was limited
to five years. The first centre was estab¬
lished in Mexico, and was followed by
others in India, Yugoslavia, Brazil, U.A.R.,
Pakistan, Uruguay, Philippines, Indonesia,
Thailand, Cuba and Korea. Unesco still
co-operates in running centres in Thailand
and Korea.
Scientific teaching and research have
also been developed and reinforced under
the programme, mainly in existing and newly
created universities. Unesco experts have
advised on curricula and on laboratory and
field experiments for students, on seminars
for university staffs and on the introduction
of new methods and new equipment. Dur-

ing the last fifteen years, universities of
32 different countries were modernized and
developed under this scheme.
Another area of activity under the
Expanded Programme relates to the
creation of scientific instruments centres,
where specialized laboratory equipment is
made and repaired. The natural outgrowth
of such a centre has led to testing and
standardization of apparatus and construc¬
tion of equipment for schools. Both types
of projects are now developed under the
Special Fund programme.
Unesco has also been associated with
the reform of higher technical education in
two ways: by granting fellowships to key
administrators and professors from techni¬
cal universities or faculties of engineering
who were later to be responsible for orga¬
nizing a new programme (in Mexico and
Yugoslavia for example); and by helping
new institutions such as the large regional
Indian Institutes of Technology and the
Middle East Technical University.
Technical aid missions have also been
concerned with the efforts of governments to
lay down á national scientific policy. Alge¬
ria, Iraq, Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar and
Morocco have received experts in this field
as part of the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance.
Missions have also been carried out in
the social sciences (political science, public
administration, economics, and the social
effects of industrialization and technical
change). Regional social science centres
have been established in Brazil and India.
ALTHOUGH Unesco has been
providing assistance in the deve¬
lopment and use of mass communication
facilities since the beginning of the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assis¬
tance, such aid was entirely concentrated
for the first ten years or so on the educa¬
tional use of the media. From the start, a
small but steadily increasing portion of
Unesco's programme was devoted to such
projects as the establishment of school
broadcasting services, of educational film
services and the setting up of national
audio-visual centres. One example was the
setting up of the Latin American Educational
Film Institute in Mexico.
A major change occurred after the U.N.
Economic and Social Council had asked
Unesco in 1959 to undertake a general
survey of information resources and needs
in the developing countries. Accordingly
in 1960, 1961 and 1962, Unesco organized
three large-scale regional meetings on the
needs of information media in Asia, Latin
America and Africa. In 1961, the Economic
and Social Council invited the Technical
Assistance Board, the Special Fund and
other appropriate agencies to assist the
less-developed countries in expanding and
strengthening their national information
media, and a new programme field was thus
established for action under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance in which
Unesco was invited to play a major role.
While continuing its, by now, traditional
assistance in establishing audio-visual ser¬
vices for education, Unesco has therefore
been able to meet new requests in the field
of mass communication proper. It has, for
instance, provided expert services in the
establishing of national news agencies, in
developing the press and in launching tele¬
vision. The volume of these activities is
still not large in absolute figures, but it
was this sector which showed the largest
proportional increase in Unesco's 1965-66
programme, requests received from its mem¬
ber countries showing a 36% increase
above the previous period.
Within the overall framework of mass
communication development, Unesco has
given priority to the training of professional
personnel, and to a large extent this has
been most fruitfully accomplished through 9Q
the organization of regional training courses
and through assistance in the establishment
of training institutes.
