One camp
three nations
many friends

Some of the young volunteers
from Great Britain, the U.S.S.R.
and U.S.A. who joined hands
to help build a summer camp
for Soviet youth groups in the
southern Caucasus in 1963.
This work camp and others in
Great Britain and the U.S.A.
were part of the Tripartite
programmes arranged by orga¬
nizations in the three countries.
Young people shared in work
projects, talks and discussions.
Unesco- Gillette
by Margaret Rose
Friends Service Committee joined with the Friends Ser¬
vice Council of Great Britain and with the Committee of
Youth Organizations of the U.S.S.R. In the scheme, 30
volunteers between the ages of 20 and 30 (10 from each,
country, five men and five women) gather for a month .
in the summer to participate in a service project, usually
construction work, and a series of discussions.
The Tripartite programmes were held in Great Britain in
1962, then in the Soviet Union, and in 1964 in the United
States. For two and a half weeks, the participants live
together in the same quarters, think, discuss, and work
together in an effort to build relationships, with respect
and understanding.
Daily camp activity is usually divided into four or five
hours of work in the morning, planned discussions for
two to three hours in the afternoon and social activities
and excursions in the evening. Committees (one member
from each national group) plan work, discussions, and
housekeeping. Leaders from each national group form
a special committee.
HE host country has naturally tended to make
detailed plans for the project, including social
activities, tours, receptions, and the like. The participants,
however, have asked for more opportunity to plan some
part of the available time themselves.
Although the work project is undertaken with the idea
of advancing a community project, it is also meant to
provide an opportunity for a sense of shared purpose
and an impetus to informal conversations.
In Bristol, England, in 1962, the participants worked on
a construction project already started by a local commu¬
nity improvement association. They helped to build a
centre for social and educational activities. It was esti¬
mated that their three weeks' work accomplished what
the community would have needed five months to com¬
plete! There were professionnal foremen to guide the
work plan, and the work team organized the volunteers
into groups each day and dispatched them to lay bricks,
pour cement, hammer nails, etc.
In 1963, in the southern Caucasus region of the Soviet
Union, the participants helped to construct a Young
Pioneer's Summer Camp owned by the local Confectioner's
Trade Union of Kalbardinia-Balkaria. In the United States
in 1964, Tripartite volunteers helped expand the facilities
of Camp Reinberg, a camp used by children from many
parts of Chicago.
ORE and more young people are now taking
part in volunteer international exchange pro¬
grammes with students from other countries. There are
many different types of programmes, but all have in common
the purpose of trying to develop better understanding
between citizens of different nations.
Working for "better understanding" is a euphemism heard
among university student groups around the world. Satis¬
factory ways of getting youth together to discuss their
views, however, have been difficult to develop. One
programme which provides a setting for a real inter¬
change of ideas, and consequently better understanding,
is the Tripartite Work and Study Projects.
To arrange this programme which combines a volun¬
tary work project and planned discussions, the American
IFFERENCES of opinion do exist among those
taking part about the merits of the work projects
and the work experience in general. Some have said
that the need for their work was not great, and that they
therefore lacked a feeling of purpose. Others say that
it does not matter what the work is, since the important
thing is the communication between the workers rather
than the material results. Some volunteers believe it is
a mistake to stress the value of conversation at the
expense of work. Another criticism is that physical work
in the morning is so exhausting that the volunteers have
not enough energy left to discuss important matters in
the afternoon. It has also been suggested that there gj
should be more contact between workers and the people
for whom the work is being done.
CONT'D ON PAGE 68

ONE CAMP, THREE NATIONS (Cont'd from page 53)
Tm a graduate in economics
but now I'm peeling potatoes'
No one has proposed that the work experience be drop¬
ped from the programme. The purpose of the criticism,
which is sought at the end of each camp in evalua¬
tion sessions, is to improve the quality of the work
experience. Some of the suggestions are being tried out
this summer in Great Britain, when the second series of
Tripartite begins. The work programme will be altered.
Instead of being planned for half a day over a longer period,
it is expected that the work will be concentrated in one
week with an eight hour day. Less time will be spent on
work than in previous years; more emphasis will be given
to meeting youth and community groups in the neigh¬
bourhood of the project and to visiting places of interest.
Besides doing construction work, the camp members
help with chores around the living quarters assigned to
them. In Bristol, participants prepared all their own meals.
A Russian at Bristol remarked: "I'm a graduate in econo¬
mics of Moscow University. Now I'm peeling potatoesl We
talk as much as possible, exchange views and laugh a
lot." In the Soviet Union a local chef did most of the
cooking, but there was a national dinner night for Great
Britain and the United States when the volunteers from
those countries cooked and served their own national
dishes.
In the afternoons all 30 volunteers sit down together
in a discussion group. What kinds of topics are discus¬
sed? The problems and responsibilities of youth in the
modern world is the most basic theme, but each year camp
participants decide for themselves more specifically what
they want to discuss. In 1963, topics chosen included.
The Cultural Values of Youth, Youth's Ideology and Morals,
The Individual and the Collective, Peace and Disarmament.
Among those for 1964, were How Does an Individual Form
His Own Code of Ethics? What Limits Should We Impose
on Individual Freedom? How Do We Build a World Commu¬
nity That Permits Diversity? Each of these topics is intro¬
duced by a keynote speaker and then, for the next three
days, about nine hours are spent putting questions and
exchanging points of view.
Q
68
UESTIONS such as these are discussed at
length: "If art is a rich experience of mankind,
with whom should it be shared?" "Does an artist produce
spontaneously or from a preconceived idea?" "Can art
replace religion as a spiritual experience?" Or, concern¬
ing Youth's Ideology and Morals: " In what way does
youth in your country discuss its problem?" "Do you
consider a dissenting minority among youth to be a
problem?" "Does reason or emotion tie one to an ideal?"
"How have the ideals in our societies originated?" " How
do we approach individuals who do not live up to
these ideals?" "Is nonviolence an effective technique of
social change?"
Experience in these discussions shows that topics which
touch first of all on our common humanity and social
functions are more valuable than topics requiring much
detailed factual information about economics and politics.
For example, first-hand information from individuals who
have participated in movements of social change and deve¬
lopment in their own countries is a source of new know
ledge for everyone. Also, discussion about broad social
and moral ideas challenges each participant to examine
his own thinking. This process of seeing others with
different ideas thinking about the same problems as one¬
self, when combined with work and the routine patterns of
daily camp life, builds respect and understanding.
I N the second and third camps, the discussion
group of thirty persons was divided into smaller
groups for at least one out of the three days spent on
each topic. Some people objected to this method because
it was then not possible to hear what everybody had to
say; but others felt that it increased opportunities for
discussion in depth and encouraged less forceful speakers
to express themselves.
Past participants suggest many ways to improve the
discussion sessions. Some say there should be more
preparation beforehand to give discussions a more factual
content. Others feel there should be no topics assigned
and that they should be allowed to develop naturally
within the group in the course of its association. Still
others say it is somewhat artificial to focus on youth when,
in fact, the discussion deals with philosophical and social
concerns regardless of age.
These criticisms, and those regarding the work project,
must be judged and understood in the spirit of the Tri¬
partite experiment as a whole. The spirit is one of co¬
operation and a deep desire to work at improving not
only a programme, but a relationship. Tripartite is built
on years of effort and hours of discussion. Each summer
participants from former camps (up to three from each
country are permitted) join the new campers. Each year
the leaders relate to the new members some of the
issues and experiences of the previous camps.
The attitude of co-operation which does not hide
differences and does not fear imperfections is one of the
important experiences in understanding that has developed
from Tripartite. Understanding, after all, is not something
that is acquired and preserved, but an active, restless
thought process. Sometimes it is more perfect than others,
but always it aims to strengthen the constructive relation¬
ships between men.
Perhaps the final lesson for many participants, which
becomes clear when they return to their countries, is that
understanding is a responsibility. It cannot exist for the
benefit of others if it is dormant; it has to live and develop
in individual lives and in society.
A programme similar to Tripartite was held in 1964 in
Poland, and one is planned in Eastern Germany this year.
There is good reason to believe that the Tripartite idea
could be practiced between nations in many parts of the
world. Understanding this, young people have a respon¬
sibility to try to make it possible.
MARGARET ROSE is a specialist in Slav languages and litera¬
ture. She has worked in the secretariat of The American Friends
Service Committee for the State of California (U.S.A.).
