In 50 developing nations
20,000 VOLUNTEER WORKERS
FOR PROGRESS & FRIENDSHIP
by Arthur Gillette
I t is natural that the young people of Asia,
Africa and Latin America wish to respond to
the challenge of underdevelopment. Their future, more
than that of their elders, is threatened by sickness,
ignorance and poverty. Along with their regular school
or work activities, which they may not always see as
contributing directly to development, they take part by
the millions in workcamps and non-manual voluntary
service projects. They build roads, teach literacy, improve
medical facilities, and do a host of other jobs that contribute
to progress in their countries.
But what of youth in the industrialized nations to
whom the world of the developing countries seems so
far away and so different? They too are concerned about the
plight and the struggle of the developing lands.
The accession of African and Asian countries to inde¬
pendence has aroused the interest of young people of
industrialized regions in the problems of underdevelopment
during the last decade. So has the rise of leaders in Latin
America who are dedicated to raising living standards and
broadening social and cultural opportunities on that conti¬
nent. This new interest is concentrated in youth movements
whose members take part increasingly in campaigns and
meetings concerned with the developing countries. It also
reaches attentive readers and listeners and viewers of the
mass media, which are dealing more and more frequently
with the subject.
This interest has led to action, and many of the young
people in industrial countries are not content to sit by as
spectators of one of the most enthralling dramas of the
twentieth century. They want to play an active role
and are doing so increasingly by serving as long-term
volunteers in the developing countries.
One of the most widely known programmes of long-
term international voluntary service is the United States
Peace Corps. Launched in 1961 by President John F.
Kennedy, the Peace Corps quickly caught the imagin¬
ation of young Americans of widely differing walks of
life. Today, some 9,000 Peace Corps men and women
are at work in nearly 50 countries. They are staffing
a broad range of posts requiring average skills in such
fields as nursing, construction, agronomy and teaching.
The first long-term volunteers from industrialized areas
went off to work in a developing country a quarter of a
century before the initiative taken by President Kennedy.
In 1934, Pierre Ceresole, son of a President of Switzerland,
led a team of Europeans sponsored by Service Civil Inter¬
national to Bihar, India, where they helped reconstruct
villages stricken by earthquakes and floods. Later and
especially after the second world war, various organiz
ations, including the World Council of Churches and the
International Builder Companions, followed this example.
New programmes, such as Voluntary Service Overseas,
in Great Britain, were created.
In the last four years the growth of voluntary service
has been phenomenal : nearly 20,000 long-term volunteers
from two dozen industrialized countries (1) are now working
in some 50 developing nations. In some countries and in
some professions, volunteers account for a significant
proportion of all medium-skilled personnel. In 1964, for
example, U.S. Peace Corpsmen constituted 50 per cent
of Liberia's secondary school teaching staff.
About 250 organizations national and international,
governmental and private, of various inspirations are
currently involved in recruiting, training and sending out
medium-skilled young volunteers from North America,
Eastern and Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand.
Voluntary service is, however, more than a vehicle for
transferring needed technical skills to the newly developing
nations. It enables volunteers to get to know and under¬
stand the people of these countries; and these peoples in
turn learn more about the countries from which the volun¬
teers have come.
HIS international understanding is neither super¬
ficial nor temporary. Working together toward
common aims, living in similar, simple conditions, surmount¬
ing frustations and frictions, the two groups can learn to
tolerate the differences that separate them, and then may
make a lasting reality of an underlying solidarity.
The common philosophy of the long-term service organi¬
zations is simple. For these organizations, their volunteers
and the host countries, international service has a twin aim
and double value. Firstly, it serves as a vehicle of manpower
supply which facilitates the transfer of skills to and training
of national personnel in the newly developing areas of the
world. It is also a crucible in which day-to-day difficulties
and successes, shared by local people and volunteers alike,
shape deep and lasting international understanding.
A description of the service given by three typical volun¬
teers should help to bring home its real significance.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
(1) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Eastern Germany, Federal Republic of Germany, Finland,
France, Hungary, Israel, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, U.S.A., U.K. U.S.S.R., Yugoslavia.
57

20.000 VOLUNTEERS (Cont'd)
Working themselves out of a job
58
Miss Alison MacEwen, 23, received a B.A. in social
anthropology from the University of Edinburgh in the
summer of 1964. While a student, she took part in the
activities of the U.K. Council on Education for World
Citizenship, served in several international voluntary
workcamps, surveyed village schools to be affected by
Glasgow town planning, and travelled extensively in Europe
and elsewhere.
Sponsored by the United Nations Association of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Alison began a two-year
assignment in Latin America as sociologist with a youth
movement for the U.N. last September. Her job consists
of taking censuses and analysing data in preparation for
workcamps and other service projects sponsored by this
movement. However, assembling dry facts and figures
is less important for Alison than the human contacts she
makes on her rounds. During January and February of
this year, she helped organize a neighbourhood develop¬
ment project in a poor quarter of a semi-industrial town.
Miss MacEwen reported : "We have managed to get
the women of the families I visit each day to come and
meet volunteers in a sort of shelter with a roof of straw,
where we give their children milk. We explain to the
mothers the importance of daily milk for their children,
and we're hoping to get the distribution established as
a routine event each morning.
"It often happens that the poor people are reluctant
to admit their problems, and are even less ready to come
to an institution such as a health centre. We are over¬
coming this through my visits, and by inviting them to
meet us where the surroundings are informal and there
is no atmosphere of 'authority.' When the community cen¬
tre we are building is finished these people will already be
used to working with strangers and the installations of medi¬
cal services should be smoother than it would otherwise
have been."
BOGDAN Szcygiel is a doctor in his mid-thirties
from Olkuz, Poland. After finishing his medical
studies, he initiated the "White Sundays" scheme through
which he and other qualified members of the Polish Union
of Rural Youth spent their Sundays touring out-of-the-way
villages in the Cracow region giving courses on first aid
and family planning.
Recruited in October 1964 through the Polish Committee
for International Co-operation, he joined a team of Service
Civil International volunteers working in and around
Tlemcen, Algeria, where he became leader of medical
activities.
Dr. Szcygiel directed a team of volunteers that included
another Polish doctor as well as nurses from Belgium,
England and Germany. Each member of this group
ministered to the medical needs of approximately 4,000
inhabitants of the Tlemcen area. In the city itself, the
volunteers organized and dispensed medical care in the
poor quarters, gave first-aid courses, and helped Algerian
personnel to prepare their examinations leading to more
advanced medical study. Dr. Szcygiel also led a small
flying team in the countryside surrounding Tlemcen which
gave medical assistance, helped with child-rearing and
introduced balanced diets to tent camps of nomads as
well as to permanent villages.
Last April, at the end of his service period, he returned
to Poland, and talked and wrote much about his work
as a volunteer. Strongly impressed by the needs of
Algeria and the scarcity of facilities and personnel, he
is now collecting medical equipment which he will take with
him when he returns to the country under a Polish technical
assistance programme in the next few months.
native of the eastern state of Maine (U.S.A.),
^young Peace Corpsman Robert Johnson has
served as a teacher at Ubon Teachers College in northeast
Thailand. Recently, at the end of his first year's service,
he wrote: "Life as a volunteer is rather unspectacular.
Whatever we are, whatever we do, we find ourselves
closely involved in the day-to-day affairs of the institutions
in which we teach or work. The glamour of living half
way around the world has worn off. Life has become rou¬
tine, even dull at times.
"But when the glamour wears off, something else comes
to take its place. This something else is a sense of being
at home, of being at ease in Thailand. When we arrived,
for instance, most Thais were surprised to see us wai
(bow with the hands joined as for praying) to our superiors.
Some liked it, some laughed (in Thailand, often an
expression of embarrassment), and some told us frankly
that farang (foreigners) should not wai."
The 250 or so organizations involved in long-term service
have differing aims, approaches and resources. Never¬
theless, we can say that the experience of most volunteers
parallels that of the three just described. They work at jobs
requiring average-level skills for from six to twenty-four
months. They live in simple, sometimes primitive, conditions.
They receive an amount of pocket money that is sometimes
equivalent to the pay of their local counterparts, but less
than they could earn doing a similar, salaried job at home.
They seek to pass on specific knowledge as well as
enthusiasm, thereby hoping to enlarge the pool of skilled
local manpower and to work themselves or their volunteer
successors out of a job. They learn as much (if not
more) than they teach, and become deeply and per¬
manently interested in the developing countries in general,
and "their" country in particular.
Since 1962 Unesco has aided the Co-ordinating Com¬
mittee for International Voluntary Service to undertake
various research projects in this field to ensure exchange
of information among bodies sending and receiving volun¬
teers, and to disseminate publicity on service possibilities
to prospective volunteers (2).
Critics have said that long-term voluntary service is a
passing fad. A more serious criticism which has been
made is that volunteers are often so young that they
lack experience of life. Other critics have pointed out
that volunteers are ignorant of the cultures and civilizations
in the countries they visit and therefore are generally ¡II-
(2) Readers may obtain further Information by writing to the Co¬
ordinating Committee for International Voluntary Service, 6, rue
Franklin, Parls-16*.

Young men from Ca¬
meroon and Kenya
and a young woman
from the Netherlands
join forces on a
workcamp project
that will bring fresh
water to a new com¬
munity centre in the
Cameroon Republic.
Unesco-Glyn Roberts
prepared to understand the ways and customs of the local
population.
A member of Service Civil International's British branch
said recently: "Twenty years ago you were considered
a bit of a crank if you went on a short-term voluntary
workcamp. Today, long-term service is something of
a status symbol among young people in the indus¬
trialized countries." However, as the enthusiastic pioneer
phase of large-scale volunteer activities comes to a close,
sponsors and users alike are making a thorough appraisal
of long-term service. Indications are that in the future
there may be less, euphoria about volunteers, but more
volunteers, used more efficiently.
So long as the lack of averagely-skilled manpower
persists in the developing countries, and so long as there
is a need for better understanding between young men and
women of different races, continents and ideologies, long-
term voluntary service will remain a prime means of
international co-operation among youth.
ARTHUR GILLETTE was formerly general secretary of the Co¬
ordination Committee for International Voluntary Workcamps,
and has represented the committee at meetings and training CQ
projects in Africa, Latin American and Eastern and Western ****
Europe. He is now a member of Upesco's Division of Youth
Activities.
