r.
fe
t*
¿LA
by Ted Morello
First grade primary school
children learn to read with
new teaching machine.
usis
10
T a time when the field of education is In
worldwide ferment, a single instructional pheno¬
menon has captured the attention not only of pro¬
fessionals but of laymen. It is the so-called "teaching
machine revolution" or, more properly, "programmed
instruction".
Some of the striking achievements attributed to pro¬
grammed teaching under experimental conditions help to
explain the fascination that auto-instruction exercises:
Children two and three years of age have been taught
to read and type... Without teacher, textbook or homework
eighth-grade pupils completed a full year's work In ninth-
grade algebra in a single semester... Three University of
Michigan students were taught by machine to speak fluent
Spanish in half the time required by traditional methods...
Studying for seven hours a day, an eleven-man group
learned as much Russian in 10 days as they would have
in one and a half semesters of conventional college study.
Referring particularly to emerging nations, one authority
says: "We are convinced that programmed instruction can
work miracles... in solving the world's educational prob¬
lems."
A "programme" consists of instructional material de¬
signed to lead a pupil almost unaided and without error to
a pre-selected level of learning by what amounts to a
Pavlovian stimulus-response-reward pattern. Behind any
programme lies the theory that the material must start with
something familiar to the student and progress with increas¬
ing difficulty through steps so small that the student can
move forward alone with reasonable assurance of respond¬
ing correctly. A programme may be presented in book
form or by mechanical devices (hence the designation,
"teaching machine").
As a practical matter, programmed instruction has not
yet progressed beyond the tentative, experimental stage.
There are those who contend that it never will, for nothing
approaching unanimity exists in academic reaction to this
unknown quantity clamouring for acceptance.
Few Innovations In teaching have generated so much
debate. At one extreme are those whose missionary zeal
for teaching machines borders on fanaticism. At the other
are those who, for a variety of reasons, condemn them just
as enthusiastically. In between Is the overwhelming bulk
of educators uncertain, cautious, even suspicious, but
hopeful, too, and eager to believe that here at last is a
sign pointing down the royal road to learning.
By recent count there were in the United States alone
well over 100 companies in the teaching machine field, and
the number is growing. Considering this mechanical explo¬
sion, it is not surprising that educators don't even agree on
what is and what Is not a teaching machine. However, a
definition by Dr. Douglas Porter, a programming authority
at Harvard University, is fairly representative. Teaching
machines, he says, are "devices which endeavour to' alter

the course of learning by automatically presenting the
student with a 'reward', or reinforcement, immediately
after he has made a correct response... All these devices
possess three operation characteristics: (a) they present
a sequence of problem materials to the student; (b) they
provide some means by which the student may record his
solution to the problem; and (c) they automatically and
immediately indicate correctness of the solution."
The fact that a student is responding frequently in an
explicit manner gives him a constant check on what he is
learning. Unlike a lecture situation, his active participation
makes any lapse of attention immediately apparent to him.
The impact of correction is infinitely greater because it
comes immediately instead of days or weeks later, as in
the case of written examinations. Finally, the Immediate
confirmation of correct response rewards and stimulates the
pupil to further efforts.
One of the most striking features of auto-instruction is
the fact that a student may move along at his own pace
neither held back by slow-learning classmates nor pre¬
cipitated into an area for which he is unprepared.
Dr. B. F. Skinner, a Harvard psychologist who used
laboratory pigeons to demonstrate the step-by-step
learning that underlies teaching machine instruction, adds
this rmportant point:
"The machine Itself, of course, does not teach. It simply
brings the student Into contact with the person who com¬
posed the material it presents. It is a labour-saving device
because it can bring one programmer into contact with
an indefinite number of students."
The Center for Programed Instruction, a nonprofit educa¬
tional organization in New York City that acts as a
worldwide clearing house for information in the field, puts
it this way:
"A teaching machine has been likened to the binding
of a book. Therefore, if a child learns anything, he will
learn as a result of the material in the machine (i. e., the
programme) rather than as a result of the teaching machine
itself. The machine in actuality has very little to do with
the process, and is in many cases unnecessary."
Indeed, research indicates that the mechanics of pro¬
gramme presentation whether by book or machine has
little effect on results.
The mechanical aspect of programmed learning is a
particularly sensitive one. Advocates of the system shy away
from the term "teaching machine" in favour of "program¬
med learning", "automatic tutoring", "auto-instruction" or
"psychomotor self-instruction". (The more implacable
critics scoff at the system as "instant knowledge" or....
"canned genius.") Nevertheless, "teaching machine" per- I I
sists among laymen as the most convenient and common
designation.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TEACHING MACHINES (Cont'd)
Students given
every chance to be right
12
A teaching machine may range from a device scarcely
more sophisticated than the traditional student work book
to a complex mechanical and even electronic tutor, that
presents not only written but audio-visual material. There
are about 100 models in various stages of development,
of which about half are in limited or full production.
Regardless of simplicity or complexity, a teaching ma¬
chine is only as effective as the programme the instruc¬
tional material that it presents to the pupil. As Prof.
Robert Glaser, who has devised programme books at the
University of Pittsburgh, observes:
"The fact that it ¡s a difficult and aversive task to
programme material and a much easier task to build the
accompanying hardware is indicated by the fact that at
the present time machines outnumber programmes by a
large factor. We are in the situation of having shells
without innards."
That point was underscored when a school board spent
$5,000 for 20 machines and then discovered that no
programmes were available for them.
OST researchers are satisfied that there no
longer is any doubt that programmed teaching
is effective. ("Even a bad programme is a pretty good
teacher", one experimenter says.) Emphasis now has
shifted to making programmed teaching efficient to pre¬
paring material that will guide a pupil in the desired direction
without meaningless or even damaging departures.
A sound programme is one that has been prepared
meticulously and tested rigorously. A programmer first tries
it out on a single student, changing a word or phrase or
adding or eliminating sections until the desired response
emerges. One by one, as many as ten other students
work through the material, which again is revised as neces¬
sary. Finally, the programme is group-tested. Ideally, it
is then capable of teaching efficiently perhaps ninety-
eight per cent of all students who are intellectually on a
par with those who participated in the testing programme.
Wilbur Schramm, director of the Institute for Communi¬
cations Research at Stanford University, says there has
always been a "deadly inflexibility" about the age at which
the average student was considered ready for any given
instruction. Underscoring the necessity of meaningful pro¬
gramming, he then asks rhetorically:
"But suppose that readiness depends upon teaching
method as well as upon subject matter. Suppose, for
example, that a student is ready for the -usual way of
teaching geometry only in the tenth grade but is ready for
another way of teaching it as early as the second grade?
Suppose that, as in the Soviet Union, intelligence tests
were to be minimized; and when a child could not under¬
stand an explanation or a concept, the blame were to be
laid, not on the child's supposed lack of intelligence, but at
least partly on the way the material is being taught?
Suppose the testmakers were to think of their assignments
not as selecting the fit from the unfit, but rather as selecting
the kind of instructional methods which will fit different kinds
of individuals?"
Programming falls into two broad categories: linear and
branching. A linear programme tries to guide the student
step by step toward a correct response, even prompting
him with thinly veiled hints. Dr. Skinner, a principal pro¬
ponent of linear programming, says:
"Teachers generally want students to be wrong. If
everyone knows the answer to questions, teachers make
them tougher. With teaching machines, you give the
students every opportunity to be right."
In the branching approach the pupil who responds with
the right answer moves along the trunk route to the next
question. But if he responds incorrectly, he is detoured over
explanatory material that provides the background to
correct his error. As he absorbs the subsidiary material, he
is led back, question by question, to the mainstream of
instruction. In other words, the student is either presented
with remedial material or accelerated to more advanced
material.
Programmed textbooks are by far the mostly widely
used presentation method indeed, virtually the only one in
curricular use. This despite one major distinction between
machine and text that favours the former. As one research
team has pointed out: "With programmed texts, nothing
but his conscience prevents the subject from gaining access
to the correct answer prior to making his own response."
Machines, on the other hand, are designed to be cheat-
proof, mechanically serving up problems one by one and
masking answers until the student has irrevocably res¬
ponded.
Other devices for presenting the curriculum material
include memory drums, rotating disks, film sequences,
slides, index cards and magnetic tape recordings.
In terms of Dr. Porter's "operation characteristics", how
a problem is presented depends on the design of the
machine; but in general the problem ranges from short
statement or question to a number of paragraphs pre¬
sented either visually (film, television or in writing) or orally
(by recordings) or both. The device then may either wait
for the learner to respond before reacting (learner-paced)
or it may move on to the next question at the end of a
predetermined period of time (machine-paced).
HE second step student response may be
taken in a variety of ways, again depending on
machine design. The student may write a word or passage,
punch a hole, push one or more buttons or Indicate his
reaction in some other way. Answer mechanisms tend to
polarize toward "multiple-choice" on the one hand and
"constructed response" on the other.
The final step confirmation of the solution's correctness
and reinforcement (reward) likewise depends In form on
the device used. Generally, revealing the answer by
exposing more of the programme both grades a student's
response and (when he is right) rewards him sufficiently.
However, the reward may also sometimes take the form
of flashing lights, bell-ringing, audio-visual evaluation, or
particularly for younger children the vending of candy,
marbles or small toys.

The boy at the type¬
writer is studying ocea¬
nography. The type¬
writer is part of a
teaching machine used
to demonstrate current
research on the human
learning process. A
series of lessons and
questions about ocea¬
nography appear on the
screen before the stu¬
dent. He reads and
responds by using the
typewriter to answer the
questions. The order
of succeeding lessons
depends on the appro¬
priateness of his answers
previously programmed
in a digital computer.
USIS
Here is the step-by-step operation of one simple auto-
Instructional device programmed for basic arithmetic. The
device consists of 12 sheets packaged In a cardboard
folder. A window In the folder exposes a portion of one
sheet: a box (or frame) containing one question or instruc¬
tional paragraph or both, and a second box left blank for
student response. When he has completed frame I, the
pupil slides the sheet upward to frame 2, exposing the
answer to frame 1, plus a new question or instructions
and second box for the written answer to question 2.
Frame 1, for example, reads: "In arithmetic, we must
understand numbers and what they mean if we are to get
correct answers".
Because this is instructional material rather than a
question, the "answer" box merely Instructs: "Go to the
next frame".
Frame 2 reads: "When we u	d numbers in
arithmetic we will get correct answers. Fill in the word".
In the adjoining box the pupil is expected to write,
"understand". He then moves the sheet upward, exposing
frame 3, which contains the correct answer to the frame 2
question and presents the new instructional material: "We
call the way numbers are put together a system". Frame
4 reads: "When we understand the number system, we
will get (right/wrong) answers. Choose the right word.
In the answer box the pupil writes, "right" and, is
rewarded when, on moving to frame 5, the word "right"
is exposed as the correct response to the frame 4 question.
At its most revolutionary, programmed teaching not only
guides a pupil through what to learn but shows him how to
learn. The distinction is roughly equivalent to that between
a lecturer and a tutor. Both provide facts, but the tutor
additionally helps the student to learn them..
Since the system focuses on guiding a pupil to a correct
response rather than trapping him into a wrong one, promp¬
ting is an integral part of programming. As specific
examples of good and inadequate prompts. Dr. David J.
Klaus, associate programme director for training and edu¬
cation at the American Institute for Research, in Pittsburgh,
lists the following problems:
Example X: "Fahrenheit and centigrade are scales of
temperature; Kelvin is a 	 ".
Example Y: "Fahrenheit and centigrade are scales of
temperature; Kelvin is also a 	 ".
Dr. Klaus observes that example X is a poorly cued frame
resembling "a test question rather than an aid to learning".
"By adding a single word, however, example Y illustrates
a very good frame", he says. "It is almost impossible for
a student to answer it incorrectly even if has never
seen the word 'Kelvin' before."
What can be expected from auto-instructional devices?
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

TEACHING MACHINES (Cont'd)
Too costly for emerging countries ?
14
Three levels of programmed learning are usually mentioned.
At the lowest is so-called rote learning of such material
as vocabulary, arithmetic, spelling and the basic facts of
history and geography. A step higher is conceptual learning
in which a student not only must memorize facts but must
be capable of handling a wider variety of problems and
examples than can be specifically covered by the pro¬
gramme. Physics, statistics and economics present challen¬
ges in this direction. The most sophisticated instructional
level involves the teaching of such capabilities as creative
thinking and judgement.
"This may be the level of education at which auto-
instruction will yield its greatest fruit", says Dr. Klaus.
"The possibilities of developing a programme in this area
are derived from two simple observations. First, we have
sufficient data to indicate that creativity and judgement are
examples of learned behaviour. Secondly, we have evidence
to indicate that these behaviours can be taught. What Is
left is simply a problem of mechanics, that is, identifying
exactly those behaviours to be learned and then finding
the means to successfully establish these behaviours in
the student's repertoire with auto-instructional methods
and devices."
Yet it is precisely at this point that many educators split
with teaching machine enthusiasts. For while conceding the
device's role in purely quantitative teaching, they are du¬
bious about a machine's effectiveness as an instructor in
qualitative subjects.
In terms of the number of programmes available, the
field is dominated by mathematics, which lends itself to
programmed instruction because it is a subject of precise
answers that can be learned in small steps. English, including
reading and spelling, is probably second, followed by
psychology, foreign languages and physics.
Dr. Edward B. Fry, a teaching machine researcher at the
University of Southern California, remarks:
"It is probably quite safe to say that in the next few
years some programme will have been developed for every
subject taught in our schools."
contrary view comes from Dr. George D. Stod¬
dard, chancellor of New York University. He
accords the machine a place as an instructor In facts,
formulas, vocabulary and grammatical rules. But he fears
that such instructional methods will stultify rather than
stimulate a child's thinking, creative and performing pro¬
cesses.
"Perhaps a live teacher who infuriates a student is better
than a machine that leaves him stuffed with information but
cold as a mackerel," Dr. Stoddard says.
Much of the hostility toward auto-instruction is based on
economics; despite assurances to the contrary, many
teachers fear that machines will replace them. One so far
betrayed his hostility as to fail thirty per cent of a class that
had come to him via a programme-taught preliminary course.
And in at least two cases, indignant school administrators
have demanded legislation barring programmed instruction
from classrooms.
Among parents and laymen generally, opposition is often
based on sentiment the fear that "traditional" relation¬
ships between pupil and teacher will be destroyed.
Both categories of opponents visualize varying degrees
of automation, ranging up to the extreme of a 100 per cent
mechanized educational system from kindergarten through
university.
Proponents of the system scoff at such fears as ground¬
less. They reply that, with or without machines, pro¬
grammes can liberate teachers from the drudgery of purely
mechanical instruction so that they may be free for "those
inspirational and thought-stimulating activities which are,
presumably, the real function of the teacher," in the words
of Dr. S.L. Pressey, the Ohio State University psychologist
generally regarded as the precursor of the teaching ma¬
chine revolution.
NE educator has. said in the machine's defence:
"A human being should not be wasted in doing
what 40 sheets of paper or two phonographs can do. Just
because personal teaching is precious and can do what
books and apparatus can not, it should be saved for its
peculiar work. The best teacher uses books and appliances
as well as his own insight, sympathy and magnetism."
Auto-instruction would be irresistible even if its only
promised advantage were an impressive speedup in edu¬
cating the world's children. (Dr. A.A. Lumsdaine, an edu¬
cation psychologist at the University of California, Los An¬
geles, predicts that with machines, "bright pupils will be
able to finish the grade school curriculum by the time they
are 10 years old instead of 14"). The fact is, programmed
instruction is enormously attractive for other reasons.
In a world clamouring for more and more teachers, pro¬
grammed learning seems to offer a way of spreading out
the available supply. And with the soaring cost of ela¬
borate school buildings beyond the reach of impoverished
and even of many advanced nations, machines which can
be used in buildings of monastic simplicity or even at home
seem to be a budgetary blessing. Attracted by these and
other considerations, educators from Latin America, Asia,
Africa and Europe are eagerly watching developments in the
field. The first experimental steps already are being taken
in Sweden, France, Great Britain, Japan, West Germany,
South Africa and Nigeria.
Prof. Arthur French of Makerere College in Kampala,
Uganda, admits that there is widespread interest among
African educators ; but he adds that many administrators
are intimidated by the cost of teaching machines. Pro¬
grammers not affiliated with commercial "teaching machine"
manufacturers tend to agree that emerging countries would
be unwise to invest heavily in mechanical devices now.
Says P. Kenneth Komoski, president of the Center for
Programed Instruction:
"We are not going to help a country that is trying des¬
perately to create or acquire traditional textbooks by telling
them we have better books that cost more (as indeed they
dol). In fact, the less emphasis we put on the products of
programmed instruction, i.e., programmed texts and teaching
machines, the better off we will be. For one thing, teaching
machines will not work in developing countries today for
the simple reason that they do not work in this country.
They simply have not been sufficiently debugged... I
believe we would be foolhardy to chance mechanical failure
so far from home."
CONT'D ON PAGE 16

Palais de la Découverte, Pans
Michel Péron, Paris
CALCULATED DISK
Advanced research in programmed instruction is
making increasing use of the potentialities of the
electronic computer. In the United States com¬
puters have been used experimentally in group
and individual learning exercises and examinations.
Below, computer memory disk capable of record¬
ing 500,000 words in the shaded area. Above and
left, the great ancestor of our modern computers,
Pascal's mechanical calculator, now preserved in
a Paris museum (detail shown on cover). It is
operated by turning the series of wheels; results
then appear in the sight holes at top of cover.
IBM, Paris

1
m¿
TEACHING MACHINES (Cont'd)
A simple teaching machine operated
with a typewriter roller action. Stu¬
dent writes answer to question in
window on right and can go on
to the next question if he is correct.
From " The World of Teaching Machines "
© 1961. Electronic Teaching Laboratories.
Washington. D.C.
A new technique of unlimited potential
For the immediate future, Mr. Komoski suggests, empha¬
sis should fall on "finding out how the principles of pro¬
grammed instruction may be generalized to all instructional
situations and applied to all available media" regardless
of culture. Such an approach is aimed at solving two
great unknowns about the prospect of worldwide use of
programmed instruction: (a) To what extent can pro¬
grammed instruction, still an almost wholly American phe¬
nomenon, be transferred merely by programme translation
to another nation even an English-speaking one? (b) How
many of the principles applicable to American-oriented
programme instruction would* be valid in constructing indi¬
genous programmes in other languages for peoples of
other nationalities, cultures or educational levels?
' While admitting that almost nothing is known about
programmed instruction except that it works, educational
psychologists in the field nevertheless are confident that it
is a new weapon of unlimited potential in the worldwide
war against ignorance. Pointing out that the global need
for teaching of literacy and technology "is so vast as to
be almost beyond comprehension," Dr. Schramm says:
"Could an intelligent use of programmed instruction signi¬
ficantly reduce the time and money required for that task?
Everyone who is familiar with programmed instruction and
has looked closely at the needs of the new states is most
optimistic about what could be accomplished. These coun¬
tries are desperately short of teachers; here is a device to
multiply good teachers. These countries have unusual
motivations to learn; here is a device to take advantage of
these motivations and provide a tool for self-teaching.
These countries have need for a considerable amount of
expert and specialized teaching which is often not within
the competence of many of their teachers. Countless one-
room schools are in charge of teachers who themselves
have only four to six years of education. How much the
learning opportunity of those one-room schools could be
increased by the addition of a small library of well-made
programmes."
Unesco
'workshops'
on
programmed
instruction
ZZ OR several years Unesco has
been studying the possibili¬
ties of introducing programmed
instruction in developing nations.
In 1963 it held "workshops" on
programmed instruction in Ra¬
mallah (Jordan) and Ibadan (Ni¬
geria) to introduce to educators
in the Middle East and West
Africa the techniques of pro¬
gramming instructional materials.
In 1964 another workshop was
held at Accra (Ghana) and a
work conference took place in
Zaria (Nigeria). Programmed ins¬
truction materials were also de¬
veloped in 1963-64 in Sao Paulo,
Brazil, where a Unesco pilot pro¬
ject on physics teaching was
launched. In 1965 two workshops
are planned for French-speaking
African countries (in Madagas¬
car) and for Arab educators con¬
cerned with teacher training. For
further information on program¬
med instruction and other new
techniques in education see "Pro¬
grammed Instruction in West
Africa and the Arab States" and
"New Methods and Techniques in
Education" (Nos. 52 and 48 in
the Unesco publications series
"Educational Studies and Docu¬
ments"; $1.00; 5/-; 3,50 F.).
16
H
