A GENERATION
OF BUILDERS
by Yuri Kotier
INE way of assessing this planet's future is to
find an answer to the question "What are the
young people of the mid-20th century like?" This article is
an attempt to present a few answers from one country,
the U.S.S.R. and to see what things Soviet youth are
thinking about, what their hopes, ambitions and preoccu¬
pations are today.
This is an age of tremendous change. It has known
revolutions and world wars, it has been called the cosmic
age and the atomic age and it is also the age of the ther¬
monuclear bomb. Still it is also an age of the new: it is the
age of humanism. For the first time, men have seriously con¬
sidered general disarmament as a global issue. Scores of
countries have been freed from colonialism to build a new
life. Science has soared to unprecedented heights and is
laying the groundwork for the welfare of mankind as a
whole. In all these new developments we find young people
in the forefront.
It is true that some persons have called this the "age
of the lost generations". The idea that thermonuclear war
is inevitable has gained some ground among young people,
and has prompted some to adopt the gather-ye-rose-buds-
while-ye-may attitude, but the egoists and the weak have
never been representative of humanity as whole.
It has been my good fortune to be able to attend many
discussions and debates carried out by youth groups in
various parts of the Soviet Union, from Moscow to Sverd¬
lovsk, from Murmansk to Kherson, and Kodand to Tallin.
I
62
F I were asked to sum up the views of Soviet
youth in one sentence, I would say that what
characterizes the young people of our country today is
optimism. Soviet youth reject pessimism; they refuse to
take things for granted or live in a rut; they possess a deep
sense of responsibility to the world they live in and will not
remain on the sidelines; they are eager for a fuller spiritual
life and will not be kept within the narrow bounds of conven¬
tion.
Although Soviet young men and women may have
differences of opinion about different things in life they
do agree on one point: this is a generation of builders,
and everyone must work together to build a new life. In
the last decade young people have played an important,
often a key, part in every major development undertaking,
ranging from the ploughing up of virgin lands in the
eastern areas of the Soviet Union to the development
of public self-administration.
Young people have journeyed to the Far North beyond
the Arctic Circle, to Siberia and Central Asia in the Far
East, living in tents under rudimentary conditions in order
to build new towns and heavy industries, dams and mines.
In the past few years a million and a half young men and
women have gone out to work at the country's major
construction sites. In Siberia alone 22 new towns and
140 housing projects have sprung up, thousands of kilo¬
metres of gas and oil pipelines have been laid and over
15,000 kilometres of railways have been built and electrified,
thanks to Youth Projects.
typical example is Temir-Tau near Karaganda,
the centre of Kazakhstan's coal basin in Soviet
central Asia. In the old days it was a small village. Then
the government decided to build giant steel and copper
works in the area.
Temir-Tau was declared a Youth Project and a call was
issued to young men and women all over the country who
were not afraid of roughing it, living in tents and doing
really strenuous work. Tens of thousands of boys and
girls responded to the call. By the end of the 1950s Temir-
Tau had a population of 59,000. Today the figure has risen
to 150,000 and more than half of the inhabitants are under
23. The city itself is a replica of the U.S.S.R., its population
being made up of people from every Soviet Republic, region
and territory.
There are now over 130 Youth Projects in action through¬
out the country though most are in the wild parts of
Siberia, the Far North and Central Asia. This urge to
build, to overcome difficulties and create a new future is
marred neither by fanaticism nor asceticism. Nor are the
human elements of life denied; indeed a great effort is now
being made to intensify them.
Soviet youth are no different in many ways from youth
in other parts of the world today. They are bursting with
vitality and give vent to their ¡oie de vivre in various
forms. They like to ride motorcycles or walk about with
transistor radios slung across their shoulders; they love
jazz and the most modern forms of dancing; they carry
on heated debates about modern art, and have even taken

to wearing fancy shirts and pinning pictures of film stars
in the driver's cab of their lorries which they drive at
breakneck speed along Siberia's endless highways.
An increasing number of Soviet youth are now specializing
in science and technology. And scientists and engineers
under 30 make up a large percentage of the personnel
of leading industrial and technical institutions. In certain
Institutes of the Academy of Science 50 to 85 per cent of
the scientists are under 30 years of age.
"Have you ever been to Komsomolsk-on-Amur?" one youth
recently wrote, "I helped to build it. I am a romanticist by
vocation. I am sure there is such a vocation. It was cold
and hungry living in the thickly overgrown taiga where we
erected the world's first youth city. But we had a romantic
vision. We knew that in building that new city we were
bringing about a revolutionary change in our country."
This attitude describes one of the chief traits of Soviet
youth today who believe that helping others is the most
important thing in life and see their work as part of the
reshaping of their country.
In this connexion it is worth noting that collective action
was recently voted the chief characteristic of modern
Soviet men and women at all youth debates across the
country. "You are responsible for everything", is a very
popular slogan among young people today who consider
themselves responsible for everything occurring around
them, both good and bad. They feel that the present is
their responsibility and even more so the future.
The largest youth group in the U.S.S.R. is the Komsomol.
This organization, in which the idea of collective action
is a dominating one, had 22,000 members some 47 years
ago and today boasts 22 million.
Recently the Institute of Philosophy of the Academy
of Science of the U.S.S.R. carried out a public opinion poll
of young persons in the Moscow area. One thousand young
people employed by the Moscow Electrical Engineering
Works were asked to reply to six questions affecting their
work and their everyday lives. Their answers were highly
revealing.
The first question dealt with salaries and youth's attitude
to work. Answers: "Wages are important but the main
thing is the meaning and social usefulness of your work"
42 per cent; "Any work is good so long as the pay is
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
The young people of the U.S.S.R. are passionately fond of poetry and Soviet poets often
come to read their works to enthusiastic audiences in which youth is well represented.
Here a teen-ager recites the poems of Valdimir Maikovsky beside a portrait of the poet.

Left, the construction
of this factory ¡s a Soviet
youth project on which
much of the work is
done by volunteers.
Right, midnight in Mos¬
cow. A young jazz quar¬
tet plays toa vast crowd
in Manegnaia Square.
j¿&pQF*>
R!\- vv^
3£
L ' w«V. 3*K
**?
mvi
Above, a holiday hike
alongside Lake Baikal.
¿Afij?
Tass photos
A GENERATION OF BUILDERS (Cont'd)
64
What makes a happy marriage?
good" 2 per cent; "Salaries are the main thing but the
work you do also counts" 12 per cent; "What counts
most is doing a good job, having a job where they can't
do without you" 40 per cent; "I can't stand the work"
1.5 per cent; "Don't know" 2.5 per cent.
Question Two: "How would you spend your time if working
hours were drastically cut?" Answers: "Watch more televi¬
sion" 8 per cent; "Take a study course, enrol at a technical
institute or college, read more books" 27 per cent; "See
more plays, take up some form of art" 17.5 per cent;
"Take up sport" 24 per cent; "Take it easy" 2 per cent;
"Look for another job to make more money" 1 per cent;
"Take up technical invention" 20 per cent; "Don't know"
0.5 per cent.
These replies show a marked tendency on the part of
Soviet youth to go in for self-improvement activities such
as home study, art, sport and technical training.
In a book published last year, "Marriage and Family in the
U.S.S.R.", by Dr. A. Kharchev, we find a study of the atti¬
tudes towards love and marriage of young people and
newly-weds in the city of Leningrad. Almost 85 per cent
of all marriages of persons under 30 in Leningrad and
just about half the total number of marriages in the city
take place at the Leningrad Palace of Marriages. Here Dr.
Kharchev interviewed 500 couples and collected further
data from an additional 300. Of those polled 21 per cent
were workers, 28 per cent students, 10 per cent engineers
and technicians, and the remaining 41 per cent office
workers, doctors or young persons employed in various
occupations dealing with the arts and sciences.
In answer to the question, "What in your opinion is the
chief factor making for a happy marriage?", 76.2 per cent
said love, or love and similar attitudes; or mutual trust;
sincerity; friendship, etc. Equality of status and mutual
respect was the reply given by 13.2 per cent; love and a
good flat to live in by 4 per cent; love and money, 1.6 per
cent; children, 0.6 per cent; and a realistic view of life,

0.2 per cent. Only 4.2 per cent replied they didn't know.
Even if we assume that all those who answered "Don't
know" considered the material factors to be the most
important for a happy marriage we find that no more
than 5 per cent of the total number of young people polled
can be classed as "materialists". It is obvious that for
the overwhelming majority moral factors are by far more
important.
This of course does not mean that young people complet¬
ely pooh-pooh material conditions. Sample interviews
carried out by Dr. Kharchev showed that young couples
getting married in Leningrad are by no means blind to the
importance of economic and other material factors in married
life but in cases of conflict, moral considerations take
precedence.
When young people point out that they feel both partners
in marriage should be equal, they do not mean by this that
marriage is a business arrangement. For Soviet youth today
marriage is above all a question of love, and they do
not think there is anything old fashioned about such an atti¬
tude. If a couple is in love, they say, that's what counts most,
and not having a flat for themselves, or money in a savings
account or a television set should not prevent them from
getting married.
Of course this is not the whole picture. Today's generation
of youth has many faces, and it is never completely like
the one in the advertisement. One can find every type of
person among Soviet youth today. There are the egotists
and the opportunists, the cheats and the drunkards, the
rowdies and the delinquents. Youth groups are conscious
of this and are making every effort to deal with such
persons and to reintegrate them into their community.
The wealth of a nation, as everyone knows, is its youth,
for youth are a nation's great natural resource and the basis
of its strength. It is in the measure that society as a whole
understands its young people and allows youth to participate
on a footing with grown-ups in the activities of a nation
that the future society can be built on firm foundations.
YURI KOTLER, the Soviet author and journalist, is a specialist on
sociology and youth problems. He is a special correspondent of
the magazine, "Soviet Union".
65
