The rehabilitation of a long-disdained genius
CARAVAGGIO
Portrait
of Caravaggio,
by Ottavio
Leoni
Marucelliana
Library. Florence
ARAVAGGIO, the 16th-century Italian artist,
now occupies a special place in the history
of art. Long considered as a minor artist, accorded only
the status of a painter of works "for the curiosity shop",
Caravaggio has now been rehabilitated. During the past
thirty years he has increasingly been recognized as one of
the revolutionary geniuses of Italian art. Today, art histo¬
rians trace, within the vast perspectives of world painting,
his influence on such masters as Velasquez, Vermeer and
Georges de la Tour.
Caravaggio was a key figure in the development of baro¬
que painting but, with the decline of this art style as tastes
and fashion changed, his works fell from favour and finally
into disrepute. By the end of the 19th century "Caravag-
gism" was being attacked as strongly by the "naturalists"
as by those who preferred academic art, though for quite
different reasons. It was restored to a worthy place in
the Pantheon of the world's art thanks largely to the efforts
of two Italian art critics, Roberto Longhi and Lionello
Venturi, in the first quarter of the twentieth century. Six
major Caravaggio exhibitions have been held in the past
14 years.
The ups and downs of Caravaggio's posthumous career
were in a way postscripts to his stormy, turbulent life
which, when it ended in 1610, seemed to have been mar¬
ked during most of its brief course by shocks and scandal.
There was so much about Caravaggio that was scandalous:
his wealth of talent, the excesses of his Bohemian mode
of life and, apart from his revolt against the aesthetic
standards of his time, his new and disturbing view of the
world, which so antagonized many of his contemporaries.
For he suddenly revealed human beings as nature has
made them and not as the classical art style then decreed.
The son of a mason, Caravaggio was born in 1573 in the
village of Caravaggio near Bergamo in northern Italy.
His real name was Michelangelo Merisi, but as was common
in his day, he later took the name of his birthplace.
When he was eleven years old he was apprenticed to
a painter from Bergamo, Simon Peterzano, who worked
for many years in Milan. Caravaggio was sixteen or
seventeen when he finally set off for Rome, then the
dominant artistic centre of Europe.
With the Renaissance, classicism in art was again in
favour, a fact of which the young Caravaggio took no heed
whatever. This is reflected in his early works, particularly
in one he painted in 1590 when he was seventeen. Every
detail of "Rest on the Flight to Egypt" reveals a taste for
naturalism and a lyrical affection for nature.
In Rome, Caravaggio worked in the studio of Cesare
d'Arpino, a celebrated artist and teacher. For his master's
patrons he painted fruit and flower subjects, but also from
his brush came minor masterpieces: "Boy with a Basket of
Fruit" and "The Young Bacchus".
CONT'D ON PAGE 23
Left, The Supper at Em-
maus (detail). Caravaggio
made several paintings of
the meeting between Christ
and his disciples at Emmaus.
This version is now in the
National Gallery, London.
Unesco Catalogue of Colour Reproductions
Colour page, opposite:
Detail from the Martyrdom of
St. Matthew. French Church
of St. Louis, Rome.
Centre colour pages:
Christ Calling St. Matthew.
French Church of St. Louis,
Rome.
Photos © Arts graphiques de la Cité. Paris

1BJK.
Éaf
^H '
Bfl
yjWM
BBJBBJBJBBJBSBBJSBBB
BBBBBBBBBBBBl BJBJBJBJBJBJBJBJBJBBBJbbbbbI
gn
Kl
BBBBB
TBHI
an
Bfl
V
IbbI

?m
y¡m
BBl
BBJ
BJB
is*
I
.
"rtSfí :
Ö
BBl


CARAVAGGIO (Cont'd)
'Angry young man'
of the Renaissance
A Roman prelate, Cardinal del Monte, now became inter¬
ested in the talented young artist, and commissioned from
him three paintings depicting the life of St. Matthew, for
the Contarelli Chapel of the Church of St. Louis, in Rome.
In these works, executed between 1597 and 1600, the
full measure of Caravaggio's genius was at last revealed.
By his incomparable treatment of contrasts, by suddenly
infusing deep shadows with pools and shafts of piercing
light, he gave his paintings a startling effect of movement.
In this dramatic chiaroscuro, figures and objects acquired
a new wealth; his brush conjured up a new dimension.
Caravaggio's first religious paintings caused a scandal.
People called them vulgar and were shocked because the
models were no longer the idealized types used by Cara¬
vaggio's predecessors. He had simply taken them
from among the ordinary people he met in the streets:
old women with faces marked by hardship and adversity,
fresh-faced adolescents, young men looking astonishingly
like today's "mods" and "rockers", innkeepers, ragged
wastrels. In Caravaggio's hands, refined-looking, evanes¬
cent Madonnas were transformed into sturdy peasant
women suckling infants, and saints became ordinary men.
The abrupt gesture, the suggestion of violence so dis¬
pleasing to delicate and refined tastes, the return to a
world of physical reality shorn of every artifice, all, never¬
theless, tell of a love of humanity that still has the power
to move us three centuries later. Perhaps Caravaggio's
great secret, the very source of his inner power, was his
compassion, his ability to feel the emotions of others, to
suffer with them. He was indeed an "angry young man"
of the Renaissance whose "rage for life", paradoxically,
concealed a terror of death that only showed clearly in
his final works.
What displeased Caravaggio's contemporaries far more
than the "tricks" with light and shade was the presence in
his paintings of such convincingly life-like figures, the
sudden intrusion into the sacred of the everyday, as in
the "Crucifixion of St. Peter" and the "Conversion of
St. Paul." Yet the noblemen of Rome went on buying his
paintings. Caravaggio was now famous, but still a contro¬
versial and often disparaged figure. His fellow painters
observed him closely, recognizing a novator.
Caravaggio haunted the ill-famed quarters of Rome. He
became involved in brawls and was haled before the courts.
In one of these fights he killed a man. At that moment all
Rome was talking about his painting, "Death of the Vir¬
gin" (today in the Louvre Museum). Caravaggio had had
the audacity to depict Mary as a coarse, vulgar street
woman. Some even hinted that he had used as his model
the corpse of a courtesan taken from the River Tiber.
Caravaggio was forced to flee from Rome after his fatal
brawl. He went to Naples, then to Malta where, in 1608, he
found an enlightened patron in the Grand Master of the
Order of Malta. He went on paintingand brawling. Leav¬
ing Malta he returned to Naples from where he began to
make his way back to Rome. But on reaching Port 'Ercole
he fell ill. Desperate and alone, he died at the age of 37.
In these last years he painted "The Beheading of St. Jean
the Baptist" (Malta), "The Entombment" (Syracuse) -and
"Resurrection of Lazarus," (Messina) three masterpieces
immersed in the light of tragedy, their figures enveloped in
the silence of the vast empty space that hangs over them.
Above, The Flight to Egypt (detail). Caravaggio
painted this work when he was 17. (Doria
Pamphili Gallery, Rome). Below, Narcissus at
the Fountain. (National Art Gallery, Barberini
Palace, Rome.)
Colour page, opposite:
St. John the Baptist. National Art
Gallery, Corsini Palace, Rome.
© Arts graphiques de la Cité, Paris
