1965: International
Co-operation Year
live in a world of conflicts and yet the world goes
WW on, undoubtedly because of the co-operation of
nations and individuals... Little is known, or little is said, about this
co-operation that is going on, but a great deal is said about every
point of conflict, and so the world is full of this idea that the
conflicts go on and we live on the verge of disaster. Perhaps
it would be a truer picture if the co-operation elements in the
world today were put forward and we were made to think that
the world depends on co-operation and not on conflict."
In these words, addressed to the United Nations General
Assembly, Jawaharlal Nehru, the late Prime Minister of India,
drew the attention of the world community to the relative silence
on the immense amount of co-operative work that goes on
between countries in contrast to the emphasis that is placed on
conflict in the world.
Mr. Nehru recalled a suggestion that the U.N. General Assembly
should ask all countries to devote a year "not to speeches
about peace", but to the furtherance of co-operative activities
in all fields. The dedication of such a year, he believed, might
direct man's thinking and energy to the idea of co-operation,
and thus create an atmosphere for solving problems more easily
and lessen the world's conflicts.
On December 19, 1962 the U.N. General Assembly unani¬
mously adopted the idea of an International Co-operation Year
and on November 21, 1963, it designated 1965, the 20th anni¬
versary of the United Nations, as International Co-operation Year.
HE Year will be commemorated under the symbol
of joined hands and with the theme "Peace and
Progress through Co-operation". Stamps issued by the U.N.
Postal Administration and a special medallion will commemorate
jointly the U.N. Anniversary and the International Co-operation
Year.
U.N. Specialized Agencies, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, non-governmental organizations and U.N. member states
have been asked to link their own special interests and activities
with commemoration plans for this year of co-operation. Member
states have been asked to consider ratifying a number of mul¬
tilateral agreements which have as yet been applied only on a
limited scale, particularly those relating to the Law of the Sea
and to Human Rights and related fields.
The Year of International Co-operation will have attained its
goal if it leads a greater number of the world's peoples to
concern themselves more directly with the problems of interna¬
tional co-operation, as well as its achievements, its hopes and its
potentialities.
II
Unesco-Ministry of Information. Government of India
The work of the World Meteorological Organization is one of
the longest-established examples of effective world-wide
co-operation. This specialized agency of the United Nations
grew out of the International Meteorological Organization,
an organization of national weather services created nearly
90 years ago. In the U.N. calendar for International Co¬
operation Year, March 23 has been designated as World
Meteorological Day. Here, a meteorological observation
balloon with transmitter is released from a research vessel.
