^-=""
i A"
WW
* Í.I *
A group of Africans
is marched off to an
employment centre
in Johannesburg. For
these men no choice
of work exists. In
urban areas the
movement, residence
and employment of
non-Whites is strictly
controlled. People
of the "Coloured"
groups are also sub¬
ject to these rules.
© Paul Almasy, Paris
,- JSK

IT IS STILL NOT TOO LATE
Supported by laws and acts of repression, the policy of "apartheid" in South Africa has
opened the way to violence and to forces that are now leading at an accelerating pace
towards disaster. On December 4, 1 963, the Security Council of the United Nations appoint¬
ed a group of specialists to examine ways of resolving the present situation in South Africa
through the full, peaceful and orderly application of human rights and fundamental freedoms
to the entire population, regardless of race, colour or creed. Below we publish an abridg¬
ment of the recommendations and comments of this U.N. group. Working under the chair¬
manship of Mrs. Alva Myrdal, the distinguished Swedish sociologist, who was formerly
director of Unesco's Department of Social Sciences, the group comprised Sir Edward
Asafu-Adjaye, one of Ghana's leading jurists, Mr. Dey Ould Sidi Bara, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, and Sir Hugh Foot, (now Lord
Caradon, Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the United Nations).
THE future of South Africa should be settled
by the people of South Africa all the people
of South Africa in free discussion. There can be no settle¬
ment and no peace while the great majority of the people
are denied the fundamental freedom to participate in deci¬
sions on the future of their country. We are convinced
that a continuation of the present position including a
denial of just representation must lead to violent conflict
and tragedy for all the people of South Africa. We wish,
therefore, to emphasize the first and basic principle that
all the people of South Africa should be brought Into consul¬
tation and should thus be enabled to decide the future of
their country at the national level.
In order to give effect to this essential principle, we
consider that all efforts should be directed to the estab¬
lishment of a National Convention fully representative of
the whole population. Such a representative National
Convention would consider the views and proposals of
all those participating and set a new course for the
future (1).
(1) The disenfranchised part of the population constitutes four-fifths OQ
of the whole. Under the franchise restricted to White voters only ¿v
about half voted in 1961 for the Nationalist Party, now in power,
and the rest voted for parties which oppose the present "apartheid"
policies of the Government.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SPOKESMEN FOR
FREEDOM 6l JUSTICE
-
Q Holmes-Lebel, Paris - Ian Berry
Many White South Africans are opposed to the poli¬
cy of "apartheid." Above. Alan Paton, author of
the famous novel, "Cry the Beloved Country,"
which has been published in 16 languages. He is
president of a party which draws its members from
all racial groups and which since 1960 has campaign¬
ed actively for the introduction of universal suffrage.
Albert J. Luthuli, a former Zulu chief, who was awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1960, has consistently fought the policy of "apart¬
heid" by methods of non-violence. He has described South Africa
as "a vast camp of displaced persons." For his resistance to "apart¬
heid" he has been banished to Natal until 1969. Restricted to this
area, he now has practically no contact with the outside world.
Right. Miriam Makeba. the well-known South
African singer. She has been banished from
South Africa and now lives in the United States.
In July, 1963, she appeared before the U.N.
Special Committee. The time has come, she
declared, for all mankind to act with firmness
to stop the South African Government from
dragging the country into a horrifying disaster.
.' > .:, . -
IT IS STILL NOT TOO LATE (Cont'd)
A racial policy condemned the world over
30
[In March 1961, an All-in-African Conference unanimously
demanded a national convention of elected representatives
of all adult men and women on an equal basis irrespective
of race, colour, creed or other limitations. This demand
was supported by different parties and organizations and
prominent persons in academic, religious and public life.
A national convention would carry out sweeping reforms.
It would introduce a Bill of Rights, incorporating the funda¬
mental principles set out in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. It would set up a Supreme Court vested
with authority to defend equality of rights for all citizens.
It would draw up a new constitution for South Africa.
Among its other tasks would be the solution of broad
economic and social problems, the establishment of rights
of freedom of movement and residence and of freedom
of opportunity in employment. It would also guarantee
education for all, irrespective of race.]
We believe that the mounting condemnation by world
opinion and the growing insistence on positive action should
now be directed to the achievement of this purpose. It is
only on the road of free and democratic consultation and
co-operation and conciliation that a way can be found
towards a peaceful and constructive settlement. Only
thus can all people of South Africa be saved from catas¬
trophe and the world from a conflagration of incalculable
consequences . . .
We wish to draw special attention to two main factors
in the present situation. On one side is the mounting
International condemnation of the racial policy of the
South African Government and the growing determination
of the African States, in particular, to take positive action
against South African racial discrimination and domination.
On the other side is the increased persistence and military
preparation of the South African Government, coupled
with repressive action and legislation which leave many
South Africans with the conviction that they have no
means of resistance other than violence. These forces
are set on a collision course. They approach the crash

at accelerating pace. As the explosion grows nearer the
need to endeavour to prevent it becomes ever more
urgent.
United Nations concern about South Africa started in
relation to the problem of the treatment of people of Indian
origin and the status of the Mandated Territory of South
West Africa, but for more than a decade since in 1952
the "campaign of defiance against unjust laws" was organ¬
ized by non-White organizations in South Africa the
United Nations has directed its attention to the whole
problem of "apartheid" in South Africa. Throughout this
decade there have been repeated appeals to the South
African Government from the United Nations to abandon
its policies of "apartheid" and growing demand for action,
leading up to resolution 1761 (XVII) of the General Assem¬
bly of November 6, 1962 which was passed by a vote
of 67 in favour, 16 against and 23 abstentions. Thus for
the first time a resolution calling on Member States to
impose diplomatic and economic sanctions against South
Africa was passed in the General Assembly with more than
a two-thirds majority.
During 1963, the Security Council and General Assembly
passed further resolutions calling for an abandonment of
"apartheid", the liberation of political prisoners, the cessa
tion of the political trials against opponents of "apartheid"
and the termination of sale of armaments and ammunition
to South Africa. In regard to the question of South West
Africa, the General Assembly made an appeal to Member
States not to supply petroleum and petroleum products
to South Africa. The Assembly's resolution calling for the
termination of political trials was passed by a vote of 106
to 1 (South Africa), and the Security Council's resolution
of December 4, 1963 was unanimous.
During the recent debates in the Security Council and
the General Assembly, condemnation of the policies of
South Africa in the strongest terms came from the
overwhelming majority of Member States, including those
with the closest ties with South Africa. On August 6,
1963 the United Kingdom Permanent Representative spoke
of the policies of "apartheid" as "evil, totally impracticable,
and leading Inevitably to disaster in South Africa itself",
and to "certain tragedy". Mr. Patrick Wall, M.P., speaking
for the United Kingdom delegation in the Fourth Committee
of the General Assembly on November 12, 1962, described
"apartheid" as "morally abominable, intellectually grotes¬
que and spiritually indefensible." On December 4, 1963,
the permanent representative of the United States said that
"progress in Africa is over-shadowed by the racial bitter¬
ness and resentment caused by the policies of the South
African Government." He went on to say that it was the
duty of the Security Council to ensure an end to the
injustice of "apartheid." "not in bloodshed and bondage,
but in peace and freedom."
EANWHILE, the South African Government has
become increasingly isolated. In 1961 it left the
Commonwealth. It had earlier withdrawn from Unesco and
has now withdrawn from the Food and Agriculture Organi¬
zation and the International Labour Organisation, and has
been suspended from the Economic Commission for Africa.
Pressure for action, particularly for sanctions, has come
most strongly from the African States, and at the Confer¬
ence of Heads of State and Government held in Addis
Ababa in May 1963 a Committee of Liberation was estab¬
lished to co-ordinate material aid to movements of national
liberation in Africa . . .
In contrast to and conflict with the increasing interna¬
tional condemnation and demands for positive action to
bring "apartheid" to an end, the South African Govern¬
ment has pressed on with greater persistence and gather¬
ing speed in the application of the policies which the
world has condemned.
In pursuing this course it has been encouraged, and
perhaps given a sense of impunity, by a wave of economic
prosperity. Dr. Diedrichs, the Republic's Minister of
Economic Affairs, was able to claim on March 4, 1964,
that South Africa's economy is "among the most dynamic
in the world . . ."
These boom conditions have strengthened the determi¬
nation of the South African Government to pursue its poli¬
cies of "apartheid" and to supplement its massive powers
of suppression by increased financial allocations for repres¬
sive action . . .
On March 16, 1964, Dr. Donges, Minister of Finance,
announced a record defence budget of 310 million Rand
(£155 million). This is 52 million Rand (£26 million) more
than in the current year, and this follows on the qua-
drupling of the defence budget in the past four years. 31
South African production of armaments has risen in those
years by 80 per cent. Dr. Donges told the South African
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IT IS STILL NOT TOO LATE (Cont'd)
I N. Mandel
Painter Gerard Sekoto is the son of a mission teacher in the
Transvaal. He left South Africa for the U. S. A., where his
work has been exhibited in Washington'sNational Gallery. For
the past 1 5 years he has continued his painting career in Paris.
In exile
free to
speak
Ezekiel Mphahlele. a
young South African
writer, was a secon¬
dary school teacher
in Johannesburg be¬
fore he emigrated in
1958 to Nigeria, to
teach at the Uni¬
versity College, Iba¬
dan. Since last year
he has been director
of the Chemchemi
Cultural Centre in
Nairobi, Kenya. He
has written many
bOt/KS and articles on
problems of Africa.
Congress of Cultural Freedom
Faber and Faber, London
Born in Johannesburg
in 1919, Peter Abra¬
hams lived there un¬
til he was 20. A jour¬
nalist and writer he
returned to South
Africa as a special
correspondent in
1952. In 1955 he went
to Jamaica where he
now lives. He is the
author of many books
and short stories in¬
cluding "Wreath for
Udomo,""Songofthe
City," "Dark Testa¬
ment" and "Tell
Freedom" (an auto¬
biography of his
early years in Africa).
Last chance to avert an
Parliament in introducing his budget that the 25 per cent
increase in defence expenditure was to "discourage foreign
aggression." South African Ministers have, however, never
sought to disguise the fact that defence and security
expenditure is largely, if not primarily, intended for action
within South Africa. Nor have they disguised the fact
that the Army and the Air Force as much as the police
are concerned with internal security. As the Minister
of Defence, Mr. J. J. Fouche, said in the Senate on March 28,
1960:
"The task of the Army and Air Force is to take
action for internal security as soon as disturbances
have reached a degree where the police are unable
to control them . . . Greater mobility, armoured protec¬
tion and increased striking power have been given to
twelve of the infantry units at strategic places in the form
of Saracens. These Citizen Force units, together with
the two Mobile Watches which are organized as Saracen
units for internal security, form a shock element
in the Army . . Besides these Watches and
the units of the Citizen Force the commandos
have been organized over the past years in order to
ensure that they will be able to act more efficiently
for internal security. At the moment, there is a scout
corps of twenty-five men with each commando and these
will be available immediately in case of internal emer¬
gency	"
HESE forces of conflict cannot be disregarded
or minimized. Only when the extent of the
danger is fully realized is there any hope that action suffi¬
ciently drastic will be taken to prevent it...
A race conflict starting in South Africa must affect race
relations elsewhere in the world, and also, in its interna¬
tional repercussions, create a world danger of first magni¬
tude . . .
We emphasize the special importance of world opinion.
Many countries, particularly African countries, are directly
identifying themselves with the cause of the oppressed
people of South Africa, but there is a wider International
concern. The conscience of the world has been stirred,
and there is a recognition in world opinion generally
that the South African problem is unique, demanding excep¬
tional treatment. There is an international crisis of cons¬
cience; it arises from the fact that in South Africa there
¡s a government professing to speak in the name of
Christianity and the "European race" which is the only
government in the world which chooses as its guiding
policy not a striving to attain justice, equality and safe¬
guards for human rights, but a determination to preserve
privileges, defend discrimination and extend domination to
such a degree that it amounts to the organization of a
society on principles of slavery. In South Africa the
denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms is
openly pursued as an avowed policy...
Some may think that time is past when there is any hope
of avoiding the collision which is now approaching, and
that the recent declarations and actions of the South
African Government rule out any possibility of negotiation.
Certainly time is short, and the dangers grow rapidly nearer
and greater.
Nevertheless, there is some ground for hope that the
point of no return has not yet been reached and that a

ordeal of violence and hate
fruitful dialogue may yet take place among the different
sections of the South African population.
Chief amongst the encouraging factors is the insistence
on constitutional measures and methods advocated over
many years by the parties and organizations opposing
"apartheid." Their leaders have displayed outstanding
political responsibility and have throughout emphasized
that all South Africans of whatever race should enjoy equal
rights.
Chief Luthuli, in his Nobel lecture delivered in Decem¬
ber 1961, made his famous declaration:
"The true patriots of South Africa, for whom I speak,
will be satisfied with nothing less than the full demo¬
cratic rights. In government, we will not be satisfied
with anything less than direct individual adult suffrage
and the right to stand for and be elected to all organs
of government. In economic matters, we will be satisfied
with nothing less than equality of opportunity in every
sphere, and the enjoyment by all of those heritages which
form the resources of the country which up to now have
been appropriated on a racial 'white only' basis. In
culture, we will be satisfied with nothing less than the
opening of all doors of learning to non-segregatory insti¬
tutions on the sole criterion of ability. In the social
sphere, we will be satisfied with nothing less than aboli¬
tion of all racial bars. We do not demand thes^e things
for people of African descent alone. We demand them
for all South Africans, white and black."
At the Conference at which the Pan-Africanist Congress
was established in 1959, Robert Sobukwe said that every¬
body who owes his only loyalty to Africa should be
regarded as an African; and that there is only one race,
the human race.
Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress when
on trial in 1962 before being sentenced to five years
imprisonment told the court:
"I am no racialist, and I detest racialism because
I regard it as a barbaric thing, whether it comes from a
black man or from a white man."
The struggle in South Africa is not a struggle between
two races for domination; it is a struggle between the
protagonists of racial domination and the advocates of
racial equality.
WE believe that if a new course is set now it is
still possible to envisage all South Africans
enjoying political justice and freedom under a constitution
guaranteeing human rights and providing for a democratic
system of government. Removal of the restrictions on
employment and residence and movement will open up
possibilities for far greater industrial and agricultural pros¬
perity. The economy of South Africa can surge forward if
the barrier of discrimination is removed. Reduction of
expenditure on military and repressive measures will free
large sums for development and welfare. And if equal
opportunities for education, are granted, a great new
reservoir of human capacity and skill will be created to
contribute to fruitful and peaceful progress. When the
burdens of oppression and discrimination and isolation are
lifted all South Africans will benefit.
We have no doubt that the cause of emancipation will
prevail in South Africa. The great majority of the popula
tion cannot be forced back into already overcrowded
reserves constituting less than 13 per cent of the country.
The right of the human person, the right of each individual
to live and work and move freely In his own country cannot
long be denied. A political, economic and social system
built on the domination of one race by another by force
cannot survive.
What is now at issue is not the final outcome but the
question whether, on the way, the people of South Africa
are to go through a long ordeal of blood and hate. If so
all Africa and the whole world must be involved.
We believe that the course of reason and justice which
we have advocated a course which could be promptly
and honourably accepted by all offers the only way and
the last chance to avoid such a vast tragedy.
The report of the U.'N. Group of Experts was submitted to the
U.N. Secretary-General on April 20, 1964.
In a letter dated May 22, 1964, the Permanent Representative
of South Africa claimed that the report of the Group of Experts
"consists to a large extent of inaccuracies, distortions and
erroneous conclusions on false premises" and declared that
"for obvious reasons the South African Government can see no
useful purpose in commenting on the detailed proposals for a
National Convention and its agenda."
On June 9, 1964, the Security Council urged South African
Government to "renounce the execution of the persons sentenced
to death for acts resulting from opposition to the policies of
'apartheid' and to end forthwith the trial in progress, instituted
within the framework of the arbitrary laws of 'apartheid'."
On July 13, 1964, the Government of South Africa replied, and
reiterated that South Africa regards "intervention by the United
Nations in the judicial processes of a member state as completely
illegal..."
On June 18, 1964 the Security Council renewed its appeal
to the Government of the Republic of South Africa "to liberate
all persons imprisoned..." and to accept the main conclusions
of the Expert Group that "all people of South Africa should be
brought into consultation and thus be enabled to decide the
future of their country at a national level."
On the same day, the Security Council invited the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, in consultation with appropriate
United Nations specialized agencies, to establish an educational
and training programme to allow education and training abroad
for South Africans.
On November 6, 1964, three leaders of the African National
Congress, Vuysile Mini, Wilson Kjayinga and Zinaxile Mkaba
were executed in Pretoria.
On November 16, 1964, the South African Government declared
that it would not respond to the appeal and invitation addressed
to it by the United Nations to examine the conclusions of the
report by the Group of Experts.
The case for economic sanctions against South Africa has often
been stated in the General Assembly and has been taken up by
the Special Committee and the Group of Experts. Recommen¬
dations have been made for states to place embargos on the
supply of arms, oil and rubber to the Republic of South Africa;
to ban the import of gold, diamonds and iron-ore from South
Africa; to refuse docking facilities to ships and servicing facilities
to aircraft bound for or returning from South Africa; and, among
other measures, to refuse to furnish technical assistance or equip¬
ment to the Republic of South Africa. The report of the Group
of Experts concludes: " It is only through a unanimous decision nn
of the Security Council that the weapon of sanctions can be Jo
rapidly effective. Only if action is agreed and complete can the
threat of sanctions achieve its purpose."
