National Museum Anthropology, Chapultepec, Mexico

Masterpieces of ancient Mexico
ISCUSSING the richness
and diversity of Mexico's
ancient past, the noted Mexican scho¬
lar, Ignaz Bernai once wrote: "Just as
Western civilization is the sum total of
different national cultures, which we
now call Italian, French of Spanish
perhaps individually unintelligible,
but conjointly forming an intelligible
whole so the meso-American civili¬
zation is composed of former national
cultures Maya, Aztec, Zapotee,
among others which long ago came
from a single stock."
Some 11,000 archeological sites
have been found in Mexico, but it can
almost be said that archaeologists
have thus far barely scratched the sur
face. The people of Mexico were
incomparable architects and builders.
The British sculptor, Henry Moore,
once said that the conception of vol¬
ume and form in ancient Mexican art
has never been surpassed in the entire
history of sculpture in stone.
Pyramids and temples, massive fig¬
ures delicate statuettes hewn from jade
and marble, ceramics, works in terra
cotta, carved steles and painted mur¬
als these and many other works
have come down to us from Mexico's
past which goes back over 3,000 years.
Mexicans are now showing more
interest than ever before in their coun¬
try's past and are building museums to
house this unique heritage. Last year
in a single month no less than three
new museums devoted to pre-Colum¬
bian art were opened in the country.
One of these, the National Museum
of Anthropology in Mexico City's Cha¬
pultepec Park, former site of the Aztec
royal palace, has over 200,000 exhibits,
including what has been termed the
finest collection of pre-Columbian art
ever assembled. The second was ins¬
talled in the home of Mexican painter
Diego Rivera. It houses his immense
pre-Columbian collection which he
donated to the nation. ßl
The third museum was opened in
Teotihuacan, an ancient city in the
CONT'D ON PAGE 34

32
Photos © Gisèle Freund, Paris

THOUSAND AND ONE CHARACTERS
FROM THE HUMAN COMEDY
For nearly 2,000 years the pre-Columbian artists of central America
displayed extraordinary skill and imagination in modelling innumer¬
able figurines which record a thousand and one images from
everyday life. Sometimes with malice, sometimes ingenuously,
always with an astonishing vigour, they depict work, games, love,
motherhood, dancing. The acrobat (opposite page) is a vessel
modelled eight centuries before the Christian era by an artist of
Tlatilco in the Valley of Mexico; one leg twists over to touch his
head, the other serves as the mouth of the vase. The six figurines
below, 23 to 55 cm. (9 in. to 21 in.), were made by the Pacific Coast
civilization (Mexico) between the 4th and 13th centuries. A. D.
1 - Pelota player carrying a ball.
jL - Helmeted man brandishing a missile.
- Hunchback. Dwarfs and hunchbacks were often kept
at the courts of the "caciques" (chiefs) because they were
supposed to haye magic powers.
4 - A roguish-faced figure holding a long tube used to collect
agave juice from which an alcoholic drink was made.
D - A seated woman rests her chin on one knee.
O - Seated couples are favourite subjects. Here the man
places his arm affectionately around the woman.
"^Hí.
cy.
>1
p

Gisèle Freund, Paris
Etienne Hubert, Paris
EAGLE KNIGHT
Below, head of an Eagle Knight,
a member of one of the great Aztec military orders.
He wears a helm shaped like
an eagle's head, a distinction reserved
for the famous warrior knights
of ancient Mexico (14th-16th centuries).
GOD OF SPRINGTIME
The Toltec civilization spread
over large areas of Mexico between
the 9th and 13th centuries. A.D., leaving
its imprint (the word "Toltec" signifies
"artist") on famous Maya cities such as Chichen
Itza and Uxmal. Left, head of
Xipe-Totec, the god who
symbolizes spring and seed time.
This 38 cm. (14 in.) fragment
of a terra cotta statue is now
in the Vienna Anthropological Museum, Austria.
BREASTPLATE OF GOLD
Right, breastplate in gold,
12 cm X 9 (5 in. X 3 i)
representing the god of the shades.
It was made by an artist
of the Mixtee people,
the great rivals of the Aztecs
who lived in the Oaxaca mountains
of central Mexico.
Mixtee artists probably
made the works which
Albrecht Dürer saw at Antwerp in 1520,
and which caused him to enthuse:
"I have seen the things
brought to the king from
the new land of gold...
Never in my life have
I seen anything that afforded
me so much pleasure.
These are astounding works of art,
and I was struck by the subtle genius
of the people in these strange lands."
© Gisèle Freund, Paris
ANCIENT MEXICO
(Continued from page 31)
Valley of Mexico, which attained its
zenith in the 2nd and 3rd centuries
A.D. only to decline and be abandoned
by its people towards the 10th century.
Teotihuacan with its mighty temple-
pyramids the Pyramid of the Sun,
65 metres (213 ft. high) and the Pyra¬
mid of the Moon, 42 metres (138 ft.)
covered an area of 142 square kilo¬
metre (54 sq. mi.). The cultural, reli¬
gious and historical fame of the city
continued long after Its decline and
fall. But it was not until 1905 that
archaeologists began systematic exca¬
vations. Today, completely uncovered
and restored, the centre appears much
as it must have done in the 3rd cen¬
tury.
In the course of these vast opera¬
tions innumerable works in stone and
ceramic were recovered. The works
will go into the Teotihuacan Museum,
itself a veritable museum-city in which
the painted murals now being removed
from Teotihuacan's walls will also be
placed.
Deeply conscious that its pre-Co¬
lumbian masterpieces are part of a uni¬
versal cultural heritage, Mexico is pre¬
serving them in its multiplying mu¬
seums, not as isolated relics of past
civilizations, but in their original ethnic
and social context one which gives
full meaning to their infinitely varied
forms of beauty. A few examples are
presented on these pages.
34

im&&aalm?â
mÊHBOHKÊÊÊÊÊm
