In 1796 Edward
Jenner, an English
doctor, carried out
the world's first

vaccination, thereby
discovering how to
produce immunity
against smallpox. We
present here the
story of Jenner's
patient search for
a way to defend man
against a disease
that had plagued him
throughout history.
28
S a student he was rather dreamy, but also
gifted with great Imagination. There was a
poetic streak in him and he loved nature and the English
countryside of the 1770's. This 21 -year-old Englishman
was the third son of the Vicar of Berkeley in Gloucester¬
shire. For eight years already he had been apprenticed
to a surgeon apothecary, Daniel Ludlow of Sodbury, near
Bristol. The young man's name was Edward Jenner.
One morning during consulting hours a young country
girl came to see him. Like any other doctor he asked her
a number of questions and wanted to know whether she
had been ill before. Yes, she said, she had had the cowpox
and this was just as well, she added, for it would protect
her against the smallpox: "I cannot take that disease for
I have had cowpox".
Jenner's curiosity was aroused. He had of course been
taught the technique of inoculation like all medical students
of his day and was familiar with this means of protection
against smallpox, but he realized that it was not perfect.
In London, in Jenner's early days, smallpox killed one to
three thousand persons every year. Jenner came from a
country district where the belief was fairly widespread that
cowpox, an infection of the udder transmissible to man,
would protect the person who got it against smallpox.
Jenner practised smallpox inoculations but the scientist
in him suspected that improvements were possible. Ana¬
lysing the results of his inoculations critically he realized
that most of the unsuccessful inoculations those that
did not "take" occurred among .persons who looked
after animals and who previously had had cowpox. This
obviously called for further investigation.
Leaving Sodbury, the young man spent two years in
London as a resident house pupil with Dr. John Hunter, the
distinguished surgeon and medical researcher, at St.
George's Hospital. His ambition was to set up practice
in surgery and pharmacy at Berkeley. Before leaving
Hunter he wished to know what the great man thought
about inoculation. Was this technique not outmoded?
Could something better be found? Hunter's advice was:
"Don't think. Jenner, but try experiments".
Cowpox protects against smallpox this Idea obsessed
the young doctor of Berkeley. But proof was needed.
Opportunity offered it in the shape of a milkmaid, Sarah
Nelmes, and James Phipps, a boy of about eight years.
Sarah had developed a cowpox sore on her right hand.
The sore appeared so typical to Jenner that he had a
drawing of her hand made. Two other small pustules on
her wrist, he was convinced, were also due to cowpox. If
the matter in the pustules was really active, he argued,
then it should have its effect also on a child who had neither
had smallpox nor cowpox. So on May 14, 1796 he made
two superficial incisions in the arm of James Phipps and
inserted some of the liquid from Sarah's large pustule. In
this way he hoped to protect the child against smallpox.
Seriously, carefully, he followed up the results of his
operation. At first there was almost no reaction and the
incision marks practically disappeared, but then, when
everything seemed to be over, the skin where the insertions
had been made became red and slowly swelled up; a sore
appeared and grew. The boy felt quite well until the seventh
day when he had a slight pain under the arm. On the
eighth or ninth day he had some fever, shivered a little,
lost his appetite and had a slight headache. Throughout
the .day he felt slightly ill and that night he slept badly.
But the next day the boy was quite well again.
Neither Jenner nór his patient was the least bit worried by
the remaining scabs. Jenner was happy with the result.
The reaction had not been serious a little fever, a passing
indisposition, and no complications. But of course that
was only half the story. What would the future bring?
Would James Phipps escape smallpox ?
Edward Jenner wanted to be sure. In July he faced the
cardinal test and inoculated the boy with matter taken
straight from a smallpox pustule. What would be the out¬
come? Jenner was worried. He could not sleep, got up at
night and walked up and down in the consulting room in

cover him with ridicule and made fun of his method which,
they said, the doctor had simply got from a milkmaid.
The public showed strong opposition. The clergy even
spoke of vaccination as a kind of plot against the designs
of the Lord. In fact, there were vested interests at stake
and Jenner's method was opposed by inoculation "special¬
ists". The opposition did not hesitate to imply that Jenner
was an unscrupulous fellow who was out to make a for¬
tune by championing an ineffective method of treatment.
Matters became worse because Jenner was highly sensi¬
tive to criticism, could not put up with disagreement and
was rude to people who did not embrace his view. How¬
ever, after a good many tests and countertests, all of which
were successful, the wind started to turn. The simplicity
of the operation also proved to be a good argument. It
became increasingly difficult for the opponents to argue
their case, especially after Pearson and Woodville, two
prominent figures in British medicine, had confirmed
Jenner's results.
But something was wrong after all. Jenner and his
followers made the mistake of basing part of their argu¬
ment on the assumption that vaccination conferred lasting
immunity. This gave rise to some hesitation among English
doctors who, while supporting the principle of vaccination,
stressed the necessity for re-vaccination. At this point
of the controversy the promoters of vaccination showed
themselves to be too conservative. They were against
re-vaccination, not because they thought it would be alto¬
gether useless, but rather for fear of discrediting their
method and of weakening the confidence of the public.
The public, of. course, was only too easily put off by clumsy
vaccinations and occasional severe reactions.
his comfortable house at Berkeley. What if he had made
a mistake?
Time dragged heavily. Again he meticulously observed
every phase of the reaction. But the days went by and it
was not long before all trace of the vaccination disappeared.
Young Phipps did not get the fever, nor a:,y infectious
symptom. He seemed indeed to be resistant to smallpox:
the animal disease had immunized him. So, for Jenner,
the decisive experiment had been performed and hence¬
forth he was sure of the protective value of cowpox.
Jenner was so overjoyed that he treated James Phipps as
his son. Later, in 1818, he even had a house built for the
young man, the first person he vaccinated.
HE advent of smallpox vaccination was the
opening of a great chapter in the history of
world medicine. But Jenner realized that not everybody
would be convinced by his method so he pursued his
studies and repeated his experiments. It was not until 1798
that he decided to publish his findings in a little work of
60 pages entitled "An inquiry into the causes and effects
of the variolae vaccinae". His ideas, however, were
received rather sceptically at first.
Jenner spent three months in London. He was in the
prime of life and his friend, Edward Gardner, left the
following description of him: "He was rather under middle-
size, but robust, active, and well formed. He was parti¬
cular in his dress, and when I first met him, he was clad
in a blue coat with yellow buttons, buckskins, well polished
jockey-boots with handsome silver spurs, and carried a
smart whip with a silver handle. His hair, after the fashion
of the time, was done up in a club, and he wore a broad-
brimmed hat."
But the elegant Jenner looked in vain for volunteers on
which to try out his vaccination. There were numerous
supporters of the old method of inoculation who tried to
WHAT really counted was that the movement had
started and it could not be reversed. Despite
objections, it spread to many parts of the world. Benjamin
Waterhouse vaccinated in Boston though he complained
that the public was uninterested and suspicious. Seaman
vaccinated in New York; Coxe, Rush, Oliver and Currie in
Philadelphia, and James Smith in Baltimore. In Hanover,
Germany, Stromeyer also complained of the opposition of
his colleagues. Another vaccinator, Stuve at Görlitz, said
he had many enemies and that his fellow doctors were
jealous of him. In France, there was propaganda against
the vaccinators, but it did not go very far. In 1800, Wood¬
ville took vaccine to France and taught his French colleagues
the new method.
But Jenner was not to be satisfied with all this. Now that
he had determined the protective power of cowpox, nothing
would do but for vaccination to be practised everywhere.
He had set himself the task of protecting the whole of
mankind against smallpox.
General immunization, he was convinced, could only be
achieved through cowpox. But the pustules on the cow
did not last very long and they contained too little matter
for widespread use. Furthermore, sick cows were not
always to be had and it was out of the question to spread
cowpox among healthy animals. Jenner considered that the
sore produced in man was so like the cowpox sore that the
artificially produced sore could render the same services
as the original one. In other words, since the supply of
matter from cows was limited he would create another such
pustule in the next person. In this way, an uninterrupted
chain of solidarity against the disease might be created.
Jenner's obstinacy in experimenting this system was to have
its reward and he succeeded in continuing this person-to-
person vaccination for a period of 14 months without appar¬
ent loss of efficacy. He claimed that, after all these
passages, the vaccine was just as effective as if it had been
taken straight from a cow.
Sure of himself, Jenner continued his demonstrations,
countered every objection, and decided to carry the battle
to London. He set up house in Bond Street. Two years
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

m m
A ton
'-\*iv^:i-
prevention...
How to prevent smallpox through
vaccination has been known since the
end of the 1 8th century. Yet the disease
remains endemic in many Asian and
African countries and is still not
completely eliminated in Latin America.
The aim of an eradication campaign is
to vaccinate 100 per cent of the
population in countries where the
disease is prevalent. For this, enor¬
mous stocks of vaccine are needed. In
India, where 250 million people (out
of 450 million) were vaccinated bet¬
ween 1962 and 1964, vaccine is
being produced with assistance from
WHO and UNICEF. At the King
Institute of Preventative Medicine in
Madras, vaccine is prepared from virus
grown on the abdomen of calves (top
right). Freeze drying of this vaccine
(bottom and opposite page) produces
a stable product which can be stored
successfully in India's tropical climate.
WHO photos P.N. Sharma
^
y
l ». '
WK
X
FU
S:
7
ú
W^.m
J
f
JENNER (Cont'd)
A baby christened Vaccinov
30
later, his technique had been adopted by 40 doctors who
became enthusiastic supporters of the new method. In
1800, as many as 16,000 Londoners were vaccinated. In
1801, the number rose to 60,000.
News of victory came from abroad. In the United States,
Waterhouse was supported in his efforts by a propagandist
of choice: Thomas Jefferson in person, who had his entire
family vaccinated.
The Geneva doctors also were In the van; Dr Odier
obtained vaccine from England and was able to vaccinate
over 600 persons at the very time an epidemic of smallpox
had broken out. Nevertheless, the epidemic caused
254 deaths. His colleague, Alexandre Marcet, invented a
way of preserving the vaccine between two slides of
opaque glass wrapped in black paper.
Another Genevan, Jean de Carro, had the honour of
being the first and greatest propagandist for vaccination
outside Britain. He had established himself in Austria and
was won over by Jenner's method about which he had read
in a local paper. He did not hesitate to vaccinate his
two sons and soon after submitted them to the countertest
in the presence of Austrian doctors. After this convincing
demonstration, smallpox vaccination was adopted through¬
out Austria and Germany. As a reward, he was knighted
by the Emperor Francis II. Thanks to his enthusiasm,
vaccination soon spread to Poland and Russia. In St.
Petersburg, the royal surgeon de Lyndström made good
use of the vaccine sent by de Carro. Elisabeth Alexevievna,
Empress of all the Russians and wife of Alexander I, was
so enthusiastic that she not only sent Jenner a ring with a
large diamond but encouraged mass vaccination. At her
command, Anton Petrov, the first child to be vaccinated
in the Empire, was escorted in a coach through St. Peters¬
burg to be baptized, and was given the new name of
Vaccinov. The State paid for his upbringing and later
granted him a pension for life.
Carro, knowing that Jenner was trying to introduce the
vaccine in India, developed a new method of preservation.
The vaccine was dried on threads and pieces of ivory,
which were then enclosed in a wooden box as protection
against light. Using this method Carro sent the vaccine
to the British Consul in Baghdad. His initiative was
crowned with success: vaccinations were performed at
Basra on the Persian Gulf and soon in Bombay. Jenner
was so happy that he sent his friend a silver snuff box
with the inscription "Edward Jenner to Jean de Carro".
The vaccine was spreading. Dom Balmis, surgeon to
King Charles IV of Spain, brought it together with 22

children needed for person-to-person transmission from
La Coruna in Spain to the Canary Islands, to the Caribbean,
to Mexico, to Guatemala and to South America. Then, with
26 other children, he went to the Philippines and China.
At Naples and in Sicily, fervent religious processions were
held to fetch the vaccine prepared by Dr Sacco the new
method was almost credited with sacred power. In France,
Bonaparte, First Consul, admired Jenner's efforts and offi¬
cially encouraged vaccination. The year after he became
Emperor, he made vaccination compulsory for all his
soldiers.
One day, when he was about to set off again for the
wars, he was listening absent-mindedly in the presence
of the Empress Josephine to the reading of a letter request¬
ing the liberation of an English prisoner and was about to
say no when Josephine remarked "But it's Jenner who is^
making the request". Napoleon immediately changed his
mind: "Ah, Jennerl I can refuse nothing to Jenner."
The merit of having been the first head of state to decree
compulsory vaccination for all subjects goes to Felix Pascal
Bacciochi, Prince of Lucca and Piombino. His decree is
dated 1806. His example was followed by Bavaria the
following year, then by Denmark In 1810, by Sweden in
1816, and by Württemberg in 1818, where the King ordered
every infant to be vaccinated before the age of three.
Jenner subsequently led a somewhat secluded life in his
country house in Berkeley. He could now consider that
he had reached the goal he had set himself. Vaccination
was spreading with irresistible force. He spent many hours
alone working at the bottom of his garden in a summer
house which he had specially built. There he also pursued
his favourite pastime, birdwatching. On an appointed day
he still received all those who wished to be vaccinated,
in the summer house, which he called his Vaccina Temple.
Sure of his achievement, proud of the wide appreciation
his discovery had received, he continued to correspond
with men of learning up to the time of his death, which
occurred as he sat at his writing table, on January 26, 1823.
For long, however, smallpox vaccination was to have its
enemies. Some of them were important figures who did
their best to play on the fears of the public. For example,
in 1855, a work was published in Paris by Verdi-Delisle
entitled "The Physical and Moral Degeneration of the
Human Race caused by the Vaccine". In 1890, Alfred
Russell Wallace, "in the name of individual liberty", joined
the detractors and fought the idea of legislation that would
make vaccination compulsory and non-compliance punish¬
able by 'fines or imprisonment. Bernard Shaw himself
swelled the ranks of the opponents with his play, "The
Doctor's Dilemma."
All the arguments of the doubters, detractors and oppo¬
nents, however, lost ground against the favourable conclu¬
sions of the official reports on vaccination that gradually
accumulated: 1882 in Germany, 1885 and 1896 in England,
and 1913 in Pennsylvania, for example.
Jenner's discovery was first accepted and then advocated
in many places all over the world. As a mass preventive
measure, it soon changed the face of smallpox epidemics Q1
became less frequent and less serious. Jenner's tenacity,
maintained during 26 long years of struggle, was at last
bearing fruit.
