One of the great scientific
discoveries of the past
few years has been the
unravelling of the mecha¬
nism of heredity. Scientists
have found that the genes,
which determine the nature
of new organisms as they
are passed from parents
to children, are molecules
of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA), the fundamental
building blocks of heredity.
These are arranged in special
patterns which scientists
have begun to decode.
Left, visitors to a "Methods
of Science" exhibition exa¬
mine a model of the DNA
molecule. Playing cards in
the "ladder" to the left of
the model symbolize the
elementary units of the
detailed chemical code
in the DNA molecule.
USIS
SCIENCE
AND THE
COMMON MAN
by Ritchie Calder
I GNORANCE of the law, it is said, is no excuse. In the mid-
twentieth century ignorance of science should be no excuse.
For, while the first of these statements does not assume that everyone
should have a law degree, and the second should not imply that everyone
should be a science graduate, the truth is that science has become the
social dynamic of our times. It dominates international politics. It threatens
our lives and our livelihoods, or, if it is properly applied, it can promise a
fuller and a more meaningful life. Yet a great gulf of language and of ex¬
periences separates the scientist in his specialty from the wider commu¬
nity, and this separation is fraught with danger for our civilization and for
science itself.
Science, which exists to remove mystery and magic, has
created its own mystery and its own magic. People, in igno¬
rance through lack of explanation, regard science with a
kind of superstitious awe and, at the same time, want
science to produce those miraculous gadgets and cures
which a certain type of popular journalism has taught them
to expect and, indeed, to take for granted. In the absence
of a proper understanding of the methods and the processes
of science and of any social integration of scientific know¬
ledge, the apparent haphazardness of discovery encourages
a popular attitude towards science which is mistrustful and
unhealthy. People fear what they do not' understand.
Science, by its emphasis on experimental research, has
forsaken natural philosophy, and in its hurried retreat from
scholasticism is forgetting the scholarliness in which it made
common ground with the humanities. By the same token,
those humanities have lost touch with science. Overspecial-
ization gives the scientists the excuse for saying: "We have
no time for other subjects"; and their colleagues in the
arts, the excuse for saying: "If it takes the scientist so long
and so close a study to learn, how can we be expected to
understand ?"
The fragmentation of science into more and more bran¬
ches, each with its own specially invented jargon, is dividing
the scientists themselves and making it difficult or often
impossible for one scientist to understand another, much
less make himself intelligible to the wider public. In our
schools and universities, by over-early and continuing segre
gation, one section of our citizenry is given too little science
and another section too much.
This is as much a criticism of the humanities as it is of
the science faculties. It is not only a question of reconcil¬
ing, somehow, the"Two Cultures" of which Sir Charles
Snow has spoken; it is a question of how far we can get
to the mass of the community an understanding of the forces
which are determining their very existence. Pierre Auger's
estimate that 90 per cent of all the scientists that have ever
lived are alive today, has become a cliché. The other 10 per
cent have their niches in the Corridor of Time which stret¬
ches back to the time when Thinking Man first mastered fire.
But the word "scientist" is itself a comparatively recent
invention. The word did not exist in English nor, as far as
anyone knows, in any other language until 1841. Before
that the inquirer into natural phenomena was a "man of
science". As late as 1895 the London "Daily News" was
still protesting about "scientists" as "this American innova¬
tion" and to his dying day H.G. Wells insisted that the
proper term was "man of science".
The distinction is important. The "man of science"
belonged with the virtuosi, like Pepys, Wren, Evelyn, Bishop
Ward, Governor Winthrop, William Petty (the father of politi¬
cal economics) as well as with Boyle and Hooke, the men
who founded the Royal Society.
They belonged in the Lunar Society of Birmingham, where
James Watt, the inventor of the steam engine, would argue
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

6
SCIENCE AND MAN (Cont'd)
The Two Cultures'
on speaking terms
music with Herschel, the Astronomer Royal, who had been
a German bandmaster; where Joseph Priestley, the dis¬
coverer of oxygen, would discuss politics as readily as
chemistry and eventually had his house in Birmingham
burned for his pains by the mob; where Erasmus Darwin
speculated about evolution, which his grandson Charles was
eventually to define, and wrote poetry on his way home, by
moonlight, to Lichfield; where William Small could be found
(who, at Williamsburg, had been Thomas Jefferson's Pro¬
fessor of Natural Philosophy and who had taught him the
checks and balances of Newtonian physics which were built
into the American Constitution); where Josiah Wedgwood,
the potter, could learn from Priestley's oxidization, and go
out and find non-ferrous clays for his fine white porcelain.
Such men discussed everything, including science, with
minds unbuttoned like their breeches' bands. A "man of
science" could converse and communicate with any other
educated man (the fact that educated men were a small
élite, in those times, is another matter). There was no
barrier of language. They were the gifted amateurs. Any
educated man could be intelligible to another because the
scientific terms which they used were based on the roots
of Latin or Greek and they meant, descriptively, what they
said.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, men were
becoming "scientists" and the "-ist" meant that they were
ceasing to be amateurs or natural philosophers or "men of
science", on speaking terms with their colleagues in the
humanities; they were for their own specialized purposes
inventing their own language of convenience.
WO hundred years before, in 1640, Jan Come¬
nius, the great Bohemian educationalist, had a
proposal which would have incorporated science in wisdom.
His ideas of education command the respect of pedagogues
today, but there was one aspect of his contribution which
particularly affected science; that was his Pansophicon.
There is no doubt that his idea was inspired by Sir Francis
Bacon's "House of Salomon" in "New Atlantis" but Come¬
nius spelt it out. His idea was to create a college at which
the wise men of the world would foregather, for a year at a
time, and bring with them, and assess and explore, all the
natural knowledge, collected from all over the world, and
propound it and make it widely known for the adoption by
men for their benefit.
It was an idea which appealed to responsive minds in
Britain, and he was invited to London. His enterprise was
so well received that the Seminary of St. James's, Chelsea,
was actually earmarked for the college. The ways and
means of setting this up were to be discussed in Parliament
in the fateful session in which the Civil War broke out.
Charles I lost his head; Comenius lost his college, and the
building which had been assigned to the project was given
by Charles II, at the instigation of Nell Gwynn, to house the
veterans of wars. Today the Royal Chelsea Hospital for
Pensioners is where the Pansophicon might have been.
The idea did not become entirely lost; it influenced the vir¬
tuosi, who met as the "Invisible College", first in London
and then at Oxford, and who conceived the Royal Society
of London, the prototype of all National Academies.
In its way the Lunar Society of Birmingham was also an
offspring of the Pansophicon, and today the Princeton
Institute of Advanced Studies reflects Comenius's intention.
But it is not only on the high, intellectual level of synthesis
and assimilation, as at Princeton, that Comenius needs his
But if you cut a
Moebius band one
third of the way
from the edge you
get two pieces
one of them be¬
coming another
Moebius band.
IBM drawings
present-day expression. We need a heart-pump to spread
the corpuscles of science through the body-politic. We
have to restore something of the inquiring spirit and common
understanding.
When, in Britain, the Royal Society was itself becoming too
remote as a learned society at the end of the eighteenth
century, the Royal Institution was founded by Count Rum-
ford. He was an American who had been employed by the
King of Bavaria who had made him a Count of the Holy
Roman Empire, and he came to London with the idea of
setting up, by private subscription, "an establishment for
feeding the poor and giving them useful employment...
connected with an institution for bringing forward into gene¬
ral use new inventions, and improvements, particularly such
as relate to the management of heat and the saving of fuel
and to various other mechanical contrivances, by which
domestic comfort and economy can be promoted".
Although this institution was indeed to provide the labor¬
atories for Sir Humphrey Davy, and for Faraday, by 1831

MOEBIUS
Making child's
play of mathematics
Scientific discoveries
can be illustrated in
a simple way and
can even become an
amusing game. One of
these is the so-called
Moebius band or strip.
It is named after the
19th century German
astronomer and mathe¬
matician, August Moe¬
bius (1790-1868) who
discovered that there
are surfaces with only
one side and one edge.
The Moebius strip is a
long rectangular band
of paper which is given
a half twist before the
ends are pasted toge¬
ther. Two surfaces then
become a single one.
Right, a large 15-foot
model, made for an
exhibition designed to
present mathematics
in a popular way. One
of the surprising fea¬
tures of the Moebius
strip is demonstrated
by the arrow at its
centre. To move around
the strip and return to
its original departure
position it has to make
two circuits, instead of
one as on an ordinary
two-sided surface.
© Leigh Wiener -----._
it had become more especially a meeting place of the
intelligentsia and less committed to the people. This led to
the establishment of the British Association for the Ad¬
vancement of Science. The new association was founded at
York in 1831 and one of its objects was to remove the
obstacles which stood in the way of the advancement of
science, with the clear recognition that one of these
obstacles was public ignorance. To that end men of science
were invited into the provinces for the annual meetings,
which still continue, so that the "man in the moon" could
come down to the "man in the street".
When, after the middle of the nineteenth century, science
became more and more specialized the British Association
tried to correct this trend. In the 1860s it started lectures to
the "operative classes", and Tyndall, T. H. Huxley, Lubbock,
Preece, Ayrton, Bramwell, Ball and other great figures of
the times carried the facts of science into the countryside.
There was a great hunger for understanding among the
people, who were practically illiterate. In South Wales the
miners organized excursion trains from the mining valleys
to hear Sylvanus Thompson talk in Cardiff on electricity,
and in Bradford a crowd of 3,500 millworkers listened to
him with rapt attention for an hour and three-quarters.
Ray Lankester, Richard Gregory and H. G. Wells picked
up the torch at the beginning of the twentieth century.
Weils, a B. Sc. in biology, could seize on an abstruse paper
by Soddy (1911) and understand enough about the transmu¬
tation of atoms and the possible release of energy to predict
to the exact year, 1932 the first artificial radio-activity.
Scientists, however, were becoming still more specialized.
In 1900, the Royal Society of London abdicated its claims
to be a National Academy and sponsored the British Aca¬
demy, to which it referred problems of philosophy, psycho¬
logy, social science, literature and so on, while it itself
became the learned society of experimental science. "Natu- 7
ral philosophy" survived in the titles of Scottish university
chairs, whose professors were physicists. "Physics", which
had been a term derived from Aristotle's treatises on
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND MAN (Cont'd)
Cryptic language and private jargons
"natural things", had (except in the Physical Society of
Edinburgh, which still belongs to biologists) been expro¬
priated and restricted to "the science treating of the pro¬
perties of energy and matter (excluding biology and
chemistry)".
In place of the free-ranging discussions with benign wine
and gentle candlelight at the Lunar Society, we have narrow¬
er and narrower briefings in the fluorescent glare of seminar
and colloquia where, in their private jargon, the scientists dis¬
cuss last week's meson, the latest amino-acid synthesis, or a
hair on the whisker of a banana-fly. Learned societies,
themselves "splinter" groups of natural philosophy, have
sub-groups within groups and sub-sections within sections.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the ordinary person
thinks of science as a kind of vault to which only a graduate
scientist knows the combination, and within it a series of
safes labelled "Physics," "Chemistry," "Biology," "Geo¬
logy," "Astronomy," etc. And each of these has its special
combination lock. And inside these safes there are lockers
vast numbers of lockers marked "Nuclear physics,"
"Crystallography," "Solid state," "Colloid Chemistry," "Or¬
ganic," "Inorganic," "Cytology," "Genetics," "Biophysics,"
"Biochemistry," and so on ad infinitum.
I T is questionable whether anyone, or any body,
has ever made a complete list of all the so-
called branches of science. What makes it worse, of
course, is that each invents its own private language. It
would not be so bad if they would admit that it is their lan¬
guage of convenience, a shorthand, with grammalogues
peculiar to the inventor and to the small esoteric group
around him, but so many scientists assume that their code-
language is common language and that somehow people
are ignorant or stupid if they do not understand. Much
even of the normal language of science has been corrupted
away from meaning by usage.
It would be an excellent education and discipline for all
scientists if they were to take their latest monograph,
eschew all scientific terminology and use, instead, de¬
scriptive phrases not for the edification of the public (or
even to oblige science writers like myself) but for their
personal, private illumination. It is hard but true to say
that a scientist who cannot explain what he is doing does
not in fact know what he is doing. Every great scientist
has been able to make himself comprehensible even
Einstein triedl It is the lesser scientists without the full
confidence of their subject who make themselves defen¬
sively unintelligible. Language, therefore, is one of the
worst features of this fragmentation of science; in fact, it
is not too much to say it is one of the causes of it.
"The trouble about science and scientific explanation
is that it tends to be incomprehensible to anyone except
the expert," wrote Professor Hyman Levy in the "Literary
Guide," June 1955. "Scientists in transforming social life
have enormously inflated the language. The influence of
the Norman invasion on the English language was pro¬
found; yet how far-reaching the influence of modern science
has hardly been assessed. Listen to a group of chemists
or biologists or mathematicians talking among themselves
and you will realize that most Englishmen today no longer
know their mother tongue. Even a foreigner may under¬
stand more of what is said." (Perhaps one should inter¬
polate "If the foreigner is a chemist, a biologist or a mathe¬
matician, of a particular school of chemistry, biology, or
mathematics.")
Dealing with the "language" of mathematical symbols,
Professor Hyman Levy asks: "You say you want an expla¬
nation of Einstein's Theory of Relativity. What kind of
explanation? In terms of words of the Anglo-Saxon period
and therefore with very nearly the concepts prevalent at
that time? In terms of the language of the seventeenth cen¬
tury and therefore with concepts prevalent about the time
of Newton? In terms of the language of, say, 1900? In
modern technical terms? In modern mathematical symbo¬
lism? All these would represent attempts at explanation
but how successful could they possibly be?"
Or, this writer might add, in terms of the language
of a London bar where, over a glass of beer and bread
and cheese, Professor Levy himself once gave me a
"translation" of Einstein, which made me sound very con¬
vincing that night on the BBC. I admit it was rather like
getting a Cree Indian to define atomic energy which I
once did. I found government geologists teaching Red
Indian trappers in the Canadian North to look for uranium
ore, and I wondered what it all meant to the Cree In¬
dians. I asked the chief of the Crees, what, in his language,
was atomic energy. He replied: "Eskotik-otchit kaochi-
pyik," which means "Lightning which comes out of rock."
This question of terminology is propably the most impor¬
tant consideration in the discussion of the communication
of science to the wider public. "A nod," it is said, "is a
good as a wink to a blind horse." And there is a good
deal of nodding and winking by scientists in their dealings
with ordinary people who are blind to science, or blinded
by science.
As Professor Levy pointed out, scientists, regardless of
their native tongue, can generally understand each other.
They have enough common ground in terms of their special
subjects. This is rather like the craftsmen in the Middle
Ages, who moved about Europe, without knowing one an¬
other's language, but with the signs and symbols of their
specialities. Their craft really were "mysteries" and the
mechanical "rites" under the secrecy of a brotherhood were
conveyed from generation to generation and from master
to apprentice.
Sometimes, one feels, the modern cryptic languages of
the scientists specialities have been conceived, as we once
invented operational code-names during the war, not to
explain, but to deceive. Nor does it help when scientists
in one discipline borrow the terminology of another. Like
the word "plasma," for instance. The physiologists first
used it about 1845 to describe the colourless liquid part
of blood, lymph, milk, or muscle. A hundred years ago,
the biologists embodied it in the word "protoplasm," the
living matters of cells. The classicists should, at that time,
have taken exception because, from its Greeks origins, the
world should have meant "mould" or "matrix." By their
default, however, the biologists acquired it by right of usage
and ultimately by the popular sanction of blood donors.
WE now have a new science of plasmaphysics,
which means the physics of electrified gases.
The term had been used by the fluorescence engineers to
mean the flux of positive and negative ions in tube lamps,
before it was given a new importance by researches on the
harnessing of thermonuclear energy the putting of the
H-bomb into dungarees for civil purposes.
Why "plasma?" In physics, it is certainly not a "matrix,"
nor is it the biologists' "fluid." If there is any analogy,
it is between the ions and the blood corpuscles the
opposite of the physiological usage. At a meeting in the
United States, which included physicists and biologists, the
physicists talked possessively about plasma until a bio¬
logist at the back of the room said plaintively: "Mr. Chair¬
man, can we please have our word back?" "No, you can¬
not," said the chairman, "the nuclear physicists have so
much money they have bought it."
Such borrowing of words causes confusion and is often
completely misleading. Sometimes, one suspects, they are
condescensions an example of talking down to less
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

Science and the common man (Cont'd from page 8)
32
sophisticated brethren or sometimes the terms are relics of
a convenient analogy at the descriptive phase of a subject.
For example, we know how the word "fission" came into
nuclear physics. Hahn and Strassmann found that when
they bombarded uranium with neutrons the element broke
up into two portions of roughly similar mass. The result was
reported to their colleague Lise Meitner, then a refugee in
Stockholm. Her nephew, Otto Frisch, later Jacksonian Pro¬
fessor at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, was visit¬
ing her.
They discussed the implication and agreed that the like¬
ly explanation was that the absorption of a neutron had
disturbed the balance between the forces of attraction
and repulsion within the nucleus of the uranium atom. It
was as though the nucleus had become elongated and had
developed a waist before dividing into two. This seemed
to Frisch to be similar to the way living cells divide. When
he got back to Copenhagen, where he was then working
in Niels Bohr's institute, he consulted a biological colleague
and asked him what the biological term was and was
told "fission." This expropriation is still appropriate.
Exact scientists invented the term "atomic pile" and
then they themselves complained that it was inaccurate;
it was not "atomic," it was "nuclear;" and it was not a
"pile," it was a "reactor." Actually, in the squash court
at Stagg Field, of the University of Chicago, where Fermi
built it, it was called a "pile" because its significance was
known to very few and to most people it was just a heap
of graphite blocks and uranium metal. But the term was
a nuisance. We got stuck with "atomic pile." As science
editor of the London "News Chronicle," I spent nearly three
years converting the readers by writing "atomic pile (nu¬
clear reactor)" and, gradually, "nuclear reactor (atomic
pile)."
The most grotesque examples of misunderstandings and
misrepresentation of scientific facts are to be' found in the
field of atomic energy. With the release of atomic energy,
man created his own elemental gods. Forces like the
thunder, and the lightning, which our primitive ancestors
sought to appease, have been replaced by the Unseen,
the Unheard, the Unstated, the Unsmelt, the Unfelt, the
Unknown and the All-Pervading by the radiations which
have broken from the nucleus. This has created a new
superstition. That superstition, like the elemental gods, is
radioactive.
The fact that these new elements were arrived at by
the exercise of reason and can be rationally measured
and comprehended by the scientists is of little consolation
to those who do not understand the ways of science, and
who, in ignorance, instinctively regard science as meddling
with things which would better left alone. This is irrational
and deplorable but it is the ambiance of ignorance which
must be recognized in any discussion of the problems of
atomic energy.
In October 1957, the World Health Organization (WHO)
called together a group, of which I was a member, to study
the mental health aspects of the peaceful uses of atomic
energy. This group had at its disposal the reports of
many investigators in many parts of the world, not only
in the more sophisticated societies but also among the
people in the less-developed countries remote from news¬
paper headlines or nuclear text-books.
The findings of this WHO study group were superficial
but, even so, very disquieting. The disturbing features be¬
came plain. One was the universal disquiet about atomic
energy, not only of its potentialities for destruction in a
nuclear war, but even of its peacetime applications. The
group began to realize that the crust of our vaunted civili¬
zation was only egg-shell thick, and that, confronted with
the release of immeasurable power from the infinitesimally
small atom, civilized man tends to cower, like his Nean¬
derthal forefathers, in the dark caves of his own emo¬
tions. We were back in the "childhood of mankind."
(TO BE CONTINUED)
RITCHIE CALDER has been professor of international relations at
the University of Edinburgh since 1961. Winner of the Unesco Kalinga
Science Prize (1961), he is well known to readers of The Unesco
Courier for the many articles we have published In past Issues. His
article on Science and the Common Man will be continued In our
next issue. It is condensed from the Unesco publication, "Impact
of Science and Society", Vol. XIV (1964) N° 3. For further details
of this quarterly review and subscription rates see Inside back cover,
