Giant sandstone baboons over six feet
high (right) topped the facade of the
great temple of Abu Simbel until they
were cut into blocks last August. For
3,000 years they were the first figures on
the façade to be lit by the rays of the
sun as it rose above the hills on the far
side of the Nile. The dismantling of the
Abu Simbel temples must be completed
by August 1966; to reconstruct them on
higher ground will take until May 1970.
Photos Unesco-Nenadovic

DISMANTLING
ABU SIMBEL
by Louis A. Christophe
HE dismantling of the great temple of Abu
Simbel has begun; 300,000 tons of rock have
been removed; the hill above the temple has been
excavated. On the façade the frieze of baboons and the
hieroglyphic inscriptions beneath it have been cut into
blocks. Last August, the ceiling of the sanctuary was
removed and for the first time light from above shone down
on the gods seated in the darkness within.
The operations at present proceeding at Abu Simbel
the first of their kind in the world have but one object: to
save intact for posterity two unique monuments. These have
to be transported, block by block, to a position near the
original site but higher up so that the waters rising behind
24 the Aswan High Dam can never reach them.
The initial stage of the work is nearing completion. It
began with the separation of the two temples from the
hillside out of which they were hewn, by removing the entire
mass of surrounding rock. This called for precisely cal¬
culated protective works: the reinforcement of the façades
by sandhills as a precaution against damage being caused
to the statues by falling blocks of stone, and the installation
of scaffolding to support the ceilings in the interior of both
monuments.
Indeed, there is no denying that for the returning traveller
the remembered charm of Abu Simbel has vanished. And
this first sad impression is in no way mitigated by the
spectacle of the sandhills which cover the façades, by *hë
long laborious walk through the long metal tunnel leading
inside the monuments and by the sight of the complicated
network of scaffolding which fills the various halls.
But when reason finally triumphs over emotion, every¬
thing immediately becomes clear. The coffer-dam, some
400,000 cubic metres of rockfill material whose crest now

rises 135 metres above sea level, is there to remind us of
the danger which threatened this historic site. Had this
coffer-dam not raised its protective mass before the temples
of Abu Simbel, they would have been submerged and
damaged during the winter of 1964-65, and perhaps some
of their treasures the Osirian pillars with their huge statues
in particular would already have been destroyed.
The great temple is now completely separated from the
mass of rock which surrounded it and, in August 1965, the
first ceiling, that of the sanctuary, was cut into three blocks,
each weighing from 15 to 20 tons. These blocks were lifted
by a giant crane and deposited not far from the site where
they will be put back in place next year. A trench is now
being dug behind the sanctuary to facilitate the cutting of
the walls of that hall and of the four seated figures that are
its main adornment.
On the façade, other blocks have likewise been cut away
with infinite precaution and stored: first, those directly
surrounding the sculptured part, the pylon of the monument,
which is to be used again in the reconstruction so that the
framework will consist of the original stone; then those of
the façade itself the frieze of baboons, the cornice and
the hieroglyphic inscription just below the baboons. By
the end of August, the work had reached the horizontal
torus and it was planned to make an early start on cutting
up the top of the crown of the huge statue seated at the
south end of the façade.
The removal of the mass of rock from above the small
temple was begun much later and has just reached the
series of blocks which will be used again when the temple
is re-erected. However, since this monument is smaller
than its neighbour, it will be easier to cut up and work will
begin in the near future, even before all the blocks of the
great temple have been transported, on reassembling the
pieces of the small temple on the site now being prepared
for it.
In fact, as one climbs from the river bank to the plateau
towering over the temples of Abu Simbel, one passes
through a series of work-sites. Below, men are cutting
into the living rock; above they are levelling off sites for
the new foundations of the two monuments; nearby, tra¬
velling cranes are busily storing away the huge stone
blocks which are brought up several times a day by special
trailer lorries.
These different centres of activity, where workmen labour
for twenty hours out of the twenty-four, are linked by a net¬
work of asphalted roads. These roads also lead further
south to a village by now almost a straggling town
which is nearing completion. Workshops and equipment
stores have sprung up near the work-sites as well as
installations which supply water and electricity. A little
further away are offices and homes (the engineers often
have their families with them) built around a dining hall and
a club, where a swimming pool is now being constructed.
In front of these simple, rectangular houses built in
Nubian style, alluvial soil brought up from the river bank
when the lake was at its lowest level and just before the
beginning of the flood season has been laid down to
CONT'D ON PAGE 29
25

26
The façade of Abu Simbel as it appeared in
the spring of 1850 to the French writer,
Maxime du Camp, who took this daguerre¬
otype the first photograph ever made of
the temple. The colossi were half hidden by
a river of sand flowing down the hillside.
Abu Simbel was probably invaded by sand
during the XXVI Dynasty, 2,500 years ago.
Unesco Unesco-Laurenza
The statues of Rameses on the northern side of
the temple entrance as seen for half a century.
The huge sand dune which had half hidden the
temple was not completely cleared until 1910.
The rise and fall of

/if/ i-.- - ./ *#<**/ Mr +w * %s .
/ *v ;»-H u
V» 1
1964
y " '
i» i K
i»
if
. -
Bulldozer covers the façade with sand to
protect the giant statues of Rameses during
the dismantling operations. These are sched¬
uled to be completed in the autumn of 1966,
.* Klrtrt-n/^^M/1/1*
a
Photos Unesco-Nenadovic
History appears to be repeating itself.
Only the heads of the colossi emerge from
the man-made sand dune, as they did in
1850. Since September 1965 the statues
of Rameses have been completely hidden
from sight and the frieze of baboons
above them has now been cut up and
removed. (See drawing next page.)
the Nubian sands
27

*?
V
¿ /
^A' **
From left to right, hieroglyphic
inscription on upper façade
of the great temple at Abu
Simbel is split into huge blocks.
Left, hand saws, not power
tools, are used for this oper¬
ation. Blocks are numbered
(foreground, centre photo) and
stored to await temple's re¬
construction on hilltop. Far
right, section is gently lowered
to giant transporter. It bears
the graven inscription: "Rame¬
ses, beloved of the gods".
Photos Unesco-Menadovic
Í
Drawing VBB, Stockholm
Architect's drawing gives section view of great temple during dismantling operations. Arrow
marks emplacement of colossal statues of Rameses II on façade of the Great Temple of Abu
Simbel, totally covered with sand asa protective measure. Temple has been completely separated
from mass of rock around it. Statues surrounded by scaffolding are Osirian pillars of the first hall.
Last September, sanctuary ceiling was cut into three blocks each weighing between 15 and 20tons.
28
-d *S*tt

DISMANTLING ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
receive shrubs and flowers. Finally, beyond the hospital,
the round-roofed houses of the workmen hide the runway
where light aircraft land every day, maintaining rapid com¬
munication with Aswan.
The desert-like plateau, which was once the exclusive
domain of scorpions, snakes, jackals and hyenas, is now a
place of bustling activity, full of the constant movement of
squads of workmen, transport lorries, mini-buses carrying
foremen and engineers, and motor cars taking the key men
in this vast enterprise to points where the most delicate
operations are going on. Here, as elsewhere in Nubia,
birds are rare; they all seem to have flown away to more
fertile regions. There is only a flock of vultures at the
western edge of the village, attracted from no one knows
where by the cries of the animals at the slaughter-house.
In scorching summer heat and during the near-freezing
nights of the Nubian winter, engineers, foreman and labour¬
ers are working without respite to save the temples of
Abu Simbel from the threatening waters.
By the end of 1966, when the reconstruction of the
smaller temple will be well advanced, the first blocks of the
great temple are to be fitted into place on the new site.
And two or three years later, visitors to Abu Simbel will
have the surprise and pleasure of seeing that a dream has
become reality. The waters of the Aswan High Dam will
again mirror the majestic facades of the temples, behind
which, rebuilt exactly as before, the monuments will stand
within the heart of a man-made mountain.
This monumental achievement of modern times recalls
symbolically one of the noblest of the Osirian legends.
As the story is told, Set, being jealous of Osiris, imprisoned
his brother in a chest, and to gain undisputed sway over
Egypt, killed him, cutting his body into twenty pieces which
he cast into the Nile. Isis, the wife of Osiris, searched
along the river until she found the twenty pieces and was
able to reconstitute the body of her husband. After under¬
going the magic rites of embalming, Osiris ensured his
succession on earth through his son, Horus, before
descending to the underworld to become the god of
the dead.
In like manner, thanks to the international campaign
launched by Unesco, the temples of Abu Simbel will rise
again in all their ancient majesty.
t LOUIS A. CHRISTOPHE, Assistant Secretary-General of the In¬
stitut d'Egypte, was appointed by Unesco in 7960 to supervise
the work of preservation of the Nubian monuments in the UAR.
He is the author of many papers on ancient Egypt and has just
published a book on Abu Simbel (boxed note below).

The Discovery of Abu Simbel
Since the day on 22 March 1813 when the Swiss Traveller
Johann Burckhart stumbled upon the temples of Abu Simbel
deeply buried in the sands, the monuments of Rameses II
have had a long and eventful history. Their many adven¬
tures form the subject of a new book by Louis A. Christ¬
ophe "Abou Simbel et l'épopée de sa découverte" . An English
translation of the work ¡s in course of preparation. (Published
under the patronage of Belgium's Queen Elizabeth Founda¬
tion of Egyptology and with the co-operation of the Belgian
Ministry of Education and Culture. Editions P. F. Merckx,
Brussels, 1965. 35.50 French francs; 395 Belgian francs.
29
