TURNING POINT
The United Nations Development Decade is 5 yrs old.
How has it fared ? U Thant gives a frank answer
For the past five years the world community has been engaged in a global
adventure unprecedented in history: the United Nations Development De¬
cade which has now reached its mid-point. How far has this gigantic effort
actually succeeded, what have been the major difficulties and disappoint¬
ments and what are the prospects for the remainder of the Decade during
the 1960s? To these questions, which none of us whatever our country öf
origin can afford to ignore, the Secretary-General of the U.N. offers a frank
appraisal in the challenging analysis published below.
by U Thant
Secretary General of the United Nations
4
HE idea of a Decade of Development, launched
and sustained by the United Nations, is design¬
ed to remind us of a number of things. First, the process
of development itself the process whereby, at different*
times and at different speeds but with complete irrever¬
sibility, the whole human race is adapting to its use the
modern instruments of science and technology. This
process involves all mankind from the commuter in mod¬
ern Megalopolis to the herdsmen on the Saharan fringe.
The United Nations Development Decade seeks to stim¬
ulate our imagination so that we may become aware of
the increasing interdependence of the whole process the
growth, underneath the vicissitudes of day-to-day politics,
of a substratum of economic and social experience which
is more or less common to all the nations of the earth.
Above all, it tries to dramatize the stark fact that the
gap in resources between the fully modernized nations and
their still developing neighbours is tending to widen, leaving
some two-thirds of humanity below the poverty line, turn¬
ing the developed societies, whether or not they realize
it, into a privileged élite.
The concept of the Decade is essentially a focus for
action, action fd lessen the gap, to speed up the proces¬
ses of modernization, to release the majority of mankind
from crippling poverty, to mitigate the tensions and hosti¬
lities which must flow from the world's vast inequalities in
wealth, to restore solidarity and hope.
The U.N. General Assembly has emphasized the need for
increasing the transfer of resources to developing coun¬
tries by expressing the hope that the "flow of international
assistance and capital should be increased substantially
so that it might reach as soon as possible approximately
one per cent of the combined national incomes of the eco¬
nomically advanced countries."
The launching of the Development Decade represents a
new departure In international economic relations. By
agreeing to co-ordinate action with a view to attaining a
5 per cent growth rate in developing countries, governments
in fact extended the concept of sustained and expanding
demand from the domestic economy to the world at large.
The adoption of a target for transfers of resources to
developing countries in terms of a proportion of the national
incomes of developed countries showed that the concept
of shared resources is beginning to enter the philosophy
of States in relation not simply to their own citizens but to
other States as well.
Today, halfway through the Development Decade, how
has the General Assembly's initiative fared? Many of the
basic facts remain as tough as ever. The harsh fact' per¬
sists that many of the poorest economies have continued
to grow most slowly, the growth in developing countries
as a whole slowed down; at the same time the growth rate
in the economically advanced market economies has acce¬
lerated. The gap between the per capita incomes of the
developing countries» and those of the developed countries
has also widened during the 1960s; between 1960 and 1962
the average annual per capita income in the developed
market economies increased by almost $100 while that in
the developing countries increased by barely $5.

The annual flow of international assistance and capital to
developing countries was substantially larger in the early
years of the Development Decade than in the second half
of the 1950s. However, more recently the net flow has
virtually ceased to increase and progress towards the 1 per
cent goal for resource transfer to developing countries was
halted.
Two-thirds of the world's population living in the less
developed regions of the world still share less than one-
sixth of the world's income. In 1962 annual per capita
income in these regions averaged $136 while that of the
population of the economically advanced market economies
in North America and Western Europe averaged $2,845 and
$1,033, respectively.
These abstract figures do little to convey the realities
which underlie the gaps in income. In spite of dramatic
improvements in the prevention of disease which over the
last decade have added ten to twenty years to the expec¬
tation of life in the developing countries, their average
still falls by as much again behind life expectancy round
the North Atlantic. In particular, the tragic death of small
children weighs far more heavily upon the developing lands.
In the most highly developed countries, the mortality rate of
children up to five years of age varies from 4.5 to 6.3 per
1,000. Yet in Latin America, the rates are five to ten times
higher and in Africa, higher still.
One reason lies in the disparities in medical services ;
in North America, Western Europe and the U.S.S.R. where
there is generally one doctor for fewer than 1,000 inha¬
bitants compared with one for 6,000 in India, 32,000 in
Afghanistan, 39,000 in Mali and approximately 96,000 in
Ethiopia. Failure to invest adequately in the control of
disease and the promotion of health, together with a lack
of coverage by health services of large segments of the
population where disease is endemic, has led in many
parts of the world to a deterioration of standards of health
and sanitation.
NOTHER reason for the difference in mortality
rates certainly lies in disparities in diet. Men
and women in North America and Western Europe eat
on the average about 3,000 calories and 80 to 90 grammes
of protein a day. In Latin America, outside Argentina, the
average falls to 2,400 calories and some 70 grammes of
protein; in Asia to 2,100 calories and 50 grammes a level
still below prewar standards; in Africa the protein consump¬
tion is lower still. But these abstractions give no true
sense of the gap between the steaks and chocolate, the
salads and fruit of diets in the developed countries and the
bowl of rice, with little variety beyond a change of sauce,
which makes up, day in, day out, the food of most Asians.
Inadequacies in diet and medical care are made
more intolerable for about 1,000 million people by the des¬
perate standards of housing which they are forced to
endure. The major cities of the developing continents all
have their densely crowded shanty towns in which 20 to 30
per cent of the city's inhabitants may be living without
water, without sewers, without roads. And out in the
countryside the shacks of day labourers, landless men,
untouchables and rural unemployed only seem a little less
miserable because of their larger ration of light and air.
The misery of much of the developing world ¡s a progres¬
sive misery. It threatens to grow worse in the second
half of the Decade. On present showing the numbers of
unemployed and men and women suffering from hunger
and malnutrition will be markedly greater in 1970 than
today. It Is in the poorer countries that the highest growth
rate of population is found. In most of Asia and Africa it
is over 2 per cent and rapidly approaching the 3 per cent
level. In some of the Latin American countries it is higher.
On present showing there simply is not in prospect a
growth in agricultural production sufficient to accommo¬
date this rising flood of people. The world's agricultural
production is growing by under 3 per cent per year, and
the growth rate is much lower in some critical areas. The
continuance of traditional methods in farming has often
been the main obstacle to any significant increase in food
production.
APID migration to the cities has further com¬
plicated the problem. The rate at which this
migration has taken place has often far exceeded the rate
at which urban employment opportunities have been increas¬
ing, with the result that unemployment is rising in many of
the developing countries.
To give one striking example: in 1955 the Indian esti¬
mate of unemployment was some 5 million. By 1961 it had
grown to 8 millions. Even if the planned production targets
for 1966 and 1971 are fulfilled, the Indian authorities esti¬
mate that unemployment will still rise to 12 million and
14 million in these two years respectively. A particularly
disturbing feature in these situations is the degree to which
unemployment will fall most heavily on young people. In
Indonesia, 50 per cent of the urban unemployed and In
Ceylon 80 per cent are under 25 years of age.
This phenomenon of urban unemployment may not in
theory be worse than the semi-employment and under¬
nourishment of the villagers. But in the countryside
family and clan give some support. There is a little more
spare food; in some regions, there may be hunting and fish¬
ing on the side. The city reduces the new migrants to
the rawest struggle for survival. Yet it is to the cities they
come in a flood which far surpasses in speed the general
growth of population. Cities grow, the world over, by
about 4 per cent a year. Some of the greatest cities grow
at twice that rate. About 5,000 newcomers a week move
into Rio de Janeiro. The capital cities of tropical Africa
have doubled in little more than a decade.
The problems that spring from the dynamism of growth
in population, coupled with the added dynamism of urban
expansion, are propelled forward by yet another dimension
of dynamic change the change in people's expectations.
This factor is no doubt inescapable in an open world of
total communication where the richer nations give a daily
demonstration of what can be achieved in terrestrial pros¬
perity. But it compels the governments of the developing
lands to undertake policies and projects which, in the short
run, tend to complicate their already formidable difficulties.
In a world where new drugs dramatically reduce morta¬
lity from such old enemies as yaws or leprosy or tubercu¬
losis, people clamour for the medical help that sends the
population leaping still further ahead of food supplies. In
a world of hope and upheaval, the young men seize the new
means of transport designed to open up the countryside to
stream away from the farms before there is room for them
In the cities and before the farms are producing a surplus
of food.
In a world now aware of education as the gateway
to advance, parents demand village schools which the
youths often leave with barely a primary education to seek
unskilled jobs in urban centres just the jobs which a more
sophisticated industrialization is beginning to abolish.' No
government of a developing country can escape these
dilemmas. But as the Development Decade advances, the
impact of all these dynamic forces of explosive change is,
on balance, to make their difficulties more complex and
their prospects more daunting still.
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

55»Ti3ïS5jg(£2S?»
á"
PIf 1
:'-
v^gi
COLOMBIA'S
FABULOUS
VALLEY OF
THE CAUCA
Like many developing nations,
Colombia is a country of striking
contrasts: on the one hand cities
and whole regions (like Bogota, the
capital, right) on a par with any
found in the most industrialized
countries of the world; on the other
hand, vast areas waiting for full
development. Top left, the Servicio
Nacional de Aprentisaje, a voca¬
tional training school in Bogota,
built some years ago with U.N.
technical aid. The ultra-modern
pilotis support the business training
section attended by 2,000 young
men and women. Lower left, rafts
of "guadua" logs float down the
Cauca River near Cali. The valley
of the Cauca is one of the richest
and most fertile of all South Ame¬
rica, but much of it is still unexploit¬
ed. In 1963 Colombia with the help
of the World Bank undertook an
extensive survey of coal deposits
in the valley and with FAO help set
up an agricultural training centre.
Photos O Paul Almasy, Par


TURNING POINT
IN DEVELOPMENT
PART mm
B1 UT there is no place for despair. Even if the
	 'distance between the developed -and the de¬
veloping countries sometimes seems unbridgeable, the
developed are themselves proof that such chasms can be
crossed, such disparities reduced to a more tolerable level.
After all, the first decades of technological change inside
the advanced economies produced conditions which closely
resemble the divisions and difficulties of the modern world
economy.
In the United Kingdom, for example, in the middle of the
nineteenth century, after some fifty or sixty years of rapid
economic growth, society was so divided between rich and
poor, so diverse in opportunity and affluence, so alien in
class and culture that it resembled not so much a unified
community as two nations separate in wealth, separate in
understanding, indeed, almost as separate in contact and
sympathy as are the two segments of the modern world
the rich "North" and the still poverty-stricken "South"
below the Tropic of Cancer.
But a century has passed and conditions in the deve¬
loped countries have changed dramatically. The slums
have largely vanished. Good health is all but universal.
Educational horizons widen steadily. Entire communities
have made the transition to the standards of middle-class
comfort. It has taken time, but the chasm has been
crossed. It can be crossed again.
The analogy is imperfect, no doubt, but it can be a source
of hope and guidance. In many fundamental ways the pro¬
cesses of economic and social development, precipitated by
technological change, resemble each other, in spite of the
great variety of cultural and national backgrounds against
which they work. The methods by which today's fully mod¬
ernized societies overcame their internai obstructions are
now part of the vital information available to developing
societies as they struggle with their own problems. Some
of the steps taken in the now developed societies are rele¬
vant to the much wider context of development in general.
I
8
N the nineteenth century, a stream of disco¬
veries and inventions, coupled with increasing
sophistication in their application pushed back the limits
imposed by materials and skills. The nuclear and chemical
revolutions of our day with their promise of almost limitless
power and almost unlimited substitutes are only the last in
a sustained series of physical liberations from the oid
restraints.
This greater technical elbowroom helps to explain the
success of another type of adjustment the ability of the
mass of the workers to capture a much larger share of the
economy's production. Once higher purchasing power
became a fact, it was clear that better technology could
accommodate the larger wage bill by increasing output per
worker and that the bill itself had become a vital element
in sustaining market demand.
Meanwhile, changes in governmental policy also under¬
lined the importance of sustained demand and increased its
effectiveness. Through their fiscal policies, governments
both lessened the income gap and reinforced market
demand. At the same time, the proportion of taxation
spent on schools, health and better housing led to sharp
increases in skills and working capacity and thus hastened
the growth of productivity.
The expansion and adaptation of science and technology ;
defensive, collective action by poor nations to increase
their earnings in the world market; enlightened action by
the developed élite to see that sharing in fact occurs; direct
transfers of resources from rich nations to poor to increase
their skills and education, their health, social assets and
ability to help themselves; and finally, a general effort to
extend the concept of sustained and expanding 'demand
from the domestic economy to the world at large all these
factors can, by analogy, play their part in lessening the gap
between rich and poor nations, in sharing more fully the
new patrimony of technology and affluence and in creating
a modern'world society. And, in essence, this is what the
Decade of Development is all about.
When the United Nations itself was set up twenty years
ago, it was designed, apart from its strictly political pur¬
poses, as a centre for harmonizing international efforts
towards world-wide economic and social improvement but
not as the sole instrument by which that effort should
directly be made. Responsibility in particular fields was
divided among the United Nations and a number of autono¬
mous international agencies.
WITH the Development Decade, co-operation
among international organizations has become
of critical importance. A rural resettlement programme is
likely to require not only the crop specialists whom the Food
and Agriculture Organization can provide, assistance from
the International Labour Organization in such matters as
surveying the manpower potential and providing for training
for rural employment, from the World Health Organization in
the public health aspects of the scheme, from the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
the provision of school and out-of-school educational faci¬
lities, but also from the United Nations itself in regional
planning, the provision of social services, the development
of community organization and local government at the area
of settlement. Furthermore, it may benefit from food sup¬
plied by the World Food Programme, and the United Nations
Children's Fund may provide equipment and medical sup¬
plies. If capital as well as technical assistance is needed
to carry out the scheme, the government may wish also to
bring the International Bank or its affiliate, the International
Development Association into the picture.
Another vital factor has been the inception and growth,
from 1949 onwards, of the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance. This is a central pooling of govern¬
ment contributions designed to provide, financial resources
(nearly 500 million dollars in the first fifteen years) which
the United Nations and the agencies could use to meet
the priority needs of developing countries for expert
assistance, fellowships and equipment for demonstration
and training purposes.
The Special Fund, a partnership between over 100
Governments and the family of United Nations agencies,
represents a new dimension of co-operation. Since its
inception in January 1959, it has assisted more than 500
high-priority projects in some 13Ö low-income countries
and territories involving over 1,000 million dollars of which
approximately 60 per cent has been provided by the
recipient countries.
The Special Fund has concentrated its efforts on four
major activities : surveys of available resources and their
economic potential for development ; strengthening or
establishing applied research institutes which define
industrial and agricultural potentials, promote better use
of local materials and improve production techniques ;
establishing training institutes which produce engineers,
technicians, planners, managers, industrial instructors, and
secondary school teachers ; building economic planning

Three dramas of underdevelopment:
(1) exploding populations (2) rising unemployment
(3) mushrooming shantytowns
units which will focus and co-ordinate national and regional
development efforts. The Fund has also provided advanced
education or technical training for over 70,000 nationals
of seventy-four developing countries.
The work of the Expanded Programme and the Special
Fund shows how much relatively modest amounts of
multilateral assistance can contribute in helping developing
countries to make their natural resources more available
for productive use, and to put those resources to work
for the benefit of their people. The efforts will certainly
be intensified if, as the Economic and Social Council
recommends, the two programmes are fused in a single
United Nations Development Programme.
A striking example of the new unified approach is
provided by the World Food Programme under the
joint sponsorship of the United Nations and the FAO.
The World Food Programme is a true child of the Develop¬
ment Decade, having begun operations only in 1963. Its
finance $100 million for the period 1963-1965 which maybe
increased to $250 million in the three-year phase is made
up of voluntary contributions in cash, food surpluses and
services such as shipping.
In addition to giving emergency help in times of disaster,
its major work is the longer task of promoting economic
and social development through the provision of surplus
food required in development projects as diverse as
irrigation, afforestation and road construction. Much of its
work and that of the Food and Agriculture Organization
has received signal support from the Freedom from Hunger
Campaign which, under the leadership of FAQ, has raised
over $220 million and drawn 165 states and territories into
action since 1960 in the interests of better diets and more
productive farming.
HE growing co-operation between the Inter¬
national Bank and other organizations within the
United Nations system in development work is another
source of increasing efficiency. The Bank, like every other
agency concerned with growth, has become more and more
aware that the springs of rapid development lie in the
farms where output and skill must rise if there is to be a
food surplus for the cities, in diversified, industrial growth,
and in education It is therefore beginning to look in these
new directions and its first step has been to reach special
partnership arrangements 'with the Food and Agriculture
Organization and with Unesco and to devise ways in
which Bank money up to a level of some $400 million
can be channelled into its subsidiary, the International
Finance Corporation for investment in industrial ventures.
The United Nations and its agencies, by establishing
patterns of co-operation, agreeing on priorities and working
out policies for putting them into effect, can help govern¬
ments to co-ordinate their own activities and decisions.
There are opportunities for inter-governmental co-ordin¬
ation at other levels.
The governing body of each agency is itself a centre
for inter-governmental co-operation. Some agencies the
Universal Postal Union, for instance, or the International
Telecommunication Union are by the very nature of their
work intergovernmental throughout their entire operations.
Over a wider area, a body such as the U.N. Social
Commission can be the sounding-board for the world's
dilemmas for example, its chaotic urbanization, its run¬
away growth in population as well as its aspirations
and ensure that they and the policies they call for are
brought primarily and with due weight to the governments'
attention.
The United Nations Regional Commissions in the
developing continents in Asia and the Far East, in Latin
America, in Africa have become active centres of co¬
ordinated strategy. In Latin America, the Economic
Commission for Latin America has been a leading
influence in the movement to set up a free trade area
and to back it with agreed policies on industrial
deployment. In Africa, the Economic Commission for
Africa has been instrumental in setting up the African
Development Bank and has helped to launch inquiries
into the possibility of an African Payments Union.
An instance of how far this type of regional co-operation
may go can be seen in the steadily increasing integration
of Central America. Since the signing of the General
Treaty on Central American Economic Integration in Guate¬
mala in December 1960, trade has almost doubled and
currencies have become completely convertible.
Two other examples of inter-governmental co-operation
deserve particular mention. Missions supported by the
Special Fund have surveyed the Senegal and the Niger
River Basins in Africa and assisted the riparian States
in drawing up draft treaties for joint use and development
of the river's resources. In the Far East, a much more
ambitious scheme is in hand to survey and develop the
whole of the Lower Mekong River Basin.
The Mekong project covers not only the uses of the
river in irrigation, in power, in navigation and flood
control but also the administrative structures needed to
exploit all these possibilities and the kind of economic
and social development needed if people are to take full
advantage of them.
More than twenty countries, beside the riparian States
Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and the Republic of Viet-Nam
the United Nations and most of the specialized agencies,
three private foundations and a number of business firms
have all been concerned with the preliminary surveys
and not all the political vicissitudes of the region have
deflected the four local Governments from co-operation
in this field. The tragic juxtaposition of the scheme with
the fighting in South-East Asia and the hope that con¬
ceivably it might provide the context of a constructive
peace only serve to heighten its significance.
Y own definition of an inspired choice is a man
or more, has unlocked the doors of skill and
output, confounded the gloomy prophets of inherent physical
limitation and so fantastically increased man's power io
produce that, in developed economies, to sustain sufficient
demand is more the problem than to mobilize sufficient
supply. This technology is, naturally and inevitably, one of
the developing nations' chief hopes for the successful
achievement of modernization and for any considerable
bridging of the gap between rich and poor.
The poor nations are, in some ways, infinitely better
placed than the pioneers of an earlier century. In the
first place, they have a hundred years of other nations'
experience upon which to draw with some degree of
clarity. One forgets how much earlier technological ad¬
vance was based on uncertain experiment and lucky guess.
Above all, one forgets the mystery in which the whole
process of modernization was shrouded. The early entre¬
preneurs tried out new processes, tested the market, made
a profit or perhaps were ruined and all the time they
CONT'D ON PAGE 30
9

TURNING POINT bV u Thant (cont'd from p. 9)
were unwittingly changing the face of the earth. The very
phrase that was used, "the Industrial Revolution" is a
symbol of the inadequate estimate of what in fact was
happening. Industry played only one part in the remaking
of a whole society by the uses of reason, calculation,
analysis, cost-consciousness, improvement, experiment
and feed-back.
Today, with hindsight we can better interpret what has
been happening. In fact, the whole idea of development
as a dynamic process, the factors which make for trans¬
formation, the policies which can accelerate it lie at the
very root of the concept of a "Decade of Development".
It is therefore hardly surprising that the United Nations
and the specialized agencies have undertaken special
studies and experiments dealing with the process of
development itself.
A second advantage in the developing world is the
sheer scale of information now available in every field
connected with development. There is not an area of
knowledge or action in which remarkable experiments
have not been carried out experiments which can be
freely studied and may be of crucial help. In the critical
fields of agriculture, for instance, well-known and straight¬
forward changes in the use of fertilizer, better seed, new
tools and plant protection can produce as much as qua¬
druple yields from the land. The developing world might
well despair if it had used up all the available technology
and was still undernourished. The vastness of potential
innovation is the best guarantee of progress and the
task of transferring knowledge of it is correspondingly
urgent.
At a level which escapes the headlines and therefore
takes place almost in anonymity, a phenomenal increase
has occurred over the last fifteen years in the process
of humanity educating itself. If the first change in any
revolution is to change the way in which people think,
the whole world today is mined with explosive change
change in the whole dimension and dissemination of human
knowledge, in the power that goes with it, in the
expectations to which it gives rise.
URING the Development Decade, the tempo of
all this exchange of information and experience
has been increasing. So have the attempts of the United
Nations family to look ahead and study its material dynamic¬
ally. For instance, the United Nations itself has published
its "Long-term Economic Projections for the World Eco¬
nomy." The Food and Agriculture Organization has put
out projections for agricultural commodities up to 1970, and
is engaged on an ambitious Indicative World Plan for Agri¬
culture. Meanwhile Its Third World Food Survey has made
calculations of food needs up to the year 2000 which
suggest that while food supplies in general must triple, the
increase needed for the poor countries is over 200 per
cent higher still.
A wide variety of papers studying the likely development
of international trade to the end of the sixties were pre¬
pared for the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development held in 1964. Thus, the developing govern¬
ments are being offered more than simple current data.
Along with this increase in the fund of knowledge
available has gone an increase in internationally aided
research of all kinds and in the search for new sources of
natural wealth. In promoting scientific research in a great
variety of fields Unesco has played a central role. In
1961 the United Nations convened a Conference on New
Sources of Energy which provided the first world-wide
exchange of existing knowledge and experience in solar
energy, wind power, geothermal and tidal energy and consi¬
dered means of bringing techniques relating to these types
of energy into wider use. The United Nations has carried
out extensive studies in the development of water resour¬
ces. Panels on the use of nuclear energy in desalinization
are held by the International Atomic Energy Agency twice
a year. The United Nations is holding an interregional
seminar on the economic aspects of water desalinization
later this year. It has also been actively engaged with
other agencies in the investigation of ground-water
resources for domestic, agricultural and industrial uses In
regions where lack of water has been preventing economic
development.
ET the present position of the developing
nations, confronted with the vast surge of
modern technology, is not all gain. Since much of the
technology has been designed for other societies at other
times, it does not always fit in with the present needs of
emergent States. Worse, it may even involve them in
contradictions which more developed societies have avoid¬
ed. The most notorious and difficult of the contradictions
is the tendency of modern measures of health to bring
about a very sharp increase in population before any other
factor in the community food production, educational
development, savings, industrial development has become
really dynamic.
This is not the only contradiction. A very large part of
today's productive technology is geared to the needs of
societies in which labour tends to be scarce and capital
abundant. A modern refinery can cost over $60 million,
yet employ only 300 people. This is an extreme case but
the trend is general. Automatic looms, combine harves¬
ters, road laying machinery, earth-movers, power shovels
the inventions of sophisticated technology dispense with
the only resource which all the developing countries have
in abundant, indeed over-abundant, supply their man¬
power offering instead machines which swallow up their
meagre savings. And just those areas of the economy
which seem to promise the most certain road to growth,
wealth and Independence the heavy industrial sector
which, via the magnetic appeal of the United States and
the U.S.S.R. fascinates the new economies are precisely
the sectors in which capital investments are highest and
the returns longest to mature.
A similar disproportion bedevils other fields. For
example, virtually the entire expenditure of the world in
commercial research takes place in the developed nations.
It is designed to cut costs and increase competitiveness
in the developed sector. Some substitutes made possible
by the chemical revolution for instance plastics and
rayon are cheaper than natural substances. Where the
difference in price only slightly favours primary producers,
manufacturers in developed countries often prefer substi¬
tutes which are under their control and beyond the vicissi¬
tudes of politics and weather. A new cheaper chemical
Insecticide could ruin in a year one of the chief standbys
of peasant farming ¡n East Africa pyrethrum. Binder
twine made as a by-product of petro-chemicals could
threaten to knock out the other sisal. There are no flows
of research money on anything like the same scale to
increase the competitiveness of primary products or to
diversify their use. Technology, used overwhelmingly as
a tool of developed societies, can turn into a potent instru¬
ment of disruption elsewhere.

Developing nations represent only 4 ¥b
of the world's export of manufactured goods
(and of this figure one quarter comes from Hong Kong alone!)
These risks lay at the basis of the United Nations deci¬
sion to summon a Conference to be prepared and run
with the co-operation of a number of the agencies, on the
Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit of
the Less Developed Areas. It met in Geneva in 1963 and
decided both to follow-up this first initiative and to take
positive steps to get more brains and money into research
oriented towards developing needs. An Advisory Com¬
mittee was established which began to meet in 1964 with
the aim of picking out, from the vast potential supply of
problems and possibilities, the most urgent points for
"concerted attack".
It was naturally not difficult to define major areas of
primary interest more and better food, improved health,
new techniques and education, urban planning, the better
use of natural resources and methods of industrialization.
The trouble is that such a list tends to be virtually cotermin¬
ous with human existence and it is now the Advisory
Committee's more difficult task on which it has, in fact,
embarked to pick out in each category points of "attack"
where the chances of a breakthrough are great and the
advantages of making one very wide-spread.
One such instance is clearly large-scale desalinization
of water for agriculture, for which" the best hope lies in
utilizing nuclear energy, another is the provision, from a
multitude of sources, of more protein in ordinary diets,
both by producing synthetic protein and by conserving
available proteins by a variety of methods ranging from
cold-storage chains to food irradiation.
I N the relations between rich nations and poor
I nations, the market they share is the world¬
wide market of international trade, and the higher earnings
the poor nations must seek is a higher proportion of the
gains made in international commerce. The share of deve¬
loping countries in world exports declined steadily from
nearly one third in 1950 to only slightly more than one-fifth
in 1962. One of the major targets of international action
must be at least to restore the proportions they previously
enjoyed.
The underlying pattern of the world market has not
changed very much over the last century. It was brought
into being by the developed nations' need to look over¬
seas for food, minerals and tropical materials, to invest
the necessary capital to produce them in mines and plan¬
tations, in transport and harbours, to recoup the investment
out of the sale of the exported materials and pay for
whatever local balance remained with their own export
of manufactures.
This pattern of trade left little capital in the local eco¬
nomy, led to virtually no modernization outside the sector
concerned with foreign trade and therefore did not set
in motion local forces of diversification and growth. Inter¬
national trade, outside the developed core made up largely
of North . Atlantic States, continued to rest on the
exchanges between strong, modernized and developed
communities on the one hand and, on the other, weak
economies dependent, very often, on a single product.
Intensification of trade could only occur between develop¬
ed economies and virtually the whole organization of the
trade remained in Western hands.
To this day, about 66 per cent of world trade is en¬
grossed by the developed market economies. They control
94 per cent of the world's shipping and virtually all its
insurance. To a very considerable degree, they still control
the processing of the materials underdeveloped nations
account for only 4 per cent of the world's exports of
manufactures and even this percentage is very mislead¬
ing. Nearly a quarter of these exports are provided by
the one fabulous source of Hong Kong.
Since most of the developing nations were still colo¬
nies at the end of the Second World War, and the
independence of the majority was not achieved until the
early sixties, it was only in the last few years that the
attention of the international community has been drawn
to the unbalanced patterns of world trade. The develop¬
ing countries had increasingly begun to realize a certain
common interest in formulating their common grievances
against existing arrangements and seeking redress for
them. The United Nations was a natural forum for their
activity for it was at meetings of the United Nations and
its related organs and subsidiary bodies that many of
the ideas which were beginning to engage the serious
attention of the developing countries in the economic
sphere, were initially broached. And the culmination of
this pressure by the developing countries was the conven¬
ing in Geneva in the spring of 1964, of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, itself the most
important event so far of the United Nations Decade
of Development.
The developing nations' three main headings of dissatis¬
faction are the uncertainty and instability of export
incomes; the difficulty of access to developed markets
for some raw materials and for any more diversified and
processed exports; and the structural bias of the whole
market towards the interests of the rich. Between 1950
and 1962, the unit value of exports from developing coun¬
tries to developed countries fell by 5 per cent in compa¬
rison with 1955 the figure was 12 per cent. Incidentally,
this decline was enough, in the case of Latin America,
to wipe out the effect of all the imports of public and
private capital during the fifties.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Deve¬
lopment led to the establishment of institutional machinery
within the United Nations to deal with problems of trade
and development on a continuing basis. This» in itself
is a landmark in the history of international organization.
N O single idea has more profoundly shaped the
modern economy than the belief that all citizens
have the right to share in its resources and opportunities.
Whether the policy is predominantly realized by the transfer
of wealth through taxation from rich to poor as in the
market economies, or by budgetary provisions as in centrally
planned States, the consequences tend in the same direc¬
tion towards a community in which the' wealth created in
it is so divided that the vast majority of the people have
the education, the skills, the environment and the kind of
income needed to lead a satisfying life.
Since the war, there has been some evidence to suggest
that this concept of shared resources is beginning to
enter the philosophy of States in relation not simply to
their own citizens but to other States as well. During
the fifties, the flow of financial resources from developed
to developing countries steadily increased.
To meet the needs of developing countries several new
multilateral lending agencies have been established, both
within and outside the United Nations framework, in the
late 1950s and early 1960s. These include the International
Finance Corporation and the International Development
Association, the African Development Bank, the Inter-Ame¬
rican Development Bank and the Central American Bank
of Economic Integration and the Development Fund of the
European Economic Community. Preparations are also
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TURNING POINT
IN DEVELOPMENT
(Cont'd)
32
under way for the setting up of an Asian Development
Bank. With the increase in multilateral lending facilities,
the establishment of the United Nations Special Fund and

the expansion of activities under United Nations technical
assistance, the proportion of resources which are being
provided to developing countries through multilateral
channels has increased from around 6 per cent of the
total in the late 1950s to over 10 per cent in 1963.
The need for external assistance is not confined to
long-term development capital. Developing as well as
developed countries need "working capital" to underpin
international trade. Between 1960 and early 1965 the
International Monetary Fund made available $5,600 million
to forty-three members, thirty-two of them developing
States. It has also started to operate a modest scheme
to compensate primary producing countries for fluctuations
in export receipts.
T the mid-point of the Decade one cannot say
that the future of this essential financing is
secure. In spite of the increase in the flow of long-term
capital since the mid-1950s, the target set by the General
Assembly according to which resource transfers to develop¬
ing countries are to rise to 1 per cent of the national incomes
of developed countries has not yet been attained. In fact,
the levelling off in the flow of funds to developing coun¬
tries since 1961 has set back progress towards the target.
It is as though such programmes had lost the élan
of a new venture before they had acquired the respec¬
tability of old usage. The words are spoken, the gestures
are made, but the sense of clear commitment seems
elusive. The richer nations of the West, a little bemused
by the quick easy success of the Marshall Plan among
a group of essentially already developed nations, have
tended to approach the whole problem of development with
an unrealistic time scale. Put in the aid, mobilize the
resources and, within a decade, the young economies
should be well on their way to self-sustaining growth. So,
in the crudest terms, ran the hope. But even the most
favoured of the developed nations the United States
took eighty years to reach industrial maturity. Even the
most ingenious Japan took at least forty for its first
revolution and, since the war, fifteen for its second.
The nations which seek to develop their economies
today face all the old dilemmas of rapid transition how
to modernize static farming, how to squeeze savings from
a poor pre-industrial population, how to choose those
industries which actually produce a surplus, how to finance
the new skills needed to produce more capital before
the capital exists to divert to the schools. But they face
even tougher problems as well the population explosion,
urbanization beyond control, unfavourable trade patterns
and inappropriate technology.
The United Nations has already produced a very large
volume of information on the explosive nature of the
world's expansion in population. The censuses it inspired
have shown, throughout the developing world, even a higher
growth rate than had been expected. The World Popu¬
lation Conference, to be held in 1965 (1), will no doubt
underline with new urgency the degree to which, in the
developing continents, the decline in mortality and growth
in population, by preceding the modernization of the eco-
(1) The conference took place from August 30 to September 10 in
Belgrade Editor.
The 'beer, boots and bricks' phase
of early industrial development
nomy, now impedes that process. Yet modernization alone
can provide food and income for the growing millions.
The Conference will make inescapably, dramatically
clear that the situation carries with it a potentially ine¬
vitable risk of disease, starvation and social collapse.
Governments can therefore be urged, with even greater
energy, to give proper priority to the slowing down of
population growth rates and the adoption of acceptable
methods of control.
So far, the United Nations has chiefly concentrated on
drawing attention to population factors in the context of
economic and social development by means of scientific
evaluation and analysis of data.
It is now going to expand the scope of its work so
that it includes questions connected with policies which
are designed to influence the size, structure and change
of the population. In Asia and the Far East, as a result
of a decision of the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East in 1964, United Nations activities have been
extended to include family planning and this year a United
Nations team was sent to India to review the family plan¬
ning programe and to make recommendations for acce¬
lerating it within the five-year economic plan.
The population problem of the developing countries,
however, is not merely one of too rapid increase in the
total numbers it is vastly accentuated by massive shifts
of population from the countryside to the burgeoning cities.
The great cities of the affluent world themselves suffer
from overcrowding, social disorder, pollution and traffic
congestion. But in the developing world, the worst aspect
of the urban dilemma is again one that the developed
world to some extent escaped the massive movement
of rural migrants into the cities ahead of any real chance
of their earning a living. The most conspicuous problem
is the acute shortage of housing resulting in overcrowd¬
ing, the growth of "shanty towns" and a chronic shortage
of community services and facilities.
HE United Nations has set targets for housing
in the developing countries based on a standard
of ten new dwellings for every 1,000 inhabitants. So far
only two new dwellings for every 1,000 inhabitants have
been built in many developing countries even though these
countries have allocated 15 to 25 per cent of their total
investment in capital formation to residential construction.
The United Nations has made studies of urbanization
in various regions Africa, the Middle East. It has call¬
ed conferences on such issues as new towns and on urban
development, planning and policy. It has assisted in the
preparation of national physical plans, including master
plans for cities. It has helped in resettling shanty town
dwellers. Now the Social Commission has adopted a
proposal suggesting that a full-scale inter-governmental
programme for joint investigation of the problem should
be launched, and areas set aside for studies and experi¬
ments in regional solutions which seem essential if unwieldy
movements of internal migration are not to throw intole¬
rable strains on young and still unstable economies. There
¡s the germ here of the kind of world process of confront¬
ation and education that has occurred in the field of trade;
but what is also needed is action and investment on a
scale hitherto quite unknown.
Recognition of these deeper difficulties should help to
educate and reassure those in the developed world who
despair too soon, who fear that because the developing
nations have not made a decisive break-through to growth
and economic independence in ten years, they never will.

PART 3
HE slow but real progress of development has
attracted less public attention than its occasional
spectacular mishaps. Indeed, the public has been largely
ignorant of what has been learned in the last fifteen years
in the field of development and of how much, in region after
region, is beginning to go modestly well.
The first point to make is that the developing world, for
all its frustrations, is in motion. National incomes are
rising and most agricultural economics have made some
break from traditional farming. The beginnings of industrial
growth are to be found on every side. This is not yet the
recipe for "take-off" but it is a considerable advance on the
stagnation of the twenties and the thirties.
This new dynamism has sprung in part from the fact
that quite a number of the developing countries have been
investing their resources in the right things. And one
reason for this is the increasing relevance of the advice
they receive from experts supplied by governments, uni¬
versities, foundations, and, to a greater and greater degree,
the United Nations and the specialized agencies, partly
through their own budgets, but more substantially through
the voluntary contributions of governments to such under¬
takings as the Special Fund and the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance.
NLY ten years ago, the general tendency was
to agree that savings made up the critically
scarce factor in static economies. Pour in the needed
stimulus, add to the foreign exchange reserves, get the
World Bank to put in some infra-structure and the economy
would begin to stir. In some economies the strategy was
not far wrong. After ten years they needed no more
exceptional assistance. But in other communities, the effect
of capital aid without much wider modifications of policy
was rather like splashing water on to leached soli. It
simply washed off.
Much of the progress that has been made since and
which »the Decade of Development seeks to dramatize
is concerned with producing a better soil in which the
assistance can germinate. A few examples of this better
developmental husbandry will illustrate the point. There
can hardly be a realistic plan for expanding a country's
infra-structure transport, power, and so forth unless an
inventory of its resources and their whereabouts has been
established. In this field of pre-investment surveys, the
Special Fund has taken the lead.
But the greatest potential resource of any country are
its human resources. Trained men for administration, for
education, for public health and medicine these, too,
belong to the stage of pre-investment since no investment
can succeed without them. Here, aided by increasing
resources from the Special Fund and the Expanded Pro¬
gramme, the United Nations family is setting up institu¬
tions for administration, managerial and industrial training
and is supporting universities and technical colleges.
However, far more is needed than the higher cadres.
Underdeveloped countries are by definition short of all the
intermediate skills as well. A welcome decision has just
been taken by the International Labour Organization govern¬
ing body as a contribution to the Development Decade,
to open this year the Turin International Centre for Advanc¬
ed Technical and Vocational Training. To relate interme¬
diate skills to the probable needs of each particular eco¬
nomy, . new techniques have been evolved, particularly
the techniques .of manpower surveys and educational
planning to which the International Labour Organization
and Unesco respectively have made a signal contribution.
And clearly within the context of any educational plan,
no single item is more urgent than teaching the teachers.
In this field Unesco with the help of the Special Fund
has taken the initiative in planning and establishing
teacher-training colleges and the International Bank,
recognizing the productivity of education, has begun to
provide credits for educational projects which involve the
direct development of education itself both in terms of the
number of students in schools and the content of the
educational programme. Unesco's recently' started pilot
programme for universal literacy represents an imaginative
new approach both to increasing productivity and to the
wider enjoyment of elementary human rights and dignity.
No less significant an insight in postwar developmen¬
tal strategy is the new priority accorded to agriculture.
Unless production on the farms on which the great bulk
of the people still live begins to go up, there is no sur¬
plus for saving, no surplus to feed the towns, no surplus
to keep pace with rising population and keep down costly
imports of food, no agricultural raw materials to feed into
industry, above all, no rise in farm income to provide an
expanding market for the nascent industrial system.
There is no conflict between the priorities of farming
and industry, and the need to re-emphasize farming springs
not from any desire to "keep developing economies depen¬
dent" but simply to counteract the glamour of factory
chimmeys which may all. too often be smoking above pro¬
ducts which no one in the community can afford to buy.
Wherever the agricultural sector has been jolted into
movement in Taiwan, for instance, or increasingly in
Pakistan the reasons tend to be the same. Access to
water, access to the new technologies of fertilizer and
improved seed, ample credit for the farmers, inducements
to work and produce more in the shape of land owner¬
ship or secure tenancy, co-operatives to give advantages
of scale and some control over marketing, quick access
to the urban market, reclamation of land through malaria
eradication these are the recipes and it is in these fields
that the relevant international agencies, with the Food
and Agriculture Organization at the centre of the picture,
are at work. Moreover, each element is seen more and
more as a part in a fully concerted policy.
«EVELOP1NG countries themselves have tend¬
ed to give special attention to the industrial
sectors in their development programmes. In this field the
question of priorities is of particular importance and
difficulty. Each country has its own particular endowment
of resources and its own local needs and skills. Up to a
point, the first efforts in industry usually substitute local
products for imports. This is the "beer, boots and bricks"
phase through which most economies pass. But whatever
the background of the economy, one need is clear expert
advice in selecting the types of industry that are likely
to prosper.
Private foreign investment has an important role to play in
industrial development, particularly if, in return for tax and
tariff concessions most developing governments offer, the
firms are ready to train local people at all levels of skill and
look for local participation in the enterprise. While skill bot¬
tlenecks in developing countries do impose some limitations
on their capacity to make effective use of additional foreign
investment, new projects in which foreign capital can be
fruitfully absorbed are constantly being revealed and creat¬
ed with the expansion of education and training. The Unit¬
ed Nations family is doing its best to help developing
countries to identify these projects.
33
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TURNING POINT
IN DEVELOPMENT
(Cont'd)
We know how much still remains to be done
but we also know what we can do
In addition to these problems, a new and formidable
one the full dimensions of which are only gradually
becoming apparent looms ahead: this is the problem of
the growing indebtedness of the developing countries,
and the limits that this imposes on their ability to utilize
the credits which may be available to them.
According ,to International Bank estimates, the public
and government-guaranteed debts of thirty-seven develop¬
ing countries rose from $7,000 million in 1955 to $18,000
million in 1962, interest payments increased nearly fourfold,
and amortization payments were more than tripled. By
1963 the servicing of the external debt absorbed over
13 per cent of the export receipts of these countries.
In response to the increasing debt servicing difficulties
of the developing countries the United States took the
tnitiative of providing development loans at low interest
rates and on easy repayment terms, and other countries
gradually eased their own lending terms. The developed
countries also co-operated in setting up the IDA as a
"soft-loan" subsidiary of the International Bank.
PART 4 Conclusion
34
HERE have been some clumsy beginnings and
uncertain efforts. But the activity, the effort,
the learning, the striving, the aspiration are fully as impor¬
tant as the inevitable delays and mistakes. After such
energetic beginnings, it would be tragic and foolish indeed
if the effort of assistance were now permitted to falter.
The United Nations does not exist apart from its
member governments and in the last analysis governmental
decisions will determine the tempo of its activities over
the rest of the Development Decade. One of the chief
reasons for today's uncertainty is that it reflects a general
crisis in the world's political relationships. It is true that
this has not yet impaired directly the United Nations work
of development. But it has impaired the atmosphere. It
has lessened goodwill and confidence. Yet the paradoxical
truth is that the U.N.'s development work can be one of
the world's chief instruments in lessening political friction.
But development, which should be one of mankind's
great constructive tasks is often bedevilled with suspicion
and misunderstanding, owing partly to the memories of
the colonial era and the persistence in some cases of
economic dependence.
It is for this reason that the question has been raised
whether a larger emphasis on the use of international
or multilateral agencies in the work of development might
not permit the vital task to go forward in an atmosphere
less charged with political tension. For instance, in the
recent governmental study of France's aid programme
which is the world's largest in relative terms of national
income it was recommended that the percentage chan¬
nelled through multilateral agencies might be raised from
12 per cent to 25 per cent. There are cogent reasons
for such proposals. The United Nations and its related
agencies comprise rich States and poor States and enjoy
the advantage of having representatives of both on their
governing bodies and on their staffs.
But perhaps the strongest argument for giving the
international agencies a larger share in the work of
development lies not so much in immediate questions of
effectiveness or efficiency but in the deeper question of
the kind of world community the nations are to live in.
At this point it is necessary to return once more to the
experience inside developed countries. When these coun¬
tries confronted as does the world today the vast
inequalities of wealth and opportunity which coincided with
the deployment of the new resources, they^did not try to
bridge the gap solely by private person-to-person giving
and philanthropy. The decisive change was the decision
that citizens as a matter of right and social justice should
begin to share more fully in the steadily increasing
resources of their community.
Clearly, if in the world community which science and
technology are moulding into an inescapable unity, the
same principles are applied, the case is very strong for
an attempt to base an increasing proportion of international
assistance of all sorts in trade, in technical aid, in capital
transfers, in compensatory finance upon international
institutions and upon an agreed international formula or
standard of obligation such as the target of 1 per cent
of national income. What is formulated as a universal
obligation is more likely to obviate misunderstanding and
possible recriminations. What is given in the name of
citizenship has the best chance of creating responsible
citizens in return. This at least has been a large part
of the experience of developed society in its domestic
aspect. It is still the only working experience upon which
the world can draw in fashioning its own common life.
Reason and vision together tell the nations that they
have entered into an uncharted phase of the world eco¬
nomy. Although over -^120,000 millions are being spent on
arms each year, this arms burden has not prevented eco¬
nomic growth in the developed world at an annual rate of 5
to 6 per, cent. How much more could be achieved for
the benefit of the whole world if even a part of these
vast efforts could be redirected from producing the instru¬
ments of death to producing the instruments of growth
and work and lifel Roads and dams, water and fertilizer,
steel and machines, houses and cities, skills and welfare
all these could provide an economic stimulus equal to
that of arms production, all could therefore be as simply
and as easily afforded by the richer States.
But development need not wait for disarmament, and it
must not. The greatest task of the United Nations Decade
of Development is to convince governments and peoples
that they have the means to wipe out mass poverty with
its attendant miseries and dangers, and to stir them to
use those means to the full. We have seen how much
remains to be done, at this mid-point of the Decade,
to achieve even the modest targets set.
Who, then, can deny the compelling urgency of apply¬
ing our efforts more purposefully, more vigorously and
with a more coherent strategy? Whether we shall succeed
is still doubtful, and in that measure so is the future of
man. But there is no doubt whatever about what can
be done. If we have courage and constancy of purpose,
a better world for all is within our reach.
H
From "The United Nations Development Decade at Mid-point" ,
an appraisal presented by the Secretary-General to the U.N. Economic
and Social Council m July, 1965.
