Structures that seem close to space-age architecture are astronomical sight¬
ing devices built in the 18th century in the courtyard of the palace
of Prince Jai Singh at Jaipur, 60 miles from Delhi, in India. Himself a
mathematician, astronomer and architect, the prince built this open-air
observatory when he constructed a handsome capital at Jaipur in 1728.

The stones of Jaipur
speak of astronomy
Photos Ç Paul Almasy, Paris
Above, in background and topped by a
cupola over an observer's post rises the
Samrat Yantra, "the emperor of instruments."
Over 90 feet tall it is the largest of all the
sundial-type instruments at the Jaipur obser¬
vatory. In foreground (and in photo left)
are miniature versions of the Samrat Yantra.
The observatory has a complex of twelve
such devices named the Rasi Valya, each
structure being aligned on a zodiacal sign.

I N the courtyard of the splendid 18th century palace
at Jaipur, sixty miles from Delhi, in India, stands a
complex of huge yet graceful stone structures. They are as old
as the palace itself, but with their clean, functional lines they look
like ultra-modern examples of space-age architecture.
If these structures have a functional kind of beauty it is because
they are in fact scientific instruments in stone, the equipment of
an observatory built by a powerful Moslem ruler, Prince Jai
Singh II, in the new capital he raised at Jaipur in 1728.
A skilled mathematician, astronomer and architect, the prince
conceived a single grandiose project that englobed his interest in
all these fields. He ordered the construction of a network of
astronomical observatories in the Amber Territory which he ruled
under the Moghul Emperor Mohammed Shah. Mobilizing skills
and resources with a lavishness that recalls some of the building
feats of the Egyptian Pharoahs, Jai Singh raised five open-air
observatories in the largest towns of his kingdom: Jaipur, Delhi,
Mathura, Benares and Ujjain.
© Lucien Hervé, Paris
The contributions of Moslem science in mathematics, medicine,
physics and chemistry to the knowledge of the medieval world are
well known. Among the most important in astronomy were its
splendid observatories and its outstanding versions of such astro¬
nomical instruments as the astrolabe and sextant. Moslem astro¬
nomers and mathematicians were able to calculate precisely the
latitude and longtitude of their cities at a time when this achieve¬
ment was almost unheard of in Western Europe.
Jai Singh II followed in this tradition. In building his observa¬
tories he had as predecessors the observatory of al-Mamun, caliph
of Baghdad in the 9th century, the medieval Moslem observatories
at Cairo and Maragha and the outstanding one built by Ulugh-Beg,
a grandson of Tamerlane, at Samarkand in the 15th century.
Jai Singh was, in fact, the last of a series of Moslem rulers
who down the centuries had built observatories and drawn up
astronomical tables on which to base and maintain accurate calen¬
dars. For in the ancient world the promulgation of a calendar was
CONT'D ON PAGE 21
19

As the powerful ruler of
the Amber territory. Jai
Singh ordered five observa¬
tories to be built in the
cities of Jaipur, Delhi, Ma-
thura, Benares and Ujjain
so that the observations and
calculations of his astrono¬
mers and mathematicians
could be verified and cor¬
roborated. Right, huge yet
ethereal structures preserved
in the Delhi observatory.
Lucien Hervé, Paris
Above, right and below, three giant
instruments in stone at Jaipur.
Above, stairway leading to obser¬
ver's post at top of Samrat Yantra
structure which is oriented in a
north-south direction to point at
the Pole Star. Right, another
smaller observation tower built by
Prince Jai Singh casts its graceful
reflection in a lake in the palace
grounds. Below, part of one of
the large hemispherical pits at the
observatory. Its graduated marble
surface acts as a bowl sundial.
Black patterns in the bowl are
cutouts through which observers
behind the shell sighted the stars.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

Paul Almasy, Paris

THE STONES OF JAIPUR SPEAK OF ASTRONOMY (Cont'd)
not only an important practical need; it was a mark of sovereignty,
and also had a religious significance.
The observatory built by Jal Singh at Jaipur was primarily for
this purpose and his aim in constructing a network of similar
centres spanning his territory was to allow verification and corro¬
boration of the observations and calculations made by his mathe¬
maticians and astronomers.
The Jaipur observatory, still in a remarkable state of preserva¬
tion, offers one of the most striking examples of astronomical
architecture. Everything about it, from the large circular observa¬
tion bowls set in the ground to a giant 90 feet high sundial-type
instrument, the Samrat Yantra (Emperor of Instruments) ¡s on a
grandiose scale.
The monumental size of the devices was dictated by the need
for accuracy. No telescopes were used at Jaipur and because of
the limited acuity of the naked eye, instruments equipped with
very large scales were essential.
Like today's giant nuclear accelerators used in physics research
and huge modern radio telescopes, the stone instruments at Jaipur
had also to be large in order to do their job, though for obviously
different reasons.
With his inquiring mind and enthusiasm for astronomy and
mathematics Prince Jai Singh was the last royal Moslem astro¬
nomer in the medieval tradition. His observatory at Jaipur is both
an outstanding monument to and the culmination of all of ancient
and medieval astronomy.
21
