RICHES OF CROESUS. A silver
shekel (.6 in.) struck about 550
B.C. during the reign of a monarch
famed for his wealth. King Croesus
of Lydia (Asia Minor). The heads
of lions and bulls are motifs that
can be traced back to Sumerian
times when they were used on the
seals of ancient Babylon. Gyges,
founder of the Lydian dynasty, is
credited with the invention of
coins for use as State currency.
Photos OP Wenger. Bern

AMBASSADORS OF ART
AND HISTORY
by Otto Paul Wenger
B
KNIFE-MONEY. A knife-shaped
Chinese copper coin (5.3 in.)
dating from the 4th century B.C.
In ancient China arms and knives
were often used for trade and
barter and eventually miniature
replicas replaced them as coinage.
'EFORE man invented coins
'barter was the prevailing form
of trade. Evidence of some measure
of barter over very great distances can
be found as far back as the Old Stone
Age. Flint, for example, which at that
time was in very great demand, was
exchanged between Northern France
and Southern Germany. Barter was
subsequently extended to ornaments
and implements (flint weapons, amber
ornaments), and, when the use of
metals began, copper, tin, bronze and
gold became important items of trade.
The great rivers already served as
trade routes, as in the case of the
amber route. In Ancient Rome, on the
other hand, in the fifth century B.C.,
cattle were still the most important
measure of value. The original name
for cattle in Latin was "pecus", whence
"pecunia", and, in Homer's writings,
the ox was still the standard of value:
Menelaus's armour is worth nine oxen,
while Glaucus's is worth as many as
one hundred.
The increasingly brisk trade across
the frontiers of individual towns and
states made it necessary, however, to
adopt a common measure of value.
Herein lies the great significance of
money and consequently of coins.
Money, however, does not always con¬
sist of coins. Cowrie shells, which were
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

AMBASSADORS OF ART (Cont'd)
already known as a means of payment
In East Asia as early as 1300 B.C. or
thereabouts, still circulated until quite
recently as money in Africa. The large
perforated limestone disks, which
played an important rôle as a medium
of exchange on the South Sea Island
of Yap, are well-known.
In the nineteenth century, tea
pressed into brick from (tea-brick
money) was used as currency in Tibet,
and in the second century B.C.,
spades, knives and other implements
were used for payment In China, which
was then already highly civilized. At
the end of the Shang dynasty (about
1.200 B.C.), these working implements
were replaced as a means of payment
by small replicas made from the same
metal. They were not, however, true
coins such as those used today.
To whom, then, do we really owe
the invention of coinage, which was to
have such Important consequences?
5E
28
GREEK writers have left us
reliable accounts of the in¬
vention of coined money. The historian
Herodotus and the philosopher Xeno-
phanes, who were both born In Asia
Minor, ascribe the invention of coinage
to the Lydians. The latter were the
dominant power in Asia Minor in the
seventh, and the first half of the sixth,
century B.C. Gyges, the founder of the
Lydian dynasty (687-652 B.C.), may be
considered to be the real "inventor" of
coin money.
The first coins were made of elec-
trum, a natural compound of gold and
silver, found in the Lydian rivers. At
first, they were plain, nugget-like
objects bearing no image. It was only
later on that an image was stamped on
coins, but, at the beginning, only on the
obverse; the reverse showed one or
two impressed squares produced by
the punch with which they were struck.
A little later, on the island of Aegina,
the first silver coins were minted, and
shortly afterwards the first coins of the
rich seaport of Corinth and the first
Athenian coins appeared. In 593 B.C.,
Solon, the founder of the Attic politi¬
cal constitution, reorganized the coin¬
age system and minted the first large
silver coins of four drachmas (tetra-
drachma). For the first time, these
coins had images on both sides. While
the Aegina coins were stamped with a
rough representation of a turtle, the
Corinthian coins bore a winged horse
and the Attic coins were adorned with
an owl. In ancient times, the Aegina
coins were known as "turtles", the
Corinthian coins as "fillies" or "foals",
and the Attic coins as "owls". The
coins of these three towns were widely
current.
The noble art of coining spread with
astonishing rapidity in Greece in the
sixth century B.C., and from %there it
reached the West about 550 B.C.
Two centuries after their invention,
.<&&&
9 ,* wr\Vw
a.
O
e
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

./>«
as
x - , * ». 3y?
* ** X :' ». ¿*
**^^^fcp
W-Î
- *&»
»
SMILING GODDESS. Athena, helmeted and wearing a string
I of pearls, appears on this silver Corinthian coin (.78 in.) minted
about 480 B.C. Athena was the Greek goddess of wisdom and pro¬
tectress of the arts, sciences and industry.
HUMAN-HEADED BULL. Half-man, half-animal, this river-
- divinity was revered by the people of Gela, an ancient Sicilian
city where this silver coin of four drachmas (.95 in.) was minted about
425 B.C.
CAPTIVE LEADER. The expressive portrait on this silver denarius
I (.47 in.) is the work of a Roman engraver, L. Hostilius Saserna
(about 45 B.C.). With its air of resignation and its cheeks hollowed
by suffering, the face is probably that of Vercingetorix, leader of
the Gauls, who, after his capture by the Romans at the battle of
Alesia, was taken to grace Caesar's triumph in Rome in 46 B.C.
ATHENIAN OWL. For several centuries Attic coins bore the
figure of the owl, symbol of Athena, the patron goddess of
Athens. An olive branch, symbol of peace, and a crescent moon
also figure on this silver piece of four drachmas (1 in.) dating from
about 430 B.C.
V»
I example of the engraver's skill, (.78 in.) are those of the Byzan¬
tine emperor Michael III (839-867 A.D.) and his mother, Theodora.
The emperor, known as "Michael the Drunkard", was assassinated
by Basil of Macedonia who became emperor in his place.

AMBASSADORS OF ART (Cont'd)
BARLEY EAR AND GRASS¬
HOPPER. Metapontum, a Greek
colony in Italy, used an ear of
barley the source of its wealth
to identify its coins. A variety of
subsidiary symbols appear on its
coinage including such animals
as the grasshopper (shown here)
lizard, owl, mouse and others.
Photos © O.P. Wenger. Bern
Precursors of the newspaper
30
coins were already being widely used
throughout the Greek world. They pro¬
moted trade by land and sea; they
enabled the citizen to amass money for
himself. When, later on, the Persians
made the gold daric the basis of a
single uniform currency for their whole
great empire, and when the practices
of interest accounting, pledging, pro¬
curation and security were taken over
from Babylon, all the conditions for
world trade as we know it today were
established.
The dies were carved by hand and
the coins themselves were stamped by
hand on an anvil. The Greek artist's
genius made the coin a work of art.
No coin was identical with another, and
no other people in the world has
ennobled "money" as a product of
artistic skill, to the same extent as the
ancient Greeks.
The representations stamped on the
coins were extremely varied. First
came representations of the gods in
all their shapes and forms; there is also
a striking variety of animals and plants.
The image of a living person appeared
on coins for the first time in Europe
during the reign of Demetrius Polior-
cetes of Macedonia (306-283 B.C.).
Greek coins finally penetrated deep
into India, but Greek power was vis¬
ibly declining. Rome was rearing its
head. The images of indigenous gods
and rulers were replaced by portraits
of proud Roman emperors.
It was only in the fourth century B.C.
when the Greek art of coining was
at its height that the formless lumps
of bronze used as money by the
Romans were shaped and marked to
become a state coinage. The first
coins, however, were cast and not
struck. The actual minting of Roman
silver coins did not begin until about
269 B.C. The basic unit was the silver
denarius. In the year 44 B.C., the
Senate conferred on Caius Julius Cae¬
sar the right to have his head portrayed
on coins. This was the first time that
the image of a living person had
appeared on Roman money.
Under the Emperor Augustus, the
line of development which was to make
Roman money a pattern for all future
currencies was started. The Emperor's
head thenceforth adorned the obverse
of coins, while the reserve was used
for State propaganda. At that time
there was no press, radio or television
and so coins became the "common
man's newspaper". Domestic and
foreign political events were commem¬
orated. The worship of the gods,
social policy and architecture were all
recorded on coins in pictures and
words.
THE minting of gold and silver
coins was the prerogative of
the Emperor himself, whereas the
Senate had a certain say in the minting
of bronze hence the two letters S.C.
(Senatus Consulto) imprinted on
copper coins. The imperial coins
minted during the first two centuries
A.D. are of surpassing beauty. This
is particularly true of the large bronze
coins, the sesterces. The magical
effect of the patina gives them the
lustre of rare jewels.
Rome's rule lasted for many centu¬
ries, but in the latter days of the Roman
Empire coin design became steadily
flatter and sketchier, and it is not
always possible to recognize the effigy
of the ruler. The slow decline of the
Roman Empire was accompanied by
the decline of the coinage in general.
It was a long time before the unmis¬
takable Buzantine style left its mark on
the imperial coins. The Byzantine
coins are simple, austere and highly
stylized.
Like every other art, coining has its
seasons of greatness and its periods
of decline. The art of coining in the
early middle ages cannot compare with
that of classical antiquity. The nor¬
thern peoples can show nothing to
rival the peerless mastery of the
ancients in all branches of the visual
arts.
From the end of the seventh cen¬
tury on, Charlemagne's mint regula¬
tions provided the standard for the
greater part of Europe. The most im¬
portant coin was the denarius or penny.
But even then the coinage steadily
deteriorated. The right of coinage was
the prerogative of the king, who ceded
it for money to margraves, palsgraves,
abbots and bishops. Almost all those
who enjoyed the right of coinage tried
to derive the maximum profit from
their prerogative.
In the middle of the twelfth century,
the penny became so thin that it was
no longer possible to make a clear
stamp on both sides. In those times of
need, the mint masters remembered
the ancient technique of hollow stamp¬
ing which had never died out. The new
one-sided pennies were called bractea-
tes. For those who enjoyed the prero¬
gative of coining, they represented a
productive source of revenue. They
were often called in within a year of
issue, and nine new coins were
exchanged for twelve old.
Shortly after the death of Frede¬
rick II, the powerful city of Florence
minted its own gold coins, florins, bear¬
ing the city's lily escutcheon. Venice
followed suit in 1284 with its ducats.
The Gothic style then made its appea¬
rance. The Gothic gold coins are
magnificent, particularly the English
noble, which was coined for the first
time by Edward III to commemorate his

naval victory over the French off Sluis
(July 12, 1340).
With the Renaissance came larger
silver coins. In 1486, the world's first
thalers were coined at Hall in the Tyrol.
At that time, they were still known
as "Guldengroschen". Later develop¬
ments, by way of Saxony and the sil¬
ver-mine of the Counts von Schlick in
Joachimethal (Bohemia), led finally to
their being known as "Taler" (thaler).
This great silver coin conquered the
whole world. In Scandinavia it became
the "rigsdaler"; the English took it
over as the "crown", the French as the
"ecu", the Italians as the "tallero", the
Spaniards as the "peso", the Russians
as the "rouble" and finally the Ameri¬
cans as the "dollar". At the end of the
eighteenth century, this extremely
popular silver coin also reached the
Far East.
Coins have gone through all the
stages in the evolution of culture: rise,
apogee, decline.
All peoples have coined money, and
confidence in coinage and, conse¬
quently, in currency has become a
question of confidence between the
peoples. Money appears most strik¬
ingly as a link between peoples in the
tourist trade.
Whereas, in ancient times, in the
middle ages and at the beginning of
the modern era, trade necessitated the
transport of money with a heavily
armed escort, today it is generally
carried through by book transfers and
bank transactions instead of transfers
of specie.
Money as such, it is true, no longer
appears as a link between peoples
except to a minor extent. This applies
particularly to coins, i.e. "hard cash"
though few currencies today can claim
to be designated "hard"! Neverthe
less, it is impossible to imagine pre¬
sent-day international relations without
money to fulfil its function as an
internationally recognized measure of
value.
Money may even be sa!d to play a
certain part as a means of transmitting
information, in so far as coins, and
now more particularly bank-notes, are
representative of national pride: great
figures in the history and culture of a
nation, scenes and symbols of nation¬
al life, or even of humanity transcend¬
ing national bounds (as the guiding
principles of peoples) are set before
other nations by means of the coining
press or the bank-note printing press.
OTTO PAUL WENGER Is a member of the
Swiss Numismatic Society. He has written
many studies on coins, Including "Kleine
Münzkunde" (A Pocket Handbook on Coins)
published recently by Hallwag, Bern, Swit¬
zerland.
amé?.
Cut out in oval shapes from
thin sheets of gold, Japanese
coins of the 19th century are
stamped with different marks
and may bear a mint-master's
name. Above, gold piece (1 .4 in
by .78 in.) dating from 1860.
HOLLOW PENNY. When
a metal shortage occur¬
red in the 12th century
in Europe, the penny
became so thin that it
could only be stamped
on one side. Mint
masters used the old
technique of hollow
stamping to produce
coins like this "brac-
teate" (as these hollow
pieces were known) en¬
graved in Halberstadt
(Germany) by Gero von
Schrembke (1170). It
depicts the stoning of
St. Stephen whose por¬
trait is held by angels.
'v"ri*
a-- ï
Silver nugget-shaped coins minted in Siam (1851 to 1868).
