Fifteen years ago, the first day of July 1950, marked the beginning of the
largest and most far-reaching undertaking in international technical co-opera¬
tion: the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance.
The Expanded Programme reaches this anniversary mark in a year of special
emphasis on international responsibilities and action to help meet the problems
of a world in which not only the political security but also the economic and
social well-being of mankind as a whole has yet to find its proper balance.
In the first place, the fifteenth year of the Expanded Programme is also being
celebrated as the twentieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations
itself. Secondly, this is also International Co-operation Year: and the Expanded
Programme stands out as an example of harmony of purpose and action in the
midst of diversity. Thirdly, the year 1965 marks as well the mid-point of the
United Nations Development Decade; and the Expanded Programme, with its
close partners the United Nations Special Fund and the regular programmes of
the United Nations and the associated specialized agencies constitute together
one of the most important direct contributions of the organized international com¬
munity to economic and social progress in the countries which stand most
urgently in need of development.
Finally, the year brings a prospect of a new and closer association of the
Expanded Programme and the Special Fund already recommended by the Eco¬
nomic and Social Council and awaiting action by the General Assembly in a
single United Nations Development Programme.
The Unesco Courier has asked Mr. David Owen, Chairman of The United
Nations Technical Assistance Board, to recall the early days of the Expanded
Programme and to give an account of its growth and progress. We are happy
to present his article below.
o
o.
Ó
x

12
TECHNICAL
CO-OPERATION
A WORLD
OF CHANGE
by David Owen
Excutive Chairman
U. N. Technical Assistance Board
WO documents that stand like milestones In
the history of international assistance to the
developing countries are before me as I write these lines.
One is the first, the other the latest, of the Annual Reports
of the Technical Assistance Board to its governing body,
the Technical Assistance Committee of the United Nations
Economic and Social Council. Almost exactly fifteen years
lie between the first and last of these pages and what
a world of change and progress these years have encom-
passedl
"The basis for operations under the Expanded Programme
Is now firmly established... the financial support pledged
by governments at the Technical Assistance Conference
now paves the way for the actual launching of this major
undertaking of the family of the United Nations." So we
wrote in our first report, under the date of July 4, 1950.
What we meant, in simpler terms, was that we now at
least had money in pledge, If not yet In the bank to the
amount of some $20 million; and we also had the machinery
agreed methods and procedures of co-ordination among

mm mWM
One of the first Egyptian women to train as a specialist in industrial hygiene, this student of the Higher
Institute of Public Health in Alexandria is measuring gas toxicity given off in rayon textile manufacture.
The World Health Organization helped the U.A.R. to equip the Institute. In 15 years, U.N. specialized
agencies have sent 859 experts to the U.A.R. and granted over 1,000 fellowships. Over 580 U.A.R. ex¬
perts have gone to other countries. FAO, Unesco, ILO and the International Civil Aviation Organization
this year are taking part in 15 large-scale scientific and technological Special Fund projects in the U.A.R.
the founding members with which to convert that money
Into expert advisers, fellowships and equipment asked for
by developing countries to help them attack their problems
of economic and social development.
Oddly enough, and for the first and last time, we found
ourselves at that moment with resources far more plentiful
than firm' requests for assistance. These were so few,
Indeed, that the Technical Assistance Board was able, as
a body, to scrutinize and almost to savour many of them
individually. With no small sense of anticipation, and even
of excitement, we agreed also to send a few exploratory
missions Into the field In order to find out precisely what
kinds of assistance the countries needed most.
We were, in short, feeling our way into the barely-
explored ' realm of co-ordinated International technical
assistance: indeed, "pragmatic" was the expression that
we applied In that first report to the nature of our approach.
But by the time and It was only a matter of months
that the requests for assistance came pouring in and that
our commitments to provide experts and fellowships
mounted in each case into the hundreds, we felt that the
Expanded Programme was substantially in operation.
And indeed it was, by comparison with the scale of
international assistance previously available. But to turn
from the first report of the Technical Assistance Board to
the latest is to rediscover how far we had yet to go in
developing the Expanded Programme, as it has come to
be called, and to recognize, with some grounds for pride,
how much has been accomplished.
Fifteen years ago the United Nations family looked out
on a group of over 100 underdeveloped countries and
territories which were suffering from a lack of capital,
generally unfavourable trade opportunities and a serious
shortage of technical and administrative skills and expe¬
rience. The International organizations were in no imme¬
diate position to provide the first two ingredients, and so
they concentrated their energies and the resources to 'be
made available by the voluntary contributions of Govern¬
ments, on the ingredient which they could effectively
mobilize: the exchange of knowledge, skills and experience,
13

WORLD OF CHANGE (Cont'd)
32,000 fellowships for training abroad
to organize a civil service or the management of an air¬
port; to run a demonstration farm or a model school; to
train industrial apprentices, nurses and weather forecasters.
Our principal medium of assistance to the countries in
need of it was to be the assignment of "experts", and
this seemed to me at the beginning to be fraught with
perils. Could we assemble, from our various member
countries, large numbers of men and women with sufficient
personal and professional qualifications to fulfill our prom¬
ises to requesting governments? Even one poorly chosen
expert could discredit in an entire country the conception
of international assistance, and we would be running this
risk some hundreds of times a year.
It happened in fact that these fears were intensified
almost immediately by an extremely unfortunate selection
of one of our first appointees. He turned out, however,
to be an exception to a record which we and the thousands
of professionals and technicians concerned can hold up
with no little pride. There have been more than 14,000
appointments in the intervening years: agronomists
recruited and sent out by the Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization; malariologists by the World Health Organization;
educational planners by Unesco, atomic energy specia¬
lists by the International Atomic Energy Agency; and so
on through the hundreds of particular fields of economic
and social development covered by our participating organ¬
izations (1). I do not think that these agencies would
claim a consistent level of excellence among all their
appointments, but from my own knowledge I can say that
we have had a minimum of embarrassment (and virtually
none of a political kind despite an almost universal range
of nationalities), adequate standards of competence and
a fair share of inspired choices.
I Y own definition of an inspired choice is a man
(or woman) who can function effectively in the
face of delay, resistance or inertia, adjust his objectives to
what can reasonably be accomplished, and gain the con¬
fidence and friendship of the people with whom he works.
This is especially difficult at the grass roots, but hardly less
so in the government offices and institutions where more
than half of our experts can be found. These are the
planners, the statisticians, the fiscal advisers, the admi¬
nistrators, and all the many others whose conditions of
work do not conform to the heroic mold, but whose advice
can seriously affect a country's progress in a given sphere.
I am thinking, for example, of one of our economists
in Libya whose advice was eagerly sought and followed
in establishing national priorities; the experts in Ghana who
helped to plan and analyze a major country-wide census; the
multi-national team that is helping Singapore to industria¬
lize; and the people all over Africa who are drawing up plans
for or demonstrating improvements in education, agriculture,
medical services and the like. It is one of the ironies of
the first fifteen years of the Expanded Programme that
these kinds of assistance have won the least public atten-
j . (1) In addition to these four, there are the U.N., the International
J4 Labour Organization, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Telecommunication Union, the World Meteorological
Organization, thé Universal Postal Union and the Intergovernmental
Maritime Consultative Organization.
tion because they are undramatic and because their suc¬
cess, when it happens, happens without fanfare.
The other principal form of technical co-operation under
the Expanded Programme has been the fellowship award
the means given to the technician, the teacher, the
administrator, the factory foreman or the trade unionist
in a developing country to obtain further training away
from home. There have been 32,000 such awards In the
last fifteen years, and they have, I believe, left a higher
degree of professional and technical polish at many levels
in many developing countries. I have met cabinet ministers
who referred proudly to earlier periods of training under
international auspices, just as I have met railway foremen
and factory supervisors who did their jobs better, or took
over jobs of greater responsibility, when they returned
from abroad.
T the same time, we have learned to regard
Lthe fellowship aspect of technical co-operation
as a secondary means of achieving national development.
We have accumulated much evidence that the primary
means is the creation of institutions, those locally or region¬
ally based facilities which can ensure the creation and the
perpetuation of skills without draining a country of its scarce
and non-expandable supply of trained men and women.
Most government officials have come to share this view,
which is reflected in the number of requests for Expanded
Programme assistance in establishing teacher training
colleges, scientific research institutes, schools for public
administration, for social workers, for medical personnel,
and especially for all grades of vocational instructor and
supervisor.
The Programme does not run these schools or assemble
entire faculties, any more than it builds dams or maintains
farms. But our experts do provide the support in the plan¬
ning stage and in the organization and administration of the
institutions, and often fill key positions on the staffs until
these institutions can train their own replacements. As a
result, we can point to such facilities as the Higher School
of Nursing in Alexandria, Egypt, where 124 young nurses
have already graduated, to the Libyan vocational and
clerical training centre where the graduating list since
1953 has reached over 650, to the Indian Institute of
Technology at Bombay, the Central American School of
Public Administration and the Middle East Technical Univer¬
sity in Ankara, Turkey. In these cases and several others,
the International family can reasonably say that without
technical co-operation the facilities might not have existed
at all.
They would certainly not have existed, of course, if they
had not also received the adequate support of the receiving
governments. In the light of present-day knowledge of
the possibilities as well as the limitations of technical
assistance, this statement may appear self-evident. It was
not necessarily as self-evident when technical co-operation
was still a little tried and somewhat Messianic concept.
We were so preoccupied then with our own machinery for
giving aid that we sometimes tended to take it for granted
that the developing countries would have the Institutional
capacity to absorb the assistance.
In fact, a basic symptom of underdevelopment was the
absence or inadequacy of just those facilities and services
that could guarantee the effectiveness of technical assis-
CONT'D ON PAGE 16

WORLD OF CHANGE (Cont'd)
AFGHANISTAN :
a land 90 % unexploited
Left, photo-reproduction apparatus pro¬
vided by Unesco in use at the audio¬
visual centre in Kabul (Afghanistan).
The centre prints textbooks and maps.
Below, pipe-laying in a Kabul suburb-
part of a new public works programme.
The ILO ¡s helping Afghanistan to plan
for full employment as well as to im¬
prove its vocational training facilities.
ILO
National effort counts most
16
tance: national machinery for co-ordinating assistance; an
economic and social development plan with built-in priori¬
ties; an adequate legislative and administrative framework;
and, not least, a nucleus of technicians and administrators
who could be assigned as counterparts to the international
experts.
The absence of all or some of these affected not only
the Expanded Programme but also the endeavours of all
those governments and organizations which ventured
independently into the new field of economic aid, and it
tried the mettle of many persons involved. I recall the
case of a most distinguished mining engineer whom we
had assigned to an Asian country. More than six months
of his allotted year were allowed to pass without any
support from the ministry which had eagerly sought his
services. Just as we were about to move him to another
country, however, his work caught the interest of quite
another branch of the government, and he was on his
way to a successful assignment.
But cases such as' this demonstrate the flexibility of the
individual rather than the solution of the basic problem. This
was left to be solved and is moving slowly towards solu¬
tion with every passing day by the administrative maturing
of governments, by their accumulation of experience in deal
ing with and making use of all kinds of external aid and also,
I firmly believe, by the efforts by which the United Nations
and its agencies are helping governments in those very
directions.
Under the Expanded Programme, for example, new pro¬
gramming procedures were adopted in 1954 which put the
burden of establishing priorities for development on the
receiving governments themselves and which encouraged,
and indeed virtually obliged them to set up central co-or¬
dinating units to arrange their requests for assistance
according to national development priorities. Working with
these units are the resident representatives of the Tech¬
nical Assistance Board and the field representatives of
the agencies, who are able to guide governments in their
choice and use of' foreign assistance, the former in terms
of overall policy, the latter on the technical substance of
projects.
Moreover, the Expanded Programme has had an effect
on national planning and co-ordination, particularly in the
newer countries, by the very nature of the assistance which
is offered: not only, as I have mentioned, by the emphasis
given to training, but also by providing expert advice in
all areas of economic and social planning and administra¬
tion. From the very beginning, I felt that this delicate and

Afghans report for
work on a section
of the Asian High¬
way now under cons¬
truction between
Kabul and Kandahar.
crucial area of assistance is a natural focal point for an
international (and therefore disinterested in character) pro¬
gramme, and it has been gratifying to .see this confirmed
by the requests of many governments for assistance of
this kind.
We have grounds for being satisfied that the Expanded
Programme has proved itself to be a substantial and useful
instrument for economic and social development. We
remind ourselves constantly, however, that it is an instru¬
ment and that, like all instruments, it must be used pro¬
perly to produce measurable results. Technical co-operation
cannot work wonders by itself. It was never meant to do
so. In the enormously complicated task of building the
economy of a nation, it is that nation's own strenous efforts
on Its own behalf which count first. Those efforts may
bear fruit more or less quickly depending upon the availa¬
bility of capital (from within and without), the opportunities
for profitable foreign trade and a dozen other vital and
interlocking factors, of which provision of skills is only
one, however important. It is always difficult and some¬
times presumptious, therefore, to try to measure the
contribution of the Expanded Programme or any other
avenue of technical assistance to the overall development
of a given country.
It was said fifteen years ago that ours was a programme
not for years but for decades and this has turned out
to be, if anything, an understatement. Looking at some of
our work, I must frankly confess that it has often taken
longer to achieve worthwhile results than we might ori
ginally have believed. I am not thinking so much of such
classic cases as that of an expert whose recommendations
on the reorganization of a country's civil service languished
on a shelf for four years, until a new administration dusted
it off and made it national law. I am thinking rather of the
stubborn resistance of the problems of poverty, disease
and ignorance their capacity, .indeed, to grow as well as
to survive. In the rapidly increasing population of the
developing countries as a- whole, these evils are capable
of blighting even larger numbers of lives now than when
we began our concerted attack on them fifteen years ago.
We can be satisfied that national and international efforts
have together prevented the toll from being even greater
and have opened for many thousands of people opportu-
nitids as well as hope for economic and social improve¬
ment. But we have far to go before we can be satisfied
that enough has been done to create such opportunities
and to justify such hopes.
Generous though our governments have been in contri¬
buting to this cause their donations through the Expanded
Programme alone total the equivalent of five hundred million
dollars for 15 years their earnest desire to see the burdens
of underdevelopment lifted for the sake of a decent and
peaceful life for all mankind has yet to be matched by the
resources needed for the purpose. The growth of the
Special Fund, and the proposed merger of the two program- ^_
mes in a combined United Nations Development Programme, | /
gives us reason to hope that these resources will increas¬
ingly be made available in the years ahead.
