The mystery of Mohenjo-daro
CITY OF THE DEAD
by Marcel Brion
of the Académie Française
WHEN the Aryans of antiquity invaded the Valley
of the Indus in the year 2,000 B.C. or there¬
abouts, they came upon many cities which had attained
a high degree of civilization and material progress.
The most ancient monuments discovered thus far do not
date back much beyond the middle of the fourth millenium
but far earlier civilizations may well have existed in this
region of Asia before then. We are undoubtedly in for a
number of surprises and startling discoveries once the
bottom-most strata have been excavated and all the ruins
of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa are brought to light. The
ruins visible today represent indeed no more than a tiny
fraction of the great complexes of urban area still awaiting
excavation today. This is true despite the tremendous
operations which have been carried on over, the past forty
years by the Antiquities Service . and the extraordinary
results achieved up to now.
The discovery of the dead cities of the Indus was due,
like so many other archaeological finds, to chance. It
was while a railway line was being constructed that it was
noticed that the bricks used for ballast came from what
had been a large number of edifices, spread over a vast
area; steps were at once taken to prevent these buildings
from being destroyed and to consolidate them. Archaeolo¬
gists then set to work to identify the "occupation strata"
left by the successive inhabitants of these sites. The
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

What became of the inhabitants?
early history of India and Pakistan was then shrouded in
mystery; absolutely nothing was known about the inhabi¬
tants of the region, where they had come from, to what
race they had belonged, and what level of civilization they
had attained.
It was at Harappa that investigations were begun; and
the significant discoveries made there encouraged archaeo¬
logists to embark on new excavations at Chanhu-Daro,
Jhangar, Jhukar, Amri, Rupar, Ali Murad and Nal, where
remains were found of different, though no less interesting
cultures. Large quantities of pottery were brought to light
and studies of these potsherds soon revealed sequences
of civilization which showed that the sites had been
occupied over very long periods.
Though the pioneer archaeologist of the Indus first broke
ground at Harappa, this city in fact yielded less than
Mohenjo-daro, since it had either been destroyed by
invaders or had decayed through the neglect of its own
people. Harappa, which lies near the Ravi, a tributary of
the Indus, was nothing but a shapeless heap of debris; a
few objects were discovered there but the whole site had
been so thoroughly disturbed that it provided no evidence
of real scientific value, although some scholars have seen
in the pictographic characters engraved on the seals found
in the city of Harappa, the origins of the Indian alphabet.
A few years later, however, exacavations In the ruins of
a Buddhist monastery on the site of Mohenjo-daro, some
four hundred and fifty miles (700 kms) from Harappa,
brought to light bricks similar to those used in the building
of Harappa; it was thus seen that Harappa and Mohenjo-
daro were the work of the same culture which had used
exactly similar materials to build these cities hundreds of
miles apart. Though not intact, Mohenjo-daro was fortu¬
nately far less dilapidated than Harappa, and excavations
revealed the remains of a city comparable in its size and
the quality of its buildings with the famous sites of Meso¬
potamia and Egypt.
When the work began, there was nothing to be seen but
a large number of mounds whose brick-red, reddish ocre
and light red colours stood out sharply against the greyish
hue of the surrounding landscape. Unlike the tells of Meso¬
potamia, formed by the accumulation of a "layer cake" of
strata left by successive occupations on a single site, the
Indus Valley mounds consisted of vast heaps of bricks
fallen from buildings demolished by wind and rain over a
period of more than five thousand years. Ancient tradition
had given this group of mounds the name of Mohenjo-daro,
in the language of Sind, "the place of the dead."
Standing on the banks
of the Indus River, Mo¬
henjo-daro was a pros¬
perous trading centre.
Left, modern impression
of a busy quayside (Mo¬
henjo-daro museum).
© Paul Almasy, Paris

This name does not seem to be justified by the presence
of large numbers of skeletons, for no major cemetery has
yet been unearthed there, nor are there any of the funeral
deposits much prized by the archaeologist. It is quite
possible that the inhabitants of Mohenjo-daro, like those
of present-day India, burned their dead; those corpses
which have been exhumed appear to have died a violent
death, perhaps at the time of the capture of their city
by invaders.
No tombs containing objects to throw light on the
precise nature and quality of this civilization have yet
come to light, but archaeologists excavating the ruins of
a house have found a score of corpses, several of them
decapitated and the skeleton of a woman who had fallen
head first down a flight of steps leading to a well set
below the level of the street.
There were no objects with skeletons, unlike the case of
another group found in the citadel at Harappa, in 1946.
These men and women, the family of an ivory-carver, had
apparently fled from the attackers taking their treasures
with them; they had been caught by the enemy who car¬
ried off the treasures but left behind two elephant's tusks
(discovered with the skeletons), apparently considering
them of little value or too cumbersome to be worth taking
away.
The cemetery at Harappa contained several corpses wrap¬
ped in reed shrouds and placed in wooden coffins, together
with vases and bowls decorated with animal and plant motifs,
similar to those discovered in Mesopotamia. There must,
in the third and the second millenium, have been active
trade and perhaps also cultural contacts between the val¬
ley of the Indus and the valley of the Euphrates, during
a period marked by considerable exchanges between civi¬
lization as far apart as those of Ur and Mohenjo-daro (1).
The same reed shrouds have been found at Sumer, and
a similar arrangement of corpses, stretched out and with the
head towards the North. A vase from Tell Agrab is adorned
with a bull-god in his stable-temple similar to those found
on seals from the Indus Valley; excavations at Khafajah
have brought to light another seal which was fashioned in
the Indus Valley and almost certainly brought there from
Mohenjo-daro, in the same way as the cornelian pearl
belonging to the "treasures" of the royal tombs of Ur.
HERE is every indication that during its greatest
prosperity Mohenjo-daro was a busy trading
centre, a meeting place for local and foreign merchants,
owing to its splendid position on the banks of the Indus.
Harappa also stands on the banks of a large river and the
populations of the two cities, despite the distance between
them, probably resembled each other judging by the similar¬
ity of their cultural structure. The types of people repre¬
sented by the skeletons at Harappa belong to four dif¬
ferent races: Proto-Australoid, Alpine, Mediterranean and
Mongoloid, the single Mongoloid skull discovered showing
the same characteristics as the very early ones found
in the necropolises at Tepe Hissar, near Damghan.
We can visualise what the people of Mohenjo-daro looked
like at the time the city was a flourishing trade centre, by
taking a look at the human figures engraved on the seals
(1) For other facts on Mohenjo-daro, see Vol. I of the 6-tome History
of Mankind (Prehistory and the Beginnings of Civilization, by Jac¬
quetta Hawkes and Sir Leonard Woolley), published by George Allen
and Unwin, London (£6.6.0.) and Harper and Row Inc., New York
($15.50). See also The Unesco Courier, June 1963 and May 1965.
or modelled in the round on the handful of statues which
have been unearthed.
To learn how these people lived, we need to examine
the town itself which is now quite accessible to visitors.
What strikes everyone most of all are the "modern" build¬
ing methods and the systematic use of town-planning, which
are at once obvious to anyone who strolls through the
streets and enters the houses.
As in all hot countries, and the valley of the Indus is
one of the hottest areas in the world, where people have
to protect themselves against the sun, the streets are
mostly narrow, little more than alleys, and on the street
side, the walls of the houses have no openings except their
doors. Light and air came from the inner courtyards
round which the houses were grouped. The main thorough¬
fares of the town, however, were wider; outside the centre
of the city they were as broad as modern motorways.
The commonest building material used was brick, for
this is a country where both stone and wood are scarce.
The bricks were made of baked red clay, sometimes eked
out by adding earth, or "pisé" (puddled clay) enclosed in
a baked brick casing. The bricks were held together by
cob-mortar, giving sufficient solidity for the houses to be
several storeys high, as was necessary in a densely popu¬
lated town with the dwellings and shops crowded into
a small "business centre."
FOR water-supplies and rubbish-disposal, there
was a complicated network of canals, under¬
ground pipes and sewers, forming a system described
by some archaeologists as the most complete and in¬
genious ever devised in antiquity. Excavations have led to
the discovery of draining-wells, thanks to which the small
street sewers, when choked up, could easily be cleared
simply by removal of the brick cover.
Water was brought into the city via the canals and fed
into small wells inside the houses. Those in the poorer
quarters had apparently no such amenities and their in¬
habitants were obliged fetch their water in pails and vessels
from the houses of the rich.
While the rich had their own bathrooms, there were also
public bathing establishments for those who had no baths
of their own or who preferred to meet their friends at
the public baths. These thermae seem to have played as
important a part in the social life of Mohenjo-daro as they
did in that of the Romans. The bricks walls of both baths
and wells were coated with gypsum and sometimes with
bitumen to make them watertight.
In a town like Mohenjo-daro, whose streets were laid out
in a draught-board pattern, intersecting at right-angles and
generally running in the direction of the prevailing north-
south and east-west winds, keeping down the dust must
have been a difficult problem. To meet it, the ground was
consolidated by means of a kind of macadam made of
fragments of pottery combined with ground brick, which
was then damped and rammed down into a hard surface.
All this indicates a decidedly utilitarian attitude, a desire
for material comfort and a rational use of the Mohenjo-
daro site and its resources. Yet our insight into the
"Mohenjo-daro culture" is confined to what we know about
its town planning programme and how this was carried
out. The most important monuments discovered so far
are completely utilitarian ones: the Granary and the Town
Baths. No traces have been found of either a palace or
a temple; though it must be remembered that we do not 29
yet know how large an area the town covered it must
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IMMMM
Paul Almasy, Paris
CITY OF THE DEAD (Cont'd)
Miniature engravings and chiselled jewellery
30
have extended far beyond the zones so far excavated
so it is quite possible that royal and religious buildings
were located in a part of the city that the archaeologists
have not yet found.
In the absence of objects in the tombs and caches of
temple treasures, our knowledge of the social and religious
life of the inhabitants in the Indus Valley in the fourth and
the third millenium is confined to what we can learn from
their pottery» children's toys, jewels and seals.
Indus sculpture is represented by a few very curious and
beautiful statues, including one in steatite, a soft stone,
depicting a thick-set man with a heavy face and slanting
eyes, wearing a cloak with a trefoil decoration, and a
bronze figurine of a young dancing girl, her long arms
adorned with bangles from wrist to shoulder.
It Is difficult to date these objects, since we do not
know either how long this culture flourished before the
Aryan invasion put a stop to its development or how
much time elapsed between the remote beginnings of a
chalcolithic (copper and bronze working) age or even
a stone age and the epoch when it reached its full deve¬
lopment.
This development is seen in the exquisite craftsman¬
ship of the objects fashioned in gold, silver, bronze, cop¬
per and tin brought from Rajputana, Baluchistan, Burma
and Bombay, perhaps also from the mines of Oman; and in
the consummate skill with which Mohenjo-daro jewellers
worked the precious and semi-precious stones cornelian,
jasper and agate, as well as the jadeite imported from
Tibet to produce jewellery of the most Intricate and
exquisite designs.
The divinities which presided over spiritual and material
life in the The City of the Dead are familiar to us from the
figures on the seals, though it is not always easy to tell
whether a particular animal was depicted because of its
religious attributes or symbolic significance, or whether the
artist was simply inspired by the pleasure of depicting
buffaloes, monkeys, tigers or elephants. These seals were
used either as amulets or talismans, or else for protecting
the contents of some recipient by stamping it with a sacred
image calculated to inspire awe and respect. It Is these
seals rather than the statues that demonstrate the out¬
standing talent and artistic taste of the Mohenjo-daro
engravers.
The animals on the seals are usually depicted in a bold
gracefully naturalistic style. Tiger's teeth for instance, are
painted in minute detail; Brahmin bulls, which appear fre¬
quently, are represented sometimes with a swollen hump
and sometimes with a flabby one, according to how well-
nourished the animal Is.
In a religious context these animals the rhinoceros,
tiger, elephant and bull are associated with the cult of a
deity known, for want of a better designation, as the Horned
God. This god is usually represented by a figure depicted
front-view, seated on a low table forming a sort of throne;
his arms are covered with bracelets and he has two large
horns on his head.
We also find a Homed Goddess, surrounded by the

The bull is one of the
commonest motifs found
on seals from the Indus
Valley. Right, a bull and a
written inscription from one
of these seals, decorates
the facade of the museum
at Mohenjo-daro. Left,
a team of oxen pulling a
cart a clay toy found in
the ruins of Mohenjo-daro
Nedeco, Amersfoort
same animals as the Horned God. She is often shown
standing upright in a tree which botanists believe to be a
pipai, a tree which the people of modern India still revere
as sacred, and which they deck with jewels and vases.
It may be that the modern cult of the pipal, which is also
believed to be the habitation of the goddess Lakshmi, origi¬
nated in the worship of this sacred tree associated with
the Horned Goddess in the ancient culture of Mohenjo-daro.
The discovery of this site, with all that it has already
taught us about the prehistory or the proto-history of India,
concerning peoples whose very existence was hitherto

unknown, has made Mohenjo-daro one of the focal points
of modern archaeology, more important even than Harappa
and the other Indus valley excavation sites.
The energy and efficiency with which the Pakistan Depart¬
ment of Antiquities has set about excavating and preserving
the remains of this great trading city, deserves the highest
praise. The results obtained in a bare forty years are
indeed remarkable, both scientifically and artistically that
Is, from the point of view of both the specialist and the
tourist.
The world's archaeologists were therefore greatly alarmed
when it was learned that the ruins were threatened, not so
much by the flooding of the Indus, which is not a serious
danger, as by salts attacking the brickwork and causing
it to disintegrate. The danger is so great that according to
some estimates, the monuments now unearthed may be
completely destroyed by erosion within a few decades,
unless immediate protective measures are taken.
It is the irrigation of the areas round the excavation sites
(for the development of agriculture), together with the
decomposition of all the organic waste accumulated in so
large a city during a period of occupation which lasted at
least a thousand years certainly from 2,500 to 1,500 B.C.
and probably much longer that are responsible for these
salt deposits which are filtering into the walls and being
carried up through the bricks by capillary action. These
salts are even . more deadly when they attack pisé or
unbaked brick; and their destructive action is further
accentuated by the effects of rain and sandstorms, dust and
the scorching sun.
Aware of this danger and wishing to help in remedying
the situation as rapidly as possible, Unesco sent an
international mission of specialists to make an on-the-spot
investigation at Mohenjo-daro (see page 22). The report
of this mission proposes methods for halting the erosion
caused by the salt and for preventing its reoccurence.
When the preservation and restoration of Mohenjo-daro
are finally completed and its masterpieces of art assembled
in the nearby museum, The City of the Dead, rescued from
thousands of years of oblivion, will no doubt become a
new tourist attraction on a par with the architectural
wonders of Iraq, the cyclopean palaces of the Incas, the
shrines of the Aztecs and Mayas, and the temples of
Angkor which have been wrested from the engulfing jungle.
MARCEL BRION of the Académie Française is an historian and
the author of authoritative works on the German Romantic period
and the Italian Renaissance. His book, 'La Résurrection des Villes
Mortes", has been published in most European languages and is
considered as one of the classics of archaeology. Its English language
version, 'The World of Archaeology', was published by Elek, London
(2 volumes, 1962) and by Macmillan, New York (1962). Others of
his works translated into English are: "Romantic Art" (Thames ana
Hudson, London, 1960; McGraw Hi», New York, i960) and "Leonardo
da Vinci" (Heinemann, London, 1955).
31
