Characters in a system
of writing that was used
fifty centuries ago
the Valley of the In
have come dow
engraved i
Une
1964). Far. right,
found at Mohenjo-daro
and now displayed in
the museum opened on
the site of this ancient
Indus Valley city. The
handful of sculptures,
found in its ruins are
works of original and
graceful beauty, like
this bronze figurine
a young- dancing gir;
Nedeco, Amersfoort, The Netherlands

MOHENJO-DARO
A 5,000-year old heritage
menaced by destruction
by
Harold </. Plenderleith
Caesar Voute
Theodoor de Beaufort
The vast ruins of Mohenjo-daro, an incomparable monument to a great civilization that flour¬
ished in the Indus Valley some 5,000 years ago, are threatened with complete destruction
within the next few decades unless major protective work is undertaken. Last year at the request
of the Pakistan Government, Unesco sent a mission of specialists to make an on-the-spot
22 investigation and to see what could be done to halt the ravages of salt erosion in the ruins.
Here, these specialists describe the dramatic situation at Mohenjo-daro and suggest
techniques for preserving one of the most striking monuments of the dawn of civilization.

Paul Almasy, Paris
OHENJO-DARO in the valley of the Indus,
400 miles up-country from Karachi, is to-day no
more than a complex of ruins in burnt brick covering an
area of some 250 acres (100 hectares). But it provides,
with another such site, Harappa, evidence for the existence
of a great urban civilization an Indus Valley Culture in
the 3rd millennium B.C., antedating the Aryan invasions.
The site was completely buried. We owe its chance dis¬
covery in 1922 to an officer of the Archaeological Depart¬
ment who, when excavating a Buddhist stupa and
monastery, was struck by the prevalence of so much burnt
brick in the area. It was left to Sir John Marshall, then
Director-General of Archaeology, and later to his succes¬
sor In office, Sir Mortimer Wheeler, to excavate, as far as
possible, what turned out to be the remains of a great
city lying beneath and extending far beyond the Buddhist
remains. '
The importance of this monument is unquestioned. The
tragedy lies in the phrase "as far as possible" and the
explanation in the fact that erratic movements of the great
Indus river have caused the site to become eroded In
some places and covered with alluvial deposits in others.
Moreover, the river has a tendency to raise its bed and
consequently the water-table in the adjoining plains. This
process has been aggravated by the irrigation of the fields
and under such conditions satisfactory drainage is impos¬
sible.
Not only has the water-table risen considerably during
the past few years, but there has been a great accumulation
of soluble salts as a result of the very arid climate. These
salts by capillary actions have invested the whole area to
such an extent as to give it the appearance of a covering of
snow. This is a very serious problem as the salts cause
large scale destruction of the brickwork, "eating" it within
a matter of years.
Now in these parts a rainstorm is a rare occurrence, but
it had actually rained on the day preceding our arrival in
January 1964, to the chagrin of the custodians who had
taken pleasure in observing our wonder at their tales of
saline deposits. We were impressed, just the same, by such
of the salt as had survived in odd corners. This was as
nothing, however, to our amazement at the crystallizations
that were seen after a couple of days' sunshine: glassy
CONT'D ON PAGE 25
23

SCIENCE TRIES TO SAVE
A SALT-RIDDLED CITY
Drawings below show the increasingly destructive effects on
Mohenjo-daro of invading mineral salts, and illustrate four
possible ways of saving this vast brick-built monument last
inhabited about three thousand five hundred years ago.
O Salt-impregnated water rises by capilliary action and
erodes the bricks. This underground water could be removed
by pumping or drainage.
Ö Salty water also infiltrates to walls through surrounding
earth and debris. This can be stopped by clearing the area along¬
side the walls.
%) Dust-laden winds carry salts and deposit them on bricks.
Falling rain helps the salts to penetrate the brickwork. Walls
must be cleaned regularly of dust and salts.
Cr Accumulated salts within the bricks erode the walls.
The Pakistan Government is studying was of leaching out the
salts with fresh water.
Eaten away by salts, the
walls of Mohenjo-darg
are gradually crumbling
into dust (above). White
stains are caused where
salts are deposited by
infiltrating waters. Salt
erosion is but one aspect
of a wider world problem,
now being studied by
hydrogeologists and soil
scientists: the invasion
and poisoning by salts of
fertile soils in lands with
arid climates. This threat
raises serious problems
as to choice of irrigation
methods (see Unesco
Courier, December 1962).
Restoration of damaged
walls is facilitated by the
fact that bricks still made
today in the area of Mo¬
henjo-daro (right) have
exactly the same form
and colour as those from
which city was construc¬
ted 5,000 years ago.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

MOHENJO-DARO (Cont'd)
needles a centimetre in length sprouted from shady walls
and, where the ground was rough and exposed to the direct
action of the sun, the salts formed a white cushion like
masses pressing upwards as in a vegetable garden well
stocked with cauliflowersl
What could be done to control this? How could the
water-table be lowered? How could the old buildings be
preserved? What would it all cost? Such were the ques¬
tions to which answers were required, but it was only on
arrival that we learnt that inundations had hindered digging
to the extent that the all-important foundation layers of the
city had never been actually excavated, nor could they be,
as long as the ground remained water-logged.
Faced with this veritable labour of Hercules, we began by
making an assessment of the position and found two contin¬
gencies in our favour. The first was the intimate knowledge
of the ancient city possessed by the superintendent of Anti¬
quities of West Pakistan. We studied his experiments in
protection as by introducing damp-proof courses in stra¬
tegic places and were much interested in the use of mud
bricks to cap the old walls and trap the salt. In him we
should have a staunch ally.
The second consoling feature lay in the fact that Pakistan,
dependent upon the success of her rice crops (for which
not only a plentiful supply of water is essential, but also
an adequate control of the water-logging and salinity prob¬
lems), had accumulated a body of hydrological knowledge
upon which we. could draw in working out a scheme of pre¬
servation for the area.
It was clear that there could be only one practical way of
getting rid of the great bulk of saline material, namely, to
redissolve it and to return it to the Indus by pumping the
liquid into drains or canals. The tube-well is the recognized
type of equipment brought into operation for this purpose.
The fundamental activity was that of preparing a large
contour map of the immediate neighbourhood. Information
was accumulated from this, from a study of various features
on the aerial photographs and in the field, from the analysis
of soils and salts and water samples from which it was
possible to form some definite ideas concerning the sub-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

26
MOHENJO-DARO (Cont'd)
surface geology, and, what was even more vital, concerning
the movements of moisture and salts in the soil and build¬
ings. Only then did it become possible to have views
regarding the adequacy of the existing dykes (bunds) and
to consider the siting of water outlets and the distribution
of pumping equipment.
The lowering of the water-table was possible, but this
was not enough. A second major problem concerned
getting rid of the vast quantity of salt that would be left
behind when the water receded. This could only be done
by redissolving the efflorescences and using the ancient
drainage system which apparently, was very carefully
planned by feeding it from a multiplicity of smaller land
drains and sumps set in strategic places. Even the old dry
wells might have to be brought back into temporary service
during the period of desalinization.
It would be altogether too optimistic to suppose, however,
that, with an annual rainfall amounting to about three inches,
the ground could be cleared in a reasonable time. Finding
the cheapest, most effective method of leaching the bricks
has turned out to be a rather complicated matter. The
first tests concerning the leaching of bricks with fresh
water to determine how rapidly the salts can be extracted
have been carried out.
The next and more complicated series of tests will take
place during 1965-66 to enable specialists to prepare a
more detailed programme of conservation for Mohenjo-daro.
Quite clearly, the cost will depend in the first place
upon how far it is necessary to lower the water-table,
whether only enough to save the visible remains, or, at the
other extreme, to dry the foundations and make complete
excavation possible. The limit will no doubt be decided on
financial grounds but a limit there must be, if only because
an early result of our enquiry has been the unexpected dis¬
covery that the ancient city of Mohenjo-daro covers an
area of at least twice the size that has been supposed.
The Pakistan authorities, recognizing their great respon¬
sibilities, could not have been more co-operative and are
deeply anxious to save as much as possible of this major
monument, this mysterious "City of the Dead", that flour¬
ished 5,000 years ago.
HAROLD J. PLENDERLEITH Is director of the International Centre for
the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural Property,
created In Rome by Unesco. THEODOOR DE BEAUFORT Is an
engineer specializing In drainage operations. He Is attached to the
Netherlands Land Development and Reclamation Society (Amersfoort,
The Netherlands). CAESAR VOUTE Is a geologist and a member of
the Consulting Department, Training Centre for Aerial Survey, Nether¬
lands Engineering Company (Delft, The Netherlands).
