Biological aspects of race
A III UMENT
OF PARAMOUNT
IMPORTANCE
The undersigned, assembled by Unesco in order to
give their views on the biological aspects of the race
question and in particular to formulate the biological
part for a statement foreseen for 1966 and intended
. to bring up to date and to complete the declaration
on the nature of race and racial differences signed
in 1951, have unanimously agreed on the following :
1
All men living today belong to a single species, Homo sapiens, and
are derived from a common stock. There are differences of opinion
regarding how and when different human groups diverged from this com¬
mon stock.
Biological differences between human beings are due to differences
in hereditary constitution and to the influence of the environment on this
genetic potential. In most cases, those differences are due to the inter¬
action of these two sets of factors.
3
There is great genetic diversity within all human populations. Pure
races in the sense of genetically homogeneous populations do not
exist in the human species.
There are obvious physical differences between populations living
in different geographic areas of the world, in their average appearance.
Many of these differences have a genetic component.
Most often the latter consist in differences in the frequency of the
same hereditary characters.
8
5
Different classifications of mankind into major stocks, and of those
into more restricted categories (races, which are groups of populations,
or single populations) have been proposed on the basis of hereditary
physical traits. Nearly all classifications recognize at least three major
stocks.

Since the pattern of geographic variation of the characteristics used
in racial classification is a complex one, and since this pattern does not
present any major discontinuity, these classifications, whatever they
are, cannot claim to classify mankind into clear cut categories; moreover,
on account of the complexities of human history, it is difficult to determine
the place of xertain groups within these racial classifications, in particu¬
lar that of certain intermediate populations.
Many anthropologists, while stressing the importance of human varia¬
tion, believe that the scientific interest of these classifications is limited,
and even that they carry the. risk of inviting abusive generalizations.
Differences between individuals within a race or within a population
are often greater than the average differences between races or popu¬
lations.
Some of the variable distinctive traits which are generally chosen as
criteria to characterize a race are either independently inherited or show
only varying degrees of association between them within each population.
Therefore, the combination of these traits in most individuals does not
correspond to the typological racial characterization.
In man as well as in animals, the genetic composition of each popu¬
lation is subject to the modifying influence of diverse factors: natural
selection, tending towards adaptation to the environment, fortuitous muta¬
tions which lead to modifications of the molecules of desoxyribonucleic
acid which determine heredity, or random modifications in the frequency
of qualitative hereditary characters, to an extent dependent on the pat¬
terns of mating and the size of populations.
Certain physical characters have a universal biological value for the
survival of the human species, irrespective of the environment. The dif¬
ferences on which racial classifications are based do not affect these char¬
acters, and therefore, it is not possible from the biological point of view
to speak in any way whatsoever of a general inferiority or superiority of
this or that race.
7 Human evolution presents attributes of capital importance which are
specific to the species.
The human species, which is now spread over the whole world, has
a past rich in migrations, in territorial expansions and contractions.
As a consequence, general adaptability to the most diverse environ¬
ments is in man more pronounced than his adaptations to specific envi¬
ronments.
For long millennia, progress made by man, in any field, seems to have
been increasingly, if not exclusively, based on culture and the transmiss¬
ion of cultural achievements and not on the transmission of genetic
endowment. This implies a modification in the rôle of natural selection
in man today.
On account of the mobility of human populations and of social fac¬
tors, mating between members of different human groups which tend to
mitigate the differentiations acquired, has played a much more important
rôle in human history than in that of animals. The history of any human
population or of any human race, is rich in instances of hybridization and
those tend to become more and more numerous.
For man, the obstacles to inter-breeding are geographical as well as
social and cultural.
9

BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF RACE (Cont'd)
At all times, the hereditary characteristics of the human populations
are in dynamic equilibrium as a result of this inter-breeding and of the
differentiation mechanisms which were mentioned before. As entities
defined by sets of distinctive traits, human races are at any time in a
process of emergence and dissolution.
Human races in general present a far less clear-cut characterization
than many animal races and they cannot be compared at all to races of
domestic animals, these being the result of heightened selection for spe¬
cial purposes.
9 It has never been proved that inter-breeding has biological disadvan¬
tages for mankind as a whole.
On the contrary, it contributes to the maintenance of biological ties
between human groups and thus to the unity of the species in its diver¬
sity.
The biological consequences of a marriage depend only on the indi¬
vidual genetic make-up of, the couple and not on their race.
Therefore, no biological justification exists for prohibiting intermar¬
riage between persons of different races, or for advising against it on
racial grounds.
Man since his origin has at his disposal ever more efficient cultural
means of non-genetic adaptation.
11 Those cultural factors which break social and geographic barriers,
enlarge the size of the breeding populations and so act upon their genetic
structure by diminishing the random fluctuations (genetic drift).
As a rule, the major stocks extend over vast territories encompass¬
ing many diverse populations which differ in language, economy, cul¬
ture, etc.
There is no national, religious, geographic, linguistic or cultural group
which constitutes a race ipso facto ; the concept of race is purely bio¬
logical.
However, human beings who speak the same language and share
the same culture have a tendency to inter-marry, and often there is as a
result a certain degree of coincidence between physical traits on the one
hand, and linguistic and cultural traits on the other. But there is no
known causal nexus between these and therefore it is not justifiable to
attribute cultural characteristics to the influence of the genetic inheritance.
10
13
Most racial classifications of mankind do not include mental traits
or attributes as a taxonomic criterion.
Heredity may have an influence in the variability showh by individuals
within a given population in their responses to the psychological tests
currently applied.
However, no difference has ever been detected convincingly in the
hereditary endowments of human groups in regard to what is measured

by these tests. On the other hand, ample evidence attests to the
influence of physical, cultural and social environment on differences in
response to these tests.
The study of this question is hampered by the very great difficulty
of determining what part heredity plays in the average differences ob¬
served in so-called tests of overall intelligence between populations of
different cultures.
The genetic capacity for intellectual development, like certain major,
anatomical traits peculiar to the species, is one of the biological traits
essential for its survival in any natural or social environment.
The peoples of the world today appear to possess equal biological
potentialities for attaining any civilizational level. Differences in the
achievements of different peoples must be attributed solely to their cultural
history.
Certain psychological traits are at times attributed to particular
peoples. Whether or not such assertions are valid, we do not find any
basis for ascribing such traits to hereditary factors, until proof to the
contrary is given.
Neither in the field of hereditary potentialities concerning the overall
intelligence and the capacity for cultural development, nor in that of
physical traits, is there any justification for the concept of "inferior" and
"superior" races.
The biological data given above are in open contradic¬
tion to the tenets of racism. Racist theories can in no
way pretend to have any scientific foundation and the
anthropologists should endeavour to prevent the results
of their research from being used in such a biased way
as to serve non-scientific ends.
