"There is a clear prospect that racial conflict, if we cannot curb and finally
eliminate it, will grow into a destructive monster compared to which the reli¬
gious and ideological conflicts of the past and present will seem like small family
quarrels." These were the words used by U Thant, Secretary-General of the Uni¬
ted Nations, last year, to warn the world against the consequences of racial
discrimination. Racial discrimination, imposed as an official policy in the
Republic of South Africa, has created a dramatic and unparalleled situation that
in recent years has increasingly stirred the conscience of the world. In November
1962 the United Nations General Assembly set up a special committee to inves¬
tigate the policy of "apartheid" and its consequences in South Africa. The results '
of these investigations have been published in a series of comprehensive reports,
the most recent of which appeared in December 1964. These show the increas¬
ing gravity of the situation. The facts they relate, which The Unesco Courier
presents here in abridged form, speak for themselves. They depict in graphic
terms a tragedy in which millions of people in South Africa are being engulfed
for one reason alone: because of the colour of their skin.
REPORTING FOR WORK at a factory in Johannes¬
burg. In South Africa the vast majority of unskilled
jobs are done by Africans. An integral aim of "apart¬
heid" is to reserve the skilled and higher-paid profes¬
sions for the Whites. The U.N. Special Committee
reports that the ratio between the average wage earnings
of Whites and Africans in mining is fifteen to one.
O Paul Almasv. Pans

APARTHEID
in South Africa
HE Republic of South Africa has... uprooted
thousands of families from their homes in the
urban areas and expelled many thousands of Africans to
distant reserves. It has arrested and convicted hundreds
of thousands of persons under pass laws and other racially
discriminatory measures. It has excluded non-Whites (1)
from new categories of employment. It has Instituted a
reign of terror against opponents of "apartheid": the leaders
of the non-Whites have been jailed or restricted, and thou¬
sands of persons have been thrown in jail for opposition to
"apartheid", with no certainty of ever being set free. Harsh
penalties have been imposed on members of the major
non-White organizations...
Meanwhile the government has spent much effort in
propaganda at home and abroad, describing its policy as
"separate development" of the races in order to deceive
world public opinion. The policy itself remains basically
unchanged.
Prime Minister Dr. Verwoerd stated in the House of
Assembly on January 25, 1963:
"Reduced to its simplest form the problem is nothing
else than this: We want to keep South Africa White...
'Keeping It White' can only mean one thing, namely, White
domination, not 'leadership', not 'guidance', but 'control',
'supremacy'. If we are agreed that it is the desire of
the people that the White man should be able to continue
to protect himself by retaining White domination... we
say that it can be achieved by separate development."
Government leaders admit that the non-Whites cannot
be treated forever as inferior, nor would they accept con¬
cessions which do not provide for equal rights. They claim
that the move towards self-determination of both the major
groups is the only solution which will preserve the nation¬
hood and the vital interests of the Whites. Hence the
development of "Bantustans" in the African reserves is
given great emphasis in government policy.
Under the government's plans, the African reserves will
be progressively granted the rights of self-government.
The Africans will exercise their political rights only in the
reserves and the Whites only in the rest of the country,
described as the "White" area.
(1) According to Information supplied to the International Labour
Organization by the Government of South Africa in 1962, the popu¬
lation of the Republic of South Africa comprises four very distinct
population groups of whom eleven million are Bantu, three million
of European origin, 500,000 of Asian origin and one and a half million
of mixed origin.
This ingenious formula represents, in fact, a serious
attack on the rights of a great majority of inhabitants. It
means that Africans will lose all existing rights, and all
hope of equal rights, in 87 per cent of the territory of the
country in return for self-government in the reserves which
constitute only 13 per cent of the territory.
The idea that the African reserves constitute the home¬
lands of the Africans is based on a distortion of history
and a negation of present-day realities. Only 38 per cent
of Africans today reside in the reserves, which cannot
provide an adequate livelihood for even their existing
inhabitants. The Africans constitute a majority in both
the "White" urban areas and "White" rural areas. A large
percentage of the Africans were born or have lived for long
periods outside the reserves and have little contact with
the reserves...
NE of the first acts of the Union of South Africa,
formed in 1909 by agreement between the two
major White elements in the country, was the promulgation
of the Native Land Act of 1913, which limited African land
rights to 10 1/2 million "morgen" (about 21 million acres).
The Native Trust and Land Act of 1936 provided for the
acquisition of an additional 15 million acres for African
occupation, and for the liquidation of the "Black spots"
(African-owned land) in the rest of the country. When this
additional land is acquired, the African reserves will cover
less than one seventh of the country.
The traditional geographical separation is mainly a
restriction on landownership imposed by the government
in which the Africans had no voice and which the African
leaders had protested strongly. The reserves contain only
38 per cent of the African population of the country, and
even a government commission found that they can decently
support only half of their present population. The majority
of Africans live outside the reserves. The Africans out¬
number the Whites in the urban areas. The number of
Africans is about four times the number of Whites in the
"White" rural area.
The National Party came to power in 1948 after a cam¬
paign in which it stressed the alleged dangers of Increasing
African population outside the reserves, and the trend
towards economic integration. It embarked on a series of
laws to outlaw all social intercourse between the racial
groups, to restrict the rights of Africans outside the
reserves, and to reinforce tribalism1.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

[RÄKKETTE SLECS BLANKES
IPARCELS furqpeans ONLY
APARTHEID (Cont'd)
Paul Almasy. Paris
13 million persons in a web of restrictions
The Bantu Authorities Act of 1951 abolished the Native
Representative Council and authorized the Governor-Gene¬
ral to establish Bantu "tribal authorities". The establishment
of these authorities was opposed by the Africans and the
government had to impose them by threats, deportation
and arrest of African leaders and severe police action.
African resistance had been ruthlessly quelled in Tembuland
and East Pondoland between 1957 and 1960.
Under the so.-called Promotion of Bantu Self-Government
Act of 1959, the small number of qualified Africans were
deprived of their right to elect a few White members to
Parliament. The Act provided for the gradual consolidation
of the 264 scattered African reserves into eight "national
units" and the establishment of territorial authorities in
these units. Territorial authorities were established in the
Transkei (1) and in five other areas by the end of 1962.
A number of comments may be made on these moves
towards "the creation of Bantustans."
First, these moves are engineered by a government in
which the African people have no voice and are aimed at
the separation of the races and the denial of rights to the
African population in six-sevenths of the country.
Second, the "Bantustans" were not demanded by Afri¬
cans but are being imposed against their wishes. The
leaders of the African people are imprisoned or silenced,
entry into reserves by Whites Is controlled by permit, and,
22
(1) The Transkei, situated on the coast in the northeastern part of
the Cape Province, has an area of 16,350 square miles and a population
of over two million.
under Proclamation 400, the Transkeians are denied free¬
dom of assembly and speech.
Third, the self-government granted to Transkei at present
is limited in many ways. Paramount Chief Sabata Dalin-
dyebo of the Tembu, one of the biggest tribes in the
Transkei, declared recently:
"The freedom you are getting in the Transkei is a fowl-
run. A cattlekraal would be better."
Fourth, the scheme aims at strengthening tribalism and
utilizing the tribal system against African aspirations for
equality.
Fifth, the "national units", made up of scattered reserves,
are not economically viable. They do not provide a mini¬
mum standard of living even for the existing population
of less than four million. They have few known' mineral
resources and are almost devoid of industries. Their
economies depend largely on the export of labour to the
"White" areas at the rate of over half a million migrant
labourers a year.
The creation of "Bantustans" may, therefore, be regarded
as designed to reinforce White supremacy in the country
by strengthening the position of tribal chiefs, dividing the
African people through the offer of opportunities for a
limited number of Africans, and deceiving public opinion.
The policy of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa, as indicated earlier, is to keep most, if not all, of
South Africa under White control by treating Africans out¬
side the reserves as transient aliens allowed to remain only
to minister to the needs of the Whites. The movement of
Africans to the "White areas" is strictly regulated and

'
© Holmes-Lebel. Paris - Ernest Cole
On a railway platform (left) signboards warn the traveller that he must only use the service allocat¬
ed to his racial group. Parcels offices, refreshment rooms, telegraph and telephone services are
all segregated for Whites and non-Whites. Right, as a train pulls out of the station Africans
are still trying to force their way into the already packed carriages reserved for non-Whites.
African family life is restricted. Any African who is unem¬
ployed or becomes a "problem" is expelled. Some of the
disabilities imposed on the Africans and other 'non-Whites
are briefly reviewed below.
The Group Areas Act of 1950, which provides for the
forcible separation of racial groups, continues to be im¬
plemented actively though the General Assembly has
repeatedly called upon South Africa to refrain from enforc¬
ing Its provisions. "Black spots", where Africans hold
freehold rights, are being rapidly cleared.
Between November 6, 1962 and the end of August 1963,
"group areas" were proclaimed in about 40 cities and
towns. Tens of thousands of families, mostly of non-Whites,
are forced to move from areas in some of which they have
resided for generations...
This uprooting of settled communities has created serious
hardship for the families which are obliged to move to
distant new locations. It has caused great insecurity and
bitterness.
In line with its policy of territorial separation, the govern¬
ment is proceeding with plans to replace and remove the
African population of 250,000 in the Western Cape and
reserve the area for the Whites and the Coloureds. Thous¬
ands of Africans are being expelled to the reserves.
The scheme has been opposed by many industrialists,
farmers and political leaders. The United Party leader, Sir
de Villiers Graaff, speaking In the House of Assembly on
May 28, 1963, said that the National Party seemed to see
the Western Cape as "the stronghold of White civilization"
where the Whites in a kind of siege could make a last stand
while there was trouble elsewhere.
Under the Bantu Laws Amendment Act of 1963, popularly
known as the Servants Act, the residence of African domes¬
tic workers on the premises of their White employers is
severely restricted.
The Department of Bantu Administration and Develop¬
ment sent a directive to all local authorities on February 14,
1963 curbing any further expansion of African private enter¬
prise in urban areas.
The pass system has often been described as perhaps the
most serious grievance of the African people as it restricts
their freedom of movement at every turn. Over the years,
the African people have staged numerous protests against
the passes, regarded by them as "badges of slavery",
including the demonstration at Sharpeville and other areas
in 1960.
Under the Natives (abolition of Passes and Co-ordination
of Documents) Act of 1952, the National Party Government
replaced the passes of the Africans by "reference books."
The rest of the population has been Issued identity cards.
While non-Africans rarely suffer penalties for non-
possession of Identity cards, the Africans are subjected
to severe punishments for even accidental misplacing of
reference books.
The reference books contain permits to remain in an
urban area, tax receipts and other particulars. Africans
found outside the reserves without permits are taken to
courts, for fine or imprisonment, and expelled. Juvenile
offenders may be sentenced to whipping.
The regulations were strengthened during 1962,
particularly by the requirement that all African women
must carry "reference books" from February 1, 1963. The
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

APARTHEID (Cont'd)
A multitude of arrests and convictions
24
extension of the pass system to African women has always
been strongly resented by Africans, as the subjection of
women to the procedures may lead to serious consequences
for their families. Mothers of small children may be
suddenly arrested. Husbands and wives may be arrested
separately and expelled to their respective "homelands"
which may be hundreds of miles apart. A mother may be
"endorsed out" even though her child was born in the
city: if she takes the child with her, the child loses the right
to return to the city without special permission.
One of the most striking features of the South African
racial policies is the multitude of arrests and convictions
under the numerous laws and regulations which restrict the
freedom of movement and residence of the African people.
The number of convictions in 1962 was 384,497, or over a
thousand a day. The total convictions in the previous
decade was 3,886,568.
The urban Africans are In constant dread of being
expelled from towns and sent to the reserves. Such orders
seem to have greatly Increased as the Government proceeds
even more vigorously with its "apartheid" policies. In 1962,
4,254 African women and 677 African children were
"endorsed out" of African townships of Johannesburg.
The Johannesburg Star, on June 10, 1963, reported two
case histories, narrated by an African social worker, which
disclose the hardships encountered by the urban Africans.
"The parents of two young boys were both working
in the city to make ends meet, so they sent their children
to their grandparents in the country to be properly
brought up and educated.
White & non-White
definitions
The South African Population Registration Act of 1950
classifies the population into racial categories which
it defines as follows:
WHITE: "White person means a person who in
appearance obviously is, or who is generally accepted
as a White person, but does not include a person who,
although in appearance obviously a White person, is
generally accepted as a Coloured person."
This definition was revised in the Population
Registration Amendment Act of 1960 to free citizens
of certain countries with which South Africa has
diplomatic or consular relations from the restrictive
measures applied to non-White people. According to
the new definition, a White person can also mean a
person who is generally accepted as a White person
even though obviously not in appearance a White person.
NATIVE: "Native means a person who in fact is, or
is generally accepted as, a member of any aboriginal
race or tribe of Africa."
COLOURED PERSON: "Coloured person means a
person who is not a White person or a Native."
In Proclamation No 46 of 1959, Coloured people are
sub-divided as follows: "Cape Coloured, Cape Malay,
Griqua, Chinese, Indian, 'other Asiatic' and 'other
Coloured'." The last group comprises persons not
included in any of the other groups, and who are neither
White nor Native.
(From "L'Afrique du Sud et la Primauté du Droit »
"South Africa and the Primacy of Law a report
published by the International Commission of Jurists,
Geneva, in 1961.)
"When the children had finished school and were old
enough to work, they found there was no work for them
In the country, so they were brought to Johannesburg.
But in Johannesburg they were 'endorsed out' because
they had not lived in the city. And when they returned
to the country they were 'endorsed out' of that district,
where they had spent their childhood because they were
born in Johannesburg.
"Legally they are not living anywhere they are
displaced persons. So what do they do? They live
illegally with their parents in Johannesburg, lying low by
day and roaming the streets at night workless, shiftless,
mal-nourished and hopeless.
"Another boy lived in the country with his parents until
they both died and he came to Johannesburg to live with
an uncle. He was caught in a pass raid and 'endorsed
out' of Johannesburg because he was not born there and
had not lived there for 10 years.
"He was told to go back to the place in the country,
but he had lost touch with the people there since the
death of his parents and no longer knew anybody who
could give him a home. He is only 17. So he continues
to live illegally with the uncle, hoping not to be 'picked
up', and his uncle supports him.
"What does the future hold for him? Will his uncle have
to support him In idleness for the rest of his life?
"Is it any wonder that many of them became tsotsis
[juvenile delinquents] even criminals?"
N integral part of the "apartheid" policy is the
»preservation of the skilled and higher-paid
professions to the Whites and the limitation of African
workers to unskilled and low-paid occupations. Through
the implementation of this policy, the Republic has provided
for its White inhabitants one of the highest standards of
living in the world, while the non-Whites receive only a
fraction of White earnings.
The National Party Government has greatly extended the
"colour-bar" in employment. The Industrial Conciliation Act
of 1956 provides for the reservation of occupations for
particular racial groups. As the Whites monopolize political
power, their Interests are paramount when there is com¬
petition among racial groups. The non-Whites can never
be certain of being able to utilize the skills they have
acquired or seek to acquire.
Five work reservation determinations were made in the
past year, reserving the driving of motor-trucks, skilled
jobs in the building industry and bartending in various areas
to Whites only. Other reservations are under investigation.
These decisions have created great bitterness.
Such blatant discriminatory measures as job reservation
are facilitated by the fact that the Africans have no political
rights and, Indeed, are denied even trade union rights.
African trade unions cannot be registered and cannot
engage in collective bargaining. African workers are not
permitted to strike: penalties reach a fine of 1,000 Rand,
three years' imprisonment, or both.
In the public services, the Whites not only monopolize
the higher levels but form a majority, though they account
for less than a fourth of the population.
Registration of the population by race continues to evoke
serious resentment, especially in view of recent reports
that hundreds of Coloured families had been reclassified

For their efforts to obtain equ -
ality of rights in South Africa,
many Africans have been ar¬
rested and condemmed to long
terms of imprisonment. One
of them is Nelson Mandela,
an African leader, shown here
(centre). He was one of a
group of 91 Africans who were
tried in 1962. He was again
tried on new charges in 1963
and on June 12, 1964, was
sentenced to life ¡mprisonnent.
Photos © Holmes-Lebel, Paris - Ian Berry
as Whites. In many cases, one part of the family Is
classified as White and another as Coloured.
Hundreds of persons are annually convicted under the
Immorality Act, which prohibits mixed marriages and carnal
intercourse between members of different races.
Though mixed sports are not prohibited by law, Govern¬
ment leaders have pressed sports associations to segregate
members by race. Segregated sports facilities have been
established under the Group Areas Act and local bodies
have prevented mixed sports. Passports and other facilities
have been denied to mixed teams and legislative measures
have been threatened unless the associations comply with
Government policy. Such measures have led to proposals
in International sports organizations to exclude South Afri¬
can teams.
One of the most significant aspects of the policy of
"apartheid" is the determined effort to bring education
under government control, segregate the educational
system on the basis of race and tribe, and train the non-
Whites for the Inferior position assigned to them by
government policies.
A major step In this direction was taken in 1953 with
the promulgation of the Bantu Education Act transferring
responsibility for African education (except higher educa¬
tion) from the provincial governments to the Central
Government, and granting wide powers to the Minister over
both government and private schools.
Religious missions were obliged to transfer control over
their schools to the government or lose state subsidies if
they chose to remain as private schools. Only a small
number could survive without subsidies.
A separate account was established for grants-in-aid to
non-government schools. The government's contribution
was pegged at 13 million Rand [A Rand is the equivalent
of 10/- sterling or $1.40], with the result that the
Africans were obliged to pay for educational expansion
through Increased taxes and contributions by communities.
The government then proceeded to extend "apartheid"
into higher education by dividing the higher institutions on
a racial and tribal basis, and locating African colleges out¬
side urban areas.
In 1959, legislation was adopted to take over control of
the Fort Hare University College and to establish separate
university colleges for non-White persons. No White person
may attend any of the colleges for non-Whites, and after a
transition period (during which students already enrolled in
one of the "open" universities were to be allowed to finish
their courses subject to the annual approval of the Minister),
non-Whites are restricted to their colleges.
The Council and the Senate of each non-White university
college is composed of White members only. Non-Whites
serve on the Advisory Council and the Advisory Senate.
HE Government claims that the transfer ol
African education to its control has resulted in
great expansion of educational opportunities. The number
of pupils, for instance, increased from 938,000 in 1953-54
to 1.6 million in 1961. The figures on such expansion,
however, deserve some qualifications and comments.
First, as the government's share in financing African
education is pegged at 13 million Rand, increases in expen¬
diture must be provided by direct taxes on Africans. The
result has been a decrease in per capita expenditure on
education.
Second, of the 6,927 schools for Africans, only 169 are
government schools; the rest are state-aided schools.
Third, 97 per cent of the children attending school are in
the primary grades and of these only about one quarter
are in higher primary grades (the second four years of
primary school). Only 911 sat for the matriculation examina¬
tion in 1962.
Fourth, many African leaders and educationists oppose
"Bantu education" on the ground that it seeks to promote
tribalism and restrict learning by emphasizing mother-tongue
instruction and greatly reducing instruction in English and
Afrikaans. Primary schools have been organized on an
ethnic basis, with each providing education in one of the
seven recognized African languages. English and Afrikaans
are taught as subjects, and each is allotted less than two
hours a week. A petitioner before the Special Committee
stated:
"This means that the standard of English and Afrikaans
remains very low making it even more difficult for the
African to fit into an economy run by Whites who do not
speak tribal languages, and even to communicate with
Africans of other tribes."
Fifth, the increase in university enrolment of Africans is
misleading, as it is mainly in extension or correspondence
courses In the University College of South Africa and in
non-degree courses at tribal colleges.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

All labour legislation in
South Africa is based on
separation in employment
according to race. In
1957 this racial discrimina¬
tion was extended to the
nursing profession by the
Nursing Act. Left, at a
meeting in Johannesburg
a White nurse joins non-
White colleagues in protest¬
ing agains the "apartheid"
regulations. Right, this
young non-White nurse
would not be allowed,
according to law, to serve
on the council that deals
with the registration, train¬
ing and discipline of nurses.
And whatever her qualifica¬
tions, she would never be put
in charge of White nurses.
Photos <© Holmte-Lebel, Paris -
Ian Berry.
APARTHEID (Cont'd)
One Bantu child in three in infancy
The iniquities suffered by the non-Whites under individual
laws or aspects of policy provide but a partial picture of
the varied effects of the "apartheid" policy in terms of
poverty, malnutrition, disease, breakdown of family life,
humiliation and racial tension.
Because of racial discrimination, the White population of
the Republic of South Africa has been able to enjoy one
of the highest standards of living, while the non-Whites are
denied an equitable share of the national income. A few
facts from a recent report to the Economic Commission for
Africa are illustrative:
The ratio between the average wage earnings of
Whites and Africans In the mining industry is approxi¬
mately 15:1; in secondary industry it Is 5:1.
In 1960, the Whites who constituted 19.3 per cent
of the population accounted for 67 per cent of the national
income; the Africans who constituted 68.4 per cent
of the population received 26.5 per cent; and the
Coloureds and Asians, who constituted 12.4 per cent of
the population, received 6.5 per cent.
In 1959, the Whites had a per capita Income of £425
a year; Africans £39; and Asians and Coloureds £54.
Poverty, malnutrition and disease are so widespread
among the non-Whites in South Africa, despite the vast
economic resources of the country, that the situation has
caused national concern and led recently to debates in the
Parliament and the press.
A number of recent surveys show that the average income
26 °f African families is far below the minimum monthly
expenditure required for decent living.
Surveys In Durban showed that 60 per cent of African
workers had no breakfast at all and that a large number of
African school-children had nothing whatever to eat until
supper-time. In a hospital survey in the Cape, 54 per cent
of the non-White children were found to be severely under¬
weight and 17 per cent to be at a level Indicative of gross
starvation. Dr. Hansen, associate professor of Child Health
at Cape Town University, stated in October 1962:
"The total mortality rate for all cases in the age group
one to four shows that Bantu children are dying at
25 times and Coloured children at 15 times the rate of
White children."
In Cape Town, one hundred times as many non-Whites
as White children die per year of gastro-enteritis. Kwashior¬
kor, which is considered medically as being the index of
the general state of malnutrition in a community, was found
in five per cent of the Bantu children treated by doctors
who assisted in a recent study.
The general infant mortality rate of African children is
one of the highest in the world, varying from over 200 per
1,000 in the cities to 300 to 400 in some of the rural areas.
The corresponding figure for White children is 27, which
is one of the lowest in the world.
Added to the poverty, malnutrition and disease are the
constant humiliations suffered by the Africans because of
the complex laws restricting their freedoms and laying
down heavy penalties for breaches.
An African cannot enter an urban area without a permit
and cannot stay for more than 72 hours without a work
permit. An African cannot establish the right to residence
in an urban area unless he has lived there continuously
since birth or worked continuously for a single employer

committed a crime or of possessing information on the
commission of a crime. This legislation evoked widespread
criticism in South Africa and abroad as ending the rule of
law and creating a police state.
The Minister of Justice is now empowered to ban political
organizations and public meetings. He is authorized to
prohibit persons from public activities, restrict their move¬
ments, banish them, place them under "house arrest" or
detain them for recurring periods of ninety days each.
He may prohibit publications or require deposits of
20,000 rand for registration of newspapers. In many cases,
the Minister Is not required to give grounds for action or
may only have to charge the victim with furthering the aims
of communism, defined so widely as to cover all active
opposition to the policies of "apartheid." The powers of
the courts to review his actions are extremely circum¬
scribed.
In June 1963, the Commissioner of Prisons revealed that
5,293 persons had been arrested in the previous year for
alleged security crimes; of these, 2,047 had been arrested
on charges of attempting to further the aims of the African
National Congress or the Pan-Africanist Congress.
Hundreds of persons were tried in the past few months
on charges of sabotage, association with or furthering
the alms of unlawful organizations...
Sabotage, it may be noted, is defined very broadly and
carries the maximum penalty of death.
One result of this series of repressive actions was the
growing conviction among the opponents of "apartheid,"
including all the major non-White organizations, that there
was no legal means of fighting the policy and that violent
resistance was essential to secure equal rights for all the
people of the country.
for ten years, nor is the wife or unmarried child under eigh¬
teen of an African meeting such requirements. Even then
he can be "endorsed out" if he takes employment in
another area or fails to report within three days of his
being unemployed.
The wife of an African worker in town can visit him for
no, more than 72 hours and only if she obtains a permit
from officials on the ground, for example, that she wishes
to conceive.
Such laws and regulations have led to serious social
problems. The rate of illegitimacy among African children
in urban areas Is extremely high. The Annual Report of
the City Medical Officer of Health for Durban for 1961 states
that out of a total of 5,864 births amongst the Africans,
3,665 were illegitimate.
For infractions of the onerous laws and regulations, in
the making of which they have no voice, the Africans are
summarily imprisoned, fined or "endorsed out" of their
towns.
Flogging is a mandatory punishment for various offences.
Official figures Indicate that in the past ten years 850,000
strokes have been inflicted on penal offenders. Floggings
are currently running at the rate of 80,000 strokes a year
on 17,000 offenders. The number of offenders flogged
today is eight times what it was 20 years ago.
Not surprisingly, the situation has led to bitterness and
racial tension and this is recognized even by responsible
officials who support the policies of "apartheid."
The South African Government has enacted a mass of
repressive legislation in recent years to silence and suppress
all opposition to the policies of "apartheid." Such legisla¬
tion has been further strengthened during the past year.
The General Law Amendment Act of 1963, promulgated
in May, provides inter alia for the detention of persons for
90 days at a time without trial on suspicion of having
HE non-White people of South Africa had tried
a variety of peaceful means to achieve their
aims and faced harsh persecution by the Government.
In the post-war period alone, one may recall the Indian
passive resistance movement of 1946-48 in which 2,300 per¬
sons courted arrest; the Campaign of Defiance against
Unjust Laws in 1952 in which over 8,500 persons of all
races were arrested for non-compliance with "apartheid"
regulations; and numerous demonstrations, boycotts, and
strikes. All these had been countered by the harshest
measures of repression and ever more rigorous laws. The
government has consistently refused to recognize that the
demand by non-Whites for a share of political power in
the country is legitimate, and has put down all such demands
as mortal dangers to the social order.
To cope with the increasing tension in the country, the
government has undertaken a tremendous expansion of all
branches of the armed forces, the setting up of air com¬
mando units, the establishment of police reserves and
home guards, the training of civilians in the use of arms,
the development of the radio network to link all of the
nearly one thousand police stations, the import of vast
quantities of modem arms, and the great increase in the
defence and police budgets.
During the period between 1960-61 and 1963-64, the
defence budget has nearly quadrupled, while the expen¬
ditures on police increased by over one-third. Estimates
for the current year are far in excess of the highest annual
expenditure during the second World War when South Afri¬
can forces saw action In many theatres.
The problem in South Africa is not merely the perpetua¬
tion of inequalities arising from historical developments
or the continued existence of such inequities as the denial
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

APARTHEID (Cont'd)
Incalculable harm to persons of all races
of franchise to a majority of the population, the separation
of people by race or the discrimination in the sharing of
the fruits of labour. Such terms as segregation and discri¬
mination can hardly describe the humiliation and oppression
to which millions of people, who constitute a large majority
of the population of the country, have been subjected by
the policies of its government
The problem, moreover, is not one of a peculiar political
or social system which democratic-minded peoples find
objectionable, nor one of colour or race, but the con¬
sequence of a racialist ideology enshrined as state policy
and implemented by force against the majority of the people
of the country, in violation of the obligations of the South
African Government under the United Nations Charter.
The racist creed that the policies of "apartheid" are based
on is the very antithesis of the concept of international
co-operation which is at the root of the existence of the
United Nations.
The Special Committee noted that the major non-White
organizations favour equality of all citizens, irrespective of
race, and that they have repeatedly expressed a desire for
discussions to ensure progress towards equality. It has
also noted with great satisfaction that among those who
oppose the policies of "apartheid," despite severe repres¬
sion, are members of all racial groups in the country,
including many Whites.
The United Nations has already made clear .In General
Assembly resolution 616 B (VII), reaffirmed in subsequent
resolutions, that the peaceful development of a unified
community in multi-racial societies such as the Republic
of South Africa would best be assured "when patterns of
legislation and practice are directed towards ensuring equa¬
lity before the law of all persons regardless of race, creed
or colour, and when economic, social, cultural and political
participation of all racial groups is on a basis of equality."
The Special Committee feels that this is the only course
which can serve the true interests of all the peoples of the
Republic of South Africa, irrespective of race or colour.
The harsh repressive measures instituted by the govern¬
ment frustrate the possibilities for peaceful settlement,
enhance hostility among the racial groups, and precipitate a
violent conflict with incalculable harm to persons of all
racial groups in the country, to friendly relations among
states, and to the maintenance of peace in Africa and
the world.
