Aphrodite's city
resuscitated
Aphrodisias is a striking example of an historic city now saved by
government action. For centuries peasants had installed themselves
amid the ruins. Below, fragments of ancient columns used to
prop up village building. Turkish Government has built a whole
new town to remove the inhabitants and restore the ancient site.
THE traveller in modern southwest
Turkey who finds himself fol¬
lowing the fertile, winding course of the
old river, the Meander, now called the
Menderes, may take a rocky, dusty path
which rises among olive groves towards
the foothills of the encircling mountain
ranges where a snowy, jagged peak,
Baba Dag, towers against the calm and
open sky.
If he does so he will come, after some
time, suddenly upon a misty wilderness ¡
of poplar trees and through them he will
see, veiled at first and then startling in
their white and shining splendour, a row
of perfect Ionic colums rising from the
ground. He has arrived at the place
which was once the loveliest and most
famous of all the cities dedicated in
ancient times to Aphrodite, goddess of
beauty; to the city called Aphrodisias
built there in the 3rd century B.C. in
classic Caria, now the province of Aydin.
From its earliest times through the tur¬
bulent passage of Greek, Roman and
Byzantine history this city held a unique
distinction: it was the fountainhead of
art, the workshop of beauty which sup¬
plied an Empire. Generation after gene¬
ration of its carvers and sculptors sent
their work in the inimitable Carian marble
through the seaports of Asia Minor to
the rest of the world.
Alexander the Philosopher was born in
CONT'D ON PAGE 23
Colour page, opposite
Carved stone head peers from undergrowth
covering innumerable fragments of once-proud
buildings of Aphrodisias.
Centre colour pages
Top left: White Ionic columns standing among
young poplar trees are believed to be remains of
porticoes around the agora or public square
of Aphrodisias.
Bottom, left to right: Fallen glories of Aphrodisias,
where graceful Greek columns still rise above
tumbled masonry, form the backdrop to a
cabbage patch or serve to buttress bank of an
irrigation ditch.
Top right: One of many striking reliefs of gods,
goddesses, satyrs and other mythological figures
adorning the temple of Aphrodite.
Bottom right: Villager of Geyre stands amid
relics of halcyon period when Aphrodisias was
famed centre of art and religion.
All photos © Ara Güler. Istanbul

kV^
;
*»\
&
^J^' ^k
> >.
jwf*




APHRODITE'S CITY (Cont'd)
Stadium
for 30,000
Colour page, opposite
Top: The magnificent stadium
of Aphrodisias, one of the
most imposing- in the whole
Mediterranean area had places
for 30 000 spectators. Its
immensity can be judged from
comparison with cattle brows¬
ing in its grass-grown arena.
Bottom left: A mutilated but
still majestic marble head by
a sculptor of Aphrodisias. It
was found on the probable site
of a palace.
Bottom right: Housewife's
chores amid fragments of mar¬
ble carvings and columns for
which Aphrodisias was once
famous in the Roman world.
Below : In 1963 the Turkish
Government transferred the
villagers of Geyre from their
homes in the ruins of Aphro¬
disias to a new settlement of
modern houses. Excavation
and the eventual restoration of
the ancient city can now go on
unhampered.
Aphrodisias; medicine, rhetoric and phi¬
losophy flourished there; music and
drama had their festivals, Byzantine
Christianity made the city a Bishopric
with many churches. Somewhere between
the 11th and 14th centuries the city
declined and gradually sank back into
the quiet plain that had borne it, until
in the 17th or 18th century a small village
called Geyre came into being to straggle
uncertainly over its fallen glories.
Over the years the villagers of Geyre
unthinkingly made free with the artisti¬
cally priceless ruins scattered around
them, appropriating them casually into
the pattern of their daily life. Fragments
of fallen Ionic colums were used to prop
up the wooden houses and street posts
of the village; carved sarcophagi served
as wine presses or troughs to catch the
waters of mountain streams; a splendid
relief from the old city decorated a far¬
mer's barn and one of the world's most
perfect examples of Ionic columns which
probably had once been part of a great
temple to Aphrodite offered the spectacle
of their majestic, classic beauty from the
midst of a villager's cabbage patch.
In 1959 the Turkish Government
decided to save Aphrodisias the Beau¬
tiful. By 1963 it had built an entirely
new settlement for the people of Geyre
a mile away from the site of their original
village a modern community with
school, infirmary, barns and storehouses
and fertile pastures for the villagers'
livestock.
No longer hampered by the presence
of the villagers excavation and restora¬
tion work is now going on in Aphrodisias
under the aegis of the Turkish Ministry
of Education and the Direction of Anti¬
quities and Museums and with the help
of a team of archaeologists from the
University of New York.
The most grandiose relic of Aphrodisias
is the magnificent stadium, one of the
most imposing in the whole Medi¬
terranean area, which accomodated
30,000 spectators. Another gem is the
covered auditorium with rows of marble
seats and elaborate stage decoration of
handsome statuary. Elsewhere the dis¬
mantling of a wall revealed within the
foundations a nine-foot image of Aphro¬
dite buried there when the city became
a centre of Christianity.
Aphrodisias was a city of marble. When
it won fame and prosperity as a centre
of art and religion, an extensive building
programme used the nearby supplies of
Carian marble to raise the magnificent
monuments now being brought to light.
So many artistic treasures are being
discovered that it would seem the long
dead artists of Aphrodisias left their
greatest testament, not spread throughout
the world in museums, but in Aphrodisias
itself. Now the brilliance of this art is
being brought to light from the ruins
among the poplars and olive groves of
the tranquil Carian plain birthplace of a
city of grace and beauty.
All photos © Ara Güler. Istanbul
