Head of a woman in terracotta fashioned
between 1, 400 and 1, 500 years ago by an
unknown Japanese. He was not a professional
sculptor. He wished simply
to honour the memory of a leader, by
decorating his tomb with a funerary figure sculpted
in clay with a bamboo spatula. Figures of this
kind shaped by unknown artists are called
"haniwa". This one is onty 16 cms (6 in.) high.
Photo @ M ! che) Courto ! s
Ajf photos courtesy
Robert Laffont, publishes. Paris
HISTORY
OF MANKIND
One of the great tasks Unesco set itself in the past twenty years has been the
preparation of a six-tome History of Mankind on science and culture.
In 1951 Unesco established an International Commission for an International History
of the Scientific and Cultural Development of Mankind to supervise the work of
the historians and scholars from many countries who were to prepare the History.
Volume I of the History of Mankind, dealing with prehistory and the beginnings
of civilization, was the work of two renowned archaeologists, Jacquetta Hawkes
and Sir Leonard Woolley. It was published in 1963 in London (George Allen and
Unwin, Ltd.) and in New York (Harper and Row, Inc.). In 1966, Unesco's 20th anni-
versary year, it is being made widely available in other languages. A Serbo-Croat
edition has been published in Zagreb and a Greek language edition (50, 000 copies)
is being published in Athens in weekly instalments with colour plates. A Spanish
language version (Editorial Sudamericana, S. A.. Buenos Aires) has just been
published, and a French edition (Robert Laffont, Paris) will appear later this year.
Translations into Hebrew, Italian, Japanese and Slovinian are also planned.
Volume I has also appeared in paperback form, in two parts, in the United States
(a first printing of 150, 000 copies by The New American Library, Inc.-Mentor
Books). A collection of paperbacks under the general title of Readings in the
History of Mankind Series (edited by Guy S. Metraux and Francis Crouzet) is
also being published (100, 000 copies) in the Mentor Books series. These paper-
backs are based on articles which have appeared in the Journal of World History
(the review published by the International Commission for a History of Mankind).
The first four titles, published between 1963 and 1965, are The Evolution of Science,
The Nineteenth Century World, The New Asia, and Religions and the Promise of the
Twentieth Century. Another publication based on the same sources, Studies in
the Cultural History of India, has appeared in Agra, India, and a Hindi translation
is in preparation.
The Ancient World, Volume II of the History of Mankind (a set three books), by
Luigi Pareti, Paolo Brezzi and Luciano Petech, was published in English last year,
and a third volume, The Twentieth Century (actually Volume VI in the series), by
Caroline F. Ware, K. M. Panikkar and J. M. Romein, is to be published in London
later this year (see the Unesco Courier, June 1963, May 1965).
This horse comes down to us
out of the long night of
prehistory when man, despite his
unrelenting struggle for survival,
already exercised his talent
as an artist. It was drawn
with manganese on the wall of
an almost circular gallery
in the Niaux cavern (Ariege,
France) 12, 000 years ago. Tools
and weapons found there
show that the cave was
one of the underground
refuges of Paleolithic man.
Bison, mammoths and horses
decorating these caves
32 astound us by their surenessof line and the impression
of movement they convey.
Photo Andre Held
A head from the Lahore Museum
(Pakistan) depicts with startling
realism the asceticism
of Buddha during his years
of fasting and penitence.
A detail of a statue carved in
shale and seated on a
pedestal, it is the work
of a Greco-Buddhist school
of art-the Gandhara
school, which produced many
images of the fasting
Buddha in the 2nd and
3rd centuries A. D.
First portrayal of
the Buddha as a man
rather than as a symbol are
accredited to this school,
which combined the realism
of Greco-Roman art with
the symbolism of Asia.
Photo &commat; Biltgen

