A STATEMENT
BY ELEVEN
DISTINGUISHED
GEOPHYSICISTS
We publish here the letter ad¬
dressed to the London Times by
eleven distinguished scientists
who participated in programmes
of study and research during the
International Geophysical Year
and the International Years of the
Quiet Sun, organized by the
International Council ofScientific
Unions with the assistance of
Unesco. The Times published the
letter on July 25, 1966.
A French translation of "The Knight in the
Tiger's Skin" has appeared In the Unesco
Collection of Representative Works (Editions
Gallimard, Paris, 1964). In 1965 this trans¬
lation was awarded the Prix Langlols of the
Académie Française. An English translation
for the Unesco Collection Is In preparation.

December 31, 1965, marked the end of the observational phase of the
International Years of the Quiet Sun. This two-year enterprise, involving
the closest co-operation between scientists of no fewer than 71 countries,
has been concerned with the study of the sun and the earth under condi¬
tions of minimum solar activity.
It formed a complementary enterprise to the even greater scientific
co-operative project of seven years ago the International Geophysical
Year.
Both projects were organized by special committees appointed by the
International Council of Scientific Unions and financial assistance was
given by this Council, by Unesco, and by the participating nations.
Beyond question, the scientific achievements of these two enterprises
have been immense and there can be little doubt that as a result of the
IGY and IQSY, man's understanding of solar and terrestrial phenomena
and of the relationship between them, has advanced to a really enormous
degree. Vast stores of data have been assembled in World Data Centres
located In a number of countries and are freely available for study by
scientists of every country. The planning and organization of these enter¬
prises has occupied the time and energy of innumerable scientists from
all nations over a period of several years. Men of science of every nation
have been brought together in a spirit of friendly understanding and co¬
operation which has known no barriers of nationality, race, colour,
religious or political opinion.
The basic objective of both these projects could be summarized in the
phrase: "The common study of our planet by all for the benefit of all,"
acid it is certain that the objective has been achieved in full measure.
These world-wide co-operative scientific projects have shown conclusively
that, however many and serious are the political problems that trouble the
human race, it is possible for all the nations of the world to work closely
together in great enterprises for the common good.
We, the undersigned, officers of the special committees which organiz¬
ed the projects, wish to commend the examples of the IGY and IQSY to
the peoples of all nations. At the same time, we would wish to express the
earnest hope that scientific academies and governments everywhere will
resolve to place this co-operation in geophysical science on a permanent
basis.
In so doing, we feel that not only will the rapid advance of geophysical
science be maintained but, more importantly, it is certain that this continu¬
ed close co-operation between men of science from all parts of the world
will make a significant contribution to the wider field of human understand¬
ing and goodwill.
V.V. BELOUSSOV
Soviet Geophysical Committee, Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
LLOYD V. BERKNER
Director, Southwest Centre for Advanced Studies, Dallas, Texas
W.J.G. BEYNON
Department of Physics, University College of Wales, Aberystwyth
SYDNEY CHAPMAN
High Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colorado
J. COULOMB
Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, Paris
G. LACLAVERE
Director, Institut Géographique National, Paris
HOMER E. NEWELL
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington
M. NICOLET
Institut Royal Météorologique. Brussels
MARTIN A. POMERANTZ
Bartol Research Foundation, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania.
N.V. PUSHKOV
Director, Institute of Terrestrial Magnetism and Radio Wave Propagation
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.
G. RIGHINI
Director, Osservatorio Astrofísico di Arcetri, Florence

