The curved lead plate
which this printer
is carrying to a rotaiy
press in Lagos (Nigeria)
will print two pages
of a local newspaper.
Today the leading newspapers
in tropical Africa
are printed in English
or in French.
Standardized alphabets
are now planned
for some of
the most important
African languages
spoken in vast areas, from
Senegal to the Cameroons.
They will then
be able to play a major role
in education and
the circulation
of news and information.
Literacy textbooks,
grammars, dictionaries
and reading materials
will be prepared
and published with
the co-operation of the
Unesco Regional
Centre in Accra.
O Paul Almasy, Paris

Ancient scripts
from the heart of Africa
by Dimitri A. Olderogge
I T would be difficult to overestimate the import¬
ance of writing in human history; writing made
it possible for each generation to pass on to posterity the
knowledge it had accumulated.
In his Ancient Society, the American ethnographer Lewis
H. Morgan made the appearance of writing the starting
point of civilization. Karl Marx agreed with Morgan on the
significance of writing in the history of society and Marx's
colleague, Frederick Engels, said in his book, The Origin of
the Family, Private Property and the State, that civilization
began with the invention of writing and its utilization for
literary purposes.
The hieroglyphic writing evolved by the Egyptians in the
fourth millenium B.C. served as the basis from which the
alphabets of the Mediterranean and India were later deve¬
loped. The hieroglyphic writing of the peoples of the Far
EastChina, Korea and Japan appears to have developed
independently of the Mediterranean cultures. The same
DIMITRI OLDEROGGE is a leading Soviet specialist on African
questions. He is a corresponding member of the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences.
may be said of the writing of the American people, the
Mayas in particular.
One of the most ancient systems of writing, the hierogly¬
phic script of Ancient Egypt was created in Africa (in the
Nile Valley), but it did not influence the development of
writing among other peoples of the African continent; the
one exception was the writing of the ancient Nubian kingdom
of Meroe (600 B.C. to 400 A.D.) which was obviously the
result of Egyptian influence.
Because of this it is usually assumed that the peoples
of the Sudan and tropical Africa never developed scripts
of their own; it is true that the Vai tribe in Liberia invented
a script in the early nineteenth century, and so did the
Bamum, of the Cameroons in the twentieth century, but
these were considered exceptions. It was also affirmed as
an indisputable fact that both scripts were invented under
the influence of either European or Arabic scripts. But Is
this true? Is it conceivable that the African peoples, with
their original self-created culture, never advanced to the
stage of Inventing some system of writing?
When Portuguese navigators first reached the west coast
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

ANCIENT SCRIPTS FROM AFRICA (Cont'd)
"Nlo tre' = to carve symbols on a calabash
26
of Africa, there were states in existence along the whole
length of the Upper Guinea coastline. The accounts of
European travellers mainly Portuguese, Dutch, and English,
but also German and French give descriptions of them.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries trade was so
highly developed along the seaboard later known as the
Gold Coast, that Portuguese ships carried slaves from
Benin for sale to African merchants, instead of carrying
them to Europe. The African merchants used the slaves as
porters to take goods into the interior and bring back
gold and ivory.
The first European caravels were met by large fleets
of vessels sent out by local rulers, some of them capable of
carrying a hundred men. This fact alone shows that the
Portuguese navigators found the western seaboard of Africa
inhabited by peoples who had reached a high level of
culture. Any doubts there may be on this score are dispelled
immediately one calls to mind the ancient bronze reliefs
and sculptures in the round produced by the artists of the
Benin and Yoruba peoples.
These bronze castings have been preserved. They
include portraits of a king and his heir, an army commander
and many other high-ranking persons all indicative of
an elaborate court ceremonial. Each officer or courtier
wears some mark of rank headdresses, shoulder sashes,
masks worn hanging from the belt, which are the equivalent
of modern badges and insignia, and special types of
swords called ada or ebere.
Some reliefs show a nobleman of high rank setting out
on a journey accompanied by a numerous suite. The noble¬
man is mounted on a horse with young men supporting him
on either side; armour-bearers carry his sword and shield
and his servants hold their shields high above their heads
to protect him from the sun. The nobleman is taller than
the servants around him; the artist has done his best
to stress social inequality in the same way as those who
carved the reliefs of ancient Egypt.
It is easy to picture Benin from the descriptions of tra¬
vellers of that time. Houses in the town were built close
to each other in straight rows as in Dutch towns. The
king's palace, wrote a seventeenth century traveller, was
as big as the town of Haarlem. The streets were wide and
straight, as wide as the Herengracht or the Keyzersgracht
in Amsterdam; side streets almost as wide led away to left
and right.
WE know this from scraps of evidence that have
chanced to survive, and fortunately there are
enough to show the high level of culture in ancient Benin.
We now know that the Benin culture was only one branch of
the ancient and highly developed culture of Yoruba. Since
little of the Yoruba culture has been preserved we might
have regarded the tales and legends of the Yoruba about
their past as pure invention had it not been for the bronze
and terracotta sculptures real gems of African plastic
art that have been discovered recently. We have little
information on the states that lay to the west of Yoruba
only the tales of travellers and merchants who visited the
Gulf of Guinea between the sixteenth and nineteenth cen¬
turies. But these are sufficient to show that all along the
Guinea Coast there were states with developed cultures
and that to the west, north and east there were peoples
with considerable lower levels of culture.
All this gives us much to ponder on. One wonders
why, In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, peoples like
the Vai, Ekowi, Bamum and Toma who lived on the peri¬
phery of the West African states should have had their
own systems of writing, whereas nothing has been found to
suggest that any system of writing ever existed in the
coastal kingdoms. Why did the Vai script appear among
a people at a lower level of culture than that of Yoruba or
Dahomey? How did the Nsibidi inscriptions come to be
made by tribes living in the dense jungles around the Cross
River in the Cameroons?
One would naturally expect the peoples of Dahomey,
Yoruba and Benin, and other similar kingdoms to have
had their own systems of writing at some time. This seems
more than likely since the state must have needed records
of tributes received and taxes due, and reports on the state
of the army; it also had to issue orders and instructions.
Yet the question has never been investigated.
MONG the scripts of the Guinea Coast those of
the Vai and Bamun are the best known. The
Vai script was discovered in 1849 by S.W. Kölle who came
away with the impression that all adult men in Bandakoro
could, to some extent, read and write, and that in other
villages there were always a few people who could read
the native script. The American Africanist, Oric Bates,
noted in 1834 (thus even earlier than Kólle) "the Vai have
written volumes."
The rapid spread of writing shows that the appropriate
conditions for its invention must have existed long before.
Syllabic systems of writing derive from pictographic sym¬
bols, and the "invention" of the Vai script by Momolu Doalu
Bukele and some helpers consisted of selecting suitable
symbols and arranging them according to a precisely
defined system. Momolu Massakwa, the Liberian consul
in Britain, has told how the Vai transmitted news of a
sudden attack by their enemies, of the outcome of battles
and other events, by means of pictograms on strips of
bark. To say that the enemy had been defeated and had
fled they drew the figure of a man running with his hands
on his head and put a dot beside it to indicate the plural.
It was symbols of this kind that were used as a basis for
the syllabic alphabet.
The history of the Vai script is quite clear the symbols
gradually acquired a phonetic character and represented
the sounds of the syllables. Professor August Klingenhe¬
ben, an eminent linguist, discovered that the Vai script
depicts very exactly the phonetic structure of the language
(there are symbols which differentiate between syllables
containing two types of B and two of D, symbols for nasa¬
lized vowels and for labio-velar sounds). He concluded
that it could only have been invented by native speakers of
the language.
Influenced by the Vai writing, neighbouring tribes rapidly
assimilated its principles and invented their own systems.
We now know that similar systems of writing exist among
the Mende, Bassa, Gerze (Kpelle) and Toma (Loma).
The history of the Bamum script is now well known.
Njoya, the chief of the Bamum, evolved this system from
symbols that had been In use before him and which had
long been known in the savannahs of the Cameroons. In
his lifetime, Njoya four times reformed the Bamum script to
give it a more systematic form.

Both the Vai and Bamum scripts, therefore, were created
by turning ancient systems of symbols into a standardized
system. The older symbols have not been preserved
because they were inscribed on perishable materials wood
and bark which did not survive long In the damp tropical
climate of West Africa.
The Nsibidi symbols, widely used among the Ibo people
(a tribe four million strong) in southern Nigeria, only became
known in Europe in 1904. The Nsibidi symbols are not
a real system of writing because one symbol may be used
for several different meanings and the same idea can be
expressed by several different symbols. The number of
symbols was unlimited and the way of drawing them was
not systematized.
The Leningrad Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography
(U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences) possesses a number of
calabashes from the Cameroons, many of which are covered
with Nsibidi symbols based on pictograms. These inscrip¬
tions are usually "records" of proverbs, "the sayings of
the old men". It Is no accident that In the Ewe language,
for Instance, the verb nlo means "to carve" (drawings)
and also "to write"; nlo tre means "to carve drawings on
a calabash" and nlo leta means "to write a letter" (from
the word "letter").
It seems that records of this type must have existed
throughout the Guinea Coast but they were never studied
and have now disappeared since they were written on
perishable materials like wood and calabashes.
The systems of recording numbers are better known.
Trade in gold has been conducted on the Gold Coast and
the Ivory Coast for centuries and gold dust was sent by
caravan routes to the trading centres of Western Sudan
Djenne, Bamako, Mopli, Timbuktu, and other towns. The
gold trade continued from the twelfth century until 1591
when the Songhai kingdom was crushed by Moroccan
troops. Weights were needed to weigh the gold dust, and
some made of bronze have been preserved. They are
covered with different symbols circles, spirals, volutes,
incisions, etc. Studies of these inscriptions show that they
are conventional signs for weights.
HERE is no doubt that the payment of tribute
had to be recorded, and that some system of
writing was needed apart from figures. Unfortunately
nobody has taken up this problem, but I believe that
something like a system of writing must have existed in
Upper Guinea for a long time. I base my theory on the
following facts.
Among the regalia of the kings of Dahomey was a cere¬
monial axe with a decorated biade. Ceremonial axes of this
kind could be "read", since each of them had its own
particular significance. King Takdonu or Dakodonu (1625-
1650) had an axe of very strange design. According to
A. Le Hérissé, a French scholar who studied the history of
Dahomey, the blade of the axe could be read in this way:
above there was a symbol depicting flint da, below a
depiction of the earth ko, with a hole In it donu; together
these make the name Dakodonu.
Le Herissé's Dahomey friends presented him with an axe
depicting his name. On the blade there was a local tree
hun with its leaves ama bound by a rope kan and with
spaces between the leaves biyo; this was read as nma-
kambiyo a word meaning "it doesn't matter, It is not neces¬
sary". This was also the name given to Le Hérissé by his
Dahomey friends because he repeated the word so often.
These examples show that the people of Dahomey long
ago developed the principles of hieroglyphic writing and
it has not been preserved simply because the materials
they used were not long lasting.
We also find less developed systems of writing on the
walls of Dahomey's palaces; they strongly resemble the
hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt, for instance those at Nar-
mer and other cities, where the early form of the cartouche
contained both pictograms and hieroglyphs. The Egyptian
Pharaoh was drawn as a hawk with a hoe in his talons des¬
troying city walls, or as a bull trampling a man underfoot
or tearing down a wall with his horns.
Of similar character are the reliefs on the Dahomey
palace walls that show the kings of Dahomey as ele¬
phants or mighty birds tearing their enemies to pieces.
In both ancient Egypt and in Dahomey we find the earliest
stages of the development of a system of writing.
From "L'Ecriture des Bamum". IFAN 1950
"King Njoya teaches the first characters
of his writing to the nobles"
says the inscription in Bamum
at the top of this drawing.
Njoya, King of the Bamum (Cameroons) Invented
a pictographic script
at the end of the 19th century,
and later transformed it into
a syllabic and phonetic alphabet
(see the Unesco Courier, Nov. 1950).
There is an anachronism in the drawing.
At the time their alphabet
was devised, the Bamum had not yet
adopted the Islamic dress
in which the artist, Ibrahim Njoya,
has depicted them.
The arrival of Portuguese merchants on the Guinea Coast
and the systematic hunt for slaves that followed interrupted
the independent development of the peoples of that area
and doomed them to suffer all the horrors of the slave
trade which prevented any further development of their
native culture.
Traces of earlier systems of writing are also to be found
among peoples Inhabiting the southern part of the conti¬
nent. An Italian missionary, Gazazzi da Monecuccolo, said
in his Historical Description of the Three Kingdoms of
Congo, Matamba and Angola (Bologna, 1687) that hiero¬
glyphic writing was widely used in Matamba.
The Portuguese historian Barroch tells of an Inscription
in an unknown language which he saw over the doorway at
the entrance to one of the stone buildings in the land of
Monomotapa. However, this statement Is not universally
accepted; some scholars believe he may possibly have seen
a carved ornament such as was frequently used to decorate
the walls of stone buildings.
It is difficult today to say whether a system of writing
actually existed in the sixteenth century on the territory now
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

í
m
Unesco-P.A. Pittet
ANCIENT SCRIPTS FROM AFRICA (Cont'd)

Scripts of the Tuaregs, Swahili and Nubians
28
known as Rhodesia. In the National Museum at Bulawayo
there is a manuscript report written by Blake Thomson, one
of the explorers of this area. This quotes a statement by
one of the local inhabitants, a man named Lino, who
declared that the Nyungwe people who lived on the banks
of the Zambesi once possessed manuscripts written on
skins. They were kept in the temple of Murenga and were
copied from time to time as the leather perished. The
copyists tried to imitate the symbols exactly although they
did not know their meaning. It ¡s a pity that Blake Thom¬
son's report and the copies of the symbols preserved in
the same museum have not been published
A hieroglyphic inscription discovered on the cliffs at
Cholemba near Tete (Mozambique) on the middle reaches
of the Zambesi was published in 1896. This inscription did
not seem to attract much attention, although to this day it
remains the only evidence of the existence of an ancient
system of writing in South Africa. It can scarcely be a
hoax since it was discovered at the end of the last century
when nobody was interested in the history of the African
peoples. However, it would be a mistake to draw any defin¬
ite conclusions until further discoveries have been made.
We may sure that many of the peoples of the Guinea
Coast, people who were free of all outside influences until
the fifteenth century, had the rudiments of systems of
writing and even developed systems.
The peoples of the Sudan and East Africa came under
the influence of Arab culture and Islam and created their
own scripts on the basis of Arabic. Just as adaptations of
the Arabic alphabet were made to suit the needs of the
Turkish and Persian languages, so systems of writing in
Arabic characters were devised by many African peoples.
Among the languages so written we may mention Swahili
with its rich literature and those of the Western Sudan
Hausa, Fulbe, Kanuri, Manding and others. Nor must we
forget the writing of Ethiopia whose original script was
devised early in the Christian era from the South Arabian
Sabaean script.
In Christian Nubia, the ancient Nubian system of writing
was devised in the tenth century under the Influence of the
Coptic script. Nobody even suspected the existence of
this Nubian script until 1906, when among Arabic and Coptic
manuscripts received by the Berlin Museum from Egypt
some in an unknown script were discovered. Studies
showed that they were written in the ancient Nubian lang¬
uage which makes them the oldest written records of
African languages proper.
Today, as in past centuries, the Tuaregs of the Sahara
use a special script known as tifinag which is a development
of the ancient Libyan and Punic scripts used in North Africa
at the time of Carthage, in the second century B.C.
Now that most of the African peoples have freed them¬
selves from colonial dependence, the problem of scripts
for the African languages has become more urgent. All
the newly-Independent states have naturally chosen as
their primary task the achievement of economic indepen¬
dence. This requires them to develop their own industry as
rapidly as possible, to build factories, construct ports with

languages
to grind
The people of Dahomey developed a form of hieroglyphic writing over three
centuries ago. They used it to give specific meanings to the designs of the
ceremonial axes known as "recades". Above, a decorated axe blade bearing
the emblem of King G I ele. which signifies "I am the lion cub which spreads
terror from the moment ¡t has teeth." Left, a Dahomean father explains
to his children the meaning of one of the reliefs sculpted a century ago on the
palace of one of Dahomey's monarch's, King Ghezo of Abomey. These alle¬
gorical figures, which recount the king's exploits, are actually a rudimentary
form of writing. Right, an ancient Dahomean calendar. Three calendars are
combined on this board into which marks have been burned and holes bored.
At the top, from left to right, are seven rows of circles: large ones represent the
days of the week; small ones indicate the propitious and the unfavourable
"moments" of the day and night. A local calendar (top right) is based on the
days for holding markets. The twelve rows of 30 holes each which cover most
of the board compose a yearly calendar based on lunar periods. Holes marked
with a sign announce tornadoes or rain. Dots tell when to plough and sow.
Photos O Musée de l'Homme, Pans
modern equipment, create highway and railway networks,
and to solve town-planning problems, all of which requires
skilled personnel engineers, technicians and an army of
proficient workers. Such skilled personnel can only be
trained if the people are literate.
There is no doubt that English and French, and perhaps
some other European languages, will remain the basic lan¬
guages for secondary and higher education in many count¬
ries of tropical Africa; primary education, however, must be
given in the local languages. Among the young people of
the African countries there is a great desire to learn; all
sections of the population are eager for knowledge.
I have seen how Africans are trying to devise alphabets
for their peoples. Different people have different ideas
about how the problem is to be solved; some propose to
devise symbols like the Vai or Bamum of which we have
already spoken, and to make up an alphabet from them;
others suggest using the Arabic alphabet as a base; the
third group, and its members form the majority, want to
take the Latin alphabet and adapt it to the phonetic system
of their own languages. In this field, too, there are many
difficulties.
The most widespread and best-established systems of
writing now in existence are those of the Swahili and
Hausa languages based on the Latin alphabet. The two
scripts are similar since they make use of the English
pronunciation of Latin letters and their combinations,
although there are some slight differences. Swahili, for
instance, uses the English combinations CH and SH while
Hausa uses C instead of CH, but uses SH like Swahili. The
vowels are not given their English value but follow "contin¬
ental pronunciation," as the British say.
In the former French colonies, where teaching in the

local languages in state schools was forbidden, the work of
creating scripts has to begin from scratch. A number of
African languages have spread from countries where the
official language is English to countries where it is French.
The Hausa language, for instance, is spoken in "English"
Nigeria, in Niger, Dahomey, Tchad, etc., where the French
language has been accepted. The question then arises
should the traditional English system of spelling be retained,
or should the French system be used, for instance, CH
instead of the English SH. Vowels create an even more
difficult problem.
In short, a number of specific problems exist. If they are
solved within the boundaries of a single state, many people
will remain divided the Fulbe, Hausa, Mosi and many
others are kept apart by the political boundaries of English-
speaking and French-speaking states. Unsolved problems
will have to be dealt with at special conferences attended
by linguists and representatives of the African governments.
For this purpose a number of conferences have been held
in recent years in the biggest university towns of West
Africa in Ibadan and Accra at which the problems were
discussed.
The most recent conference on linguistics was held
at Bamako under the. auspices of Unesco. It dealt with
the alphabets used for the chief languages of the Western
Sudan Hausa, Manding, Kanuri Fulani, Tamasheq and
Songhai. The aim of the conference was to bring concord
into the writing of these languages through the production
of a standardized alphabet.
In this short article we cannot deal with all the problems
that affect the African languages. The problems are many,
but we have to make the first advances by establishing
standard systems of writing for the most important lang¬
uages of the African continent.
29
