The latest kinds
of teaching
techniques
put mathematics
in the form of a
language which
describes
the relations
and interrelations
among objects
and sets of objects.
One of the first
steps is an exercise
in reasoning.
Here children learn
to identify
and to group
objects on the
basis of shape,
volume and
colour, and learn
to recognize how
they are related
to one another.

New approaches to mathematics teaching
WHY 1101 13
Mathematics teaching is ceasing to be a series of formal and complicated
drills through which children acquire the skills needed in solving exam¬
ination problems. Increasingly, teachers and educational researchers are
evolving and testing a kind of teaching that eschews learning by rote.
Experience with these new techniques shows that not only arithmetical
operations, but also fundamental concepts of mathematics can be learned
intelligently by young children of primary school age. Last January an
international group of specialists met in the Unesco Institute for Education
in Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, to examine the results of
recent research into the learning of mathematics by children aged six to 12.
Below, a member of this group, Nicole Picard, describes some of the class¬
room and curriculum innovations of this new approach to mathematics.
by Nicole Picard
HE urgent need for a new
approach to the teaching
of mathematics has gradually become
evident over the past ten years to
those responsible for education.
The advent of a scientific and tech¬
nical civilization and its gradual exten¬
sion throughout the world has brought
far-reaching social changes, and in
particular compulsory schooling. In
the 1880s, education concerned chil¬
dren of six to ten years of age only;
nowadays, in many countries that have
reached a high degree of industrial
development, it is compulsory for chil¬
dren of six to 14 or even 16. The basic
objectives . of education have also
changed and urgent educational prob¬
lems have arisen which now confront
industrially-developed and developing
countries alike.
As long ago as 1912 the distinguish¬
ed British mathematician and philo¬
sopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote:
"Before long science will be making
spectacular new progress and for
those who have not received an ade¬
quate education there will be no re¬
dress."
It is just as important to solve the
problem of intellectual undernourish¬
ment as that of bodily undernourish¬
ment; indeed, it is only by solving the
first problem that solutions will be
found for the second.
NICOLE PICARD is a specialist in research
on mathematics teaching at the National
Pedagogical Institute in Pans. She has
written many studies on the introduction to
mathematics In primary education.
When the idea of compulsory school¬
ing began to develop and spread about
1880, it was put into practice with great
haste; everyone was to be taught to
read, to write and spell correctly and
to count, and the programmes were
drawn up on that basis. In primary
education mathematics was confined
to the use of numbers. The pupil
learned to do sums and solve arithmet¬
ical problems, but he was hardly ever
called upon to use his judgment. Few
children reached the stage where
reflective thought is required, and
those who did mostly came from the
socially privileged classes.
Gradually, advances were made in
technology. The horse-drawn vehicle
was replaced by the railway, the car
and the aeroplane. Distances dimin¬
ished and contacts between different
countries became easier. Nowadays
networks for rapid communications
cover the surface of the globe and
even space itself has become a sphere
of activity for man. Similarly, inform¬
ation is transmitted by more and
more powerful means. The volume
of knowledge within reach of each of
us increases continuously; but in order
to assimilate it, we need to develop
faculties of reflective reasoning and
critical appraisal.
Today technological development
and increasing automation are gra¬
dually eliminating the employment of
unskilled labour. By 1970 nearly half
the working population of the indus¬
trialized countries will be composed of
middle-ranking technicians and super
visory staffs. At the same time the
need for more higher-level tech¬
nicians and administrators is increas¬
ing.
Reading, writing and arithmetic are a
far from adequate stock-in-trade for
making one's way in our twentieth-
century world. A person who has not
received more than that has been
intellectually starved.
The new patterns of economic
growth and employment revealed the
need to prolong compulsory schooling.
The advantages of an educated com¬
munity, in terms of national economic
progress, became apparent, and high¬
er education was therefore made
accessible to an ever-larger number
of students, especially those studying
science and technology.
At the same time the content of
teaching and teaching methods and
aids have been changed. In mathe¬
matics in particular, the reform be¬
gan at the top, in higher education.
This was brought about by the vast
accumulation of new scientific know¬
ledge which revised many basic scien¬
tific concepts. Mathematical res'earch
became the main instrument for this
revision.
In fact there should not be one kind
of mathematics for school teaching and
another for practical use. The basic
core of mathematical reasoning and
structures, together with their symbols,
should be known to all. Detailed stud- n n
ies should follow in mathematical re- ¿v
search and in other scientific fields
physics and chemistry obviously, as
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

WHY 1101 = 13 (Continued)
Replacing symbols, jargon and routine
24
well as medicine and psychology.
Mathematics is also being increasingly
used for research in sociology and
history.
In the introductory teaching of
mathematics, it is not just a matter of
using the formulae of numerical calcu¬
lation or the spatial ideas of Euclid¬
ean geometry. What is applied now
in any field of learning, when we are
attempting to organize new facts, is
the mathematical language of structure,
relations, functions and symbols.
This is sometimes called, "modern"
mathematics. The new branch of math¬
ematics, concerned with theories of
sets and relations, which 20 years ago
was reserved for a small number of re¬
search specialists, has become, in the
last ten years or so, a subject for
higher mathematical education. This
evolution in mathematical studies has
forced a reform in the mathematics
curriculum at various levels.
However the introduction of the new
mathematics created serious problems.
Teachers noted that because what they
were explaining was so completely
new, their students were not able to
take it in and benefit from it unless
their minds were first "de-condition
ed." They needed to acquire a new
way of thinking; the old mathematical
frame was much too compartmentaliz¬
ed. It was obvious that training along
the new lines must begin at the secon¬
dary level (12 to 16 years of age).
Several groups were therefore set
up to study the reform of mathematics
teaching at this level. An interesting
fact was that the groups included
educational psychologists, logicians
and specialists on problems of learn¬
ing.
One of the many working groups of
this kind is the International Commis¬
sion for the Study and Improvement
of Mathematics Teaching, which began
its work in 1950. This group has used
the method of international seminars:
it has co-ordinated the work done in
various places and has drawn up
guidelines for further research.
It was observed, in the first place,
that the reform of mathematics teach¬
ing could not be achieved unless It
took root in the nursery school and
extended to the university; secondly,
that there was a very close connexion
between initiation into mathematics and ,
the development of the faculty of rea¬
soning and intelligence; and lastly, that
the revised subject matter demanded
new teaching methods.
In countries where school attendance
is compulsory up to at least 14, prim¬
ary education is designed to lay solid
foundations on which to build second¬
ary education. Primary mathematical
education should aim to provide a
variety of experience. Concrete exam¬
ples should serve as the basis from
which it will be possible effectively to
abstract (in the etymological sense, to
"draw from") and generalize math¬
ematical concepts. This should be pos¬
sible from the ages of 12 to 16.
In this way children will have had five
years of experience in formulating
ideas about mathematical structures.
This learning will build the foundations
of their mathematical knowledge.
Many programmes have been drawn
up for this purpose. They differ in
their approaches and also in the
volume of their content. It seems clear
now as a result of the work of child
psychologists that from the age of
seven, and not only from the age of 12
as was formerly thought, children are
in fact capable of something more than
merely memorizing calculation drills
and acquiring routine skills.

Right, the meaning
of symbols. Exercises lead
children from everyday
things with which
they are familiar to
the abstract idea
of numbers.
They work first with elements
that compose sets, then
learn to recognize when
sets have the same kind
and number of elements.
Association of equivalent
sets then leads to the use
of numerals to identify them.
Left, fingers still come
in handy for this boy
to show the teacher
that he has the right answer
to the problem.
In fact experience shows that from
the age of seven children are capable
of understanding mathematical shapes
and sizes (provided they are suffi¬
ciently simple), and while playing with
these concrete objects are able to
deduce from the experience many
mathematical relations. They can also
solve practical problems, provided, of
course, that the methods used are di¬
rectly related to their sense of manipu¬
lation and tactile skill. They should be
given a variety of materials to enable
them to manipulate various forms of
mathematical structures.
Of the methods used for the reform
of mathematics education, those for
arithmetic employ the most traditional
approach. They consist in utilizing
materials for manipulation that have
the same structure as the ordinary
numerical system. Instead of learning
addition and multiplication tables by
heart, children study addition and multi¬
plication by an ordered arrangement
of concrete elements.
Notable examples are the Cuisenaire
rods and the blocks used by Catherine
Stern. These were devised on the
basis of the pioneering research of
Maria Montessori. Arithmetical opera-
Photos © Institut Pédagogique National - Jean Suquet, Paris
tions are represented by material
arrangements to be performed by the
children. Playing is, in itself, perform¬
ing an operation: the action of putting
bars together in line with the ends
touching one another corresponds to
the operation of "addition." Two bars
a and b are equivalent to one bar c
which has the same length as that
obtained by putting the bars a and b
together end to end:
O^
If we symbolize the placing end to
end by +, we have a + b = c; b +
a = c; in the same way that 2 + 3 =
5; 3 + 2 = 5.
A similar procedure can be used for
discovering the properties of the mul¬
tiplication of numbers. As a corollary,
the fact that addition and subtraction
are inverse operations can also be
seen, as well as the relation between
multiplication and division. These
methods are in use in Belgium, Canada,
the United Kingdom and Switzerland,
and to some extent in France.
Let us take a look at numeration by
position. According to one of the
known principles of the psychology of
intelligence, a concept is assimilated
better when all the possible compon¬
ents are made to vary. In the case
of numeration by position, this means
in particular that we must vary the
bases. When we write a number, we
make use of a sign-position. Thus,
in order to write 1966, we use
the numbers 1, 9 and 6-, however, in the
"word" 1966 the first and the second
"6" do not have the same significance.
Our sign - positions constitute an
"alphabet," the meaning of each sign
depending upon its place in the word.
If our alphabet has ten signs we are
using a system of numbers "with the
base ten," if it has three signs, a
system of numbers with the base three
and so on. Electronic computers use
the base two, the Babylonians used
the base twelve, certain primitive peop¬
les use the base five. In teaching
this implies that instead of speaking
only of units, tens, hundreds, thou¬
sands, etc., we shall speak of suc¬
cessive groups, based on a certain
method (a numeration with the base
2, 3, or 5 for example, or of 10, as
CONTINUED ON PAGE 27
25

CONCRETE
STEPS
TO
ABSTRACT
CONCEPTS
As more purposeful mathematics
teaching is introduced, children learn
to count on other bases than that of
the decimal system. Here a class
learns how to calculate with a numbers
system based on four. (1) The teach¬
er gives each child a cube and
divides the class into groups of four.
(2) She calls each group in turn, takes
their four cubes and gives in exchange
to the group leader a rod which is
four times bigger than a cube. (3) Call¬
ing out four group leaders at a time,
she exchanges their rods for a single
block that is four times bigger than
a rod (or sixteen times bigger than
a cube). All the children participate
in these successive collections and
exchanges of objects whose relative
sizes correspond to the number base
being used. Experience shows that
by their second year in primary school,
children are able to add, subtract,
multiply and divide on any number
base. They have not been taught
these operations by rote but have
discovered them experimentally.
Photos Unesco - Dominique Roger
26

Children make their own discoveries
WHY 1101 = 13 (Continued)
in the case of the decimal system).
From the time they begin to study
numeration, children learn to count in
terms of different bases: for this they
use what are called Multibase Arith¬
metic Blocks.
If we say that we have 13 2 1
objects, that will mean that,
H with the base four we have 1. 43 +
3.42 + 2.41 + 1.4° objects;
with the base ten we have 1.103 +
3.102 + 2.101 + 1.10° objects,
and with the base n (n > 4 as we
have at least, the signs 0, 1, 2, 3),
1.n3 + 3.n2 + 2-n1 + 1.n° objects.
In this equipment of blocks with
base n, the power zero is represented
by small cubes, the power one by a bar
of n cubes, the power two by a plate of
n bars of n cubes, the power three by
a cube of n plates, the power four
by a bar of n cubes of n plates, etc . . .
so that our number 13 2 1 will be
represented by the objects as follows:
In this way children are led to make
successive groupings and exchanges,
following a model which varies accord¬
ing to the base used, the exchanges
being imposed by the fact that, for
example with four as the base, four
plates must always be put together
to make a cube.
From their second year of primary
school, children are capable of per¬
forming the four arithmetical operations
on any base. An interesting point is
that the operational techniques are not
learned, but discovered experimentally.
As regards methods based on the
notion of sets, these necessitate much
more extensive changes in the pro¬
grammes than the previous method.
They are based in particular on: (1)
work involving the introduction of math¬
ematical logic; (2) work in the sphere
of psychology, concerning the evolu¬
tion of the child's mental structure and
his grasp of mathematical concepts.
The methods have in fact a much
wider and more ambitious aim than
giving an understanding of mathema¬
tics. Experiments made in the past
few years indicate that where these
methods have been used there are no
longer any pupils good at literary sub¬
jects who are bad at mathematics.
These same methods, which are based
on notions of sets, operations with
sets, and the logic of sets, do indeed
help to develop a child's intelligence,
by helping to organize his reasoning
abilities. Experiments In the use of
such methods were started this year
with mentally retarded children but the
results have not yet been assessed.
In these methods, an integral number
is considered as a property of a set.
The notions of set and property are
thus fundamental ones, and the notion
of number is built upon them.
Two sets, A and B, have the same
cardinal number (that is, the same num¬
ber of elements) when their elements
can be put into one-to-one correspond¬
ence with each other.
The two sets A and B have a com¬
mon property, namely that they each
have four elements.
As we have said, before even talk¬
ing of number the children "manipu¬
late" the notions of set and property.
A set can be defined either in terms
of its extension by enumerating all
its elements once and once only; or
in terms of what it comprises by
defining the elements of the set by a
common property characteristic of
them (all the children in the class
wearing a blue pullover for example).
Two sets are equal if and only if they
are composed of the same elements:
thus, if A is the set of even numbers
above 1 and below 10 and if B = (2,
4, 6, 8), then A = B.
Notions of the property of an object
gradually lead to the notion .of the
property of a set. Operations with
sets provide the introduction to opera¬
tions with numbers. In addition, the
intuitive study of sets does not merely
have the utilitarian purpose of introduc¬
ing the child to numbers, but gives
him, at a very early age, an initiation
into the logic essential to organized
thought.
Studies of the mental development
of the child have shown that children
of the same age differ vastly according
to their social origin. Many children
have not been able to get from their
family background the cultural comple¬
ment necessary to the full flowering of
their intelligence. The new teaching
methods involve notions of sets, opera
tions with sets and also the fundamen¬
tal notions of relatians that are
indissolubly associated with them.
They thus give children, from their
nursery school days, habits of classific¬
ation, order and comparison. This
offers each child the possibility of
developing his own faculties to the
maximum.
In fact these methods are meant
to be introduced at the nursery school
stage in the form of games and mani¬
pulations. This has been done mainly
in England, France, Belgium, Northern
Europe and the U.S.A.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
To keep their records of trade and gov¬
ernment administration the Egyptians need¬
ed large numbers 5,000 or more years ago.
So they made up a set of numerals by
which they could express numbers of dif¬
ferent values from units up to hundreds of
thousands. Above, the number 27,529 as
written by the early Egyptians.
Among the oldest systems of numerals are
those used by the Chinese, and later
adopted by the Japanese. These have
naturally changed somewhat in the course
of the centuries. One type (shown above)
is based on the use of sticks laid upon a
table and used for calculating. It was also
used in written documents.
VVVV=2I966I
The Sumerians of the Mesopotamian valley,
over 3,000 years ago, had one system of
calculating for everyday use and another
which was taught in special schools and
used exclusively in texts on mathematics
and astronomy. Cuneiform, or wedge-shap¬
ed, numerals were adopted for both sys¬
tems. In the "scientific" system, the value __
of each numeral, starting from the left, is ¿J
sixty times that of its neighbour on the right.
Thus the cuneiform numerals above signify
216,000 + 3,600 + 60 + 1 = 219,661.

(7x23)+(1x22) + (Ox2') + (1x2°) = 13
Notation on the decimal scale, which originated in the
number of fingers on the hands, is by far the most widely
used system. Certain peoples have made use of other
notations, including one based on 20 (the Mayas) and
the binary (using the base 2). Reference is made to the
base 2 in a Chinese book believed to have been written
about 3000 B.C. Paradoxically it is the system used
by ultra-modern electronic computers. The binary scale
employs only two symbols: 0 and 1 and the digits re¬
present powers of 2. Its importance is in relation to the
use of perforated cards in computers. Since it has only
two digits any number can be represented by a series
of switches which are either "on" for. one or "off" for
nought. The use of perforated cards dates back well
over a century and a half when the French engineer,
Joseph Jacquard, perfected an attachment for the power
loom in which a chain of punched cards passed before
the needles of the loom (left). Only the needles facing
the holes are able to carry out the process of weaving.
© IBM
28
WHY 1101 = 13 (Continued)
In mathematics, the notion of "rela¬
tions" cannot be dissociated from that
of sets. A relation can be represented
by a "diagram". Thus, if we repre¬
sent by>	 the relation "having the
same shape as" between cut-outs
stuck onto a sheet of paper, we get the
following "diagram":
Experience shows that from the age
of six, children are capable of repre
senting non-oriented relations (a dash
instead of an arrow). Reflexivity (each
element is of the same form as itself)
as a concept is still too subtle for them,
but at the age of eight it can be un¬
derstood without difficulty.
The importance of "representations"
(graphs, plans, diagrams, tables) is that
they enable the child to express in
pictures what he would be completely
incapable of expressing in words. In
schools where teaching methods based
on representations of this kind have
been tried out, it has been found that
not only are the children capable from
the age of six of making their own dia¬
grams; they also draw conclusions
from them and thus make a first attempt
at reasoning. This is interesting not
only in pedagogy but also from the
viewpoint of studying a child's way of
thinking and powers of reasoning.
The study of relations from earliest
schooldays has been tried out in Bel¬
gium and France with very interesting
results.
A situation can easily be mathematic-
ized if it can be expressed in a form
directly accessible to logical reason¬
ing. This procedure has been tried
out in the countries mentioned above
and also in the U.S.S.R., where some
interesting research has been done.
Experience has shown that algebra
can be introduced into the curriculum
from the age of eight provided that
concrete materials which can be manip¬
ulated are used. In fact it makes
possible a great saving of mental
recapitulation. For the solution of
problems traditionally set in the prim¬
ary school, children find It much easier

DÜRER'S MAGIC
SQUARE
In Albrecht Dürer's famous engraving "Melancholia" (detail
left), there appears a device about which more has been
written than any other form of mathematical amusement:
the "magic square". This consists of an array of numbers
in a square which, when added up by rows, diagonals or
columns, yield the same total. In Dürer's square the numbers
are: 16, 3, 2, 13, 5, 10, 11, 8, 9, 6, 7, 12, 4, 15, 14, 1, and
their sum is 34 in all directions. As a final refinement, the
celebrated German artist has included the date of his work,
1514, in the bottom row.
TOWER
OF HANOI
ME
The Tower of Hanoi was invented by the French
mathematician Edouard Lucas and sold as a toy
in 1883. The problem is to transfer the tower
of eight disks to either of the two vacant pegs in
the fewest possible moves, moving one disk at a
time and never placing a disk on top of a smaller
one. The minimum number of moves required is
expressed by the formula 2B_1 (n being the
number of disks). Thus three, disks can be
transferred in seven moves, four in 15, five in
31 and so on. To transfer the eight disks and
rebuild the tower 255 moves are required.
Proving that n disks in the Tower of Hanoi can be
moved to another peg in 2"_1 steps is an excel¬
lent exercise in mathematical induction.
Glraudon, Paris
to use simple forms of algebra than
the complicated arithmetic they are
normally taught.
It would obviously take too long to
review all the research that is being
done. Some relates to the introduc¬
tion of geometry (this is being studied
especially in Belgium, Canada, Italy
and the U.S.A.); another branch deals
mainly with simple experiments in
mechanics and physics. Research, in
fact, is going on in a great many
countries including Denmark, Norway,
Poland, Hungary, to name only four.
In the developing countries the
problem of establishing a suitable sys¬
tem of education takes a different form,
and is perhaps even more acute than
in the industrialized countries.
The most urgent question facing
educational authorities in developing
countries is the definition of the role
of education. Many of these countries
now need to train a large number of
teachers in the next few years. Un¬
doubtedly this will involve great diffi¬
culties, but paradoxically, these coun¬
tries have an advantage over the in¬
dustrialized countries. They have to
train, not to re-train their teachers.
They do not have to face the problem
of "deconditioning" hundreds of thou¬
sands of teachers who have become
used to rigid and stereotyped methods.
The people responsible for education
in these countries are generally very
enthusiastic. They need to be given
as much information as possible about
the educational reforms we have been
describing. This will ensure that from
the outset the teaching of mathematics,
which is also a factor in the develop¬
ment of intelligence, will become, not
a conditioning to out-of-date techni¬
ques, but an opening of the mind and
a development of aptitudes.
Moreover, as this new teaching
proceeds on the experience of experi¬
ments with children, it can very well
be adapted to different cultural back¬
grounds and related to the social
context in which children and adults
grow up.
Similarly, the study of science can
also be made relevant to the actual
living conditions of a particular com¬
munity. In fact one can form math¬
ematical structures and relations by
deriving them from the study of other
ordinary elements of concrete objects.
Source material for this can be select-
from a number of simple, everyday
experiences.
When sociologists and ethnologists
make their contribution to the already
promising research of the mathema¬
ticians, logicians and educational psy¬
chologists, even more fruitful results
can be expected.
29
