Sparking tomorrow's
tourist explosion
O
TURKEY
AiREAS of Asia Minor once
ranked among the most famous and pros¬
perous places of the ancient world, only
to become almost forgotten lands as the
tides of history flowed away from them.
These places the western and southern
regions of present-day Turkey are now
being rediscovered by a growing number
of tourists.
The pleasant climate and the exceptional
natural beauties of these regions are not
the only reasons for their increasing popu¬
larity. Their outstanding tourist attraction
is a wealth of ancient monuments Hittite,
Greek, Roman, Byzantine, Seljuk and Otto¬
man.
Along the routes followed by the modern
tourist lie remains of cities with illustrious
names: Heracles of Latmos, Miletus, Did-
yma, Nysa, Hierapolis and Ephesus, whose
great temple of Artemis was hailed by the
ancients as one of the Seven Wonders of
the World. In the valley of the Meander,
historic Aphrodisias, a capital of the arts,
is being restored (see the Unesco Courier,
January 1965). Its Roman stadium with
30,000 places is one of the best preserved
in the world. These regions possess an
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
MOTELS FROM
ANCIENT CARAVANSERAIS
Turkey plans to repair many of the ancient
caravanserais along its highways and to
convert them into modern motels. Some
of these caravanserais, built between the
12th and the 15th centuries, have great
historical worth and architectural beauty.
But through neglect, the erosion of time
and weather and the use of their walls
as stone quarries by local people, many
of these buildings have passed from dila¬
pidation to almost total ruin. With their
conversion into motels they will once again
fulfil their centuries-old purpose of provid¬
ing shelter for travellers and their convey¬
ances (with the automobile replacing the
traditional camel and mule). The plan to
adapt the caravanserais to modern needs,
while preserving their characteristic appear¬
ance, will help to enlarge the network of
hotels in areas to which the Turkish Go¬
vernment has given priority for tourist
development. Above, engraving of the
central court of a caravanserai. Right,
remains of an archway in the caravanserai
of Incesu, in Cappadocia.

Photo Unesco-Dominique Lajoux
NIAGARAS OF STONE
TURKEY (Continued)
incomparable network of antique theatres
which could be restored and revived as
centres for cultural spectacles.
On the Cappadocian plateau of Central
Turkey is the region of Urgüp, long re¬
nowned for its rock-hewn churches. At
Urgüp, the erosion of wind and water has
carved out rocky valleys and left them
filled with cones and pyramids of stone
in which at different times men have made
their homes and excavated tombs, shrines
and churches (see the Unesco Courier,
September 1958).
With Unesco's co-operation, Turkey has
drawn up a special programme which in¬
tegrates the protection of monuments with
the development of tourism. Special prio¬
rity is given to the coastal regions of Izmir
and Antalya and to the area of Urgüp. The
plan proposes large-scale investment in
road improvement and the expansion of the
hotel network, as well as measures for the
preservation and protection of the historic
monuments which are a major asset of
Turkey's expanding tourist industry.
1
X M, I
rnM%L:
i
ai i
!
Photo Turkish Ministry of Information and Tourism

Photo Michel Kursanskis
At Pamukkalé, near Izmir, in western Turkey, the architectural
splendours of the ruined Roman city of Hierapolis are rivalled
by the beauty which nature has created close at hand.
"Niagaras" of white stone (opposite page), formed by the
calcareous waters of thermal springs, flow down the hillside,
on which they have formed huge natural basins. The springs,
which in ancient times were visited by people from all parts
of Asia Minor, have almost dried up. But plans are being
made to regenerate them and thus restore to life a grandiose
spectacle of nature.
Termessos, an ancient Greco-Roman city set in the mountains
that dominate the plain of Antalya and the Mediterranean coast,
is sometimes called "The Machu Picchu of Turkey". Much
of the site has still to be cleared and restored, including
the magnificent Roman theatre (above), one of many surviving
stadiums in this part of Turkey one of the most famous
crossroads of the ancient world. The province of Antalya,
which looks across to Cyprus, has over 90 recognized
archaeological sites, but these are believed to be only a
fraction of the sites that are likely to be discovered in this area.
15
