12
TO ESTABLISH AN EQUILIBRIUM
ALL over the world till lately, and In most
of the world still today, mankind, in its
sexual life, has been following the course of
Nature: that is to say, it has been breeding up
to the maximum. To let Nature take her extra¬
vagant course in the reproduction of the human
race may have made sense in an age In which
we were also letting her take her course in deci¬
mating mankind by the casualties of war, pesti¬
lence, and famine. Being human, we have at
last revolted against that senseless waste. We
have started to impose on Nature's heartless play
a humane new order of our own. But, when
once man has begun to interfere with Nature,
he cannot afford to stop half way. We cannot,
with impunity, cut down the death-rate and at
the same time allow the birth-rate to go on tak¬
ing Nature's course. We must consciously try
to establish an equilibrium or, sooner or later,
famine will stalk abroad again. And here we
come back to the heart of our problem. The
death-rate can be reduced by public action taken
by the few ; the birth-rate can be reduced or
stabilized only by private action taken by the
many...
by Arnold Toynbee
... What is the true end of Man? Is it to popu¬
late the Earth with the maximum number of human

beings that can be kept alive simultaneously by
the world's maximum food supply? Or is it to
enable human beings to lead the best kind of
life that the spiritual limitations of human nature
allow? The first of these two possible objectives
seem irrational. What matters, surely, is not that
the surface of this planet should hold, say, four
thousand million instead of three thousand mil¬
lion living human beings; what matters is that
living beings, whatever their number, shall
develop the highest capacities of their nature;
and, if this is the true end of Man, what we
should aim at is the optimum size of population
for this purpose in the economic and social
circumstances of each successive generation.
From "Population and Food Supplies," the first McDougall
Memorial Lecture, delivered by Professor Toynbee in Rome
at the 10th FAO Conference on November 2, 1959. The
lectures were established by FAO to commemorate Frank
Lidgett McDougall, one of its founders and leading figures,
who died in 1958.
