MOON CRAWLER. Capable, sturdy self-contained vehicles will be re¬
quired for lunar exploration and development. This drawing shows
one concept of such a vehicle. Equipped with threepoint caterpillar
treads for stability and a rocket system, this hybrid vehicle
would be able to crawl or make short flights over moon terrain.
It would carry geophysicists, geochemists, geologists and
other scientists on long range investigations over the moon's surface.

Drawing Northrop, California
** T-.X5
Goodyear, Ohio
MAMMOTH TYRES (above)
are a mock-up of those
being developed for a
U.S. moon vehicle. Though
16 ft. in diameter,
each will weigh only 125 lbs.
LUNAR LANDSCAPE.
The surface of the moon
photographed last February
by the Soviet moon probe,
Lunar 9, first spacecraft to
make a soft lunar touchdown.

LUNAR
INTERNATIONAL
LABORATORY
by Bruno Friedman
S OMETIME around 1970 a
human being will, for the
first time in the history of the universe,
set foot upon the moon. The visible
vehicle that will carry him there will
be a rocket. Yet in a very real sense
the true thrust will be generated not
by burning fuel, but by the surge of
science over the centuries.
The truth of this statement is reveal¬
ed when it is realized that the epochal
feat will be synthesized out of major
contributions from virtually every
branch of modern science (and of
engineering, as well): chemistry, phy¬
sics, electronics, mathematics, medi¬
cine, bacteriology, psychology, astro¬
nomy, geophysics, metallurgy, and
others.
Now let us note for it is germane
to what follows that science is, above
all, international. There is no branch
of science that has been developed by
a single nation. Rather, every branch
of science is the creation of know¬
ledge-seekers, great and obscure, of
all nations, each making his contribu¬
tion over the course of time to erect
the total moon-achieving structure.
With science so much the shaper of
the achievement, it is most fitting that
science will be a great beneficiary of
man's installation on the moon. As
Dr. Frank Malina states it: "Just about
every branch of science will find the
moon, with its unique environmental
conditions no atmosphere, a gravity
only 1/6th that of earth., very weak or
non-existent magnetic field a great
laboratory for a host of experiments
and observations essentially impos¬
sible to perform on earth. Great pro¬
gress must inevitably be stimulated."
Dr. Malina speaks as Chairman of
the Lunar International Laboratory
(LIL) Committee of the International
Academy of Astronautics (IAA). And
the LIL Committee, composed of
distinguished space scientists from
several nations, is the embodiment of
the awareness that the moon's great
potential for science can best be
realized if the investigations are
"onducted as an international venture
and in an international laboratory.
The LIL Committee came into being
in August 1960, when the concept
of a lunar international laboratory
was put forward by Dr. Malina at
Stockholm during the 11th Congress
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

LUNAR LABORATORY (Cont'd)
Will the moon disclose
a lost record of the universe?
of the International Astronautical Fed¬
eration (IAF) and was welcomed as a
meaningful project by the then newly-
formed Academy (1).
The committee has two purposes:
to awaken the interest of the world's
scientific community at large in the
lunar laboratory, and to explore by
means of discussions and symposia
the various lines of research that can
be profitably conducted on the moon.
These are generally held at the annual
IAF congresses, whose seats are the
capitals of the world.
'HE committee's efforts
_ have met with considerable
success. Its meetings and a discussion
panel held at Warsaw in 1964 have pro¬
duced a broad overall view of lunar
science. Now the sciences are being
explored in depth at symposia devoted
to particular subjects. At the first
symposium at Athens in September
1965, the papers presented dealt speci¬
fically with lunar geosciences and
astronomy and astrophysics. The sub¬
jects for the Madrid symposium, in
October 1966, are the life sciences and
lunar medicine.
That the majority of the papers are
presented by experts who are not
committee members reveals the wide¬
spread response of the international
scientific community to the idea of
a lunar laboratory.
From these studies will be evolved
a sound scientific programme for a
laboratory, when the time is ripe for
it. When? The committee foresees
that this will be sometime in the period
1975-85.
The scientific investigations on the
moon may greatly advance our under-
32
(J) Its present roster Includes such lumi¬
naries of the space sciences as: M. Florkin
of Belgium; N. Boneff of Bulgaria; A. Dollfus
and L. Malavard of France; H. Oberth of the
German Federal Republic; F. Zwicky of
Switzerland; L.I. Sedov of the U.S.S.R.; AC.
Clarke, Z. Kopal and Sir Bernard Love//
(Vice-Chairman) of the U.K.; and W.H.
Pickering, S.F. Singer, L. Spitzer Ir., H.
Strughold and H.C. Urey of the U.S.A. Noralr
Sissakian of the U.S.S.R., was also a member
until his death last March.
standing of man, his environment and
the universe in which he lives.
The priority subject will be, of
course, the moon itself. The founda¬
tion work will be done at the national
level by the first moon explorers,
American and Soviet, perhaps acting
in co-operation as the nations do in
Antarctica.
The large-scale work of mapping the
moon's geographical, geological and
geophysical features will be done by
circumlunar satellites, some put into
orbit even before the first human
landings, others after. These highly
sophisticated orbiters, using infra-red
sensors, radar, radio microwaves,
radiation counters and other devices,
will not only map the surface, but
probe under the surface.
The lunar scientists themselves will
make direct observations and experi¬
ments to determine the nature of the
lunar rocks, the moon's seismic and
volcanic activity, its internal tempera¬
ture and structure.
What is learned about the moon
may help answer many questions
about our earth. The geological
record of the earth's history has been
greatly damaged and obscured by the
volcanic, seismic, erosive and sedi¬
mentary processes to which the crust
has been subjected over the 4.5
thousand million years of the earth's
existence.
This is much less true of the moon,
with no atmosphere, no oceans and a
far cooler interior. Reading the geolo¬
gical record of the moon, which is
as old as the earth, may reveal much,
by analogy, particularly about the
earth's formative period, its first one
thousand million years.
Moreover, this reading of the moon's
early history, taken together with anal¬
yses of the remains of meteorites on
the lunar surface, will give the scien¬
tists valuable clues as to how the
solar system itself was formed.
Meteorites are artifacts of the solar
system's genesis, relics left over from
the age when dispersed matter agglom¬
erated to form the planets and their
moons. These invaluable information
carriers from the past reach the earth
in frustratingly limited numbers, for
very few survive the fiery passage
through the atmosphere. But the
moon's surface will be rich with their
remains.
CONT'D ON PAGE 34
Heroes & hobbies
of the junior
astronaut
The conquest of space fascinates
young people the world over. Right, Polish
youngsters perch beneath pictures of U.S.
and Soviet astronauts their real-life
heroes. Far right, reverie beneath
a large-scale model of a lunar landscape.
Right, young Soviet space enthusiast
displays a model interplanetary
station he has designed and made; it will
join spacecraft and installations on the
model of a future inhabited planet (below)
made by other members of a
junior astronauts' club in the U.S.S.R.

LUNAR LABORATORY (Cont'd)
A superb new window
on the far reaches of space
34
Valuable indications as to how life
evolved on earth may also be found
in the lunar surface. That any life
forms, or even remains of life forms,
will be discovered is doubtful, given
the moon's harsh conditions. Yet the
lunar scientists may find carbon com¬
pounds, produced by natural chemical
reactions, which represent intermediate
stages in the formation of the first
primitive carbon-based living mole¬
cules from which all life on earth devel¬
oped. This would be a resounding
discovery.
There is even a remote possibility,
points out Prof. H. Florkin of the Uni¬
versity of Liege, that primitive life
forms or their remains may be found
in lunar micro-environments, where the
conditions are far less severe than
in the gross environment. Such micro-
environments may be, for example,
deep pits in craters, the interiors of
porous rocks or some metres down
in the lunar surface layer.
To the new insights that lunar
science may provide about the solar
system, earth and life, add those that
may be gained about the origins and
formation of the great universe itself,
because the moon will be such a
superb observatory for both optical
and radio astronomy.
On earth, the atmosphere greatly
limits the passage of light waves and
radio waves. Moreover, man himself
is a considerable impediment, pro¬
ducing enormous quantities of artifi¬
cial light and interfering radio waves
from all forms of electronic equipment.
Astronomy on the moon will gain
greatly from the absence of these
disadvantages, as well as from specific
lunar advantages, such as a far slower
rotation period, enabling astronomical
instruments to follow their targets over
a much longer period of time.
Lunar telescopes, optical and radio,
will be able to probe much farther out
into the reaches of space, will be able
to "see" heavenly objects far dimmer
than can be now seen from earth,
will be able to resolve much finer
details of these objects, will be able
to "see" much better into the interior
of our Milky Way, a typical spiral
galaxy.
From the new information gained
as, for example, by the accurate
counting of distant galaxies it may be
possible for cosmologists to decide
between two current conflicting hypo¬
theses about the origins of our universe
or to reject both and propose a
better one.
The moon will also be an outstanding
meteorological observatory, helping to
raise weather prediction to new levels
of accuracy, it was noted by Prof. K.Y.
Kondratiev and co-workers of the Uni¬
versity of Leningrad in a paper pre¬
sented at the Athens LIL symposium.
Telescopic observations from the
moon will' follow the large-scale move¬
ments of clouds and air masses in the
earth's atmosphere. Their big view
will complement the smaller-range,
more detailed observations made by
a system of meteorological satellites
orbiting the earth.
LL the above is a very
incomplete catalogue of
science on the moon. In addition,
observations, presently impossible from
earth, will be made on cosmic rays
and on the nuclear particles that fill
interplanetary space; experiments in
considerable variety will be made in
chemistry and physics in the lunar
vacuum and in plant and animal biology
in rigorous lunar conditions. Important
advances in all these fields cannot fail
to result.
Moreover, much will be learned
about man himself: about his physio¬
logy, his psychology and his sociolog¬
ical relationships in the high-stress
lunar environment. The LIL scientists
themselves will be the guinea pigs.
For, as Prof. C. Stark Draper of
the Massachusetts Institute of Tech¬
nology has emphasized, humans will
be in short supply in the lunar labor¬
atory for a long time because of the
high costs of placing men and equip¬
ment there. Much of the data gathering
will be done by compact automatic
sensors. These data, after conden¬
sation in the laboratory's lightweight
computers, will be telemetered to co¬
operating research centres and uni¬
versities on earth for analysis.
Which points up a question: How
will a lunar laboratory be created,
organized and managed as a co-oper¬
ative international activity?
The LIL Committee cannot deal with
this question, for this is a matter that
governments must resolve. Quite
possibly, however, a suggested scien¬
tific programme evolved out of the
committee's work will be helpful when
the intergovernmental deliberations
regarding a laboratory begin.
The committee feels that possibly
the lunar international laboratory could
be established under the auspices of
an existing international organization,
such as the U.N. or Unesco. And
an indication of Unesco's awakening
interest in the matter is the fact that
it is contributing funds to enable
scientists to attend the 1966 Madrid
LIL symposium.
Certainly these bodies, the U.N. and
Unesco, have long been interested
in the establishment of international
scientific centres.
A few such centres have indeed
been created: CERN (European Centre
for Nuclear Research) at Geneva and
the International Computation Centre
at Rome, both founded through
Unesco initiative, though they are
not Unesco bodies; also, there are
the United Institute of Nuclear Re¬
search at Dubna, U.S.S.R. (the Eastern
European equivalent of CERN), the
European Launcher Development Or¬
ganization (ELDO) and the European
Space Research Organization (ESRO).
So the nations can get together.
Moreover, the problems of establishing
a lunar centre, a lunar international
laboratory, may be much reduced by
comparison with those which have
blocked the founding of terrestial sci¬
entific centres, by the moon's remote¬
ness thus reducing the conflicts of
national self-interest and by its power¬
ful appeal as a human adventure. So
the world's states may have a stronger
will to bring a laboratory of this kind
into being.
The foundations for a lunar interna¬
tional laboratory may well have been
laid on December 13, 1963, when the
General Assembly of the United Na¬
tions unanimously approved a Dec¬
laration of the Legal Principles Gov¬
erning the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space.
The first principle states:
"The exploration and use of outer
space shall be carried on for the bene¬
fit and in the interests of all mankind."
