by Henry R. Cassirer
I N Venezuela and Japan, In
Czechoslovakia and the
United States, special programmes are
broadcast by television stations for
children in kindergartens. In Britain
tiny tots are asked to "Watch With
Mother", while in New Mexico, in the
United States, where there are no
public kindergartens, the "TV Kinder¬
garten" takes their place in many a
home and community. Pre-school chil¬
dren tend to watch television whenever
there is a receiver in the home, and
educators are becoming increasingly
aware of the Importance of the tele¬
vision experience in the lives of young
children.
But why should special efforts be
made to reach children between the
ages of two and six with television
programmes?
Experience Indicates two types of
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6
4
HENRY R. CASSIRER Is in charge of the
educational use of mass media in Unesco's
Department of Mass Communication. He
is the author of "Television Teaching To¬
day" (Unesco, 1960; price: $3.00, 15/stg.).
©


TELEVISION (Continued)
Wonderland through the 'looking-glass'
6
answers to this question. On the one
hand, it is argued that In countries
which offer massive television pro¬
grammes by day and night, children
inevitably are attracted to the screen
and see many shows either not suited
to their age or of doubtful value. The
moving image on the TV screen exerts
a fascination quite independent of the
content of programmes. This fre¬
quently tempts parents to use TV as a
baby sitter; they urge their children to
"watch the tele" In order to have them
out of the way when they would like
to get on with the housework. Under
these circunmstances, it is particularly
valuable to present programmes care¬
fully prepared and adapted -to the
young ones In order to meet their
hunger for TV and to give them a sense
of values and discrimination with res¬
pect to the majority of unsuitable
shows.
Those who argue this way unques¬
tionably have the child's Interest in
mind; but this is essentially a negative
approach: let's have TV programmes
for the young ones, because we can't
keep them away from television
anyway.
more fundamental reason¬
ing stresses the Important
positive contribution which television
is able to make in order to "develop
the world within the child and fami¬
liarize it with the world around", as
the producers of one series of pro¬
grammes put it. This approach sees
in television one of the tools to attack
one of the basic sources of social
inequality in our time, the great dispa¬
rity among children of school age
between those who come from well-
to-do homes and a cultured back¬
ground and those who bring with them
the social and cultural deprivation of
their home.
Rather than difference in intelligence,
It is difference in background which
gives rise to the greatest problems In
elementary education, prevents chil¬
dren from rising above the social status
of their parents, and deprives them of
the equality of opportunity through
education one of the fundamental
objectives of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
The underprivileged suffer handicaps
of both body and mind In the race
through life. "Children need certain
basic knowledge to profit even from
kindergarten; children lacking this
knowledge certain words, ideas, hab¬
its fall behind in their work and may
take as long as five years to complete
the third grade", stated a leading edu¬
cator from one of the cities of the
American Midwest.
Her point of view is shared all
around the world. Children who come
to school with a very limited voca¬
bulary and with no idea of the way
nature and the man-made world look
beyond their restricted experience
in urban slums or on a poverty-
stricken farm, are unable to benefit
from education to the same degree
as children who have been more widely
exposed to social and cultural experi¬
ences. It is here that the audiovisual
media of communication, and especially
television, become significant forces
for the democratization of opportuni¬
ties.
It is generally recognized that inborn
intelligence is no more than a potential
Photo © Rapho - Lfmot
In the past decade special efforts have been made to reach
children between the ages of two and six with television programmes.
Well-planned programmes have proved to be effective helpers
for the kindergarten teacher, and regular use Is made of them in some schools.

to be cultivated. Without stimulation
and education, particularly during the
early formative years, such an intelli¬
gence is lost for the future. There is
need, therefore, for a systematic edu¬
cational programme for pre-school
children and a more intensive effort
by both parents and educational Insti¬
tutions; television can effectively assist
such a programme.
While the basic objectives of pre¬
school education are similar in most
countries, the degree to which such
education is carried by the home or the
kindergarten varies not only (or
perhaps mainly) between nations, but
primarily between social classes and
conditions of cultural environment. The
role of television must thus equally
vary In different conditions.
In Venezuela the Audio Visual Centre
of the Ministry of Education produces
a programme entitled En el Jardin de
Infancia. It ¡s transmitted, via the facil¬
ities of a commercial station, primarily
for use in kindergartens, but also for
the benefit of individual families, to
raise the standards and opportunities
not only in Caracas but equally (or
perhaps more particularly) in smaller
communities.
The programmes seek to assist kin¬
dergarten teachers and parents in
activities aimed at developing psycho¬
logical functions and manual skills of
children.
ROGRAMMES are deve¬
loped in close collabo¬
ration with the kindergarten teachers
and designed for follow-up action in
the group under the guidance of the
teacher and through the stimulation of
individual activities.
These programmes have been pro¬
duced continuously since 1960, and
many government and private schools
in Caracas, as well as in other parts
of the country have spontaneously
bought receivers so they could benefit
from these broadcasts. Their effective¬
ness is evident from an opinion survey
among kindergarten teachers who
reported:
"Attendance has become better.
Efficiency in manual skills has Improv¬
ed. Vocabulary Is richer and more
correct. Collaboration... and compre¬
hension are enhanced.
" Television has helped to develop
sight and hearing, to exercise memory
and to stimulate attention. It has in¬
fluenced the children's behaviour."
Kind_ergarten teachers recognize
that the programmes are of value not
only to the children, but to their own
professional training. As so often in
educational television, programmes
which appear to be designed principally
for child audiences are in fact of
supreme value ' In the in-service
training of teachers. Typical is a letter
from one of the kindergarten teachers
to the television teacher in Caracas:
"I have learned a good deal thanks
to you and your programme. I have
taught the children what I learned and
now I can teach with enthusiasm.
Professionally, I have learned a num¬
ber of practical and useful techniques
for teaching children of pre-school age
techniques which were entirely un¬
known to me."
ANY of the values noted
in these reports from Vene¬
zuelan teachers are echoed in other
parts of the world. Expansion of the
child's vocabulary, broadening of his
horizon, stimulation of manual skills
and of creative activities are key ob¬
jectives of kindergarten teaching which
can be directly served by television.
In Japan, the public broadcasting
corporation, NHK, presents a total of
10 hours 15 minutes per week of pro¬
grammes specially aimed at children
under six years. Commercial stations
also have regular programmes for the
very young ones. NTV carries some
11 hours a week of broadcasts primar¬
ily designed to entertain children
through cartoons, quizzes, puppets, au¬
dience participation and physical exer¬
cises. NET, the commercial educa¬
tional station, has three programmes of
70 minutes each (with three repeats)
per week which follow the official
kindergarten curriculum and show to
the children fairy tales and folklore
from Japan and other countries through
dramatic presentations, teach them
good manners and etiquette, and
enhance rhythmical education through
singing and dancing.
In Japan television is popular with
both children and teachers. Throughout
Japan 82.1% of kindergartens and
71.6% of nursery schools have receiv¬
ers, and a survey in 1964 indicated
that the rate of utilizing NHK program¬
mes was 73.5% in kindergartens and
88.2% in nursery schools.
At a recent regional conference of
the National Federation of the Society
for Study of Educational Broadcasts at
Kittakyushu, I pointedly queried some
one hundred kindergarten teachers
about the value of using television.
Does it not tend to create passivity
among children rather than active
expression? And does not the rela¬
tively poor quality with which scenes
of nature and distant places are repro
duced on the TV screen provoke dis¬
tortions in the mind of the child and
impair their value?
Both arguments were recognized as
valid but by no means inevitable prob¬
lems. Programme producers are
conscious of the Importance of stimu¬
lating classroom activities. Captain
Do-re-mi-fa, for Instance, a musical
show designed for the musical educa¬
tion of children, aims particularly to
inspire Interest in music and to let
children move and play In response to
music. Rhythmical education is con¬
sidered of key importance in Japan for
both pre-school and school children,
and believed essential for body control
and the development of a harmonious
personality. Here radio also proves of
great value, and many of the kinder¬
gartens which receive TV programmes,
also use their radio receiver for music¬
al programmes and story telling.
As to the lack of full reality In pro¬
grammes which show nature and social
scenes, it was pointed out that many
children in the sprawling cities of
industrial Japan had few other oppor¬
tunities to see more than their imme¬
diate surroundings. Teachers stressed
the importance of familiarizing children
with unfamiliar scenes, for they arouse
natural curiosity and create a sense
of familiarity which enlarges the voca¬
bulary and provides notions of the
world around which are of great value
to the child in preparation for more
systematic learning at a later age.
HE home situation is the
primary target of the BBC
in Great Britain. Watch With Mother
may well be the oldest television pro¬
gramme still regularly broadcast over
the same national network. Five of
its six series of 26 films were produced
between 1952 and 1955, and have been
repeated regularly ever since. Few
British children today have not grown
up with Andy Pandy, the puppet small
child dressed in "clown" clothes who
plays with toys, sings and dances like
a three-year old with his companion
teddy bear. Other familiar figures of
early childhood fantasies on television
are the Flowerpot men and the glove
puppets, Rag, Tag and Bobtail. While
most of these programmes appeal to
the young child's love for stories and
an imaginary world, a film series made
in Canada using real animals to act
stories of a colony of small animals
(hamster, rat, frog, etc.) called The
Tales of the Riverbank, is also very
popular. J
A more distinctly educational pur¬
pose is served by Play School, a daily
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

TELEVISION (Continued)
'Much that portends of a halo'
8
25-minute programme aimed primarily
at the child at home but ready for nur¬
sery school. The eavesdropping au¬
dience goes down to two-year olds and
Includes over a million regular adult
viewers. Children with parents, family
groups and nursery schools watch
but the target remains the intelligent
four-year old sitting alone In front
of the set.
The purpose is to stimulate the child
with ideas and information which affect
him not only during the programme but
long afterwards. There is, in fact,
impressive evidence of long-term
follow-up activities art work (the BBC
receives a steady supply of paintings
for the Play School picture board),
singing, imaginative games and prac¬
tical play.
A report from the producer observes
that "Play School tries to offer a child
at this crucial stage of its develop¬
ment a wider range of subject matter
and a richer canvas of people than
has been customary in past children's
television programmes for this age
range. It takes into account the limit¬
ations restricted terms of reference;
small vocabulary; shorter span of con¬
centration but it makes no concession
apart from this. Talking down is a sin.
False attitudes are stamped on. The
child under five is gullible and all too
easily Influenced for good or bad. Our
responsibility, therefore, lies in not
taking advantage of this but assuming
a taste and discrimination in the under-
five which, like a rather frail flower, can
respond to the hands of the right
gardener."
HE gullibility of young
children is of primary con¬
cern to the producers of programmes.
An American student of communica¬
tions has suggested that "a child's
early exposure to television, regard¬
less of the content, contains much
that portends of a halo. It is all
good. It amuses, entertains, and
watches over the child. The child, left
to his own devices, makes indiscri¬
minate use of the medium. When he
is good, he is rewarded with more
exposure; when bad, he is often
punished by denied use. From these
kinds of contacts, standards, tastes and
discriminations find no formative
roots." Hence the particular respon¬
sibility of those who seek no more
than to attract and amuse the child
audience in order to reach a wide
audience for commercial publicity.
But there are pitfalls on both sides,
as has been found in countries, such as
Australia, where commercial and non¬
commercial programmes compete for
the audience. A primarily purposeful,
didactic approach may fail to involve
the child sufficiently to make an impact
on a large portion of the audience. A
primarily entertainment approach may
fail to leave a constructive impact.
How to balance both approaches is an
issue which faces the television direc¬
tor, and not only in the sphere of pro¬
gramming for pre-school children.
This competitive situation is of parti¬
cular significance to the United States.
Among the commercially most success¬
ful programmes is Romper Room
whose format is also distributed to
many other countries. The programme
emphasizes the. involvement of chil¬
dren, not only on the receiving end but
in the studio itself.'
OME educators feel that to
show little children acting
out their games in front of the camera
is not desirable, that it impairs the
educational impact and leads children
to show off rather than to express
themselves quietly and creatively as
individuals. Others welcome this ap¬
proach as an inducement to the wat¬
ching children to participate in the
action.
Romper Room suggests many activi¬
ties which help keep the youngster
physically fit, and develop his mind
and social adjustment. To familiarize
the child with natural and social
scenes, and thus to enlarge his horizon
and vocabulary, the programme uses
films, pictures and objects to show
foreign lands, interesting professions,
as well as animal life. To develop
"reading-readiness" among children,
they are taught to recognize and draw
letters and numbers, play a game called
"Look 'N' See", as well as a word
game called "Words and Sounds" to
increase their vocabulary.
Here ¡s a slick production designed
to attract, amuse and instruct young
viewers and, incidentally, also to sell
merchandise. On the other side of
American television are the non-com¬
mercial educational television stations
which make special efforts to provide
programmes which are of value to the
children and their parents alike.
Notable among the many program¬
mes produced by these stations is
7V Kindergarten produced at Albu¬
querque, New Mexico. In this state
the need for some new form of pre
school education Is so evident that
many of the usual reservations
about ^.ihe use of television seem
to fall by the wayside. The people
of this state have a trilingual culture;
the basic language of children who
enter school is English, Spanish or
one of the American Indian langua¬
ges, and this diversity in linguistic
and social backgrounds poses a
particular problem for the school
system. Another problem arises be¬
cause the state covers a large but
sparsely populated area. There are
no public kindergartens in New Mexico
and much of the population could not
take advantage of them even if they
were offered.
To meet these educational problems
of cultural diversity and dispersal of
population is one of the primary pur¬
poses of the TV classroom which
reaches many remote areas and makes
proper conditioning for school possi¬
ble. The programme seeks to prepare
the pre-school youngster for his first
school year. Using the standard kin¬
dergarten curriculum as a backbone,
the programme is prepared with the
advice of the educational authorities
and stimulates the child in reading
development, linguistic ability, number
ability and social readiness.
"Recognizing the limitations of only
30 minutes per day with the children,"
adds the report from New Mexico,
"emphasis is placed on assisting
parents to meaningfully guide the child
after the programme Is completed.
Each project is designed to use inex¬
pensive, readily available materials.
Thus, parent education is an important
adjunct to the series."
BSENCE of public kinder¬
gartens, especially in the
lower Income parts of American cities,
is a problem all over the United States
and particularly in the large, urban
areas of the eastern states. Here,
educational television finds one of
its most important tasks. Station
WQED in Pittsburgh produces three
times a week a semi-Instructional
series of programmes for the pre¬
school child entitled QED Kindergar¬
ten. The programme was started in
1963 and is regularly used by fifteen
other eastern U.S. stations as well as
in Chicago and San Francisco. Here,
too the station co-operates closely
with kindergarten teachers and child
development authorities in the elab¬
oration of the programme and the selec¬
tion of the teacher who presents it in

Television can introduce
the young child to
knowledge of all kinds,
from drawing and music
to the mysteries of Nature
and the marvels
of science. It Is often
through television
that children in great
industrial cities first
learn to appreciate the
beauties of the
countryside. In certain
regions, such as
New Mexico, television
programmes prepared with
the help of teachers
help to overcome the
special problem of a
trilingual population. In
Czechoslovakia, traditional
puppet shows help to
stimulate artistic and
mental activity. Right,
a Czech puppet introduces
some cartoon personalities.
Photo © Loutkovy film, Prague
front of the camera. Regular feed-back
of reactions from children, parents and
school authorities helps to steer the
programme towards its main objective,
to inform and shape the mind of the
young child, and to draw on entertain¬
ment and amusement to the extent that
it serves to enhance this purpose.
All aboard with Mr. Be, another pro¬
gramme produced by educational tele¬
vision in Memphis, Tennessee, is de¬
signed to prepare the pre-school child
for the first grade and aid in the maxi¬
mum development of his potential. This
programme Is presented in a nostalgic
19th century setting built around the
romance and exciting mobility of trains,
with Mr. Be holding forth as the former
engineer of the olden days who now
lives in a combination train depot and
general store. The store is filled with
Interesting junk, pictures and pets, and
the train is a replica of a famous
Civil War train "The General."
One hundred and eighty-three pro¬
grammes have been recorded on
videotape, many of which introduce the
children to new sights and facts. One
day Mr. Be demonstrates with a home¬
made steam engine how steam is able
to move a train, and tells the story of
railroads up to a modern diesel passen¬
ger train. On another day, he explains
how clocks tell "when" and "how
long", and how in earlier times people
used to tell time by the sun and the
moon. Visits to a shoemaker or a gro¬
cery store, to lions who live in the
jungle or to the bird house in the zoo,
bring knowledge and new words to the
young ones. How electricity is a friend
of man when controlled, but a danger
ous enemy children must beware of
and follow important safety rules, is
another of the many topics of this in¬
structive programme.
One of the arguments against tele¬
vision for children is that it will keep
them from reading, from seeking their
own information at their own pace and
choice. But experience has shown that
television, whether for adults or chil¬
dren, can be as much a stimulator of
reading as a distracting, deadening
force. It is a matter of how TV is used
and how It relates to books. In France,
television has for many years carried
a weekly programme for adults and
a companion programme for children
in which new books and authors are
introduced to the large television
public.
The impact of these programmes is
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

TELEVISION (Continued)
Fan mail from
the kindergarten
10
shown by the eagerness with which
publishers try to get their books
discussed on them. Similarly, tele¬
vision in the United States has also
been a stimulator of reading; many
programmes for young children are
direct TV adaptations of books and
thus contribute directly to their sale
or borrowing in public libraries.
Picture Book Parade ¡s a series of
films directly based on the illustrations
and text of well-known children's
books. Through slow close-up photo¬
graphy, with the camera panning over
pictures, picking up detail or showing
the entire scene, and with the accom¬
paniment of music and text, these
films are a simplified, slow type of
animation whose pace is suited to the
rhythm of child viewers. Local stations
use these films, or produce their own
visual book reports, as part of regular
programmes for school and pre-school
children. These programmes, enter¬
taining in themselves, induce children
to get hold of the books so they can
look at them, or read them if they
have already learned to do so.
E-READING or re-viewing
of the familiar is particu¬
larly satisfying to children, just as they
love to hear the same story over and
over again. Many television produ¬
cers labour under the fallacious as¬
sumption that only novelty counts and
consider it contrary to the style of
the medium to repeat themselves.
But that is not the way children see
it. "My five-year-old has been asking
me to write for weeks to ask you if
we could see 'Red Carpet' again,"
writes a mother from Ithaca, New
York, "We enjoyed the other stories
too and would like to see them all
again and then some new ones."
If television does not provide an
opportunity to see the story again, the
book does. And so many mothers
echo a letter from a housewife in Cali¬
fornia who wrote: "After we watch and
listen, we borrow these books from
the library and get a real thrill out of
re-reading them and getting a long
close look at the pictures." No wonder
such programmes, whether produced
on film or in local educational stations
all over the United States, are parti¬
cularly popular with children's libra¬
rians who welcome the Introduction of
good books to both children and
parents.
Educational television in the United
States is the work of devoted people
who do not have at their disposal any¬
thing like the technical resources and
finance available to commercial sta¬
tions. At Milwaukee, for instance, a
group of performers who work for the
museum, the public school system, the
Bureau of Community Relations, or
who are housewives looking after their
families, come together as volunteers
at the educational station to participate
in Children's Fair, a variety show
geared for viewers aged three to
seven. "Tired of violence in the name
of humour? Then try your children on
a TV diet of Children's Fair," runs the
appeal for this programme whose pro¬
moters donate their time for this daily
half-hour broadcast "to accent the
positive aspects of life and the world
in which we live."
Reaction against the violence of
much of television, whether in pro¬
grammes specifically designed for
them or, more frequently, In general
programmes which are seen eagerly
by children, is one of the prime motives
in the production of programmes by
educational stations.
N outline of the purposes
of The Land of Play, a
programme produced at Michigan
State University, sums up this point
of view: "There is no need and there
is no place for violence in this pro¬
gramme. There are no weapons, no
physical attacks, no verbal barrages.
The stories may be suspenseful, but
not frightening. We use no fear
appeals. This is a happy, light, posi¬
tive programme. The characters who
are involved in the programme are
involved in positive ways. Proper
conduct is rewarded and rewarding . . .
not materially, but other ways. Stories
and situations have morals, but morals
are never drawn from them and pre¬
sented to the child wrapped in the
label 'MORAL'."
Concern for the moral development
of children Is also a preoccupation at
the Kiev TV Centre in the Ukraine,
which presents special programmes
for pre-chool children every day in the
morning and the early evening. These
programmes seek to develop the
curiosity of children, to give them

Opinon surveys among
teachers confirm that young
children are far more
attentive when schools
make use of television.
Kindergarten teachers in
Venezuela, for example, report
that collaboration
and comprehension
are improved. Left, two
well-known puppets on B.B.C.
television programmes for
the very young: Bill and Ben
the Flowerpot men.
Can a chipmunk teach the
new mathematics on TV?
Here, at any rate, he is
helping the television teacher
to show children how to
make a "telephone" with
tin cans and string. Children
benefit most when
learning is presented
as a fascinating game.
Photo © Holmes - Lebel - Larry Fried/Curtiss - Camera Press
more intimate knowledge of their
surroundings, to promote feelings of
social adjustment, and "to help them
to understand those actions which are
good and those which should be
blamed."
Here, too, it is emphasized that
"such knowledge should come to small
children by a fascinating game and
not by direct admonition. While
playing and dreaming, children learn
at the same time various useful things.
The programmes for pre-school chil¬
dren do not Include direct teaching of
certain subjects but they do include
enrichment materials for the educa¬
tional programmes of kindergartens."
The Pencil Drawer, for Instance, is a
game -which has been broadcast for
several years and in which an artist
puppet called "Merry Pencil" teaches
children the art of drawing and
explains, at the same time, phenomena
such as why the squirrel dries
mushrooms on the pine tree and why
birds fly off to warmer countries.
"This programme is a great success
among the little ones and the depart¬
ment receives hundreds of letters with
pictures drawn by the children at home
or in the kindergartens under the
guidance of their teachers, nurses or
parents."
Finally, we come to Czechoslovakia,
the country which has perhaps the
greatest tradition in puppetry, in
children's films and now in television
programmes for the little ones, broad¬
cast regularly ever since 1958. A
report from the editor of kindergarten
programmes in Prague reads like a
summary of all that has been said by
producers around the world; for
children are children and have much
the same reactions, Independent of the
culture in which they live, while the
television medium poses similar prob¬
lems and opportunities irrespective of
its particular form of organization and
control.
The danger of passivity In the viewer
is recognized here as elsewhere. The
child viewer "Is Inclined to consume
passively miles of stories, events and
tales, without being forced to strain
his mind," a danger which the pro¬
ducers in Czechoslovakia strive to
combat by seeking "to Incite, Instigate,
inspire and excite our children; we
want to acquaint them with the
unknown world that surrounds them.
We want our viewers to be entertained,
but simultaneously to be instructed."
WHILE initially Czech TV
programmes were aimed
at the entertainment of very young
children, a much closer co-ordination
with preparation for school in kinder¬
gartens is now sought by the producers
who base their programmes on the
official kindergarten curriculum. The
fairy-tale form is considered most
effective in order to Influence and
educate young viewers. They take
children to the farthest corners of the
world and are blended with realistic
reportages about the world of grown¬
ups.
Programmes are popular with kin¬
dergartens, a selected number of which
regularly report back audience reaction
to the station so that programmes may
be adapted to their needs. Producers
seem confident that the programmes
are in fact stimulating artistic and
mental activities, and contributing to
the development of individual capacity
in the child. Programmes are broad¬
cast twice a week (with one repeat)
and on Saturday morning the announcer
acquaints teachers with the content of
subsequent programmes to aid them
in their use. For the producers recog¬
nize the importance of the teacher
"who must not waste the feelings which
the children have experienced during
the programme."
Television serves the child and the
parents, the school, the teacher and
society as a whole when It develops
the personality and broadens the
horizon of youngsters about to enter
school. This educational task responds
to the yearning of children for know¬
ledge, to their love of fantasy and
their curiosity of life. "If it Is said of
adult listeners that you will never
satisfy everyone," states the producer
of Czechoslovak kindergarten pro¬
grammes, "then our smallest listeners
surely form an exception which proves
the rule. Five and six-year-old viewers
do not telephone, do not threaten, do
not make categoric demands. But
naturally they also have wishes and
desires, usually that one of the fairy
tales be repeated. Through adults
they often show us their dissatis¬
faction when they are cheated out
of a programme. But they have always 1 1
been, they are and will probably '
remain the most grateful of television
viewers."
