No true portrait exists of the Georgian poet,
Shota Rustavel!, the 12th-century author of
"The Knight In the Tiger's Skin". But Rustaveli's
work has inspired numerous painters and
illustrators. Right, Rustaveli depicted by the
Georgian painter, Niko Pirosmanashvili, or
Pirosmani as he is called (1860-1917). A
gifted artist with an original style, Pirosmani often
portrayed the history and legends of his
country (see the Unesco Courier, Oct. 1962).

RUSTAVELI AND
THE KNIGHT
IN THE
TIGER'S SKIN' *££
he Knight in the Tiger's
Skin, a long epic poem
written in the late twelfth century,
is the greatest and most popular work
of Georgian literature. But more than
this, it is a story of the triumph of
true love which deserves a high place
in the annals of world literature, and,
as we shall see, it has several features
which make it especially attractive to
the modern reader.
The author, Shota Rustaveli, lived
800 years ago, in the "Golden Age"
of the Georgian people, when the
State of Georgia stretched from the
Caspian to the Black Sea and from
the Caucasus Mountains to the
headwaters of the Euphrates. Rusta¬
veli was a feudal aristocrat about
whom remarkably little is known;
contemporary chronicles, although
they describe the life and work of
even minor figures of the epoch,
hardly mention his name. The Knight
in the Tiger's Skin (known in some
English translations as "The Man of
the Panther Skin") is his only surviving
work. Indeed, the principal source
of historical and literary facts about
him is the Prologue to the poem
itself.
The plot of the poem is complex
and involved, but Rustaveli unfolds
it with all the mastery of a great poet,
and to this day the story holds the
reader enthralled.
In his old age King Rostevan of
Arabia, being without a male heir,
vests the sovereignty of the realm
in his only daughter, the beautiful
28
IRAKLE ABASHIDZE is a prominent Georgian
poet, translator and critic. He is first
secretary of the Writers' Union of the Soviet
Socialist Republic of Georgia and a member
of the Republic's Academy of Sciences.
Among other .works of poetry, he has written
a book of 'verse devoted to Shota Rustaveli.
and intelligent Tinatin, who is in love
with Avtandil, a valiant knight. During
a hunt arranged to celebrate the coro¬
nation, Rostevan and Avtandil come
upon a mysterious knight clad in a
tiger's skin, sitting mournfully by a
stream and weeping tears mingled
with blood. After they have tried
in vain to speak with him, he
disappears in the twinkling of an eye.
This event upsets and depresses
the old king, and Tinatin sends
Avtandil to search for the strange
knight. After three years of arduous
wanderings, Avtandil succeeds in
finding him, and the knight, whose
name is Tariel, tells his sad story.
He is the son of one of the seven
kings of India; this king decides
before his death to do homage- to
Parsadan, who rules over the other'six
kingdoms. Tariel is brought up at
Parsadan's court as his heir, and one
day he falls passionately in love with
Parsadan's daughter, Nestan-Darejan.
But Parsadan threatens to marry her
to a foreign prince and to proclaim
him heir to the throne. At the
princess's instigation, Tariel kills his
rival. As a result, the princess is
severely punished and exiled, and
now, after a long search, Tariel has
lost all hope of finding her and has
been living in the forest with the
wild beasts.
Avtandil encourages him and pro¬
mises him his help, and after many
adventures, he discovers that Nestan-
Darejan is held captive in a remote
fortress. With the help of a third
knight, he and Tariel attack the
fortress and free the princess. Thus
honour and true love triumph: the
Knight in the Tiger's Skin marries
Nestan-Darejan, and Avtandil returns
to Tinatin. Peacefully and humanely
they rule their countries and happy
peoples.
Photo © APN
Two things about this story strike
the reader straightaway: the important
part played by women, and the
"modern" attitude to romantic love.
The crux of the plot is King Parsadan's
decision to arrange a political marriage
for his daughter and her determination
to marry only the man she loves.
By medieval standards. King Parsa¬
dan's action was absolutely reasonable
and correct. It was unheard of at
that time for mutual attraction to
take precedence, as a foundation for
marriage, over all other considerations.
Rustaveli's great originality and
genius is most clearly demonstrated
in the fact that he made this very
human situation the pivot of his whole
work.
However, to explain the importance
and the brilliant characterization
of the women in The Knight of the
Tiger's Skin, we must refer to the
social and political conditions in
twelfth century Georgia.
The secluded way of life for women
was thoroughly alien to the Georgian
people. The conversion of the
Georgians to Christianity was
attributed to a woman, Saint Nino
of Cappadociá. (Incidentally, whereas
early Christianity in the West took
the form of asceticism and the denial
of all earthly pleasures, in Georgia
it was closely connected with the
concept of fertility and life. This has
a greater significance than might" be
supposed at first glance, and may
possibly account for the extensive
secular literature which appeared in
Georgian in the Middle Ages side
by side with religious works).
Early ecclesiastical writings had
already pointed out that men and
women were one and equal In the
eyes of the Almighty, and Nicho¬
las Gulaberisdze, an ecclesiastical

writer who was a contemporary of
Rustaveli's, composed a special
treatise In defence and In praise of
woman's honour and dignity. Finally,
and perhaps most important, Rustaveli
himself witnessed the splendid flower¬
ing of Georgia as a state under
the reign of a woman, Queen Tamar
(1184-1213), whom he praises in the
Prologue to his poem.
This was indeed a culture re¬
markable for its richness and diversity.
There were two academies which
offered a truly universal education.
Many major works on religion, history
and philosophy were written, and a
considerable number of foreign writ¬
ings were translated. Still greater
development was achieved In archi¬
tecture, painting and music (the
written music of the period has been
preserved). If the "Golden Age"
reached Its culmination under
Queen Tamar, it dawned during
the rule of her ancestor, King David
the Builder (1089-1125): a man of
culture who was accustomed to take
his library with him when he went
to war, and a pious Christian who
wrote psalms of a rare beauty. He
showed unusual religious tolerance
for his time, and took pleasure in
disputing with Muslim scholars on the
finer points of the tenets of Islam.
But I digress from the poem itself.
The language It was written in is not
so very different from modern Geor¬
gian no more different, let us say,
than the language of Shakespeare is
from modern English. The poem
consists of over 1,600 quatrains, the
lines of each quatrain rhyming with
each other, thus:
Amartis perad shetsvalabroli tsremlisa
[banaman.
Didkhan itiris kmaman da man kalman
[shaosanaman.
Shekhspa, sheigo adjari, tskhenitsa
[sheikvana man,
Dadumdis, tsremlin mokhkvetna shav-
[man gishrisa danaman.
(Linguists may be puzzled at not
finding the slightest similarity with
any other language. This is not
surprising: the origins of the language.
like those of the Georgian people,
are shrouded in mystery. The only
European language which bears any
similarity at all to Georgian is Basque
and even its relationship has yet
to be proved).
Suffice to say that the euphonic
structure of the poem Is brilliant, so
much so that Georgian readers are
often so carried away by the musical
sound and linguistic magic of Rusta¬
veli's verses that they only begin to
appreciate the content when they go
back and read it over a second time.
The poem's music must of necessity
be largely lost in translation. But
Rustaveli's skill in story-telling, his
psychological insight and his poetic
imagery are of universal appeal.
For Instance, many of the devices
which he uses in unravelling the
complicated plot foreshadow those of
the modern novel: flashbacks, exten
sive dialogue, secondary love Inter¬
ests, the first description of char¬
acters through the dialogue of others,
the quoting of letters. In fact this
aspect and the author's under¬
standing of all the intricate nuances
of human psychology justify us in
looking on the poem as one of the
first novels in the history of European
literature.
Rustaveli's imagery is so rich, and
the poem's similes and metaphors
fall so thick and fast, that I cannot
hope to do justice to them in a few
lines. I shall just mention two images,
both important ones for an under¬
standing of the poem.
The first is the tiger's skin itself.
This, the leitmotif of the whole poem,
is symbolic of Tariel's loved one:
when she was in a rage at her father's
decision to marry her against her will,
she reminded him of a tigress beau¬
tiful even in her fury. But it is also a
symbol of his valour, and of his lonely
life among the wild beasts.
The other is the poet's comparison
of the chief characters to the sun.
This is more than just a conventional
epithet suggesting the sun's brightness
and physical beauty. The sun for
Rustaveli, and here we get into the
realms of the Neo-Platonist philosophy
of the age, stands for an ideal state
of goodness the highest stage of
development, to which man can attain
through his intellect and will-power.
He constantly reminds us that his
heroes and heroines are close to this
state. Towards the end of the poem,
after the rescue of Nestan-Darejan,
we read:
"The Sun has returned and the
[darkness is dispersed,
Evil is overcome; the good prevails,
[and will endure forever."
This optimistic and positive idea of
the victory of justice over arbitrary
power, of good over evil, is the
underlying theme of Rustaveli's work:
man must go on seeking, for he can
achieve complete happiness in this
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
King Rostevan of Arabia meets a knight clad in a tiger's skin.
The stranger is an Indian prince, Tariel, whose Odyssey
Rustaveli recounts in his long epic poem which ranks as a
masterpiece of world literature. This miniature, decorating
a manuscript of "The Knight in the Tiger's Skin", was
painted by a Georgian artist, Mamuka Tavakarashvili, in 1646.
Aft fafî J~¿¡>¿)
29

30
world. But above all this is a poem
of passion and flesh-and-blood pas¬
sion: worshipping from afar is ob¬
viously no consolation to the Knight in
the Tiger's Skin! Love is seen as a
spur and a signpost in the direction
of higher truth and harmony, which
by the same token, is not to be
achieved by mystic contemplation and
passive "dissolution" in the Deity after
the fashion of the philosophical poetry
of the East: The Knight in the Tiger's
Skin Is a philosophical and ethical
code of action, of will-power. It is
the triumph of the mind and of active
and radiant humanism.
This makes Rustaveli's poem one
of the first great works in a truly
European spirit, if we understand that
spirit to be the achievements and
gains of mankind at the time of the
Renaissance. And though he quotes
from Aristotle and Plato as well as
The embossing and engraving of metal with ornamental designs ¡s a traditional
form of Georgian art, going back 1,000 years. After attaining Its peak
in the late 12th and early 13th centuries in the reign of Queen Tamar,
whose praises were sung by Rustaveli it slowly declined and finally died
out. In the past two decades a number of young Georgian artists, using
the techniques of the medieval masters, have succeeded in giving not
only new life, but also new expression to this ancient art.
THE KNIGHT IN THE TIGER'S SKIN (Continued)
from the Bible and the Koran, it is
not too much to say that Rustaveli
came very close to a profound under¬
standing of Christian philosophy as
it was before it was changed by later
dogmas. At the same time, he is
very close to our present-day un¬
derstanding of the world.
The Knight In the Tiger's Skin has
been translated into many languages,
including Italian, Polish, Hungarian, Ru¬
manian, Czech, Mongolian, Spanish,
Chinese, German, French and English.
It has also been translated into 17 lan¬
guages of the Soviet Union, where
nearly 1,400,000 copies of the work
have been published.

