OUR
SHRINKING
PLANE
by Eric N. Valters
ODAY, there are 60 million more people in our
world than there were only a year ago.
If this trend continues the world's population will surpass
the 7,000 million mark within a generation, by the year 2000
more than doubling the number of people alive today
and doubling also mankind's needs for food and shelter,
fuel and clothing, and all the other things that go into the
making of a decent human life.
During the month of September last year, more than
800 men and women from almost 90 countries met in
Belgrade, Yugoslavia to attend the Second World Population
Conference sponsored by the United Nations. They came,
not as representatives of their governments but in their
individual capacity as specially qualified doctors and statis¬
ticians, economists and lawyers but most of all as demo¬
graphers, experts in population questions.
Their theme: the world's population, and its unprecedented
growth in recent years. They, adopted no recommendations
and took no decisions. Rather, they confined themselves
to a thorough debate and exchange of views, aware that
no country in the world would want to have a population
policy dictated to it from outside.
But even without decisions it was a most important meet¬
ing by virtue of the fact that it conclusively showed the
existence of a world-wide awareness of the population
problem, of world-wide concern with it. And this in itself
is something relatively new.
As put by one participant, Dr. Bakari Kamian, an educa¬
tionist from the Republic of Mali: "At present the develop¬
ment of the growth of the world population is such that
it poses very important problems. If this growth continues,
it will pose problems of such gravity as to affect the very
fate of mankind, even raising the question of man's survival."
From Asia came this view from Anup Dutta Sharma, an
economist from India: "This rapid growth of world popula¬
tion and its growing imbalances in the different regions
is the cause of human anxiety and sufferings, and this
may cause political and social conflicts."
An economist from Chile, Dr. Julio Morales, highlighted
the problem as it affects Latin America in these words: "In
its history, Latin America has never experienced a demo¬
graphic growth as high as the one now in existence. In
fact, it is not only the highest in Latin American history;
at the same time it is the highest in the world."
4
ERIK N. VALTERS is a staff member of the United Nations.
This article is an adaptation of two U.N. radio programmes written
by Mr. Valters for the series "Perspective Sixty-Five" on the basis
of interviews and statements recorded for U.N. Television and
U.N. Radio at the time of the Second World Population Conference
in Belgrade last September.
From the Soviet Union, a Moscow demographer, Dimitri
Valentey, expressed a different point of view: "We con¬
sider that there is no basis for pessimism," he said. "We
consider that the human mind can ensure that the growing
world population will have the energy, mineral, and water
resources and all the other things which it will need."
In the keynote address to the Conference, delivered by
Dr. B. R. Sen, Director-General of the U.N. Food and Agri¬
culture Organization there was, however, a marked element
of concern indeed alarm about the eventual results of
the rapid growth of the world population.
"It is a simple arithmetical calculation," said Dr. Sen, "that
if food output everywhere just kept pace with population
growth at the present level of consumption, by the end
of this century the number of people who would be subject
to hunger and malnutrition would be double what it is
today." (See text page 10).
I N addition to food, there is also the growing
need for housing, clothing, fuel, education. Can
the world provide all these to an expanding population? On
this crucial question, these were differences of opinion,
strongly held, among the participants in the world Population
Conference.
Professor Alfred Sauvy of France, one of the world's fore¬
most demographers, described this disagreement during a
U.N. television interview in these terms: "We do not agree
for various reasons, because, after all, in the heart of
every scientist there exists a sentiment which more or
less dominates his mind more or less consciously. In parti¬
cular, there are optimists and pessimists. There are those
who believe in future progress progress which has not
yet been achieved but which should be there at the
appointed time. And there are those who, like Doubting
Thomas, only believe what they see and what they touch,
and who say that which they see and which they touch
does not suffice to provide 3,000 million human beings with
the 2,500 calories a day and with the many other things
which they need."
This kind of disagreement, of shall we say, difference in
emphasis, found among experts, is exemplified by the two
following points of view. The first by Professor Philip
M. Häuser, of the University of Chicago: "If you assume
that all of the world's resources, present total product, all
goods and services produced, were available, and then
ask how many people could the world support at the
European level of living, the answer is: about 1,500 million,
and we already have a population of 3,200 million.
"If you ask what can the total world product support
at the North American level of living, the level of living
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

CHÜd'UNE
ARRIVAL * OOWTUfrí
Japan
(259 persons
per square
kilometre)
is making a
determined effort
to keep its
population under
100 million.
It has cut its
annual population
increase by half
In the past
15 years.
Picture on
right symbolizes
population pressure
in Japan and
other countries.
White-gloved
guards are
used in Tokyo
stations to
"help" passengers
Into trains.
© Dalmas, Paris

OUR SHRINKING PLANET (Cont'd)
6
in Canada and in the United States, the answer is: only
500 million, and we have 3,200 million."
"Now, if everybody on this earth lived at the level of
living, let us say, of South-East Asia, then we can stand
many more people than the earth already has. So there
is no one answer to this question. But this is clear: with
present rates of growth and with the present population
of the globe, it is going to be extraordinarily difficult to
raise levels of living in the developing areas very much
during the remainder of this century, unless rates of popu¬
lation growth are decreased."
Dimitri Valentey, Chairman of the Council of Population
Problems of the U.S.S.R. Ministry of High and Secondary
Specialized Education, in Moscow, has summed up the
second view in the following words: "Potential geological
world resources of oil are estimated at 250-300 thousand
million tons or more. Potential geological resources of
natural gas exceed 200 billion cubic metres. Nor must we
forget atomic energy which increasingly takes its place in
the world's energy balance. Finally, there are the sources
of energy which we call 'exotic'. I mean the forces of the
wind. and of the sea tides, the temperature difference at
various depths in the oceans, and lastly, the energy of
the sun. Energy is life, and we have enough energy on
earth and in our universe to provide human life with every¬
thing necessary 100, 200 or 1,000 years hence."
The highest birth rates obtain in the world's developing
regions: rates averaging 3 per cent per year, as compared
to 1.3 per cent in the already industrialized countries. And
so the question naturally arises (and was also discussed in
Belgrade): can these developing nations which are despe¬
rately trying to improve their living standards attain this
goal while maintaining their current high birth rate?
The answer to this question is by no means obvious,
because experts today agree that there was and there Is
no constant and significant direct effect of population
increase on the rate of rise of per capita production.
As put In Belgrade by Professor Simon Kuznets of
Harvard University in the United States: "In some countries,
high rates of population increase were accompanied by
high rates of growth in per capita product. In others,
low rates of population growth were associated with low
rates of growth in per capita product. In still others, low
rates of population increase were combined with high
rates of growth in per capita product. This diversity of
relations is found in countries within both the developed
and the developing regions."
On the other hand, it must also be said (it was In
fact said by Professor Kuznets) that a rate of population
increase which is high in absolute terms, such as that In
many developing countries, might well be a problem.
This was confirmed in Belgrade by numerous participants
from the developing countries.
For example, from Mali, with an annual population
Increase of 31 per cent, Balari Kamian, Director General
of the Ecole Normale Supérieure in Bamako, declared:
"We have to build many more schools, build many more
hospitals and sanitary installations to take care of the
human beings who come into this world. We must also
provide for future investments to be able to employ these
young people once they have reached the working age.
And we must provide for other investments to open up
new opportunities and, above all, to solve the problem
of additional supplies that will be needed."
Professor Sohandal Nagda of Bhopal in India, spoke about
his country's population growth rate and its effect on India's
economic development: "The growth rate currently is placed
at the figure of 2.5 per cent per annum by some. This
growth rate as a rate is high, without doubt; applied to

IN THE PAST 10 YEARS
The world's population increased by
480,000,000
or more than the total population of India
or of Europe (excluding the U.S.S.R.)
IN 3 YEARS (1960 to 1963
The world's population increased by
170,000,000
or as much as the combined populations
of Japan and Brazil
India's 475 million people at the moment, it presents a
colossal problem and a great obstacle to India's effort to
improve its lot. In fact, India is adding to its numbers
11 million persons every year. Any increases in the
national output have to be put side by side with the needs
of increasing numbers."
India's Deputy Minister of Health, Mrs. Soundram T.S. Ra-
machandran, who also attended the Conference, had this to
say on the subject: "We are developing fast as far as in¬
dustries, irrigation, and so many other conveniences are
concerned. There is a planned programme. But there are
11 million children born every year. Just these figures
upset that planning. Therefore family planning has become
a national programme, so that planning the family and plan¬
ning for the nation can go hand in hand and show good
results."
Birth control or family planning is a very touchy and
sensitive issue in many parts of the world both advocated
and rejected on the basis of convictions which are deeply
held.
Addressing the opening meeting of the Second World
Population Conference, Philippe de Seynes, United Nations
Under-Secretary for Economic and Social Affairs, emphasiz¬
ed that the United Nations itself was neutral on the
subject of birth control out of respect for all beliefs and
in view of the present state of our knowledge. But he said:
"We cannot fail to mention the fact that some govern¬
ments, representing a considerable proportion of the world's
population, are now engaged, by means of birth control
methods, in trying to curb a population growth which has
acquired an alarming momentum.
"They have reached the conclusion, in some cases after
much hesitation and heart-searching, that at the present
rate of their population growth, too great a part of their
total product is inevitably channelled toward the needs of
the most elementary consumption, and that capital formation
is dangerously slowed down; in some instances, the prob¬
lem is even seen in terms of sheer survival." And the UN
Under-Secretary added: "We are ready to respond to
all requests for assistance from any country which, on
the basis of its own assessment of the situation, has
decided to embark on such a policy or to explore its
possibilities."
According to a statement made at the World Population
Conference, more than half of the people in the developing
regions today live in countries that have established
national policies favouring the limitation of births. Almost
invariably, the reason given for such a policy is the desire
to promote economic and social development without hav¬
ing to devote a disproportionate share of the increase in
the national product to the needs of an overrapidly in¬
creasing population.
However, some participants said: "Do more for economic
and social development, and the birth rate will decline by
itself, without any artificial measures."
This view was expressed, among others, by T.V. Ryabush-
kin, Deputy Director of the Institute of the Economics of the
World Socialist System, Moscow, U.S.S.R.: "We consider
that social and economic conditions are the decisive factor
for the demographic process. We hold the view that the
birth rate declines when industrialization takes place, when
women are involved in the process of social production, and
when the cultural standard of the people rises. That is
why there is no necessity of taking some special measures
which could artificially decrease the birth rate further."
Artificial birth control has further been opposed on reli¬
gious grounds for instance, by the Roman Catholic Church.
In Belgrade, the Holy See observer, Father Henri de Ried¬
matten, urged greater respect for human life and more
faith in man's future: "The population problem is a prob-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

OUR SHRINKING PLANET (Cont'd)
Changing views on family planning
8
lern' of life, and therefore it is linked up with realities which
are essentially dynamic realities. It is from this point
of view that we approach this World Population Conference
with the wish that, in spite of the fears which certain
countries show with regard to the population phenomena
(which are disquieting but which must be interpreted in
a doubtful fashion), one should not lose sight of the fact
that it is essential in a problem of this kind to proceed,
despite everything, with faith in life, with faith in the
inventive and productive possibilities of the human genius,
and avoiding the risk of leading humanity into other adven¬
tures in order to escape from dangers which today appear
imminent."
Not all religions have a negative attitude towards birth
control and family planning. A Moslem point of view was
expressed by Abdel Moneim El Shafsi, Director of the
North African Demographic Centre in Cairo, in the United
Arab Republic.
"Islam does not prohibit any person from planning his
family," Dr. El Shafsi told a U.N. radio reporter. "We will
find that family planning was practised more than a thou¬
sand years ago, even in the days of the Prophet, and
the contemporaries of the Prophet have mentioned the
fact, and he did not prohibit it. And one of the greatest
theologians of Islam, about 800 years ago, went into the
matter very deeply and scientifically, and found it justi¬
fiable for anybody to plan his family, and even specified
the best method to be practised."
Have national policies favouring the limitation of births
had any effect on the birth rates? The answer is: they are
beginning to have in some places. At the Conference in
Belgrade, we talked to the moderator of a meeting on
fertility, Professor Ronald Freedman of the University of
Michigan, in the United States. He told us: "We are, I
think, going to see, perhaps by the end of 1965, certainly
within the next three or four years, for the first tim©
in the history of the world, an acceleration of birth-rate
decline as a result of a large organized programme in
LEADING SOVIET DEMOGRAPHER
ON FAMILY PLANNING
In the European and North American countries the
lowering of the mortality rate has been accompanied
by a lowering of the birth rate. It seems clear that
in a number of developing countries, too, the problem
of reducing the birth rate must find a place alongside
industrialization, social reform and cultural growth if
a sound basis for economic progress is to be assured.
In some of these countries the birth rate will be
reduced as a result of women participating in pro¬
duction, a higher level of culture and the development
of industry and urban life. In others, however, a
definite demographic policy to reduce the birth rate
must be considered essential. The example of Japan,
where the birth rate has been halved, is instructive.
The spread of the idea of family planning makes
for a richer spiritual life for the woman and at the same
time helps keep population growth at the optimum
level. Demographers in each country must determine
the rate of population growth that is economically
¡deal and must ensure that such rates are maintained.
Boris Urlanis
In a special statement to the Unesco Courier
four particular populations Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and
Hong Kong; I think we are going to have that develop¬
ment In those four places. Now, these are small places,
they don't constitute a very large part of the population of
the world. Nevertheless, it is a historic event that this
should happen, and it points the way to what may happen
in the other countries."
Another example may be India. This is what we were
told by Mrs. S.T.S. Ramachandran, doctor of medicine and
India's Deputy Minister of Health: "In India also, a declin¬
ing birth rate is being indicated, especially in Bombay.
It has come to 27 births per thousand, which is comparable
to any developed nations. And in the rural areas also,
where we are working intensively, within four years we
have shown a decline in birth rate from 45 to 36."
"When we heard that in some of the developing coun¬
tries they are showing very good results, we were happy
to tell them, even though we have not achieved such
O Magnum - Brian Brake
>* ; Liitö*i& ' «' ' ^¡¿¡Asilas 'i k'fc^?1
- tit i

results as a nation wide programme because of India's
vast country and vast millions; but still we are making
good progress in those areas where people are more
conscious of the problem. And this is sure to catch up,
so that we can achieve much in the next five years."
Mrs. Ramachandran told us that India's family planning
programme emphasizes two methods of birth control: an
inter-uterine contraceptive device for women, and sterili¬
zation for men. She went on: "The family planning
programme is very well received in the cities, but it is
equally well received in the rural areas also. You see,
there are various factors which promote family planning
in our country: the desire to have a better life; to have a
better education; and also consciousness to have a smaller
family, so that parents can give all the opportunities to
their children."
The delegates to the World Population Conference in
Belgrade tended to agree that, in general, the African
continent was under-populated and not over-populated, and
that some countries were suffering from manpower short¬
ages rather than from population surpluses.
In Latin America, however, the situation is different.
Though there are no national family planning programmes,
there do already exist in some Latin American countries
small experimental projects, designed to study the prob¬
lem of controlling the birth rate.
As a Mexican economist and demographer, Victor L.
Urquidi, pointed out: "Surveys carried out in Latin Ameri¬
ca reveal that there is a demand for information on family
planning. The governments are not yet executing policies
in this area and it will be necessary to pass through a long
period of study, of preparation, but there is no doubt that
there is already a consciousness of the fact that in addi¬
tion to whatever is done to stimulate economic develop¬
ment, there is need to convince the people that it is neces¬
sary in some way to limit the family, without, of course,
prejudicing the stability of the home or creating artificial
problems."
In conclusion, we should like to stress once again that
the recent World Population Conference took no decisions
either on birth control or, for that matter, on any other
aspect of the population problem. Rather, the conference
was planned as a forum for debate, for the exchange
of views, for throwing some light on one of the great
problems of our time while always reserving the question
of action, if any, to the exclusive competence of national
governments.
In the decade ahead more than 600 million will be added to the world's population more
than twice as many people as are believed to have existed on earth at the start of the Christian era.
Today, the population of India (below) grows by ten million every year.
PS
tf far:*' .A. t ' V> YV-
M ,*
UP