éÊM\
mmm\
^^^^^K. *W 	% . mm
}^W'mr.
EDUCATION
FOR
ANEW
AGRICULTURAL
REVOLUTION
HE world's hungry 60 to 80 per cent of whom
live on the land will be able to produce
sufficient food to nourish themselves and their children
only when a radical transformation occurs in their present
methods of food production and distribution... Much of
the work needed to introduce and sustain these changes
is educational in character and therefore directly concerns
Unesco. The fight against hunger and the fight against
illiteracy are, in a sense, two aspects of the same struggle."
In these words, Unesco's Director-General, M. René
Maheu, underlines the direct link between education and
food and shows why Unesco has been giving increasing
emphasis to agricultural education and science in its
world programme (1).
In co-operation with other United Nations agencies,
Unesco has helped its member states to:
Plan, launch and develop programmes of rural and
agricultural education.
Eradicate illiteracy in rural areas (see page 33).
23
(1) In the preface to "Education and Agricultural Development", a
Unesco basic study, N° 15 of a series published by U.N. organizations
in support of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

EDUCATION AND AGRICULTURE (Cont'd)
60,000 advisers for 60 million farmers
24
Spread agricultural knowledge and information through
Radio Rural Forums (see page 25).
Apply scientific research (including the social sciences)
to problems of food and agricultural production.
Unesco has also promoted research in large anu for
the most part as yet unproductive areas of the globe in
such fields as earth sciences, arid zones, humid tropics,
marine sciences, oceanography and hydrology (an
International Hydrological Decade began under Unesco
sponsorship on January 1, 1965 see the Unesco Courier,
"Water and Life", July-Aug. 1964). Such research may
well prove to be of great significance for the work of
agriculturists and food experts, as it could lead to the
discovery or creation of fresh sources of food.
To speed the development of agricultural education in
its member states, Unesco has concentrated on four
basic objectives: education geared to rural social and
economic development; the training of scientists and
technicians to carry out agricultural programmes; the
training of teachers in the agricultural sciences; and the
provision at all levels of education of science teaching
linked to the needs of rural development.
Much of this work has been carried out in co-operation
with the U.N. Development Programme, Unicef and the
World Bank. Programmes in agricultural education
carried out in co-operation with the U.N. Special Fund
have helped to expand agricultural training at the
Mindanao Institute of Technology in the Philippines, at
the Rural Polytechnic Institute of Mali and at the Institute
for Higher Technical Education in Agriculture and Industry
in the United Arab Republic. Other U.N. Special Fund-
Unesco programmes are to be launched in Nigeria (to
train instructors for farm institutes) and in Brazil, Colombia,
Tunisia and other countries. These programmes provide
aid totalling several million dollars.
S OME 40 Unesco technical assistance missions
have been sent to member states in the past
few years to strengthen and develop the national institutions
where teachers and technicians are trained. The work of
Unesco specialists, the equipment provided for labora¬
tories and workshops and the fellowships granted for study
in technologically developed countries have all contributed
to the success of these missions.
In Nigeria, for instance, agricultural science is being
progressively introduced into the school curriculum, and
this movement towards multi-purpose schools is also being
developed in Ethiopia, Sudan, Ceylon and other countries,
where teachers now receive special training and school
children are given practical lessons on local farms.
Together, Unesco and Unicef are working on projects
which range from the training of teachers and the provision
of equipment for rural primary schools to the development
of rural science studies. Full use is made use of audio¬
visual aids in the classroom and special emphasis is given
to practical work, thereby creating closer links between the
school and the rural world.
The planning of agricultural education, the introduction
of agricultural subjects into general education, the
orientation of the rural primary school towards rural
development and the training of teachers create complex
educational problems that call for study and experiment.
Collaborating with specialists in many countries, Unesco
experts have been testing new teaching methods and
materials in selected schools so that the most effective
techniques can be adopted for general use.
Unesco has also organized post-graduate courses for
teachers from the developing countries in specialized
fields of agriculture, in agricultural engineering, for
example. Scientists and university teachers have benefited
from training in food technology and food processing in
Israel, Italy, U.S.A., Netherlands and other countries.
India, one of the focal points in the fight against hunger,
wishes to take urgent measures in science and education
to ensure that improved farming techniques and technical
knowledge will be available to meet any future emergencies.
In response to a request for technical help, several
Unesco missions were sent to consult with and advise the
Indian Government. Recently Unesco sent a leading
British agricultural scientist, Sir William Slater, to study
the problems of agricultural education in India and to
suggest how it could make a more direct and forceful
impact on Indian farming than in the past.
Following this mission, Sir William pointed out that in
the time available to carry out these measures a new
generation of farmers would not have grown up, so it was
essential to educate those already working the land as
well as the rising generation of farmers. As the level of
literacy among farmers was low, teaching would have to
be primarily by direct contact, involving the spoken word
and demonstrations.
Sir William expressed the view that to give real effect
to this educational effort there should be at least one
agricultural extension officer for every thousand farmers.
As there are an estimated 60,000,000 farmers in India this
meant that at least 60,000 full time extension officers would
be needed.
Parallel to its programme of food production, he said,
India faced another vital problem: food preservation. The
amount of food destroyed before and after harvesting by
rodents and other pests had been variously estimated at
between 20 and 25 per cent and even higher figures which
were far greater than that of India's present food gap.
Thus another important job for India's agricultural extension
officiers would be to demonstrate to villagers the best
ways of preserving and storing food to protect it from
animal and insect pests.
In one of India's school gardens
children tend papaya trees they have planted
under the guidance of agricultural experts.
