NEW PATTERNS
OF TRANSPORT
FOR AFRICA
Modern roads laid across
the sands of the Sahara
have made possible
the exploitation
of vast oil deposits.
This network of highways
will be incorporated into
a future Trans-Saharan highway.
Here, surveyors plot the line
of a new route
deep in the desert.
Esso
by W. H. Owens
I N recent years an entirely new pattern of trans¬
port has emerged in Africa and Asia where
the development of modern communications is a matter of
vital concern to the young independent nations. (See "The
Great Asian Highway", Unesco Courier, June 1965.)
Future progress and prosperity in these countries will
depend primarily on the exchange of materials, goods and
services both with their neighbours and with peoples over¬
seas. This means that they must be served by good inter¬
national road networks, linking the main cities, ports and
production areas, and by deep water harbours capable
of accommodating large ships and handling all types of
cargo with speed and economy.
In the past, the African and Asian transport systems
were based principally on the routing of export produce
and minerals as directly as possible from their source to
shipping points on the coasts. The railways and roads
constructed in the days of colonial rule were designed
first and foremost for this purpose. Consequently there
were no transport links across frontiers between the
main centres of neighbouring territories, except where they
happened to be provided by natural waterways.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
H

- 7
A big industrial complex ¡s now growing up around Accra, capital of Ghana,
thanks to the nearby new port of Tema with Its ultra-modern installations,
and also to the completion of a great dam across the Volta River.
The first two turbines of the Volta hydroelectric Installations,
which began to operate in August 1965, are now supplying electricity to a wide area.
Here, a surveyor signals to his partner on one of Ghana's
new construction sites near the Volta River.
G. Gerber-World Bank
NEW PATTERNS OF TRANSPORT (Cont'd)
Through jungles and desert wastes
12
Today the development of new means of transport is
strikingly evident in such a region as West Africa, where
a large number of former colonial territories have achieved
indépendance since World War II.
Modern industrial plants have been established to process
the crops and raw materials from farms, mines and forests,
and the various countries are eager to develop reciprocal
trade with their neighbours. Such trade can grow and
prosper only if there are modern inter-territorial communi¬
cations.
Over the past four years successive conferences have
been convened by the U.N. Economic Commission for
Africa (ECA) to discuss proposals for building international
highway systems to serve the main geographical regions
of the continent and provide easy access between them.
At the first meeting of West African Transport and Works
Ministers, held at Monrovia (Liberia) in 1961, agreement
was reached on the basic routes for a regional highway net¬
work of some 14,000 miles. This will link the capital cities and
major centres of all territories, reaching east to the Sudan
frontier and south to the Congo. Since then, ECA experts
have made detailed studies of West African transport
problems and the special transport needs of the land¬
locked countries of the region.
In 1962 ECA sponsored the first East African transport
conference at which an international road system for this
region, including all countries from Sudan in the north to
Mozambique in the south, was agreed to. Economic and
technical surveys of alternative routes, particularly over the
main existing gap between Khartoum and Nairobi, are now
under way.
Both East and West networks will link up at many points,
so that eventually it will be possible to drive the width of
the continent on continuous metalled roads. Construction
of some of the new inter-territorial routes are already
under way for example, the first all-weather highway
between the Ivory Coast and Ghana was started early in
1964 but the task is an immense one that will keep highway
engineers busy in Africa for a long time ahead.
With the major oil developments in the Sahara, the linking
of this vast and potentially rich region to the rest of Africa
has assumed growing importance. Desert highway cons¬
truction has so far been limited to the essential transport
needs of the oil and natural gas bases. But a considerable

*%-* *fc
T. Spencer-World Bank
'-%>£-'
Camels take a rest while a modern caravan rolls
by on a metalled highway which crosses an ancient trail
near the Awash River in Ethiopia.
mileage of these modern oil roads the first ever to be
built across the barren desert wastes will be incorporated
in the proposed trans-Saharan Highway which will link the
Mediterranean ports of Africa to the interior, and especially
the land-locked south Saharan states of Mali, Niger, Chad
and Upper Volta.
The trans-Saharan Highway project was discussed by
transport specialists from ten African countries at an ECA
conference held at Algiers in May, 1964. Agreement was
reached on a north-south route through the heart of the
desert to join up with the road network of West Africa.
This would take the form of an inverted letter Y on the
map, stretching south from the Mediterranean coast at
Algiers, via El Golea and In Salah, to Tamanrasset in the
Hoggar mountains.
From Tamanrasset there would be two branches; one
to Gao, in Mali, which could be extended through Upper
Volta to Ghana; the other to Agades, in Niger, which would
join up with the trunk road system of Nigeria. There
would also be two feeder roads at the Mediterranean end,
one from Morocco and one from Tunisia, both joining
the main trans-Saharan route at Tamanrasset.
A four-nation committee, consisting of Algeria, Tunisia,
Mali and Niger, is now studying the plans for this great
highway project which, at a conservative estimate, will
cost in the region of $126 million.
Delegates to all recent African transport conferences
have stressed the need for standardization, not only as
regards road and bridge design but in such matters as vehi¬
cle legislation, traffic signalling and safety devices, and the
classification of through highway routes.
Another problem being studied is the simplification of
existing frontier formalities or where possible, their aboli¬
tion. Without such reforms the immense value of the
international roads to future trade and tourism in Africa
could be seriously jeopardized.
Both African and Asian countries alike are too poor to
finance these urgently needed highways from their own
resources. So help is being provided on a generous scale
through agencies such as the U.N. Special Development
Fund and the World Bank. The World Bank has already
produced loans of well over a thousand million dollars for
highway development in nearly thirty countries, and most
of this vast sum has been invested over the past five
years. It has also sponsored transport surveys in India,
Burma, Nigeria and other countries.
Several important African highway projects are included
in the twelfth annual programme of the U.N. Special Fund,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

NEW PATTERNS OF TRANSPORT (Cont'd)
Latest innovation:
the 'portless port'
which was approved by its governing council in January,
1965. Among these projects are a study of highway
development in Western Nigeria, the development of the
highway system in Somalia, and a transport survey of the
southern regions of the Central African Republic and
Cameroon. The Special Fund provides for the services
of consulting firms, experts, technicians and whatever
equipment is required.
Modern ports must also play a key role in the economic
development of the emergent countries. Significantly,
routes between ports and land-locked countries have
high priority in the international highway programmes both
of Africa and Southern Asia.
Until quite recently there were very few modern deep-
water harbours able to accommodate ocean-going ships
around the African coastline. Apart from the ports of South
Africa and the Mediterranean coast, most of the maritime
trade was handled at the numerous surf ports which had
served the African peoples for centuries.
Overseas vessels which called at these surf ports had
to anchor out in the roadstead while fleets of the traditional
paddle craft carried the goods in relays between ship and
shore. Quite obviously such an out-of date method has
proved increasingly uneconomic in modern times, and as
trade grew so did the delays to shipping.
I
14
N the years following World War II, queues of
ocean-going ships might be seen off the African
surf ports awaiting their turn to discharge or load cargoes.
Since then, however, the principal harbours on the east
and west coasts have been dredged and deepened. Con¬
crete wharves with modern cargo transit sheds have been
constructed to allow the direct berthing of deep-draft
vessels, and electric cranes and other mechanized handling
appliances have been progressively installed. As a result
of the greatly improved rate of ship turn-round, overseas
trade at these harbours has increased rapidly.
The most important single maritime development in Africa
during the past decade is Ghana's great new port of Tema,
which has replaced the surf port of Accra a few miles away.
Tema was officially opened in February, 1962, by President
Kwame Nkrumah, who described the 80 million-dollar pro¬
ject as "a signpost to the future" for his country.
Eastern Ghana now has a first-class modern seaport
for handling large ships and all types of cargo a facility
which will assist the country's development. Without it,
the famous Volta River Project Ghana's largest single
economic undertaking could never have been started at
all.
Tema Harbour is nearly one mile in circumference and,
with a water area of about 500 acres, is the largest man-
made harbour around the African coastline. Eventually
there will be twenty deep water berths for shipping and
the port can handle up to a million tons of dry cargoes
annually. There is a separate oil berth for ocean super¬
tankers of up to 35,000 tons.
The benefits of this new African port are not to be
confined to Ghana alone. Through the developing inter¬
national highways, other states in the region will be able
to share its advantages and thereby develop overseas
trade for the good of all. The extensive river systems of
A NEW CITY
has risen at Nuadibu
(formerly
Port-Etienne)
where the western
tip of the Sahara
desert meets
the Atlantic coast
of Mauritania.
The building
of port installations
and a railway
has led to
the exploitation of
one of the world's
largest iron-ore
deposits 400 miles
(600 km)
distant in the desert.
In 1960,
the World Bank lent
$66 million for
the development of
this vast mining
operation.
E H. Dean-World Bank
West Africa will play their part too. These are capable
of great development as low-cost transport routes to serve
the communities of the hinterland a long way from the
coast.
One of the real handicaps to maritime development in
the poorer countries of the world are the high costs both
of building and operating a modern deep-water harbour.
There is also an acute shortage of the various skills required
to run a complex enterprise of this kind.
These and other problems would suggest, perhaps, that
the conventional type of seaport may not after all be the
one best suited to the future needs of the emergent nations.
The new trend of carrying cargo in bulk, and the ocean
transport of goods in pre-packed containers, is already

making some of the long established operations at the
world's docksides obsolete. In other words, many activities
which are at present carried on in the vicinity of a ship's
berthing place could be done with much greater economy
in the areas to which most of the cargo is consigned or
where it originated.
One of the most interesting developments which could
perhaps help to solve port problems in many developing
countries is the offshore berthing platform, or loading
tower a conception which has been described, paradoxi¬
cally, as the "portless port". Linking a ship with the store,
and so to the connecting roads or railways, in the simplest
possible way gives such installations great flexibility.
For example, they can be set up as a shipping point as
close as possible to newly exploited sources of raw mate¬
rials, and so reduce the cost of building long stretches of
link roads or railways and of transport operations along
these. Offshore platforms can be adapted for handling all
types of ships and cargoes.
Although the emergent nations of Africa and the Far
East have many obstacles to overcome as they developed
their land and sea communications, they do also have the
advantages of an age of unprecedented technical and scien¬
tific progress and international co-operation. All the latest
technical advances in every field of transportation, together
with the means of financing them, are being made available
to these young and advancing countries through the various
specialist agencies of the United Nations.
15
