FOR FREEDOM
FROM HUNGER
First victories
Well over $405 million had been
raised for the world-wide Freedom
from Hunger Campaign by last autumn.
Contributions came from many
countries from international organiz¬
ations, groups and individuals. Special
stamps issued in 150 countries raised
$335,000. Twenty-three million dollars
have been used to launch FAO
projects and the rest have been
allocated to programmes supervised
locally in 95 countries in Asia, Africa,
the Near East, the West Indies, Latin
America and the South Pacific.
Under the FAO programme, fertil¬
izer projects in Latin America helped
many small farmers to increase their
crop earnings twentyfold. In West
Pakistan, demonstrations of the use
of hybrid corn led nearly 20,000
farmers to cultivate this cereal. In
India the output of a new cattle food
factory has helped to boost milk
production. After their boats were
equipped with outboard motors,
fishermen in Ceylon increased their
catches fourfold in 1962. Similar
projects were carried out in Togo,
Dahomey, UAR and East Pakistan.
Short cut to better crops
More than a million farmers have
seen the World Fertilizer Programme
of FAO in action since it was launched
four years ago. Millions of others
have heard rural radio broadcasts or
read newspapers, bulletins and village
posters describing the programme.
Nearly 40,000 fertilizer trials and
demonstrations have been carried out
in 17 countries of West Africa, the
Near East and North Africa and the
northern part of Latin America.
Results of the first two years of the
programme showed average yield
26
YOUNG WORLD MANIFESTO
An appeal to young people everywhere to mobilize for the
fight against hunger was launched by the Young World Assembly
which met last October in Rome to commemorate the 20th anni¬
versary of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Young
people from 33 countries, including leaders and representatives of
national and international youth organizations, issued the follow¬
ing manifesto whose text is being widely publicized by FAO in
the Freedom from Hunger Campaign.
H ALF the world does not have enough to eat. Each
year, as a result, many millions die young, as
surely as ¡f shot by the guns of a tyrant. Many more
are maimed for life by hunger, in body or in spirit.
We say to you, this suffering can and must be stopped. When
all of us, whether we live with it or far away in the rich, well-fed
countries, make up our minds to end this hunger, we can
do it.
The earth is ruled mainly by people out of touch with the
young world. They know that men starve and die in millions.
But they think it more Important to make guns, bombs, warships,
rockets, to send us to fight one another, than to provide seed
and water, schools and hospitals, so that we might feed and serve
one another.
Twenty years ago today, men of foresight set up the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to lead the
attack on hunger. Many eat better than they would have done
without it. Yet, after 20 years, there are more hungry people
than ever before. In another 20 years' time, if we do not act,
there will be yet more, famine will haunt many lands and we
shall be fighting one another again. We must prevent such an
outcome through the mobilization of the young world.
Know your power and know what you must do.
If you live in a rich country, you have wealth to share. Tell
your fellow countrymen about the hunger ¡n other lands. Demand
of your governments that much more of the nations' wealth
very many billions of dollars worth should go to world develop¬
ment.
If you live in a poor country, demand adequate food for your
fellows. Do not turn your backs on the land and people who
provide the food; instead work with them for rural develop¬
ment. Plan with them, so that starting with what little they have,
they themselves can develop in body and in spirit.
If you are educated In special knowledge and skills, do not
accept the old priorities. Know that science and technology,
that can send men into space, need only to be released into
the poor lands to work even greater miracles. See that your
skills are used to help the needy.
If you are a young parent, resolve to end the suffering of
children. Know, too, how to plan the size of your family, so
that the progress of all is not compromised.
Let us all make plain to the rulers that the division of the
world into rich and poor must end and that we know that efforts
equivalent to the many billions of dollars wasted on armaments
are needed to develop the world. Let them know, too, that if
political or financial systems prevent a just distribution of food
and wealth, those systems must be replaced.
Above all we must show our willingness to work for world
development, and demand that we be given the opportunity to
do so. Mankind is one family In which each of us has the
duty to help the other.
We who are meeting at the Young World Assembly have
pledged ourselves to this struggle as countless other young
people all over the world have done. Our generation has power
and knowledge that no previous generation has ever had. With
these we must create a world in which the human spirit is set
free from hunger and want, for ever.

Unicef - Jack Ling
An attack on malnutrition ¡n the villages of India began in 1960
when a Unicef drive to increase production and consumption
of "protective" foods was launched in Orlssa. This programme
now covers 10,000 villages. In places where food is a perennial problem
it is always the nutritionally vulnerable, children
and the pregnant and nursing mothers, who suffer most. Here,
a young girl receives milk and vitamin pills at a village health centre.
increases of about 75%. Average
financial returns on the crops have
been about 2.5 times the cost of the
fertilizer itself.
French youth in action
Since it was set up in 1964, the
French national committee for the
Freedom from Hunger Campaign has
been helped by over 330,000 young
people, including students, young
agricultural and industrial workers and
state employees. More than 42 million
francs ($21 million) have been raised,
and to enable young people to
contribute modest sums, the committee
has broken down larger projects into
smaller "pilot shares". A project for
Mayotte in the Comoros Islands
which costs 200,000 francs ($400,000)
has been split up into 351 "lots",
ranging from 90 francs ($18) for three
pedigree cockerels to 1,400 francs
($2,800) for an insecticide spraying
machine.
Odds against the farmer
Discussing the difficulties faced by
the farmer in many less developed
countries, FAO Director-General, B.R.
Sen, recently wrote: "Handicapped by
ignorance, poverty and debt, he must
face great fluctuations of price, and
because of his lack of resources must
usually sell immediately after the
harvest when prices are lowest. If
he improves his methods of farming,
much of the benefit of his increased
output may go to the merchant or the
landlord to whom he is indebted.
Often he has so little security of
tenure that he has no real inducement
to improve his holding."
Training centre for Far East
food technologists
An FAO International Food Techno-
ogy Centre has been opened at
Mysore, India. A joint venture of
FAO and the Indian Government, it
is supported by funds raised by the
Canadian people as a contribution to
the Freedom from Hunger Campaign.
Trainees from Far Eastern countries
can study food processing, packaging
and storage, thus helping to prevent
losses of food through spoilage and
waste and improving the nutritional
value of preserved and processed
food. Some training courses lead to

a master's degree at the University
of Mysore and others teach operators
of small industries that use traditional
methods how to apply modern science
and technology to the processing,
preservation and distribution of foods
with high vitamin and protein content.
World food programme
helps tree-planters
The World Food Programme is
supplying food to Algerian workers
who are transplanting 22 millions
saplings under an emergency afforest¬
ation programme. The saplings, now
in nurseries, are ready for transplant¬
ing and a delay until next year's
planting season could result in the
death of many trees. A World Food
Programme official said recently that
without additional food supplies
workers and their families (totalling
400,000 persons) would be without
means of support. He announced that
20,000 tons of wheat were being
shipped to Algeria.
Literacy and development
in Argentina
A national campaign to eliminate
illiteracy in Argentina is concentrating
on agricultural areas. Argentina aims
to teach some 250,000 persons to read
and write within the next four years.
A programme of education for semi-
literate persons is expected to reach
2.5 million persons, most of them in
rural areas, within six years. By 1969
Argentina hopes to increase its gross
national product by 34 per cent. To 01
achieve this the agricultural sector of ^
the nation's economy will receive 17
per cent of total capital investment
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FOR FREEDOM FBOM HUNGER (Cont'd)
28
which will cover such improvements
as planting permanent livestock
pastures, mechanizing large numbers
of farms, building storage facilities and
reclaiming much of the nation's soil.
Ultra-violet radiation
to preserve grain
A combine-harvester with a built in
ultra-violet radiation device has been
designed by an agricultural machinery
factory near Moscow. Immediately
after threshing the grain is given an
"ultra-violet shower", which destroys
any bacteria that might damage the
grain during storage.
Only 10 % of land
surface is farmed
Only 10% of the world's land
surface less than 15 million square
kilometres (5,800,000 square miles)
is farmed regularly and bears crops.
Just over half the world's population
1,700 million persons gain their liveli¬
hood from the soil, and of these, 65%
live in the Far East. Rural populations
represent 35% of the total of the
U.S.S.R., 25% m Europe, 50% in
Latin America, over 70% in Africa,
almost 60% in the Near East, 65% in
the Far East and 10% in North Ame¬
rica and Oceania.
Farm schools in Venezuela
Adults and young people in rural
Venezuela are given an elementary
education supplemented by courses
in agriculture and animal husbandry
in the Escuelas Granjas Comunales
(farm schools). These schools function
autonomously and finance their work
through the sale of farm produce.
Some specialize in poultry raising,
others in bee-keeping, others again in
livestock breeding or fruit and vege¬
table farming. On leaving school,
students receive in interest-free loan
of 1,200 dollars which enables them
to farm small family plots with help
and supervision from the school staff.
Paraguay's 'self help '
schools
Working as a team, four U.N.
agencies (FAO, Unesco, WHO and
Unicef) are helping Paraguay to carry
out a national nutrition programme
which aims to increase food pro¬
duction and teach healthier eating
habits. Among the obstacles to
economic development in Paraguay
are a high illiteracy rate, low popu¬
lation density and an archaic land
tenure system. Paraguay's annual per
caput income is just over 100 dollars.
Today young Paraguayans are helping
to change this state of affairs through
a self-help programme in 100 schools,
which have received farm equipment,
sewing machines, carpentry tools and
fencing wire. These schools are now
doing forestry work, and raising fruit,
vegetables and poultry. Nearly all
have five or more acres under culti¬
vation. School clubs and other extra
curricular clubs have been started.
Fountains of milk
A vast number of programmes
aimed at increasing milk and meat
production have been launched in
countries where these two vital
sources of protein have long been in
short supply. In India the milk pro¬
duction centre at Anand has
increased its annual deliveries to
Bombay from 2,500 to 25,000 tons in
the past eight years. In addition,
26,000 cows have been taken from
Bombay to the village of Aarey
where 30 farms with modern dairy
equipment now produce pasteurized
milk for Bombay.
Vital cereal
Rice produces an average of two
and a half times more grain per
hectare (24 acres) than wheat, two-
thirds more barley, and one-third more
than maize. The food value of rice
is greatest when it is unpolished.

For well over a decade the
United Nations and its
specialized agencies
have worked with
Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru
to better the lot of some
seven million Indians living
on the high plateaux of the
Andes. The Andean Highlands
project, a programme
designed to develop the
human resources
of the region, has been
directed by the International
Labour Organization.
Unesco, FAO and WHO
have provided technical
help In the educational,
agricultural and public health
fields of community
development. Left, lesson
for farmer-students in an
agricultural school on the
shores of an Andean lake.
© Paul Almasy, Paris
HOW YOU CAN HELP A WORLD CAMPAIGN
One of the first responses to the joint appeal by the U.N. Secretary-General and
FAO's Director-General for aid in the grave food emergency facing India was a
donation of $10,000 in Unesco Gift Coupons from schoolchildren in the Netherlands.
The contribution was forwarded to the Indian National Commission for Unesco by the
Unesco Centrum Nederlands, a voluntary organization in Amsterdam.
Since the launching of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign in 1960, Unesco has
co-operated with FAO by collecting funds through the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme
to help fight hunger around the world.
The wide variety of projects aided in this way ranges from nutrition programmes,
poultry raising and forestry development to literacy teaching and rural development.
Unesco Gift Coupons have made available water supply, farming, seed processing
and fishing equipment and have helped the work of child care centres, mobile veterinary
laboratories and agricultural education centres.
You can help, too. Mail your contribution today to one of the organizations listed
below, or to: Unesco Gift Coupons, Place de Fontenoy, Paris 7 , France.
Australia: The Secretary, Australian National Advisory Committee for Unesco,
Commonwealth Office of Education, 50 Miller Street, North Sydney.
Canada: The Executive Secretary, United Nations Association in Canada, 329 Bloor
Street West, Toronto 5.
New Zealand: The Secretary, National Commission for Unesco, Education Department,
Wellington C. 1.
Sweden: The Secretary-General, Swedish National Commission for Unesco, Vasa-
gatan 15-17, Stockholm.
United Kingdom: The Secretary, Council for Education in World Citizenship, 93 Albert
Embankment, London S.E. 1.
United States: Unesco Gift Coupon Office, Room 2201, U.N. Building, New York 17,
N.Y.
"Brown rice" as this is called, retains
the fat, minerals and vitamin B which
make it a much more substantial food
than the pearly-white grains of polished
rice eaten in the West.
Beneath deserts
water in plenty
The latest oil prospecting techniques
have helped geologists in their search
for hidden reservoirs of underground
water. In this way, FAO prospection
teams have located large quantities of
subsoil waters in the Chad, El Sal¬
vador, Greece, Haiti, Israel, Saudi
Arabia, Syria, Turkey and the UAR.
In certain cases enough water to
irrigate between 30,000 and 100,000
hectares (75,000 and 250,000 acres) of
arid or semi-arid land has been found.
Many a slip twixt
crop and lip
One fifth of the food produced in
the world never reaches the dinner
table. Insects and rats devour grain
stored in silos and barns. Fish rots
where no refrigeration storage is
available. Meat is wasted for lack of
transport to take it to market. All over
the world FAO is trying to reduce
these losses by helping to set up food
industries and canning factories. In
Senegal, FAO experts helped to
establish the country's first canning
plant in 1963. Less than a year later
the factory was producing 3,000 cans
of meat and peanut sauce a day (sold
at less than half the price of a similar
imported product). Senegal now has
a drying and smoking plant which
deals with 20 tons of fish per day.
FAO specialists helped Burma to
reorganize its rice-storing facilities.
Today Burma's rice storage units have
a capacity of three million tons.
From Bristol to Malawi
A remarkable fund-raising effort by
the people of Bristol, England, has
given Likuni in central Malawi a farm
institute costing $135,000. Training
courses cover a wide area of agricul¬
tural activity in support of Malawi's
national programme for increased crop
production. Bristol's support for the
institute part of the Freedom from
Hunger Campaign included a contri¬
bution of $33,000 raised by the children
of the city.
Credit for cash-crop farmers
Tanzania has received a $5 million
credit for a four-year programme of
loans for agriculture from the Inter¬
national Development Association. The
programme aims at increasing the
incomes of thousands of small farmers,
and at making possible a widespread
adoption of better production techni¬
ques. Tanzania's net earnings of
foreign exchange are expected to
increase by some $5 million annually
through greater or improved export
crops.
Changing food habits
in the right direction
Upbringing, social habits, status,
family life, religion, work and the desire
for prestige, all conspire to fix our diet,
point out FAO Applied Nutrition
experts, who have learned how diffi¬
cult it can be to change food habits
in the right nutritional direction.
As well as appealing to scientific
evidence to help bring about changes
in eating habits, the nutritionist there¬
fore looks also to the anthropologist,
the sociologist and the social psycho¬
logist to help him. Supported by their
studies of what people do and why
they do it, it then becomes possible to
persuade people not so much to aban¬
don traditional diets as to modify them
slightly.
"Incaparina", a protein-enriched food
made by mixing maize, sorghum,
cotton-seed, flour, dried yeast and
synthetic vitamin-A, is being success¬
fully introduced into the diets of
schoolchildren in Central America, pri-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

30
FOR FREEDOM FROM HUNGEB (Cont'd)
marily because it can be made Into an
appetising gruel, called atole, of a
kind they already know and enjoy.
Tailoring the food to their tastes called
for eight years of laboratory work and
much trial and error. Mexican experi¬
ments in introducing a small amount
of fish flour into bread, cookies, bis¬
cuits, tortillas, noodles and bean foods,
without changing their flavour, smell
or appearance, also seem to have
worked well.
Sharp rise in production
and use of fertilizer
A rise of over ten per cent in world
fertilizer production was achieved for
1964/65 over the" previous year's
figure reports FAO. The estimated
combined world output (excluding
mainland China) was slightly over 42
million tons. Largest increase in output
was shown by Europe (1.5 million
ton). Asia also showed a sharp
increase of about 400,000 tons. The
heaviest rate of application was found
in Europe (110 kg. of all fertilizers per
hectare of arable land). This compared
with 45 kg. in North and Central Ame¬
rica. 39 kg. in Oceania, 22 kg. in the
U.S.S.R.. 11 kg. in South America and
Asia and only 4 kg. in Africa.
Betters diets from
the back garden
Home gardens and private poultry
and fish raising will be encouraged in
Western Nigeria through a Freedom
from Hunger campaign project financ¬
ed by NEDERF a Netherland founda¬
tion, set up to administer funds for
this and similar programmes in West
Africa. NEDERF will provide $200,000
and will supply horticulturists and nutri¬
tion experts, as well as $17,400 worth
of equipment, supplies and services.
The Western Nigerian government will
provide over $100,000 in services and
cash for this two-year project.
Men against the locust
The last of six training courses
aimed at building up national staffs
to take over desert-locust control oper¬
ations was held recently In Teheran,
Iran. Modern control methods have
been taught to participants from 14
countries which will conduct their own
operations after a six-year U.N. Spe¬
cial Fund project is wound up in June.
Training co-operative staff
A five-year programme to train staff
from managers through crop fore¬
man to service personnel needed on
self-governing co-operatives is being
launched In Algeria. The project, which
seeks to train some 15,600 persons,
has been allocated $1.3 million by the
U.N. Special Fund and the equivalent
of $5.7 million by Algeria. Training
will also extend to small farmers.
© Bachofen, Geneva
