It d
w
w
is
to
oes not matter
ho reaches the moon
hat counts
the benefit
first;
man
by Anatoly Blagonravov
WE are now in the ninth year
of the Space Age, the
period of history that opened with the
launching of Sputnik 1 in 1957.
Nobody now doubts that the con¬
quest of space is one of the para¬
mount problems facing mankind today.
The leap into space marked an impor¬
tant stage in the history of civilization.
The most alluring prospects, hitherto
undreamed of possibilities, have open¬
ed up before man.
Space research is a branch of
science in which all mankind has a
stake. In the final analysis, the results
of the research should benefit all
people the world over, irrespective of
which country obtains them. The study
of outer space helps man understand
the general laws governing the uni¬
verse that surrounds us, the knowledge
gained promotes progress in science
and technology, and today scientific
and technical achievement reaches
most of the world's inhabitants.
Man today needs space research,
but the tasks involved, especially
flights to outer space, demand a tre¬
mendous concentration of effort and
ANATOLY BLAGONRAVOV, a distinguished
Soviet astrophysicist, is chairman of the
Commission for the Exploration and Use
of Cosmic Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FOR THE BENEFIT OF MAN (Cont'd)
A gigantic natural laboratory
8
funds which puts it beyond the resour¬
ces of many countries. It is no wonder,
therefore, that the Soviet Union and the
United States of America, countries
in which science and technology have
reached the highest development,
should take upon themselves the main
burden of space exploration. Their
successes in this field go far beyond
the bounds of mere national achieve-
men they are of service to all man¬
kind.
Scientific achievements are signif¬
icant not merely because they solve
various practical problems but mainly
because they accelerate progress.
It took man many millenia to find
out what our earth is made of and
what position it occupies in the uni¬
verse; to learn the rudiments of mech¬
anics, physics, mathematics and astro¬
nomy man toiled for hundreds of years.
It was this gigantic labour that pre¬
pared the "way for the amazing leap
forward that science has made in the
past few decades, the leap that led to
the accomplishment of space flights.
In a relatively short time earth satel-
Unlted Technology Center
lites, spaceships and interplanetary sta¬
tions have provided scientific material
of tremendous value that would have
required long years of persistent and
often useless labour to acquire by the
old methods. Space research has
compelled scientists to reconsider the
physics of the upper layers of the
atmosphere. It has enabled man to
photograph the side of the moon never
seen from the earth and has provided
valuable Information on Mars and Ve¬
nus and on primary cosmic rays, solar
radiation, meteoric matter and the in¬
terplanetary medium. Space research
has also thrown fresh light on the ef¬
fect of solar activity on geophysical
processes.
Rockets and artificial earth satel¬
lites have given us ultra-violet ray
and X-ray astronomy, new methods
of studying the universe. The So¬
viet automatic station Luna 9, mak¬
ing a soft landing on the moon, has
sent back photographs of the lunar
landscape and other valuable infor¬
mation. More recently, Luna 10 be¬
came a satellite of our natural satellite.
Earlier in the century scientists had
Space stations will be
of vital Importance In the
future exploration of the
universe. Whatever form
they are given, they are
likely to be built from
prefabricated parts
launched Into orbit for
astronaut technicians
to assemble. Artist's
Impression (right) shows
a space platform shaped
like a lighthouse with a
spacecraft "docked" in
foreground. Drawing
below shows astronauts
assembling a space
station with the
aid of "tractor" rockets
(foreground and in rear).
Some scientists believe
that a large wheel will be
the most likely shape for
a large space platform.
When completed it would
be spun to provide
artificial gravity
for the crew.
already begun to feel the need to
extend the study of outer space and
to obtain scientific material that could
be made accessible only by using the
universe itself as a natural laboratory.
At first glance our planet appears
to be a completely isolated celestial
body, but actually thousands of threads
connect the earth with the various pro¬
cesses taking place in outer space.
It has long been known, for instance,
that solar light and heat play a unique
role in the life of the planet and of
man; in more recent times it has been
discovered that the sun is the source
of other types of radiation that also
exercise considerable influence on the
earth. We now possess information
concerning sun-earth relations whose
existence we formerly never even
dreamed of.
Other and more distant cosmic
bodies also have an undoubted effect
on terrestrial processes. Some of these
bodies, for Instance, are sources of
what is known as cosmic radiation
whose intensity determines the radia¬
tion background at the earth's surface.
One could list other examples of the
way the "terrestrial" depends on the
"cosmic", but it will be better to sum
them up by saying that a profound un¬
derstanding of many earthly phenom¬
ena, the study of their real causes
and the explanation of their nature,

V,- tftww*
v
^>
\
would be impossible without proper
consideration of cosmic factors.
That, however, is only one aspect.
Science, as we know, progresses from
study of individual phenomena to the
discovery of general laws that operate
In nature. This is the only way mod¬
ern science can solve the gigantic
problems Involved in harnessing ever
new and more powerful natural pro¬
cesses for the benefit of man.
If the researcher hopes to under¬
stand these processes fully he cannot
remain on earth; his sphere of activity
must widen to embrace outer space
as well as our own planet.
To study the laws of the structure
and evolution of the earth we must
have data for comparison from other
bodies in the solar system with which
the earth is connected, not only by
their external similarity, but also by
their common origin. To study the
sun we must have information about
similar stars in other parts of the
universe. Even the study of the shape
of the earth requires observations
made from space by means of artificial
earth satellites.
Thus many problems of a terrestrial
nature require a transition from
planetary to cosmic research.
The cosmos, outer space itself, is
a gigantic, inexhaustible, infinitely var
ied laboratory created by nature.
Here we can observe and study new
phenomena, reveal new laws of nature
and then use the knowledge obtained
for the benefit of man, for the solution
of practical problems on earth.
Progress in science requires a con¬
stantly Increasing volume of Information
about phenomena In the universe.
Conventional terrestrial research must
be developed but at the same time
the area from which information is
gathered must extend into space.
LL scientific and technical
progress depends on the
speed at which many modern, disci¬
plines develop especially physics
chemistry, astronomy, biology and
cybernetics; the development of these
sciences also determines the rate of
production growth In the community,
and these are the branches that stand
in ever greater need of information
from outer space.
However, the main purpose of today's
space research of space flights in par¬
ticular, is to learn more about the part
of the universe surrounding our planet.
We should not expect, therefore, the
data obtained by space research to
have an immediate application,
although in time this knowledge will
find an increasing number of uses.
© APN
Even today we can name quite a
few scientific discoveries that have
come to us straight from the depths
of space. Take atomic energy, for
example. From early days astronomers
studying the sun and other stars realiz¬
ed that they are powerful heat radiators.
It was obvious that a new type of en¬
ergy was involved, since none of the
hitherto known sources of energy could
provide such a colossal output as that
observed. The discovery of this fact
was a powerful incentive to scientists
to step up the study of the sun and
other stars. The parallel study of the
structure of matter developed inten¬
sively until man's efforts enabled him
to release and harness the energy
contained in the atomic nucleus.
How many still unknown sources of
energy are there? How many natural
processes that can be placed at the
service of man does space still hide
from us?
No matter how we look at the spe¬
cific nature of modern science we are
led to the conclusion that develop¬
ment of space research is absolutely
essential.
As we have said, not all space prob¬
lems can be solved by terrestrial ob¬
servation. More and more problems
are coming to the fore that must be
studied outside the earth's atmosphere,
either in outer space or from the sur-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
9

FOR THE BENEFIT OF MAN (Cont'd)
Efforts repaid a hundredfold
10
face of other celestial bodies. For
this scientists must have space vehi¬
cles capable of delivering measuring
instruments and apparatus and the
researcher himself to various points
in space. The era of the study and
conquest of space, the main feature
of which is space flights, is an
essential stage in man's development.
The space era in the development
of terrestrial civilization, however, is
not merely a matter of launching arti¬
ficial earth satellites and making space
flights. It is the use of an ever-grow¬
ing concentration of the forces of
science and of funds to study the
numerous phenomena occurring on
earth and outside the earth and to
carry out extensive research on both
a planetary and cosmic scale.
HE broader the scope of
scientific research, the
greater the scale on which it develops,
and the greater the need for closer
international co-operation. Research is
most likely to bring the desired results
if it follows an agreed programme and
uses standardized instruments, and
also if the data acquired are processed
and analysed jointly. The effort thus
expended will pay for itself a hundred¬
fold, as joint international research con¬
ducted In recent years has proved most
convincingly. The International Geo¬
physical Year and the Year of the
Quiet Sun are excellent examples of
such fruitful co-operation to say noth¬
ing of the pre-arranged programmes
under which the scientists of different
countries study solar eclipses and
other astronomic phenomena.
Today the attack on the secrets of
nature is being waged with increasingly
powerful scientific forces. In a number
of countries mighty accelerators and
big optical and radio-telescopes are
being built, and the latest achievements
of physics, electronics, cybernetics
and other sciences are being mobi¬
lized in the service of astronomy.
In turn space exploration exerts a
strong influence on the development
of other fields of science and technol¬
ogy. For instance, it stimulates the
further development of cybernetics
and electronics and compels scientists
to seek ways of creating micro¬
miniature laboratory equipment.
For this mighty technical array to
be used most effectively, for scientific
progress to be achieved at maximum
tempo, there must be a broad ex¬
change of information between scien¬
tists of various countries, concerted
effort and close contact. A good
example of such collaboration is the
United Nuclear Research Institution in
Dubna, near Moscow, where scientists
from many socialist countries work
side by side.
Another example of international
co-operation in space exploration is
the joint Soviet-French experiments
in colour TV transmissions using
the French Secam system via the
Soviet space communications satellite
"Molniya" (see page 23).
There has also been some success¬
ful co-operation between Soviet and
American astronomers; in one in¬
stance a Soviet scientist, A. D. Kuzmin,
worked at the observatory of the Calif¬
ornia Technological Institute for
several months. Joint research produc¬
ed some interesting data on physical
conditions on Venus. World science
forums are being held more and more
frequently.
The tendency to unite scientific
effort to develop international research,
is one of the outstanding features of
contemporary science, especially in
the field of space research. This, in
turn, leads to greater international co¬
operation and mutual assistance be¬
tween different countries and different
social systems, and leads to a streng¬
thening of world peace.
The successes of modern science
in designing space vehicles of various
types power carrier rockets, space¬
ships and steerable automatic stations
have enabled researchers to pro¬
gress from the passive study of
phenomena to experiments in the
upper atmosphere and in interplanet¬
ary space.
Experimentation is the most rapid
and effective way of acquiring know¬
ledge. The observer always has to
wait for the right conditions; the exper¬
imenter creates the conditions he
needs; he can change them at will
in the course of the experiment, and
then observe the results of the
changes.
The first experiment in space was
the launching of an artificial earth
satellite. It was preceded by theoret¬
ical calculations based on celestial
mechanics and it proved that our
previous knowledge of the structure
of the solar system and the laws
governing the motion of heavenly
bodies was correct.
When a manned satellite went into
orbit the possibilities for observation
and experimentation increased Immeas¬
urably, for man's actual presence in
space is essential for precise seien-
Photos C APN
PIONEERS OF
ASTRONAUTICS
The names of many men figure in the
story of man's progress from the
concept of space flight to actual accom¬
plishments in astronautics. One such
man is Konstantin Eduardovich Tsiol-
kovsky (above), a Russian school
teacher who was born in 1857 in Kaluga.
When the first aeroplanes were being
coaxed to leave the ground, Tsiolkovsk/
was already writing about satellites,
"ether suits" (space suits), the use of
plants to provide oxygen and food for
space travellers and even the coloniza¬
tion of the planets. In the latter part
of his life (he died in 1935) his genius
was fully appreciated, and today a
crater on the moon bears his name.
His vision inspired Soviet scientists who
in 1929 founded an organization for
studying rocket motors. Above right,
members of this group are seen with an
experimental rocket they built in the
early 1930s. In the group is Serge
Korolyov, later to become a celebrated
Soviet designer of rockets and space¬
ships, who died earlier this year.
Another authentic pioneer was a U.S.
physics professor, Robert Hutchings
Goddard. In the early 1920s. Goddard
not only worked out calculations on roc¬
ketry and space flight, but also experi¬
mented with fuels, built rockets and
actually flew them. Right, in March 1926,
Goddard prepares to launch the world's
first liquid fuel rocket, the forerunner
of the powerful engines that hurl space¬
craft into orbit todey.
USIS
tifie work. As we have said the main
purpose of our invasion of space, for
the time being at least, is to obtain
a more profound understanding of our
immediate surroundings.
In space itself it is possible to make
a direct study of phenomena and pro¬
cesses still unknown to science, and
this of course, means that the space
explorer must inevitably face the
unknown. As man penetrates further
and further into space that unknown
will gradually become more and more
extraordinary; it will be more and
more difficult to relate it to what is
known and it will be necessary on
each occasion to find new, original
approaches to problems.

With science and technology at
their present level such research can
be done only by man, because the
human brain possesses potentialities
far in excess of the most perfect of
our modern electronic computers and
other cybernetic apparatus. Situations
may arise during a space flight that
have not been foreseen, and the
optimum decision that has to be made
instantaneously can be made only by
man.
Research during space flights be¬
came still more practicable when Soviet
scientists and engineers designed
the multi-seat spacecraft that made a
successful flight carrying astronauts
Komarov, Yegorov and Feoktistov.
Spaceship crews may include such
specialists as astronomers, physicists,
biologists, doctors and engineers; each
of them, working in his own field, can
conduct continuous and varied obser¬
vations. There is no doubt that in the
relatively near future we shall see
many scientific discoveries made on
board spaceships.
Another important advance in space
exploration was made during the
flight of the Soviet spaceship Vos-
khod 2 when an astronaut, Alexei
Leonov, stepped ont of his ship into
space for the first time; he remained
outside for ten minutes protected only
by the spacesuit he was wearing. This
was a scientific and technical
achievement that ranked with such
other accomplishments as the orbiting
of the first artificial earth satellite
and the flight of Yuri Gagarin, the first
astronaut.
N astronaut must have a
, certain freedom of move¬
ment in flight if he is to carry out all
the operations necessary for an effec¬
tive exploration of space, but the cap¬
sule of the spaceship hampers his
movements considerably. The flight of
Pavel Belyayev and Alexei Leonov
showed that this obstacle can be sur¬
mounted. Using a special spacesuit
which supplies him with oxygen and
protects him from the hazards of space,
the astronaut can leave the ship, move
freely in space and carry out different
tasks.
A short time later this experiment
was repeated by U.S. astronauts.
Since it has been shown that a man
can leave his ship in space, it will be
much easier to do such things as join¬
ing two spaceships, building research
stations in orbit and landing expedi¬
tions on other heavenly bodies.
U.S. scientists have made an impor¬
tant contribution to the conquest of
space. Among other things U.S.
spacemen have made flights along
ballistic trajectories the first step
towards the future establishment of
inter-continental rocket transport; they
have also developed the technique of
landing on water.
Valuable information was sent back
to earth by the U.S. space stations
Mariner 2 and Mariner 4 from the vici¬
nity of Venus and Mars; another U.S.
contribution was made by photographs
transmitted by the Ranger Space Sta¬
tion as it approached the moon.
U.S. scientists have carried out
fascinating experiments with lasers to
determine the orbital position of artifi¬
cial earth satellites. This was done by
reflectors on the vehicle powerful
enough to send the light signals of the
lasers back to earth. This method of
observation showed the position of the
vehicle in orbit with an accuracy of 15
metres. Various types of lasers, work¬
ing in different wavebands, are an im¬
portant new tool for space studies.
U.S. scientists and engineers have
achieved outstanding successes in the
practical use of space vehicles; one
example being the systems of meteor¬
ological and communications satellites
they have created.
An important new stage in the
conquest of space was marked by the
flight of Soviet Automatic Station Luna
9. The moon being our nearest neigh¬
bour in space, its study is of tremen¬
dous interest to science, and the soft
landing constitued a substantial contrib¬
ution to lunar exploration.
The comprehensive study of the nat¬
ure of the moon, the structure of its
surface and interior, the composition of
lunar matter and the physical condi¬
tions prevailing there will greatly ex¬
tend our knowledge of the structure of
the planets of the solar system and of
the history of their origin and develop¬
ment. In the final analysis this will
help us study our own planet and make
the best use of its colossal natural
resources.
The astronomers' dream of an orbital
observatory beyond the terrestrial
atmosphere is already coming true.
The idea of building a space station
on the moon at some future date is a
fascinating one. Such a station, func¬
tioning in a vacuum and in a gravita¬
tional field one sixth of the strength of
that of the earth, could be an invalu¬
able cosmic observatory and a physico-
chemical laboratory in which scientists
could study various processes under
unusual conditions.
Soviet scientists made an extremely
important step forward in space ex¬
ploration at the end of 1965 and the
beginning of 1966 when automatic in¬
terplanetary probes Venera 2 and
Venera 3 were sent to Venus. After a
three-month flight, the Venera 3 probe
reached the surface of the planet on
March 1, 1966 and delivered a pennant
with the emblem of the Soviet Union.
This precision landing was achieved
by a correction of the probe's trajectory
successfully carried out on December
26, 1965.
Venus became the second celestial
body, after the moon, to be reached by
a man-made space vehicle.
Problems on a planetary scale are
being solved in the course of space
exploration, and this makes it an area
in which all-round co-operation be¬
tween scientists of a number of coun¬
tries would be most effective. Space
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
H

12
FOR THE BENEFIT OF MAN (Cont'd)
Weather eyes
open in space
research itself, moreover, must be
conducted on a broad basis. Soviet
' scientists are convinced that rockets
and spaceships must serve the cause
of peace and the progress of humanity.
Data obtained from space satellites,
to complement information from ground
meteorological stations, is an important
factor in reliable weather forecasting.
Following a Soviet-American agree¬
ment, a round-the-clock communication
channel now provides for a two-way
transmission of meteorological data,
meteorological charts and photographs.
This channel will assume a special
significance when a continuous action
system of weather-service satellites
is put into orbit.
Some international space studies
have already been carried out, among
others the Anglo-Soviet radio trans¬
missions through the U.S. satellite
Echo and through the moon and Venus.
Radio signals transmitted from Britain's
Jodrell Bank Observatory were reflect¬
ed from the surface of one of these
planets and picked up by the Soviet
radio-astronomic station at Zimenki,
near Gorky.
The purpose of these experiments
was to extend our knowledge of the
conditions under which radio waves
penetrate the upper layers of the
earth's atmosphere. This is of great
practical importance for the develop¬
ment of long distance radio communi¬
cation of the earth-spaceship-earth
type, to ensure reliable radio commun¬
ication between the earth and space¬
ships and other objects that in the
future will be placed in orbit.
Special communications satellites,
put in high orbits to ensure prolonged
operation, are of major significance in
establishing a world-wide system of
radio communication and television.
The sucessful launching of the Molniya
relay satellite by the Soviet Union, for
example, has made possible a regular
television link between Vladivostok and
Moscow.
Actually, it does not matter which
country is first able to send an expedi¬
tion to the moon or is responsible for
some other success in space; the im¬
portant thing is the benefit it will bring
to people; this is the real purpose of
all these achievements.
The history of science shows that
when outstanding scientific discoveries
are made in any country, their further
development is due to the joint effort
of the scientists of the whole world.
The conquest of space will be no
exception.
t
*n
