the director of the National
Book Centre of Pakistan examines
READING HABITS
AND BOOK PUBLISHING
IN ASIA
by Ibne Insha
12
HE great expanse called
Asia extends from Iran on
the periphery of the Middle East, to
palmgrove islands of the Pacific, many
thousands of miles eastwards. It
covers a multitude of peoples, cul¬
tures, languages, and scripts; the vast
region comprises radical variations in
terrain, climate, customs, traditions,
modes of living and thinking, as well
as social and environmental situations
generally. The patterns of statehood
and economy differ, too, and the
Interstate cultural affinities are mostly
limited to immediate neighbourhoods.
Yet it is Asia all the same, with
unmistakable features of identity and
similarity.
All these countries are what we call
developing countries . All share a
considerable, in some cases disturb¬
ingly high rate of illiteracy, and all
are trying to improve the situation by
employing breakthrough literacy pro¬
grammes. Most have neither a very
high living standard or per capita rate
of income, and the inadequacy of
means of communication is a general
handicap. All need a quickened pace
of progress In technological fields; and
the advancement and modernity of
Japan, for instance, is still a rare
phenomenon in this region.
Most are tradition-bound and have
often disregarded the utilitarian aspects
of education. Even the learning of
the three Rs has amounted to the
achievement of knowledge for its own
sake, or, at best, has been regarded
as a key to professions like teaching,
the priesthood or the judiciary. Now,
however, the emphasis is changing In
IBNE INSHA, Pakistani author, poet and
literary critic, is director of the National
Book Centre of Pakistan, Karachi. He has
carried out surveys of reading habits in his
country and has organized many book
festivals, exhibitions and seminars. This
article is adapted from a paper he contribut¬
ed to the meeting of experts on book
production and distribution in Asia, held
in Tokyo in May.
favour of the sciences. Many of the
countries in this region have been
under foreign domination or influence
for extended periods and are only now
changing over, or going back, to na¬
tional languages as media of educa¬
tion. This has a considerable bear¬
ing on reading preferences of the
better educated classes.
What deters a potential reader?
We may enumerate the deterrents to
the use and enjoyment of books as:
illiteracy; low purchasing power; non¬
availability of specific reading matter;
lack of information about availability
of books; inadequate library systems;
inadequate book promotion.
How to induce people to read. Of
the deterrents named, abolition of
illiteracy is of fundamental importance,
yet we are not concerned with it direct¬
ly here. Our immediate concern is to
induce those who are literate to read,
and to encourage them to go beyond
their textbooks. Our typical client is
a man with a reasonable measure of
schooling (about four years) and a
modest purchasing power. The prob¬
lem is to make reading a "felt need"
for him.
He must come to realize that as a
student, he stands to gain by extend¬
ing his area of study not only for
examinations but later in life. If he
works in a factory or an office, reading
can help to improve his efficiency and
prospects. A businessman can profit
from books imparting information
concerning his affairs. A farmer is
likely to be interested In better agri¬
cultural methods, and a mechanic In
the techniques of his trade. A house¬
wife needs books on cookery, knit¬
ting or child-care. But of course, all
of them need books for general read¬
ing poetry, fiction, travel, history,
biography and general subjects. But
basically it is the potential reader,
man, woman or child, who should feel
the urge to read, and that urge has
sometimes to be created.
To be a reader requires a reasonable
period of schooling normally four
Photo © Holmes Lebel - Camera Press
years. It is at this stage that the
school teacher or the school librarian
should begin stimulating the student
to read outside the classroom.
The Unesco Seminar on Children's
Literature, in Teheran, in April 1964,
drew up a Book Utilization Course cov¬
ering about 36 hours over the whole
college year. If the use of the school
library is encouraged by teacher and
teaching Is not just confined to pre¬
scribed texts, it will go a long way
to Inculcate the book reading habit.
Once acquired it is most likely to

In recent years Asian countries have made a tremendous effort to increase their book production and
distribution. But to do so they have had to overcome formidable obstacles: high density of population,
shortage of technical resources and capital. In May 1966, Unesco convened an important meeting to study
the possibilities of developing Asia's book publishing Industry. Photo shows young readers in a Singapore street.
endure for a lifetime. Perhaps some
sort of test based on non-textbooks
read by a student might be introduced
at the end of his course. School
libraries need to be better equipped,
too, for a broad, basic and enlighten¬
ing education.
A network of public libraries. A
student's awakened interest in reading
will, in time, lead him to the public
library and the bookshop. In Asia, we
need a network of local libraries in
cities and towns as well as in rural
areas. Such a network would provide
a much needed fillip to the publishing
and the bookselling trade. In the
United States and the United Kingdom,
from 75% to 90% of children's books
are bought by libraries; the rest are
sold by bookshops to the individual
buyer. A similar, even a much smaller
ratio of consumption would result in
a vigorous publishing Industry in Asia.
Street lending libraries. The role
of street lending libraries and mobile
libraries is significant, too. In India and
Pakistan, street libraries known popu¬
larly as "Anna Libraries" have existed
and flourished for long. At one time
one could take out a book daily for an
anna (1/1 6th of a rupee, a pre-metric
system coin) and a voracious reader
was welcome to more than one book
for the same fee. A survey has shown
that housewives and students predo¬
minate as the clientele of these insti¬
tutions.
The choice of books in these libraries ^ ^
is not always a happy one. In fact, 1 "I
there have been complaints that they **
stock cheap fiction only, and sometimes
undesirable literature too, hence that
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

READING HABITS IN ASIA (Continued)
"Penny book clubs' for children
14
the authorities should suppress them.
It may be so. But some way should
be found to improve rather than close
them.
Experiments are being conducted
with mobile libraries and "box libra¬
ries" In some countries. The mobile
libraries, which constitute the well of
knowledge that goes to the thirsty have
been very useful but their number is
limited and needs to be increased.
Box librairies contain standard sets
of books catering to different tastes.
These are supplied by community de¬
velopment organizations to community
centres in rural areas and circulate
from village to village. It is a good
way to make literates life-long readers.
The "home library" is one of the
most effective ways to develop book-
buying habits in Asia; ¡t incorporates
the features of book clubs as we know
them to work in the West. A home
library can be run by a single publisher
who has a strong and varied list, or
by a wholesale bookseller.
What is a home library? An instal¬
ment plan relying on a strong body of
patrons or subscribers. Books are
dispensed on attractive terms, and the
initial offer is often too alluring to be
resisted. As can be seen in advertise¬
ments of book clubs, the bestsellers
of the season are offered at extremely
low prices to new members if they
undertake to buy a specified number
of books in a year, from a large
selection offered, and at a specially
low price.
A model plan for a home library for
Asian countries has been devised by
the consultant to the All India Home
Library Plan Society, Artur Isenberg.
Subscribers are asked to pay 5 ru¬
pees (about one dollar) monthly, for
18 months, or a total of 90 rupees.
In return subscribers who complete the
subscription period receive 100 rupees
worth of books which they can select
from a list of over 500 titles. In
addition, each subscriber receives free
of charge a number of bonus books
as well as a monthly magazine, plus
free packing and mailing of books.
A modest discount (of about
10%) on book orders placed after
subscriptions have been taken out may
be given; or other facilities such as
limited credit made available.
The subscriber who does not com¬
plete his subscription period does not
receive the considerable extra benefits
mentioned above, but he does receive
his money's worth of books of his own
choice. His accounts are credited with
any payments he may have made and
debited with the cost, at list price, of
any books, including bonus books, sup¬
plied to him, as well as with the cost
of posting them and also the magazine
issues sent to him up to the premature
closing of his subscription account. In
other words, the incomplete subscrip
tion is treated like any other retail
book purchase.
Different organizations initiating
home library plans In India are reported
to have sold more than 10 lakhs of
rupees ($210,000) worth of books since
the first such scheme was launched in
January 1960. Since the bulk of the
clientele is that section not normally
reached by bookshops or other con¬
ventional outlets, it really means that
a new sector of the literate public is
acquiring the book reading habit.
The economics of a home library
system are: small profits per sub¬
scriber, multiplied by a large number
of subscribers into an attractive overall
profit.
simple variation, especially
for children, would be
something like the "Paisa Library" of
Lahore which flourished in the early
1940s; we might call it a "Farthing
Library" or a "Penny Library."
The "Paisa Library" scheme was
designed to promote saving as well
as the book reading habit. Children's
books are usually purchased by par-
rents, but this scheme gave the child¬
ren a sense of importance since the
books were bought out of their own
meagre pocket money. The child had
to save one paisa a day, which made
30 paisas a month (less than half a
rupee, or ten U.S. cents). The sum
was sent to the promoters, a leading
firm of publishers, who issued a child¬
ren's magazine of long standing, and
all correspondence, dispatch and other
costs were paid out of these ten cents.
The child received a new book each
month for about seven cents net.
The important underlying idea was
to encourage the buying of books out
of one's own resources as opposed
to receiving books as a present. The
project was abandoned after more than
fifty titles had been published, ranging
from 72 to 112 pages. The war raised
the cost of materials and everything
else involved in production, and it
became impossible to continue the
"a paisa a day" project. The hall¬
mark of the scheme had been inexpen-
siveness which still is the prime con¬
sideration in most countries, and the
system is well worth trying again.
The importance of book festivals and
book exhibitions in developing the
reading habit in Asia cannot be over¬
emphasized. It is one of the striking
ways of bringing books to the atten¬
tion of potential readers and informing
people that the books they are inter¬
ested in have actually been published.
Admittedly there is a shortage in
Asian countries of books in certain
fields, particularly science and techno¬
logy, or biography and literary criti¬
cism, but the books that are available
are not always known to the general
public.
I wish I could quote from the register
of comments we keep for every book
exhibition. The response is so great
that there are always requests by indi¬
viduals and especially educational in¬
stitutions for these book exhibitions to
be prolonged. It is really exhilarating
to see students eagerly queuing to
browse among the stalls, and reading
books on the spot. Such book exhibi¬
tions should be of a general as well
as a specialized nature, to attract
particular strata of readers.
Our experience shows that book
exhibitions should be accompanied by
sales arrangements. People who see
good books exhibited are disappointed
not to find them readily available for
purchase and by the time they return
home other considerations dampen
their enthusiasm and customers for
books are thereby lost.
In order to increase the book reading
habit, book exhibitions need to be
better advertised or publicized, either
in the book supplement section of daily
newspapers, or through posters,
streamers and radio/TV programmes
where possible. It is always good
policy in Asia to declare a sale at
discount for the duration of an exhibit¬
ion in order to attract potential book
buyers. During the Pakistan National
Book Festival of 1964, for example, all
books were available at 10 % discount,
not only at the door of the exhibition,
where sale arrangements^ were pro¬
vided, but in city bookshops as well.
Every bookseller could afford to give
a 10 % discount without asking for
special arrangements from publishers.
In this connexion I should mention
that it is not generally known, even
in Pakistan, that money used to buy
books can be deducted from income
tax in Pakistan. The National Book
Centre of Pakistan recently produced
a poster to publicize this little known
fact and this has had a marked effect
on the sale of books.
"Book Festival" is a much more
attractive name for general annual
events than "Book Exhibition," and it
should be given a festive look. In
Pakistan, we gave away free of charge
thousands of balloons with slogans,
book marks and illustrated book lists
during the festival.
Movable feasts of books should
be provided through bookmobiles, visit¬
ing educational institutions, industrial
housing areas and other suburbs with
displays of books, and carrying extra
portable wire book racks and addi¬
tional stock for display outside the
van.
More and better book vending. Book
buying is incentive buying. Books
would surely sell in greater numbers
if a potential reader had the chance to
look at them. This takes us to the

need for more bookshops or book
outlets with "browsing" facilities. In
the West, these are offered by the
drugstore or department store. In Asia,
we should make use of restaurants,
general stores, fairs and festivals or
other places where people congregate.
In Iran and in Andhra Pradesh, India,
this has proved a great success. The
success of Iranian paperbacks is based
on a shift of emphasis from the book¬
shop to the news-stand and similar
outlets. As a result, bookshop sales
now represent only one half of total
book sales. Millions of new readers
are being created among people who
hitherto were outside the orbit of
conventional booksellers. Bookmo¬
biles or bookshops on wheels run by
cooperatives of publishers and book¬
sellers would also help to boost sales.
Though primarily a commercial en¬
terprise, a bookshop also plays an
important cultural role. Municipal and
other local bodies in Asia should there¬
fore be pursuaded to reserve centrally
located stalls and kiosks for book
vending and to lease them on special
terms. Asia's railway bookstalls would
do well to provide a larger variety
of books. Enlarged book vending fa¬
cilities at the terminals and stopping
places of other forms of transportwould
also do much to stimulate book buying.
I T is imperative, of course,
for the reader to be told
what books are available. A need
therefore exists for more subject lists
of functional bibliographies to guide
readers. Trade papers could do much
in this respect if their scope was wid¬
ened to include reviews and articles
on books.
The National Book Centre of Paki¬
stan has Itself published a book list
of currently available children's litera¬
ture. Arranged by subject and carry¬
ing an authors' index, the list gives
details of the volume, illustrations,
content and price of books. Another
list published by the Centre covers
reference books and book on Paki¬
stan. Such subject bibliographies do
much to promote book sales. They
should, however, be based on com¬
pletely objective selections of books
so as to make them clearly distinguish¬
able from publishing trade catalogues.
They should be modestly, even nomin¬
ally priced to allow distribution on the
widest scale.
Good books are not usually cheap,
and cheap books, in turn, are not
always good. The ideal situation of
good books at cheap prices is a para¬
dox to a book producer. Paperbound
books, while revolutionizing the distri¬
bution systems, have tried to reconcile
the two situations and can be consider¬
ed as an answer to the growing needs
of Asian readers with modest pur¬
chasing power. Mass production is a
prerequisite, however, since the profit
margin of publisher, bookseller and
author on a paperback is far lower than
in the case of a hard cover edition.
According to one graph, the publisher's
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Although book production in many Asian countries is expanding, the number
of books bought by the people of the region is still no more than one-thirtieth
to one-sixtieth of that in the industrialized nations. Asian countries also
need three times as many textbooks. Travelling bookshops, like this one
in Ceylon, help to ease the book famine, but many more are needed.
A revival of the "penny book clubs" which enabled children
to buy a book each month for a very small sum has been proposed.
15

16
READING HABITS IN ASIA (Continued)
net profit on a paperback retailing at
2/6 (stg.) is about 2 %. On a hard¬
cover book it would be about 15 %.
Paperback publishing deserves the
utmost support and encouragment.
Prerequisites are cheaper raw ma¬
terials, modern printing and binding
facilities and also the services of
technicians trained by European paper¬
back publishing firms.
One Asian country, Iran, has
developed a very successful paper¬
back series entitled "Kltabhai-Jebi",
one of whose important innovations
is a uniform sales discount. Whatever
the price of a book, the retailer gets
five rials (about 7 U.S. cents), and
unsold books are collected and
replaced by the publisher's repres¬
entatives. Western publishers should
be asked to charge nominal copyright
fees in order to encourage similar
enterprises.
For the illustrated books needed
by children, and sometimes published
in colour, arrangements for a central
and syndicated production of il¬
lustrations are advisable, as was re¬
commended by the Teheran Seminar
in 1964. The Franklin Organization,
operating in some Asian countries,
has tried this successfully. Illustrations
for everyday science books by
Bertha Morris Parker, published
simultaneously In Arabic, Urdu and
Persian, were produced centrally in
Teheran, and the different language
texts were printed in other countries.
The writer has experimented with
most of the book promotion measures
described here, as Director of the
National Book Centre of Pakistan, an
organization created on Unesco's
initiative, which seeks to encourage
book development on progressive
lines and to promote reading habits.
We should like to see similar book
promotion organizations, transcending
professional interests, set up on a
national basis, and then loosely
federated on a regional footing.
Ceylon, Iran and India already have
such agencies, and In recent years
the Unesco Centre for Reading
Materials in South Asia, from its
headquarters in Karachi, has actively
promoted an exchange of information
designed to encourage book pro¬
duction and development.
The Unesco Centre issues a
magazine, sponsors surveys of reading
habits, arranges professional training
"workshops" and helps to create a
dialogue between representatives of
the book world in South Asia.
This has involved Pakistan, India,
Burma and Ceylon, which have been
in the Centre's orbit for about ten
years, to a greater degree than other
countries such as Iran, Nepal,
Afghanistan and Thailand. As the
Centre's orbit is expanding and as
mass co/nmunication programmes are
likely to be given a new stimulus, a
closer integration can be expected in
the years to come.
V*
,X
