by Lord Ritchie-Calder
THE generation which hasgrown up in the past
twenty years is unique. Nothing like
it has ever existed in the history of
mankind. Every teenager and every
twenty-year old everywhere has, in his
or her bones, radio-strontium, a man-
made element which did not exist
before 1945. Its presence, the result
of fall-out from atmospheric bomb
tests (now suspended), may be medi-
cally unimportant but it is the brand-
mark of The Atomic Age. For many,
their birth certificates were registered
by computers. For some, their zodia-
cal sign was Sputnik. But their future
was not predicted by astrologers ; it
was predicated by scientists.
This is a generation which was born
into The Atomic Age, programmed into
The Cybernetic Age, rocketed into The
Space Age and stands poised on the
threshold of The DNA Age. They
take for granted scientific and techno-
logical advances about which the
Founder Fathers of the United Nations,
legislating for the future, knew nothing.
When they signed the Charter at San
Francisco in June 1945 only three
people-Truman, Attlee and Eden-
knew (and each imperfectly) about the
impending release of nuclear energy.
Which shows how wise were we
who put the"S"into Unesco. It
nearly was not there. The Committee
LORD RITCHIE-CALDER has been pro-
fessor of international relations at the
University of Edinburgh since 1961. He
has travelled over most of the world on
missions for the U. N. and its specialized
agencies, and took part in the two U. N.
Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy (1955 and 1958). Professor
Calder was consultant editor for the eight
volumes produced from the proceedings
of the U. N. Conference on Science and
Technology (1963) and prepared the com-
prehensive volume on the conference,. world of Opportunity."He is the author
of many books on science for which he
was awarded the Kalinga Prize for science
writing (1961). In the honours list of
lunge 11, 1966, Professor Calder was given
a life peerage by Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II.
of Allied Ministers of Education who,
in wartime London, recognized the
necessity for such a specialized
agency, conceived it as UNECO-the
United Nations Educational and Cultur-
al Organization. One recalls the argu-
ments : the pedagogues regarded
science as something which, read in
textbooks or taught in class, belonged
to education and the aesthetes re-
garded science as something which,
with the grace and patina of time,
might qualify as culture. There were
others who argued that science was
the pace-maker for both education and
culture.
In view of the later agonizing about
"The Two Cultures"it is worthwhile
remembering that the person who ac-
tively and successfully promoted the
"S"was the distinguished poet, Archi-
bald MacLeish, and that the first Direc-
tor-Genera !, Juhan Huxiey, was a
scientist.
One must not blame those who
doubted. What we now recognize as
the Scientific and Technological Revo-
lution was not as self-evident, even in
terms of destructiveness of war, as it
is today. But we had confirmation,
with full justification of the"S", by the
time of the first General Conference in
1946.
The Atomic Age had been born with
count-down precision at 5 : 30 a. m. on
Monday, July 16, 1945, in the desert
of New Mexico and the realization, for
the world's people, came with appal-
ling force with the destruction of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Nuclear
energy, Man's greatest discovery
since his mastery of fire, exploded
with cataclysmic violence.
In tntercepting the flying bombs, the
anti-aircraft batteries on the English
coast were already fitted with predic-
tors, which, as computors, with feed-
back, were the precursors of the elec-
tronic marvels of The Cybernetic Age.
Londoners, bombarded with V-2's,
were already aware of The Rocket Age
which was to lead to The Space Age.
But, to the post-1945 generation,
we are like The Dawn Men-practi-
cally pre-historicl They are not the
least surprised when an astronaut
steps out of a space capsule travelling
at 17, 500 miles an hour and ambles
across the continent of America in
20 minutes or round the globe in
90 minutes. They accept, without
perplexity, that a man-made piece of
hardware can circumnavigate Planet
Number 3, the Earth, sixteen times a
day ; that probes can reach out to
Mars or Venus or"soft-land"on the
moon and they judge them less by
what they report back than by what
they fail to do. Communications
satellites, mirroring events on the far
side of the world, impress them less
than the first automatic telephone ex-
change did my generation. And why
not ? They assume that you ask the
scientist and hire the technologist and
they will produce anything you want.
The youth of today recognizes, what
is not yet plain to his elders, that the
scientist has miniaturized his planet.
No place on earth is more than a few
hours distant by jet-propulsion ; no
place on earth is more than a few
minutes away by rocket-propulsion ;
and no place on earth is more than
split seconds away by radio. In a
single generation, man has unlocked
the secret of matter and released it as
CONTINUED ON PAGE 11
The prodigious advance of science
in the past 20 years has revealed
a universe of totally new dimensions.
Scientific triumphs in every field,
from atomic research to the
expiration of outer space, have
advanced the frontiers of human
knowledge. In these 20 years
Unesco has promoted scientific
progress and the application of its
benefits to economic and social
development. It has included in
its programme the study of problems
in major fields such as hydrology,
biology, oceanography, geophysics
and ecology as well as aid to
the underprivileged nations.
Right, giant blades of a turbine
used for generating electricify.
Photo @ N. Max ! mov-APN
TWO DECADES
IN THE WORLD
St ! BMSSMNMSTm
! Mt) M M ! < ! M N K t Bt iNt P. < !  MMt)  NB BMN) .
SCIENCE


In launching the International Hydrological Decade in 1965, Unesco has called for global action to meet Photo C Pau ! Amasy. Paris
one of the great threats confronting the multiplying world population-lack of water, and also its abuse.
This vast programme of hydrological studies will include a world-wide stocktaking of water
resources. Under its Major Project for Arid Zone Research (1957-1962), Unesco has already
.-organized systematic studies of areas covering one-third of the earth's land surface, in over
1 0 a score of scientific fields, including hydrology, new energy resources such as solar and wind
energy, ecology and climatology. It has also helped to set up desert research institutes (in Israel,
Turkey, India, U. A. R. and Pakistan, for instance) whose aim is the reconquest of arid lands. Here,
a technician uses laboratory models to study water flow problems.

TWO DECADES OF SCIENCE (Continued)
Their ivory tower toppled with Hiroshima
nuclear energy. He has burst the
gravitational fences of his planet and
adventured into space and in the
study of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
and molecular biology is probing the
secrets of life with implications as
great as, or greater than, either the
atom or space. By radio-astronomy,
he is reaching out to the limits of the
universe and recording the broadcast
signals of cosmic events of thousands
of millions of years ago.
Pierre Auger, Director of the Natu-
ral Sciences Department of Unesco
during the scientifically eruptive years
of the 1950s, coined a phrase (Current
Trends in Scientific Research, Unesco
1961) which has become overworked
but which is limpid truth :"Of all the
scientists and research workers who
have existed since the beginning of
Homo sapiens, ninety per cent are
a ! ive today."
The other ten per cent have their
niches in the Gallery of Time which
stretches back to the mastery of fire,
perhaps 100, 000 years ago. This is
another way of saying that the bulk of
measurable achievements of science
belongs to the past fifty and, prepon-
derantly, to the past twenty years.
Or as it was put by an enthusiastic
young physicist,"Today, we are privi-
leged to sit side by side with the
giants on whose shoulders we stand."
This acrobatic feat and this juggling
with Time is like saying that Harvey
had discoursed with Aristotle ; that
Einstein had exchanged reprints with
Newton ; that Watt had met Archimedes
at a seminar ; or that Pasteur, before
taking his broth up into the bacteria-
free Alps, had had a word with Rhases,
the Lute Player, who, in A. D. 900 hung
pieces of fresh meat around Baghdad
and where the meat putrefied least
built the Caliph's hospital.
PUT it another way : Thinkof H. G. Wells, the cente -
ary of whose birth we are celebrating
this year. Writers of modern science
fiction will tell you that they have to
escape into remote fantasy because
otherwise they will find their imaginative
projections overtaken on the news
pages of the Late Night Special. Wells,
a trained scientist, would take a piece
of abstruse research and confidently
prophesy its fulfilment. This is what he
did with a scientific paper by Frederick
Soddy which no more than hinted at
the release of nuclear energy from the
splitting of the atom and, in The World
Set Free, Wells fictionalized it, pre-
dicting with uncanny accuracy the arti-
ficial splitting of the atom twenty years
ahead.
That was comparatively short-range
forecasting but even Wells would not
have been rash enough, even in fiction,
to foretell what followed the discovery
of uranium fission by Hahn and Strass-
man in 1938. Immediately the signif-
icance of chain-reaction was under-
stood. By the spring of 1940 Peierls
and Frisch had sent to the British
MAUD Committee the specification for
an atom bomb and by 1945, at the
expense of $2, 000, 000, 000, the Man-
hattan Project, by mobilizing the scien-
tists of many nationalities and the vast
technological potential of the United
States, had produced it. Science had
become a. crash programme"and the
Big Machines had replaced the"string
and sealing wax"laboratories.
The atom bomb has had as pro-
found an effect on science as it has
had on history. Whereas, in the past,
the scientists had been entitled to say
that they had made discoveries and
that others had perverted them into
weapons of destruction, in this case the
scientists themselves had conceived a
fundamental advance as a bomb, a
thousand times (and later, with the
H-bomb, a million times) more power-
ful than existing explosives.
It was the scientists, including Ein-
stein, the pacifist, who, with some diffi-
culty, persuaded the politicians and
generals that the bomb should be
made. After Hiroshima and Nagasaki
this produced a conscience-crisis
among the scientists. Their ivory
towers had been shattered by the blast
and they felt a great weight of social
responsibility. They could no longer
detach themselves from politics in the
widest sense.
In 1946 Einstein became chairman of
the Emergency Committee of Atomic
Scientists at Princeton, New Jersey,
and issued a personal statement :
"Science has brought forth this dan-
ger, but the real problem is in the
minds and hearts of men. We will not
change the hearts of other men by
mechanism, but by changing our hearts
and speaking bravely.
"We must be generous in giving to
the world the knowledge that we have
of the forces of nature, after establish-
ing safeguards against abuse.
"We must be not merely willing but
actively eager to submit ourselves to
binding authority necessary for world
security.
"We must realize that we cannot
simultaneously plan for war and peace.
"When we are clear in heart and
mind-only then shall we find courage
to surmount the fear which haunts the
world."
Physicists who had been involved
in the evolution of the bomb formed
themselves into Atomic Scientists
Associations in Britain and in America
and went into the market place to
inform the public about the military
and political consequences, about
radiation hazards and about the
peaceful uses. This ultimately found
its expression in a new kind of
"learned society,"the Pugwash
Conference. The first conference in
1957 brought together in the village of
Pugwash, Nova Scotia, the eminent
scientists of East and West. And the
movement has continued-a coming-
together, not of decision-makers but of
scientists who can influence those
who make decisions.
t N 1955, and again in 1958,t we had the United Nations
Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy at Geneva. The first
was one of the most exhilarating occa-
sions in the history of science because
it brought together scientists who, for
fifteen years, had been cut off from
their colleagues by the barbed-wire
fences of military security. Immediately,
to the dismay of those who had to try
to maintain secrecy, the Uranium Cur-
tain, as well as the Iron Curtain, col-
lapsed.
There was a disclosure, and a shar-
ing, of fundamental knowledge and, as
the late Homi J. Bhabha, the Indian
President of the Conference, said,
*Know ! edge once given can never be
taken away."What was revealed was
not the know-how of making the bomb
but the know-why of nuclear physics.
It was summed up by the remark of
Dr. E. T. Hughes who had been pre-
siding over a session on the cross-
section of the nucleus (supposed to be
the most jealously guarded secret) at
which scientists of seven different
groups, not only within the nuclear
powers but in countries like Portugal,
had disclosed their findings. These
had been plotted on a graph and
the plots were indistinguishable.
Dr. Hughes came jubilantly into a
ptenary meeting, unrolled the graph
like a scroll and said,"This should be
the emblem of this Conference. It
shows, thank heavens, that the nucleus
is the same on both sides of the Iron
Curtain."
The high promises of foot-loose,
peaceful energy, which was to solve
the industrial problems of the under-
developed countries (we call them"de-
veloping"now) have not yet been ful-
filled. Those cheap nuclear reactors
for industrial purposes which seemed
almost at the"wrap it up and take it
away"stage in 1955 have not been
forthcoming. Electric power from the
atom-yes, for those who can afford
huge generating stations and have a 11
grid system, but not the packaged
reactors for poor countries. Nor are
we yet in sight of Bhabha's vision of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

TWO DECADES OF SCIENCE (continued)
Discoveries that changed the face of the world
thermo-nuclear energy-putting the
H-bomb into civilian dungarees with, in
his phrase,"as much energy as there
is deuterium in the Seven Seas."In
other words, limitless.
Out of such conferences came the
"open house"nuclear research cen-
tres-Brookhaven in the U. S. A., Dubna
in the U. S. S. R. and C. E. R. N , the Cen-
tre for European Nuclear Research, a
co-operative of European govern-
ments which Unesco helped to initiate,
in Switzerland. The study of fun. da-
mental particles-the structure of the
nucleus-means massive machines,
enormously expensive, like the one
which is about to be built in America
at a cost of $340, 000, 000. Small-and
even big-countries cannot afford to
have them of their own but they can
contribute to the cost and have use
of the facilities.
The encouragement of such interna-
tional enterprises has been one of the
principal functions of, Unesco since
1946 when, instead of the billion dollar
budget it should have had, we, the
delegates, gave it the wishful words
"stimulate"and"facilitate."And that,
particularly in science, is what the
organization has done eminently well.
Science, of course, is traditionally a
commonwealth. International co-oper-
ation between individuals, national
learned societies and the congresses
of the various disciplines existed but
had been interrupted by the war. The
guiding body is ICSU-the Internation-
al Council of Scientific Unions. It
had been more or less"moth-balled"
during the war when the free-trade in
ideas was suspended. It needed"facil-
itating."Unesco could not afford fuel
oil but it could provide lubricating oil.
It enabled ICSU to get moving again
and Unesco's"stimulation"consisted
of encouraging the formation of further
unions and congresses for any mis-
sing discipline, and the effect was
immediate.
AFTER the first World Warintransigence and discrim-
ination had prevented scientific
congresses from getting together for
over six years. After the Second
Wold War, with Unesco's help, they
were resumed within six months and
the man-to-man exchanges and the
cross-fertilization of ideas was one of
the factors in the acceleration of scien-
tific progress.
The outstanding achievement of the
Unesco-ICSU combination was the
International Geophysical Year, 1957-
58. This was the period of maximum
12 sunspot activity, which provided theoccasi n for a systematic study of
Planet Earth, its atmospheric envelope
and of the cosmic influences upon it.
Over 70 nations participated and the
Lug. Y. Committee was responsible for
the operation of more than 2, 500 major
scientific stations as well as thousands
more temporary stations and observa-
tion posts involving over 10, 000 scien-
tists and technicians as well as ama-
teurs and volunteers. It embraced all
the sciences, and organizations con-
cerned with man's physical world and
its physical environment. The aggre-
gation of data was so enormous that it
will take a generation of scientists
- even with computers-to work it all
out. It is estimated that). G. Y cost
$500, 000, 000 but what Unesco could
afford served as the catalyst.
Incidentally, the fantastic program-
mes of space research now running
at probably $8, 000, 000, 000 a year be-
gan modest ! y in LG. Y. Rockets had
been used for direct exploration of the
atmosphere up to 250 miles and sev-
eral hundred rockets were fired during
LG. Y. by Australia, Canada, France,
Great Britain, Japan, the United States
and the Soviet Union.
Data about pressures, temperatures
and density of the atmosphere, par-
ticles, radiations and fields were tele-
metered back to earth during the
rocket life-span of a few minutes. To
overcome these limitations the J. G. Y.
included satellite vehicles in the pro-
gramme and the U. S. A. and the
U. S. S. R. agreed to produce them. In
orbit, they were to make continuing
observation, inwards and outwards.
It was almost taken for granted that
the U. S. A. with its enormous techno-
logical potential would mount the first
one, but the whole world was taken
by surprise when Sputnik I, the Soviet
satellite, was launched on October 4,
1957, into an orbit from 64. 3 deg. N. to
64. 3 deg. S. It weighed 184 Ibs. as
against the 30 Ibs. of the U. S. satellite
which was not launched until three and
a half months later.
Alas, for the innocent intentions of
Lug. Y. ! The weight and the orbit
showed that the U. S. S. R. had power-
ful rockets, and to spare. This led
to loud cries about the"missile gap."
To close this alleged gap and to try to
recover the lost prestige the U. S.
embarked on a massive space pro-
gramme.
The Soviet Union followed suit and
we have had intense space competi-
tion ever since.
Unesco was born into The Cyber-
netic Age as well. Nuclear physics
had exploded. Solid state physics
erupted. The whole character of
communications and the electronics of
industrial processes were changed by
semi-conductors and transistors which
led to miniaturization of what would
otherwise have been massive batteries
of vacuum valves. The computer in
the simple sense of a calculating
machine became a misnomer. Apart
from doing impossible sums at incred-
ible speeds, the computer began,
with greater than human efficiency, to
reproduce. the logical faculties of the
brain and, through the ingenious sys-
tems of cybernetic feedback, (automa-
tic self adjustment) to control ma-
chine processes.
With all the combinations-an infal-
lible memory, an unswerving logic,
photo-electric cells more observant
and more tireless than the human eye,
microphones more sensitive than
the human ear and electric nerve-end-
ings more sensitive than the most
skilled human touch-automation is
replacing acquired experience. As the
U. S. Secretary of Labour, Willard
Wirtz, has pointed out,"The machine
now has the equivalent abilities and
skills of a student with a high school
diploma."
COMPUTERS can designcomputers and control the
machines that make computers and
embody in successive generations of
computers the experience of ancestral
computers.
At the Unesco Conference of Inform-
ation Processing in 1959 at which
nearly 2, 000 electronic experts were
gathered, I said to one of the greatest
of them,"But you still cannot pro-
duce the electronic equivalent of the
human brain with its 15, 000, 000, 000
brain cells and their neuronic circuits".
His reply (verbatim) was"Don't be
silly. I could put your brain with its
cells and circuits on a plate five inches
by six". And he went on to explain
that if you stacked such plates like a
pack of cards and linked them up
one could store, in a space no bigger
than a cigar box, all the information in
all the libraries in all the world.
The only consolation he could offer
was that they knew how to put in
the information but did not yet know
how to get it out ! This input process
depends on cryogenics or ultra-deep
freeze. At temperatures near abso-
lute zero certain metals lose all elec-
trical resistance so filaments of them
can be so fine that by comparison a
spider's web would look like the gir-
ders of Sydney Harbour Bridge, and
"valves"could be no bigger than a
brain cell. By reducing a printed
circuit of the 15, 000, 000, 000 cells to
the dimensions of an electron-micro-
scopic photograph it is possible to do
what he claimed.
Now, concurrent with The Atomic
Age, The Cybernetic Age and The
Space Age, we have The DNA Age.
The"life sciences"are now claiming
attention and appropriations on a scale

once reserved to the physical scien-
ces. Molecular biology is now all
the vogue. With the discovery of the
structure of deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), the
basic chemicals of the living cell, we
have the clue to the secret of life.
In the arrangement of the atoms
in the molecules of DNA and RNA is
the"information code"which"pro-
grammes"not only the nature and
behaviour of the cells in the body
but determines the hereditary traits
passed on from one generation to
the next. It is predictable that we
shall be able to change, by man's
prescriptions, the nature of living pro-
cesses and of posterity.
Students of the Karachi Polytechnic Institute (Pakistan) at work in the
Civil Engineering Department whose equipment was supplied by
Unesco. To overcome a serious shortage of scientists and technicians,
countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are expanding and improving
teaching facilities in the basic sciences, a prerequisite of economic and
social development. Unesco has helped its member states to set up
science institutes, research laboratories and centres for the design and
construction of scientific equipment. Today Unesco aids nearly
50 projects for setting up and operating technological and
professional training institutes in some 30 countries.
Photo Unesco-Paul Almasy, Paris
Hundreds of brilliant scientists are
now ingeniously employed in molecu-
lar biology but what is needed are
people to sit down and think what we
are going to do with the secret of
life when we get it. What we first
did with the secret of matter-nuclear
energy-is not encouraging.
All this is spectacular and awe-
inspiring proof of Man's unlimited
ingenuity. But how, in Unesco's terms
of reference which include, not only
the acquisition of knowledge, but the
use of that knowledge, can we apply
science to the betterment of the condi-
tions of mankind ?
The humanitarian sciences have also
had spectacular results. Just as we
can date the atomic explosion as July
1945 so we might date the population
explosion as February 1935. Then
a desperate father, Dr. Domagk, inject-
ed a red dye, the drug Prontosil, into
the veins of his daughter, Hildegarde.
She had generalized septicaemia and
her case seemed hopeless. She
recovered.
That was the first of the sulpha
drugs which not only had an intrinsic
value but reminded the medical pro-
fession and medical science of what
Ehrlich had demonstrated in 1911,
when he showed that it was possible,
with salvasan, to kill specific germs
within the human body. Until then any
antiseptic which could destroy germs
in open wounds was fatal if ingested.
With this reminder from the sulpha
drugs, Fleming's penicillin (1928) was
rediscovered and perfected, as the
drug we now know, by Chain and
Florey, who recognized that it could
inhibit germs within the human body.
More lives have since been saved by
penicillin and its kindred antibiotics
than have been lost in all the wars
of all human history.
Then, with D. D. T. we gained the
means of controlling the insect-carriers
of diseases such as malaria.
By the combination, and refinement,
of such means it has been possible to
reduce the mortality from mass infec-
tions, to save mothers in childbirth to
have more chidren ; to save infants
and toddlers to grow up, to marry and
to multiply ; and to extend the span
of life. Today, as a result of science
there are 170, 000 more mouths to be
fed every day.
It has taken mankind, (if we date
from the hominids) a million years
to reach the present figure of
3, 250, 000, 000 ; it will, on present trends,
take thirty years to double that. Some-
how death control has to be offset
by the control of reproduction. But
at the same time we have to feed a
population of which already two-thirds
are underfed and we have to provide
for those who are still to come.
If science could be as imaginative
and resourceful in providing for the 13
needs of human beings as in its great
physical achievements the imminent
future would not seem so forbidding.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

TWO DECADES OF SCIENCE (continued)
At the United Nations Conference
on Science and Technology in Geneva
in 1963 it was abundantly clear that
even if we only applied what we al-
ready knew the needs of mankind
could be met. It is not a question of
knowledge ; it is a question of intention.
Unesco, concerned with knowledge
and research has addressed itself to
these long term problems. Its major
project of a few years ago, The Arid
Zone Project, brought together some
27 disciplines to study the nature of
deserts and their potential for devel-
opment. By inter-relating specialist
knowledge, it enthused the scientists
who took part into a new breed of
"desert experts". Botanists became
professional about hydrology. Geo-
physicists became fascinated by the
peculiarities of desert plants. And so
on. The results were hovel and im-
pressive and, if applied, hopeful-life
the desert agriculture promoted by
the discovery of great aquifers beneath
the Sahara and the Egyptian deserts.
The Hydrological Decade initiated by ;
Unesco deals with one of the great
threats confronting the multiplying
population, the lack of water in many
places and the abuse of water in
others. Nothing so reveals the ignor-
ance, the recklessness and setfish-
ness even of nations abounding in
science as the squandering of this
vital resource.
Out of, and beyond, the LG. Y. came 
the Indian Ocean Project, sponsored
by Unesco and combining, again, the
research efforts of many countries in
the study of one of the most interest-
ing areas of the world-interesting not
only to meteorologists and ocean-
ographers but to marine biologists.
From the close examination of such
seas we could begin to see how the
oceans, which cover seven-tenths of
the earth's surface, could be develop-
ed to help to feed the multiplying mil-
) ions.
And then there is the International
Biological Programme, which, in its
way, is doing what the LG. Y. did about
the earth and its physical environment.
Lob. P., by systematic studies extending
over nine years, will examine the
biosphere, the"life"part of our world.
The character of science and of its
achievements has changed, during the
lifetime of Unesco and Unesco has, in
its own structure, adapted itself to
the change. To the concern for scien-
tific knowledge and for the advance-
ment of science itself, has been added
an active promotion of the application
of science, and of technology. To the
"know-why"has been added the"know-how", with all its imperative
values for countries seeking develop-
ment.
For what shall it profit man to know
all about everything-the universe, the
14 core of the earth, the secret of matter'and the secret of life-if his species
hungers and thirsts and is denied
human dignity.
