Museum visitors are often puzzled
by suits of ancient
armour. How on earth
did the sturdy
warriors of the past squeeze
inside such tiny metal
shells ? The answer is
simple. They were smaller
than the men of today. In
this century alone the
average man has grown
taller by from 7 to 10 cms
(3 to 4 ins). Armour shown here
is a 16th-century German
suit weighing 35 kg
(77 lbs) displayed
In the Army Museum,
Paris.
© Paul Almasy, Paris


OUR
PINT-SIZE
ANCESTORS
by Vladimir Vlastovsky
CIENTISTS in the economically advanced coun¬
tries have been struck by the fact that children
for the past one hundred years have been growing and
developing faster and are taller when they reach adulthood.
Doctors in many countries are working to determine
whether this accelerated growth is actually harmful for
the health of young people or not. There are many educa¬
tionists and psychiatrists who now feel that a reappraisal
and indeed a sweeping revision is called for with regard to
our present ideas about the physical and psychological
development of children, as well as the age when sex
education should begin. The rapid growth of children is
also having widespread repercussions in unexpected do¬
mains like the size of school desks and other furniture, sizes
of junior models of clothes for boys and girls, etc.
In the past 30 or 40 years it has been found that the aver¬
age height of new-born babies has increased by almost half
an inch (one centimetre) and weight at birth has also shown
27

i: 3333: TTTT xnx miimmmm xxrx xnx xroxnx -14- 1 ~r xnx xnx TTTTTTpi Xjxr. xrrr xxrx :
I44I--H44- 1 1 1 1 Tiii iiTÍ Ml 'TT' liii mm mTT. 1TI1 i i 4-44- lli ! T ' 1 ' 1 IT -
ixx
H
A
HAMBURG WARSAW
28
OUR PINT-SIZE ANCESTORS (Cont'd)
a slight rise. New-born babies now double their weight one
month earlier than in the past.
Compared to children of the second half of the 19th
and the turn of the present century the height-to-weight ratio
of today's youngsters has increased much more rapidly.
The differences are particularly noticeable at the age of
puberty as shown in the graph published above comparing
the height of 13-year-old boys in several countries.
Further information reveals that the average height of
these 13-year-old boys has increased by almost one inch
(2 centimetres) in a decade and their weight by nearly three-
and a half pounds (Ii kilos). Amongst boys in the 14 to
16 year age group the rate of increase is even greater.
Figures on 15-year-old boys studying in Soviet vocational
schools and boys of the same age who worked in Russian
industry in 1822 reveal that today's youth are on average
seven and a half inches (19.5 cms) taller and thirty five
pounds (16 kilos) heavier than their counterparts of 150
years ago. A less marked increase has also been noted
amongst girls.
Comparing the growth rate of children living in towns
and rural areas in various parts of the world it has been
found that children in large cities grow and develop faster
than youngsters in small towns, and small town children in
turn develop faster than those in rural areas. In some
countries a difference has been observed in the develop¬
ment rate of city children belonging to different social
groups.
One consequence of the increase in height and weight of
youngsters has been an acceleration of the advent of
puberty. A century ago European girls attained puberty
on average at the age of 16 or 17. Now it is usually 13 or
14. Similar findings have been made for boys.
Other indications of accelerated development in children
today are the earlier cutting of teeth and the ossification
of different parts of the skeleton, including the cartilages
at the end of the long bones an important factor determin¬
ing body growth.
This accelerated growth also means that children now
stop growing at an earlier age. In the past, growth contin¬
ued until the age of 18 or 20; today most youngsters are
fully grown at 17 or 18, and girls at 16. This does not
prevent them, however, from growing to be taller than
their parents.
Investigations carried out in the Soviet Union show that
for the past 60 years young people have been maturing at
least two years sooner than before, so that a 15-year-old
boy of today is as mature physically and sexually as a
17-year-old youth was at the start of the century.
Research in many countries, such as France, Italy, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Great Britain and the United States, indi¬
cates that young people are now six to eight inches (15-20
cms) taller on average when they reach the age of puberty
than those who lived a hundred years ago. The average
height of adults, during this same period, has risen by three
to four inches (7-10 cms).
Many theories have been advanced in an attempt to
explain this quickened growth, among them the effects of
extra sunshine, improved diet, pre-natal care and even the
stepped up pace of city living. In my opinion the chief cause
is probably genetic in nature. In 1924 a Soviet scientist, Vic¬
tor Bunak, in analysing changes in the height of young men
of military age from several European countries suggested
that height and growth were not only influenced by economic
and dietary factors but also by the genetic changes resulting
from the inter-marriage of different populations.
There can be no doubt however that the material condi¬
tions of life strongly determine the growth rate and are
instrumental in favouring or retarding the genetically prede¬
termined potential for growth.

LENINGRAD
© APN
As to the psychological acceleration noted in modern
youth, all research conducted in this domain points to the
fact that the children of our times are intellectually more
developed than those of 50 or 100 years ago. But scientists
do not always agree in their assessments of children's capa¬
city for work or their ability to think critically.
Some scientists consider that physical and intellectual
development in children proceed simultaneously and in
harmony, while others maintain that the intellectual growth
lags beind physical growth.
The question naturally arises as to whether such accele¬
rated growth has a negative effect on the health of the
growing generation. The widely-held theory that an early
development of the body leads inevitably to premature old
age and a shortened life span has never been confirmed.
To the contrary, it appears that today's women, aside from
reaching sexual maturity earlier, retain the capacity for child-
bearing three to five years longer.
Futhermore, some problems of eyesight characteristic of
old age develop five to eight years later now than was the
case a hundred years ago.
Nevertheless, some scientists remain apprehensive about
the effect of this accelerated growth on health. They cite
cases of spine deformations, a tendency toward asthenia
(weakness and fatigue), an increase irTthe number of child¬
ren suffering from rheumatism at an early age and numerous
cases of hypertension (high blood pressure). So far these
apprehensions are insufficient for any final conclusions but
they merit the attention of biologists and doctors.
Educators ask: Is this early development good or bad;
should we be pleased by it, ignore it, or try to slow it
down? There is still no exact answer.
Did this acceleration really start in the 1830s, or is it
rather a process that has been taking place since the
beginning . of mankind and which is gradually gaining
momentum?
It appears that the changes in man's growth have their
ups and downs or so some anthropologists and medical
reasearchers feel. In the areas where archaeological and
paleo-anthropological reasearch have been able to trace
successive populations over millenia, scientists note that
the size of men underwent much slower and more varia¬
ble modifications.
There have also been variations in the age of puberty
among European women. It apparently was the same from
ancient times until the 15th century. The women of South¬
ern Europe reached puberty at 14, those of Northern Europe
at 15. Then it became increasingly late until, by the end
of the 18th century, it was reached at 17 or 18. But since
the 1830s the trend has been reversed sharply.
Where does the over-all acceleration tendency stand
today? Since it is slowing in some countries and social
groups, one can assume that in the economically advanced
regions it will come to a halt in the next 20 to 25 years. In
the developing countries, on the other hand, the next few
decades of improving economic and cultural standards will
be accompanied by an acceleration in the growth rate.
Will we then see a period of relative stability, or will there
be a decrease in growth and development? At present, it
is difficult to judge.
VLADIMIR VLASTOVSKY, a biologist, heads the laboratory for the 9fl
study of the physical development of children and adolescents
at the Institute for Child and Adolescent Hygiene of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences.
