1 ·
IN THE MINOS OF MEN
Jacques Maritain
Head of the French delegation to
the 2nd Session of the Unesco
General Conference
Above the Babel of minds
HE anguish of man is engulfing everyshore. In this world, crushed by the
afflictions brought on by the War and by the weight of
rival economic, political and ideological interests, shall not
those dedicated to the tasks of the mind, and who feel
a responsibility for such a mission, give voice to the basic
instinct for preservation, to the immense longing for peace
and freedom, to the refusal to suffer and die, which, despite
a strange kind of apparent inertia more akin to despair
than to strength of soul, stir the hidden depths of men's
conscience ?
Modern thought has been likened, not without reason, to
the Tower of Babel. Never, indeed, were minds so harshly
divided. As human thinking splits into more and more
specialized areas, it becomes more difficult to apprehend
the implicit philosophies to which every one of us is
necessarily committed. Doctrines and mystiques, mental
traditions and schools of thought thus clash together and
no one school can even understand the signs used by the
others to express themselves ; the voice of each is a
mere sound to its companions on the road. Dig as deeply
as we will, there are no common foundations left to specula-
tive thought ; there is no longer any common tongue.
In such circumstances, can we conceive of a meeting of
minds between men gathered together precisely in order
to accomplish a common intellectual task, men who come
from the four corners of the earth and who not only belong
to different cultures and civilizations, but to antagonistic
spiritual backgrounds and schools of thought ? Is an
institution like Unesco to give in and abandon all hope
of affirming common ideas and common principles, to
content itself with compiling documents and surveys, factual
data and statistics ? Or should it, on the contrary, attempt
to formulate an artificial conformity of minds and to establish
a common doctrinal denominator-likely, in the course of
discussion, to shrink and finally disappear altogether ?
The solution, I think,'must be sought in another direction.
Because the end-purpose of Unesco is a practical one,
agreement between minds can be reached spontaneously,
not on the basis of a common abstract concept, but upon
the basis of a common practical concept ; not on the
affirmation of one and the same vision of the world,
of man and of knowledge, but upon the affirmation of a
single corpus of beliefs to govern action. This is little
46 enough, no doubt, but it is the last remaining fortresswhere minds can meet. Hence it justifies the undertaking
of a great task, and we will have achieved much if we
can attain awareness of our common practical convictions.
That is why stress must be laid on the crucial importance
- although restricted to the practical field-of the collective
thinking to which Unesco has appealed ever since its
foundation and, in particular, of the statement of principle in
which it declared, in the Preamble drafted at the London
Conference,"that the great and terrible war which has now
ended was a war made possible by the denial of the
democratic principles of the dignity, equality and mutual
respect of men, and by the propagation, in their place,
through ignorance and prejudice, of the doctrine of the
inequality of men and races" ; and"that the wide diffusion
of culture, and the education of humanity for justice and
liberty and peace, are indispensable to the dignity of man
and constitute a sacred duty which all the nations must
fulfil in a spirit of mutual assistance and concern."This is
why I consider that one of the major tasks undertaken by
the United Nations is the new declaration of human rights,
to the drafting of which Unesco is contributing.
1947-Unesco General Conference (Mexico City)
Ju ! ian Huxtey
Director-General of Unesco
from 1946 to 1948
Ten points for a crucial
self-appraisal
I would like to ask member states toexamine critically and dispas ionate-
ly what they themselves are doing in education, science
and culture and to examine it against the yardstick of the
aims and purposes laid down in our Constitution.
W Are you examining scientifically your problems of govern-
ment and of social and economic organization, with the aid
of advice from the best specialists and in a dispassionate
spirit of science ; or are you treating them as they arise
on an essentially political basis, and in the light only of
emotional or material interests ? Are you profiting by the
experience of other countries in the field of administration,
by studying their methods and sending your young men
to be trained abroad ?
W Are you allowing that full freedom of press and opinion,
of expression, research and teaching, which is laid down
in our Constitution ?
. Are you profiting by the experience of the various
countries which have been attempting, in such fields as radio
or film, to combine freedom in presenting different points
of view with same reasonable degree of control ?
. Are you attempting to use natural science to the full,
whether in education, to give to your citizen a proper
understanding of the method and the actual and potential
Q ;'"oa :
ci
ou'"0< :
: >
o
Õ. < :a.
ouU>'"c
: : : >
6
Õ- Ca

achievements of science, or in practice, in the solution
of concrete problems ?
. Have you taken adequate steps towards the conservation
of nature in your country-whether for economic, or social,
or aesthetic reasons ?
. What have you done to preserve and make known your
cultural heritage ? Have you taken steps to preserve your
historical and ancient monuments, to unearth further re-
mains of your past history, to exhibit its treasures and
make them known to the world at large ?,
. Have you taken steps to remove the scourge of
illiteracy from your people ?
W Have you provided the possibility of higher education
for all classes of your population ?
. Have you taken pains to provide the best architecture
for your public buildings, and have you encouraged the
creative artist, whether in painting or music, in literature or
drama, to express the spirit of his country and to make life,
more interesting and more worthwhile for its people ?
W I will ask one final but over-riding question : Have you
looked at your problems from a Unesco angle-that is to
say not merely as national problems but as part of a
single world problem, where several nations must learn
to make adjustments in the interests of the whole body
of nations ? I think of such problems as over-population,
facilities for study abroad, the utilization and conservation
of natural resources, the making available to the world
of the treasures of national art and history, or the removal
of those sources of social discontent which are too often
the seeds of war.
1948-Unesco General Conference (Beirut)
Reinhold Niebuhr
Member of the United States dele-
gation to the 4th session of the
Unesco General Conference
Nations don't always
get along too well but...
CAY we really create world commun-pity by asking sov reign States to
think beyond themselves, to relate themselves to other
peoples, to remove from their texbooks all matters pre-
judicial to and inviting contempt of other peoples, to throw
down barriers and every kind of restraint which prevent
people from speaking to one another ? Is it really possible
to create community in this way, considering that the world
community is a hopelessly pluralistic community, and that
every community we have known in history had some core
of homogeneity, which is what the world community lacks ?
To create world community is indeed a difficult prob-
lem, but it is not an impossible one. Those of us who
deal with the problems of Unesco have had some exper-
ience of this, and, we might add, that even if on occasions
we should regard the problem as hopeless we may bear
in mind that every modern community, though it has a
core of homogeneity that the world community lacks, is,
at the same time, a much more pluralistic community than
anything that was known a hundred or two hundred years
ago.
I think that in the Middle Ages it was assumed that there
must be a unified culture if there was to be peace. We
have proved the medieval period wrong for in every one
of our modern nations we have all kinds of ethnic and
cultural, religious, and linguistic pluralisms.
We don't always get along too well, but we do get along.
1949-Unesco General Conference (Paris)
Maria Montessori
Member of the Italian delegation
to the 5th session of the Unesco
General Conference
Tuning in on youth
NOWT merely children, but young peopleas a whole are undoubtedly full of
energy and resources, to which we have paid insufficient
attention. We, who have always concentrated on the
problem of teaching and transmitting our knowledge to
young people, never seem to have thought that, conversely,
we have so much to learn from them, so much of the
hidden resources of human nature itself. We should be ever
on the look-out for what young people, through their lives
and activities, have to teach us in this way.
. I think, therefore, that if Unesco one day decided to
regard children as a factor in the reconstruction of the
world and the establishment of peace, and tried to enlist
their aid, organize them, discuss matters with them and
make use of everything they have to teach us, this would
be of great assistance in breathing fresh life into this society,
which must be built up not by one section of men, but
by all men, from the beginning of their lives onward. It is
the young people, the children, upon whom we may base
our hopes of building a better world, since they can give
us more than we in fact have today, and more than we
at one time had but have since lost.
1950-Unesco General Conference (Florence)
Jaime lorries Bodet
Director-General of Unesco
from 1948 to 1952
An indivisible responsibility
N HE destiny of mankind is an indiv-isible responsibility which we all must
share. So long as it remains possible to flout with impunity
even one of the rights of one single human being, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights will continue to
accuse us all of cowardice, sluggishness, laziness, and to
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
NN'"'"T3
. l :
toCI>
0U
: J.
Q
o
Õ. < :0..
>
JO... J
o"'"Q)c
: J
o
Õ. < :0..
o
0
=>
; D
ÕI ;"-

remind us that we are lacking in human charity. So long
as the greater part of the human race continues to live
face to face with hunger and injustice and to die in squalor
and ignorance, the Declaration adopted in Paris will
represent nothing more than a remote ideal.
To make the Declaration known everywhere is to wage
a world-wide campaign for a life worthy of man, to whom
the governments have dedicated this Declaration, not in
mere lip service, but in solemn recognition of their duties
to civilization and to humanity.
To help states carry out these duties in the field of educ-
ation, science and culture is the proud mission of Unesco.
1949-Celebration of the first anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (Paris)
Luther Evans
Director-General of Unesco
(1953-1958)
Ever-increasing collaboration
for the common task
UNESCO is young, but it is maturingrapidly ; we must all strive for it to
become fully mature ; Unesco is weak, but it is growing
stronger ; we must strive to speed up its accession of
strength ; Unesco is searching for the best modalities of
action to achieve peace and progress through education,
science and culture, and in this it has made surprising
progress in seven years ; we must concentrate on the
objective of determining consciously what types of activities
and what methods and procedures are fruitful and give
them priority over others. Unesco has not yet fully develop-
ed its most appropriate and most fruitful relationship to
the associations and groups of creative intellectual workers
of the world, although much of great value has been done ;
we must understand more fully, and help these workers
themselves more fully to understand that their work of
mind and spirit is essential for the forward progress of
civilization, and we must secure their ever-increasing
collaboration in the common task...
1953-Unesco General Conference, 2nd Extraordinary
Session (paris)
Vittorino Veronese
Director-General of Unesco
from 1958 to 1961
Realities and paradoxes
48 WITHIN Unesco I see the well-springs
of several contrasting forces and
currents. Yet far from feeling dismay,) regard this as
proof that we are indeed at grips with the realities of life,
not merely sailing in the clouds.
A first antithesis derives from the inter-governmental char-
acter of Unesco. Unesco inevitably expresses a political
resolve, however democratic the procedures by which that
resolve is taken ; and though operating at an interñational
level, it remains governmental in composition. But Unesco's
work is done in the spheres of education, science, culture
and mass communication which are in principle the freest,
in one sense the most personal and, being the most creative
of man's activities, should also be the most independent.
This gives rise to a second antithesis-that between the
demands of intellectual life and the administrative and
financial resources on which it must depend. The first
are limitless ; the second strictly rationed. Yet the two
have to be reconciled in practical decisions, invariably
involving sacrifices.
For educationists, scholars and artists it is a bitter
experience to learn that the noblest arguments must needs
yield all too often to those of a material order. To learn to
take into account all these factors which, as they are
assembled, gradually bring about a balance permitting
action and progress, is hard, but salutary.
There is yet another paradox-perhaps the most profound
of a ! !-which Unesco has to overcome. It strives to maintain
a strict and dispassionate neutrality towards philosophies,
systems, political beliefs and religions. Yet it cannot remain
alien, deaf and blind to the noblest expressions of human
thought, to the anxieties of our modern world, to the
yearning and quest for a code of social ethics to match
the century of nuclear discoveries and interplanetary
conquest. No ! impartiality is not indifference.
1958-Unesco General Conference (Paris)
Mohammed H Fasi
Head of the delegation of Morocco
to the 11th session of the Unesco
General Conference and present
chairman of the Unesco Executive
Board.
The year of Africa
t his year, which I would call Africa'syear, has indeed been a memorable
one for our continent. The accession to independence of
all these brother nations, who come to enrich the cultural
patrimony of mankind, is a happy omen for the future of
the world and of peace.
Welcome ! my dear brothers of Africa to your home, to
this home of the mind, to which we, as Africans, be we
white, brown or black, have a duty to bring the stamp of
our civilization and our culture. We all have need of
Unesco and of all the countries which are ahead of us on
the path of progress. But it is also true that in a human
sense the world will be enriched by the discovery of this
great continent, knowledge of which was supposedly
acquired from exotic works and colourful descriptions.
Today, it is Africa's own sons who come to express them-
selves freely and to make known to the world the wealth of
poetry and art which this continent conceals.
7960-unesco General Conference (Paris)
oU
NGO< : 
: J
o
Õ.. c :! l.
co
Q
E
4 :
: ;
oo'"7c
: : >
o
Õ. < :<l.
J
OI
NN
C: >Q)
ù :
. 1
<. : J
I
L
I

Jawaharlal Nehru
Prime Minister of India
(died 1964)
Four a synthesis of science
and culture
education by itself does not necessar-. ily lead to a conversion of minds
towards peaceful purposes. Something more is necessary,
new standards, new values, and perhaps a kind of spiritual
background and a feeling of commonness of mankind.
That commonness of humanity is already being brought
about by technological progress, but the minds of men
have not grasped it or kept pace with technological pro-
gress. So, we see that science and technology which have
brought so many benefits to the world and gradually tend
to go towards the formation of one world, are also used
to the manufacture of terrible weapons of mass destruction.
At the base of it, all is fear and hatred.
How then can we get rid of this fear and hatred and
use modern scientific progress in the cause of peace and
tolerance ?
We in India, as in many other countries of Asia and
Africa, are trying to develop ourselves so as to put an end
to our poverty and raise the standards of hundreds of
millions of our people. This cannot be done without the
help of science and modern techniques. The problem
before us is whether in adopting the methods and tech-
niques of science we might not create a society full of
internal conflict and the urge for power which brings it
into conflict with other groups. Can we succeed in
bringing about a synthesis of modern science with
something of the spiritual background which has en-
nobled life throughout the ages.
Unesco has set the right ideal before it to try to turn
the minds of men, and the way it is trying to do so is
not the direct method of facing our many problems and
conflicts, but the indirect way of creating appreciation and
understanding of art and culture. Presumably this is a
surer method of dealing with these problems than the
direct political method, though of course both methods
have to be tried.
1962-Visit to Unesco (paris)
Norair Sissakian
President of the 13th session of the
Unesco General Conference
(died 1966)
Confounding the pessimists
NOTCHING shows the importanceoaf education better an the popular
saying that an illiterate man is incapable of seeing even
from a mountain top. Education is of the greatest economic
and social importance especially nowadays when the
harmonious development of man's mental and physical
faculties must satisfy the needs of all sections of society,
serving as an essential basis for continued progress.
One example we may quote is the work of S. G. Strumilin,
a member of the Soviet Academy, who'has attempted to
assess the economic consequences of the development of
education. Prof. Strumilin has reached the following
conclusion : the value of the work done by a person who
has had four year's primary education is 43 % greater
than that of an illiterate person, 108 % greater if he has
had a secondary school education and 300 % times greater
if he had a higher education.
The close links between science and education and the
growing role of science in our modern society have led
Unesco to accord a priority to science in its programme
similar to that already given to education. It is impossible
to speak of the effectiveness of education if its results arenot incorporated in technical and scientific projects and
do not lead to the solution of technical and scientific
problems. In turn, the effectiveness of education is
determined by scientific and technical achievement.
Certain fears have been voiced in the past-and unfor-tunatety are still being repeated by some people-that
our ptanet's sources of energy are being rapidly exhausted
and that we shall be unable to feed an increasingly vast
population. Present-day achievements in the natural sciences
and in technology have answered these fears and show
that all grounds for pessimism are unfounded.
1964  Unesco General Conference (Paris)
Rene Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
since 1962
To all young people
twenty years old
May thoughts and my good wishes goout especially to ou, young people
all over the wor'd, who wi ! ! be twenty this year...
Unesco is your age ; like yourselves it will be celebrating
its twentieth birthday in 1966.
There is no doubt that between you and Unesco there
are those affinities, that spontaneous fellow-feeling which
historians find in a given generation like the very air it
breathes. May there be between you and Unesco an
understanding no less great than this resemblance which will
gradually be revealed in the mirror of history...
We live in an age when the reign of Man in his full
universality is being organized. States have set up instit-
utions designed to establish it step by step. The peoples
of the world must support those institutions and help them
forward.
Unesco is one such agency. Born at the same time as
yourselves, it was created for you. It has grown up with
you, it is through you that it will come to be what it
must be...
1966-From a message to young people for the New Year
c :
: ã
ooUNN<II7c :
=>
o
Õ. < :a
? !n : t
C
7
O
O
L
aCL j
! I
il
dJ
Q
OU
N
0'
õ
"-
