Oceanography, which has become a major field of international scientific
co-operation in the past 15 years, offers a striking example of what
Unesco can do, despite its limited budget, to achieve impressive results
through direction and co-ordination. In 1960, Unesco established the Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission and the Unesco Office of Oceanography. The
Ofnce co-ordinates intemational ocean research enterprises valued at
some $15 million in an average year. Its outstanding achievements include : the
Indian Ocean Expedition (1959-1965), Tropical Atlantic Expedition (1963-1964)
and the study of the Kuroshio Current (the Gulf Stream of the Pacific) in t965. Within
a few years over 250 scientific cruises have been made in various parts of the
giobe. Above, a Soviet atomic-powered ice-breaker on an expedition in the Arctic Ocean.

NEW
OUTPOSTS
OF
SCIENCE
by Evgueni Fedorov

HE extraordinary advancet) of science and technology
in the past 20 years astounds us all.
Spectacular discoveries come crowd-
ing one after the other, and almost
as swiftly are put to practical use.
Many people who can still remember
the time when a motor car was a
rare spectacle already regard the
launching of satellites and spacecraft
as an everyday affair. And no doubt
they will live to see astronauts mak-
ing round trips to the moon and, who
knows, to more distant planets as well.
International contacts, important in
the development of any branch of
learning, and particularly science, have
increased enormously in the past few
decades. These years have seen the
EVGUENI FEDOROV is vice-president of
the Word Meteorological Organization
and head of the Hydro-Meteorological
Services of the U. S. S. R. He is a
member of the U. S. S. R. Academy of
Sciences, and was formerly chief scientific
secretary of its Praesidium.
creation of a great number of inter-
national scientific associations, unions
and committees, whose activities in
many cases are co-ordinated by
Unesco.
Progress in science and progress
in technology are interdependent.
That one cannot advance without the
other is demonstrated in some newly-
independent countries which have
lagged behind in these fields. These
nations, which are now members of
the U. N. and Unesco, are determin-
ed to overcome their handicaps and
are eager to set about transforming
their industry and agriculture and
their science and technology as rap-
idly as possible. But to do so, they
need schools, technical institutes and
research laboratories, as well as the
benefit of the technological experience
acquired by the economica)) develop-
ed nations.
Many of these young nations re-
cently freed from colonial domination
have joined Unesco, and their arrival
has made an impact on the whole of
Unesco's programme, particularly its
promotion of internationa ! scientific co-
operation.
International co-operation is in-
dispensable to all branches of science,
but the need for it is perhaps greatest
of all in the earth sciences. Studies
in this field are concerned with natural
phenomena in the atmosphere, in the
seas and on the land areas of our
planet and therefore affect all peoples
and demand a co-operative effort by
scientists of all nationalities.
World science has long recognized
the importance of an international
partnership to carry out research in
geophysics, meteorology, oceanogra-
phy and related fields. This co-opera-
tion began with the organization of the
First Polar Year of 1882-83, during
which 11 countries made joint mete-
orological, geomagnetic and auroral
observations at 14 stations in the
northern polar region.
Fifty years later came the Second
Polar Year of 1932-33, in which 44
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo 0 N. Max ! mov-APN

NEW OUTPOSTS OF SCIENCE (Continued)
Micro-man against a macro-world
countries participated. And Internation-
al co-operation in science reached an
historic peak in the International
Geophysical Year of 1957-58 when
scientists of more than 60 nations
collaborated closely in a vast global
research programme. Today, under
the sponsorship and encouragement
of Unesco, many countries are making
joint studies of the oceans, seismic
phenomena, the earth's crust and other
aspects of our planet.
The expansion of international co-
operation in the earth sciences is proof
that humanity has now reached a new
and vitally important stage in its
relations with nature. The interaction
between society and nature, which
began when man became conscious of
his own"self", is an indispensable
condition of human progress. In the
beginning, the human race, weak and
helpless, was exposed to the elemental
forces of nature. Hard work and col-
lective action enabled man to protect
himself against the elements-and
then to master them.
What stage in this development have
we reached today ?
The primitive conceptions of the
world came from limited observations.
Within these limits each tribe visualiz-
ed the earth, rivers, forests and
mountains. Since then the boundaries
of the known world have expanded
until they now extend to the farthest
galaxy whose distance can be measur-
ed-some 1022 km (10, 000, 000, 000, 000,
000, 000, 000 kilometres).
THE human mind has alsoprobed i wards to pene-
trate another sphere. Man has spe-
culated for thousands of years about
the nature of matter, the smallest
elements of which substances are
formed. But it was not until compar-
atively recently-less than a hundred
years ago-that he acquired a more
or less correct understanding of mole-
cules and then of atoms. And not
until the past decade has he discover-
ed the secrets of atomic nucleii and
of the even tinier fundamental part-
icles.
What is the smallest measurement
known to man ? It is apparently the
distance at which the weak interaction
of the particles of an atomic nucleus
16 occurs ; estimated at 10-22 (. 000, 000,t D 000, 0, 000, 000, 000, 01 of a centimetre).
How curious that we should have
reached out approximately as far in
the directions of the macrocosm and
the microcosm alike.
Man's mind has also measured
processes occurring with infinite slow-
ness and phenomena lasting fractions
of a second. The longest period of
time that can be measured by modern
science is approximately 1010 yearns
(10, 000, 000, 000 years)-the maximum
age of certain stars and galaxies. At
the other extreme, the shortest phe-
nomenon is the length of life of certain
fundamental particles which are timed
at 10-10 sec. (. 000, 000, 000, 01 of a
second).
Such, in highly simplified form, are
the present scales of space and time
with which we work.
Our knowledge of the universe now
reveals the earth to be a mere speck of
dust in the immensity of space. Yet our
knowledge of our own planet is far
from complete. We have explored
its surface ; we are familiar with pro-
cesses that affect the atmosphere and
the oceans. But our knowledge of its
internal structure, of the processes
going on within it and of its actual
origin is still largely hypothetical.
What then is the measure of our
control over nature ? Obviously, the
extent of our exploitation of natural
resources and the amount of power
we can harness to our needs can serve
as criteria.
Thousands of years ago man lived
without even being aware of deposits
of iron ore or oil. And only quite
recently have we realized the value of
uranium reserves. Today there is scar-
cely a single element which is not
utilized for one purpose or another.
Many sources of natural wealth are
being exploited so rapidly that there
are fears they may be exhausted. Even
fresh water is in short supply in cer-
tain regions.
Our own individual muscular efforts
enable us to generate the power of
a few score watts ; this for thousands
of years was all the power man had
at his disposal. A few dozen persons
could thus produce perhaps 10 kilo-
watts.
Our regular sources of power-
electric generating plants, engines,
etc.-can now produce approximately
1, 000 million kilowatts. The power
that man could obtain sporadically by
firing all his rockets or systematically
setting off atomic explosions, is
greater by two or three orders of
magnitude. How does this compare
with the energy produced by nature ?
Practically all the elemental proces-
ses occurring on the earth's surface,
in the atmosphere and in the oceans
derive from solar energy. Over the
whole of the hemisphere reached by
the sun, this energy totals approxim-
ately 1013 kw (10, 000, 000, 000, 000 kilo-
watts).
This means that the sun provides
us with energy representing a sizeable
fraction of-or sometimes almost as
much as-the energy generated by
the processes occurring in the earth's
atmosphere and hydrosphere. If pro-
gress continues at the same rate (and
it is likely to accelerate still further),
200. years from now we shall possess
continuous power sources of some
1013 kilowatts.
Thus, we have now reached a stage
at which man is able to exploit a
large proportion of the earth's natural
riches, and has at his disposal energy
comparable in amount to that possess-
ed by the elements throughout the
whole of the planet.
Such a situation poses a number
of important and intriguing problems.
Will Nature's resources suffice for
mankind ? Natural resources are not
inexhaustible after all, and the earth's
population is growing rapidly.
t) ET us suppose that acalculation had been made
in 1850 of the amount of energy
that could have been produced per
head of population using all the means
then available ; the result would have
been about 10, 000 kilowatt-hours. A
hundred years later, in 1950, the figure
would have been 200, 000 kWh. par
person, despite the increase in the
earth's population in the interval. The
explanation lies in the discovery of
many new sources of energy and in
improved methods of transforming
them.
Per capita resources of foods and
materials have increased in much the
same way. Despite the dwindling re-
serves of natural resources, the pos-
sibilities for satisfying all of man's
basic needs have actually increased
with every century-with every year,
in fact-thanks to the discovery of
more and more resources and the
steady progress made in the means
of exploiting them. This state of
affairs is likely to continue-at least
in the foreseeable future.
The future will also see the harnes-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18

We know very little about the inner structure of our planet and the processes going
on within it. To promote the training of seismologists and earthquake engineers and the
observation of earth tremors, Unesco established the International Institute of Seismology and
Earthquake Engineering in Tokyo, and is now setting up a seismological centre for Latin
America in Lima (Peru). Unesco also founded the Institute for Volcanology at Catania (icily).
! t has supported international programmes in geophysics and astronomy, and it met one-third
of the cost of launching the recent International Years of the Quiet Sun research
project. Above, a vast outcrop of rock laid bare by wind erosion.
Phoro WK Hamblin Springer Verlag. Helde ! berg

NEW OUTPOSTS OF SCIENCE (Continued)
Man the plunderer-a dying species ?
sing of thermonuclear energy, solar
energy, tidal energies and the power
created by ocean currents, and even
the utilization of geothermal energy.
As for food, cattle raising requires
twenty times less space than hunting,
agriculture twenty times less again.
Agriculture is becoming increasingly
productive and its possibilities are far
from exhausted. Furthermore, the
food potential of the sea is far
greater than what we take from it
today. And modern chemistry has
begun to produce synthetic foodstuffs.
Thus, limitations of the earth's natural
resources are not an insurmountable
obstacle to human development.
Since man first mastered agriculture,
he has always chosen a small part
of his natural environment (a field, a
garden, a herd of cattle) and has
cultivated it intensively. His attitude to
the rest of nature-which he regarded
as being wild, encroaching and in-
exhaustible-was quite different, and
he plundered it with no thought for
the conservation of its rich resources.
Marx, in one of his letters, noted
that"cultivation, when it develops
unmethodically, leaves nothing but
desert... Massive deforestation has
laid waste entire regions and disturbed
the normal balance of the water cycle.
The misuse of soil has led to dust
storms and the erosion of fertile layers
of earth. And certain species of ani-
mals and fish used for food have
been decimated.
T bills abuse of nature mustclearly stop. Concern for
the husbanding of natural resources
is gradually becoming the rule-at
least within the bounds of each coun-
try ; but it has not yet been extended
to the"common land"-the atmosphere
and tlie seas as a whole. Today, the
vast demands on the common natural
resources of the world combined with
improved techniques for exploiting
them, have made it imperative to aban-
don this"predatory"attitude towards
nature. We must ! earn to treat all
the natural riches of the world with
the same respect we have for our
own gardens, fields or herds.
Modern technology allows us not
only to make wide use of natural re-
sources but also, in many cases, to
18 change and improve them. Whereas'0 for centuries fish were bred in ponds,
during the past decade they have
been"cultivated"in lakes and parts
of the sea. Surely the time has come
to consider a rational plan for the fish-
ing industry, covering all the oceans.
In my opinion the rational utilization
of basic natural resources in the in-
terest of mankind as a whole should
be one of Unesco's most impo, rtant
tasks in the years to come.
Man, in his relations with nature, is
not only influenced by his environment
but in turn influences it. The vast
quantities of fuel consumed each year
cause a gradual increase in the
amount of carbon dioxide in the air ;
this in turn, impedes the radiation of
heat from the earth, which is becoming
warmer. So far this temperature rise
is negligible, a fraction of a degree
only ; it could, however, eventually ! ead
to a noticeable change in the heat
balance of our planet.
Other important modifications have
been made to nature through the drain-
age of large areas of bog and the
irrigation of deserts. Land improve-
ment measures such as these influ-
ence the water cycle. These changes
are still very small, affecting only
2 to 3 % of the earth's surface, but
CONTINUED ON PAGE 23

NEW OUTPOSTS OF SCIENCE (continued)
Nature in'mobile equilibrium'

more and more land is being subjected
to these improvements.
How do we know what changes
will occur in nature as a result of the
further development of industry, agri-
culture and land improvement ? We
know what their general nature will
be, but we cannot yet predict their
magnitude. The chief difficulty is that
the natural environment is not a static
structure but a complex of processes
in a state of"mobile equilibrium."
Of particular interest are those
occurring in the atmosphere and hydro-
sphere, the pattern of which has long
been known : the sun heats the earth's
surface, which in turn heats the
atmosphere-principally in the tropical
zone ; the warm air rises and, in the
upper strata of the atmosphere, moves
toward the polar regions ; there it cools,
sinks, and moves back towards the
equatorial belt.
This simple pattern is made more
complicated by the rotation of the
earth, by the distribution of the con-
tinents and oceans, and by the pres-
ence of mountain ranges. All these
combine to create the system of move-
ments known as"general circulation",
which is also linked with the circulation
of ocean waters. The atmosphere and
the hydrosphere are so closely associ-
ated that every movement in one is
communicated to the other. The two
are linked by the water cycle which
constantly modifies the earth's surface
by washing out and transporting matter
from one place to another.
LEATHER changes are caus-ed by fluctuations in the
lower atmosphere. The relative stabil-
ity of the climate shows that despite
these fluctuations the hydrometeoro-
logical processes are in a state of
equilibrium, but we know that the
world's climate has not remained the
same throughout its history. Its evolu-
tion suggests that more than one
"mobile equilibrium"is possible, and
that there have probably been several
at various periods in the earth's history.
We have heard of sudden"explo-
sions"occurring in the population of
certain species of animals and insects
from time to time. Studies show that
they are most often due to abnormally
sharp fluctuations in atmospheric or
oceanic conditions.
These shifts may result in the dis-
appearance of certain organisms and
an increase in the numbers of other
species which possibly s. erved as food
for the ones destroyed. Once started,
these fluctuations may pass from one
process to another and fade out gra-
dually, or else they may increase
through a kind of chain reaction.
We know that certain processes on
earth can influence one another, but
we still do not know to what extent.
Man himself is exerting a growing in-
fluence on his environment and before
very long this could give cause for
alarm. If we interfere with the compli-
cated system of natural phenomena,
we may start processes which could
develop, through a chain reaction, and
produce disastrous consequences.
A SIDE from these dangers,however, the periodic ins-
tability of natural processes does open
up interesting possibilities for re-
search. Could we modify the existing
equilibrium in nature for our benefit ?
Scientists have already tried out var-
ious experiments on the weather, in-
cluding the sowing of dry ice on clouds
to produce rain.
In my view, artificial transformations
of the climate can hardly be consider-
ed as one of man's practical objectives
in the immediate future. But the effect
of man's activities on the climate and
other facets of our environment, today
and in the near future, poses a crucial
problem. There is no doubt that it
is an international one, too, because
of the nature of the research involved
and the implications of its results.
We are approaching the point where
mankind will be compelled to make
practical use of all the resources the
earth has to offer and where man will
be in a position to control fundamental
processes on a worldwide scale. In
short, man will soon become the
master of the earth. (It is perhaps no
mere chance that at this stage man
is reaching out into space.)
Need one point out that at such
a moment in its development society
ought to act as a single community ?
It is one of the major tasks of Unesco
to co-ordinate the efforts of mankind
in the conquest of nature and the
rational utilization of natural wealth
for the benefit of all nations. In
this task, Unesco can well draw in-
spiration from its own ideals : the 23
maintenance of peace, and the pro-
motion of the freedom, independence
and progress of all peoples.
