Young artists from Paris
schools bring their
sketchbooks to Unesco H. Q.
Above, children settle down
in front of the Wall of the Moon,
a decorative mural in ceramic
by Spanish artists, Joan Miró
and Jose Llorens-Artigas.
Below, others find inspiration
in the Japanese garden.
How youngsters
see Unesco
"It's a big building where countries from all over the world work together
to do away with wars", explained a 13-year-old schoolboy, after
visiting Unesco H. Q. in Paris."I know what war is", he added."My
parents suffered a lot in the last one. At Unesco people meet to talk
things over. They try not to quarrel, and that must be very difficult ; and
they explain their ideas". Accompanied by their teachers, children from
art classes in several Paris schools recently came to look at Unesco H. Q,
Afterwards, these youthful (8 to 15 years old) artists portrayed some
of the things about Unesco that had impressed them most. On these
pages we are happy to present a short selection of their paintings which
depict Unesco as seen through young eyes.
Photos Unesco-Dominique Roger
the Earth, a man reaching up, higher and higher, and
the other man bringing fire that gets lighter and lighter
until you can't see it at wall,"
for science and learning and friendship."
PEACE. By Agnes Kende (aged 14),
International Lycee Oasses, Sevres.
"1 wanted to show Peace in my painting
of Unesco,"said Agnes."So I painted
a dove and the big stone with the Japan-
ese word for peace cut in it. And
1 put in Calder's mobile because I like
it so much."
PROMETHEUS. By Claire Weulersse
(aged 9), Atelier d'education par I'art,
Paris.
Claire's painting was inspired by the
big mural of Rufino Tamayo, decorating
the Main Commission room at Unesco.
"I liked it right away,"she said,"and
then I was told it was the legend of
Prometheus giving fire to the world.
But I see it as the big sun which brings
us warmth."
COLOURS OF FIRE. By Judy McDivitt
(aged 14), International Lycee Classes,
Sevres.
Judy also chose Tamayo's"Prome-
thew.""/'m not very good at draw-
ing,"she said,"but I felt I could paint
Prometheus in my own way. rocks for
fs now I see unesco ; al/tne peoples working togetner
colour page, opposite :
MIGHTY MOBILE. By Jean-Marc Adler
(aged13), Ate) ierd'educationpar)'art,
Paris.
"1 chose the big mobile of Alexander
Calder because I like everything that
is full of movement and life,"explained
Jean-Marc."And I like everything
modern, which ; s why/e Unesco."
centre colour pages :
CLASPED HANDS. By Dominic Hall
(aged 13), International Lycee Classes,
Sevres.
"/patnted the hands that are joined
throuah Unesco"said Dominic."That





Colour page, opposite
THE SIX PATIOS. By Jai Imbrey (aged
13). International Lycee Classes, Sevres.
'/was/mpressed by Unesco's modern
buildings and the way they contrast with
the Eiffel Tower, and also by the under-
ground patios when you see them from the
7th floor. I spelt the French word'defense"
on the wall ; th a'c'./'m not very good
at French spelling", admitted U. S.-born jay.
Bottom
SMOOTH AND FULL OF FRIDGES, By
Franz Merkling (aged 13), Ate ! ier d'educa-
tion par I'art, Paris.
"What struck me most of all was Unesco's
big conference building,"said Franz."It's
smooth and yet it's full of ridges. I also
like Calder's mobile, so I put it in, though I
know you can't see them the way I show-
ed them. And I painted Miró's wall because
it has lovely colours."
